A Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, Conteininge an Answer
to a certain Book lately set forth by M. Hardinge, and Entitled, A
Confutation of etc.

By John Jewel Bishop of Sarisburie.

3. ESDRAE. 4. Magna est Veritas and praeualet.

Great is the Truth, and prevails.

ET INVENTA EST PERIIT
printer's or publisher's device

Jmprinted at London in Fleetestreate, at the sign of the Elephante, by Henry
VVykes.

Anno 1567. 27. Octobris.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

TO THE MOST VIRTUOUS, and Noble Princess, Queen Elizabeth, by the Grace of
God, Queen of England, France, and Irelande, Defender of the Faith, etc.
IT had benne greatly to be wished, most Gracious Sovereign Lady, that, as God
of his mercy has geeuen us, ever sithence the first time of your Majesty's
most happy gouernmente, such success in all civil affairs, such
concord, and quietness in all Estates, as our Fathers seldom have seen
before: so our hearts with like felicity might thoroughly have consented in the
profession of one undoubted Truth, and al our wills, which now are so
violently rent a sunder, and so far distracted, might fully have joined
together in the VVil of God: that al quarrelles, and contentions set aparte,
we might with one mouth, and one mind glorify God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. How be it, it appears by the continual story, and whole
discourse of the Holy Scriptures, that Almighty God, of his deep Judgments,
and secret Providence, suffers some men oftetimes to delight in darkness,
to withstand the Gospel, to seek occasions, and wilfully to set them selves
against the knowledge, and Truth of God. I write not this, Most Gracious
Lady, to thintente to make them odious in your Majesty's sight, that this day
are the procurers of al these troubles. God is hable even of the hard
insensible stones to raise up children unto Abraham, and to make them the
vessels of his Mercy. Nevertheless, as S. Paul teaches us, such men
there have benne in times paste, 1. Timoth. 4.
that have had their Consciences burnte with hot irons, speakinge and
maineteininge Lies in Hypocrisy: Roman. 1.
that have geeuen them selves over into reprobate, and wilful minds, and have
despised the Wisdom of God within them selves. And, notwithstanding such
battles, and dissensions, specially in the Church of God, which is called
the House of Unity, be offensive, and grievous unto the Godly, and therefore
work great hinderance unto the dew passage of the Gospel of Christ, yet in
the end the trouble hereof in Gods Elect is recompensed abundantely with
great advantage. For Gods Truth is mighty, and shall prevail: Dagon shall
fall down headlonge before the Arc: the Darkness shall flee before the
Light: and the more fiercely man's wisdom shall withstand, the more
glorious shall God be in his Victory.

But, shortly to discourse unto your Majesty the particulare occasions hereof
from the beginning, after it had pleased Almighty God, at the first entire of
your Majesty's Reign, by a most happy exchange, and by the means of your
Majesty's most Godly travails, to restoare unto us the Light, and comfort
of his Gospel, there was written, and published by us a Little Book in the
Latin tongue, entitled, An Apology of the Church of England, conteininge
the whole Substance of the Catholic Faith, no we professed, and freely
preached throughoute al your Majesty's Dominions: that thereby al foreine
Nations might understand the considerations, and causes of your Majesty's
dooinges in that behalf. Thus in old times did Quadratus, Melito, Justinius
Martyr, Tertullian, and other Godly, and Learned Fathers, upon like occasions,
as well to make known the Truth of God, and to open the grounds of their
Profession, as also to put the Infidels to silence, and to stop the mouths
of the wicked.

This Apology, being thus written first in Latin, and afterward, upon the
comfortable report of your Majesty's most Godly enterprises, translated into
sundry other tongues, and so made common to the most part of al Europe, as
it has benne well allowed of, and liked of the Learned, and Godly, as it is
plain by their open testimonies, touching the same, so has it not hitherto,
for ought, that may appear, benne anywhere openly reproved, either in Latin,
or otherwise, either by any one man's Private writing, or by the Public
Authority of any Nation.

Only one M. Hardinge, not long sithence your Majesty's subject, now
mislikinge the present state, and resiante in Louaine, has of late taken upon
him, against the said Apology, with the whole Doctrine, and all the parts of
the same, to publishe an open Confutation, and to offer the same unto your
Majesty: wherein he shows him self so vehemente, and so sharp, and busy in
findinge faults, that he doubts not to seek quarrelles against us, even in
that we maineteine the Baptism of Christian Infantes, the proceeding, and
Godhedde of the Holy Ghost, the Faith of the Holy, and Glorious Trinity, and
the General, and Catholic Profession of the common Creed. Thus, for that he
has once severed him self from us, he bears now the world in hand, we
can believe nothing without an error.

The maigne ground of his whole plea is this, That the Bishop of Rome, what so
ever it shall like him to Determine in Judgment, Confu fol. 334. a.
can never err: that he is always undoubtedly possessed of Gods. Holy
Sprite: Conful. fol. 285. b.
that at his only hand we must learn to know the VVil of God: Confuta.
324. b.
that in his only Holiness stands the Unity, Confut. 204. b.
and safety of the Church: that who so ever is divided from him, Confut. 306.
b.
must by judged an Heretic: and, that without the obedience of him, there is
no hope of Salvation. And yet, as though it were not sufficient for him, so
vainly to soothe a man in open Erroures, he tells us also sadly, and in good
earnest, that the same Bishop is not only a Bishop, but also a King: that
unto him belongs the Authority, Confut. fol 280. a.
and right of both Swerdes, Et 305. b.
as well Temporal, as Spiritual: that al Kings, and Emperors receive their
whole power at his hand, Confu. fol. 247. b
and ought to swear obedience, Confu. fol. 248. b.
and Fealty unto him. For these be his words, even in this Book so boldly
dedicate unto your Majesty: Confu. fol. 178. b.
It is a great eye soar, says M. Hardinge, to the Ministers of Antichriste,
to see the Vicare of Christ above Lords, and Kings of this world, and to
see Princes, and Emperors promise, and swear obedience unto him. And whereas
Pope Zachary by the consent, Confut at. Folio 178. b.
or conspiracy of the Nobles of France, deposed Chilperichus, the true,
natural, and liege Prince of that Realm, and placed Pipinus in his room, Lo,
says M. Hardinge, ye must needs confess, that this was a Divine power in
the Pope: for otherwise he could never have done it. Thus mutche he
esteems the dishonoures, Confutat. Fol. 182. a.
and overthrows of Gods Anointed.

Whereas also Pope Boniface the Eighth, for that he could not have the
Treasury of France at his commandment, endeavored with all his both
Ecclesiastical, and VVorldly puissance, to remove Philip the French King from
his estate, and under his Bulls or Letters Patentes, had conueighed the same
solemnly unto Albertus the King of Romans, M. Hardinge here tells your
Majesty, that all this was very well done, to thintente thereby to fraie the
King, and to keep him in awe, and to reclaim his mind from disobedience.
Now, Confut. Fol. 182. b.
touching your Majesty's most Noble Progenitors, the Kings of this Realm,
whereas we, as our loialtie, and allegiance binds us, justly complain,
that Pope Alexander. 3. by violence, and tyranny forced King Henry the
Second to surrender his Crown Emperial into the hands of his Legate, and
afterward for a certain space to content him self in Private estate, to the
great indignation, and grief of his louinge Subjects: And that likewise Pope
Innocentius the third sturred up the Nobles, and Commons of this Realm
against king John, and gave the Enheritance, and Possession of al his
Dominions unto Ludouicus the French King, (as for the misusinge of your
Majesty's most dear Father of most Noble Memory, king Henry the Eighth,
for as mutche as the smarte thereof is yet in fresh remembrance, I will say
nothing): To these, and al other like Tyrannical injuries, and just causes of
grief, M. Hardinge shortly, and in light manner thinks it sufficient to
answer thus: What though King Henry the Second were il entreated of Pope
Alexander. M. Harding. Fol. 340. b.
3? What though King John were il entreated of that Zealous, and Learned Pope
Innocentius. 3? What though King Henry the Eighth were likewise entreated
of the Popes in our time? If know right well, Most Souer aine Lady, the
goodness of your Graceous Nature deliteth not in such rehearsalles. Neither
do I make report hereof, for that such things sommetimes have benne done:
but for that the same things even now at this time, either so lightely are
excused, or so boldly are defended. Such humble affection, and obedience
these men by their open, and public Writings, teach your Majesty's true
Subjects to bear toward their Natural Prince. It shall mutche warrante the
honor and safety of your Roial Estate, if your Majesty shall sommetimes
remember the dishonours, and dangers, that other your Noble Progenitors have
felt before you.

But concerning the Majesty and right of Kings, and Emperors, M. Hardinge
tells us, M. Harding. Fol. 318. b.
They have their first Authority by the Positive Law of Nations, and can
have no more Power, then the people has, of whom they take their Temporal
lurisdiction: as if he would say, Emperors, and Kings have none other
right of Gouernmente, then it has pleased their Subjects by composition to
allow unto them. Thus he says, and says it boldly: as if God him self
had never said, Prouer. 8.
Per me Reges Regnant: By me, and my Authority Kings bear rule over their
Subjects: Or, as if Christ our Saueour had never said unto Pilate the Lord
Lieutenante, John. 19.
Thou should have no Power over me, were it not geeuen thee from above:
Roman. 13.
Or, as if S. Paul had not said, Non est potestas, nisi a Deo: There is no
power, but only from God. And yet further, as if their whole study were
fully bente to deface the Authority, and Majesty of al Princes, even now one
of the same company doubts not to teach the world, Dorman. Fol. 15.
That the Pope is the Head: and Kings, and Emperors are the feet: Like as
also an other of the same faction says, The Emperoures Majesty is so far
inferior in dignity to the Pope, Stanislaus Or^chouius in Ch^maera, Fol. 97.
as a Creature is inferior unto God. We divise not these things of malice,
Most Graceous Lady, but report the same truly, as we find them proclaimed,
and published this day by their vain, and dangerous writings, which
notwithstanding they would so feign have to be taken as Catholic. If this
Doctrine may once take root, and be freely received amongst the Subjects,
it shall be hard for any Prince to hold his Right.

As for your Majesty, for that it has pleased Almighty God in his Mercy, to
make you an instrumente of his Glory, as in Old times he made many other
Godly, and Noble Princes, to refourme his Church from that huge, and lothesome
heap of filthe, and rubble, that either b, violence, or by negligence had
benne thrown into it, therefore M. Hardinge even in this self same Book,
under certain general threats, charge you with disordred presumption, by
the example of Ozias the wicked King, M. Harding. Fol. 298. a.
upon whom, as he untruly says, God sent his vengeance for the like. For
be the Abuses, and Errors of the Church never so many, be the falls, and
dangers never so great, be the Priests, and Bishops never so blind, yet,
by this Doctrine, it may never be lawful for the Prince, be he never so
learned, or so wise, or so Zealous in Gods cause, to attempt any manner of
Reformation. And therefore thus he says unto your Majesty, and with all his
skill, and cunninge, labors to persuade your Majesty's Subjects, if any one,
or other happily of simplicity will believe him, that the Godly Laws, which
your Majesty has geeuen us to live under, are no Laws: that your
Parlamentes, Confuta. 277. Confut. 328. a. Confuta. 172. b. Reioind. 314.
Confut. 87. a. Confut. 269. b. Reioind 42. a. Confut. 43. a. Confut a. 269. a.
323. b. 334. a. 338. a. 348. b.
are no Parlamentes: that your Cleregie, is no Cleregie: Our Sacraments, no
Sacraments: Our Faith, no Faith. The Church of England, whereof your
Majesty is the most Principal, and Chief, he calls a Malignante Church, a
New Church erected by the Devil, a Babylonical Tower, a Heard of
Antichriste, a Temple of Lucifer, a Synogoge, and a School of Satan, full of
Robbery, Sacrilege, Schism, and Heresy. And all this he furnissheth with
such liberty of other discourteous, and unseemly talks, as if he had benne
purposely hired to speak dishonor of your Majesty's most godly dooinges.

Of al these, and other like Tragical fantasies, for as mutche as he has so
boldly adventured to make a present unto your Majesty, we have great cause
to reioise in God, for that our controversies are brought to be debated before
such a personage, as is hable so well, and so deeply to understand them. For
I have no doubt, but as by your great Learning, and marvelous Wisdom,
you shall soon see the difference of our Pleadinges, so of your Majesty's
graceous inclination unto al Godliness, you will readily find out the
Falsehedde, and geeue sentence with the Truth. Verily, after that your
Majesty shall have thoroughly considered the manifest Untruths, and corruptions,
together with the Abuses, and Errors of the contrary side: the Weakness
of the Cause, the Boldness of the Man, and the immoderate Bitterness of his
speech, I have good hope, the more advisedly you shall behold it, the less
cause you shall find, wherefore to like it.

For the discovery hereof, for my poor portion of Learning, I have
endeavored to do, that I was hable: And the same here I humbly present unto
your Majesty, as unto my most Graceous, and Sovereign Liege Lady, and, as now,
the only Nource, and Mother of the Church of God within these your Majesty's
most Noble Dominions. It may please your Majesty graceously to weighe it,
and to judge of it, not according to the skill, and ability of the Writer,
which is but simple, but according to the weight, and worthiness of the
Cause. The poor labors have benne mine: the Cause is Gods. The goodness of
the one will be always hable to countreuaile the simplicity of the other.

God evermore inflame, and direct your Majesty with his Holy Sprite, that the
Zele of his House may thoroughly devour your Graceous heart: that you may
safely walk in the ways of your Father David: that you may utterly abandon
al groaues, and Hille Aultars: that you may live an Old Mother in Israel:
that you may see an end of al dissensions, and stablishe peace, and Unity in
the Church of God. Amen.

Your Majesty's most Humble Subject, and Faithful Oratoure, John Sarisburie.

I. S. Good Christian Reader, I have here set before the certain principal
flowers of M. Hardinges modeste speech. Taste no more, than may well like
thee. And judge thereof, as thou shall see cause.


M. Hardinge, in the Preface before his Confutation of the Apology. The manner
of writing, which I have here used, in comparison of our Adversaries, is
sober, soft, and gentle, etc. And in respect of their heat, bitterness,
and railinge, as many tell me, over cold, sweet, and mild.

Again, in the same Confutation. There is no man of Wisdom, or honesty,
that would with so immoderate vpbraidinges, empaire the estimation of his
modesty. Fol. 300. b.


M. Hardinge.
Your Diuellishe spite. Reioinder. fol. 18. b. Your Diuellishe wickedness.
Reioinder, prefa. to the Reader. Your Diuellishe Villainy. Confuta. fol. 256.
b. Your railinge words of Satan's prompring. Reioinder. 67. 2. You are
joined to Satan. Satan your Scholemaister. Reioin. 12. b. Ye are moved by
the instincte of Satan. Confuta. 43. b. 255. a. Your Father the Devil. Conf.
2. a. Your Babylonical Tovver. Confut. 42. a. Your Nevve Church set up by
Satan. Con. 42. a. The Devil has you fast bound. Con. 24. a. Ye are of
the Schole of Satan. Con. 69. b. Your Sathanical Sprite. Co^futa. 111. b. Ye
are the Children of the Devil. Con. 115. a. A Page, a Slave, a Clavvebacke of
the Devil. Confuta. 131. a. Ye are the limbs of Antichriste. Con. 202. a. Ye
are the practiced Ministers of Antichriste. Confu. 195. b. Ye have taken a
pattern from Satan* Con. 323. b. Your reprobate Congregation. Con. 338. a.
Your Synagoge of Satan. Con. 341. b. Your confuse ^entes of Satan. Con. 334.
Your Synagoge of Antichrist, and Lucifer. Confuta. 212. b. The Heard of
Antichriste. Confu. 48. a. The Nouice of the Devil. Confu. The Devil, and his
Ministers. 116. b. Ye have learned of the Devil. Con. 128. b. Your Father the
Devil. Confu. 348. b. Satan your Master. Confuta. 348. b. Satan's brood.
Con. 348. He has conceived hatred by the inspiration of Satan. Con. 288. b.
Satan holdethe you captive. Con. 342. b. The Sptite of Satan is in you. 172.
a. Ye are fast bound in Satan's fetters. Con. 68. a. Ye are enemies of
Unity. Con. 55. b. Enemies of the Sacrifice. Confu. 67. a. Ye are loose
Apostates. Confu. 323. Sacrilegious Churcherobbers. 323. Thieves. Con. 155. b.
Abominable. Con. 17^. a. Lecherous Lourdaines. 75. b. Profane Helhoundes.
Confuta. 114. b. Despisers of God. C. 131. b. Your wicked, and blasphemous
Sprite. Your dark, and malicious Soul. Reioind. 104. Your heresies.
blasphemies, Sathanismes. Your filthy railinge rabble. Con. 75. b. Coluinistes,
Sathanistes. Confu. 81. b. Your wicked Chams^ brood 114. b. Your profane
malice. C. ^29. b. Your vileness. 135. a. Your damnable fide. 135. a. Your
blasphemous tongues. Your detestable blasphemies Your Diuellishe rabble. 209.
b. Your Turkishe Huguenotes, vvoorse the^ Infidels. 282. b Your Malignante
Church. Your Congregation of Reprobates. Con. 269. b. Your vile heresies 339.
a. Your Diuellishe stoutness of heart. Your Turkishe, and Heathennishe heart.
295. b. Your Turkishe doctrine. ibi. Ye brag Lucifer like. 173. b Ye speak
villainy. Your quarrel is against Christ. Con. 178. b. Ye would say, if
ye durst, that Christ is the Abomination of desolation, and Antichriste is the
True God. 194. a. When were there ever su^che Thieves in the Church of God.
201. a. Your Doctrine is Heresy, your life is iniquity, 172. b As crafty
knaves in a Comedy. Reioind. 22. a. Vain bragginge, Vanity, Scurrilitie,
extreme impudency, passinge madness. proud vauntinge Goliathlike. Re. in
pre. 2. He is a fool. 186. Reasonlesse, vvitlesse. Reioind. 192. a. Foolish
Negatiues. R. pre. They are Apes. Con. 1. b They are Asses. Any sotte would be
ashamed to make such arguments. Con. 51. b. He has on his fools coat if
he play the Vise well, and Verletlike. Re. 251. b. The canker of this false
doctrine. Reioind. prefa. False Gospellers. Re. pre. Unshamefast. 94. a.
Impious. Impudente, 123. a. Ye are paste al shame. 186. a A great Lier.
Boldness in Lieinge. Ye Lie for a vantage. Your fchole of Lieinge. Ye
profess Lieinge. False Lies. Impudente Lies. Vain Lies. Bold Lies. Lovvde
Lies. Foul Lies. Shameless Lies. Railinge Lies. Manifest Lies. Notorious
Lies. Sclaunderous Lies. Horrible Lies. We vvil proclaim you a Lier. 258. b.
Your Liberty of lieinge. Your Art of lieinge. 218. b. Your Figure of
impudente Lieinge. 253. a. Ye be desperate in your Lieinge. 277. b. You Lie
in the plural number. 303. a. And what shall I say more but al is Lies. 255.
b. Leave your Railinge. Re. We like not your Railing. 80. a. I leave your vile
eloquence to your self. 111. b. Your Railinge terms. Your vile eloquence.
Your scoldinge tale. Your spiteful words. Con. 149. b. Your rancoure. Your
spite. Your filthy Railinges. Your vile vpbraidinges. Con. 175. Your Malicious
Railinge. 184. b. Your false cankered sclau^ders. 184. b. Cease your barkinge.
Reioind. prefa. to the R^a. The poison of your tongue Reioind. prefa. Your
drop of poison. Your Serpentine tongue. Reioind. 67. a. Such crakinge
Chalenlengers. Re. prefa. Your Railinge Sprite. Spit out your Malice. Spit out
your poison. Reioind. prefa. Your hot raginge Sprite. Con. 3. a. Spit forth
your galle. Confu. 23. a. Your Heresies, and Villainies. Con. 10. b. Your vain
boaste in wickedness, wrought by the power of Satan. 19. b Your filthy
railinge rabble. 75. b. It likes your filthy Sprite. 101. a. Ye cursed
Chananees. 121. b What crake ye^ 128. b. The Devil the Scholemaister of your
Malice. 168. a. Luther, that filthy Freeze. 192. a. your bavvdy Bale. 168b.
Brentius, that shameless railinge Hereuque. 288. a Cough up the cromme of your
Heresy. Re. 167. b. Cough out that vile poison. Re. 80. Your Diuellishe
Blasphemy, and Villainy. 256. b. A blaste of your railinge Sprite, 266. b.
Luthers stinking sink. 42. b Zuinglius rabble. 42. b. Your vile, spiteful,
blasphemous talk. Re. prefa. If there were any spaike of shame in you. 94. a.
The stinking breath of your vile words. m. b. This Defe^der is like a mad
Dog. 207. b. Your vile, venomous, and lothesome stuff, 246. b. I would I
could pluck malice from your blasphemous heart. 292. b. With such
spitefulness of words, as the Devil has enrspired the^ vvithal. Con. 342.
b. It spiteth you, and the Devil. 279. a. Rail, and revel while ye vvil.
254. a. Ye rave, and cry, out. 177. b. The finds of Hell were not yet let
loose, that begat Lutherians, and Caluinistes. Confu. 183. b. The Devil
coming from Hell, has carried you away. 225. b. In your hearts the
Devil has made his shop. 132. a. Ye shall be bound hand and foot with the
cords of the Devils clevve. 292. a. The Devil possesses you, and rides you.
255. a. The Sprite of the Devil is within you. 255. Ye boil in rancoure, and
malice. 269. b. Stamp, and rage. Sturdy dog eloquence. 42. b. Stinte your
barking. R. pre. The Devil reigns in your hearts. 87. b. Maugre the malice of
the devil, and of all the Sacramentaries. 95. b. Your Malice seems to pass
the malice of the Devil. Re. prefa. Ye bark with words more vile, then
the barkinge of a dog. Re. Rail until your tongues burn in your headdes in
Hell fire. 112. a. Bark until your bellies break, ye Helhoundes of
Zvvinglius and Luthers lit^oure. 178. b. Without al vvitte, and modesty. Con.
170. b. Cunerus petri de Brouwersha^en. Pastor S. Petri Louanij indignus
approbauit. An. 1565. 10. Aprilis.
M. Hardinge, in his Preface to M. Ievvel before the Reioinder. We spare your
woorshippes, and put you in mind of your outrage with more Courteous language.
Again: I seem to men of right good discretion, rather to offend of
lenity, and softness: And many do wish, I had tempered mine ink with
sharper ingredience.

Thus mutche only out of the Heap. For to lay forth al, it were to make an
other Book.

One demanded this Question of Zoilus the Railet.

Why takeste thou such pleasure in speakinge il?

Zoilus made answer.

Because, whereas I would rather do it, I am not hable.


Scoffs, and Scorns.
M. Hardinge hereof thus reproves his Adversary.
Your scorneful scoffs. Re. prefa. Your Lothesome scoffs. Re. prefa. Your
scoffinge Sprite. Confu. 19. Yourir kesome cuttes. Re. prefa. Your art of
scoffinge. Re. prefa. Your scoffinge head. 284. a. Ye sauce your words
with scoffs. 29. 76. Ye play Hickscorner. Re. prefa. Ye play the Vise in
an Interlude. Re. pre. Your boieishe and Childishe disposition. 314. b. Your
hoieishe scoffs. 300. a. Your boieishe mockeries. 149. a. Your bitter
tvvitinges. ibidem.
M. Hardinge of him self.
Such grace in writing I neither use, nor couete, nor have I it: nor if I
had it, should I think it meet to use. The Truth of God would not be set
forth with scoffs. Whose desire to understand the Truth is cold, the
same is to be tuarred up rather with grave and earneste exhortations, then with
scorns, and mockes. Reioind. In the Preface to the Reader.
M. Hardinges perfourmance of the same.
His Ministerlike talk: with sum fadde Hypocrifie. Re. prefa. His
Eua^gelical meekness. Full coldely, and demurely he promises. Re. 18. b. His
solemn Prayer protestantelike. Re. 18. b. His Rhetorical persuasions in
pulpite: with holy holdinge up of hands, and casting up of eyes to Heaven.
Re. prefa. His Ministringe words. Re. 235. His pulpite buzzing. R. pre. His
holy Companions. 170. b This blessed Brotherhoode. Confu. 1^. b. Ye speak
like a liberal ge^tleman. Con. 284. a. This gaie Rhetorician. Redioind. prefa.
This ioily felovve. 9. a. This ioily Defender. 53. b. This worthy Captain.
Re. 31. b. This substantial Doctoure. Cuckovvlike. His glorious Sermon, prefa.
His worthy courage. R. pre. He proves it like a Clerk. 115 Well, and Clerkely
reasoned forsoothe. 219. a. His foresaid vvoorshipful reasons. 276. a. His
Clerkely provves. 149. b Like propre ge^tlemen. 140. a They have tried them
selves like proper men. 139 b. Luther your Radix less. Con. 42. b. Calvin
your Patriarch. ^0. a Your great Rabbine Peter Martyr. Con. 82. a. Now come
in these reverend Fathers of our nevve Clergy. Re. 155. a. Our ministering
Clergi. 146. a Our ministering Prelates. 63. a Our nevve Gospel Prelates. Our M.
John of Sarisburie. 251. b. How say yovve Sir Minister Bishop? 56. b. The
confusion of your Goliathship. Re. prefa. Ye speak mutche of your
Ministershippes goodness. 170. b. This is false, saving your Ministerships.
Con. 347. b. Your Superintendenteshippes. 256. b. Your Maisterships. Re. pre.
Your Masshippes. 247. a.
M. Hardinge. Confuta. fol. 209. b.
Thus we comme within you Defenders, as it were: and claspinge with you, wring
your weapon out of your hand: and with the other end of it strike you down:
As it is not hard to us, by learning to overthrow you. etc.

A View of Untruths, Wherewith M. Hardinge thus charge his Adversary.
Aristotle being once asked, what a common Lier gained by his Lieinge,
answered thus: That when he tells Truth, noman will believe him. Confuta.
159. a. Who sees not, and almost feels your Lies? 176. When will ye
foresake the School of Lieinge? 179. a. Ye are good in the art of Lieinge.
218. b. Ye have sworn to belie all the world. 245. a We have taken you tardie
in so many, and so manifest Lies. 159. a. Being disposed to Lie, he would
Lie for a vantage. 157. b. Lie so long, as ye list. 150. a. Al men do
epsy your Lieinge. 150. b. A sumpe of Lies. 5. a. Carteloades of Lies. 175. A
man for his Life cannot find one leaf, in it without many Lies. 219. Lieinge
to this fellow is Accidens Inseparabile. 273. b. Make of it, what ye will. A
lie is a lie. 155. b. The number of Untruths, uttered of M. Jewelles part,
noted, and Confuted by others, and by me, amounts to a thousand, and odd.
M. Hardinge in the Preface to the Reader before his Reioinder.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, good Christian Reader, I have thought it needful, for thy better
satisfaction, to geeue thee a short view of these so horrible, and so
shameful Untruths: that by a sewe, thou maiste be hable, to judge the better
of the rest.
A Vievve of Untruths.
Reioinder, Fol. 1.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Here appears small hope, that M. Hardinge will deal plainly in the rest,
that thus makes his first entry with * a Cauil.
M. Hardinge.
1. Untruth. For it is no Cauil. The B. of Sarisburie. Whereas the * matter is
known, and agreed upon, it is great ^olie, to pike a quarrel unto the word.
The matter is, what is meante by private Mass.
M. Hardinge.
2. Untruth. It is not known, nor agreed upon. The B. of Sarisburie. Every
Mass, says M. Hardinge, is * common, and none Private.
M. Hardinge.
3. Untruth. I say not so, but with addition, which makes certain
limitation.
The B. of Sarisburie.
If there be * no Private Mass at al, then was there no private Mass in ye
primitive Church: which was my first assertion.
M. Hardinge.
4. Untruth. It is not said, There is no Private Mass at al. For there is
Private Mass, as Private is taken in an other sense.
The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Harding in his. 22. Article, entreating of the Accidents of Bread, and
Wine, etc. calls that thing Private, that is disputed in open Audience, in
the hearing of five hundred, or more, and is set abroad to the knowledge of
the world.
M. Hardinge.
5. Untruth. In that place I speak not hereof, but of M. Iewelles fine last
Articles.
The B. of Sarisburie.
He says, These matters were never taught in open Audience, but Privately
disputed in the Schools.
M. Hardinge.
6. Untruth. I say not so, but otherwise.
The B of Sarisburie.
As for the Mass, sommetimes he makes it the Sacrifice, sommetime the *
Communion etc.
M. Hardinge.
7. Untruth. I never said the Communion to be the Mass.
The B. of Sarisburie.
If the Sacrifice be common, why doothe he geeue it these Private Cities, This
for the Living, This for the Dead, etc?
M. Hardinge.
8. Vntruther. I geeue not the Sacrifice these Titles.
The B. of Sarisburie.
He says, It is a feast, and therefore it is common. And thus he salueth one
error with an other.
M. Hardinge.
9. Untruth. It is no error, to say, The Communion, which is in the Mass,
is a Feast.
The B. of Sarisburie.
What if ye Priests will be, to work Necromancie, or Sorcerie, as it is
reported of Pope Hildebrande?
M. Hardinge.
10. Untruth. This is not veported by any grave, and true writer: But by them
that flattered the Emperor of that time.
A Reply.
This story is largely set out by Beno, Cardinale of the Church of Rome.
Vrspergensis says, Manifestum Necromanticu^. An. 1080.
The B. of Sarisburie.
What if ye Piestes will be, to poison some body, as Henry the Emperor was
poisoned in the Communion Bread?
M. Hardinge.
11. Untruth. He was not so poisoned: but died otherwise.
A Reply.
Vrspergensis says, Quidam Religiosus tradidit Imperatori intoxicatam
Eucharistiam. An. 1313. Likewise says Auentinus, Bap. Egnatius, Supplementum
Chronicor. Raui. Textor, Carrion. etc.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Pope Victor was poisoned in the Chalice.
M. Hardinge.
12. Untruth. He died otherwise.
A Reply.
He died even so. Read Martinus Polonus, Volaterranus, Matthaeus Palmerius,
Supplementu^ Chronicorum, Fasciculus Temporum, Raui. Textor, Anselmus Rid,
Massaeus Cameracensis, Vrsperg. Page 230.
The B. of Sarisburie.
Lyra says, Many miracles are wrought in the Church * to mock the people.
M. Hardinge.
13. Untruth. Lyra says it not. 14. Untruth, To wocke the people, is not in
Lyra.
A Reply.
The words of Lyra be very plain, Aliquando in Ecclesia fit maxima deceptio
populi in Miraculis fictis a Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaere^tibus, propter
Lucrum: Sommetimes even in the Church the the people is shamefully deceived
with feined Miracles, wrought either by the Priests, or else by their
companions, for lukers sake. In Daniel. Ca. 14.
The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Hierome says, Dominica Coena omnibus debet esse Co^munis.
M. Hardinge.
15. Untruth. S, Hierome is not the Authoure of those brief Commentaries.
A Reply.
These are printed emonge other S. Hieromes works, and are commonly known by
his name: but by any other Anthours name they are not known.
These he fiftiene of the first horrible great Lies, that M. Hardinge has so
advisedly noted in his Reioinder. It were but lost labor to proceed
further. As these are, even so are the rest.

Now, good Reader, may it please thee, to take a prouse of other Untruths,
that after great travail, and seekinge, he has likewise found out in the
Apology.

The Apology. Part 2. Cap. 4. Diuis. 2.
The Council of Carthage provided, that no Bishop should be called either the
Highest Bishop, or ye Chief Priest.
M. Hardinge.
1. Here, Sir Defender, ye play false. Ye are taken with false Dice. False
play, shameful falsifieinge, false teachinge, false slight, forginge of
Canons, your Lie your falsehedde. Shame on you Defender. How so ever this Canon
be construed, it takes no place out of Aphrica: and therefore cannot justly
be alleged against the Bishop of Rome.
The Reply.
The words of the Council, alleged by Gratian, are these: Primae sedis
Episcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum, vel Summus Sacerdos, vel aliquid
huiusmodi: Sed tantum, primae Sedis Episcopus. Vniuersalis autem nec etiam
Romanus Pontifex appelletur.
The Apology. Part 2 Cap. 12. Diuis. 2.
Calixtus decreed, that the Consecration being finished, all the people should
Communicate etc.
M. Hardinge.
2. Untruth. This Decree had Relation unto the Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons, and not unto the people.
The Reply.
Here M. Hardinge is soon reproved even by his own Doctors, Durandus, Hugo,
Cochlaeus, Clichtoueus. For thus they say, Omnes olim, tu^ Sacerdotes, tum
Laici cum Sacrificante communicabant etc. Hic vnicum hac de re Canonem
recitabo. qui Calixto adscribitur.
The Apology. Part 2. Ca 8. Diuis. 2.
Gregorius Nazianzenus says, speakinge of his own Father, that a good, and a
diligent Bishop does serve in the Ministry never the worse, for that he is
Married, but rather the better.
M. Hardinge.
3. Untruth. Ye make manifest Lies. Ye use your accustomed figure
Pseudologia, which is Lieinge in plain English, etc. How could he say,
that a Bishop serves in the Ministry never the worse, but rather the
better? etc.
The Reply.
This error of M. Hardinges grew of Ignorance. For Nazianzenes words be
very plain: Meo Patri Matter mea, data illi a Deo, non tantum Adiutrix facta
est, sed etiam Dux, and Princeps, verbo, factoque inducens illum ad res optimas
etc. In pietate non verebatur seipsam illi Magistram exhibere. In Epitaphio
Patris.
The Apology. Part 6. Ca. 5* Diui. 2.
Pope Liberius was a favorer of the Arian Heretics.
M. Hardinge.
4. Untruth. That you say of Liberius is stark false. He never favored the
Arians.
The Reply.
The Authoure hereof is S. Hierome, De Ecclesiasticis Scriptoribus. In
Fortunatiano. And one of M. Hardinges own principal Doctoures says, De
Liberio Papa constat fuisse Arianum.
The Apology. Part 6 Ca* 5. Diui. 2.
Pope Zosimus corrupted the Council of Nice.
M. Hardinge.
5. Untruth. Ye belie Zosimus: He corrupted not the Council of Nice.
The Reply.
This matter most plainly appears by the Records of the Council of
Aphrica.
The Apology. Part 6 Cap 5 Diuis. 2.
Pope John held a detestable opinion touching the immortality of the Soul.
M. Hardinge.
6. Untruth. That you report of Pope John, is likewise most false. The
woorste that Marsilius, and Ockam wrote of him, is, that he taught openly, that
the Souls of the lust see not God, until the day of Judgment. That he had
any detestable opinion of the Immortality of the Soul, there was no such
his opinion: But it is your false sclaunder: by which your wicked, and
detestable maltce, ye imagine to deface the Authority of the Holy See
Apostolic.
The Reply.
Gerson in Sermon Paschali: Pope John 22. decreed, that the Souls of the
wicked should not be pounished, before ye day of the last Judgment. Which
error the Vntuersitie of Parise condemned for Heresy, and caused the Pope to
recante. Council. Constantien. in Appendice. In primis Quin imo Johannes Papa.
22. dixit, and pertinaciter credidit, Anima^ hominis cum corpore humano mori*
and extingui, ad instar animalium brutorum. Dixitque, mortuum semel, etiam in
Nouissimo Die, minime esse resurrecturum.
The Apology. Part 6. Ca. 6. Diui. 1.
The Canonistes sale, The Pope can do as mutche, as Christ him self can do.
M. Hardinge.
7. Untruth. The most part hereof is very false, and sclaunderous. Mentiris
in your Divinity is a Verb Commune.
The Reply.
The words be most manifest, and out of al question: Excepto peccato, Papa
potest, quicquid Deus ipse potest. Extra, De translatione Episcopi. Quanto.
Hostien.
The Apology. Part 6. Ca. 6. Diui. 1.
Sum of them have said, The Pope is the Light, that is comme into the
world: And, who so is an il dooer, flees that Light.
M. Hardinge.
8. Untruth. If ye were hardely charged, to show, where he said it, or,
where he wrote it, ye would be found a Lier, as in many other points ye are
found already. That he never wrote it in any of his eloquente Italian Sermons,
set forth in Printe, I am assured. And more has he not set forth. Now it
remains, that ye tell us, where he says so or else confess your
sclaunderous Lie.
The Reply.
In the Oration, that Cornelius the Bishop of Bitonto pronounced in the Council
of Tridente, ye may find these words: Papa Lux venit in Mundum: Sed
dilexerunt homines tenebras magis quam Lucem.
The Apology* Part 4. Ca. 1. Diui. 1.
They have decreed, that a Priest, for Fornication ought not to be removed
from his Cure.
M. Hardinge.
9. Untruth. This is a foul Lie. And herein these men most shamefully have
sclaundered the Church: as, by that I have said, to any man it may appear.
The Reply.
But unto the best learned Canonistes it appears far otherwise.
Panormitane says, Hodie ex Simplici Fornicatione Clericus non deponitur.
Extra. De Consangui. and Affini. Non debet. Likewise it is solemnly noted in
great letters in the Margin, Fornicationes causa hodie nemo est deponendus.
The Apology. Part 6. Ca. 14. Diui. 1.
In the Council of Chalcedon the Civil Magistrate condemned iiJ. Bishops,
Dioscorus, Iuuenalis, and Thalassius, for Heretics, and gave Judgment, that
they should be deposed.
M. Hardinge.
10. Untruth. That al these three were condemned in that Council* we find
not. Mutche less. that they were condemned by any Civil Magistrate, do we
find etc. What is impudency? What is licentious Lieinge? What is
deceiteful dealinge, if this be not?
The Reply.
These be the words, pronounced openly in the Council, Videtur nobis iustum
esse, eidem poenae Dioscorum Reuerendum Episcopum Alexandriae, and Iuuenalem
Reuerendum Episcopum Hierosolymorum, and Thalassium Reuerendum Episcopum
Caesariae Cappadociae subiacere. Council. Chalcedonen. Action. 1. Page 831.
Reioinder. Fol. 251. b. The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Harding healpeth it forewarde with a little pretty false translation of his
own. For, whereas it is written in the Latin, Cum benedixisset Sa^cta, He
translateth it thus, When he had consecrated the Sacrament. And likewise these
words, Post finem Orationum, he translateth thus: After he had done ye
Prayer of Consecration.
M. Hardinge.
11. Untruth. Gentle Reader, consider, how falsely M. Jewel demeaneth him
self. These words, Post finem Orationum, thou find not at al in all this
32. Diutision. If they be not here, why reproves he me for vsinge a pretty
false translation? This is not a pretty, but a gross, and a shameless kind of
falsehed, to charge we with that, which here I say not.
The Reply.
It is in the very next Division. Therefore this matter needed nothing so
great adoo.
The Apology. Part. 2. Ca. 13. Diui. 1.
Origin says, The Bread, which is sanctified by the Word of God, etc.
M. Hardinge.
12. Untruth. Alleginge Origin, Sir Defender, ye play your accustomed false
play, corruptinge his sentence, and falsifieinge his words. He says, Ille
cibus, not, Ille Panis.
The Reply.
Yet Origin in the same place calls it seven times, Panis. Therefore this was
but a simple matter, to make such a Tragedy of false play.
The Apology. Part. 2. Ca. 1. Diui. 1.
S. Augustine says, Although the Matestie, and Godhedde of Christ be
euerywhere, yet the Body, wherein he rose again, must needs be in one place.
M. Hardinge.
13. Untruth. S. Augustine in that Treaty has not that word, Oportet, but
this word, Potest: as the Books have, that be not corrupted by the
mainteiners of that Heresy.
The Reply.
Gratian reportinge this place of S. Augustine, uses this word, Oportet.
Thus he says in most plain wise, Corpus, in quo Christus resurrexit, In Vno
loco esse Oportet. De Consecr. Did. 2. Prima. Likewise says Petrus Lombardus
reportinge the same, in Vno loco esse Oportet. Lib. 4. Did. 10. Sunt item. But
before them al S. Peter said, Oportet illum Coelos capere vsque ad tempora
restitutionis omnium. Actorum. 3. These, I trow, were not the maineteiners of
any Heresy.
The Apology. Part. 5. Ca. 3. Diui. 11.
The Old Council of Carthage commanded nothing to be readde in the
Congregation, but the Canonical Scriptures.
M. Hardinge.
14. Untruth. This Book is full of Lies, and falsified places. This Old
Council is newely falsified. The words be, Vt praeter Scripturas Canonicas
nihil in Ecclesia legatur sub nomine Diuinarum Scripturarum. It follows in the
same Decree, Liceat etiam legi Passiones Martyrum, cum Anniuersarij dies eoru^
celebrantur.
The Reply.
This Objection is very true: albeit not greatly to the purpose. For, as the
Decree cutteth of al secret, or unlawful Scriptures, so it suffers nothing
else to be read in the Church, but only the Passions, or deaths of Martyrs,
and that only upon the Martyrs Anniuersarie: which was, for one Martyr, but
only one day in the year. Now let M. Hardinge tell us, what, and how
mutche there remained biside, to be read in the Church, sauinge only the
Canonical Scriptures. How be it in the same third Council of Carthage, there
be other words found sommewhat plainer, and more pregnante, then these. For
in the said Council of Carthage, the Council of Hippo was abbridged. In which
Abbridgemente this Decree is read emo^gest others: Scripturae Canonicae in
Ecclesia legendae quae sunt: and praeter quas alia no^ legantur. These words
were abbridged, and authorized in the said third Council of Carthage: as it
is plain by the Title of the same: Concilij Hipponensis Abbreuiationes factae
in Concilio Carthaginensi Tertio. In mistakinge of which words I must
needs confess mine error. For by oversight, I thought, the Council of
Carthage had benne abbridged in the Council of Hippo, as it may appear by my
answer in this Book, Fol. 519. Whereas contrariwise, the Council of Hippo
was abbridged in the Council of Carthage. This in deed of my part was an
error. And I thank M. Dorman, that has geeuen me occasion, better to
consider the same. Notwithstanding, as I said before, the words be plain,
Praeter quas (Scripturas) alia non legantur.
The Apology. Par. 5. Cap. 11. Diui. ^.
The Canonistes this date use to say of the Pope, that for so mutche as he is
Lord of al benefices, though he sell Bishoprikes, Monasteries, Benefices, and
Spiritual promotions for money, yet he cannot commit Simonie, though he would
never so feign.
M. Hardinge.
15. Untruth. Whereas it is written in Summa Angelica, In Curia Romana,
titulus De Simonia non habet locum, The self same Sum uses this
distinction, saieinge, Verum est in ijs, quae sunt Simoniaca de Iure positiuo
solum: sed non in ijs, quae sunt Simoniaca de lure Diuino. Whereby he means,
that concerning Simonie, which properly is so called, the Pope is no less
subject thereto, then any other man. Thus have you shamefully belied Summa
Angelica.
The Reply.
Hereby it appears, that M. Hardinge understands not his own Summa. For by
Simonia de Iure positiuo, is meante the sale of Bishoprikes, and Benefices,
etc. which, as this Summa says, the Pope may freely selle for money,
without empeachemente of any manner of Simonie. For beter proof whereof
Theodoricus says, Papa non potest committere Simoniam. Sic tenent Iuristae.
Quia Simonia excusatur per Authoritatem Papae. De Schismate inter Urban. and
Clemen. lib. 2. cap. 32. An other says: Papa non committit Simoniam
recipiendo pecuni^m pro collatione Beneficiorum (...) shamefully we belie
Summa ^^gelica.
16. Untruth.
In the fourth part. 7. chapter, and. 4. Division of this Book, touching
that most vile, and shameful abusing of Franciscus Dandalus Gentleman of
Venice, that was driven to wallowe under ye Popes table in a chain like a
Dog, reported, as M. Hardinge says, by Sabellicus in the first Book of his
Second Decade: I have answered, as then I thought, according to truth, that
Sabellicus wrote no Decades, but only Enneades: as it might appear by his
works printed either at Basile by Heruagius, or otherwhere by any other.
Sithence I understand, that there is now extante an other Book of
Sabellicus, by the name of Decades, set forth of late at Basile by Coelius
Secundus Curio, An. 1560. Understand thou therefore, good Reader, that herein
I followed such Books of Sabellicus, as had benne long abroad, and were well
acquainted among the learned. But that there should any other new Book of
Sabellicus be printed afterward, specially so long after the Authors death,
I could not prophecy.
These, and such other, good Christian Reader, be our Untruths, so many in
number, and of such weighte, that M. Hardinge thinks him self well hable
easily with the same to lode a Carte. Confu. fol 175. a.
To al these so many, and so many, so horrible, and so blasphemous Lies, Gods
Holy name be blessed, we may truly say with S. Paul, 2. Cor. 6.
Tanquam seductores: and ecce veraces: We are called deceivers: and yet we
say the Truth.

How be it, I do not so warrante every parcel of any my writings, as though
there were nothing therein contained, but might safely be justified in all
respects, and against al quarrels. Such reverence, by S. Augustines
judgment, we ought to geeue only to the Word of God. Nomans Learning or
memory was ever infinite. But of al others, I acknowledge mine to be the
weakeste.

If I have at any time mistaken either Authoure for Authoure, or Name for Name,
or Chapter for Chapter, or Book for Book: as whereas in the allegatio^ of
Pope Leo, in steed of these words, Indiuiduam Vnitate^, I wrote, Indiuiduam
Trinitatem: or, whereas in steed of these words, Paulinus ad Romanianum, I
wrote, Paulinus ad. Augustinum, the said Epistle of Paulinus being mingled
with a whole Book of the Epistles of S. Augustine: Or, if upon any other like
(...), I have alleged either Liberius for Athanasius, or the Arians for the
Euty (...), or any one Father, or Doctoure, for an other, such errors,
being bold of malice, were never hitherto accoumpted damnable. The best
Learned have oftentimes fallen into them.

For prouse whereof, it were easy to say, yt Cicero, notwithstanding otherwise
a great Learned man, alleged Ajax in steed of Hector, Agamemnon in steed of
Ulysses, Eupolis in steed of Aristophanes: That Aristotle alleged Calypso in
steed of Circe: That Gratian allegeth Aniceus for Anicetus, Ambrosius for
Augustinus, Calixtus for Anacletus, Greek for Latin, Nevve for Old: That
Hippolytus allegeth the Apocalypse of S. John in steed of Daniel: That S.
Chrysostom names Abacuk for Sophonias, and Agar for Sara. If thou be desirous
to see these several errors further proved, it may please thee to see mine
Answer to this s, Fol. 362.

That in the alleginge of Liberatus I least out this word, Quodammodo, it
was only an Error. For why I should of purpose do it, there was no cause:
specially that word bearinge in that place no greatter weight. But M.
Hardinge alleginge these words of S. Augu. in Psalm. 33
Augustine, Christus quodammodo ferebatur in manibus suis, M. Hard. in his
Answer to the Challenge. Fol. ^08. b.
not of error, but, as it may be thought, of set purpose, leafte out,
Quodammodo, as knowinge, that in that one word reasted the meaning of the
whole.

Briefly, what so ever other like error shall be found in any my writings, I
will discharge both my Clerk, and the Compositoure, and the Printer of the
same, and take the whole upon me self. I speak not this for that I think, my
Book can be printed without error: for that, in such a number and variety
of allegations, were scarcely possible. But if any error, what so ever, shall
escape, as I doubt not but there will many, I proteste before him, that sees
the heart, it walbe wholly against my will.

And yet may not these men so charge others, as if they them selves only
were priuileged, and exempted from al such dangers. M. Hardinge may
remember, that he him self in steed of the Prophet Osee, Confut. 46. a.
has alleged us the Noble Joshua: and, Confuta. 312. b.
that by an other like oversight, he has alleged the Eighth Book of Socrates
Scholasticus, whereas Socrates never wrote but Seven: As likewise also M.
Dorman allegeth the Seventh Book of the Story of Theodoretus, Dorman, Fol. 22.
whereas Theodoretus him self never wrote but Five. And again, he fraieth al
Christian Princes with the horrible Examples of the Two Kings, as he says,
Dorman, Fol. 24.
Ozias, and Oza. Yet he might easily have learned, that Oza was a poor Private
man, and never known to be a King. Notwithstanding, in one of his late
litlewoorthe Pamflettes, confessinge his oversight herein, he stumbleth into an
other Error, Dorman, in his Request. Fol. 13.
as foul, as the first, and bewraieth his ignorance more then before. For now
he tells us, he has better remembered him self, that the said Oza was not a
King, but only a Prophet. And yet yewis, a child could have told him, that
the same Oza was neither King, nor Prophet, but only a Leuite. Let him look
better on his books, and he shall find it.

How be it, I would not, that either M. Hardinge, or M. Dorman should
think, that therefore they are here charged with ignorance. Errors will creep
bitweene their fingers, be they never so watcheful. In the heat, and drifte
of writing, when the mind is wholly occupied, and fully bente to the substance
of the cause, it is an easy matter, by sum confusion, one way, or other, to
disorder a word, or to displace a number, as to write either 9. for 6. or,
24. for 42. or sum other like: which error, though it be light in doing,
yet in the reckeninge oftentimes is very great. To leave other Examples, M.
Hardinge him self in his Confutation of the Apology, Confut. 47. a. Reioind.
Fol. 287. a.
in steed of the 22. of Luke, has printed the 2. of Luke. Likewise in his
Reioinder, Reioind. Fol. 287. a.
in steed of these words, (...), he has printed, and sent us quite the
contrary, (...). In one Book of the New Testamente set out at Colaine, in
steed of these words, 1. Corin. 6.
Neque Scortatores Regnum Dei possidebunt, ye shall find it by error printed
thus, Neque Sacerdotes Regnum Dei possidebunt. To be short, M. Hardinge in
this self same Book, in steed of these words, Confut. 332. a.
Lulled a sleep, by error has printed, Lulled a sheep. If al such
childishe advantages should be taken, then could no writer escape
uncontrolled.

Thus, good Christian Reader, by the short View of these few Untruths, for
so it pleases these men to call them, thou maiste the better weigh the
value and substance^^ of the (...).

Tedious Repetitions.
M. Hardinges often rehearsal, and doubling of one thing has forced me
sommetime to do the like. Which thing, good Reader, if unto thee it shall
seem over wearisome, I pray thee to consider the occasion thereof. My
meaning was only to do thee good.

To the Christian Reader.
IT pitieth me in thy behalf, good Christian Reader, to see they conscience
thus assaulted this day with so contrary Doctrines of Religion: and specially
if thou have a zele to follow, and seeste not, what: and wouldeste feign please
Eod, and knoweste not, how: nor findeste thee self sufficiently armed with
Gods Holy Sprite: nor hable either to discerue thy meat from poison, or to
unwind thee self out of the snares. 2 Corin. 11.
For Satan transfourmeth him self into an Angel of Light: The wicked is more
watcheful, and vehemente, then the Godly: and Falsehed is oftentimes painted,
and vewtified, and shines more glorious then the Truth.

These be the things, 2. Tim. 2. Matthae. 24. 2. Tim. 2. Johan. 10. Roman. 8.
that, as S. Paul says, work the subversion of the Hearers: and by mean
whereof, as Christ says, if it were possible, the very Bsecte of God should
be deceived. How be it, God knows his own: and no Power can pusse them out
of his hand. God is hable to work comfort out of confusion, and to force
his light to shine out of darkness. Al things work unto good unto them,
that be in Christ Jesus. Be Falsehed never so freashely colored, yet in the
end the Truth will conquer.

Notwithstanding, God in these days has so amazed the Adversaries of his
Gospel, and has caused them so openly, and so grossly to lay abroad their
folies, to the sight, and face of all the world, that noman now, be he never so
ignorante, can think, he may justly be excused. They deal not now so
suttelly, as other Heretics in old times were wont to do: they hide not the
lothsomenesse of their errors: they cloak not them selves in Sheepeskinnes:
they dissemble nothing: they excuse nothing: but, without either shame of man,
or fear of God, they rake up those things, that before were buried, that
themselves had forsaken, the wise had abhorred, the world had lothed. It had
benne more policy for them, to have yielded in sommewhat, and to have stayed
in the rest. So there might have appeared sum plainenesie in their
dealinges.

But this is Gods just judgment, that they, that wilfully withstand the
Truth, Esai. 30.
should be geeuen over to maintain Lies, as beeinge the Children of Untruth,
Children, that will not hear the Law of God.

For trial whereof, I beseech thee, good Reader, advisedly to peruse these
few notes, truly taken out of M. Hardinges late Confutation. Judge thereof,
as thou shall see cause. Let no affection, or fantasy cause things to seem
otherwise, then they be.

The two principal Grou^des of this whole Book are these: M. Harding. fol.
334. b.
First, That the Pope, although he may err by personal error, in his own
Private Judgment, as a man, and as a particulare Doctor in his own opinion:
yet as he is Pope, as he is the Successor of Peter, as he is ye Vicare of
Christ in Earth, and as he is the Shepherd of the Universal Church, in
Public Judgment, in deliberation, and Definitive Sentence, he never erreth,
nor never erred, nor never can err: As if he would say, The Pope walkinge in
his Galerie is one man: and fittinge in Consistory, or in Judgment, is an
other: Which thing to hold, Alphonsus de Castro says, Alphons. lib. 1.
Cap. 4.
it is mere folly. Yet is this M. Hardinges chiefest, or rather, as I might in
manner say, his only ground.

The Second is this, Confu. Fol. 16. b. Fol. 261. b.
The Church of Rome is the whole, and only Catholic Church of God: and,
who so ever is not obediente unto the same, must be judged an ^^leretique.
These two grounds being once well, and surely laid, he may build at
pleasure, what him lists.

As for the Pope, the better to countenance his estate, he says, that Peter
received thee, I beseech thee to consider, with what indifferente Judgment M.
Harding would have thee to pass bitweene us.

First he says, What should we seek for Truth? Reioind. In (...) Preface
to (...) Reader. * iij * iiij a. * iiij b. ** ij. a.
Let us only behold the custom of the Church. Again, What Arguments, what
Assegations, what show of disproufe so ever he bring against these things,
we ought to make small accoumpte thereof. Again, I would bless me self from
him, as from the Minister of Satan, and as from the Disciple of Antichriste,
and as from Gods open, and professed enemy. Again, M. Iewelles Reply, and
other like Hereticol Books, are unlawful to be readde, by order of the
Church, without special license: and are utterly forebidden to be readde, or
keapte, under pain of Excommunication. And again, Reioind. In(...) Preface to
(...) Jewel. (...).
As for the Reply, none other way will serve, but to throw al into the fire.

Of the other side, touching the Word of God, with most terrible words he
fraieth thee from it, and bids thee to consider of other things, and to
behold, I know not, Confu^. 212 (...) Reioind. in (...) Preface to (...)
Reader.
what. Ye prostitute the Scriptures, he says, as Baudes do their Harlottes,
to the Ungodly, Unlearned, Rascal people: Again, Prentises, Light Persons,
and the rifferaffe of the people: And again, The Unlearned people were keapte
from the Reading of the Scriptures by the special providence of God, that
precious stoanes should not be thrown before Swine. M Har. in his Answer,
Artic. 15. Diui. 7.
In such regard these men have, as well the Holy Scriptures, as also the
People of God. The scriptures they resemble to common Harlottes, and the
vileste creatures of the stews: The people of God they call, Ungodly,
Rascalles, Rifferaffe, and Filthy Swine.

Thus he suffers thee not to read, either my poor Book, whereof thou
should Judge: or the Holy Word of God, whereby thou might he hable to
Judge: but only bids thee to follow him, and to say, as he says: and al
is safe. Thus, first he blinds thine eyes, and then wills thee to look
about, and to condemn the thing, Hierony. in Esaiam, lib. 9. ca. 30.
thou never kneweste. So says S. Hierome, Isti tantam sibi assumunt
Authoritatem, vt sieve dextra doceant, sieve sinistra, id est, sieve bona, sieve
mala, nolint Discipulos ratione discutere, sed se praecessores sequi: These
men take so mutche upon them selves, that, whether they teach with the Right
hand, or with the Left, that is to say, whether they teach good things, or
badde, they will not have their Hearers, or Learners, to enquire causes,
wherefore they should do this, or that: but only to follow them, being
their Leaders.

But beware, I beseech, thee, good Christian Reader. A simple eye is soon
beguiled. It is very course Woolle, yt will take no color. It is a desperate
cause, yt with words, and eloquence may not be smoothed. Be not deceived.
Remember, of what matters, and with what Adversaries thou haste to deal. With
feace, and reverence be careful of thine own Salvation. Lay down al
affection, and favor of parties. Judge justly of that shall be alleged.
Unless thou know, thou canste not Judge: Unless thou hear both sides, thou
canste not know. If thou like ought, know, why thou likeste it. A wise man in
each thing will search the cause. He, that cannot judge gold by sound, or
insight, yet may try it by the poise. If thou canste not weigh these matters,
for want of Learning, yet, so sensible, and so gross they are, thou maiste
feel them with thy fingers. Thou maiste soon find a difference bitweene
Gold, and Brass: bitweene Jacob, and Esau: bitweene a Face, and a Visarde:
bitweene a fuile Body, and an empty Shadow.

Say not, Thou art settled in thy Belief, before thou know it. Vain Faith,
is no Faith. August De Tempore. Sermon 145. August. in quae^ion. Veter.
Testamen quaest. 43.
S. Augustines counsel is good: Beleeu: no more of Christ, then Christ has
willed thee to believe: Nemo de Christo credat, nisi, quod de se credi voluit
Christus. Likewise he says, Fides stulta non prodest, sed obest: Fond Faith
is hurtful, and does no good. S. Hilarie says, Non minus est, Deum fingere,
quam negare: Hilar. in Psalm. 1.
To divise fancies of God, it is as horrible, as to say, There is no God.

The Anciente Father Tertullian, speakinge of the Enemies of the Cross of
Christ, that disdeigned to submit their wills to the will of God, says
thus: Amant ignorare, Tertull. in Apologetico.
cum alij gaudeant cognouisse. Malunt nescire, quod iam oderunt. Adeo' quod
nesciunt, praeiudicant id esse, quod, si scirent, odisse non possent: They
desire to be ignorante, whereas other folks desire to know. They would not
know the Truth, because they hate it. ( What so ever it be) they imagine it
to be the same thing, that they hate. But if they knew it in deed, they
could not hate it. Let Reason lead thee: let Authority move thee: let Truth
enforce thee. The Wise Man says, Eccles. 2.
Who so fears the Lord, will not be wilful against his Word. God of his
mercy confound al Errors: geeue the Victory to his Truth: and Glory to
his Holy name, Amen.

From London. 27. Octobris, 1567.
AN ANSWER TO A Certain Book lately set forth by M. Hardinge, and
entitled, A Confutation of the Apology of the Church of England.
The Title of the Apology.
AN Apology, or answer in defense of the Church of England, with a brief,
and plain declaration of the true Religion professed, and used in the same.
The Confutation by M. Hardinge.
Whereas these defenders take upon them the name of the Church of England,
The de^enders likened to Esopes Ass.
settinge forth thereby a face of authority, they do much like the Ass that
Esope tells of, which, to make the beasts afraid, had put on him a Lions
skin, and therewith ietted abroad terribly. For as the Lions skin was but
lapped about him, The wont of all Herctiques. Heretics likened to Apes. The
name and reputation of the Church challenged by Heretics.
and grew not to his body: so they being in deed no lively members nor
part of the Church, cover them selves under the title and name of the
Church, the rather to begyle the simple. And verily herein they follow the
wont of all Heretics. For never was there any sect of Heretics hitherto,
which has not claimed to be accounted and called the Church. For which cause
of certain ancient Fathers they have been likened to Apes, whose property
is, though they be Apes, yet to counterfeit men, and to court to seem men.
Nouatianus, at says S. Cyprian, after the manner of Apes, would challenge to
him self the authority of the Catholic Church. And where as himself was
not in the Church, but contrariwise a rebel against the Church, In epist, ad
Iubainu^ de Haereticis baptiza^dis.
took upon him to affirm, that al other were Heretics, and presumed
tovpholde, the Church was on his side. Irenaeus and Tertullian, who were
before him, write, that Heretics made so much adoo to persuade, De praescript.
haeret.
that the Church was among them selves only, that they feared not to call
the right beleuinge and Catholic Church, Heretical and Schismatic. S.
Hilary declaringe how patiently he demeaned himself toward the Arians his
enemies, Contra Constantium.
by whom he was bannisshed, writes, that in five years space, whiles he
lived in bannishment, he never spoke nor wrote evil word against them,
August. contra epist. Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 1.
which falsely said them selves to be the Church of Christ, and were the
Synagoge of Antichrist. The Donatisles, against whom S. Augustine wrote much,
said, that the Christianity was quite lost and gone out of so many nations
that be in the world, and remained only in Aphrike, and that the Church was
only there. Bernard. in ca^t. Sermo. 66.
In S. Bernardes time also the Heretics who would be called Apostolikes, as
they of our time call themselves Gospellers, said that they were the Church.

But what mean all Heretics (may we judge) by couetinge so much to be seen
that which they are not? Apostolici. What mean Heretics by chalenginge
unto them the name and estimation of the Church.
Forsooth they mean none other thing, then their Father the Devil means,
when he goes about to begile man. For then what does he? uses he not this
policy, to change his owggly hew, and put himself in goodly shape of an
Angel of light? For he is not vnwittinge, that if he showed himself in his
own form, such as he is, that every one would fly from him, and none
lightly would be deceived by him. Heretics do the like. Although they hate
the Church never so deadly, yet to have the more opportunity to hurt it, 2.
Cor. 11.
pretend themselves to be of the Church. The estimation and authority of the
Church. Lucae. 10. Matthew. 18. 1. Tim. 3. Ephesians. 1. Oseae. 2. Psalm. 131. Gene.
^.
For they be not ignorant, how great the authority of the Church is. Of
whose governors Christ said, he that hears you, hears me: and he that
despises you, despises me. And again, Tell the Church. They consider in
what credit the Church is with all Christen people: how they stay
themselves by it, as being the pillour and ground of the truth: how they
Love her, even as their common Mother, how they honor it, as the Body and
fulness of Christ, as the spouse of Christ through Faith, according to that
is written, I will despouse thee to me in faith: As the true Syon, which our
Lord has chosen to be his habitation, and his restinge place for ever: As the
safe Arc to keep us from drowninge in the dangerous Seas of this world; out
of which nolesse then once out of the Ark of Noah, is nosaluation. Again they
know the Church must needs be greatly esteemed among all the godly, for the
singular promiser Christ has made to it, that he would be with it all days
to the end of the world: That he would pray to his father for the holy Ghost
to be given to it, the spirit of truth to remain withit for ever. But as
Heretics impugn the law by the words of the law, In comment. in epist, ad
Tir. cap. 3.
(...) S. Ambrose says so to over throw the Church, they presume to take
unto them the name of the Church. But what do (...) when they are urged and
wroonge, when by force of arguments they are straighted, and as it were driven
to the wall? when it is plainly proved to their face, which is sone done
that they be not in, nor of the Church, specially being of Heresy openly
denounced, The wont of the Gospellers being excommunicate out of the Church.
and by just Excommunication cut of from the Church? In this case the
practice of the Gospellers is, utterly to set the Church, as taught, and
with a hot raging spirit to defy it, and to say, that themselves be the
Catholic Church, and that the Catholics be the Papisticall Church, the
Church of Antichrist, the where of (...) a deune of Thieves, and I can not
tell what.

The Answer by the Bishop of Sarisburie.
TO answer M. Hardinge to every parcel of his Book, being so long, it
would be too tedious. Wherefore leauinge many his impertinent speeches, and
other unnecessary and waste words, which sundry his friends think, he
might better have spared, I will touch only so mutche thereof, as shall bear
sum show of substance, and may any way seem worthy to be answered.

First touching the Church of God, we believe, and confess all that M.
Hardinge has here said, 1. Timot. 3. Ephesians. 1.
or otherwise can be said. It is the Pillar of the Truth, the Body, the
Fullness, and Spouse of Christ. Al these words are undoubtedly true and
certain. And therefore, M. Hardinge, you are the more blamewoorthy, that of
the House of God, being so glorious, have made a cave of Thieves: and have
turned the beutie of Sion into the confusion of Babylon.

True it is, that Heretics have evermore apparelled them selves with the name
of the Church: as Antichriste also shall procure him self credit under the
name of Christ. Thus did your Fathers, M. Harding, long ago. They said
then, even as you say now, Johan. 8. Hierem. 7. Hierem. 18.
We are the Children of Abraham: we are the Euheretours of Gods promises: we
have the Temple of God, the Temple of God. The Law shall never pass from the
Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Thus
coutinuinge wilfully in the open breach of Gods commandment, nevertheless
they chearished them selves then, as you do now, only with the bare title of
the Church: in whose name what so ever credit ye can any wise win, your
meaning is, skilfully to conueigh the same over wholly to the Church of Rome:
as if that Church only were the Church of God, De Mayor. and Obedi. vnam
Sanctam. Did. 22. Omnes.
and without that there were no hope of Salvation: And therefore you defend,
and hold for truth, that your Church has authority above Gods Word.
And Pope Nicolas says, Who so denies the Privilege, and Supremacy of the Sea of Rome, has renounced the Faith, and is an Heretic. And thus, as Leo
says, Leo Epist. 83. Ad Palaestinos.
Ecclesiae nomine armamini, and contra Ecclesiam dimicatis: Ye arm your selves
with the name of the Church, and yet ye fight against the Church. Likewise
says S. Cyprian, Cypri. De Simplicitate praela.
Diabolus excogitauit nouam fraudem, vt sub ipso nominis Christiani titulo
fallat incautos: The Devil has divised a new kind of policy, under the very
title of the name of Christ to deceive the simple.

Now concerning that hot raginge Sprite, wherewith M. Hardinge says, the
Gospellers deste the Church and set it at naught, verily I think it a hard
matter for any Gospeller, be he never so hot, in such kind of eloquence to
match M. Hardinge. Neither yet may he well condemn al such, as in the like
cases have been hot, Esa^. 1. Matthew. 3. Matthae. 23. Johan. 8.
and earnest. Esaias the Prophet says, O ye Princes of Sodom, and ye people
of Gomorrha: John the Baptist says to the Scribes, and Phariseis, O ye
Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, and Adders: Christ says unto them, Woe
be unto you, ye Scribes, and Phariseis, ye hypocrites: Ye are of your Father
the Devil. In these eramples we see, the Sprite of God can sometimes be hot
and earnest against the deceivers of the people, and the professed enemies of
the Cross of Christ. Neither did either Esaias the Prophet, or John the
Baptiste, or Christ desie the Church of God, and set it at naught, as M.
Hardinge imagines of us: but rather by these seruent speeches uttered the
vehement zele, and just grief, they had conceived against them, that under
the name of the Church abused Gods people, and defaced the Church.

For they are not al Heretics, M. Hardinge, that this day epsy your gross,
and palpable errors, and mourn to God for reformation. S. Augustine says,
Non debet Ouis pellem suam deponere, August. Lib. 2. De Sermon. Dom^. in monte.
qu^d Lupi aliquando se ea contegant: It is no reason, the Sheep should
therefore leave of his fliese, for that he sees the Woulfe sometime in the
same apparel. Likewise, it is no reason, that we should therefore give over the
right, and enheritance, we have in the Church of God, for that you by
intrusion, and unjust means have entitled your selves unto the same. Johan.
5.
It behooves us rather, to search the Scriptures, as Christ has advised us,
and thereby to assure our selves of the Church of God. For by this trial
only, and by none other, it may be known. Ephe. 1.
Therefore S. Paul calls the Church the Spouse of Christ, for that she
ought in all things to give ear to the voice of the Bridegrooms. Likewise he
calls the Church the Pillar of the Truth, 1. Timo. 3.
for that she staieth her self only by the Word of God: Without which
Word y^ Church. were it never so bewtiful. should be no Church. Irenae.
Lib. 3. Cap. 11.
The Ancient Father Irenaeus says, Columna, and firmamentum Ecclesiae est
Euangelium, and Spritus vitae: The Pillar and buttresse of the Church is the
Gospel, August. De vnita. Eccle. Cap. 3.
and the Sprite of life. S. Augustine says, Sunt certi Libri Dominici, quorum
authoritari vtrique consentimus: Ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam: ibi discutiamus
causam nostram: There be certain Books of our Lord, unto the authority
whereof each part agreethe. There let us seek for the Church: thereby set
us examine and try our matters. And again, August. in eode^ Cap.
Nolo humanis documentis, sed Diuinis oraculis sanctam Ecclesiam demo^strari: I
will, ye show me the holy Church, not by decrees of men, but by the word
of God. Chrysostom. In Opere Imperfecto, Homi. 49. Chrysostom. in eadem Homilia.
Likewise says Chrysostom, Nullo modo cognoscitur, quae sit vera Ecclesia
Christi, nisi tantummodo' per Scripturas: It can no way be known, what is the
Church, but only by the Scriptures. And again, Christus mandat, vt volentes
firmitatem accipere Verae Fidei, ad nullam rem fugiant, nisi ad Scripturas.
Alioqui, si ad alia respexerint, Scandalizabuntur, and peribunt, non
intelligentes, quae sit vera Ecclesia. Et per hoc incident in Abominatione^
Desolationis, quae stat in Locis Sanctis Ecclesiae: Christ commands, that
who so will have the assurance of True Faith, seek to nothing else, but unto
the Scriptures. Otherwise, if they look to any thing else, they shall be
offended, and shall perish, not understanding, Daniel. 9. Matthew. 24.
which is the True Church. And by mean here of they shall fall into the
Abomination of Desolation, which stands in the Holy Places of the Church.

By these Ancient learned Fathers it is plain, that the Church of God is
known by Godde^ Word only, and none otherwise. And therefore M. Hardinge,
you so carefully flee the same, and condemn it for Heresy, and often burn
it, lest thereby the deformities of your Church should be known. Johan. 3.
For the il dooer flees the light.

Now, where as it so well likes M. Hardinge to call us al Heretics, and for
his pleasures sake to liken us to Apes, to Asses, and to the Devil,
notwithstanding we might safely return the same whole, from whence it came,
yet I think it not seemly, nor greatly to purpose to answer al such
intemperate humors. Salomons advise is good, Proverb. 26.
Answer not folly with like folly. Notwithstanding, the poor simple Ass,
unto whom we are compared, was hable sometime to see the Angel of God, Numer.
22.
and to open his mouth, and to speak, and to reprove the lewd attempt of
Balaam the false Prophet. What so ever accoumpt it pleases M. Hardinge to
make of us, by the grace of God we are that we are. If we be hable to bear
Christ with his Cross, it is sufficient.

But who they be, that have of long time ietted so terribly under the Lions
skin, and only with a painted Visarde, or empty name of the Church, have
feared all the cattle of the field, it is needelesse to speak it: the world
now sees it: it can no longer be dissembled. Even he, that lately bare him
self as the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and called him self Augustinus
Steuchus, de Primatu.
King of Kings, and See the fifthe part hereof, the 6. Cap. and. 15.
Division.
said, he had power over the Angels of God, and amassed the hearts of the simple
with the terror of his Lions pelte, only for that he sat in Peter's Chair is
now reuefled and better known, and esteemed as he is worthy: he may now
iette up and down with more ease, and less terror. And why so? These poor
Asses, whom M. Hardinge so much disdeigneth, have stripte of his counterfeite
skin, that made him so hardy, and have caused him to appear even as he is.

The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 1.
It has been an old complainte, even from the first time of the Patriarchs
and Prophets, and confirmed by the writings and testimonies of every age,
that the Truth wandereth here and there as a stranger in the world, Tertull.
in Apologetico.
and does readily find enemies and sclaunderers amongst those, that know her
not. Albeit perchance this may seem unto some a thing hard to be believed,
I mean to such as have scante well and narowly taken heed thereunto,
specially seeing al mankind of natures very motion without a teacher does
coueite the Truth of their own accord: and saying our Saueour Christ him
self, when he was on earth, would be called the Truth, as by a name most
fit to express al his divine power. Yet we, which have been exercised in
the holy Scriptures, and which have both read and seen, what has happened
to al godly men commonly at al times, what to the Prophets, to the Apostles,
to the Holy Martyrs, and what to Christ him self: with what rebukes,
reuilinges, and despites they were continually vexed, whiles they here lived,
and that only for the Truths sake: We (I say) do see, that this is not
only no new thing, or hard to be believed, but that it is a thing already
received, and commonly used from age to age. Nay truly, this might seem much
rather a merueile, Johan. 8.
and beyond al belief, if the Devil, who is the Father of lies, and enemy to
al Truth, would now upon a sudden change his nature, and hope, that Truth
might otherwise be suppressed, then by belieinge it: Or that he would beginn^
to establish his own kingdom by vsinge now any other practices, then the
same, which he has ever used from the beginning. For since any man's
remembrance, we can skante find one time, either when Religion did first
grow, or when it was settled, or when it did afreshe spring up again, wherein
Truth and Innocence were not by all unworthy means, and most despitefully
entreated. Doubtless the Devil well sees, that so long as truth is in good
safety, him self cannot be safe, nor yet maintain his own estate.

For, letting pass the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, who, as we have
said, had no part of their life free from co^tumelies and sclaunders: We
know, there were certain in times paste, which said and commonly Preached,
Cornel. Tacit^^.
that the old ancient Jews (of whom we make no doubt but they were the
woorshippers of the only and true God) did worship either a Sow, or an Ass
in Gods steed: and that all the same Religion was nothing else, but
sacrilege, and a plain contempt of al godliness. We know also, that the Son
of God, our Saueour Jesus Christ, when he taught the Truth, was coumpted a
Sorcerer and an Enchaunter, a Samaritane, Beelzebub, a deceiur of the People, a
Drunkarde, and a Glutton. Again, who woteth not, what words were spoken
against S. Paul, the most earnest and vehement Preacher, and maintainer of
the Truth? Sometime, that he was a seditious and busy man, a raiser of
tumultes, a causer of rebellion: sometime again, that he was an Heretic:
sometime, that he was mad: sometime, that only upon strife and stomach he was
both a blasphemer of Gods law, and a despiser of the Fathers ordinances.
Further who knows not, how S. Steuin, after he had thoroughly and sincerely
embraced the truth, and began frankly and stoutly to preach and set forth
the same, as he ought to do, was immediately called to answer for his life,
as one that had wickedly uttered disdainful and heinous words against the
Law, against Moses, against the Temple, and against God? Or who is ignorant,
that in times past there were some, which reproved the holy Scriptures of
falsehed, saying, they contained things both contrary, and quite one against
an other: Marion, ex Tertul.
and how that the Apostles of Christ did severally disagree betwixt them
selves, and that S. Paul did vary from them al? Aelius, e Lacta^s.
And not to make rehearsal of al, for that were an endless labor, Eusebius. Li. 5.
C. 11.
who knows not, after what sort our Fathers were railed upon in times paste,
Tertul. in Apologe.
which first began to acknowledge and profess the name of Christ: how they
made private conspiracies, devised secret Counsels against the common wealth,
and to that end made early and privy meetinges in the dark, killed young
Babes, fed them selves with men's fleashe, and like savage and brute beasts,
did drink their Blood? In conclusion, how that after they had put out the
candels, they committed Adultery between them selves, and without regard
wrought incest one with an other: that Brethern lay with their Sisters, Sons
with their Mothers, without any reverence of nature or kin, without shame,
without difference: and that they were wicked men without al care of Religion,
and without any opinion of God, being the very enemies of mankind, unworthy
to be suffered in the world, and unworthy of life?

Al these things were spoken in those days against the people of God, against
Christ Jesus, against Paul, against Steuin, and against al them, whosoever
they were, which at the first beginning embraced the truth of the Gospel,
and were contented to be called by the name of Christians: which was then an
hateful name among the common people. Tertull. in Apolo. Cap. 3.
And although the things which they said, were not true, yet the Devil
thought it should be sufficient for him, if at the least he could bring it so
to pass, as they might be believed for true: and that the Christians might be
brought into a common hatred of every body, and have their death and
destruction sought of al sorts. Hereupon Kings and Princes being led then
by such persuasions, killed all the Prophets of God, lettinge none escape:
Esaias with a saw, Jeremy with stones, Daniel with Lions, Amos with an iron
bar, Paul with the sword, and Christ upon the Cross: and condemned al
Christians to imprisonmentes, to torments, to the pikes, to be thrown down
headlong from rocks and steep places, Suetonius Tra^quil. in Nerone.
to be cast to wild beasts, and to be burnt: and made great fires of their
quick bodies, for the only purpose to give light by night, and for a very
scorn and mocking stock: and did compte them no better, then the vilest
filthe, the ofscouringes and laughinge games of the whole world. Thus (as ye
see) have the Authors and professors of the truth ever been entreated.

M. Hardinge.
Who would not think, these defenders were true men, that in the beginning of
their Apology speak so much of the truth? Yet who knows not, that
oftentimes evil meaning is hid under good words? Who has not heard, that
filthy queanes in time and place use the honest talk of chaste matrones? The
thief commends just dealinges, and many times shewithe a stomach against
false harlottes, 1. Corinthians. 11.
noman more. Among al none pretend truth in words so much as Heretics. I
fear me, says S. Paul, lest, as the Serpente beguiled Eve by his sutteltie,
so your wits be corrupted, and fallen away from that plainenes. Which is in
Christ. The Apostle feared because of the crafty Jews: who the rather to
deceive, mingled scriptures with their own traditions, and truth with falls
head. So brings the Heretic his hearer to error in faith by color and
pretense of truth.

They are much like to the Manicheis, De Vtilita. Credendi ad Honoratu^. Lib.
1. Ca. 1. Co^fess. li. 5. ca. 6. Matthew. 7.
who promised their hearers to discuss, and set forth the truth most
evidently unto them, and to deliver them from all manner of errors. By which
fair promises S. Augustine was allured to be a diligent scholar of theirs for
the space of nine years.

Christ gave us a lesson how to discern them. By their fruits ye shall
know them, says he. And now to you Sirs. Even in the beginning, and as I
may say, in the foreheade of your Apology, whiles I examine it diligently, I
find two foul faults: the one in your Rhetorike, the other in your Logike.
By which two faults both the vns kill of your secretary, and the weakness of
your matter may be espied, as the Ass, I spoke of right now, was by his two
ears staringe out under the Lions skin. Your divinity is nothing else in
gross, but a lump of lies, errors and Heresies.

First touching your Rhetorike, emongst many faulty proemes, one of the woorst
is that, which is such, as the adversary may use: which by them is called
Exordium commune, that is to wite, such a beginning, as will serve the
defendant, no less then the Plaintiff, or contrariwise. Of that sort is the
beginning of your Apology. For declaringe at large, that truth has ever
been persecuted, what says it therein (the faults amended) that we may not
say the same? That shipmaister is accoumpted very bad, who at the settinge out
of the haven drives the Ship on the rocks.

Alleaginge Tertullian to healpe your cause, ye injury the Doctor by alteringe
his words. Ye were not wise, by falsifiyng the first sentence, so much to
impair your credit. Tertullian says not, that truth readily finds enemies
and sclaunderers amongst those, that know her not: but that truth sone
finds enemies inter extraneos, amongst aliantes and strangers. Now the
Christian Catholics, whom ye call Papists, be not in respect of the truth
aliantes, and strangers. For your selves in sundry places of your Book reprove
them for resistinge the truth which they know.

You have given Tertullian a new liuerie with your own badge, and have made
exchange of Extraneos with Ignotos. Tertullian meante by aliantes no other
then Infidels, and Paynimes: emonge whom Christen people then lived, and were
daily persecuted. But after the Gospel had benne sounded abroad by the
Apostles, and their successors through all the earth, after that the Emperors
them selves, and all the people every where had received the faith, then was
the truth no more a wanderer, strangers or Pilgrim in the earth.

The Bishop of Sarisburie.
Touching this comparison of whoores, and Thieves, and other like M. Hardinges
ungentle speeches, as I have before protested, I will say nothing. He is very
doumbe, and can speak but little, that cannot speak it.

It is true, M. Hardinge, that you say: Most Liars oftentimes pretend most
Truth: as, if there were none other example, may soon appear by the whole
tenor and substance of your Books. The Devil him self, the better to found
his Lies, bears him self oftentimes as the Angel of Truth.

But the example, 2. Corinthians. 11
that ye bring of the Jews, who, as you say, the rather to deceive, mingled
Scripture with their own Traditions, and Truth with Falsehed, makes most
plainly against your self. For you know, that this is the general compiainte
of all the Godly this day throughout the whole Church of God, Matthew. 15.
Hierem. 2.
that you have mingled your Lead with the Lords Goulde, and have filled the
Lords Harvest full of your Darnel: that you have broken Gods manifest
commandments, to uphold, and maintain your own Traditions: That you have
damned up the Springes of the Water of Life, Hierem. 23.
and have broken up puddles of your own, 2. Corinthians. 11.
such as be hable to hold no water: That for your dreams sake you have
caused the people to forgeat the name of God, and have led them from that
simplicity, that is in Christ Jesus. This is the mingling of Traditions with
the Scriptures of God. I marvel, ye could so freely utter so much, and so
directly against your self.

As for the example of the Manicheis, it was utterly impertinent, and from the
purpose. Yet (Good Reader) that thou maiste understand, what manner of
Heretics these Manicheis were, and what errors they defended, first thy
forebade lawful marriage, and allowed fornication, as M. Hardinges See what is
answered in the fourth pare hereof, Ca. 1. Di. 1.
Catholics do now. So says S. Augustine of them, In quaest. in Nouum
Testam. Quae. 72.
Nuptiarum aditus intercludunt: and promiscu^ conuenire hortantur. Leo Sermon. 4.
de Quadragesima.
Secondly they received, and ministered the Holy Mysteries under one kind,
contrary to the general order of the Catholic Church. And so does M.
Harding now. Aug. Epist. 19.
Thirdly they yielded more credit to their own diuises, then to Gods Holy
word. August. con. Faustum. Lib. 32. Cap. 19.
And where as the Scriptures were plain against them, they said, even as M.
Hardinge Fol. 220. b.
M. Hardinge says, the Scriptures were falsified, and full of errors. Augu.
de Morib. Mantchae. Lib. 2. Cap. 15. Peregrinas and exquisitas f^uges multis
ferculis variatas.
Fourthly they abstained from fleashe: and yet in their fast, they had and
used al manner delicate and strange fruits, with sundry sorts of Spices in
great abundance: Aug. De Morib. Manichae. Lib. 2. Cap. 13.
They absteined from Wine, and yet used other liquours more deintie, and
precious, then any Wine, and thereof drank while their bellies would hold. S.
Augustines words thereof be these, Distenti, et crepantes, I leave ye rest.
Now judge thou, gentle Reader, whether party seems best to resemble the
Manichets.

But whereas he thus vpbraideth us, By their fruits ye shall know them. Verily
whiles the Bishop of Rome even in the City of Rome mainteineth his houses of
Ribaudrie and open Stews, and M. Hardinge is ready, and hable by his eloquence
and Divinity to defend the same, they have no just cause, greatly to boaste
them selves of their fruits. How be it, it may be thought, Christ gave us
this lesson, not thereby to try the true Doctrine from the false, but a true
professor from an Hypocrite. Otherwise our lives must be tried by the Gospel,
not the Gospel by our lives.

Now let us examine that Horrible Heresy, that M. Hardinge has espied in
the Rules of Rhetorique, by which, says he, the Secretaries vnskil is
betrayed, even in the foreheade of our Book. This entry, says M. Hardinge,
touching the complainte of Truth, is so indifferent and common to both the
parties, that either may use it, as well as other. Which kind of beginning,
says he, is called Exordium commune, and by the learned in Rhetorique is
misliked as faulty. First of al, M. Hardinge, this seems to me a strange
kind of beginning, in so deep a disputation of Divinity, to make your first
quarrel unto Rhetorique. Bilike for lack of better Entry, ye thought it good
to rushe in as you might. In deed either of us may seem to stand in defense
of Truth. I deny it not. For as we have the substance, and Truth it self,
so are you content to claim the name. And so far forth Truth is common to
us both. Origin. contra Celsum, Li. 3. and Lib. 4.
So the wicked Heathens Celsus, and Antiphon, notwithstanding they published
their Books against the Truth, yet they entitled the same (...), the Book
of Truth. S. Hierome says, Mendacium semper imitatur Veritatem. Falshed
evermore bears a show of Truth. In this sort Truth is common to either
party. Origin in Matthae. Tract. 27.
Origin says, Veritas Christus: simulata Veritas Antichristus. Christ is the
Truth it self: Antichrist is the Truth countrefeite. All this notwithstanding,
Christ refused not to use the same kind of entry, that M. Hardinge so much
mistiketh: Johan. 8. Roman. 1.
but said unto the Phariseis, Ye seek to minder me, a man that have told you
the Truth. And S. Paul to the Romans says, They have turned the Truth of
God into falshed. The like might I say of Tertullian, Cyprian, and other
Fathers. Yet, I trow, M. Hardinge will not therefore reprove either Christ, or
Paul, or Tertullian, or Cyprian: nor say, they used such a Beginning, as
their adversaries might have used as well as they, and had forgotten their Rules
of Rhetorique.

Loathe I am so long to stand in so light a matter. But I marvel mutche, that
M. Harding being so great an Artificer in so small cases, had no better eye to
his own Entry. For if in writing the Defense of Truth, it be a fault in
Rhetorique to begin with the il intreatinge, and co^plainte of Truth, what
then may we think it to be in the Defense of manifest and known error, to
begin, as M. Hardinge does, with Whoores, with Thieves, with Apes, with
Asses, with Children of the Devil, and with many other like unseemly scoffs,
and scorns? What Rhetorique, what Eloquence, what Art, what Skill is this?
What Orator ever used it? what Rhetorician, what Sophiste, Greek, or Latin
ever taught it? Verily this was sometime accou^pted an old rule in Rhetorique,
which it seems M. Hardinge had quite forgotten: Cic. De Orator. Lib. 2.
Scurrilis Oratori dicacitas magnopere fugienda est. This Secretaries
Beginning, by M. Hardinges own confession is such, as either party
indifferently might well have used. But M. Hardinges Beginning is such, as
neither party with any modesty might have used.

M. Hardinge also might have remembered, that the skilful in Rhetorique, as they
mislike Exordium Commune, Cicer. Lib. 1. De Inuentione: Argumentum Common
vitiosum est.
so they also mislike Commune Argumentum, that is, a Reason or Proof so
Common, that it may indifferently serve both parties. Which kind of proufes
if M. Hardinge would have weeded out of his Books, he should have left very
little to trouble the Printer.

Where he says in gross, that our Apology is nothing else, but a lump of
Lies: the Truth thereof, I trust, shall appear by this Treaty. In the mean
season, good Christian Reader, it may please thee to consider, that M.
Hardinges mouth is no just measure in this behalf. For some men think, it
will oftentimes utter untruth without measure. But he says, we have falsified
Tertullians meaning, placinge this word Ignotos, in steed of Extraneos, and
so at our pleasure making exchange of words, and geuinge the old Father a
new Liuerie, and thereby empairinge our whole credit. A great outcrie in so
small a matter. This great exchange of words is nothing so heinous as it is
pretended. For both Ignotus is Extraneus, and Extraneus also in Tertullians
meaning is Ignotus. And M. Hardinge well knows, that Tertullian speaks
namely, and only of such Aliens and Strangers, as knew not the Truth of
God. Whether of these two words it shall like him to leave us, the sense is al
one: it forces nothing. If he will needs refuse this word, Ignotus, so yt he
receive the other word, Extraneus, and grant, that he and his fellows be
Strangers to Gods Truth, it shall be sufficient.

How be it he adds farther, that they of his side are now no Strangers, but
know God, as his dear friends, and kinsfolk. Even so said the Phariseis of
them selves, Johan. 9.
Nunquid and nos Coeci sumus? What be we blind too? But Christ answered
them, If ye were blind, then had ye no sin. Now ye say, that ye see:
Therefore your sin remains still. Johan. 9. Matthae. 8.
And again, I am come to Judgment into the world, that they that see, may
be made blind. And again, The Children of the kingdom shall be thrown forth
into utter darkness.

Yet further M. Hardinge says, After that the Gospel had benne sounded
abroad by the Apostles, and their Successors, then was the Truth no more a
Stranger, or a Pilgrim in Earth. Whereby he would closely conclude, that his
Church of Rome can never err. But this is too vain a Paradise. Daniel. 8.
Chrysostom. in opere Imperfecto, Homi. 49. August. De C^uita. Dei, Li. 18. Cap.
51. De Ciuit. Li. 19. Cap. 27.
For Daniel speakinge of the later days says, Veritus prosternetur in ^erra,
The Truth shall be overthrown in the Earth. Chrysostom says, Abornihatio
Desolationis stabit in Sanctis Locis Ecclesiae, The Abomination of desolation
shall stand in the Holy places of the Church. S. Augustine says, Vsque ad
huius s^eculi finem, inter persecutiones mundi, and consolationes Dei
peregtinando procurrit Ecclesia: Until the worlds end, the Church goes
foreward, as it were in a Pilgrimage, bytweene the persecutions of the world,
and the comfortes of God. And again, Tota Ciuitas Dei peregrinatur in terris:
The whole City of God (which is the Church) is a Stranger, and a Pilgrim in
the Earth. Verily as long as Satan the Prince of darkness is Prince of this
world, so long the Truth of God passes in this world as a Stranger: and
being emonge Strangers, as Tertullian says, easily finds enemies, and is
it entreated. Tertullian in Apologetico.
He says further, Caeterum vnum hoc gestit, ne ignorata damnetur: This only
thing Truth desires, that noman condemn her, before he know her.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 1.
Wherefore we ought to bear it the more quietly, which have taken upon us to
profess the Gospel of Christ, if we for the same cause be handled after the
same sort: and if we, as our Forefathers were long ago, be likewise at this
day tormented and baited with raylinges, with spiteful dealinges, and with
lies: and that for no desert of our own, but only because we teach and
acknowledge the Truth.

M. Hardinge.
O blessed folowers of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martires, and
Christ him self, that suffer so much persecution in your innocence; having
deserved nothing at all, and only because ye acknowledge, and teach the
Truth. But Sirs, by your leave, how follows this (Wherefore) of your former
common place so largely treated? This is your foul fault, which you make in
your Logike. How prove ye this argument: The Truth is persecuted, and the
professors of the Truth have ever been evil treated: wherefore we ought to
bear it quietly being likewise handled for the same cause etc. If you make
this argument, which ye seem privily to make, leauinge out the Minor, The
professors of the Truth be persecuted for the Truths sake: we be
professors of the Truth: Therefore we suffer persecution for the Truths
sake: If ye say thus, we embarre you from your Conclusion by deniynge your
Minor, which ye can never prove.

And if ye reason thus, which way also ye seem to use: The professors of
the Truth suffer persecution: We suffer persecution: Ergo, we are
professors of the Truth: We grant your Minor is true: but your argument is
naught. So might all Heretics say, and by that argument prove them selves
right beleuers. Wherefore until ye prove, that ye succeed the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Christ himself in professinge the Truth,
boast not, as ye do, of your Forefathers. For not they whom ye name in your
Proeme, but Hus, VViklese, Peter Bruise, Berengarius, Waldensis, Albingenses,
Donatistes, Ae^ians, Manichees, and such the like Heretics, justly condemned
of the Church, were your Forefathers.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge pretends Logique, and ends in Sophistry. The argument, we
make, wherewith he plays so pleasantly, is founded upon these words of
Christ: Matthew. 10. Johan. 15.
The Scholare is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord: If
they have persecuted me, they will persecute you. Al these things shall they do
unto you for my names sake, because they know neither my Father, nor me. The
Minor is this, we succeed the Apostles, and Martyrs, and are the professors
of the Truth. Which Minor, by M. Hardinges judgment, we can never prove. But
Gods holy name be blessed for ever: The greatest part, of Christendom this
day sees, this Minor is true, and that both we are the professors of Gods
known Truth, and you the professors of manifest salsehed. Touching the
Donatistes, and Manichees, and al other like condemned Heretics, and
Heresies, we utterly abhor them, even as the gates of Hell. As for John
Wicklese, John Husse, Valdo, and the rest, for ought we know, and, I believe,
settinge malice aside, for ought you know, they were godly men. Alphonsus De
Haeresibus.
Their greatest Heresy was this, that they complained of the dissolute, and
vicious lives of the Cleregie, of woorshippinge of Images, offeined Miracles,
of the tyra^nical pride of the Pope, of Monks, Freeres, Partans, Pilgrimages,
Bartholomae. Abramus in Council. Ferrarien.
and Purgatory, and other like deceiuinge, and mockinge of the people, and
that they wisshed a reformation of the Church. We succeed not them, nor bear
their names. We succeed him, whose word we profess: whose word, M.
Hardinge, they of your side have so often condemned, and under a color of
false Translation have burnte for Heresy.

Hereof we form our argument in this sort: Christ the Son of God was
persecuted, and carried as a Lauuye unto the Slauterhouse for speaking the
Truth: Therefore it behooves us for the same cause sufferinge the like, to
take it with patieuce. So says S. Peter, 1. Peter. 2.
Christ died for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps.
If we suffer patiently for dooinge well, this thing is thanks worthy before
God. So the holy Father and Martyr Ignatius comforted him self, when he was in
the mids of his torments: Eusebius. Lib. 3. Cap. 36. Tertull. De Fuga in
persecutione. Matthew. 5.
la^ incipio esse Discipulus Christi Now begin I to be Christ's. Disciple. So
Tertullian, Quid debeo, nisi sanguinem, quem pro me fudit Filius Dei? What
thing owe I else, but the Blood, which the Son of God has shed for me?
The like comfort in like cases Christ gives to his Disciples, Rejoice ye,
(says he) and he glad, for your reward is great in Heaven. For thus have
they persecuted the Prophets, that were before you.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 2.
They cry out upon us at this present every where, that we are al Heretics,
and have forsaken the Faith, and have with new persuasions, and wicked
learning utterly dissolved the concord of the Church.

M. Hardinge.
If ye have forsaken the Faith, Faith in Britain.
ye were Baptized in, if ye be gonne from the faith, which S. Eleutherius
Pope and Martyr the first Apostle of Britayne preached in this land, Untruth.
by Damianus and Fugatius within little more then one hundred years after
Christ's death, Damianus and Fugatius first Apostles of the Britons. Augustinus
and Melitus of the English.
if ye refuse the Faith which Gregory the Great that holy Pope, caused to be
Preached to our Ancestors the English nation by Augustinus, Melitus, and
other holy Priests, and have thereby dissolved the unity of the Catholic
Church, and leave not to maineteine the doctrine, whereby the same unity is
dissolved: all this presupposed. We see not but that this cry made upon you
is true: For then are ye Heretics in deed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
As well this report of Eleutherius, as also the other noted in the margin of
Augustine, that the one was the first Apostle of the Britannes, the other of
the English, are both untrue. For it is certain, that the Church of
Britannie, now called England, received not first the faith from Rome. Lucius
the King of this Country had received the Gospel of Christ, and was Baptized
welneare one hundred and fifty years before the Emperor Constantine: and the
same Constantine the first Christened Emperor was borne in this Island, And
notwithstanding Eleutherius the Bishop of Rome, at the Kings special request,
sent hither Fugatius, and Damianus, to inform the Bishopes and Cleregie, and
to bring things to better order, Gildas. Polydor^^. Theodoret. De Curandis
Graecoru^ affectibus. Niceph. li. 2. c. 4. Galfrid. Lib. 8. Cap. 4.
yet undoubtedly the Church and Faith of Christ had benne planted here a
long while before they came, either by Iosephe of Arimathaea: either (as
Theodoretus writes) by S. Paul the Apostle passinge this way into Spain: or
(as Nicephorus says) by Simon Zel^tes: or by the Greeks: or by some others.

As for our Augustine of England, for it was not S. Augustine the learned
Doctor, neither was he so godly a man, as M. Hardinge makes him: for as
Galfridus writes of him, he was cruel, disoaineful, proud, and arrogant, and
no way meet to be called an Apostle. Neither was he the first planter of the
Faith in England. For the Faith was planted here many hundred years before
his coming. An. Do. 210.
Tertullian says of his time, Tertull. contra Iudaeos.
Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca subduntur Christo: The countries of
Britannie, which the Romans could never atteine unto, Anno. 212.
are now subject to Christ. Origin says of his time, Origin. in Ezechiel.
Homi. 4. Athanas. Apologia Secunda.
Terra Britanniae consensit in Religionem Christi: The Land of Britannie has
agreed to Christ's Religion. Athanasius of his time says, Anno. 334.
Episcopi Aphricae vniuersae, Siciliae, Sardiniae, Hispaniarum, Galliarum,
Britanniarum sese ad Concilium contulerunt: The Bishops of al Aphrica,
Sicilia, Sardinia, Spain, France, and Britannie came thither to the Council,
(holden at Sardica.) Anno 330.
Constantinus the Emperor in his time makes mention of the Christian Churches
in Britannie. Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. Li. 1. Ca. 10. Hilarious De Synodis.
Chrysostom. in Homilia, Quod Christus sit Deus Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. Li. 4. Ca.
3.
S. Hilarie in his time entitled his letter in this wise: Anno 360.
Clericis Tololanis, and Prouinciarum Britannicarum Episcopis: To the Cleregie
of Tolouse, Anno 400.
and to the Bishops of Britannie. Chrysostom of his time says, Et Iusulae
Britannicae extra hoc mare sitae, and in ipso Oceano positae senseru^t virtutem
Verbi Dei: The Islands of Britannie being in the very Ocean, far out of this
our Sea, have felt the power of Gods Word. Anno 367.
Theodoretus of the time of the Emperor Iouinian says thus, Huic Fidei
consenserunt omnes Ecclesiae, quaeque in Hispania sunt, quaeque in Britannia:
To this Faith have agreed all the Churches, both of Spain, and of Britannie.
These records may seem sufficient, if it please M. Hardinge to receive them.
And al, and every of these lived sundry hundred years before the arriual of
Melitus, and Augustine.

If any man shall happen to reply, The Faith was then utterly rooted out by
the invasion of the English men being Heathens, Art. 3. Diuis. 24. Beda, li.
1. ca. 26.
that matter is already answered in my Former Reply to M. Hardinge. Certainly
Beda says, The Queen of England was then Christened, Beda. li. 2. Cap. 2.
and that there were then in this Realm seven Bishops, and one Archbishop,
with other more great learned Christian men.

As touching this Augustine, we are not bound to al his dooinges. Although
M. Hardinge allow him Apostolic authority, yet al his heastes were not
Gospel. The Church in his time was grown to much corruption, as it may many
ways appear by sundry places of S. Gregory. Beda. li. 2. Ca. 26.
Verily Beda says, The Bishops, and learned Christians of this Country
utterly refused to receive this new Apostle with his Religion. And yet were
they right Catholic, and godly men. And Galfridus says, Galfridus. lib.
8. Cap. 4.
Erant septem Episcopatus, and Archiepiscopatus Religiosiscionis Praesulibus
muniti, and Abbatiae complures, in quib. grex Domini rectum ordinem tenebat:
There were then in England seven Bishoprikes, and one Archebishoprike
possessed with very godly Prelates, and many Abbeys, in which the Lords
flock held the right Religion.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 3.
That we renew, and, as it were, fetch again from Hell the old and many a
day condemned Heresies: that we sow abroad new sects, and such broils
as never erst were heard of: also that we are already divided into contrary
parts and opinions, and could yet by no means agree well among out selves.

M. Hardinge.
Since that ye raise up again the heresy of Aerius in deniynge prayer for the
dead, who was for the same accounted an Heretic above a leven hundred years
past: since that ye raise up the Heresy of Manichaeus that lived before him,
That these Defenders be renevvers of old Heresies
in taking awaire free will^ since that ye raise up the Heresy of Vigilantius,
in refusinge to pray to Saints, and to honor their holy Relics, and to
keep lights in Churches to the honor of God, and many other Heresies beside
of old time condenmed: since that ye raise up the Heresy of Berengarius in
deniyng the presence of Christ's very Body in the blessed Sacrament of the
Altar: and since that ye add to those mo Heresies of your own, as the
appointing of the supreme Pastorship or regiment of the Church in all things
and causes spiritual to a lay Magistrate, the deniynge of the external
Sacrifice of the Church, which we call the Mass, the maintenance of the
breach of Vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience: Again sith that your
Division into sundry sects can neither be dissembled nor defended, whereof we
shall speak hereafter more largely: al these things beside sundry other of
like enormitic being true, as they be most true, this other cry made upon you
is true.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This heap is great in show, and light in substance. Touching Berengarius,
gentle Reader, Arti. 5. Diuis. 6.
for shortness sake I must refer thee to my Former Reply to M. Hardinge.
Aerius the Arian Heretic, the Breach of Vows, the Dissension of Judgments
in Religion, shall be answered (God willinge) hereafter, each matter severally in
his place.

We flatter not our Prince with any new imagined extraordinary power, but
only give him that Prerogative and Chieftie, that evermore has benne dew
unto him by the ordinance, Esai. 49.
and Word of God: that is to say, to be the Nurce of Gods Religion: to make
Laws for the Church: to hear and take up cases, and questions of the Faith,
if he be hable: or otherwise to commit them over by his authority unto the
learned: to command the Bishops, and Priests to do their duties, and to
punish such as be offenders. August. contra Cresc. li. 3. ca. 71.
Thus the godly Emperor Constantinus sat in Judgment in a cause
Ecclesiastical, bitweene Caecilianus, and Donatus a Casis Nigris, and in the
end him self pronounced sentence. Greater authority then Constantinus the
Emperor had, and used, our Princes require none. This, I trust, hitherto is
no great Heresy.

S. Hierome reproved Vigilantius, for that he found fault with the Vigils or
night wakes, that then were used, with Praieing to Saints, with Woorshippinge
of Relics, with Lights, and other such like weighty matters. Touching which
whole controversy, Erasm. in praefatio. in Epistolam Hieronymi contra Vigilan.
Erasmus gives this judgment: in hunc ita conuitijs debacchatur Hieronymus,
vt plusculum in co modestiae cogar desiderare. Vtinam argumentis tantum
egisset, et a conuitijs temperasset: Against this Vigilantius S. Hierome so
raileth, that I want in him some piece of sobriety. I would rather, he had
dealte with arguments, and had spared his railinge.

Of prayer to Saints, and Lights, we shall speak hereafter. Night wakes
afterward were condemned, as I remember, in ye Council of Carthage, and so
Sentence given by the Church with this great Heretic Vigilantius against S.
Hierome. Verily ye Fathers in a former Council holden at Eliberis in Spain
decreed thus: Council. Eliberi. Cap. 35.
Placuit prohiberi ne foeminae in coemiterio peruigilent: quia saepe sub
obtentu orationis scelera latenter committunt. It likes us that women be
forbidden to watch at the places of burial: For often under pretense of
prayer, privily they commit wickedness. To be short, if Vigilantius were an
Heretic for reprouinge of Night Watches, why has the Church of Rome so
long sithence condemned and abolished the same watches, agreeably to
Vigilantius, and contrary to the Judgment of S Hierome?

Relics were subject to much villainy, and are welneare worn out of them
self.

The Manicheis emonge other their fantastical errors were wont to say, ye the
body of Man was made, August De continent. Ca. 9. August. contra duas Epist.
pelagian Li. 2. ca. 2. August ad Quod vult deu^.
not by God, but by the Angels of the Devil, which they called Gentem
tenebratum: and that in Man there be two souls of contrary natures: the one
of the substance of God: the other of the substance of the Devil: and that
either soul contineweth still as it is, and cannot alter: That is to say, that
the good soul can never be il: and that the il soul can never be good. And in
this sense they said, that Man has no Free will.

Al these, and other like errors we abhor and Detest, as frantique furies.
We say, that the Soul of Man is not the substance, but the Creature of God:
an that it may be changed from good to il: from il to good: that David may
fall: that Paul may rise: that God gives us a new heart, and a new Spirit
within our breasts.

But as touching the freedom of will, and power of our selves, we say with S.
Augustine, August Deverb. Apostoli, Sermo 11.
O malum Liberum Arbitrium sine Deo: O evil is Free Will without God. Again,
Libero Arbitrio male vtens homo. and se perdidit, and Arbitrium: Man misusinge
his Free Will, spilte both him self, and his will. Again, Quid tantum de
Naturae postibilitate praesumitur? Augusti. in Enchiridio, ca. 30. Augusti. De
Natura and Gratia Cap 53.
Vulnerata, saucia, vexata, perdita est. Vera confessione, non falsa defensione
opus habet: What do men so mutche presume of the possibility of Nature? It is
woounded, it is mangled, it is troubled, it is lost. It behooves us rather
truly to confess it, then folsly to defend it. Again, Liberum Arbitrium
captiuatum, non nisi ad peccatum valet. Free will once made thralle, avails
now nothing but to sin. Again, Quod been viuimus, Augusti ad Boni faci. Li.
3. ca. 8. Augusti. De verbis Aposto. Sermo. 10.
quod recte intelligimus, Deo debemus. Nostrum nihil est, nisi peccatum, quod
habemus: That we live well, that we understand aright, we have it of God. Of
our selves we have nothing, but only sin, that is within us.

The better to clear this whole case, I thought it good to use the more
words. Thus may we learn to know our selves, and humbly to confess our
imperfection, and to give the whole glory unto God.

Therefore to conclude, Augusti. De Bono perseueran. Cap. 13.
S. Augustine says, Nos volumus: Sed Deus in nobis operatur velle. Nos
operamur: Sed Deus in nobis operatur and operari pro bona sua volu^tate. Hoc
nobis expedit and credere, and dicere. Hoc est pium: hoc est verum: vt sit
humilis, and submissa Confessio, Cap. 6.
and detur totum Deo. Tutiores viuimus, si totum Deo damus: non autem nos illi
ex part, and nobis ex part committimus. We will: but it is God, that woorketh
in us to will. We work: but it is God that woorketh in us to work,
according to his good pleasure. This is behooueful for us both to believe,
and to Speak: This is a Godly, this is a True Doctrine, that our Confession
may be humble, and lowly, and that God may have the whole. We live in more
safety, if we give al unto God, rather then if we commit our selves partly
to our selves, and partly to him.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 4.
That we be accursed Creatures, and like the Gyauntes do war against God
him self, and live clean without any regard or Woorshippinge of God.

M. Hardinge.
What ye be, God knows, and your own Conscience should know. Our Lord
amend both you and us. But to say some what to that your guilty mind
imagines the World to report of you, if they which take away and abhor
the external Sacrifice, wherein Christ according to his own institution,
Lucae. 2^. 1. Cor. 11.
is offered to his Father, make no war against God: if they which make
Christ a Minister of Shadows, Signs, Tokens, and Figures: they, which fear
not to break their solemn Vows made to God, and defend the same as well
done: they, which assure them selves of their Salvation, and therefore live
dissolutely without due care and fear of God: If (I say) they be not cursed
Creatures, and like Gyantes that war against God, then are ye clear of this
charge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To answer Ifs with Ifs, and Words with Words, it were great folly.
Therefore leauinge the answer of Vows, and assurance of Salvation to their
several places, first we deny not ye Sacrifice of Christ. Christ only upon
his Cross is our whole and only Sacrifice for sin, and biside him we have
none other. How be it, In the. 17. Arti.
I have spoken hereof more at large in my Former Reply to M. Hardinge.

Neither make we Christ, as it likes M. Hardinge to say, a Minister of
Signs and Figures. Johan. 1.
We know, that Christ is the Fulfillinge and Perfection of the Law, and
that Grace, and Truth are wrought by him. Yet nevertheless we say, that the
Sacraments of the New Testamente are Signs, and Figures. The old Father
Tertullian expounds Christ's Words in this sort, Hoc est Corpus meum,
Tertull. contra Mar^ion Lib 4. Augustine. in Psalm. 3. Augustine. contra
A^^mantum, Cap. 12.
Hoc est, Figura Corporis mei: This is my Body, that is to say, This is a
Figure of my Body. S. Augustine says, Christus adhibuit Iudam ad conuiuium,
in quo Corporis and Sanguinis sui Figuram Discipulis suis commendauit, and
tradidit: Christ receive Judas unto his Banquet, whereat he delivered to his
Disciples the Figure of his Body, and Blood. And again, Non dubitauit Dominus
dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum daret Signum Corporis sui: Christ doubted not
to say, This is my Body, whereas he gave a Token of his Body.

I leave other Holy Fathers of like Words and sense welneare innumerable. Yet
were they neither Giantes, nor Rebels against God, nor accursed Creatures. If
they had never used these Words, nor called the Sacrament the Figure, or
Token of Christ's Body, then might M. Hardinge have ^enne bold to say
somewhat, and to lead awate his Reader with a Tragical exclamation of Signs,
and Figures. How be it, he him self, as I have showed in my Former Answer,
in the exposition of these words of Christ, Arti^ul. 12. Division. 16.
This is my Body, and other like Phrases incident unto the same, to avoid one
usual and common Figure, is forc^d to shifte him self into thirty other
unnecessary and childishe Figures: as knowinge that not so mutche as his open
Untruthes can well stand without Figures.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 6.
That we despise al good deeds: that we use no discipline of Virtue,
Fasting with Fleashe.
no Laws, no Customs: that we esteem neither right, nor order, nor
equity, nor Justice: that we give the brydel to al naughtiness, and provoke
the people to al licentiousness and ^ust.

M. Hardinge.
Ye teach men to Fast for policy, Fast for Policy. Fol. 2. Pa. 2.
not for Religion. And by your Statute of Wednesdaies fast, who so ever shall
write or say that forebearinge of Fleas he is a Service of God, otherwise then
as other polytike laws are, they shall be punished as spreaders of false News
are and ought to be. When ye Preach only Faith not to remove the merit of
works before Baptism, Epist. ad Roma. Bridle given to levvdnes by this nevve
Gospel.
as S. Paul meante it, but also after Baptism: When ye take away the
Sacrament of confession and Absolution, give ye not the brydel to al
naughtiness? Do not some of your Gospelling maids of London refuse to serve,
except they may have liberty to hear a Sermon before noone, and a play at
after noone?

The B. of Sarisburie.
I thought, M. Hardinge had known a difference bitweene Fasting, and
Abstinence, or choice of meats. True Fasting is a Religiouse work, ordained
to testify our humility, and to make the Fleashe the more obedient unto the
Sprite, that we may be the quicker to Prayer, and to al good Works. But
Abstinence from this or that meat with opinion of Holiness, Superstitious it
may easily make a man, but Holy it can not. 1. Corinthians. 14. Hebrae. 13.
S. Paul says, Cibus nos non commendat Deo: it is not meat that makes us
acceptable unto God. Again, It is good to confirm the heart with Grace, and
not with meats: Wherein they that have walked, have found no profit. The
meat serves for the Belly, 1. Corinthians. 6. Roman. 14. Matthew. 15.
and the Belly for the meat: The Lord will destroy them both. And again,
The Kingedome of God is not Meat, and Drink. Likewise Christ says, The
thing that enters into the mouth, defiles not the man.

Hereby it is easy to see, that Fasting is one thing, and Abstinence from
Fleashe is an other. The Nazareis in the old Testamente absteined not from
Fleashe, and yet they Fasted. 3. Regum. 17. Matthae. 3. Socrae. li. 5. ca. 22.
Cassidor. Lib. 9. Cap. 38.
Elias was sedde with Fleashe, John the Baptiste eat the Fleash of Locustes:
and yet they both Fasted. Socrates says, That many Christians in the Lent
season did eat Fish and Birds: many absteined until three of the clock in
the after noone, and then received al kinds of meat, either Fish, or
Fleashe, without difference. Likewise Epiphanius says, Some eat al kinds of
Birds, or Foul, absteininge only from the Fleashe of four footed beasts,
Epipha. De Haeres. Lib. 3. In Oratione de Fide Catholica: (...).
And yet they kept their Lent truly, and fasted as well as any others.
Wherefore Abstinence from any one certain kind of meat is not of it self a
work of Religion to please God, but only a mere positive Policy Augustine.
S. Augustine says, Non quaeto quo Vescaris, sed quo Delecteris: I demounde
not, what thou Eatest, but wherein thou haste Pleasure Hieronym. in Ioelem.
Cap. 1.
And S. Hierome says of the Manicheis, Ieiunant illi quidem: Sed illorum
leiunium est saturitate deterius. They Foste in deed: but their Fasting is
worse, then if they filled their Bellies.

Of only Faith, and Confession, we shall speak hereafter.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 7.
That we labor and seek to overthrow the state of Monarchies and Kingdoms,
and to bring al things under the rule of the rash inconstante People, and
unlearned multitude.

M. Hardinge.
Can Monarkes and Princes seem to be maintained by your sects. who teach the
people to rebel for pretensed Religion? Allow ye the Monarchy of the Roman
Empire, Who so much complain in your Apology, that the Pope made
Charlemaigne Emperor of the VVeste? Has the Queen of Scotland cause to
praise the procedinges of your Gospel, through occasion whereof she rules not
her subjects, but is rather ruled of her subjects?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is an other great Untruth emonge the rest. For M. Hardinge right well
knows, that we never armed the people, nor taught them to rebel for Religion
against the Prince. If any thing have at any time happened otherwise, it was
either some wilful rage, or some fatal fury: It was not our Counsel: it was
not our Doctrine. We teach the people, as S. Paul doothe, to be subject to
the higher powers, Roman. 13. Matthew. 26.
not only for fear, but also for conscience. We teach them, that who so
strikes with the Sword by Private authority, shall perish with ye Swerd. If
the Prince happen to be wicked, or cruel, or burthenous, we teach them to
say, with S. Ambrose, Arma nostra sunt Preces, and Lachrymae: Tears, and
Prayers be our Weapons. Ambrosius.
Notwithstanding, what Rebellion has benne moved in England by some of your
side, in the late Reigns of King Henry the eight, and King Edward the sixte
in defense of your Religion, ye may well remember.

The displacinge of the Emperor of Constantinople, and the placinge of
Charlemaigne the French King, serves M. Hardinge to small purpose: unless it
be to disclose the Popes conspiracy against the Emperor. Certainly, as any
man may sensibly see, it was the aduauncinge of the Pope, the strengtheninge
of the Saracenes, and after of the Turks, and the Division, and dissolution of
the state of Christendom. Platina in Adriano. 2.
Platyna says, Ab hoc tempore perijt and potestas Imperatorum, and virtus
Pontificum: After this time the power of the Emperors, and the Holiness of
the Popes were both lost.

Touching the Queen of Scotland, I will say nothing: The Kingedomes, and
states of the World have sundry agreementes, and compositions. The Nobles,
and Commons there neither drew the Sword, nor attempted force against the
Prince. They sought only the continuance of Gods undoubted Truth, and the
Defense of their own lives against your Barbarous and cruel invasions. They
remembered, At Vassei, Anno. 1562.
bisides al other warninges, your late dealinge at Vassei, where as great
numbers of their Brethren were suddenly murdered, being together at
their Prayers in the Church, and holdinge up their Innocente hands to
Heaven, and calling upon the name of God. Achab said sometime to the Prophet
Elia, Thou art he, 3. Regum. 17.
that troublest the whole Country of Israel. But Elias made him answer, It
is not I, that trouble the Country: It is thou, and thy Fathers house, which
houe foresaken the commeundementes of the Lord, and houe followed after Baalim.

The Subject is bound to obey his Prince: how be it not in all things without
exception: but so far as Gods glory is not touched. These Nobles had learned
of S. Peter, Actor 5. Psalm. 118. Psalm. 146.
It is better to obey God, then man: And of the Prophet David, Better it is to
trust to God, then to trust in Princes. For they are mortal, and shall die:
their Sprite shall be taken from them, and then shall they return into the
Earth. Neither may a godly Prince take it as any dishonor to his estate, to
see God obeyed before him. Leo. De Passione Domi. Sermon. 10.
For he is not God, but the Minister of God. Leo says, Christus quae Dei
sunt, Deo, quae Caesaris sunt, Caesari reddenda constituit, etc. Hoc est vere
no^ impugnare Caesarem, sed iuuare: Christ commanded, that is dew unto God,
to b^^euen to God: that is dew unto Caesor, to be given to Caesar. Verily this
is not to rebel against, but to help Caesar. Likewise S. Ambrose, being him
self in manner a Captain unto the people in Gods quarrel against
Valentinian the Emperor: Ambros. Lib. 5. Epist 33.
Quid praesentius dici potuit a Christianis viris, quam id, quod hodie in nobis
Spiritus Sanctus Ioquutus est? Rogamus, Auguste, non pugnamus: Non timemus, sed
Rogamus: What could be more boldly spoken of Christian men, then that the
holy Ghost spoke in you this day? (Thus ye said) We beseech thee, Noble
Emperor, we fight not. We fear thee not, but we beseech thee.

To conclude, the Queen of Scotland is still in quiet possession of her
estate: and is obeyed of her Subjects, so far as is convenient for godly
people to obey their Prince.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 7.
That we have seditiously fallen from the Catholic Church, and by a wicked
schism and division have shaken the whole world, and troubled the common
peace and universal quiet of the Church: and that, as Dathan and Abiron
conspired in times past against Moses and Aaron, even so we at this day have
renounced the Bishop of Rome, without any cause reasonable.

M. Hardinge.
Before Luthers time al Christen people came together peaceably into one
Church, under one Head, as Sheep into one fold under one Shepeherd, and so
lived Vnanimes in domo, in one accord. But after that Satan, Division and
Schismefolovved upon Luthers Preachinge. 1. Johan. 2.
who at the beginning begyled Eve, had persuaded some to taste of the poisoned
apple of Luthers New Doctrine: they went out from us, who were not of us (for
if they had been of us, they had remained with us) forsook the Catholic
Church of Christ, sorted them selves into Synagoges of Antichriste, withdrewe
them selves from obedience to ward their Pastor and Judge, and sundred them
selves into diverse Sects. This schism, division, and conspiracy against the
Head Shepherd, is nolesse wicked, Numer. 6.
then that of Dathan and Abiron against Moses and Aaron was. For as God
commanded Moses and Aaron to be obeyed of the children of Israel, Great
Untruths.
so Christ commanded al his Sheep to obey and hear the voice of him, Johan.
21.
whom in Peter, and succedinge Peter, he made Shepeherd over his whole stock.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Before the time that Gods Holy will was, that Doctor Luther should begin to
publishe the Gospel of Christ, there was a general quietness: I grant:
such as is in the night season, when folk be asleape. Yet, I think, to
continewe such quietness, no wise man will wish to sleep still.

Ye say, They have forsaken the Catholic Church: They went from us. who
were not of us. Nay rather, M. Hardinge, we are returned to ye Catholic
Church of Christ, and have forsaken you, because you have manifestly
foresaken the ways of God. But what if a man would alitle put you frendely in
remembrance? Sir, it is not so long sithence your self were out of your own
Catholic Church: and so were gonne out from your self: because your self
were not of your self. For if your self had been of your self, you would
have remained better with your self. It is no wisdom, in carpinge others, to
offer occasion against your self. I beseech God to give you grace, that you
may Redire ad cor, and return again to your self. But here you bring in a
great many Untruths in a thronge together. You say, that as God commanded
the people of Israel to obey Aaron, so Christ commanded al his Sheep to obey
the Pope succedinge Peter: You say, Christ made the Pope Shepherd over his
whole flock: You call him Our Pastor, and our Judge: you call him the head
Shepherd: and for proof hereof, for some countenance of Truth, ye allege the
one and twentieth Chapter of S. John, in which whole Chapter notwithstanding,
ye are not able to find, neither any such commandment of Christ: nor any
mention of Peter's Successor: nor Al his Sheep: nor Shepherd over his whole
Flock: nor Our Pastor: nor Our Judge: nor Our Head-shepheard. It is mutche to
report Untruth of a man. But to report Untruth of Christ, and of his Holy
Word, and that willingly, and witingly, and without fear, some men think
it to be the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

As for these words, Feed my Sheep, Feed my Lammes, they perteine as well
to other the Apostles, Matthae. 28. 1* Cor. 15.
as to Peter. Christ said generally to al his Disciples, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel. And Paul says of him self, Ego plus omnibus
laboraui: I have taken more pains (and more fed the flock) then all the rest.
Surely me thinks it is a weak kind of reasoninge, to say thus, Christ
bade Peter feed his sheep, Ergo, he made him headshepheard over all the world.

But if this whole Prerogative hang of Feedinge the Flock, what then if the
Pope Feed not? What if he never mind to Feed, as thinkinge it no part of
his office? To conclude, what if he be utterly ignorant, as many have benne,
and cannot Feed? Yet must he needs be the headshepheard over the whole
flock? and must all the sheep obey him, and hear his voice, that cannot
speak? Verily S. Augustine says, Qui hoc animo pascunt oues Christi, vt suas
velint esse, non Christi, se conuincuntur amare, Augustine in Johan. Tracta. 123.
non Christum, vel gloriandi, vel dominandi, vel acquirendi cupiditate: Who so
ever they be, that Feed the sheep to the end to make them theirs, and not
Christ's, they soue them selves, and not Christ, for desire either of glory,
or of rule, or of gain.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 8.
That we set naught by the authority of the Ancient Fathers and Councels of
old time: that we have rashly and presumptuously disanulled the old
Ceremonies, which have benne well allowed by our fathers and forefathers many
hundred years past, both by good customs, and also in ages of more purity:
and that we have by our own private head without the authority of any Sacred
and General Council brought New Traditions into the Church: and have done al
these things not for Religions sake, but only upon a desire of contention and
strife. But that they for their part have changed no manner of thing, but
have held and kept still such a number of years to this very day al things,
as they were delivered from the Apostles, and well approved by the most Ancient
Fathers.

M. Hardinge.
The ancient fathers are but men, if they please you not. But if ye find any
color of advantage but in the new Schoolmen, ye make mutche of it. So that
your own opinion is the rule to esteem them or despise them. Councels.
Councles ye admit as your fancy and pleasure leads, sometimes three,
sometimes four, sometimes five or six. But al ye would never admit: and yet
so many, as are general and have been confirmed by the Sea Apostolic,
Ceremonies of the Church Abolished by the Gospellers.
they are al of like authority. Concerning Ceremonies, if ye show us not the
use of Chrisme in your Churches, if the sign of the Cross be not borne before
you in Processions, and other where is used, if Holy Water be abolished, if
lights at the Gospel and communion be not had, if peculiar Vestimentes for
Deacons, Priests, Bishops be taken away, and many such other the like:
judge ye, whether ye have duly kept the old Ceremonies of the Church.

As for your new Traditions, P^ites and Ceremonies, I can not tell, what to
make of them, nor whether I may so term them.

No manner of thing have we changed that is of necessity either to be
believed, or to be observed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We allow the Ancient Fathers the same credit, that they them selves have
ever desired. S. Augustine hereof writes thus: Neque quorumuis Disputationes,
quantumuis Catholicorum, August. and Fortunatianum, ^pist. III.
and laudatorum hominum, velut Scripturas Canonicas habere debemus, vt nobis
non liceat, salua reuerentia, quae illis debetur, aliquid in illorum Scriptis
improbare, aut respuere, si forte inuenerimus, quod aliter senserint, quam
Veritas habet. Talis sum ego in scriptis aliorum: tales volo esse intellectores
meorum: We receive not the Disputations or Writings of any men, be they
never, so Catholic, or praisewoorthy, as we receive the Canonical
Scriptures: but that, sauinge the reverence dew unto them, we may well reprove
or refuse some things in their writings, if it happen we find, they have
otherwise thought, then the Truth may bear them. ^utche am I in the writings
of others: and such would I wish others to be in mine. Likewise he writes
to S. Hierome, Non puto, August. ad Hieronym. Epist. 19.
Frater, te velle Libros tuos legi, tanquam Apostolorum, aut Prophetarum: I
reckon not, my Brother, that ye would have us so to read your Books, as if
they were written by the Apostles, or Prophets. It is certain, Tertullian,
EEyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Papias, Irenaeus, Victorinus, Lactautius,
Hilarious, and other Ancient Fathers were oftentimes mutch deceived, S. Hierome
s^^ffeth at S. Ambroses Commentaries upon Luke, and calls them, Nugas,
trifles, and nicknameth S. Ambrose, Picus Mirandula in Apologia. August. contra
Cross. onium, li. 2. cap. 21.
sometime calling him Coruus, sometime Cornicula Likewise S. Augustine says,
Ecclesiastici Iudices, vt homines, plaerunque falluntur: The Judges, or
Doctors of the Church, as being men, are often deceived. And Thomas of
Aquine says, Non tenemur de necessitate Salutis, credere no^ solum Doctoribus
Ecclesiae, vt Hieronymo, aut Augustino, sed ne ipsi quidem Ecclesiae, nisi in
his quae pertinent ad substantiam Fidei: Picus Mirandula in Apologia Thomas in
We are not bound upon the necessity of Salvation to believe not only the
Doctors of the Church, as Hierome, or Augustine, but also neither the Church
it self, sauinge only in matters concerning the substane of Faith.

Touching the authority of Councels, Quod^ibet. 9. Arti. Vltimo. August
contra Donat is it. lib. 2. Cap. 3.
S. Augustine says, Ipsa plenaria Concilia saepe priora a posterioribus
emendantur, cum aliquo experimento aperitur, quod clausum e^at: The very
General Councels are often corrected, the former by the later, as often as by
trial and experience the thing is opened, that before was shut. Likewise
Panormitane says, Plus credendum est vni priuato fideli, quam toti Concilio,
and Papae, si meliorem habeat authoritatem, vel rationem: We ought to give
more credit to one private ^aye man, Abb. Panormit. De Electio, and Electi
Potest. Cap. Significasii. Esai. 8.
then to the whose Council, and to the Pope, if he bring better authority,
and more reason. If the Counsel be wicked, and carried with malice, as many
have benne, specially within these few late hundred years, We say, as the
Prophet Esai says, Inite Consilium, and dissipabitur: Loquimini verbum, and
non stabit: quia nobiscum est Dominus: Take Counsel together, and it shall be
broken: Speak the word, and it shall not hold: For the Lord is with us.

As for the late Schole Doctors, your selves weigh them as little, as noman
less. You say in your common talks, Bernardus no^ vidit omnia: You have
controlled your Doctor of al Doctors. Peter Lombard, with this common Caveat
in the Margin, Hic Magister non tenetur: Here our Doctor is no Doctor. You
your self M. Hardinge, M. Hardinge, Fol. 92. b. M Hardinge, Fol. 232. b. M.
Hardinge. Fol. 258.
in this your very Book against our Apology sat. that your Doctor Gratian
was deceived, and in steed of Anacletus alleged Calixtus. You your self
again say, If in a secret point of learning S. Augustine, or S. Cyprian
teach singularely, We follow them not: mutche less do we bind our selves
to beeue, what soever ^lbertus Pigghius has written. And again, We bind
our selves neither to the words of Syluester, nor of Pighius. And again. we
take not upon us to defend all that the Canonistes, or Scholemen say, or
write. And an other of your company says, that your Doctor Gratian has
published great untruths, Copus Dialogo 1. Page 33.
and wilfully falsified the General Council. Nomen Vniuer salis, says he,
assutum est a Gratiano. Thus, M. Hardinge, ye use your Doctors, even as the
Marchante uses his Counters: sometime to stand for an hundred pound,
sometime for a penny.

But now let us a little examine the particulars of your bil. Ye come in with
Processions, with Lights, with Torches, with Tapers, with Chrisme, with Oil,
with Tunicles, and Chisibles, with Holy Water, and holy Bread, and I know
not, what else: as if al these things had descended directly from the Apostles,
and without the same the Church of God were no Church.

Verily, Oil.
M. Hardinge, we hate not any of al these things. For we know, they are the
Creatures of God. But you have so misused them, or rather se destled, and
beraied them with your superstitions, and so have with the same mocked, and
deceived Gods people, that we can no longer continue them without great
conscience. I will pass over the rest, and speak only of your Oil, whereof
you seem to make most accoumpte. De Consec. Olei.
In your Pontifical thus are ye taught to bless your Oil: Fiat Domine hoc
Oleum te benedicente, vnctio Spiritualis ad purificationem Mentis, and
Corporis: O Lord, set this Oil by thy blessinge be made a Spiritual ointement
to purify both Soul and Body. And again, Emitte quaesumus, Sancte Pater,
Spiritum Sanctum Paracletum tuum de Coelis in hanc pinguedinem Oliuae, ad
refectionem Corporum, and Sanationem animarum: O holy Father, we beseech thee,
send down thy holy Sprite the Comforter from He^uen into this fatness of the
olive, to the refresshinge of Body and Soul. In like sort ye are taught to
prate over the sick: Per hanc Sanctam vnctionem, and suam prissimam
misericordiam ignoscat tibi Deus, vt per hanc vnctionem habeas Rem^ssionem
omnium peccatorum: By this holy enointinge, and by his great Mercy God
pardone thee, that by this enointing thou maiste have Remission of al thy
finnes. These things cannot be denied: they are written in all your Panuals,
used and practiced in all your Churches. Ye call it Holy Oil, and Oil of
Salvation: Ye bear the people in hand, that thereby they shall have health of
Body and Soul: And yet in deed ye have no Chrisme at al. For Pope Innocentius
says, Chrisma conficitur ex Oleo, and Balsamo: Extra. De Sacra unctions.
The Chrisme is made of Oil and Balsame. And to the making thereof the
Balsame is as necessary, as the Oil. But these many hundred years ye have had
no Balsame, nor has there benne any to be had: Therefore ye have had no
Chrisme this long while, but have deceived the people with quid pro quo,
geuinge them one thing for an other.

Now that your Oil came not from the Apostles, your own Doctor Panormitane
is witness. Panormitan. De Consuetud. ca. 5.
For thus he writes, Apostoli olim conferebant Spiritum Sanctum sola manus
impositione. Et quia hodie Praelati non sunt ita beati, fuit institutum, vt
illi conferrent hoc Sacramentum cum Chrismate: The Apostles in old time gave
the Holy Ghost only by s^ieinge on of hands. But now a days because
Bishops be not so Holy, order has benne taken, that they should give this
Sacrament with Chrisme.

Neither is this matter so thoroughly approved by all Antiquity, as M. Harding
imagines. For Pope Innocentius is witness, that in old times there were
some, Extra. De Sacra unction. Vngitur.
that found fault with these dooinges. These be his words: Non ludaizat
Ecclesia, cum vnctionis celebrat Sacramentum, sicut Antiqui mentiuntur: The
Church is not Jewishe in solemnizinge the Sacrament of Unction, as the Elders
have misreported.

Touching your Lights, In Annotationi. in. 5. librum contra Marcionem.
and Tapers, Beatus Rhenanus a man of great learning, and judgment,
doubts not, but ye borrowed the use thereof from the Heathens. I grant, the
Christians in old time had Lights in their Churches, when they met
together at their common Prayers. But it appears by the Ancient Fathers,
that the same Lights served to solace them against the dark, Augu. De tempo.
in Natali Do. Sermo. 3.
and not for any use of Religion. S. Augustine says, Vouent alius Oleum, alius
Ceram ad luminaria noctis: They promise (to the Church) one Oil, an other
wax, Eusebius devita Constan. Orat. 3. Hieron aduer. Vigilantium. M. Hardinge,
Fol. 7. b. (...) 6. ca. 2.
for the night Lights. Likewise says Eusebius, (...). Ignis Purus, quantum
satis esset and praebendum lumen precantibus. A clear Light, so mutche as
might suffice the people at their Prayers. So likewise says S. Hierome,
Cereos non clara luce accendimus, sed vt noctis tenebras hoc solatio
temperemus: We sight not cut Tapers at midde day, but only by this comfort
to eas the darkness of the night. Therefore, M. Hardinge, unto you, that set
up Lights in your Churches, as your self say, to the Honor of God, the
Aunciente Father Lactantius says thus, Number mentis suae compos putandus est,
qui Authori, and Datori Luminis Candelarum, Lights. Water.
and Cerarum lumen offert pro munere? What, may we think, he is well in his
wits, that unto God the Maker and Geuer of Light will offer up Candels, and
Tapers for a present? Verily Tertullian says, Accendant quotidie lucernas,
quibus lux nulla est, Tertul. De Idololatria.
etc. Illis competunt and Testimonia tenebrarum, and auspicia poenarum: Let
them that have no sight (of God) set up their Tapers every day, etc. To them
belongs both the Testimony of darkness, and the beginning of Pain.

But what shall I say of your Holy Water? No doubt it must needs serve, as
your Oil doothe, to the salvation of body, and soul. Augustinus Steuchus, a
principal Doctor of your side says, Augu. Steucha^ in librum numer. Cap. 19.
Non inane institutum est, quod Aquas sale and Orationibus sanctificamus, vt ad
eorum aspersum delicta nostra deleantur. It is no vain invention, that we
hallowe Water with Salt and Prayers, that by the sprinkesinge thereof our
sins may be forgeuen. Thus profanely, and Heathenlike he writethe, as if the
Blood of Christ were quite dried up.

Beside all this, one of your Doctors of Louaine tellethe us in good sadness,
by report of one of the Jesuits, Copus Dialo. ^. Pa. 18. b (...): vlato in
Timaeo: and Theodoret. De corrige^dis Graecorum affectibus, Lib. 1.
that in India Holy Water is very wholesome to drive away Mise, and to make
barren Women to conceive. I feign not this matter: The place may be seen. O M.
Hardinge, I must needs say of your company, that one said sometime of the
Grecians, These that call themselves Catholics, are ever Children.

Ye say, ye have changed nothing, that is of necessity either to be
believed, or to be observed. What necessity ye mean, I can not well
contecture. For when you list, your Holy Water, and Holy Bread must needs be
of necessity. But in deed of the ancient Godly orders of the Church ye have
in a manner leafte nothing, unless it be such as ye might best have spared:
and the same ye have so defaced with superstition, that it has now quite
lost his former use, and is not the same it was before. Certainly if you had
changed nothing, then should you have now no Private Mass.

Therefore we may justly say to you, as Tertullian said in like case unto
the Roman Heathens: Tertull. in Apologetico.
Vbi Religio? vbi veneratio Maioribus debita? Habitu, victu, instructu, sensu,
ipso denique sermon Proauis renu^tiastis. Laudatis semper Antiquitatem: noue
de die viuitis. Per quod ostenditur, dum a bonis Maiorum institutis deceditis,
ea vos retinere and custodire, quae non debuistis: cum quae debuistis, non
custoditis. Where is your Religion? where is the reverence dew to your
forefathers? You have forsaken them in your apparel, in your diet, in your
order, in your meaning, and in your speech. Ye change your life daily: yet ye
praise Antiquity. Whereby it appears, while ye seaue the good orders of your
Elders, that ye keep the things, ye should not keep: seeinge ye keep not
the things, ye should keep.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 10.
And that this matter should not seem to be done but upon privy sclaunder,
and to be tossed to and fro in a corner only to spite us, there have benne
besides wilily procured by the Bishop of Rome certain persons of eloquence
yenough, and not unlearned neither: which should put their healpe to this
cause now almost despaired of, and should polishe and set forth the same,
both in books and with long tales, to the end, that, when the matter was
trimly and eloquently handled, ignorant and unskillful persons might suspecte
there was sum great thing in it. In deed they perceived, that their own
cause did every where go to wrack, that their steightes were now espied and
less esteemed, and that their healpes did daily fail them, and that their
matter stood altogether in great need of a cunninge spokesman.

M. Hardinge.
We cannot despair of this cause, Confidence of the Catholics touching
their cause. Lueae 21. Matthae, 28. Johan. 14. The Catholic Church assuredly
defended. Ephesians. 4.
unless we would forsake our Faith, as ye have. For beleuinge Christ.
which our faith leads us unto, we cannot mistruste the continuance of this
cause. Heaven and Earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass, says
Truth it self. And his words tell us, that he will be with his Church al
days to the worlds end: And that he has besought his Father to give to it
the Sprite of Truth to remain with it for ever. Then be we most assured of
this cause. We tell you therefore, it stands, and shall stand by Christ's
presence, and by the Holy Ghostes assistance, to the end. Your cause yet
stands not, but wauereth and tottereth, as that which S. Paul terms a
puff of doctrine, and doubtless shortly fall it shall, as all Heresies have
fallen.

The authors and professors of them be dead and rotten, in Helfire with
weepinge and grintinge of teeth. The like judgment lookeye and your folowers
to have, if ye repent not, and revoke your Heresies by time.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We cannot despair. says M. Hardinge, of the continuance of our cause. For
Heaven and Earth shall pass: but Christ's Word shall not pass. He will be
with us al days to the worlds end, etc. These Words, M. Hardinge, be true
and certain: and therefore our hope is the firmer. Christ has promised that
the Sprite of Truth shall remain for ever, but not in the Pope, and his
Cardinals. For thereof he made no promise. Nay rather the Prophet Esai
says, The Sprite of God shall rest upon the poor, Esaie. (...).
and meek hearted, that trembles at the Word of the Lord.

The Church of God shall stand still, yea though Rome were possessed with
Antichriste. Matthae. 15.
It is true that Christ says, Every plant, which my Heavenly Father has
not planted, shall be rooted up: Upon which words S. Hilarie says,
Significat, Traditionem hominum cruendam esse, Hilar in Ca. 15. Matthaei.
cuius fauore transgressi sunt Praecepta Legis: He means, that the Tradition
of man, for which Traditions sake they have broken the Law of God, shall be
taken up by the roots. Heaven and Earth shall pass: and your fantastes, and
diuises, M. Hardinge, shall pass: the Lord has spoken it: But the Word of
God, and his Church shall endure for ever.

But M. Hardinges Almanake says, Our Doctrine shall fall, and that very
shortly. Herein I profess, I have no skill. Gods will be done. It is his
cause: what so ever shall happen, his name be blessed for ever. In like sort
the Heathens in old times, as S. Augustine says, vaunted them selves against
the Faith of Christ. August. In Psalm. 70.
Ad certum tempus sunt Christiani: postea peribunt, and redibunt Idola: redibit
quod erat antea. Verum tu, cum expectas, miser Infidelis, vt transtant
Christiani, transis ipse sine Christianis: These Christians are but for a
while: ^al they shall, and that shortly. Then shall our Idols come again, and it
shall be as it was before. But, O thou miserable Infidel, while thou look that
the Christians should pass, thou possessed away thee self without the
Christians. Again be says, Ecce veniet tempus vt finiantur, and non sint
Christiani. Augusti. in eundem Psal^^m.
Sicut coeperunt ad aliquo tempore, ita vsque ad certum tempus erunt. Sed cum
ista dicunt, sine fine moriuntur: and permanet Ecclesia praedicans brachium
Domini omni generationi venturae: They say, behold, the day will come, when al
these Christians shall have an end. As they had a time to begin, so shall they
have a time to continewe. But while they make these crakes, they them selves
die without end. But the Church contineweth still praisinge the almighty arm
of God to every generation that is to come.

But ye say, The Authors and Professors of our Doctrine be damned in Hell
fiere, and cry, Peccaui. This is a very terrible kind of talk. But it is a
rash part for you, M. Harding, so suddenly to skip into Gods Chair, and
there to pronounce your Sentence Definitive like a Judge. August. in Psalm. 36.
par. 3.
But God will judge of your judgment. S. Augustine says, Alia est sella
terrena, aliud Tribunal. Coelorum: Ab inferiori Sententia accipitur. a
superiori Corona: The earthly Chaier is one thing: the Judgment seat in
Heaven is an other. From the one we receive Sentence, from the other we
receive a Crown. O M. Hardinge, God grant you may once cry, Peccaui: lest
the time come that ye shall cry out, as it is written in the Book of Wisdom:
Sapien. 5.
These are they whom we sometime had in derision, and in a parable of
reproach. We fools thought their life madness, and their end without
honor. But now are they coumpted emonge the Children of God, and their
portion is emonge the Saints.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 2.
Now as for those things which by them have benne laid against us, in
part they be manifestly false and condemned so by their own judgments,
which spoke them: partly again, though they be as false too in deed, yet
bear they a certain show and coolour of truth, so as the Reader (if he take
not good heed) may easily be tripped and brought into error by them,
specially when their fine and cunninge tale is added thereunto: And part of
them be of such sort, as we ought not to shun them as crimes or faults,
but to acknowledge and confess them as things well done, and upon very good
reason. For shortly to say the truth, these folk falsely accuse and
sclaunder al our dooinges, yea the same things, which they them selves cannot
deny but to be rightly and orderly done: and for malice do so misconstrue
and deprave al our saienges and doings, as though it were impossible, that any
thing could be rightly spoken or done by us. They should more plainly and
sincerely have gonne to work, if they would have dealte truly: But now they
neither truly nor sincerely, nor yet Christianly, but darkely and craftily
charge and batter us with lies, and do abuse the blindness and fondenesse of
the people, together with the ignorance of Princes, to cause us to be hated,
and the Truth to be suppressed.

This, lo ye, is the power of darkness, and of men, which lean more to the
amassed wonderinge of the rude multitude, and to darkness, then they do to
Truth and Light: and, Hierony aduersus Rufinum.
as S. Hierome says, do openly gainsaie the Truth, closinge, up their
eyes, and will not see for the nonce. But we give thanks to the most good and
mighty God, that such is our cause, where against (when they would fainest)
they were hable to utter no despite, but the same, which might as well be
wreasted against the Holy Fathers, against the Prophets, against the Apostles,
against Peter, against Paul, and against Christ him self.

M. Hardinge.
The Catholics do not burden you with ought, wherein by their own
judgments they condemn themselves, as ye sclaunder them not only here, but
oftentimes in your Book. For if they judged otherwise. they would not
wittingly do against their judgment. That is the special property of an
Heretic, whom S. Paul hiddeth al men to a void, knowinge that he that is
such, is perverted, Tim. 5.
and seems even condemned by his own judgment.

They show both your blasphemous Heresies, and your wicked acts. Luther, ye
know. powered out his Heresies and villainies. etc. Your robbinge of Churches,
persecutinge of men for standinge s^edfastly in the faith of the Holy
forefathers, your incestuous marriages of Monks, Friars, and Nonnes, your
breach of solemn vows for fleashly pleasure, your prophaninge and
abandoninge of Holy Sacraments, your contempt of ancient and godly
ordinances and discipline of the Church, and such other things of like
estimation.

For in deed the catholics do persecute you, (if such deserved entreatinge
of evil persons may be called persecution) and al good folk besides, we
gr^^te, and shall so do, so long as they love the Truth, and keep them in
the unity of the Church. Yet with no other mind do they persecu^e you,
Genes. 16. Johan. 2. (...).
then Sara did Agar: then Christ the Jews, whom he whipped out of the Temple:
then ^eter did S^nom Magus.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Yewis, M. Hardinge, it might please you to remember, that Bartholomaeus
Latomus a Doctor of your side confesses in writing to all the world, ^ar.
Latonus aduersus Buceru^
y^ our request touching the Holy Ministration under Both Kinds, according
to Christ's first Institution, is just and reasonable:

That Gerardus Lorichius an other of your own side says, Sunt
Pse^docatholici, qui Reformationem Ecclesiae quoquo modo remorari non verentur:
They be false Catholics (and this, ^erar. Lorichius De Missa prorogand^. In
7. par. Canonis.
M. Hardinge, he speaks of you, being one of your own) they be False
Catholics, that hinder the Reformation of the Church by all means they be
hable. He says, you be false Catholics, far contrary to the common opinion:
and concludes in the end, that the wilful mainteinance and sequel of your
Doctrine in this point, is, as he calls it, Haeresis, and Blasphemia
pestilens, and execrabilis: An Heresy, and a Blayhemie against God, Pestilent
and Cursed;

That others of your ^de confess, that this your use of Ministration under one
kind, Steuin Guard. in the Devils Sophist^ie.
which now ye call Catholic, began first, not of Christ, or his Apostles,
or any Ancient Learned Father: but only of the error, or, as he better
terms it, of the simple Devotion of the People:

That Albertus Pighius, the stoutest gallante of al your Camp, grants there
have benne, Albertus ^ighius De Missa P^^uata. Platina in Vio 2. 10. Shidanus
Li. 4.
and be many Abuses in your Pass, notwithstanding ye have told us far
otherwise:

That Pope Pius oftentimes granted, and used commonly to say, He saw great
causes, why Priests should be restoared to the liberty of Marriage: That Pope
Adrian by his Legate Cheregatus confessed openly at Norenherg in the General
Diet of all the Princes of Germany, that all the il of the Church came first a
culmine Pontificio, From the top Castle of the Pope:

And to be short, M. Hardinge, it might have pleased you to remember, that your
self in your first Book, M. Harding fo. 22 b.
in the Defense of your Private Pass, have written thus: Mary, I deny not,
but that it were more commendable, and more Godly on the Churches Part, if
many well disposed, and examined would be partakers of the blessed Sacrament
with the Priest.

Al these things, M. Hardinge, be they ^ses, or Abuses: Reasonable, or
Unreasonable: Right, or Wrong: Better or worse: Be they never so wicked,
never so Blasphemous, never so cursed, yet be they stoutly defended still, and
no hope offered of amendment: With what Conscience of your part, he only
s^eth, that s^eth the Conscience. You grant, ye persecute your brethren,
where ye have the Swerd, and may persecute: but as Sara did Agar: Gene. 16
John 2. Chrysostom. in Mat. thae. Homi. 19.
as Christ did the Jews: and not otherwise. Verily, M. Hardinge, that
Christ, or Sara were persecutours. I have not greatly heard. But I remember
Chrysostom says thus: Nunquid Ouis Lupum persequitur aliquando? Non, sed
Lupus ouem. Sic enim Caim persecutus est Abel: Persequution for Love.
non Abel Caim. Sic Ismael persecutus est Isaac, non Isaac Ismael: Sic Iudaei
Christum, non Christus Iudaeos: Haeretici Christianos, non Christiani
Haeresicos. Ergo ex fructibus little cognoscetis eos: What, doothe the Sheep
perscute the Woulfe at any time? No, but the Woulfe doothe persecute the
Sheep. For so Caim persecuted Abel, not Abel Caim: So Ismael persecuted Isaac,
not Isaac Ismael: So the Jews persecuted Christ, not Christ the Jews: So
the Heretics persequute the Christians, not the Christiaus the Heretics.
(...) ye shall know them by their fruits.

S. Augustine says, August contra Lite, Pe^ili a. Lib. 2. Cap 19. Chrysostom.
in Matthae. Homil. 19.
Non eo modo persecutionem passi sunt Pseudoprophetae ab Elia, quomodo ipse
Elias a Rege nequissimo: Neither were the Palse Prophets so persecuted by
Elias, as Elias was persecuted by the wicked King. Surely Chrysostom says,
Quem videris in sanguine persequutionis gaudentem, Lupus est: Whom so ever ye
see ^eioicinge in the Bloudde of persequution, he is the VVoulfe.

But ye pretend great good will, and say, Ye persecute and murder your
Brethren for Love, In vespit.
as Christ persequuted the Jews. So I trow, Aristophancs says, Philippides
took a cudgel, and beatte his Father, and al for love. How be it. M. Hardinge,
neither are you armed, as Christ was armed: nor was Christ armed, as you are
armed. I must say to you, as S. Augustine says unto the Heretics the
Donatistes: August. contra Liter. Per^lta^^ Lib. 2. Cap. 87.
Hanc formam ne ab ipsis quidem Iudaeis persecutoribus accepistis. Illi enim
persequuti sunt Carnem ambulantis in terra: Vos Euangelium sedentis in Coelo:
Ye learned not this form of persequution, no not of the Jews. For they
persequuted the Fleashe of Christ walkinge in the Earth: You persequute the
Gospel of Christ sittinge in Heaven. Holcore in. 1. Se^ten. Quaest 3. Arti. 8.
Dubi 2. Orig. in Genes. Homi. 7. Gene. 21. Calat. 4.
Robert Holcote emonge other his doubts moves this question An Amor sit
odium: Whether Love be hatred; or no. If he were now alive, and saw your
dealinge, and the kindness of your Love, I believe, he would put the matter out
of question, and say, undoubtedly your Love is hatred, it is no Love. So Moses
says, Ismael played or sported with Isaac. But S Paul says, The same
plaieinge and sportinge was persecution. For thus he writes: He, that was
after the Fleashe, persequuted him, was after the Sprite.

I doubt not, but you think, of your part it is well done. For so Christ
says, Who so ever shall Murder you, Johan. 16.
shall think be offers a Sacrifice unto God. And your selves have set to
this note in great Letters in the Margin of your Decrees: Iudaei mortaliter
peccassent, Did. 13. Item: In Margin.
si Christu^ no^ Crucifixissent: The Jews had Sinned deadly, if they had not
hinged Christ upon the Cross. Benedictus Deus, qui non dedit nos in captionem
Dentibus eorum: Blessed be God, that has not given us to be a Pray unto their
Teeth.

To all the rest it is sufficient for M. Hardinge to say, They be Blasphemous
Heresies: wicked Acts: Lutheres Heresies, and villainies: Robbinge of Churches:
Breaches of Vows: Pleas^ely pleasures: Abandoninge of the Holy Sacraments:
Malices, Sclaunders, and Lies. And bisides these things, in effect he
answeareth nothing. Now to answer nothing with some thing, it were
woorthe nothing.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 5.
Now therefore, if it be leeful for these folks to be eloquent and
finetongued in speakinge evil, surely it becomes not us in our cause, being
so very good, to be doumbe in answearinge truly. For, men to be careless,
what is spoken by them and theite own matter, be it never do falsely and
sclaunderousely spoken, (especialy when it is such, that the Majesty of God,
and the cause of Religion may thereby be dammaged) is the part doubtless of
dissolute and retchelesse persons, and of them, which wickedly wink at the
injuries done unto the Name of God. For although other wrongs, ye oftentimes
great, may be borne and dissembled of a mild and Christian man: yet he that
goes smoothely away and dissembleth the matter when he is noted of Heresy,
Ruffinus was wont to deny, that man to be a Christian. We therefore will do
the same thing, which al Laws, which natures own voice doothe command to
be done, and which Christ him self did in like case when he was checked and
reviled: to the in^^^t we may put of from us these men's sclaunderous
accusations, and may defend soberly and truly our own cause and innocence.

M. Hardinge.
Ye have not proved, the Truth to be of your side, nor ever shall be able to
prove, mainteininge the Doctrine of the Lutheras, Zwinglians, and Caluinistes,
as ye do. Now al depends of that point. And because ye have not the
Truth, what so ever ye say, it is soon confuted: and what so ever ye bring,
it is to no purpose.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This is the very issue of the case: Whether the Doctrine that we profess, be
the Truethe, or no. Which thing through Gods Grace, by this our conference,
in part may appare. I beseech God the Author of al Truth, and the Father
of Light, so to open our hearts, that the thing that is the Truth in deed,
may appear to us to be the Truth.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 2.
For Christ verily, when the Phariseis charged him with Sorcery, as one that
had some familiare Sprites, and wrought many things by their help: I, said
he, have not the Devil, but do glorify my Father: but it is you, that have
dishonored me, and put me to rebuke and shame. And S. Paul, when Festus the
Lieutenaunt scorned him, as a mad man: I (said he) most deer Festus, am not
mad, as thou think, but I speak ye Words of Truth and sobrenesse. And the
ancient Christians, when they were sclaundered to the people for mankillers,
for Adulterers, for committers of incest, for disturbers of the commonweals,
and did perceive, that by such sclaunderous accusations the Religion which
they professed, might be brought in question, namely if they should seem to
hold their peace, and in manner confess the fault: lest this might hinder
the free course of the Gospel, they made Orations, they put up Supplications,
and made means to Emperors, and Princes, that they might defend them selves
and their Fellows in open Audience.

M. Hardinge.
When ye prove, that ye have the Truth, then may ye be admitted, in your
Defense to allege the example of Christ, of S. Paul, and of the first
Christians. But now we tell you, being as you are, these examples serve you
to no purpose. And for ought ye have said ^itherto, the Anabaptists,
Libertines, Zwenkfeldians, Nestorians, Eunomians, Arians, and al other
pestiferous Heretics might say the same as well as ye. Christ was charged of
the Jews with vsinge the power of impure Sprites, Luke. 11. Act. 26. Tertul.
in Apolog.
blasphemously: Paul was scorned of Festus, as a mad man, without cause: the
Ancient Christians were accused by the Infidels of heinous crimes, falsely. But
ye are accused of Heresies and sundry Impieties, by Godly, Wise, and Faithful
men, upon Zeal, by good advise, and truly. And as for those Ancient
Christians, when they made Apologies or Orations in the Defense of the Christen
Faith, The Apologies of the old Fathers were lavvfully published. Eccles.
Hist. Lib 4. Cap. 26.
they did it so as became Christen men, plainly and openly. Either they
offered them to the Emperors with they own hands, or put to their names, and
signified to whom they gave the same. As S. Hilary delivered a Book in
Defense of the Catholic Faith against the Arians to Constantius. Melito and
Apollinaris wrote their Apologies to the Emperors. S. Iustine the Philosopher
and Martyr gave his first Apology for the Christians to the Senate of the
Romans, the second to Autonius Pius Emperor: Eccles. Hist. Lib. 5. Cap. 21.
Tertullian to the Romans. S. Apollonius the Roman Senator and Martyr did
Read his Book openly in the Senate house, which he had made in Defense of
the Christian Faith. The Apology of the Church of England for forth
suspitiously, and without due order.
But ye do your things, that ought to be done openly, in Hucker Mucker. Ye
set forth your Apology in the name of the Church of England, before any
mean part of the Church were privy to it, and so as though either ye were
ashamed of it, or afraid to abide by it. The inscription of it is directed
neither to Pope nor Emperor, nor to any Prince, nor to the Church, nor to the
general Council then being when ye wrote it, as it was most convenient: There
is no man's name set to it: Untruth.
It is Printed without Privilege of the Prince, contrary to Law in that
behalf made: allowed neither by Parliament, nor by Proclamation, nor agreed
upon by the Cleregie in Public and lawful Synod. This packinge becomes you:
it becomes not the upright Professors of the Truth Wherefore your unlawful
Book, The Apology ^ famous Libel.
as it is, so it may be called an Inuectiue, or rather a Famous Libel, and
sclaunderous Write, as that which seems to have benne made in a corner, and
cast abroad in the streets, the Authors whereof the Civil Law punis heth
sharply.

The B. of Sarisburie.
How far forth these examples may serve us, we remit the judgment thereof
to the discrete Christian Reader. It is not yenough thus to cry out,
Impieties, and Heresies. M. Hardinges bare Word in this behalf is not
sufficient to warrant an evidence. Certainly emonge other great comfortes,
that we have in Gods mercies, this is one, and not the least, that
touching the Innocence, and right of out cause, we may say to you, as
Christ said to the Phariseis, We have not the Devil, Johan. 2. Act. 26.
but we glorify our Father: Or, as S. Paul said unto Festus, We are not
mad (M. Hardinge) as ye report of us: but we viter unto you the Words of
Truth and sobriety.

But this is a piteous fault: The names of all the Bishops, Deanes,
Acchedeacons, Persons, Vicares, and Curates of England are not set to our
Apology. It is directed neither to the Emperor, nor to the Pope, nor to the
Council. Neither is it Printed with Privilege of the Prince. This last clause
is a manifest Untruth, and may easily be reproved by the Printer. Hereof ye
conclude, It is a sclaunderous Libel, and was written under a Hedge, and, as
you say, in Hucker Mucker.

First, were it granted, that al, ye say of Hilarie, Melito, Justinius,
Tertullian, and Apollonius were true: Yet must it needs follow, that al
Books, that are not Subscribed with the Authors names, were written in a
corner? First to begin with the Scriptures, tell us, M. Hardinge, who wrote
the Books of Genesis, of Exodus, of Leuiticus, of Numeri, of Deuteronomiu^, of
Io^ue, of the Judges, of the Kings, of ye Chronicles, of Job, etc. Who inrote
these Books? I say: Who authorized them? Who Subscribed his name? Who set to
his S^ale? The Book of Wisdom by some is Fathered upon Philo, by some upon
Solomon. The Epistle unto ye Hebrews, some say, was written by S. Paul:
Some, by Clemens: Some, by Barnabas: Some, by some other: and so are we
uncertain of ye Authors name. S. Mark, S. Luke, S. John, never once named
them selves in their Gospels. The Apostles Creed, the Canons of the Apostles,
by what names are they Subscribed? How are they authorized? To what Pope, to
what Emperor were they offered? To leave others the Ancient Doctors of the
Church, which, as you know, are often misnamed, Ambrose for Augustine,
Greek for Latin, New for Old: your Doctor of Doctors, the fairest flower,
and croppe of your garlande Gratianus, is so well known by his name, that wise
men can not well tell, Erasm. In Praesae. in tertiam Seriem quaerti Tom.
Hieronymi.
What name to give him. Erasmus says of him thus, Quisquis fuit, sieve
Gratianus, sieve Crassianus: What so ever name we may give him: be it
Gratianus, or Crassianus. And again he says, Eruditi negant, illam Gratiani,
nescio cuius, congeriem vlla vnquam Publica Ecclesiae authoritate fuisse
comprobatam: The learned say, that Gratians Collection, or heap of matters,
was never allowed by any Public Authority of the Church. Erasm. In
Praefatione in. 4. Tom. Hieronymi.
And again, Non constat vllis argumentis, quis fuerit Gratianus, quo tempore
opus suum exhibuerit, cuius Pontificis, cuius Concilij fuerit Authoritate
comprobatum: It cannot appear by any tokens of record, neither what this
Gratian was: nor at what time he offered up his Book: nor what Council, nor
what Pope allowed it.

Who subscribed the late Council of Colaine? Who subscribed the Book not long
sithence set abroad under the name of the Church of Colaine, and named
Antididagma? To be short, who subscribed your own late Book entitled the
Apology of Private Mass? Where were they written? Where were they Subscribed?
By what authority, and under what names were they allowed? I will say nothing
of your late Famous Volume bearinge the name of Marcus Antonius Constantius.
This Book, as you see, has three great names: Notwithstanding the Author
him self had but two: and yet not one of al these three. What, M. Hardinge,
would you make your Brethren believe, that al these be but sclaunderous Writes,
divised only in Hucker Mucker, and under a Hedge?

The Decree, Actor. 13
the Apostles made in the fiftenthe Chapter of the Acts, it appears not, it
was so curiously subscribed with all their names. The Protestation of the
Bohemiens in the Council of Basile, the Confession of the Churches of Geneua
and Heluetia, for ought that I know, have no such Public Subscriptions.
Neither is it necessary, nor commonly used, to join Private men's names to
Public matters: neither in so mighty and ample a Realm, upon al incident
occasions is it so easy to be done. Briefly our Apology is confirmed by as
many names, as the high Court of Parlamente of England is confirmed.

Neither was the same conceived in so dark a corner, as M. Hardinge imagines.
For it was afterward imprinted in Latin at Parise: and has hen fithence
Translated into the French, the Italian, the Duche, and the Spanishe tongues:
and has benne sent, and borne abroad into France, Flaunders, Germany,
Spain, Poole, Hungary, Denmark, Sueucland, Scotland, Italy, Naples, and
Rome it self to the judgment and trial of the whole Church of God. Yea it
was Readde, and sharply considered in your late Couente at Trident, and great
threats made there, that it should be answered: and the matter by two Notable
learned Bishops taken in hand, the one a Spaniarde, the other an Italian:
Which two notwithstanding, these five whole years have yet done nothing,
nor, I believe, intend any thing to do. In deed certain of your Brethren
have benne often gnawinge at it: but such as care nothing, nor is cared,
what they write.

But if names be so necessary, we have the names of the whole Cleregie of
England, to confirm the Faith of our Doctrine, and your name, M. Hardinge,
as you can well remember, emongst the rest: unless, as ye have already denied
your Faith, so ye will now also deny your name.

To conclude, it is greatter modesty to publishe our own Book, without Name,
then, as you do, to publishe other men's Books in your own Names. For in
deed, M. Hardinge, the Books ye lend so thick over, are not yours. Ye are
but Translatours: ye are no Authors. If every bird should fetch again his
own Feathers, alas your poor Chickens would die for cold.

But you say, We offered not our Book to the Pope. No, neither ought we so
to do. He is not our Bishop: He is not our Judge. We may say unto him, as
the Emperor Constantius said sometime to Pope Liberius, Theodoret. in Hist.
Ecclesiast.
Quoia es tu pa^s Orbis terrarum? What great portion art thou of the whole
World? As for your Council of Tridente, God wot, it was a seely Couente, for
ought that may appear by their Conclusions.

We offered the Defense, and profession of our Doctrine unto the whole Church
of God: and so unto the Pope, and the Council too, if they be any part, or
member of the Church: and by Gods mercy, shall ever be hable in all places
both with our hands, and with our Bodies to yield an accoumpte of the hope
we have in Jesus Christ. Whereas it liked you to term our Apology a
Sclaunderous Libel, I doubt not, but who so ever shall iudifferently consider
your Book, shall think M. Hardinges tongue wants no sclaunder.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 3.
But we truly, seeinge that so many thousands of our brethren in these last
twenty years have borne witness unto the Truth, in the mids of most
paineful torments, that could be divised: and when Princes desirous to
restrain the Gospel, sought many ways, but prevailed nothing, and that now
almost the whole world does begin to open their eyes to behold the
light: we take it, that our cause has already benne sufficiently declared
and defended, and think it not needeful to make many words, saying the very
matter says yenoughe for it self.

M. Hardinge.
The reasons and examples ye bring for it, conclude nothing. Because lackinge
Truth. ye build upon a false ground, what so ever ye set up, eftsoon it
falls, being stated by no just proof. Here ye go forth, and feign
would ye proppe up that matter: but your reasons be as weak as before. There
have not so many thousands of your Brethren benne burnte for Heresy in these
last twenty years, as ye pretend. But when ye come to boastinge, then have
ye a great grace in vsinge the Figure Hyperbole: Then Scores be Hundreds:
Hundreds be Thousands: Thousands be Millions.

But what was Michael Seruetus the Arian, Seruetus burnt for Heresy at Ge^eua.
who was burnte at Geneua by procurement of Calvin, a Brother of yours? David
George that took upon him to be Christ, who was taken up after he was buried
and burnte at Basile, David George. Joan of Kent.
was he your Brother? To come near home, Joan of Kent that fil^h, who took
forth a lesson further then you taught her (I trow) or yet Preach, was she
a Sister of yours? So many Adamites, so many Zwenck feldians, so many hundreds
of Anabaptists and Libertines, as have within your twenty years benne rid
out of their lives by fiere, swoorde, and water in sundry parts of
Christendom, were they al of your blessed Brotherhed?

And this is the chief argument ye make in all that Huge Dungehil of your
stinkinge Martyrt, Acts and Monumentes.
which ye have entitled Acts and Monumentes. But we tell you, It is not
death that justifies the cause of dyinge: But it is the cause of dyinge that
justifies the Death.

Princes (ye say) were desirous to restrain your Gospel, and though they went
about it by many ways, yet prevailed they nothing. Therefore your Doctrine
must needs be the true Gospel. As good an Argument as this is, A vveake
argument of Truth.
may Thieves make in their Defense. For Princes be desirous to keep their
Dominions from Robbinge, and have ever devised straight Laws and punishments
for restrainte of Thieves: yet be Thieves every where, and theft is daily
committed.

And whereas your Gospel is a gross Gospel, This Carnal Gospel soon takes
place among carnal hearers.
a Carnal Gospel, a Belly Gospel: wonder it is not, if those people be not
wholly withdrawn from assentinge to the same, who be not of the finest wits.
and be much given to the Service of the Belly, and of the things beneath the
Belly. Yet where the Princes have used most diligence, Heresies restrained by
due punishment.
and best means to stop the course of your Heresies, there the people
remain most Catholic: As every man may judge by vewe of Italy, Spain, Base
Almaine, and France, before that weighty Scepter by Gods secret providence
for punishment of sin, was committed to feeble hands, that for tender age
were not able to bear it.

Your other argument, The argument of the defenders seruinge well for
Antichrist.
whereby ye would persuade your Gospel to be the truth, is, that now (as ye
crake) almost the whole world does begin to open their eyes to behold the
light. This argument seruethe marvelous well for Antichrist. And truly, if he
be not already come, ye may very well seem to be his foreronners. Nay Sirs, if
it be true that ye say, that almost the whole world looks that way, knowinge
that in the latter days and toward the end of the world iniquity shall
abound, and the Charity of the more part shall wexe cold: Matthew. 24.
We may rather make a contrary argument, and judge your Gospel to be
erroneous and false, because the multitude is so ready to receive it. The
argument of multitude returned upon the defenders to a contrary conclusion.
Again Christ has not loved his Church so little, as that the world should
now begin to open their eyes to behold the light. For the same presupposes
a former general darkness. It stands not with Christ's promises made to the
Church, touching his being with the Church al days to the worlds end, and
the Holy Ghostes remaininge with it the Sprite of Truth for ever, that he
should suffer his Church, Matthew. 28. Johan. 14.
to continewe in darkness and lack of Truth, these thousand years past, and
now at the latter days to reuele the Truth of his Gospel by Apostates,
Vowebreakers, Churcherobbers, and such other most unlike to the Apostles.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What so ever we say, here appears small weight in M. Hardinges saieinges.
We make no boaste of the numbers, and multitudes of our Martyrs. And yet, as
S. Paul says, if we should needs boaste, we would chiefly boaste of
such our infirmities. 2. Cor. 1^.
But we reioise with them, and give God thanks in their behalf, for that it
has pleased him, to prepare their hearts unto temptation, to try and purify
them as Gold in Furnace, and to keep them faitheful unto the end.

As for David George, and Seruete the Arian, and such other the like, they
were yours, M. Hardinge, they were not of us: You brought them up, the one in
Spain, the other in Flaunders. We detected their Heresies, and not you: We
arreigned them: We condemned them: We put them to the Exequution of the
Laws. It seemethe very mutche to call them our Brothers, because we burnte
them. It is known to Children, it is not the death, but the cause of the
death that makes a Martyr. August in Psalm. 34. Par. 2.
S. Augustine says, Tres erant in Cruce: Vnus Saluator: Alter Saluandus:
Tertius Damnandus. Omnium par Poena, sed dispar causa: There were three
hanginge on the Cross: The first was the Saueour: The second to be Saved: The
third to be Damned. The Pain of al three was one, but the cause was diverse.

Your Anabaptists, and Zuenkfeldians, we know not. They find Harbor
emongste you in Austria, Slesia, Morauia, and in such other Countries, and
Cities, where the Gospel of Christ is suppressed: but they have no
Acquaintance with us, neither in England, nor in Germany, nor in France, nor
in Scotland, nor in Denmark, nor in Sueden, nor in any place else, where the
Gospel of Christ is clearly preached. But it has benne your great Policy
these many late years, when ye murdered the Saints of God, first to root
out their Tongues, for fear of speakinge: and then afterward to tell the
people, they were Anabaptists, or Arians, or what ye lifted. With such
policy Nero sometime that Bloody Tiranne burnte the Christians in heaps
together, Suetonius Tranquillus in Nerone.
and made open Proclamations, that they were Traitors, and Rebels, and had
^ired the City of Rome.

It pleases you for lack of other Evasion, to call the Story of Martyrs a
Dungbi^ of Lies. But these Lies shall remain in Record for ever, to testify
and to condemn your Bloody dooinges. Ye have imprisoned your Brethren, ye have
stripte them naked, ye have scourged them with Rods, ye have burnte their
hands and arms with flaminge Torches, ye have famished them, ye have drowned
them, ye have burnte them: ye have sommoned them being dead, to appear
before you out of their graves, ye have ripte up their buried Carkesses, ye
have burnte them, ye have thrown them out into the Dunghill: ye took a poor
Babe falling from his Mothers Womb, and in most cruel, and Barbarous manner
threw him into the fiere.

Al these things, M. Hardinge, are true: they are no Lies: The eyes, and
consciences of many thousands can witness your dooinges. The Blood of
innocent Abel criethe to God from the earth: and undoubtedly, he will require
it at your hands. Chrysostom in Matthew. 1 Iomi. 19.
Chrysostom says, as it is alleged before, Quem videris in Sanguine
persecutionis gaudentem, is Lupus est: Who so ever has pleasure in the Blood
of persecution, the same is a Wolf. Ye slew your Brethren so cruelly, not for
Murder, or Robbery, or any other grievous crime, they had committed, but only
for that they trusted in the Living God. How be it, we may say with the
Old Father Tertullian, Tertull. ad Scapulam.
Crudelitas vestra nostra gloria est: Your cruelty is our glory.

Whereas we auouche the Power and Authority of Gods Holy Word, for that
the more it is trodden down, the more it growethe, and for that the Kings,
and Princes of this world with all their puissance, and policy were never
hable to root it out, your answer is, that this reason may serve thieves as
well as us. To dissemble your odious comparisons, how lightly so ever it shall
please you to weigh this reason, yet your Forefathers the Phariseis in old
time seemed to make some accoumpte of it. Johan. 12.
For thus they murmured, and misliked among them selves: Videtis, nos nihil
proficere. Ecce Mundus totus post eum abijt. Ye see, we can do no good. Lo
the whole world (for all that we can do) is gone after him. Tertullian
likewise says, Exquisitior quaeque crudelitas vestra illecebra magis est
Sectae. Plures efficimur, Tertull. in Apologetico.
quoties metimur a vobis. Semen est Sanguis Christianorum: The greattest
cruelty, that ye can divise, is an entisement to our Sect. How many of us so
ever ye murder, when ye come to the view, ye find us more and more. The seed
of this increase is Christian Blood. August. de Ciui. lib. 22. cap. 6.
So S. Augustine, Ligabantur, includebantur, caedebantur, torquebantur,
vrebantur: and multiplicabantur: They were fettred, they were imprisoned, they
were beaten, they were rackte, they were burnte: and yet they multiplied. S.
Cyprian says, Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 3. Gregorius Nazianzen. in reditium
suum ex agro. (...). Eusebius. li. 4. ca. 8.
Sacerdos Dei Euangelium tenens, and Christi praecepta custodiens, occidi
potest, vinci non potest: The Priest of God holdinge the Testamente in his
hand, killed he may be, but overcome he can not be. So likewise Nazianzene,
Morte viuit: vulnere nascitur: depastum augetur: By death it liuethe: by
woundinge it springethe: by diminishinge it encreasethe.

Thus these Holy Fathers, when they saw, the Gospel of Christ increased and
grew by persecution, contrary to al judgment of reason, and worldly policy,
they were enforced, contrary to M. Hardinges judgment, therein to acknowledge
the mighty power, and hand of God, and an undoubted Testimony of the Truth.
Justinius a Godly Learned Father, and Martyr says thus of him self, Cum
auditem Christianos public traduci, and exagicati ab omnibus, videre^ autem
eos ad mortem, and ad omnia, quae ad terrorem excogitari possent, esse
intrepidos, cogitabam, nullo modo posse fieri, vt illi in aliquo scelere
viuerent: When I (beeinge an Heathen, and one of Platoes Scholars) heard that
the Christians were accused, and reuised of al men, and yet saw them to go
to their death, and to al manner terrible, and cruel torments, quietly, and
without fear, I thought with me self, it was non possible, that such men
should live in any wickedness. Sozomen. lib 1. cap. 1. (...)
The like writethe Sozomenus of the Christians in the Primitive Church: Nec
adulatione victi, nec minis perterriti, magnum omnibus argumentum dabant, sese
de maximis praemiis in certamen descendere: The Christians neither relentinge
by fair means, (...)
nor shrinkinge for threats, made it well appear to every man, that it was for
some great reward, they suffered such trouble.

These learned Fathers therefore saw, that M. Hardinge could not see, the
encreasinge of the Gospel through death, and persecution, maugre the might of
worldly Princes, Psalm. 2.
is an evident token of the Truth. The Prophet David says, The Princes
came, and consulted together against God, and against his Christ. But he
that dwell the in heaven, Prou^r. 22.
will laughe them to scorn. There is no wisdom, there is no policy, there is
no counsel against the Lord.

Further, you say, Our Gospel is gross, and the people dulle, and sensual,
and given to their belly, and beastly pleasure, and therefore the apter, and
readier to receive the same. O M. Hardinge, what a desperate cause is this,
that cannot stand without such manifest blasphemy of the Gospel of
Christ, and dispiteful reproach of Gods people? Certainly S. Romans 2. Psalm.
2.
Paul says, The Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation: And the Prophet
David says, The people is Christ's enheritance. What has the people so
mutche offended you, that you should either in this place so scornefully, and
so reprochefully report of them, or in your former Book so disdeingfully call
them Swiene, M. Hardinge, Fol. 155. b.
and Dogs? Yet is it not so long sithence your self were an earnest
professor of the same Gospel, were it never so gross. Where was then your
finenesse, and sharpness of wit? Where was your belly? Where was the rest?
You should not so soon have forgotten your own self.

Surely M. Hardinge, neither will the sensual man drowned in filthy, and beastly
pleasures take up his Cross, and follow Christ, and yield his neck to your
swearde, or his body to your fie^e: neither is it a gross, or sensual Gospel,
that will lead him to the same.

You say, it standethe not with Gods promise, to forsake his Church a
thousand years. It is mutche for you, M. Hardinge, openly to break Gods
commandments, to defile his Holy Sanctuary, to turn light into darkness,
and darkness into light: and yet nevertheless to bind him to his promise.
Al men be liers, Psalm. 50. 2. Tim. ^.
but God only is true, and preuailethe, when he is judged. God knows his
own. Christ will be evermore with his Church, yea although the whole Church
of Rome conspire against him.

But why do you so mutche abate your rekeninge? Why make you not up your full
accoumpte of fifteen hundred threescoare and six years, as ye were woonte to
do? Ye have here liberally, and of your self quite stricken of five hundred
threescoare and six years, that is to say, the whole time, wherein the
Apostles of Christ, and Holy Martyrs, and other Learned Fathers, and Doctors
lived: in which whole time it appears by your own secret Confession, the
Church of God might well stand both without your Private Mass (for then was
there none) and also without many other your like fantasies. Neither ought you,
M. Hardinge, so deeply to be grieved, and to call us Apostates, and
Heretics, for that we have reformed either our Churches to the Pattern of
that Church, or our selves to the example of those Fathers. Verily in the
judgment of the godly, five hundred of those first years are more woorthe,
then the whole thousand years that followed afterward.

Therefore I will aunsweare you with the words of S. Hieron ad Pammachium and
Oceanum.
Hierome: Quisquis es assertor ^ouorum Dogmatum, quaeso te, vt parcas Romany
^uribus: parcas Fidei, quae Apostolico ore laudatur. Cur post quadringentos
annos docere nos niteris, quod antea nesciuimus? Cur profers in medium, quod
Petrus, and Paulus edere noluerunt? Vsque ad hunc diem sine ista Doctrina
Mundus Christianus fuit. Thou, that art a Mainteiner of new Doctine, what so
ever thou be, I pray thee spare the Roman ears: spare the Faith, that is
commended by the Apostles mouth. Why go thou about now after four
hundred years to teach us that Faith, which before we never knew? Why
bring thou us forth that thing, that Peter, and Paul never uttered?
Evermore until this day the Christian world has benne without this Doctrine.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 7.
For if the Popes would, or else if they could weigh with their own selves
the whole matter, and also the beginninges and procedinges of our Religion, how
in a manner al their travail has come to naught, no body driuinge it
forewarde, and without any worldly healpe: and how on the other side, our
cause, against the will of Emperors from the beginning, against the wills
of so many Kings, in spite of the Popes, and almost maugre the head of al
men, has taken increase, and by little and little spredde over into al
Countries, and is come at length even into Kings Courts and Palaces: These
same things me think the might be tokens great yenough to them, that God him
self does strongly fight in our quarrel, and does from Heaven laughe at
their enterprises: and that the force of the Truethe is such, as neither
Man's Power, nor yet Hell gates are able to root it out.

M. Hardinge.
It is well, that ye use the term of the beginning and procedinges of your
Religion. For in deed of late years it began, not at Jerusalem, but at
Wittenberg. Neither was it first delivered unto you by an Apostle, but by an
Apostata. Still it proceeds, and the farther of from the end. And well may ye
name it your Procedinges, for there is no stay in it. What likethe to day,
mislike the tomorowe. The seely begiled souls that follow it, be as S. Paul
says, over learning, and never reachinge to the knowledge of the Truth. ^.
Tim. ^.


Did not your Religion begin first of Co^etise, Untruth.
and grew it not afterward of rancour and malice, The first beginning of this
nevve Gospel, and the occasion that first moved Luther to Heresy.
which Martin Luther conceived against the Dominican Friars in Saxony,
because Albert the Archbishop of Mentz and Electour of the Empire, had
admitted them to be Preachers of the Pardon of a Croisade against the Turks,
contrary to an Ancient custom, whereby the Augustine Friars, of whom Luther
was one, had of long time ben in possession of that preserment? Is it not well
known what afstirre Friar Luther made against John Tetzet the Friar of S.
Dominikes order, for that the said Tetzet was made chief preacher of a Pardon.
wherein, was great gain, and thereby him self was bereft of that sweet
Morsel, which in hope he had almost swallowed down?

Where you say, your Religion is spread abroad, and has taken so mutche
increase against the wills of Princes, and almost maugre the head of al men:
that is as false, as your Religion is.

Did not the great slaughter of your hundred thousand Boures of Germany
signify to the world, The diete of Smalcald.
your cause to have had the help of man: What may weindge of the great
League of German Princes made at the diere of Smalcald, for defense of your
Lutheran Gospel?

The troubles and tumultes of France raised by your Brethren the Huguenots,
The Hugu^no^ of France.
and the lament able outrages committed there for your Gospels sake, be they
not a witness of fresh memory, that your Religion is maintained, set forth,
and defended with power and help of men?

That it is now at length come even into Kings Courts and Palaices, The
coming of Luthers Gospel into Princes Courts is a vveake argume^s for the
Truth.
it mouethe wise men no less to suspect it, then to praise it.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye make your self game, M. Hardinge, for that the Preachinge of the Gospel
issued first out of Wittenberg, and not from Rome: Notwithstanding Wittenberg
is a noble, and a famous University, so generally frequented out of al foreine
Countries, and so mutche commended for all kinds of tongues, and liberal
knowledge, as not many the like this day in Christendom.

But be it, that Wittenberg were so simple a borough, as M. Hardinge
imagines. Yet were it not more simple then was the Town of Nazareth: in
which poor Town notwithstanding, first appeared the most glorious, and
greattest Light of the world. Christian modesty would not disdeigne the Truth
of God in respect of place. That rather becommethe the Proud looks of the
Scribes, and Phariseis. They despised Christ and his Disciples, and called
them Nazarenes, in despite of his Country. And there hence, it is likely,
first grew that scorneful question used by Nathanael, Johan. 1
Nunquid ex Nazareth potest aliquid esse boni? Can any good thing come from
Nazareth, so poor a Town? So Celsus the Heathen despised the Religion of
Christ, because it came (not from Rome, or Athens, but) from the Barbarous
Jews. Origin. contra Celsum li. 1.
For thus Origin reportethe of him: Dogma Christianuns affirmat a Barbaris
cepisse ortum, hoc est, a Iudaeis. He says, the Doctorue of the Christians
had his beginning only from a Barbarous Nation, that is to say, from the
Jews.

But this is the mighty hand and power of God. 1 Cor. 1.
He chusethe the weak things of the world, to confound the strong: and the
foolish things of the world, to confound the wise. 1. Reg. 17. 2 Thessalonians* 2
Matthae. 11. Psalm. 24. Galat. 3.
He ouerthrowethe the great Goliath with a seely slinge, and blowethe down
Antichriste in all his glory with the breathe of his mouth. I thank thee, O
Father, says Christ: for that thou haste hid these things from the wise,
and Politic: and haste reveled the same unto the simple. The Faith of
Christ is not bound to place. The whole Earth is the Lords, and all the
fullness of the same. There is now no Distinction of Greek, and Barbar^us:
We are al one in Christ Jesus.

Notwithstanding, the Gospel of Christ that we profess, neither had his
beginning from that Learned Father Doctor Luther, nor came first from
Wittenberg. It is the same Gospel, Mich. 4.
whereof it is Written by the Prophet, The Law shall come out of Sion, and the
Word of God out of Jerusalem.

Touching your long tale of Doctor Luthers avarice, and sale of Pardounes, I
mind not, nor need not to answer you. It is a simple stale sclaunder. Yet
it often seruethe your turn of course, when other things begin to fail. In
deed Freere Tecel the Pardoner made his proclamations unto the people openly
in the Churches in this sort: Ioha^. Sleidanus, lib. 13.
Although a man had lain with our Lady the Mother of Christ, and had begotten
her with Child, yet were he hable by the Popes power to Pardonne the fault.
Against this, and other like foul Blasphemies Doctor Luther first began so
speak. Now whether this occasion were sufficient, or no, let M. Hardinge him
self be the Judge.

We grant, the Princes, and Estates of the world have now laid their
power to assiste the Gospel. Gods Holy Name therefore be blessed. How be it
the Gospel came not first from them. It sprange up, and grew by them many
where is against their wills.

Neither is the Gospel therefore the more to be suspected, because it has
entered into Princes Courts. Daniel was in King Nabuchodonosors Palaice, and
taught him to know the Living God. Philip. 1.
S: Paul reioiced, and took comfort in his bands, for that there were some
even in Neroes Court, that began to hearken to the Gospel. And Eusebius
says, Valeriani Aula erat iam Ecclesia Dei: Valerian the Emperors Court was
now become the Church of God. Athanasius says unto the Emperor Iouinian,
Conueniens est Pio Principi, etc: The Study and love of Godly things, Theod.
li. 4. ca. 3. Cyrill. in Epist. ad Theodos. and Valentinian.
is very meet for a Godly Prince. For so shall you surely have your heart ever
more in the hand of God. Likewise says S. Cyril to the Emperors Theodosius
and Valentinian: Ab ea, quae erga Deum est, pietate, Reipub. vestrae status
pendet. The state, and assurance of your Empiere hangethe of your Religion
toward God.

So likewise says Sozomenus of the Emperor Arcadius, Sozom. li. 9. ca. 3.
(...).

Therefore it behouethe Princes to understand the cases of Gods Religion,
and to receive Christ with his Gospel into their Courts. Psalm. 2. Esaie. 49.
For God has ordained Kings, as the Prophet David says, to serve the
Lord: and, as Esai says, to be Nources unto his Church.

If there be occasions of vanities or wickedness in Princes Courses, yet is
there no Court therein comparable to the Court of Rome. For there, S. Bernard
says, Mali proficiunt: boni deficiunt: The wicked wax: the godly wane.

Ye strive in vain, M. Hardinge: This Counsel is not of Man: it is of God. If
Princes with theirs powers could not stay it, mutche less can you stay it
with untruths and fables. The poor beguiled souls, of whom ye speak, are
neither so seely, Act. 5.
nor so simple, but they are able to epsy your folies. The Truth of God will
stand: Vanity will fall of it self. Remember the Counsel of Gamaliel: Fight
not against the Sprite of God.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 3.
For they be not al mad at this day, so many Free Cities, so many Kings,
so many Princes, which have fallen away from the Seat of Rome, and have
rather joined them selves to the Gospel of Christ.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinges answer hereto is long: the effect thereof in short is this:

The Faith of the Holy Roman Church, is the very Catholic Faith, which
who so foresake, shall be companions with Devils in everlasting fiere.

And where ye say, so many Free Cities, so many Kings, I pray you, how
many free Cities can you name, that have received your Sacramentarie Religion?
Nay the Free Cities of Germany, as many as have foresaken the Catholic
Church, do they not persecute you the Sacramentaries? But, say ye, they be
fallen from the Seat of Rome. So be the Greeks also in a point or two: yet
condemn they you for Heretics.

Neither be all the Free Cities in all the Country of Germany fallen from the Sea Apostolic. Of five parts of that great Country, at least two remain
Catholic.

Let us see, how make ye up the number of so many Kings, ye speak of? The
Realms of England, and Scotland, because by Gods providence the
Government of them is deuolued to Women, for as mutche as they be no Kings,
though they have the full right of Kings, of them I speak not. Now only two
Christened Kings remain, the King of Denmark, and the King of sweden.
Geate you now up into your Pulpites like bragginge cocks on the rowst: Flappe
your whinges, and crow out aloude, so many free Cities, so many Kings.

But what think you of all the world before this day? Were al Cities, al
Provinces, al Countries, al Kings, al Princes, etc. til Freer Luther came, and
with his Nun told us a new Doctrine, and controlled all the old, were al
these mad?

The Virtuous men of the Society of Jesus, have they not brought many
Countries, many Kings, many Princes to the Faith of Christ by preachinge the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church? We will not follow your folishnesse in
boastinge, etc. The Faith professed in the holy Romayne Church, is now
preached in Peru in the Kingdom of Ignamban, in the Kingdom of Monopotapa, in
Cambaia, in Giapan, in Cina, in Tartaio, in Basnaga, in Taprobana, in Ormaz, in
Ceilon, in Zimor, in Bacian, in Macazar.

The Miracles wrought by these Holy Fathers which converted these Countries, I
trow, ye will not accoumpte to be madness. Thus your vain boast in
wickedness wrought by the power of Satan is put to silence, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Faith of the Roman Church, Greeks.
says M. Hardinge, is the very Catholic Faith of Christ: which who so
foresakethe, be he King or Emperor, he shall be Companion with Devils in
everlasting fire. Thus mutche, I trow, M. Hardinge learned of the Countrefeite
Decree of Anacletus. For thus it pleases him to gloss, Anaclet. Epist. 1.
and interlace the words of Christ: Super hanc Petram, id est, Super
Ecclesiam Romanam, aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: Upon this Rock, that is to say,
Upon the Church of Rome, I will build my Church. And therefore Pope Bonifacius,
for a full resolution of the matter says thus: Extra. De Mayor. and. Obedien,
Vnam Sanctam. Glossa in eodem. Cap.
Subesse Romano Pontifici, omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus,
definimus, and pronuntiamus, omnino esse de necessitate salutis: We declare,
say, determine, and pronounce, that it is of the necessity of Salvation for
every mortal creature, to be subject unto the Bishop of Rome. And the Gloss
likewise upon the same, Quicquid saluatur, est sub Summo Pontifice: What so
ever creature is saved, is under the Highest Bishop. Here is no mention neither
of Christ, nor of his Gospel. Salvation, and Damnation hangs only of the B.
of Rome. This thing once granted, the case is clear: The Pope him self has
resolved the doubt. What should we need a better trial? Cornelius Episc.
Bitont. in Conci. Tridentino.
Notwithstanding Cornelius the Bishop of Bitonto in the late Chapter at
Tridente, of the Bishop, and Holy See of Rome says thus, Vtinam a Religione
ad Superstitionem, a Fide ad Infidelitatem, a Christo ad Antichristum, a Deo ad
Epicurum velut prorsus vnanimes non declinassent, dicentes in cord impio, and
ore impudico, Non est Deus: O would God (the Pope and his Cardinales) had not
fall ^en with common consent, and altogether, from true Religion to
Superstition, from Faith to Infidelity, from Christ to Antichriste, from God
to Epicure: saieinge with wicked heart, and shameless mouth, Psalm. 14.
Bernard. in Cantic. Canticor.
There is no God. In like sense, of the same Bishops, and See of Rome S.
Bernard says, Serui Christi seruiunt Antichristo: The Servants of Christ
serve Antichriste. Cornelius says, the Bishops of Rome are fallen to
Superstition, to Infidelity, to Antichriste, to Epicure: and are not ashamed
to say, There is no God. Yet, says M. Hardinge, the Faith of Rome is the
Catholic Faith: and who so departethe from the same, be he King or
Emperor, he shall be companion with the Devil in Hell fire. And thus to say,
is no mere madness.

That the Princes, and free Cities of Germany ever persecuted us, it is
utterly untrue, and like the rest of your tales. They rejoice in God in our
behalf: and being there, they received us under their protection, and
offered us such freedom, and courtesy, as they seldom offered the like to
any Nation. Certain of them by your own Confession, have already agreed to all the points of our Doctrine. But none of them al, no not one would ever suffer
the same Doctrine of ours to be condemned.

What the Grecians this day think of us, I cannot tell. Notwithstanding it
appears by their letters written purposely to the Churches of Bohemia, that
they allow well of our Doctrine, and utterly condemn yours. For thus they
writ unto them: Epist. Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae ad Ecclesia^ Pragensem.
In Council. Lateranen. Cap. 4.
(...): Wherefore, loving Brethren, and Children, if it be so as we hear,
and hope, make haste, that we may join together in Unity. And again, thus
it is recorded in the late Council of Laterane, Graeci in tantum coeperunt
abominari Latinos, vt si quando Sacerdotes Latini super eorum altaria
celebrassent, ipsi non vellent prius in illis sacrificare, quam ea, tanquam per
hoc inquinata lauissent: The Greeks began so mutche to abhor the Latins,
that, if it had happened the Latin Priests had Ministered upon their aultars,
they would not afterward make oblation upon the same, before they had washed
them: as thinkinge their Aultars defiled by the Latins handeling. Wherefore,
M. Hardinge, what so ever the Grecians think of us, it appears hereby, they
utterly refuse your Communion, and condemn you for Heretics.

But who would have thought, M. Hardinge had benne so skilful in proportions?
The whole country of Germany, says he, being divided in equal portions,
two of five remain still in y^ obedience of the Sea of Rome. We give God
thanks, it is, as it is. In deed certain towns subject to the Bishops,
in outward usage of their Churches, remain still, as they were before. Yet
nevertheless where the Churches are Popish, the people of al sorts are
Protestants, and love the Truth, and are mutche ashamed of your folies. It
was Gods secret providence, that certain of yours should remain emongst us
a season, as the Cananites remained emongst the people of Israel. Otherwise
within few years ye would deny, that ever your disorders had benne so great.

It is very hard, and in manner not possible, to convert the whole people of
so great a country al at once. The Hears of a man's Bearde, or Head never
wax white al together. Luc. 13.
Christ compares the Kingdom of God unto Leaven, which the woman takethe,
and lays in a lump of dowgh. It works, and labors by (...), and little,
Eusebius.
until it have Leauened all the whole. In this sort Eusebius seeme^^ to compare
the two parts of the Roman Empire dissentinge in Judgment of Religion: the
East part to the Night, and the Weaste to the Day. Johan. 12. 1. Corin. 15.
But Christ will draw al unto him self: and then shall God be al in all.

But here to match our so many Kings, and so many Princes, M. Hardinge has
brought us a many of news out of Ignamban, Monopotapa, Cambaia, Giapan,
Bisnaga, Ormoz, and other strange, and far Countries. There, he says, so
many, and so many Kings, and Princes are lately Converted, and brought to the
obedience of the Sea of Rome. I marvel, he says not, the Man in the Moon
was likewise newly Christened, to make up the Muster.

How be it al these things must needs be true. For Christ's own Fellows,
or, as M. Hardinge utters it in better wise, the Holy Fathers of the Society
of Jesus, have sent home word as well hereof, as also of sundry Miracles
wrought by the same Holy Fathers. Verily, so the name of Christ be publisshed,
whether it be by them, or by us, by Light, or by Darkness, Gods Holy name be
blessed. But of many their Miracles I have no skill. For thus these Holy
Fathers write, as it is said before, that with Holy Water they have driven
Mise out of the country, Copus Dialo. c. Pa. 18. Alexander de Hales, par. 4.
quaes. 53. mem. 4. Ar. 3. solut. 2. Nicola. Lyra in Daniel. Ca. 14.
and made Barren Women to bear Children, and such other the like marvelous
Miracles. Neither are we bound of necessity to believe al such Miracles
what so ever, without exception. Alexander of Hales says, In Sacrame^to
apparet Caro, interdu^ humana procuratione, interdu^ operatione Diabolica: In
the Sacrament it self there appears Fleash, sometime by the conuciance of
men, sometime by the woorkinge of the Devil. Likewise says Nicolaus Lyra,
Aliquando in Ecclesia fit maxima deceptio Populi in Miraculis fictis a
Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus, propter lucrum: Sometime even in the
Church the People is shamefully deceived with fained Miracles wrought either
by the Priests, or else by their companions, for lukers, sake. Miracles be not
evermore undoubted proofs of True Doctrine. Augusti contra Faust Li. 13.
Therefore S. Augustine says unto Faustus the Manichee: Miracula non facitis:
quae si faceretis, tamen ipsa in vobis caueremus: Ye work no Miracles: and
yet if ye wrought any, at your hands we would take heed of them. Hieremi. 23.
The Prophet Hieremie says, Seduxerunt Populum meum in mendacijs suis, and
in Miraculis suis: They have deceived my People by their Lies, and by their
Miracles.

Touching the Conversion of the East India, Vesputius writes, there were
many Godly Bishops there, Vesputius.
and sundry whole countries Converted, and Christened, long before that
either the Portugales, or the Jesuits came thither: and yet had never heard of
the name of the Bishop of Rome.

As for the rest of the Weast Spanishe Indies, the People there lived not only
without al manner knowledge of God, but also wild, and naked, without any
Civil gouernmente. ^etr Martyr Mediolanen.
offeringe up men's bodies in Sacrifice* drinkinge men's blood, and eatinge
men's fleash. Some of them woorshipped the Son, and the Moon: some, an
ancient old Tree: some, what so ever they saw first in the morninge, they
thought the same for that day to be their God. Some woorshipped certain
familiar Devils, and unto them Sacrificed young boys, and girls.

Being in this miserable state, and naturally by the very sense, and judgment
of common reason abhorringe and lothinge their own blindness, what marvel
is it, if they were easy to be leadde into any Religion, specially carrieing^
such a show of apparel, and Holy Ceremonies?

So the great King of Tartarie of late, Vesputius in Nouo Orb, fo. 485.
findinge him self and his people without any manner Religion, was contented
to borrowe some Religion of the Tu^kes. For men would rather clothe them selves
with leaves, and barks, then to go quite naked: and rather eat Akecornes,
then die for hunger.

And what if God would use this mean for the time, after ward the better to
lead the said nations to the clear Light of the Gospel, as ^. Augustine
says, the shoemaker uses his bristle not to sewe withal, but to draw (...)
his threede? No doubt, M. Hardinge, if your Doctrine, and ours were laid
together, the very Indians them selves, be they never so rude, would be able
to see. a great difference.

But let the Bishop of Rome win abroad, and lose at home. You remember the
old Proverb. Dionysius Corinthi. Dionysius when he had lost his Kingdom at
home at Syracusae, he got him self to Corinthe, and there became a
Schoolemaister, and so seemed to continue a Kingedome still.

We make no boaste, M. Hardinge, nor g^ate us to rowste, as ye say, nor ^lappe
our wings in the behalf of these Princes, and Countries, so many, and so
many, as it pleases you to sport, that have submitted them selves to the
Gospel of Christ. Neither are the same, so many, and so many, so sewe as you
would seem to make them. The Kingedome of England, the Kingedome of Scotland,
the Kingedome of Denmark, the Kingedome of Sweden: the Dukes of Saxony, the
Duke of Brunswike, the Palsgraue of Rhene, the Duke of Wirtenberg, the
Landtgraue of Hessia, the Marquis of Brandeburg, the Prince of Russia, al other
the Earls, and noble men, and great Cities throwgh the whole country of
Germany, the mighty commonweals of Heluetia, Rhetia, Vallis Tellina, with so
many hundred thousands bisides in France, Italy, Spain, Hungary, and in
the Kingedome of Poole: Certainly al these well reckened cannot seem so ^ewe,
as ye would have it. Yewisse, M. Hardinge, it greeueth you full ^ore, they are
so many. If God of his mercy bless those things. that he has mercifully
begone. it will be high time for you shortly to seek a new refuge.

We boaste not our selves of these things. There is no cause It is not the
work of man: it is the only hand of God. David says, Let the Heavens
rejoice: let the Earth be glad: Psalm. 19.
The voice (of the Apostles) is sounded abroad into all the world: Luc. 2.
The Angels of God sange, Apocalyp. 19.
Glory be to God on high: Tertull. contra Iudeos.
The Angel in the Apocalypse cries amain, Cecidit, cecidit Babylon illa magna:
Down, down is fallen that great Babylon: Tertullian says, Parthi, Medi,
Elamitae, etc. The P^rthians, the Medians, the Elamites, the people of
Mesopotamia, of Armenia, of Phrygia, of Cappadocia, of Pontus, of Asia, of
Pamphilia, of Aegypte, of Aphrica, of Rome, of H^^rusalem, of Getusia, of
Mauritania, of Spain, of France, of Britannie, of Sarmatia, of D^cia, of
Germany, of Scythia and many other nations, and Provinces, known* and
unknown have received the Gospel of Christ. Thus said they, the Angels, and
Prophets of God, and Holy Fathers, and yet without boastinge, or fleeinge to
rowste, or clappinge of whinges. Give us leave therefore, M. Hardinge, in the
like case to solace our selves with the consition of Gods mighty, and
merciful works, and humbly to rejoice at the triumph of the Cross of
Christ.

Arnobius says unto the Heathens: Ne nobis de nostra frequentia blandiamut.
Multi nobis uidemur: sed Deo admodum pauci sumus. Nos gentes nationesque
distinguimus: Deo vna Domus est mundus hic totus: Let us not flatter our selves
of our great multitudes. Arnobius contra Gentes l^. 8.
Unto our selves we seem many: but unto God we are but few. We put
difference bitweene Nation, and Nation: But unto God this whole world is but
one house. This counsel, M. Hardinge, is wholesome for either part to follow,
that who so will rejoice, may rejoice in the Lord.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 4.
And although the Popes had never hitherunto leisure to consider diligently and
earnestly of these matters, or though some other cares do now let them, and
diverse ways pulle them, or though they coumpt these to be but common and
trieflinge studies, and nothing to appertain to the Popes worthiness, this
makes not why our matter ought to seem the worse. Or if they perchance will
not see that, which they see in deed, but rather will withstand the known
Cruthe, ought we therefore by and by to be coumpted Heretics, because we
obey not their will and pleasure?

M. Hardinge.
Since Christ has given to the Pope in Peter, Johan. 22.
whose laufull successor he is, commission to feed his Sheep: Wholesome
feedinge being thend of that commission, it is not to be doubted, but he that
ordained thend, has also ordained means belonginge to thend. Therefore it is
not the duty of a good and humble sheep, to give forth a malicious surmise,
that the shepherd will not see that he sees in deed, but rather will withstand
the known Truth. And what so ever sheep be disobedient, and refuse to hear
the voice of their sheepeheard, whom Christ has made over them, the same be
not of Christ's fold. And mainteininge contrary Doctrine to their shepeheardes
true Doctrine. justly may they be accoumpted Heretics.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To be Peter's lauful Successor, it is not sufficient to leap into Peter's
stalle. Lauful Succession stands not only in possession of place, but also,
and mutche rather in Doctrine and Diligence. Yet the Bishops of Rome, as if
there were nothing else required, evermore put us in mind, and tell us many
gaye tales of their Succession, Pope Symmachus says, In Papa si desint bona
acquisita per meritum, Distin. 40. Non nos.
sufficient quae a loci Praedecessore praestantur: Glosa ibid. in verb. Cum
Haereditatem.
If the Pope want vertu^es, Dis. 40. Non est facile.
and goodness of his own, Alphonsus Contra. Hares. L.
yet the virtues that are given him by (Peter) his predecessor, 1. cap. 9.
are sufficient. And the Gloss upon the same: Petrus fecit Papam haeredem
bonitatis suae: Peter has made the Pope Heir of his goodness.

But S. Hierome says far otherwise: Non sanctorum filij sunt, qui tenent
loca sanctorum: They be not evermore Holy men's Children, that sit in the
roumes of Holy men. Likewise says Alphonsus de Castro, a special assistante
of that side, Quamuis teneamur^^x Fide credere, verum Petri Successorem esse
Supremum totius Ecclesiae Pastorem, tamen non tenemur eadem Fide credere,
Leonem, aut Clementem esse verum Petri Successorem: Notwithstanding we be
bound by Faith to believe, that the true Successor of Peter is ye highest
Shepherd of the whole Church: yet are we not bound by the same Faith to
believe, that Leo, or Clement (being Eishoppes of Rome) are the true Successors
of Peter.

The words, Johan. 20
that Christ spoke unto Peter, importe no Souerainetie, but were common to all the rest. Head Shepherd.
S. Cyprian says, Hoc erant vtique coeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari
cosortio praediti and Honoris, and Potestatis: Cyprian. de simplicita. praelato.
The rest of the Apostles were even the same, that Peter was, a^ endewed with
like fellowship both of Honor. and of Power. What special privilege then can
the Pope claim by the Succession of S. Peter? Or what talks he of feeding
the whole flock of Christ, yt never feeds any part thereof? wherein is ye
Pope like S. Peter? or wherein ever was S. Peter like ye Pope?

Yet M. Hardinge doubts not to give his Definitive Sentence, what so ever
Sheep is not obedient to the Headshepheard, is not of the flock of Christ.
The Pope also him self boldly warranteth the same. Thus he says of him
self, Quicunque praeceptis nostris non obedierit, Did. 81. si qui sunt: In
glosa.
peccatum Idololatriae, and Paganitatis incurrit: Who so ever obeieth not our
commandments, falls into the sin of Idolatry, and Infidelite. And
therefore Pope Steuin thus auanceth the authority of his own See: Sacrosancta
Domina nostra Romana Ecclesia: Did. 79. Opor^ebat.
Our Holy Lady the Church of Rome. Johan. 10.


But Christ speaking of him self says, Luc. 6.
I am the True Shepherd: And, Galat. 2.
Who so hears these words of mine. and does the same. I will liken him to a
wise man. S. Paul being but one of the sheep, says thus, I withstoode
Peter ( as M. Hardinge says, the Head shepherd) even unto his face, for
that he walked not uprightly to the Gospel of Christ. Yet was he a sheep of
the flock of Christ. Hostiensis in this case seems reasonable: De concess.
praebendae. Proposuit. Hostien. De Rescriptis. Si quando. ver. Sed nunquid.
His words be these Omnes debent obedi^e Papae, quicquid praecipiat: nisi
sequi possit peccatum: Al men must obey the Pope, what so ever he command: so
there follow no sin of his commandment. Likewise Feliuus a notable
Canoniste: Non obstante Plenitudine Potestatis, quae est in Papa, non est
obediendum ei, peccato imminente: Notwithstanding the fullness of power, that
is in the Pope, when sin shall follow his biddinge, we may not obey him.

If the Pope will claim the Headpast ourship over the whole flock of Christ,
or rather if he will be taken for any Pastor at al, let him then feed the
Flock: Let him break the bread of Life, without Leaven: Let him speak the
word of God truly, without fables: and we will hear him. Otherwise S.
Augustine has warned us: Augusti. in Johan. tracta. 46.
Sua si docere velint, ^olite audire, nolite facere. Certe enim tales sua
quaerunt: non quae sunt Jesus Christi: If they will teach you Doctrines of
their own, see, ye hear them not: (and what so ever such thing they
command you) see, ye do it not. For undoubtedly such men se^ke for their
own matters: and not the things that perteine to Jesus Christ.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 6.
If so be that Pope Pius were the man (we say not, which he would so gladly
be called) but if he were in deed a man, that either would accoumpt us for his
brethren, or at least would take us to be men, he would first diligently have
examined our reasons, and would have seen, what might be said with us, what
against us: and would not in his Bull, whereby he lately pretended a Council, so
rashly have condemned so great a part of the world, so many Learned and Godly
men, so many common wealths, so many Kings, and so many Princes, only upon
his own blind preiudices and foredeterminations, and yt without hearing of
them speak, or without showing cause why.

M. Hardinge.
Speak of Pope Pius, what ye will, and what ye can. Neither your praise can
advance his estimation, nor your dispraise abase it. His singular virtues be
well known. God is highly to be praised for that he has provided for his flock
so good a shepherd. As for you, as ^e takes you to be men, so not his
brethren, because ye have cut of your selves from the Catholic church. Your
reasons have been diligently and exactly examined already. A comparison between
the Defenders and Balsasar King of Babylon. No good wrought by reasoning with
Heretics.
In respect of your reasones Learning, and Holy Scriptures which ye bring, ye
are found such as Balsasar King of Babylon ^as signified by the hand, that
appeared writing before him in the wall.

What it is, Heretics to be admitted to reasoning, it is and has been evermore
too well known. Be they never so thoroughly confuted, they yield not. Overcome
they may be, reformed th^^ will not be. Therein no good lightly is done.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If Pope Pius w^te so good (...), who so, (...) thy a Passout for the Church
of God, why then did his Cat d^^lles of thee (...) so (...) by treason, and
conspiracy to oppose him, (...) you say* so good a man* (...) it were not so,
Oration Pij Papae.
why then did he himself (...) thereof so utterly in ^n Oration pronounced
openly in Rome in the Consist^^te* Is it not lauful for so good a man to live
in Rome? Is the same Proclamation now practiced among the Cardinals in Rome,
(...).
that was sometime used in the Council house at Ephesus, Nemo nostrum frugi
esto. Let no good man be emongste us:

Ye safe. Pope Pius would not vouchesaue to call us his Brethren. No marvel,
seeing his own dear, and first begotten Children the Cardinales would no
longer have him to be their Father. Mattha e. 28.
It is sufficient for us, Johan. 20.
that Christ the Son of God is content to call us his Brethren.

Ye have Excommunicate us, as the Ph^riseis did the Apostles, because we
speak unto you in the name of Christ. But your own Law says,
Excommunica^us non poiest Excommunicate: He that is Excommunic^t him self,
cannot give Sentence to Excommunicate others: 11. Quae. 3. Cui est illata.
And your own Gelasius says. Mala. 2.
Neminem ligate debet iniqua Sententia: A wicked Sentence (of Excommunication)
binds noman. But before al others God him self says, Ego Benedicam
Maledictionibus vestris: I will Bless, that you Curse, says the Lord. You
say, you have weighed our Reasons, and have found them too light. Now surely
that is a good Light answer. Even in such Light sort Iulianus the Apostata
wrote sometime unto the Christian Bishops: Sozomen. li. ^. Cap. 18.
(...): I have readde your reasons: I know them well yenough: and therefore I
have condemned them. But the same Christian Bishops answered him again,
(...). It may be, ye have readde our reasons: but ye understood them not. For
if ye understood them, ye would not condemn them. 1. Corin. 2.
As S. Paul also likewise says, Nam si cognouissent, nunquam Dominu^ Gloriae
crucifixissent: If they had known, they would never have Crucified ye Lord of
Glory.

But unto many of your side, M. Hardinge, I fear me we may over truly say as
S. Hilarie says unto the Arian Heretics: Hilar. De Synodis aduersus Arianos.
Vere Deum nesciunt: atque vtinam n^scirent: Cum procliuiori enim venia
ignorarent: In deed they know not God: and would God they kn^w him not: Then
their ignorance were the easier to be pardoned.

You say, There is no Disputation to be had with Heretics. Yet your Fathers
in the Council of Basile, Council Basil. Council. Trident.
and your Friends in the last Council of Trident, I will not say, had
Disputations, but certainly yielded, and gave place unto the Bohemiens, and
unto such others, as you call Heretics. But ye have reason: ye can foresee
your best advantage. It were the readiest way to disclose your shame You never
yet came to Disputation, but some of your company shranke away from you, As I
before have reported out of Tertullian: Tertull. in Apologetico.
Veritas nihil veretur, 1. Regum. 5.
nisi abscondi: Truth fears nothing, but lest she be hid. If the God of
Israel come into the Temple, the Idol of Dagon must needs fall down.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 1.
But because he has already so noted us openly, lest by holdinge our peace we
should seem to grant a fault, and specially because we can by no means have
audience in the Public assembly of the General Council, wherein he would no
creature should have power to give his voice, or to declare his opinion,
except he were sworn, and straightly bound to maintain his Authority: For
we have had good experience hereof, in the last Conference at the Council of
Irident: where the Ambassadors and Divines of the Princes of Germany, and of
the free Cities, were quite shut out from their company. Neither can we yet
forgeate, how Julius ye third, above ten years past, provided warely by his
write, that none of our fort shoul be suffered to speak in the Council,
except yt there were some man peradventure, yt would recante, and change his
opinion. For this cause chiefly we thought it good, to yield up an accoumpte of
our Faith in writtinge, and truly and openly to make answer to those
things, wherewith we have been openly charged: to the end the world may see
the parts and fundations of that Doctrine, in the behalf whereof so many good
men have little regarded their own lives. And that al men may understand what
manner of people they be, and what opinion they have of God and of Religion,
whom the Bishop of Rome, before they were called to tell their tale, has
condemned for Heretics, without any good consideration, without any example,
and utterly without Law or right: only because he heard tell, that they did
dissente from him and his in some point of Religion.

M. Hardinge.
Ye allege t'woo causes, The first is, lest by holding your peace, ye should
seem to grant a fault. The second, Two causes of making the Apology.
which ye make more specialie because by no means ye could have audience in
the late general Council. Your second cause is false, as hereafter it shall be
showed. Your first is naught, as that which shows your pride, vain glory,
and pertinacie. Well. ye do but as Heretics before you have ever done. It must
not be looked for at your hands, I^ Councels any man may shevve his opinion,
but none may give a voice, or suffrage, and Sentence Definitive, but only
Bishops.
that ye acknowledge any fault. For that were Humility, which virtue al
Heretics be far from etc. To give a voice or suffrage, and utter Sentence
definitive it pertains only to Bishops. Now ye be no Bishops, but some of
you mere lay men, and most of you Apostates.

Whether the Ambassadors and Divines of the Princes of Getmanie and of the
free Cities there. were at any time upon any consideration of their misliked
demeanor, or for any other just cause restrained from the company of the
Fathers in the late general Council at Tren^: Again whether Pope Julius the
third provided by any write that none of your sort should be suffered to speak
in the Council, the cause of recantation excepted: what ye say touching this
matter, because ye say it without proof. We have found you in so many other
points of greater importance so far to step aside from truth. that for
this we cannot believe you. But that your selves by no means could have
audience in the Council at Trent, and that the Ambassadors and Divines of the
Princes and free Cities of Germany were from thence quite shut out: Three
safe Conduites granted An accoumpt of faith by the Defenders yielded up in
vvriting, without due order in all respects.
how true that is. I report me to the three safe conductes. which the three
Popes, under whom that Council was holden, granted forth and confirmed in that
behalf. Wherefore belie the council no more, complaining that ye could not
there have audience and be heard.

Ye yield up an accoumpt of your faith in writing, ye say. But to whom do ye
yield it up? and by whom is it yielded? from whom comes ye same? Do ye
acknowledge no lauful judge, no lauful consiliorie in the whole world? Commit
ye your whole matter to the temeritie of the people? Why have ye not set your
names to the Book, that contains the profession of your faith, and of your
whole conscience.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge thought it answer sufficient, to vpbraide us with
suspicion of Untruthe. How be it I have no doubt, but both the Truth, and the
Untruthe by the particulares will soon appear.

First, that al Bishops, having voice Definitive, and interest in Councelles,
are solemnly sworn in all their Decrees, and Canons to uphold the Authority
of ye Pope, he thought it the wisest way to dissemble it. For it had been great
want of modesty, to deny it. The form of the oath recorded in the Popes
own Decretalles, Extra. De Iureiuran. Ego N.
is this; Ego N. etc. Papa^um Romanae Ecclesiae, and regulas Sanctorum Patrum
adiutor no ad defendendum, and retinendu^, saluo ordine meo, contra omnes
homines: IN. swear, that I will be an helper, to defend, and maintain the
Papacy of the Church of Rome, and ye Rules of the Holy Fathers (ye Popes)
mine own order saueds, against ol men alive. But these Rules, and Privileges
of ye Holy Fathers the Popes are these: Extra. de Elect. and Electi potest.
Singificasti.
That ye Pope is above al General Cou^celles: Extra. de transta. Episcopi,
Quanto: In gloss.
That his bare will must be holden as a law: Extra. de Concess. Praben.
Proposuit. In gloss.
That, what so ever he do, noman may say unto him, why do you thus: Pighius.
Li. 6. Cap. 13.
That his judgment is more certain, then the judgment of all the world: 9.
q. 3. Nemo. In glossa.
That if the whole world give Sentence in any matter contrary to ye Popes
pleasure, yet it seems, we are bound to stand to the Judgment of the Pope:
and, M. Hardinge, Fol. 334. b.
as M. Hardinge says, That ye Pope, what so ever he say, or do, as being
Pope, can never err, These, and other the like be the Privileges, that the
Pope claims unto him self. Al which the Bishops are bound by oths. and by
their allegiance to defend against al men alive.

Now, where you say, that Bishops only have Sentence Definitive in the
Council, ye seem willingly, and without cause to report Untruthe. For Pius
Secundus being him self a Pope, would have told you the contrary. These be
his words: Aeneas Sylui. de gestis Council. Consta^tien. Li. 1.
Apparet, alios, quam Episcopos, in Concilijs habuisse vocem decidentem: It is
plain, that certain others biside Bishops, had voice Definitive in the
Councelles. Likewise says Gerson. Johan. Gerson, Quae veritates sint
Credendae. Corol. 4.
Etiam ad Laicos hoc potest extendi: and plus aliquando, quam ad multos
Clericoru^: This (Privilege of giving Sentence in Council) may be extended even
unto y^ ^aye sort: yea and yt oftentimes better then unto many Priests. But
here of herafter (...) at large.

But whether we be Bishops or no, M. Harding is no competent, nor indissere^t
Judge. For Sallust. in bell^ Catilin.
who so will Judge uprightly, must be void of anger, hatred love, envy, and
other like affections. Which Sentence being otherwise profane, is used and
hallowed by ye Apostolic Legates in the Council. Iriden. sub Paulo. 3.
Council of Trident: Surely the Godly say, yt, as your Bishops do no part of
Bishops dewtie, and therefore in deed are no Bishops at al: so your late
Couente at Trident, what so ever glorious name it pleases you to give it, yet
notwithstanding, in deed, and verily was no Council.

Whether Pope Julius by his Bulie utterly embarred the Divines, and
Ambassadors of ye Princes, and free Cities of Germany from al audience, and
Disputation in the Council, or no, I report me to Pope Julius own Bulle
touching the same. His words be these, Breue Iulij. 3. Citatur a Caluino.
Eri^ Conciliu^, vt qui temere loquuti sunt, aut dicta recantat^^i veniant, aut
eorum maudita causa, in executionem iam ordinatarum. Constitutionu^ Haeretici
declarentur, and condemnenturi There shall be a Council, that they th^^ have
spoken rashly, either may recante their saieinges, or else without farther
hearing, or reasoning of the matter, they may be denounced and condemned for
Heretics, according to the Constitutions already mode.

Likewise says John Sleidane, Johan Sleidan*
touching the Conference had some time at Augusta: Lib. 13.
In Colloquio frequenter ad initium actionis hoc dicebantinolle se vel
tantillum de Opinione, and Doctrina sua decedere: sed quicquid facerent, eo
fieri, vt in sententiam suam nos adducerent: In the Conference y^ was had
bitwene us, and them, they told us at the first. that they would not yield one
whit, from their Opinion, and Doctrine: But that, what so ever they did, they
did it only to the intent, to bring us to their Judgment.

I could farther allege Matthias Flacius Illyricus, Iohannis Fabritius
Montanus, Petrus Paulus Vergerius the Bishop of Iustinopolis, to like purpose.
But perhaps M. Hardinge would refuse their Authorities, and call them partial.
Yet in a matter so evident, and so openly known, it had been great folly for
them to dissemble. Illyricus says, Illyri. in Recusatione Con. Tritini.
Nostri audiri non potuerunt, quamuis id Amplissimi Caesaris Legati Orarent:
Our Divines, and Orators could is no wise be heard, notwithstanding the
Emperors most worthy Ambassadors had desired it. Johannes Fabritius
says, Council of Tride^t.
Fateor extensionem fuctam esse ad alias nationes: Johan. Fabriti.
Sed tamen additur, eam formam non nisi ad illos pertine^e, qui resipiscere,
and ad Ecclesiae gremium redire velint: I grant, the Save conduite was
extended to other Nations: But it is added withal, that the same form, or
liberty should perteine to none others, but only to them, that would repe^te,
and return to the bosom of the Church, And again he says, Tantum aburant
ab A^ce Disputation^, vt ne ad vestibulum quidem accedere potuerint: The
Divines of the Princes of Germany were kept so for of from the high Castle of
Disputation, that they could not be suffered to approach to the entry. Petr.
Paulus Nergerius De Council Trident
Petrus Paulus Uergerius says, that the Bishop of Uegla in Dalmatia was (...)
shaken up in the same (...), and threatened with Deprivation, and other
extremities, only for a little in^ling of the Truth.

Now d^ it, what (...) Authorities? Noman is herein so plain and (...), M.
Hard fo. 20.
M. Hardinge him self. M. H. fo. (...). b.
This is his determinate answer, M. H. fo. 174. a.
and full resolution in the case: M. H. fo. 333. b.
Your reason (...) no more to be heard, unless ye repent, and (...) your er
rours* Again, Our doctrine has been approved too longs be put a (...) in
these days. Again, ^^^^che wicked (...), as ye have made ie, it is lanful, to
make, neither (...) Council, not without Council. Again, we tell you, that
your change of religion, and (...) Heresies ought not be have benne (...), nor
without the Bishop of (...) commanndemente, nor with his commandment. These
be your words, M. Hardinge: This you say, you tell us plainely^and therefore,
I trow, we must believe you. And so ye seem to conclude with the words
written in the P^^yhete Hieremie: Hieremi. 44
Non audiemus Verbum, quod loquissus es nobis in nomine Domini sed faciendo
faciemus omne verbu^, quod egredietur ex o^e nost^^: We will not bear the
Word, that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord: But we will do
every Word, that shall come from our own mouth.

Was may therefore say of you, Augustine. Epis^ola. ^52.
(...) Augustine sometimes said of the Heretics the Donatistes: Cum omnis
(...) suspensa expectares, in tanta collectione quid (...) ageretu^: Quare hoc?
nisi quia causam suam malam sciebant, and facillime se posse conuin^i, si
ageretur, dubitare non poterant? When every body was looking carefully, what
should be done in so great Assembly, they ( The Donatistes Heretics)
labored what they could, that nothing utterly should be done. And why for
They knew^theire cause was n^ught: and could not doubt, but that if any
conference, or Disputation should be had, they should soon be reproved.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 2.
And although S. Hierome would have no body to be patient when he is suspected
of Heresy, yet we will deal herein neither bitterly, nor brablingly, nor yet
be carried away with anger and heat: though he ought to be reckened neither
bitter, nor brabler y^ speaks y^ Truth. We willingly leave this kind of
eloquence to our Adversaries, who, what so ever they say against us, be it
never so shrewdly or despitefully said, yet think, it is said modestly and
comely yenough, and care nothing whether it be true, or false. We need none of
these shifts, which do maintain the Truth. Further, if we do show it
plainly y^ Gods Holy Gospel, y^ Ancient Bishops, and the Primitive Church
do wake on our side, and that we have not without just cause left these men,
and rather have returned to y^ Apostles and old Catholic Fathers: And i^ we
shall be found to do the same, not colourably or craftily, but in good Faith
before GOD, Truly, Honestly, Clearly, and Plainly: and if they them selves
which fly our Doctrine, and would be called Catholics, shall manifestly
see, how al these titles of Antiquity, whereof they boaste so mutche, are
quite shaken out of their hands, and that there is more pith in this our
cause, then they thought for: we then hope and trust that none of them will be
so negligent and careless of his own Salvation, but he will at length study
and bethink him self, to whether part he were best to join him. Undoubtedly
except one will altogether harden his heart, and refuse to hear, he shall not
repent him to give good heed to this our Defense, and to mark well, what we
say, and how truly and justly it agrees with Christian Religion.

M. Hardinge.
I see well, we must look to your fingers. Ye spit forth your gal, and cholar
by and by at the first. Through your whole Book in word ye pretend Truth,
zeal, plainnes, and sober dealing: But in deed power out little other then
Lieing, Spite, Scoffs, and immoderate railing. The effect of the rest in
this: Ye have joined your selves to the Synagog of Antichriste. Ye serve the
stage, ye have begonnt to play your Tragedy on falsely, shamefully, darkely,
and guilefully: your bragges, and promises, your crakes of Gods Holy word,
your errors, your Heresies, your contagious poison, your sclaunders, your new
Cleregies Doctrine, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Saieing of S. Hierome is avouched by y^ like Saying of Ruffinus an
Ancient writer. Thus he says. Vnam notam Haereseos qui dissimulat, non est
Christianus: Who so dissembleth, when he is called Heretic, is no Christian
man. For the rest blame me not, good Christian Reader, if I use no more words,
then need requires. If I thought it worthy the while, I could answer al
these things more at large. I trust, in our whole Apology there appears no
such immoderate kind of railing. But if I should follow M. Hardinges humor,
and write but the one half of that he writes, then perhaps I might
woorthily be called a railer.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 2.
For where they call us Heretics, it is a crime so heinous, that unless it
may be seen, unless it may be felt, and in manner may be holden with hands
and fingers, it ought not lightly to be judged or believed, when it is laid to
the charge of any Christian. For Heresy is a forsaking of Salvation, a
renouncing of Gods Grace, a departing from the Body and Sprite of Christ.

M. Hardinge.
The Definition ye seem to make of Heresy, is not sufficient. For as ye
define it, so every deadly sin is Heresy. The Defenders Definition of
Heresy found insufficient. The true Definition of Heresy.
For every deadly sin is a forsaking of Salvation, a renouncing of Gods
Grace, a departing from the Body and Sprite of Christ. Heresy is a false
Doctrine against the right belief, by him that professes the Faith
stubbournly either avouched or called in doubt. In which Definition this
word, stubbournly, is added, because it is not error only in those things
that be of Faith, but stubbournes in error, that makes an Heretic, as S.
Augustine teaches. Who (says he) in the Church of Christ sauer any thing
that is unwholesome and crooked, if being sharply admonished to sauer that is
hole and right, they resist stubbournly, and will not amend their venomous and
deadly Doctrines, but stand to defend them, the^ be Heretics. But now the
law of upright dealing specially in Gods cause so requiring, Lib. 18. de Ciui^
Dei, cap. 51.
ye must pardon us. if, as among husbandmen we call a rake, a rake, a spade, a
spade, a mattocke, a mattocke: so among Divines, we call Heresy, heresy, and
likewise, falsehed, lieing, sclaundering, craft, hypocrisy, Apostasy,
malice. blasphemy, every such crime, by his proper name without al glosing.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye say, This is not the right Definition of Heresy. Verily, M. Hardinge,
this is but a simple quarrel. It was not my mind in this place to utter any
Definition of Heresy, either right, or wrong. You know right well, that
such curiosity in this kind of writing is not needeful. It is sufficient,
our words be true, although they include no Definition.

For just proof of Heresy three things necessarily are required. First, that
it be an error: Secondly, that it be an error against the Truth of Gods
word: For otherwise every error makes not an Heresy. Thirdly, that it be
stoutly, and wilfully maineteined. Otherwise an error in Gods Truth without
wilful mainteinance, is not an Heresy. S. Augustine says, Errare possum,
Haereticus esse non possum: Augustinus.
In an error I may be: but an Heretic I cannot be.

It was not so necessary in this matter, so precisely to seek up Definitions.
I thought it sufficient, only to declare the horror of Heresy. For as
touching the Definition, S. Augustine says, Quid sit Haeresis, regulari
quadam Definitione comprehendi, sicut ego existimo, aut omnino non potest,
Augustine. ad Quoduultdeum
aut difficillim^ potest: To express by orderly Definition, what thing makes
an Heretic, as I judge, it is either impossible, or very hard. Therefore
you, M. Hardinge, and your fellows are the more blame worthy, for y^ of every
your fantasies ye have made an Heresy. Ludouicus Viues one of your own
School thus complains thereof: Ludouicus viues De Corrupt. Artib
Haeresis nomen rebus leuissimis impingitur: Dis. 22. Omnes.
Idem facerent Scotistae de Thomistis, nisi Scholarum consuetudo aures
emolliuisses: The name of Heresy is laid upon every light matter. So would the
Scotistes handle the Thomistes: sauinge that the custom of the Schools has
brought their ears in ure. Thus Pope Nicolas says, Qui Romanae Ecclesiae
Priuilegium auferte conatur, hic procul dubio labi^ur in Haeresim: Who so ever
goes about to abrogate the privilege of the Church of Rome, be no doubt is
an Heretic.

That ye speak of stubbernenesse in defense of Heresy, I pray God, M.
Hardinge, it do not over near touch your self. I pray God, you do not
wilfully defend that thing, wherein you know, and see manifest, and open
error. Verily S. Hierome says: ^4. Quaest. 3. Haeresis est.
Quicunque aliter Scripturam intelligit, quam sensus Spiritus Sancti flagitat,
quo scripta est, licet ab Ecclesia non recesserit, tamen Haereticus appellari
potest: Who so ever expounds the Scriptures otherwise, then the sense of the
Holy Ghost, by whom they were written, does require, although he be not yet
departed from the Church, yet may he well be called an Heretic. Likewise the
old Father Tertullian says: Quicquid contra veritatem sapit, Haeresis est,
etiam vetus Consuetudo: What so ever thing ^^uoureth against the Truth,
Tertull. de virginib. velandis. Vdalri^us Augustanus Ipiscopus ad Nicola. Papam.
it is an Heresy, be it never so mutche an old custom. Hilari. de Trinitate,
Li. 6.


Likewise your Tyrannical and filthy restraininge of Priests lauful marriage,
Vdalricus the Bishop of August a calls Periculosum Haeresis Decretum: A
dangerous Decree of Heresy.

Now touching simple error, and wilful defense, S. Hilary says, Illis in
eo, quod nesciunt, potest adhuc in tuto esse salus, si credant: Tibi vero iam
omnia ad salutem clausa sunt, qui negas, quod iam ignorare no^ potes: They, for
so mutche as they know not the Truth, may have their salvation in safety,
if afterward they believe: But al hope of health is shut from thee, for as
mutche as thou deniest that thing, that thou canste not choose but know.

To conclude, unto you, M. Hardinge, who oftentimes of small errors, oftentimes
of undoubted, and known Truths* without regard of Definition have fansied
great, Alphonsus de Castro de H^re. Li. 1. Ca. 7.
and horrible Heresies, Alphonsus de Castro a Doctor of your own says thus:
Idcirco sit, vt hi, qui tam leuiter de Haeresi pronunciant, non expendentes de
qua re loqua^tur, saepe sua ipsoru^ sagitta feriantur, incidantque in eam
foueam, quam alijs parabant. Nam velle humanas Scripturas in Diuinarum ordinem
connumerare, hoc verius ego dixerim Haeresim: quod faciunt hi, qui humanis
Scriptis diffentire impium autumant, perinde ac Diuinis: There fore it
happens, that they, that so rashly pronounce, and call every thing Heresy,
not considering whereof they speak, be often stricken with their own dart, and
fall into the same pit, yt them selves have dug for others. For this would I
rather call Heresy, to accoumpt men^ writings emonges the Scriptures of God.
So do they, that think it a wicked matter to dissent from the writings of
man, nolesse, then if it were the Judgment of God.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 3.
But this was ever an old and solemn property with them and their
forefathers: if any did complain of their errors and faults, and desired to
have true Religion restored, straight way to condemn such for Heretics,
as men new fangled, and factious. Christ for no other cause was called a
Samaritane, but only for that he was thought to have fallen to a certain new
Religion, and to be the author of a new sect. And Paul the Apostle of
Christ, was called before the Judges, Act. 24.
to make answer to a matter of Heresy: and therefore he said: According to
this way, which they call Heresy, I do worship the God of my Fathers,
beleeuinge althinges which be written in the Law, and in the Prophets.

M. Hardinge.
If ye mean Hus, Hierome of Prague, Wickle^, Almaricke, Abailard, the
Apostolikes, Peterbrusians, Berengarians, The Defenders predecessors
Waldenses, Albingenses, Imagebreakers, or such like, which ever found fault
with the Church in their time, and cried for a restoringe of Religion, as
though it had been quite lost, and would them selves have the glory of it by
bringing in their Heresy in place of the Catholic Doctrine, under the name
of Gods word, which has always ben the property of al Heretics: if, I
say, ye mean these, or any of these: we also call them Heretics, and for such
we condemn them.

But Sirs ye forget your selves foully. Contradiction found in the defenders.
How agrees this with that ye say hereafter oftentimes, that the Light of the
Truth was quite put out, and that Luther and Zuinglius first brough the Gospel
abroad into the world?

Were it true that Christ was called a Samaritane for the cause ye assign,
thereof what conclude ye? We see where about ye go. Ye would seem to join
with Christ, with Paul, and with the first Christians. But truly they refuse
your company.

But we tell you, Samaritane.
Christ was the true Samaritane in deed, Johan. 8.
that is to say, the Keeper, as he that is Keeper of mankind: and therefore he
shunned not the name. Yet was he not a Samaritane as the Jews meant. Paul
likewise, (who was not as ye say, to speak properly, called before the Judges
to make ausweare to a matter of Heresy) being accused to Felix by Tertullus
that he was of the sect or Heresy of the Nazarens (so were the Christians
first called) did not only not deny, Act. 24.
but openly confessed, that according to that way or state of life, which the
Jews called a sect or Heresy, he worshipped God. Heresy.
For it is to be considered that in those times the name of Heresy was not so
infamous, as it may be judged by the place of the Acts, cap. 5. unless
somewhat be added whereby it may be understood to be taken in rate of a vice,
as, 1. Cor. 11. Galat. 5. So the word was then indifferent, and might be
taken in good part, or evil part. Tertullian uses it in good part, where
speaking of the Christians, he calls them Sectam, Apologeti. C^. 21. Secta.
a Sect, into which Latin word the Greek word Heresis is turned. Now
these examples of Christ, Paul, and the first Christians, serve not your
defense. Christ was called of the Jews a Samaritane unworthily after the
sense of their thought: Ye are called Heretics, woorthely. Paul burdened with
the name of Heresy, for as much as thereby was signified the kind of life of
those that believed in Christ, the word being indifferent, was honored
rather then reutled. And Tertullian calls the Christian people a Sect (as he
might) without blemishe or note of any evil, Your case is not like: For ye are
charged with Heresy, as it is taken in the worst part.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O how many waste words has M. Hardinge to spare? Here once again he
comneth in with Hus, Hierome of Prage, Wicklefe, Almarik, Abailard,
Apostolikes, Peterbrusians, Berengarians, Waldenses, Albingenses,
Imagebreakers, to fraye his simple reader with a terror of strange names. We
say, Luther and Zuinglius were the first Publishers of the Gospel: and yet
again we say, the same Luther and Zuinglius were not the first: We have
forgotten our selves foully: We write contradiction against our selves: We
would seem to toine with Christ and Paul: but truly they refuse our
company: And so forth, I know not what.

verily, M. Hardinge, we never said, Luther, and Zuinglius were the first
Publishers of the Gospel. If we should so say, we should report untruth,
as you do often. Christ, and his Apostles were the first.

These worthy, and Learned Fathers, Luther, and Zuinglius, and other like
Godly and zealous men, were appointed of God, not to erecte a new Church, but
to reform the old, whereof you had made a Cave of Thieves: to kendle again
the Light, that you had quenched: and to hear witness to the Truth of GOD.

You say, Christ, and Paul will none of our company: as if you were privy of
their counsel. But perhaps, M. Hardinge, this is Clauis errans, and
therefore can neither open, Hieronym. in. 16 Ca. Matthae.
nor shut: Or, Johan. 14.
as S. 1. Pet. 2.
Hierome says, Pars aliqua supercilij Pharisaici, some part of the high
looks of the Phariseis. Christ him self has said, Who so loves me, will
keep my word: and my Father loves him: And my Father, and I will come to
him, and dwell with him. S. Peter says, Who so trusts in him, shall not be
confounded.

Of Abailard, and Almarik, and certain other your strange names, we have no
skill: They are none of ours. Of John Hus, Hierome of Prage, and Berengarius,
and other like virtuous Learned men, we have no cause to be ashamed. Their
Doctrine stands still, and increases daily: because it is of God. But as for
yours, because it is only of your selves, therefore it falls daily, and is
now forsaken the world through.

You say, that the simple name of Sect, or Heresy, wherewith S. Paul was
charged, was not so infamous, or odious in those days: and that Tertullian
called the Religion of Christ a Sect, or Heresy without any manner blemmishe
or note of evil. It was needelesse for M. Harding, to auouche Untruth so
earnestly without cause.

I grant, the name of Heresy, or Sect emonge the Philosophers was not
infamous. Cicer. in Paradox.
Cicero says, Cato in ea Haeresi est, quae nullum sequitur florem Orationis.
But in case of Religion it was evermore emongst al men taken in il part, and
condemned, and coumpted odious. Touching S. Paul, in how good part the
Jews called him Heretic, Actor. 24.
it may easily appear by these words of Tertullus his accuser: Inuenimus
hunc virum pestilentem, and mouentem seditionem omnibus Iudaeis per vniuersum
orbem, ac Principem Sectae Nazaraeorum: We have found this man to be a
Pestilent, and a wicked fellow, mouinge sedition emonge the Jews throughout
the whole world, and a Captain of the Heresy of the Nazareines. In such
good part they said unto Christ: Johan. 7.
Art thou greater then was our Father Abraham: Thou art a false Prophet,
Johan. 8.
and deceiuest the People: Thou art a Samaritane, and have the Devil.

The like good part Christ promised before hand to his Disciples: Johan 16.
They shall cast you out of their Synagoges: Matthew. 1^.
Ye shall be hated of al men for my names sake. In such good part and meaning
was S. Paul called an Heretic. And so, M. Hardinge, Nicola Lyra in 24. Cap.
Actor.
bisides others, your own Doctor Nicolaus Lyra would soon have told you.

But much more I marvel, ye should so unadvisedly say, that Tertullian
called the Christian people a Sect, Christian Faith called Heresy.
or Heresy in good part, and, as you say, without any blemishe, or note of
evil. For the same. Tertullian in the same Apology says, the Heathens
commonly called the Christians, Incestos, Homicidas, Infanticidas, Tertull. in
Apologetico.
Sacrilegos, Pessimos, Nocentissimos, Publicum odium, Hosts humani generis,
Omnium Scelerum reos: Deorum, Imporatorum, Legum, Morum, Naturae totius
inimicos: Aduouterours against kind, Mankillers, killers of Children,
Churcherobbers, most wicked, most husteful, the public hatred, the enemies
of Mankind, guilty of al kind of wickedness: Enemies against the Gods,
against the Emperors, against the Laws, against good order, against Nature it
self. Tertull. in Apologetico.
Where so ever they saw them, they made an outcrie upon them, Christianos ad
Leonem: Non licet esse Christianos: Have these Christians to the Lion: It is
not lawful, these Christians should live. So S. Augustine says, August. De
Ciuitate, li. 2. ca. 3. Eujeb. li. 4. ca. 18.
Factum est vulgi Prouerbium, Pluuia defecit cause Christianorum: It is now
become a common Proverb emonge the people, our rain fails us, because of
these Christians. So Eusebius says, the Religion of Christ was called
Impiorum Christianorum Haeresis: The Heresy of the Godless Christians. These
words, M. Hardinge, I trow, were never uttered without al manner blemishe,
and note of evil. S. Hierome says, Quod magis mirum sit, Hieronym. in Epist.
ad Titum* Cap. 3.
etiam illud de Actibus Apostolorum videtur esse relegendum, Fidem nostram in
Christum, and Ecclesiastica^ Disciplina^ iam tunc a peruersis hominibus
Haeresim nuncupatam: And that we may the more marvel, we may once again
read this place of the Acts of the Apostles: where we find, yt the Christian
Faith, and Ecclesiastical Discipline was even then of wicked men called on
Heresy.

Even as rightly, M. Hardinge, and upon as good grounds, you have again this
day condemned the same Gospel of Christ, and in ans good part, and meaning
have called it Heresy. But we may truly, and simply say with S. Paul,
Actor. 24.
According to this Sect, which you call Heresy, we woorship the God of
our Fathers, which is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 1.
But the more sore, and outrageous a crime Heresy is, the more it ought to be
proved by plain and strong arguments, especially in this time, when men
begin to give less credit to their words, and to make more diligent
search of their Doctrine, then they were wont to do. For the people of God
are otherwise instructed now, then they were in times paste, when all the
Bishops of Romes Saieinges were allowed for Gospel, and when al Religion did
depend only upon their Authority. Now a days the Holy Scripture is
abroad, the writings of the Apostles and Prophets are in Printe: whereby al
Truth and Catholic Doctrine may be proved, and al Heresy may be
disproued and confuted.

M. Hardinge.
Where ye require your Heresy, for so much as it is so heinous a crime, The
Defenders Heresies sufficiently and fully confuted already by sundry great
Clerks. Lanfrancus. Guimundus. Petrus Cluoiacensis.
by plain and strong are gumentes to be proved: it is not vnfoowen how
sufficiently and substantially that is perfoormed already by men of excellent
learning, as well of this age, as of times paste. Was not Berengarius, the
first Author of your Sacramentarie Heresy? by most plain and strong
arguments confuted of Lanfrancus B. of Canturbury, and Guinundus B. of Auersa?
Were not the Peterbrusians so, whose Heresy ye hold against the Blessed
Sacrifice of the Mass, of the learned Abbot Petrus Cluniaccensis? Was not
VVicklef so of Thomas Walden, a learned man of England? has not Luther and
Oeclampadius benne so confuted in our time, of that Holy and learned Father
Bishop Fisher?

But whatshal I speak of particular men, Tho. Walden. B. Fisher.
were they newer so excellent, by whom they have benne confuted, sith by
Public sentence of the Church they have been condemned, both in General and
Prouincial Councels? Scriptures and Doctors.
Therefore we think it not noede no we again to prove your doctrine, so
sufficiently condemned, to be Heresy. That the people be no we otherwise
instructed, then they were in times paste, we confess. But whether better
now, then in our Forefathers days, they that can consider the lives of them
no we, and of them that were then, may easily Indge.

The saieinges of the Bishop of Rome were never allowed for the Gospel. His
private sayings and common talk might be erroneous, In vvhatcase the Popes
sayings are to be taken for Truth. Luc^. 22.
notesse then other men's But what he says by way of judgment and sentence
definitive in doubteful points touching Religion, such saieinges of Peter's
successor (for whom Christ prayed, that his Faith might not fail, and who
was commanded by Christ to strengthen his Brethren) we take for Truth, and
the same obediently receive. So the Fathers assembled in Council at Chalcedon,
Untruth.
received and agreed to the saying and writing of Pope Leo, nolesse then if
Peter the Apostle and first Bishop of Rome him self had spoken. The Popes
authority we acknowledge Supreme above al other authority in Earth,
touching the government of the Church: Untruth:
yet was it never said, ne thought by the Catholics, that al Religion
depended only thereon, as your sclaunderous report bears men in hand.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Lanfrancus, Euimondus, Abbas Cluniacensis, Thomas Waldensis, John Fisher, and
other your like Doctors, M. Hardinge, are over young, al within the space of
this last five hundred years, far unlike S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, and others the Ancient Learned Fathers, and Doctors
of the Church. Neither is there any sufficient cause to the contrary, but
that Berengarius, John Wicklefe, John Hus, Doctor Luther, Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, and others, either for Learning, or for Truth, or for
Judgment in the Scriptures, or for Antiquity may well and safely be compared
with them. At the least I hope we may say of them, as S. Augustine once
said of the Doctors, and Fathers of his time: August. ad Fortunarian. Epis.
111.
Neque quorumliber Disputationes, quamuis Catholicorum, and laudatorum hominum,
velut Scripturas Canonicas habere debemus: vt nobis non liceat, salua
honorificentia, quae illis debetur, aliquid in eorum Scriptis improbare, aut
respuere: si forte inuenerimus, quod aliter selfserint; quam Veritas habet:
Neither weigh we the writings of al mean, be they never, so worthy, and
Catholic, as we weighe the Canonical Scriptures: but that, sauinge the
reverence that is dew unto them, we may wislike, and refuse somewhat in their
writings, if we happen to find, that they have thought otherwise, then the
Truth may bear. Likewise the Councelles, ye mean, are very New, and
therefore bear the less authority, for that they be so many ways contrary
to the Old. Hereof hereafter more at large. Certainly, there is none of your
errors so gross and palpable, but by some of your late Councelles it has
benne confirmed. Therefore we may justly say to you, as S. Augustine
sometime said to Mariminus the Arian Heretic, August. contrae Maximin. Li.
3. Cap. 14.
Nec ego Nicenam Synodum tibi, nec tu mihi Ariminensem debes, tanquam
praeiudicaturus, obijcere. Scripturarum Authoritatibus, res cum re, causa cum
causa, ratio cu^ ratione conceuer: Neither may I say to thee the Council of
Nice, nor maiste thou lay to me the Council of Ariminum, either of us
thinkinge thereby to find preuidice against the other. But let us lay matter
to matter, cause to cause, and reason to reason, by the Authority of the
Scriptures.

Ye grant, there is more light and knowledge now, then was before. The
greatter is either your fault, or your folly, M. Hardinge, that in the broad
day, and open Light so busily set forth the works of darkness. S.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 9.
Hic est multo impudentior. Ex furibus enim leges eos grauius puniunt, qui
interdiu furantur: He is very shameless, that woorketh deceit in the open
Light. For of al Thieves the Law most sharply punishes them, that rob in
the day time. Therefore S. Cyprian says unto you: Ignosci poruit simpliciter
erranti. Post inspirationem vero and reuelationem factam, Cyprian.
qui in eo, quod errauerat, perseuerat prudens, and sciens, sine venia
ignorantiae peccat. Praesumptione enim, atque obstinatione superatur:. He that
is deceived, Pope above Gods Word.
and erieth of simplicity, may be pordoned. But after that the Truth is once
reveled, who so continues nevertheless in his former error witingly and
willingly, sins without pardonne of ignorance, as being overcome by
presumption, and wilfulness.

You say, not withstandinge all this great Light we talk of, yet our lives
are nothing comparable to the lives of them that have benne before us. This,
M. Hardinge, has ever benne an old complainte in all ages, as may appear by
S. Cyprian, Cyprian. ad Demetrianum. August. De Ciuita. Dei. Ecclesiastes. 7.
S. Augustine, and other Ancient Fathers: It was a common Proverb in old
times, (...): Things a year paste are evermore better, then things present.
For every thing to us seems the greatter, as it seems nearest to touch
our senses. And because we feel not our Fathers euilles, therefore we
imagine, they had no evil at al. The wise man says, Ne dixeris, quae causa
est, quod priora tempora meliora fuerint, quam praesentia. Stulta enim est
huiusmodi interrogatio: Never demand wherefore the times paste were better
then the times present. For in deed it is a foolish question.

But, M. Hardinge, wherefore do you thus condemn our lives in respect of our
Fathers? Certainly you must needs confess, there are fewer blasphemies,
fewer Oaths, fewer breaches of Matrimony, fewer Stews, fewer Concubines,
fewer Fraies, fewer Murders emongst us this day, then commonly were at any
time emonge our Fathers. How be it, to let our Fathers pass, if it shall please
you to lay our lives to your lives, although we acknowledge many our
imperfections, yet Gods name be blessed, we have no cause to flee the
comparison.

The Popes words, you say, were never taken for Gospel: Yes, M. Hardinge,
and somewhat also above the Gospel. For proof whereof it may please you to
remember the words of certain your late Doctors. Syluester Prierias late
Ma^s^ter of Pope Leoes Palaice, Syluester Prierias, Co^tra Lutherum.
writes thus: Indulgentiae authoritate Scripturae non innotuere nobis: sed
authoritate Ecclesiae Romanae, Romanorumque Pontificum, quae mayor est:
Pardonnes are not warrented unto us by the authority of Gods Word: but by
the authority of the Roman Church, and of the Bishops of Rome, which is
more, then Gods Word. If this be not sufficient, he adds farther: A
doctrina Romanae Ecclesiae, and Romani Pontificis Sacra Scriptura robur, and
authbritatem trahit: The Hosy Scripture takes strength, and authority of the
Doctrine of the Bishop and Church of Rome.

Cardinal Cusanus entituleth his Book: Nicolaus Cusanus.
De authoritate Ecclesiae, and Councilij supra, and contra Scripturam: Of the
Authority of the Church, and Council above, and against the Scripture.

Your greatest Doctor Albertus Pigghius says, Albert. Pigghius, Hierarch.
Lib 1. Cap. 2.
Apostoli quaedam conscripserunt, non vt scripta illa praessene Fidei and
Religioni nostrae, sed potius vt subessent: The Apostles wrote certain
things, not to the end that such willinges should he over our Faith, and
Religion: but rather, that they should be under. Your Canonistes say, 16. q.
1. Quicunque: In Clossa.
a Papa potest dispensare co^ira ius Diuinum: The Pope may dispense against
the Law of God: 15. q. 6. Authoritate. In Clossa.
Papa potest dispensare contra Ius Naturae: The Pope may dispense against the
Law of Nature: Did 34. Lector, and Did 82 Presbyter.
Papa potest dispensare contra Apostolum: The Pope may dispense against S.
Pause the Apostle: Abbas Panot. Extra. De Diuorijs. Cap. fin.
Papa porest dispensare contra Nouum Testamentum: The Pope may dispense
against the New Testamente: Summa Angel. in Dictione Papa.
Papa potest dispensare de omnibus praeceptis veteris, and Noui Testamenti: The
Pope may dispense with all the Commandments both of the Old, and also of
the New Testamente. Hereof more hereafter, as farther occasion shall be offered.

These be your own Doctors words, M. Hardinge: they be truly reported:
they be no scalunders. And therefore Franciscus Zarabelia a Cardinal of Rome
says thus: Franciscus Zarabella, De Sectis. 115.
Persuaserunt Pontificibus, quod omnia possent, and sic quod facerent, quicquid
liberet, etiam illicita, and sint plusquam Deus: They have made the Popes
believe that they might do al things, what so ever they sisted, yea
notwithstanding they were things unlawful? and thus have they made them more
then God.

You say, The Pope in his common talk may be deceived, and err, as other
menue may: but in his Judgment Seat, and Sentence Definitive of Religion be
cannot err: as if ye would say, The Pope has one Sprite in the Consistory,
and an other at home: mutche like, as one said sometimes unto Cicero in
reproach of his inconstancy, Salust. in Cices ronem. Lucae, 22.
Aliud stans, aliud sedens de Republica loqueris: Touching the Common Wease,
ye have one mind sittinge, and an other standinge.

But Christ said unto Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith should
not fail: Therefore, say you, We receive obediently, what so ever the Pope
speaks in place of Judgment. Hereby ye seem to give us secretly to
understand, that Christ's Prayers were auailable for the Pope, to keep him
from error, not in the Church, or Pulpite, or Closet, or any other common, or
Private place, but only in the Consistory, and Council, in debatinge
doubteful cases of Religion.

But how holds this arguments? Christ prayed for Peter, that his Faith
should not fail: Augustine. in Quaesti. Noui Tesla. Quae. 75. Johan. 17.
Ergo, the Pope cannot err. Verily S. Augustine says, Nunquid pro Petro
rogabat: pro Iohanne, and lacobo non rogabat? Vt de coeteris taceamus: What
did Christ pray for Peter: and did be not pray for John, and James? I will
not speak of the rest. Neither did Christ pray for Peter only, or for the
Apostles, but, for all the Faithful, that ever should be: as him self says, I
pray not only for them, but also for all them, that through their preachinge
shall believe in me.

How be it, what, says M. Hardinge, he so obediently receives the Popes
Decrees? Yewis, the Popes them selves will not so receive them. Platyna says,
Acta Priorum Pontificum sequentes Pontifices aut infringunt, Platyna in
Stephano, and in Romano.
aut omnino tollunt. Nihil enim aliud isti Pontificuli cogitabant, quam vt
nomen, and dignitatem maiorum suorum extinguerent: The next Pope either
breaks, or utterly repeaseth his Predecessors Decrees. For these little petie
Popes had none other study to busy them selves withal, but only to deface
the name and dignity of the former Popes.

Where you say, The whole Council of Chalcedon so esteemed the voice of Pope
Leo, as if it had benne the voice of Peter him self, this, M. Hardinge, is a
manifest Untruth, as it shall soon appear. I grant, the name of Leo, for
his great learning, and granitie was mutche regarded. So. S. Ambrose for the
like cause was called, Athanas. ad Heronem. Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 23.
Orbis terrarum oculus, Sacerdotum Archisacerdos, and Fundamentum Fidei: The
Eye of the world, the Head Priest of al Priests, and the Fundation of the
Faith. So Paphnutius, being no Pope, was heard against all the rest of the
Council of Nice: So S. Hierome being neither Pope, nor Bishop, was received
against this whole Council of Chalcedon. 36 Quaest. 2. Quia legitima.


Neither did the Council follow Leo alone, as the Universal Bishop, and Head of
the Church, but joined him together with others, as esteeminge them of equal
Authority. Council. Chalcedon. Actio. 2.
For thus they made their general shoot: Omnes ita credimus: Leo Papa ita
credit: Gyrillus ita credit: Leo, and Anatolius ita credunt: Thus we al
believe: Thus Pope Leo believes: Cyrillus thus beseueth: Leo, and Anatolius
thus believe.

And with what credit can M. Hardinge say, The whole Council of Chalcedon
yielded unto Pope Leo, as if it had benne unto Peter him self? For it is
certain, that the same whole Council decreed against Leo: and likewise Leo
against the Council. For the Council decreed, contrary to the old Canons, that
the Bishop of Constantinople emonge the four Patriarchs should be the
second in dignity, and that the same Bishop of Constantinople should have and
enioie one authority, and like Privileges with the Bishop of Rome. The words
be these, Acqua Sa^ctisissmae Sedi Nouae Romae Priuilegia tribuerunt
rationabile iudicantes, Council. Chalcedon. Actio. 16. Pa. 936.
vrbem eam ornatam iam Imperio, and Senaru, aequis Senioris Regiae Romae
Priuilegijs frui, and in Ecclesiasticis, sicut illa habet, Maiestatem habere
negotijs: The Fathers gane equal Privileges unto the Holy See of New Rome
(which was Constantinople) thinkinge it to be reasonable, that the same City
of Constantinople, being now furnished with Empire, and Council, Church
depends of the Pope.
should enioie equal Privileges with the Princely City of the old Rome, and
in all Ecclesiastical affairs should bear the same Majesty, that Rome
bears. This thing Pope Leo mutche misliked, and found great fault with
the Council, and would in no wise consent unto it. Thus he writes, Leo Epist.
59.
Quae per occasionem Synodi male sunt attentata reprehenderam: I reproved those
things that were evil attempted by the Council of Chascedon: Leo Epist. 53.
And again, Nullum vnquam potuerunt nostrum obtinere consensum: They were
never hable to geate our consent.

And when these matters were paste by the consent of all the Bishops,
Lucentius Pope Leoes Legate came whininge in, and besought the Council, that
the whole matter might be repealed. The words written in the Council be these:
Lucentius dixit: Council. Chalcet don. Actio. 16.
Seeds Apostolica, quae nobis praecepit, praesentibus humiliati non debet. Et
ideo quaecunque in praeiudicium Canonum, hesterna die gesta sunt, nob ^
absentibus, sublimitatem vestram petimus, vt circunduci iubeatis. Viri
Illustrissimi ludices dixerunt, Quod interloquuri sumus, tota Synodus
approbauit: Lucentius the Popes Legate said, The Apostolic See of Rome,
whose commission we have, may not by any these dooinges be defaced. Therefore
we beseech your honors, that what so ever was concluded here yesterday in our
absence, in prejudice of the Canons, ye will command the same to be blotted
out. The Honorable Judges made him aunsweare: That we have talkte of, the same
the whole Council has allowed.

Thus many ways, M. Hardinge, the Untruth of your tale plainly appears.
For the Council of Chalcedon esteemed not the voice of Leo, as if it had benne
the voice of Peter, as you say: but rather contrariewise made light of it,
and weighed it none otherwise, then they same cause.

Therefore Liberatus says thus touching the same: Liberatus, ca. 13.
Cum Anatolius, consentiente Concilio Primatum obtinuisset, Legati vero Romani
Episcopi contradicerent, a ludicibus, and Episcopis omnibus illa contradictio
suscepta non est. Et licet Seeds Apostolica nune vsque contradicat, tamen, quod
a Synodo firmatum est, Imperatorio Patrocinio permanet: When Anatolius ( the
Bishop of Constantinople) by consent of the Council had obtained the Primacie,
notwithstanding, the Bishop of Rooms Legates stood against it, yet their
gainesaieinge could not be received, neither of the Judges, nor of the
Bishops. And al be it the Apostolic See of Rome withstand it still, yet the
Decree of the Council by the Emperors warrante continues in force.

But you never taught us, ye say, y^ the whole state of the Church depends
of the Pope. It is not your Doctrine: you never spoke it. And therefore we are
railers, and sclaunderers, that so report you. If it be so in deed, M.
Hardinge, as you say, wherefore then suffer you Cardinal Cusanus to write
thus, Veritas adhaeret Cathedrae. Nicolaus Cusasnus De author. Eccl. and
Council. Supra and co^tra Scripturam.
Quare me^bra Cathedrae vnita, and Pontifici coniuncta efficient Ecclesia^: The
Truth cleaves fast to the (Popes) Chair. Therefore the members united to
the Chair, and joined to the Pope, make the Church. Wherefore suffer you
Johannes de Parisijs, one of your Catholic Doctors, to write thus: Fiet vnum
Ouile, and vnus Pastor. Quod quidem de Christo intelligi non potest: Sed de
aliquo alio Ministro, qui praesit loco cius: Johan. De Parisijs De potestate
Regia, and Papali, Cap. 3.
There shall be one Plocke, and one shepherd. Which thing cannot be taken of
Christ. We must needs understand it of some other Minister, that rules in
his steed.

Wherefore suffer you Nosius your Grande Captain to write thus: Vnum toti
praecsse Ecclesiae Vsque adeo est necessarium, vt absque hoc Ecclesia vna esse
non possit: It is so necessary a thing, Hosius In Co^fessione Petricoui, Cap.
27.
that one only man oueruse y^ whole Church, yt without the same the Church
cannot be one. Wherefore suffer you your Canonistes to say, Constat Ecclesiam
ideo esse vnam, quia in Universally Ecclesia vnu^ est Caput Supremu^, Scilicet
Papa: It is plain, that therefore the Church is one, because that in the
whole Universal Church there is one Supreme Head, Clemen. Lib. 5. Ad nostrum:
In Glossae.
that is the Pope. To be short, why do you your self, M. Hardinge, allege S.
Hieromes words directly, as ye would have us believe, to this purpose? M.
Hard fo 80. b Hierony. contra Luciferianos.
Ecclesiae salus a Summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet: Which words into
English ye have turned thus: The safety of the Church hangs of the
VVoorship of the High Priest. He means the Pope Peter's Successor. In
which last clause, ye misconstrue, and rack S. Hieromes words far contrary
to his meaning. For S. Hierome meante not bereby the Bishop of Rome, but every
several Bishop within his own Charge: every which Bishop he calls the
Highest Priest, as in my Former Reply it is declared more at large. Art^. 4.
Diul. 15.


If these things be true, why are they now deuied? If they be false, why are
they not condemned? I trust, it may appear by these few, that we report
the Truth truly, and are no sclaunderers.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 2.
Sithence then they bring forth none of these for them selves, and call us
nevertheless Heretics, which have neither fallen from Christ, nor from the
Apostles, nor yet from the Prophets, this is an injurious and a very spiteful
dealinge.

M. Hardinge.
Nay Sirs, ye shall not so carry away the conclusion with a lie. But
contrariwise, since we bring forth many Scriptures for the Truth, which
ye impugn, as your selves shall see, when we come to confute your doctrine,
which here follows: and since not withstandinge that ye will not yield to
the Scriptures, but pervert the True meaning of them with Gloses and
interpretations of your own Heads, Untruth.
frame new opinions contrary to that ye have received, and that the Church
has ever taught: the Catholics wilful call you Heretics, and the Church will
condemn you for Heretics, and so account you, until ye recant, and repent.

But ye have not fallen from Christ, That the Defenders be fallen from Christ.
ye say, nor from the Apostles, nor yet from the Prophets. As though they
that depart from the Roman Church, which is the Catholic Church, which
diverse times in the Apology ye confess, fell not from Christ, and
consequently from the Apostles, and Prophets. Math. 28. Luke. 10.
Says not Christ in the Gospel: He that hears not the Church, let him be
to thee as an Heathen, and a Publicane? Says he not also, He that despises
you, despises me?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Whether part rightly and reverently uses the Scriptures of God, and whether
peruerteth them by shifts, and Gloses, I trust, it shall in part appear by
this conference. In deed, M. Hardinge, it is no great maisterie, by your
interpretations, and handelinges to have stoare yenough and plenette of
Scriptures. For this is one special ground of your Divinity, Extra. De
translatione Episcopi, Qua^to, in Glossa.
Papa potest ex nihilo facere aliquid: and Sententiam, quae nulla est, facere
aliquam: The Pope is hable of nothing to make some thing: and of no Sentence
to make some Sentence. By your Doctrine it is lawful, and good Logique, to
reason thus: Did. 21. Inferior Seeds. Esai. 10.
An gloriabitur serra aduersus eum, qui trahit illam^ Shall the saw boaste
against him, that draws it? Matthae. 10. Council. Roman. sub Syluestro. 1.
Non est Seruus supra Dominum: There is no Servant above his Lord: Ergo, Noman
may dare to Judge the Pope. Or thus, Ad Titum. 1. Did. 82. Proposuisti.
Omnia munda mundis: Coinquinatis autem, and infidelibus mihil est mundum: Al
things are clean to the clean: but unto the filthy, and Infidelles nothing
is clean: Ergo, It is not lawful for Priests to marry.

Or, as you, M. Hardinge, sometimes have delited to reason: Matthae. 7. M.
Hardinge in his former Book, Fol. 155. b.
Nolite dare Sanctum Canibus: Geeue not Holy things to Dogs, Ergo, It is not
laweful for the Christian vulgar People to Read the Scriptures.

Thus may you easily be well stoared, and full freight of Scriptures yenough,
and, as Hieronym. ad Pammachium: Exe^pla captiua seruiunt ad Victoriam.
S. Hierome says, may carry them captive to serve your turn. But S.
Hierome could also have told you, Hierony. in 1. Cap. Ad Galat.
Non in verbis Scripturarum est Eua^gelium, Cyprian ad Notianum. to. 2.
sed in sensu: The Gospel stands not in the bare words of the Scriptures,
but in the meaning. Therefore we may say unto you, as S. Cyprian once said
to the Nouatian Heretics: Audite, Nouatiani, apud quos Scripturae Coelestes
leguntur potius, quam intelliguntur: Hearken hereto, ye Nouatian Heretics,
emongst whom the Heavenly Scriptures are readde rather, then well perceived.

You say, the Church of Rome by our own Confession is the Catholic
Church: which Church, for as mutche as we have forsaken, we have forsalten
Christ, and his Apostles. Matthew. 18. Lucae. 10.
For says not Christ in the Gospel, say you, He that hears not the
Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen, and a Publicane? And, He that
despises you, despisethe me?

We grant, M. Hardinge, the name of the Church of Rome is Catholic: but
the Errors and abuses thereof are not Catholic. Neither is it the Church,
that we find fault withal: but the great corruptions, and foul
deformities, that you have brought into the Church.

How be it your policy herein is apparent. Your Reader, be he never so
simple, may soon see your whole drifte. Ye magnify the Church with all
manner titles of Authority, not for any special regard, ye bear the Church
in deed, but only to settle your selves in an infinite Tyranny, and to make
us believe, that you only are the Church, and to give credit to al your
fantasies: yea although ye be the defacers, and enemies of the Church. Verily
the bare name of the Church is not sufficient. S. Paul says, that
Antichriste the Man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. ^.
shall sit in the Temple of God: whereby no doubt he meante the Church.

But, M. Hardinge, Hear you the voice of God: leave your Fables: speak Gods
Holy Word, and speak it truly: be ye faitheful Ministers of the Truth. Then
who so ever shall be found to despise your Doctrine, be he king, or Emperor,
we will not doubt to call him an Heathen, and Publicane. But if he be an
Heathen, that will not bear your Church, what is he then that will not hear
Christ? Aeneas Sylui. in Gestis Council. Consiant.
Aeneas Syluius, being afterward Pope him self, says thus: Si Romanus
Pontifex non audiet Ecclesiam, Christum quoque non audiet, and tanquam
Ethnicus, and Publicanus haberi debet: If the Bishop of Rome will not hear the
Church, he will not hear Christ: and therefore must be taken as an Heathen,
Paral. Vrsperg. Page 411.
and Publicane. S. Augustine says, Oues meae vocem meam audiu^t, and sequuntur
me. Aufera^tur chartae Humanae: sonent voces Diuinae: My Sheep hear my voice,
Aug. De Ouibus Cap. 14.
and follow me. Away with Man's VVrittinges: Let the Voice of God sound unto
us.

Surely Doctor Luther him self, against whom M. Hardinge so vehemently, and
so often inflamethe his choler, in humble and reverent manner writethe thus:
Nos colimus Romanam Ecclefiam in omnibus. Paral. Visperg. Page 472.
Tantum illis resistimus, qui pro Ecclesia obtrudunt Babyloniam: We honor
the Church of Rome in all things. Only we withstand them, that in steed of
the Church, have thruste in the Co^susion of Babylon. In like sense S.
Cyprian. says, Non est pax, sed bellum: nec Ecclesiae iungitur, Cyprian
Sermon 5. De Lapsis.
qui ab Euangelio separatur: It is not peace: It is War. Neither is he
joined to the Church, that is dinided from the Gospel. Now, how carefully
the Church of Rome is leadde by the Gospel of Christ, Nicola. Cusanus, De
Authoritate Eccle. contra. and supra Scriptura^. Aug contra Literas Petilianl
Lib. 2. Cap. 85.
we may easily learn by Nicolaus Cusanus a Cardinal of the same Church of
Rome. Thus he says: Sequuntur Scripturae Ecclesiam: and non e conuerso: The
Scriptures of God follow the Church: but contrary wise the Church folowethe
not the Scriptures. To conclude, we may say unto you, as S. Augustine said
sometime to Pe^tilian the Donatian Heretic: Vtrum nos Schismatici simus, an
vos, nec ego, nec tu, sed Christus interrogetur, vt iudicet Ecclesiam suam:
Whether of us be Sch^matiques, we, or you, ask you not me: I will not ask
you: Let Christ be asked: that he may show us his own Church.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 1.
With this sword did Christ put of the Devil, when he was tempted of him:
with these weapons ought al presumption, which doothe auaunce it self
against God, ^. Tim. 3.
to be overthrown and conquered. For all Scripture, says S. Paul, that
commethe by the Inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to confute, to
instruct, and to reprove, that the man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly
framed to every good work. Thus did the Holy Fathers alwaie fight against
the Heretics, with none other force, then with the Holy Scriptures.

M. Hardinge.
That the Holy Fathers did ever more fight against the Heretics with now
other force, then with the Holy Scriptures, that we deny.

For What did the Fathers in the first general Council holden at Nice? did they
fight against Arius and the mainteiners of his Heresy with no other force,
then with the Scriptures? When those Heretics refused the word Homousion,
whereby is signified the son of God to be of one and the same substance with
God the Father, for that it was not to be found in the Scriptures, besides
which they stiffely denied, as ye do, that any thing ought to be received:
did not the Caetholike Bishops of the other side fly to the Ancient Fathers?
did they not appeal to the judgments of those Fathers, which had given
sentence of the matter then being in controversy, before that Arius and those
that held of his side were borne?

In the second Council assembled at Constantinople, Histor. Tripart. lib. 5,
cap. 10.
were not the Heretics of sundry sects by a witty and a godly policy
contrived between Nectarius the Bishop and Theodosius the Emperor, through the
suggestion of the great Clerk Stsinnius, driven to receive the Doctors, who
lived before their Heresies were heard of, as witnesses of true Christian
Doctrine worthy of credit?

Macedonius in that Council was condemned, Macedonius.
who therefore denied the Holy Ghost to be God. because the Scriptures give not
unto him that name. But the Bishops there assembled, as Photius that learned
Bishop writes, declared out of the teaching of the Fathers, and Divines before
their time, that the Holy Ghost is to be adored, worshipped, and glorified, as
being of one nature and substance together with the Father, and the Son.

In the third Council kept at Ephesus, Nestorius ever called for Scripture, as
the Heretics at this day do, what so ever sect they be of. Epist. 1. Tom.
4 Deipara not found in Scripture, yet received and kept.
the Heretic Nestorius boasted, at ye do, of the Scriptures, saying, they
were of his side, and would neither speak, nor hear ought but Scriptures,
Scriptures. And alleaginge a place or two out of the Gospel, where Marie is
called the Mother of Jesus, stoutely, find me in all Scripture, (quoth he)
where Marie is called the Mother of God. Hereto what said that holy and learned
Bishop Cyrillus, chief in that Council? Hanc nobis fidem diuini tradidere
Discipuli: and licet nullam fecerint dictionis huius mentionem, ita tamen
sentire a sanctis Patribus edocti sumus. This Fatthe (says he) the Disciples
of God have by tradition left unto us. And although they have made no express
mention of this word (Deipara) yet so to think we have benne taught of the
Holy Fathers.

When they reasoned about rules touching faith to be made, (says Vincentius
Lirinensis writing of that Council) to all the Bishops there assembled to the
number almost of two hundred, this seemed most Catholic, most faitheful, and
best to be done, that the sentences of the Holy Fathers should be brought
forth among them: to thend that by their consent and Decrce the Religion
of the Old Doctrine should be confirmed, and the blasphemy of the Profane
nouel^ie condemned. Behold Sirs what weapons the Fathers have used against
Heresies, besides the Holy Scriptures.

In the fourth Council, which was celebrated at Chalcedon, the Heretic
Eutyches, as ye and al Heretics have done, c^aked mutche of the Scriptures,
and required his matter to be discussed by Scriptures. Tell me (quoth he
mockingly to every one that reasoned with him) in what Scripture lie the two
natures? Eutyches claimed his opinion to be tried by the Scriptures.


But let us hear what the Learned Bishops of that Council said thereto.
We find in the first action of the Council, that they cried out aloude, Ea
quae sunt Patrum teneantur: The things that the Fathers have taught, The
teachinge of the Fathers to be kept: Actio. 5.
let them be kept. Again when they come to the definitive sentence, they say:
Sequentes igitur Sanctos Patres, etc. Folo winge the Holy Fathers, we do al
with one accord teach men to confess one and him self the Son our Lord
Jesus Christ, persite him self in Godhead, and perfect himself in Manhood.
And for Authority of the Fathers in high points of Faith a Bishop in that
reverend assembly named Eudoocius pronounced a notable sentence, sayeing thus:
Every one that consentethe not to the exposition of the Holy Fathers, A notable
saying of a Learned Father, for thexposition of the Fathers.
doothe alienate him self from al Pristely Communion, and from the presence of
Christ. Thus we have alleged the four first general Councels, which S.
Gregory honourethe as the four Gospels.

But the thing being so evident as it is, and so welkuorwen even to your
selves, if ye be learned, the Auctorit it of these chief Councels may suffice.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge, ye have taken in hand a needelesse labor. For you know
right well, we despise not the Authority of the Holy Fathers: but rather in
this self same place have alleged together S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and S.
Ambrose, three of the most Ancient and approved Fathers: and throughout the
whole discourse of this Apology, in the Defense of the Catholic Truth of
our Religion, next unto Gods Holy Word, have used no prouse, or Authority
so mutche, as the expositions, and judgments of the Holy Fathers. We despise
them not therefore, but rather give God thanks in their behalf, for that it
has pleased him to provide so worthy instruments for his Church: and
therefore we justly reprove you, for that so unadvisedly, and without cause,
ye have forsaken the steps of so Holy Fathers.

These four General Councelles, wherein you dwell so long, as they make
nothing against us, so in sundry points they fight expressly against you.

First, they were summoned by the Emperors, Constantinus, Theodosius 1.
Theodosius. 2. and Martianus: and not by any right, or authority of the Pope:
as hereafter it shall be showed in place convenient more at large. Sozo. li. 1.
ca. 17
Julius the Bishop of Rome was summoned by the Emperors write to appear at
the Council of Nice, as well as others: Council. Chalcedon. Actio. 1. Fol. 748.
And Pope Leo afterward was charged by like Authority to appear at the
Council of Chalcedon. Eodem tenore Leo vocauys est.


Eusebius. De Vita Constan. Orat. 3.
In the Council of Nice the Bishop of Rome was not President, but Eustathius
the Bishop of Antioche. In the same Theodoretus, Lib. 1. cap. 7. Con. Nicen.
Can. 6.
Council of Nice, the Bishop of Rome has his Authority and Jurisdiction made
equal, and leuel with the other three Patriarchs: Council. Chal. cedon. Actio.
16. Page 936.
And in the Council of Chalcedon the Bishop of Constantinople is made equal in
Authority with the Bishop of Room. To be short, Liberat. ca. 13.
the said Council of Chalcedon, for this last, and some other like causes,
Leo the Bishop of Rome would not allow. Which thing notwithstanding, the
Council standethe still in force, whether the Pope will, or no.

These be the four fiste General Councelles, which M. Hardinge comparethe in
Authority with the four Evangelists.

But these Heretics. Arius, Nestorius, Macedonius, and Euiyches in these
four General Councelles, utterly despised all the Ancient Fathers, and boasted
them selves (says M. Hardinge) of the Scriptures, and evermore cried out
Scriptures, Scriptures. Touching the Arians, that they alleged certain
doubteful, and dark places of the Scriptures, to serve their purpose, it is
certain, and manifest. But that either they despised, or that the Catholics
against them avouched the Eropsition and authority of any Father, M. Hardinges
only word must be our Warrante. For neither allegethe he any one Author for
prouse hereof, nor yet namethe any of al these Fathers.

Notwithstanding, let us grant, these Heretics cried out, as M. Hardinge
says, Scriptures, Scriptures. Even so did the same Heretics likewise cry
out, even as now M. Hardinge doothe, Socr. li. 4. ca. 26. (...)
Fathers, Fathers. Socrates says, Et Ariani Originis libros citabant in
Testimonium, vt illi quidem iudicabant, sui Dogmatis. And the Arian Heretics
alleged the Learned Father Origens Books, Doctors alleged by Heretics.
as they thought, for proof, and witness of their Doctrine.

The Heretic Eutyches said, Ego legi scripta Beati Cypriani, and Sanctorum
Patrum, Council Chalced Actio 1. Page 792 Council. Chalced Actio. 4. Pa. 877
and Sancti Athanasii: I have readde the writings of S. Cyprian, and of other
Holy Fathers, and of S. Athanafius.

Likewise the Eutychian Heretic Carosus said, Ego secundum expositionem
trece^torum octodecim Patrum sic credo, fic Baptixatus sum. Aliud quid mihi
dicas, nescio: This is my Faith, according to the exposition of the three
hundred and eighteen. Fathers ( in the Council of Nice). In this Faith was I
Baptized. What ye should say more to me, I cannot tell.

Even so said Eutyches him self: Council. Chalced. Actio. 1. Page 751
Sic a Progenitoribus meis accepi, and credidi. In hac Fide Baptizatus sum, and
signatus: and vsque and hunc diem in ea vixi, and in ea opto moti. Thus have I
received of my Forefathers, and thus have I believed. In this Faith was I
Baptized, and signed: and in the same have I lived until this day: and in the
same I wish to die.

Thus, Augustia. contra Cresco. li. 4. ca. 17 Conc. to. 1 pa. 568
S. Augustine says, the Donatian Heretic Cresconlus alleged the authority
of S. Cyprian: Thus the Nestorian Heretics alleged the authority of the
Council of Nice.

To be short, thus the Heretic Dioscorus cried out in the open Council of
Chalcedon: Council. Chalced. Act. 1. Page 767.
Ego habeo Testimonia Sanctorum Patrum, Athanasij, Gregorij, Cyrilli. Non
transgredior in aliquo. Ego cum Patribus cijcior: Ego defendo Patrum Dogmata:
Ego horum habeo testimonia, non simpliciter, aut transitory, sed in ipsorum
libris: I have the Testimonies of the Holy Fathers, Athanasius, Gregorius,
Cyrillus: I alter not from them in any point: I am thrown forth, and
bannished with the Fathers: I defend the Fathers Doctrine: I have their
judgments uttered, not by chance, or unadvisedly, but remaininge expressed
in their Books.

I doubt not, M. Hardinge, but you may hereby easily see, that the Heretics
ye speak of, cried not only, Scriptures, Scriptures, as ye say: but had
leisure also sometimes to cry, as you do, Fathers, Fathers: and that as well
to purpose, and as rightly, as you of long time have used to cry, having in
deed in the cases we speak of, neither Scriptures, nor Fathers.

To come near the matter, we say not, that al cases of doubt are by
manifest, and open words plainly expressed in the Scriptures. For so there
should need no exposition. But we say, There is no case in Religion so
dark, and doubteful, but it may necessarily be either proved, or reproved by
collection, and conference of the Scriptures.

S. Hierome says, Hieron. in Esai. Cap. 19.
Moris est Scripturarum obscuris manifesta subnectere: It is y^ order of the
Scriptures* Augu. in lib. 83. Quaest. q. 69.
after hard things, to join other things that be plain. S. Augustine like
wise says, Solet circunstantia Scripturarum illuminare sententiam: The
Circunstance of the Scripture is woonte to give light, and to open the
meaning. The like rule Tertullian also geuethe: Tertull. Aduersus Tra^eam. I
piphani lib. 3. De Semiariani^. (...)
Oportet secundum plu^a intelligi pauclora: The fewer places must be expounded
by the more. Therefore touching this word, Homousios, which M. Hardinge here
moves, and the whole contention of the Arians, Epiphanius writethe thus: Nomen
Substantiae simpliciter, and nude in veteri, and Noua Scriptura non proponitur:
Sententia autem eius nominis vbique oc^urrie: This word, Substance, plainly,
and nakedly is not found, neither in the Old, not in the New Testamente. But
the sense, and meaning of that word is found euerywhere.

In this conference, and Judgment of the Holy Scriptures we need oftentimes
the discretion, and wisdom of Learned Fathers. Yet notwithstanding may we
not geeue them herein greater credi^e, then is convenient, or then they them
selves, if it were offered, would receive. We may reverently say of them, as
Seneca in the like case sommetime said, ^eneca.
Non sunt Domini, sed Duces nostri: They are our Leaders, but not our Lords.
Scriptures and Doctors.
They are not the Truth of God it self, but only witnesses unto the Truth.

Therefore S. Augustine says, August. Epist. 19. ad Hieronym.
Alios Scriptores ita lego, vt quan^alibet Sanctitate, Doctrinaque
praepolleant, non ideo verum putem, quod ipsi ita senserint, sed quod id mihi
vel per alios Authors Canonicos, vel probabili ratione persuadere potuerint:
Other writers, or Fathers ( bisides the Holy Scriptures) I read in this sort,
that be their Learning, or Holiness never so great, I will not think it
true, because they have thought so, but because they are hable to persuade me
so, either by other Canonical writers, or else by some likely reason. Augusti.
contra Faust. lib. 11. ca. 5.
Likewise again he says, Hoc genus literatum, no^ cum credendi necessitate,
sed cum iudicandi liberate legendum est: This kind of writings ( of the Holy
Doctors, and Fathers) must be readde, not with necessity to believe each
thing, but with liberty to judge of each thing. Aug. De Vnita. Eccle. ca. 10.
And to that end he says, Ne Catholicis quidem Episcopis consentiendum est,
sicubi forte falluntur, vt contra Canonicas Dei Scripturas sentiant: We may
not consent unto the Bishops, notwithstanding they be Catholic, if they
judge contrary to the Holy Canonical Scriptures. In this authority and
credit we have, and ought to have the Holy Fathers.

Now let us see, whether the Bishops, and others in these Councelles,
confuted these Heretics, as we say, by the Scriptures: or else, as M.
Hardinge seemethe to say, for want or weakness of the Scriptures, used
therein the Authority of the Fathers. Thedor. li. 1. ca. 7 Trip. hi. li. 2.
ca. 5 (...).
First the Emperor Constantinus in the Council of Nice, instructinge the
Bishops there, how they might best debate their quarrelles, and end al
strives, says thus unto them: Euangelicae and Apostolicae Literae, and
Veterum Prophetarum Oracula perspicue nos instituunt, quid oporteat sapere de
voluntare, and sensu Dei. Ponentes ergo contentionem, ex diuinitus inspiraris
oraculis quaeramus solutionem eorum, quae proponuntur: The Evangelists and
Apostles Writings, and the saieinges of the Old Prophets do clearly
instruct us, what judgment we ought to have of the meaning, and will of
God. Therefore saieinge a fide al contention, out of those Heavenly Oracles let
us seek for the assoilinge of our questions.

Socrates also touching the same Council of Nice, says thus of the Arian
Heretics: Socrat. li. 1. ca. 6. (...).
Explicantes Sacrosanctas Scripturas saepe illos euertimus: By openinge, and
expoundinge the Holy Scriptures, oftentimes we ouerthrewe them.

Likewise S. Augustine disputinge against the same Arians refusethe, as I have
said before, both Councelles, and Fathers, and appealethe only to the
Scriptures: Nec ego Nicenam Synodum tibi, nec tu mihi Ariminensem debes
obijcere: Scripturarum Authoritatibus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum
ratione concertet: Neither will I allege the Council of Nice against you:
Augusti. contra Maxi. li. 3. ca. 14
nor shall you allege the Council of Ariminum against me. By the Authority of
the Scriptures let us weigh matter with matter: cause with cause: reason with
reason.

Touching the Council holden at Constantinople against Macedonius, and the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost, Athanasius says, Athanas. ad Serapion. Spirit.
Sanct. non esse Creaturam. ^uagrius.
Ne interroges, sed solum ex Sacris literis condiscas. Sufficient enim
documenta, quae in illis reperias: Never move question hereof, but only
learn of the Holy Scriptures. For the only proufes, that ye shall there find,
are sufficient ( to warrant the Godhed of the Holy Ghost). So likewise says
Euagrius of the other two Councelles, of Ephesus, and Chalcedon: Ex
Euangelicis, and Apostolicis de Domino vocibus scimus Viros illos Diuinos
constituisse: We know that these Godly Fathers concluded this matter by such
words, as the Evangelists, and Apostles have uttered of our Lord.

Therefore the Ancient Father Origin says, Vide quam prope periculis illi
sint, Orig. in ca. 16. ad Romans lib. 10.
qui negligu^t exerceri in Diuinis Literis: ex quibus Solis examinationis
huiusmodi agnoscenda discretio est: Consider, in what danger they be, that
have no care to read the Holy Scriptures. Chrysostom. in Opere imperfec^o, Homi
49.
For by the same Scriptures Only the judgment of this trial must be allowed.

Even so says Chrysostom, Etiamsi in ipsis Veris Ecclesijs, quae Dei sunt,
dixerint, Christum apparuisse, nolite eis credere dicentibus ista de me. Non
enim digna est Diuinitatis meae haec notitia: Oste^dens per haec, quod ab ipsis
saepe Veris Ecclesijs excunt seductores. Propterea ne ipsis quidem credendum
est, nisi ea vel dicant, vel faciant, quae conuenientia sint Scripturis: Yea if
they say, that Christ has appeared in the very true Churches of God, yet
believe them not. For this is no worthy or sufficient knoweledge of my Godhed.
By this he shows, that out of the very true Churches oftentimes come foor the
deceivers. Therefore we may not believe, no not them ( that speak unto us in
the name of the Church) unless they speak, and do such things, as are
agreeable to the Scriptures. In like manner again says Origin, Orig. in
Hiere. Hom. 1.
Necesse nobis est in restimonium vocare Sancras Scripturas. Sensus quippe
nostri, and enarrationes sine ijs restibus non habent fidem: We must needs
call to witness the Holy Scriptures: For our judgments and expositions
without those witnesses carry no credit.

And, to leave al other like authorities, that might he alleged, for short
conclusion, Aug. De Naturae and Cratia, ca. 61
S. Augustine says, Solis Canonicis Scripturis sine vlla recusatione
co^sensum debeo: I owe my consent without gain saieinge (not unto the
Doctors, or Fathers, but) Only unto the Canonical Scriptures.

But the Bishops in those Councelles, says M. Hardinge, brought forth,
and followed the expositions of the Ancient Learned Fathers. And wherefore
might they not? What man ever taught, or said the contrary? Yet
notwithstanding they alleged them, not as the fundations, or grounds, but
only as approved, ^uagrius libr. 3. Cap. 18 (...).
and faitheful witnesses of the Truth. Which thing if M. Hardinge happily
will deny, may easily appear, by the words of Cyrillus, pronounced and
published openly in the Council of Chalcedon: Gratulamur nobis mutuo, quod and
nostrae, and vestrae Ecclesiae Fidem habent consentientem, and diuinitus
adspiratis Scripturis, and Traditionibus Sanctorum Patrum: We rejoice
together each of us in others behalf, for that the Faith both of our
Churches, and also of yours, is agreeable both unto the Heavenly inspired
Scriptures, and also to the Tradition, and exposition of our Fathers. Which
words of Cyrillus being heard, and the consent of the Fathers being
known, the whole Council for joy made a shoot together, Omnes ita credimus,
Papa Leo ita credit, etc. Thus we al believe: Pope Leo thus beleeuethe: Thus
beleeuethe Leo, and Anatolius: Thus Cyrillus beleeuethe: This is the Faith of
our Fathers: This is the Faith of the Apostles: Thus have the Apostles taught.

Thus may you see, M. Hardinge, (we say not to you, as you do to us, If you
be Learned, for thereof we have no doubt: God grant, ye may direct your
Learning to his glory) but thus may you see, to what end the Bishops in
the Councelles, ye speak of, alleged the expositions of the Ancient Fathers,
and how far they weighed them under the Authority of the Scriptures. In
like sort do we also this day allege against you the manifest, and
undoubted, and agreeable judgments of the most Aunciente Learned Holy
Fathers: and thereby, as by apapproued, and faitheful witnesses, we disclose
the infinite folies, and errors of your Doctrine. And seeinge you have
forsaken the fellowship of the said Holy Fathers, as hereafter shall more ^ully
appear, we say, unto you, as Endoxius said unto the Heretic Abbate
Eutyches in the Council of Chalcedon: Ye have removed your selves, both from
al Priestly Communion, and also from the presence of Christ.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 2.
S. De Vnitate Eccle. ca. 3. Et contra Maximinum Arianoru^ ^pis. Li. 3. Cap 14.
Augustine, when he disputed against Petilian the Donatian Heretic: Let not
these words, quod he, be heard between us: I say, or, you say: Let us
rather speak in this wise: Thus says the Lord. There let us seek the
Church: there let us boulte out the cause.

M. Hardinge.
Concerning this place of S. Augustine, it ought not to be stretched to al
matters in general, that be in question, Manifest Untruth.
as though we might not use the Testimonies and Authorities of the Fathers
against Heretics: but it perteinethe only to the quaestion in that book, De
vnitate Ecclesiae, treated of, which is, where the Church is. Petilia^ the
Donatist, and the Mainteiners of that Heresy co^tended the Church to be only
in Aphrike, or at the furthest in Part Donati, among the^ only that held
with Donatus. The same heresy went they about to prove by Scriptures. But when
S. Augustine saw how weak their proufes were, which they brought out of
the Scriptures, he provoked them, the better to overthrow them, to come to the
trial of the Scriptures. And in deed where the Scriptures be manifest for
proof of any matter, what need is there of Doctors? But where the sense of
the Scriptures is obscure, and may be wrested by evil wits to the
maintenau^ce of an Heresy, there the expositions of the Fathers by all Old
VVriters have been taken of necessity, to supply the Scriptures obscurity,
and to declare the sense of the Church, which the Holy Ghost has pro^pted.
And in such cases S. Augustine himself uses the Testimonies of the Fathers
not seldom, namely against Julian the Pelagian: Where beside Scripture,
touching Original sin, he allegethe against the Pelagians a great number of
Fathers: and at length in one place speakinge of the Authority, reverence, and
credit he had them in, he says thus: Contra Iulian^ Pelagian. Lib. 1.
Quod credunt, credo, etc: What they believe, I believe: what they hold, I
hold: what they teach, I teach: what they preach, I preach. From the
special to the general negatiuely, the argument holdethe not, ye know, if ye
have not forgotten your Logike.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge, as well here, as else where, thinkethe it an easy matter, with a
bold Asseueration to smoothe his unlearned simple Reader, specially such a
one, as has no eyes to look after him. These words of S, Augustine, says
he, perteine only unto the matter he had then in hand, and therefore may not
be forced to any other. And here he remembrethe us of a profounde point in
Logique, that a Negative Conclusion from the Special to the General cannot
hold. Here it were a matter worthy the hearing: first, how M. Hardinge
could enter so deeply, to know so mutche of S. Augustines meaning: next,
for as mutche as in respect of him self, he evermore fansiethe us to be
unlearned, how he were hable to teach us to know the same. He assuerethe us
upon his word, that these words of S. Augustine must needs be pounded,
and restreined to that one only matter, and may not in any wise be stretched
farther: and this, he imagines, was S. Augustines meaning. Thus, good Reader,
by M. Hardinges handlinge, thou haste here a meaning of S. Augustines, that S.
Augustine himself never meante. For S. Augustine in the same matter, and
against the same Heretic Petilian, although not in the same Book, writethe
thus: Augusti. contra Liter. Petilian. Lib. 3. Cap. 6.
Sieve de Christo, sieve de eius Ecclesia, sieve de quacunque re alia, quae
pertinet ad Fidem, vitamque nostra^, no^ dicam, Si Nos, Sed, si Angelus de
Coelo nobis annuntiauerit, praeterquam quod in Scripturis Legalibus, and
Eua^gelicis accepistis, Anathema sit: Whether it be of Christ, or of his
Church, or of any thing else what so ever, perteininge either to our life, or
to our Faith, I will not say, If I me self, but if an Angel from Heaven shall
teach us otherwise, Gala. 1.
then we have received in the Books of the Law, and in the Gospelles, hold
him accursed.

M. Hardinge says, S. Augustine meante only of one matter: S. Augustine him
self says, he meante of al manner matters, touching either Faith, or Life.

M. Hardinge says, S. Augustine meante this only of him self: S. Augustine
him self says, De quacunque re. Si Angelus de Coelo.
be meante it of any other, yea eue^ of the Angels of God. And shall we think,
M. Hardinge knows S. Augustines meaning, and S. Augustine him self knew it
not?

Verily S. Augustine in an other case concerning the Arians, as I have touched
twice before, likewise refuses the Determinations of al Councelles, and
Fathers, and stands only to the Scriptures: Augusti. contra Maxi. Li. 3. ca.
14
Neither will I, says he* allege against thee, the Council of Nice: nor shall
thou allege against me the Council of Ariminum, etc.

Neither does S. Augustine only say thus, but also yields a reason, why he
says it. These be his words: Auferantur de medio, quae aduersus nos
inuicem, non ex Diuinis Canonicis Libris, Augu. Devnita. Iccle. contra
Petilian. Cap. 3.
sed aliunde recitamus. Quaerer fortasse aliquis, Cur vis ista auferri de
medio? Quia nolo humanis Documentis, sed Diuinis Oraculis Ecclesiam Sanctam
demo^strari: Have away al those Authorities, that either of us allegeth against
the other, sauinge such only, as be taken out of the Heavenly Canonical
Scriptures. But perhaps, sum man will ask me. Wherefore would ye have al
such other Authorities put away? I answer, Because I would have the Holy
Church to he proved, not by the Doctrines of men, but by the Word of God.

So says S. Augustine unto other the Donatistes: Augu. in Psalm. 57
Auferantur de medio Chartae nostrae: procedat in medium Codex Dei. Audi
Christum dicentem: audi Veritatem loquentem: Take a way from emongst us any
our own Books: Let the Book of God comme emongste us. Hear, what Christ
says: Harken, what the Truth speaks.

Again he says, Audi, dicit Dominus: Non, dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut
Vincentius, Augu. in Epist. 48
aut Hilarious, aut Ambrosius, aut Augustinus: sed, dicit Dominus: Hear this:
The Lord says. Hear not this, Donatus says, Rogatus says, Vincenius
says, Hilarious says, Ambrose says, Augustine says: But harken to this,
The Lord says.

In like form of words says S. Ambrose: Nolo nobis credatur: Scriptura
recitetur. Ambros. De Incarnat. Domin. Sacramen. ca. 3. Chrysostom. in 2. ad
Corinth. Homi. 3
Non ego dico a me, In principio erat Verbum, sed audio. Non ego effingo: sed
lego: I would not, ye should believe us: But read the Scriptures: I say not
of me self, In the beginning was the Word: But I hear it. I make it not:
but I read it.

Likewise says Chrysostom, Oro vos omnes, vt relinquatis, quid huic, aut
illi videatur: and de his a Scripturis haec omnia inquirite: I beseech you al,
weigh not, what this man, or that man thinks: but touching al these things
search the Scriptures.

Now, where as it pleases M. Hardinge, to tell us of an Argument Negative
from Special to General, and so to call us to the remembrance of our Logique:
pleases it him also to remember. that the Argument, that we ground of S.
Augustines words, holds not, as it is here imagined, from Special to
General: but from the imperfection, and weakness of the wisdom of man, to
the stabilitie, and certainetie of Gods Holy Word. And therefore the Old
Learned Father Origin says, Origin. in Hieremi. Homi. 1. Micro. in Psalm. 86
as it is alleged before, Sensus nostri, and Enarrationes fine his testibus non
habent fidem: Our judgments, and Expositions without these witnesses (of the
Scriptures) have no credit. In like sort S. Hierome, Quamuis Sa^ctus sic
aliquis post Apostolos, quamuis disertus sit, non habet Authoritatem: After the
Apostles of Christ, notwithstanding sum man be Holy, notwithstanding he be
eloquente, yet he wants Authority. Therefore S. Augustine says, August De
Peccator. Merit. and R^mis. li. 1. ca. 22.
Cedamus, and consenuamus Scripturae Sacrae, quae nec falli potest, nec
fallere: Let us yield, and consent to the Holy Scripture, which can neither
deceive, nor be deceived. For this cause, M. Hardinge, S. Augustine not only
in the matter that lay bitweene him and Pettlianus, but also in all other matters
what soever, so often appealed from al Fathers, and Councelles unto the
Scriptures.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 3.
Likewise S. Hierome: Al those things (says he) which without the
Testimony of the Scriptures, are holden, as delivered from the Apostles, be
thoroughly smitten down by the Sword of Gods Word.

M. Hardinge.
Ye would fallen remove us from a good hold, I see well, which is the Authority
of the Holy Fa^thers, of Ancient Traditions, and of the Universal Church. Al
these would ye to be of no force against Heretics. For ye know the Fathers
and the Church to be against you, and that so long as they are believed, your
Doctrine shall not be received, as always found to be new, and of private
deu^se. If we were driven from these, ye doubt not but to match us well yenough
in the Scriptures. And as ye would handle the matter, I think so my self
verily. For when al Authority and judgment of the Fathers and of the Church
is shaken quite of in any controversy, by whom shall we be tried? By the
Scriptures, ye say. But when both ye and we allege Scriptures to a contrary
purpose, and when we vary about the sense of the Scriptures, by whom then shall
we be judged? Perhaps ye will refer the judgment of doubtful matters, to the
Holy Ghost. We refuse not tharbitrement and Vmpiership of the Holy Ghost.
For the same has been promised by Christ to the Church, to remain with the
Church for ever, to teach what things so ever he said, to lead men into al
Truth.

And thus for judgment and trial of Truth, we shall be returned to the
Church and to the Fathers, by whom the Holy Ghost speaks unto us, whose
Authority and due estimation ye go about to remove from us.

But let us see, what force ye bring to drive us from this hold. Making your
battery against it, what shoot ye of but VVinde and Paper? Your Artillery
makethe a no^ es, but it gives no blow. As in the last allegation ye
falsified the sense of S. Augustine, so in this ye falsify both the sense and
words of S. Hierome. The words, as ye allege them, seem to be spoken
against what so ever Tradition, of the Apostles. Which words, or any the
like to such purpose, were never vtered by any Catholic Doctor of the
Church, mutche less by S. Hierome. Look ye again and vewe better the place,
ye shall say your selves, that I find the fault of falsefyeinge in you not
without cause.

S. Agg^i. cap. 1.
Hierome in his Commentaries upon those words of the Prophet Aggaeus, Et
vocaui siccicitatem super t^^ram, and super Montes: I have called the drought
to come upon the Earth, and upon the Hills, etc. First she winge the literal
sense accordingly as the Hebrew word there by him noted, signifies
Siccitatem, drought, the^ treatinge Mystically, as the seventy Interpreters
have turned that word into Romphaeam, Gladius.
that is a sword, and understanding by the sword, the Word of God:
thereof takethe occasion briefly to say, what this sword doothe, how it
destroieth the negligent soul, which is expounded to be dry earth, and how
it plaguethe Montaines that lift up them selves against the knowledge of God,
whereby he meanethe Heretics. Of whom he tellethe, how they flatter the
deceived peoples with their Bread, Wine, and Oil, (by which he means
their Heresies) as it were with meats, and drinks, and refection.

There Bread (says he) any man may very aptly call it, the Bread of
VVaylinge, and their Wine, the madness of Dragons, and the madness of
Serpents incurable: And their Oil the promisinge of Heavenly things,
wherewith they do as it were anointe their Disciples, and promise them
rewards of their labors: which the Prophet detesteth sayeinge, the Oil of
the sinner shall not anoint my head. After this follow the words of S. Hierome
which ye have falsified to the intent they might seem to serve your false
meaning. Sed and alia quae absque Authoritate and Testimonijs Scripturarum,
quasi Traditione Apostolica reperiunt atque co^fingunt, percutit gladius Dei.
But the Sword of God strikethe also other things, which the Heretics (for
of the^ he speaks) devise and feign of their own heads without the
Authority and witnesses of the Scriptures, as though they came by Tradition
from the Apostles. He that compares this place with your flsified allegation,
may sone epsy great odds between them. For ye make S. Hierome to say, that
al those things, which without the Testimonies of Scriptures are hold (so
your allowed interpreter tourneth, Asseruntur,) as delivered from the Apostles,
be thoroughly smitten down by the Sword of Gods Word. By this Sword of
your Gods Word ye would quite smite down al Apostolic Traditions at a
blow. But thanked be God, that your Sword is a forged Sword, a paper Sword,
a Sword that neither with Edge cutteth, nor with weight bears down. S.
Hierome puts not al things, which we have by Tradition from the Apostles
without the express Scriptures, to the Sword of Gods Word. Scriptures and
Doctors.
He speaks not Generally. His word is, Alia, other things: and ye make it,
Omnia, al things. Again he speaks of such things as be devised and
fained by Heretics, of their own brain, without Authority and Testimonies
of the Scriptures: unto which they give Estimation, as though they came by
Tradition from the Apostles. These circumstances and exaggerations do ye
omit, and say, that S. Hierome puts al Apostolic Traditions to that
dreadful Sword of Gods Word. Now what S. Hierome says, we hold with
it, and allow it well. But your saienge we refuse, as falsely fathered upon S.
Hierome. What he condemns, we condemn. Neither can that place be justly
alleged against us: For we inuente not, no fame not any things of our own
accord, or of our own heads, as though they were delivered by the Apostles
besides the Scriptures: that is the part of Heretics, specially of the
Tatians, as in that place S. Hierome says. We find, devise, and feign
nothing in the Catholic Religion. We do but keep and maintain things
Devised by the Holy Ghost, and leafte to the Church by the Apostles, or by
Apostolic men, or by the General Councelles, whose Authority is in the
Church most healthful, says S. Austine. But concerning the force which the
consent of the Fathers had in the judgment of S. Hierome, it appears in his
Epistle to Euagrius: where, by the Authority of the Ancient Doctors before
his time, he proves against an Heretic, that Melchisedech was a man of the
Land of Chanaan, and not the Holy Ghost.

The B. of Sarisburie
Feign would M. Hardinge have his Reader believe, that we utterly despise al
Holy Fathers. But we despise them not, M. Hardinge, as may partly appear,
by that we have already said. We read their works: we reverence them:
we give God thanks for them: we call them the Pillars, the Lights, the
Fathers of Gods Church: we despise them not. This thing only we say:
Were their Learning, and Holiness never so great, yet be they not equal in
credit with the Scriptures of God.

Thus also says S. Augustine, Augusti. contra Cresconi. Gram. Lib. 2. Cap.
29. August. Ad Hieron. Epist. 19.
Nos nullam Cypriano facimus iniuriam, cum eius qua^^ibet literas, a Canonica
Diuinarum Scripturarum Authoritate distinguimus: We offer no wrong to S.
Cyprian, when we sever any his Letters, or Writings, from the Canonical
Authority of the Holy Scriptures. And again, ioininge all the Doctors, and
^athers together, he says thus: Ipse mihi pro his omnibus, imo supra hos
omnes Apostolus Paulus occurrit. Ad ipsum confugio: ad ipsum ab omnibus, qui
aliter sentiunt, literarum tractatoribus prouoco: In steed of al these Learned
Fathers, or iather above them al, Paul the Apostle comes to my mind. To him
I run: To him I appeal from al manner Writers ( Doctors, and Fathers) that
think otherwise.

So likewise S. Hierome, Hiero. Ad Tranquillinum, To. 2.
Ego Originem propter cruditionem sic interdum legendum arbitror, quomodo
Tertullianum, Nouatum, Arnobium, Apollinarium, and nonnullos Ecclesiasticos
Scriptores Graecos pariter, and Latinos: vt bona eorum eligamus, vitemusque
contraria: I think, that the Ancient Father Origin, in respect of his
Learning, may be readde sometimes, as Tertullian, Nouatus, Arnobius,
Appollinarius, and sundry other Ecclesiastical VVriters, as well Greeks, as
Latins: that in them we may take the good, and flee the contrary. Of this
judgment were S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and sundry others: whose words for
shortness I pass over: yet were they not therefore condemned as despisers of
the Holy Learned Fathers. We remove you not, as you say, from your hold, M.
Hardinge. This is nothing else, but a courrage of your countenance. The
Fathers, ye speak of, are against you. I trust, it appears already by your
former writings, that in the Special cases, that lie bitweene us, ye have but
few Fathers to hold by.

Ye say, We evermore call you to the Scriptures. This fault, I hope, is not
so heinous. Christ has commanded us so to do: Search ye, says Christ,
the Scriptures. Johan. 5.
And S. Hilarie says unto the Emperor Constantius, Fidem, Interpretation of
the Scriptures.
Imperator, quaeris? Audi eam, non denouis chartulis, sed de Dei Libris: Doothe
youR Majesty seek the Faith? Hear it then, not out of any new scrolles,
but out of the Books of God. He is rather to be suspected, that flees the
light, and will not be judged by the Scriptures.

When the Scriptures be dark, Hilarious ad Imper. Constantium
and doubteful, and are alleged of both parts, then ye say, ye refuse not
the Vmpeereship, and judgment of the Holy Ghost. But ye add farther, The
Holy Ghost is promised only to the Church. Now by your opinion there is no
Church, Petrus De Palude, De potestate Papae, Arti. 4. Heruaeus de potest.
Papae, ca. 23.
but the Church of Room. And the Church of Room is no Church without the
Pope: For one of your great Doctors says, Potestas Papae solius excedit
potestatem totius residuae Ecclesiae: The Popes only power passethe all the
power of the whole Church bisides: And an other like Doctor says, Papa
virtualiter est tota Ecclesia: The Pope by power, and virtue is the whole
Church: And thus your reason goethe round about, a Primo ad vltimum: Ergo,
There is neither Holy Ghost, nor Interpretation, or sense of the Scriptures,
but only in the Pope. This is, Summa Summarum: which thing being granted,
what should a man seek any farther? The whole matter is at an end.

It is true, As the Scriptures were written by the Sprite of God, so must they
be expounded by the same. 2. Petri. 1. Matthew. 11. Apoc. 3. Actor. 16. Johan. 6.
For without that Sprite, we have neither ears to hear, nor eyes to see. It
is that Sprite, that openethe, and noman shuttethe: the same shuttethe, and
noman openethe: The same Sprite prepared and opened the Silk woman's heart, that
she should give ear to, and consider the things, that were spoken by S.
Paul. And in respect of this sprite the Prophet Esai says, Erunt omnes
docti a Deo: They shall be al taught of God.

But God has not bound him self, that this Sprite should evermore dwell in
Rome: Esai. 66. Chrysostom. De Sancto and Adorando Spiritu.
but upon the lowly, and humble hearted, that tremblethe at the Word of God.
Chrysostom says: Qui propria loquuntur* falso praetendunt Spiritum Sanctu^:
They that speak of them selves, falsely pretend the Holy Ghost. And again,
Si quid praeter Euangelium sub titulo Spiritus obtrudatur, ne credamus. Quia
sicut Christus Legis, and Prophetarum impletio. est, ita est Spiritus
Euangelij: If any thing be brought unto us under the Name of the Holy Ghost,
bisides the Gospel, let us not believe it. For as Christ is the fulfillinge of
the Law and the Prophets: so is the Holy Ghost the fulfillinge of the Gospel.

Now, with what Sprite the Bishops of Rome have expounded unto us the Holy
Scriptures of God, we shall show it hereafter, as fitter occasion shall require.

Here, you say, we have corrupted both the words, and the sense of S.
Hierome: That we have taken, Omnia, in steed of, Alia: And that you have
divised, and made nothing of your selves: that S. Hierome meante not hereby
the Traditions of the Apostles, but only the fond fantastes, and dreams of
the Heretics called Tatians.

Of al these things, we must needs confess, one thing is true. In deed
we took, Omnia, in steed of, Alia: and so by oversight gave some occasion
unto the quareler. How be it I doubt not, but the indifferente gentle Reader
will soon pardonne that fault. It proceeded only of negligence, and not of
malice. Notwithstanding this want may easily be supplied by a sufficient
Commentary. Matt. 15. Omnis.
For Christ says, Omnis, plantatio, quam non plantauerit Pater meus
Coelestis, eradicabitur. Every plant, that my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted out. Here, M. Hardinge, ye may borrowe, Omnia, to healpe
S. Hierome.

Or, Cyprian Lib. 1. Epist. 8. Quodcunque.
if this like you not, S. Cyprian may tell you, Adulterum est, Impium est,
Sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano furore instituitur, vt Dispositio Diuina
violetur: It is aduouterous, it is wicked, it is abominable, what so ever is
ordered by the rashenesse of man, that Gods order should be broken.

It is true, S. Hierome speakethe not these words of the Traditions of the
Apostles: It is true. Yet, M. Hardinge, he speakethe these words of such
fantasies, as were brought into the Church of God, and magnified under the
name and color of the Traditions of the Apostles. Eusebius. li. 3. ca. 28. (...).
Anno. 1548. Illyricus de Sect. Page 109. In Confe. Petricouien. De Ceremoniis,
Page 289. Copus Angl. Dial. 2. Page 194. Copus Angl. Dial. 2. Page 284. Johan
16. 2 Cor. 1^
So Eusebius says, The Heretic Cherinthus brought us in his own Monstrous
Diuises, under the pretense of Revelations, as written by some great Apostle.

Such, M. Hardinge, be your Inventions, wherewith ye have of long time
deceived the world. One of your companions the Suffragane of Sidon, at the
late diete at Augusta, in the presence of the whole Empiere, doubted not to
say, that your whole Canon word by word, even as it is now used in your
Masses, came directly from the Apostles. Your Hosius of Polonia says, that
the Apostles appointed your orders of Monks. An other of your side says,
Christus Dux, and Signifer Vitae Monasticae: Christ was the Captain, and
standerd bearer of Monks life: Imagininge, I trow, that Christ was an
Abbate. And yet afterward the same Doctor, either by some oblivion, or else
upon sum better remembrance, says thus: Elias, and Elizaeus D^ces Instituti
Benedictini: Elias, and Elizaeus were the first Captains of S. Benettes
Order. And you, M. Hardinge, have told us often, that ye have your Private
Mass, your Half Communion, and I know not what else, al from the Apostles.
And all this ye prove. God wot, by full simple conjectures, because Christ
says to his Apostles, I have many things to say unto you: but ye are not
hable to bear them yet: And because S. Paul says to the Corinthians, I will
order the rest, when I comme. Hereby ye bear us in hand, that al your most
triflinge Vanities were brought unto you by S. Paul even from the third
Heavens.

And although it were true, that ye say, ye have not divised these things of
of your selves, but have received them al from the Apostles, and Holy Fathers,
which thing your conscience knowethe to be most untrue, yet notwithstanding
the same things so received ye have sithence foully defaced with sundry your
superstitions. Ye have made them necessary to Salvation: ye have bound the
people to them no less then to the Law of God: and so have ye made them
snares of Christian consciences. Although the thing it self came from the
Fathers, yet the abuse thereof came from your selves: and for the same ye have
taught the people to break Gods express commandment. Esai. 1. Matt. 23.
Matt. 16.
Thus have you blended Gods heavenly wine with your puddle water: Thus have
ye strained gnattes, and swalowed camelles. This is the very Leaven of the
Scribes, and Phariseis, which Christ calls Hypocrisy. Therefore al be it
the thing it self, ye have thus received, in respect of substance be al one:
yet now, being thus abused, in respect of your Superstitions, and
deformities, it is not one.

The Apostles, and Holy Fathers, used Oil: yet they used it not, as ye do,
for the Salvation of Body and Soul.

Moses erected up the Brazen Serpente in the wilderness: Number. 21. Johan. 3.
Joel. cap. 1.
Yet not to be adoured with Godly honor, as it followed afterward.

God commanded the people to fast: yet not with Hypocrisy, as the wicked
fasted. And therefore God says unto them, Non est hoc leiunium, quod ego
elegi: This is not the fasting, Esai. 1 and 58.
that I have chosen.

God commanded the people to keep the Calendes, and New Moons: Yet not with
such Superstition, and Abuses, as the people kept them. And therefore God
said unto them, Esai. 1. Matthew. 23.
Who required these things at your hands?

God commanded sundry Bathinges, and Wasshinges: yet unto them, that most
precisely used the same, Christ said: VVoe be unto you ye Scribes, and
Phariseis: in vain they woorship me, teachinge the Commandments and
Doctrines of men.

Yet you, M. Hardinge, have infeaffed the Apostles of Christ, not only with
the Substance of the things, which, ye say, ye have received by Tradition,
but also with all your Abuses, Superstitions, Corruptions, and Idolatries:
which ye have divised of your selves. And therein ye well resemble the Tatian
Heretics, of whom only, ye say, S. Hierome speaks. But whether S.
Hierome meante only, I know not what fantastical dreams of the Tatians, (as
you imagine only of your self, without proof, in particulare naminge
nothing) or else also al such Superstitious Vanities, as we have often, and
justly reproved in you, it may soon appear by these words immediately
folowinge: Omnem laborem manuum, Hieronym. in Aggae. Cap. 1.
and Ieiunia little, and obseruationes varias, and (...), id est, humi
dormitiones: Al their hand Labor, and their Fastinges, and their
Observations, and Vsages, and hard Sleepinge on the ground. These and such
other like be the things, which, men imagine, came from the Apostles, and
are stricken and consumed with the Sword of Gods Word.

Thus, M. Hardinge, notwithstanding your long Gloss biside the Text, seems
to be the very meaning of S. Hierome.

If ye will yet force the contrary, and turn al from your selves to the
Tatians, as you do, the very two lines next folowinge must needs make you
blushe at your own error. The words are these, Haec autem vniuersa, quae
dixi, possunt de Ecclesiae Rectoribus intelligi: Al these things, that I have
spoken, may be understood of the Rulers of the Church. Tell us no more
therefore, M. Hardinge, of your Tatians. For S. Hierome him self tells you,
he meante not only them, but also the Bishops, and Rulers of the Church.
And a little before he says, Inferrur gladius super Montes eleuantes se
aduersus scientiam Dei: The Sword of Gods Word is laid upon the
Mountains, that lift them selves up against the knowledge of God.

In this sense writes S. Cyprian. Ad Pompeium.
Cyprian: Si ad Diuinae Traditionis Caput, and Originem reuertamur, cessat
omnis error humanus: If we return to the Head, and beginning of our Lords
Tradition, al error of Man must needs give place.

In like sense also writes Tertullian: Tertull. De Praescrip. Haere.
Ipsa Doctrina Haereticorum cum Apostolica comparata, ex diuersitate, and
contrarietate sua pronuntiabit, neque Apostoli alicuius Authoris esse, neque
Apostolici: The very Doctrine of Heretics compared with the Apostles
Doctrine, by the diversity and contrariety, that is bitweene that, and the
other, will soon pronounce sentence of it self, yt neither Apostle, nor
Apostolic man was author of it.

Even thus it fares, M. Hardinge, with a great heap of your Doctrine. Ye
say, ye have it by Tradition from the Apostles. Yet is it utterly void of al
authority, or testimony of the Scriptures. And therefore, as S. Hierome
says, it is consumed and stricken down in the Conscience of the Godly, by the
only Sword of Gods Holy Word, as our eyes see this day: and being
compared with the Apostles Doctrine, (the difference, and contrariety is so
great) it easily bewraieth it self, as Tertullian says, that it never came
from any Apostle, nor from any other Apostolic Doctor of the Church.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 4.
S. Ambrose also to Gratian the Emperor: Let the Scripture (says he) be
asked the question, let the Prophets be asked, and let Christ be asked. For
at that time made the Catholic Fathers and Bishops no doubt, but that our
Religion might be proved out of the Holy Scriptures. Neither were they ever
so hardy to take any for an Heretic, whose error they could not evidently
and apparently reprove by the self same Scriptures. And we verily do make
answer on this wise, as S. Paul did: According to this way which they
call Heresy, we do woorshippe God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ: and do allow al things which have benne written either in the
Law, or in the Prophets, or in the Apostles Works.

M. Hardinge.
Gratian the Emperor bucklinge him self as it were to encounter with the
Heretic, at the first he gives meaning to al to be ware of him, for that he
endeavors to prove his false Doctrine, (namely for the first point, that
the Son is unlike the Father) Versutis disputationibus, Cap. 2.
With suttel and crafty reasoninges. He alleges to that purpose, S. Paul
to the Colossians, Cauere ue quis vos depraedetur pes Philosophiam: Beware that
no man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, etc. For (says be)
these Heretics put all the force of their poisons in Logike, or Dialectical
disputation, which by the opinion of Philosophers is desined, not to have
power to prove, but an earnest desire to destroy and disprove. Having given
this wholesome warninge, lest him self might seem to use that, which he
counsels others to beware of: to withde awe the Emperor and al other from
the guileful Logike of Arius, Ambres. De Fide Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
at his first entry he says: I will not that thou give credit, Holy
Emperor, to argument, and to our Disputation, (then follow the words.
Whereof the Defenders take hold,) Scripturas interrogemus, etc. Let us ask
the Scriptures, let us ask the Apostles, let us ask the Prophets, let us
ask Christ: What need many words? let us ask the Father, etc.

And to this point of our belief, which is very high and secret, is that
saying of S. Ambrose to be restrained. But that for confirmation of the Truth
in points which be nearer to common sense, and for confutation of those
Heresies which be of less subteltie, of which sort these Gospellers gross
errors be, to this end that we ought not to use the Testimonies of the Holy
Fathers against Heretics, Untruth.
(for which purpose they allege this place:) S. Ambrose neither in all that
Book, neither in all his works speaks so much as one word.

But contrary wise in sundry places of that work be alleges the authority
of the Nicene Council, as a Testimony of good force against the Arians, and
declares a divine Mystery to have benne signified by such special number of
the Fathers there assembled: Saying, Sic nempe nostri secundum Scripturas
dixerunt Patres: Even thus, according to the Scriptures, have the Fathers
said. Seruemus Praecepta maiorum, etc. Let us keep the Precepts of our
Forefathers, neither with Temeritie of rude boldness let us break the
Hereditarie Seals, (he means the Doctrine sealed by the Fathers, and left to
the posterity as it were by Heritage). Which of us will be so hardy, as to
unseal the Priestly Book, sealed by the Confessors, and now consecrated
with the Martyrdom of many a one? Lo hear ye not Sirs Nothing.
how much S. Ambrose is against you?

And though he say, touching this Mysteries Let us ask the Scriptures,
Apostles, Prophets, and Christ: yet thereby does he not quite exclude the
Fathers. He says not, let us reject the Fathers. The Scriptures and the
Fathers be not contrary: and therefore thallowinge of them, is not the
disalowinge of these. Who so ever makes this argument, Untruth.
which in your Word is implied, The Scriptures are to be asked, Ergo, the
Holy Fathers are not to be asked, makes a foolish argument.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The greattest forte hereof is answered already. S. Ambrose, ye say, by this
appeal to the Scriptures, excludes not the judgment of the Learned Fathers,
but only the cau^^lations, and subtileties of Philosophers and Sophisters. For
S. Ambrose him self is the same treaty often allegeth the Authority of the
Fathers. All this, M. Hardinge, is true in deed* Notwithstanding there is a
certain secret Untruth lapped in it. For S. Ambrose allegeth the Fathers,
not as Grounds, or Principles, or Fundations of the Faith: but only as
Interpreters, or Witnesses, or Consenters unto the Faith: Which thing of our
part was never denied. Now, whether S. Ambrose meante thus, Scriptures and
Doctors.
or no, let S. Ambrose him self he the Judge. Ambr. Ad Cratia. De Fide, li. 1.
His words be these, Sic nempe nostri secundum Scripturas dixerunt Patres:
Thus have our Fathers said (not of them selves, but) according to the
Scriptures. He allegeth the Fathers, not as having sufficient credit and
substance in them selves, but only as Expounders, and Interpreters of the
Scriptures.

So says the godly Father Athanasius: Athanas. De Humanitate Verbi.
Nos ista Hausimus a Magistris diuinitus afflatis, qui Sacros Libros
euoluerunt: These things have we learned of our Masters ( or Fathers)
inspired from Heaven, which have Readde and perused the Holy Scriptures. For
S. Augustine very well says, August. Contra Cresconi. Gramma. Li. 2 Ca. 29.
Hierony. in Episto. ad Ephesians. Lib. 3. Cap. 5.
Secundum hos Libros de coeteris Literis, vel Fidelium, vel Infidelium libere
iudicamus: According to those Books of the Scriptures we judge frankely of
al other writings, whether they be of the Faitheful, or of the Vnfaitheful.
Therefore S. Hierome says, Omni studio legendae nobis sunt Scripturae, and in
Lege Domini meditandum die ac nocte: vt probati trapezitae sciamus, quis numus
probus sit, quis adulterinus: We must Read the Scriptures with all diligence,
and must be occupied in the Law of our Lord both day and night: that we
may become perfect exchangers, and be hable rightly to discern, what Money is
lawful, and what is Counterfaite. S. Hilarie says, Hoc proprium est
Apostolicae. Doctrinae, Deum ex Lege, ac Prophetis in Euangelijs praedicare:
Hilari. in Psalm. 65.
This is the very order of the Apostles Doctrine, in the Gospel to Preach God
out of the Law and the Prophets.

Otherwise, touching the discourse of natural reason, S. Ambrose says, No
Creature either in Earth, or in Heaven is hable to reach the deapthe of these
things. Thus he says: Men's deficit: Vox silet, non mea tantum, sed
Angelorum. Supra potestates, Ambro. ad Gratianum de Fide, Lib. 1. Cap. 5.
supra Angelos, supra Cherubim, supra Seraphim, supra omnem sensum est: The
mind is astonned: the voice fails, not only mine, but also of the Angels.
It is above the powers, above the Angels, above the Cherubius, above the
Seraphins, and above al manner understanding. And therefore he says, as it
is alleged once before, Nolo nobis credatur: Scriptura recitetur: Ambros. De
Incarnationis Dominicae Sacracramen. Ca. 3.
Non ego dico a me, In principio erat Verbum, Sed audio: I would not, ye
should believe me: Let the Scriptures be readde: I say not of me self,
In the beginning was the Word: but I hear it spoken. And again he says
in the same Book unto the Emperor Gratian: Ambros. ad Gratian. Imperator.
Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
Facessat nostra Sententia: Paulum interrogemus: Let our Judgment stand
aparte: and let us ask S. Paul the question.

But M. Hardinge says, Whoso ever makes this argument, which in your
Word is implied, The Scriptures are to be asked: Ergo, the Holy Fathers are
not to be asked, makes a foolish argument.

It seems no great point of Wisdom, M. Hardinge, to vpbraide others with
folly without cause: God increase both you and us in all wisdom, and
understanding in Christ Jesus. How be it, our Argument, how so ever it has
pleased you to fashon, and to handle it, as we meante it, and made it, had no
such Folly. Wherefore, what so ever Folly is now come to it, it is your
own: it is not ours. For we deny not the Learned Fathers expositions, and
judgments in doubteful cases of the Scriptures. We read them our selves:
We follow them: We embrace them: and, as I said before, we most humbly
thank God for them. But thus we say, The same Fathers opinions, and
judgments, for as mutche as they are sometimes disagreeable one from an
other, and sometimes implie contrarieties, and contradictions, therefore alone,
and of them selves, without farther authority, and guidinge of Gods Word,
are not always sufficient Warrantes to charge our Faith. And thus the Learned
Catholic Fathers themselves have evermore taught us to esteem, and to weighe
the Fathers.

The Ancient Father Origin says thus, as it is reported before; Ex Solis
Scripturis examinationis nostrae discretio petenda est: The discussinge of our
Judgment, must be taken Only of the Scriptures. And again, Sensus nostri,
and enarrationes sine Scripturis testibus non habent fidem: Origin. in Epist.
ad Roma. Lib. 10. Cap. 16. Ex Solis. Origin. in Hieremt. Homi. 1. August. De
Natura and Gratia, Ca 61.
Our Judgments, and Expositions without witness of the Scriptures have no
credit. Likewise S. Augustine, Ego Solis Canonicis Scripturis debeo sine vlla
recusatione consensum: My consent without exception I owe ( not unto any
Father, were he never so well learned, but) Only to the Holy Canonical
Scriptures. His reason is this: Nam cum Dominus ^acuerit, quis nostrum dicat,
Illa, vel illa sunt? Aut si dicere audet, vnde probat? For where as the Lord
him self has not spoken, who of us can say, It is this, or that? Or if he
dare say so, how can he prove it?

And therefore he concludes directly and in like words with S. Ambrose:
Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 96. August. De Pastorib. Ca. 14.
Ego vocem Pastoris inquiro. Lege hoc mihi de Propheta: Lege de Psalmo: Recita
de Lege: Recita de Euangelio: Recita de Apostolo: I require the voice of the
Shephearde: Read me this matter out of the Prophet: Read it me out of the
Psalms: Read it out of the Law: Read it out of the Gospel: Read it out of
the Apostles.

The Apology, Cap. 10. Division. 1.
Wherefore if we he Heretics, and they (as they would feign be called) be
Catholics, why do they not, as they see the Fathers, which were Catholic
men, have always done? Why do they not convince and master us by the Divine
Scriptures? Why do they not call us again to be tried by them? Why do they
not lay before us, how we have gonne away from Christ, from the Prophets,
from the Apostles, and from the Holy Fathers?

Why stick they to do it? Why are they afraid of it? It is Gods cause: Why
are they doubteful to commit it to the trial of Gods Word? If we be
Heretics which refer al our controversies unto the Holy Scriptures, and
report us to the self same Words, which we know were sealed by God him
self, and in comparison of them, set little by all other things, what so ever
may be divised by men, how shall we say to these folk, I pray you: what
manner of men be they, and how is it meet to call them, which fear the
judgment of the Holy Scriptures, that is to say, the Judgment of God him
self, and do prefer before them their own dreams, and full cold
inventions: and to maintain their own Traditions, have defaced and corrupted
now these many hundred years the ordinances of Christ, and of the Apostles?

M. Hardinge.
We do so. For they condemned those that went against the Tradition of the
Fathers, and so do we. Johan. 14.
The Scriptures consiste not in ink and paper, but in the sense. Which sense
the Holy Ghost by Christ's promise has taught the Church.

Epiphanius refutinge the Heretics which named them selves Apostolikes,
Haereei. 61. Scripture nesdeth Speculatio^. Tradition necessa^ie, because
Scripture has not al things. Recognition. Lib. 10.
says, that the Scriptures have need of Speculation that is to wit, to be
well studied and considered) to the end the force and power of every argument
may be known. It behooves us also (says he) to use the Tradition: For we
can not have al things of the Holy Scripture. Thus Epiphanius. By Tradition
without doubt he means the sense and understanding received of the Fathers.
For that is the Keie of the Word of God, as S. Peter taught, by report of S.
Clement. This sense and understanding of the Law had the Ministers of the
Law, to whom the Traditions of Moses and of the Elders came as it were by
hands. Now we require you to admit this Tradition, that is to say, the
Catholic sense and understanding of the Scriptures, which has benne
delivered unto us by the Holy Fathers of al Ages, and of al Countries, where
the Faith has benne received. And then we will call you again to be tried by
the Scriptures.

This have the Catholics laid before you oftentimes, and this do we show
you in this Confutation. L^c. 10.
He that despises you, despises me, says Christ of his Church. Ye
despise the Catholic Church, and therefore ye despise Christ.

What need so many questions Sirs? Your hot Rhetorike shows more courage in
word, then Victory in deed. Ye call us forth to the Scriptures, Great
bragges made by the Defenders, of thassurance of the Scriptures.
as it were to the field. Ye strike us down with words, before ye come to
encounter. To show your bravery in the mo^stre, ye refer your controversies
unto the Holy Scriptures, ye report you unto the words sealed by God
himself: but we the Catholics, as ye pretend, stick at it: we be afraid of
it, we doubt of the matter, we fear the Judgment of Holy Scriptures, we
prefer our own dreams and cold inventions. Well, now that ye have told
your lusty tale, hear our sober answer. Often^ times the true Scriptures are
stretched forth to serve evil and false purposes. The Jews went about by the
Scriptures to prove, that Christ was not so much as a I^ophete. Johan. 7.
For they said, Untruth: For the words are otherwise.
Search the Scriptures, and see, that a Prophet rises not out of Galiley. By
the Scriptures they would needs show him worthy to die. Johan. 19.
We have a Law, quod they, and by our Law he ought to die, because he has
made him self the Son of God The Devil by alleaginge Scripture, would have
deceived our Savior him self, and said unto him: Scriptum est, Matthew. 4. De
Fide. li. 2. c. ^ Mark. 10.
It is written. The Arians were full of the Scriptures, and by the same, as S.
Ambrose writes, went about to prove, that Christ the author of al goodness
was not good. It is written, quoth they, Nemo bonus nisi vnus Deus, None is
good, but only God. Likewise the Macedonians, the Nestorians, the Eutychians.

Now in this case, your selves dooinge the like, what may we do better, then
honor the Scriptures, and seek for their right Sense and Understanding?
Scriptum est, It is Scripture (says S. Ambrose to the allegation of the
Arians) I acknowledge, but the letter has not the error: would God the Arians
interpretation had not. Apices sine crimine sunt, sensus in crimine. The
letters be without crime: the sense is in crime. Hilari. De Trinita. Li. ^.
From the understanding comes Heresy, not from the Scripture: the sense, not
the word, becomes to be a crime, says S. Hilary, Since then al stands
in the sense, let us agree first upon the sense and interpretation of the
Scriptures: and then if we be not as ready as ye, come forth when ye list,
vpbraide us hardely, and say lustely, as here ye do, why stick they to do
it? why are they afraid of it?

As for the true sense and interpretation of the Scriptures, where shall we
find it, but, as before we said, Matthae 7. Johan. 4. Esai. 59.
in the Catholic Church? The Church having Christ remaininge with it al
days to the end of the world, having by promise of Christ the Sprite of
truethe, remaininge in it for ever, having by Gods own ancient promise both
the words, which the Father has put in the mouth of Christ, and the
Sprite which he put in him, whereby it may understand the meaning of Gods
words: we may not now seek for the true sense, understanding, and
interpretation of the Scriptures any where, but in the Church. Your own
Doctor John Calvin him self* In Epist. ad H^braeos.
whom ye follow and esteem so mutche, admonishes very well, and says, it is
specially to be noted, that out of the Church there is no light of the sound
understanding of the Scriptures. This ground being laid, on which each
part must stand and be tried in, crow no more against us, boast your selves
no more: Untruth.
We fear not the judgment of the Holy Scriptures. Nay it is your selves,
that fear this judgment. For your own conscience tells you that on this
ground ye are the weaker side. If ye stand with us on this ground, ye shall
never be able to defend your Master John Caluines doctrine touching
Baptism, Untruth. For he debaseth not the Sacrament of Baptism
which h^^^aketh to be of so little force, against the manifest Scripture: Let
every one of you (says S. Peter) be Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, to
Remission of Sins. Keepinge this ground Untruth.
ye shall be borne from your Doctrine touching Absolution, denyinge the Priest
to have power to absolve penitentes by his Priestly Authority, but by
Preachinge the Gospel to them, contrary to the plain Scripture: Whose Sins
ye ^orgeue, they are forgeuen to them: Whose ye retain, they are retained. If
ye refuse not this ground, ye shall be forced to restore the Sacrament of
extreme Unction* and the use of Holy Oil again, which ye have abandoned.

For what have ye to say against the Scripture, Jacob. 5.
It any sick among you? Let him cause the Priests of the Church to come in
to him, anointinge him with Oil, in the name of our Lord? Ab^dinge in this
ground, ye shall be driven to forsake your Zwinglian doctrine, which puts
Signs and Figures I only in the Sacrament of the Altar, for the True and
Real Body of Christ there 2 present. Three and dente Untruths.
contrary to the 3 clear Scripture, This is my Body. Being on this ground,
ye shall soon give over the maintenance of the Doctrine of your special Faith,
and of your Justification by Faith only, Jacob. 2.
as being contrary to the plain Scripture, Man is justified by works, and
not by Faith only. To conclude (for, to show in how many points ye may be
confuted by evident Scriptures, it were in manner infinite) if ye will admit
this for a good ground, as ye midste needs admit: then shall ye not
maintain the Presumptuous Doctrine of your certainty of Grace and Salvation,
contrary to that S. Paul counsels, Philip. 2.
With fear and tremblinge work your Salvation.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Whereas we make reasonable request^, that God may be vmpeere in his own
cause, and that al our controversies may be judged, and tried by the Holy
Scriptures, M. Hardinge thereto answeareth thus: The Scripture stands not in
the Words, but in the Sense: and the same Sense is continued by Tradition in
the Church. Otherwise, he says, the Jews, the Arians, the Nestorians, the
Eutychians, and al other Heretics were always hable to claim by the
Scriptures. To conclude, he makes up a great empty heap, of the force of
Baptism, of Holy Oil, of Extreme Unction, of Absolution of Signs, of
Figures, of Only Faith, and, as it likes him to call it, of the
Presumptuous Doctrine of the Certainetie of Salvation: in every of which
things, he says, the Scriptures are clear of his side, and directly against
us.

To answears al these points in particulare, it would require an other Book.
But briefly to touch so mutche only, as shall be needeful, First, that the
Substance of the Scriptures stands in the right Sense, and Meaning, and not
only in the naked, and bare words, it is true, and generally granted
without exception, and needs no farther proof. Hiero^y. contra Luciferian.
Hilari. De Triuitate, Li. 4.
S. Hierome says, Non in Legendo, sed in Intelligendo Scripturae consistunt:
The Scriptures stand, not in the Readinge, but in the Understanding. And S.
Hilarie, Non Diuinorum dictorum, sed intelligentiae nostrae a nobis ratio
praestanda est: We must yield an accoumpte, not of Gods Divine Words,
but of our own Expositions.

But if that only be the right Meaning, and Sense of the Scriptures, that
within these few late hundred years is cropen into the Church of Rome: and
if it be al Gospel, what so ever it be, that arriueth from thence: and if they
be al Heretics, and Schismatiques, and Despisers of Christ, and of the
Apostles, and of the Uniuersal Church, that make stay at it, or cannot
receive it, then is the whole matter already concluded: we shall need no more
adoo.

Ye say, The Jews, the Arians, the Nestorians, and other Heretics alleged
the Scriptures. Yea verily, M. Hardinge, and that even with like Faith, and in
like Sense, and to like purpose, as you allege them now: as hereafter, I
trust, it shall appear. By the way, for example hereof, in this very place,
where you allege the words of the Pharise is auouchinge the Scriptures,
Johan. 7. (...). Chrysostom. Augustinus.
it may please you to remember, that either witingly, or of some error, and
oversight, ye have manifestly corrupted the Scriptures. For, whereas you have
translated the place thus, Search the Scriptures: the Phariseis said nothing
else, but Scrurare, and Vide, Search, and see: and spoke not one word of the
Scriptures. And although the matter importe not mutche, yet to charge you with
your own rule, which must needs be good against your self, any small fault
in Gods Word must be counted great. In deed S. Chrysostom, and S.
Augustine seem to supply this word, Scriptures, although it were not in the
Text.

Touching the matter it self, Oil. Figure. Sign.
Nicolas Lyra says, Nicol. Lyra in 7. Cap. Johan.
Hoe Verbum eorum simpliciter falsum est. Quia, si intelligatur de Prohetis
generaliter, aliqui fuerunt nati de Galilaea: videlicet, Elizaeus, Tobias, and
Debora Prophetissa, and forte plures alij; This word of the Phariseis is
plainly false. For if it be taken generally of al Prophets, then were there
certain of them borne in Galilei, namely Elizaeus, Tobias, Debora, and
perchance others more. In such sort, M. Hardinge, even with like Faith and
credit, you also have used, to allege the Scriptures.

But whereto drive you all this long tale? Will you in the end conclude thus:
The Jews, and Heretics alleged the Scriptures: Ergo, Faitheful Christians
may not allege them? Or thus, Thieves have sometimes armed them selves: Ergo,
True men may not be armed? Nay, we may rather say thus unto you: The
Jews, and Heretics alleged the Scriptures: What accoumpte then may we make
of you, that flee, and condemn, and burn the Scriptures?

Certainly notwithstanding the Phariseis, Johan. 5.
and Heretics wickedly misalleged the Scriptures, as ye sometimes do to
scrue your purpose, yet for all that, Christ said unto them, Scrutamini
Scripturas: Search the Scriptures: And, Cap. 9. Diuisi. ^
as it is said before, the Catholic learned Fathers in all their cases, and
controversies appealed evermore to the Scriptures.

Where you say, The Scriptures are so clear of your side* and make so
directly against us: would God ye would in deed, and unfeignedly stand to
that trial. Your fancies, and folies would soon come to ground.

Touching your great heap of examples, of the Sacrament of Baptism
defaced, as you say, by M. Calvin: of Absolution, of Extreme Unction, of Holy
Oil, of Signs, of Figures, of Only Faith, and of the certainetie of
Salvation, which you call Presumptuous: First of the Sacrament of Baptism,
M. Calvin every where writes with all manner reverence, calling it a Divine,
and an Heavenly Mystery, and the Sacrament of our Redemption: Wherein also
sometimes he justly reprooueth you, for that ye have so many ways, so
profanely, and so irreverently abused the same. Of Absolution we shall have
occasion to say more hereafter.

Touching your Oil, in deed in show of words, S. James seems to make
somewhat for you. Notwithstanding neither doothe he call it Holy Oil, as ye
do: neither doothe he call it a Sacrament of the Church: nor doothe he
say, as ye say, it should serve for the Salvation of Body, and Soul: nor
doothe he teach you to salute it, and to speak unto it, as to a lively, and
reasonable Creature, Aue Sanctum Oleum, Alhaile Holy Oil: nor with these
words to minister it unto the sick: Per hanc Sanctam Vnctionem, and suam
pijssima^ Misericordiam, ignoscat tibi Deus: By this Holy enointinge, and his
dear mercy, God Pardonne thee. To be short, it was a miraculous gift of
Healinge, lasting only, as other like Miracles did, for the time: not a
necessary Sacrament of the Church to continewe for ever.

As for the Objection of Signs, and Figures, for shortness of time, The. 12.
Article.
I must refer thee, gentle Reader, unto my Former Reply to M. Harding. The
words of Christ, which are thought to be so plain, the Anciente Learned
Father Tertullian expounds thus: Tertullian. contra Marcion. Lib. 4. Figure.
Sign.
Hoc est Corpus meum: Hoc est, Figura Corporis mei: This is my Body: that is to
say, This is a Figure of my Body. Likewise S. Augustine, Non dubitauit Dominus
dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum daret Signum Corporis sui: Our Lord doubted
not to say, This is my Body, when he gave a Sign of his Body.

To rehearse al other like Ancient Authorities, it were too long. O what
triumphs would M. Hardinge make, if none of all the Old Learned Fathers could
be found, that ever had called the Sacrament, the Sign, and Figure of
Christ's Body? But, as before he alleged an imagined Sense of the Scriptures
without words, Only Faith.
so now he allegeth the words alone without sense. He should have remembered
better, that S. Hierome says, Ne putemus, Hierony in ^pist. ad Gala. Cap. ^.
in Verbis Scripturarum esse Euangelium, sed in Sensu: Let us not think, the
Gospel stands in the Words of the Scriptures, but in the Meaning.

Two other great quarelles M. Hardinge moves: the one of Only Faith: the
other, as he calls it, of the Presumptuous Certainetie of Salvation. Wherein
judge thou uprightly, good Christian Reader, how just cause he has to
reprove our Doctrine.

As for the first hereof, Roma. ^.
S. Paul says, Iustificamur Gratis ex Gratia ipsius: We be Justified Freely
of his Grace: we Judge that a man is Justified by Faith, without the Works
of the Law: We know, that a man is not Justified by the Works of the
Law, but by the Faith of Christ. M. Hardinge will say, Yet hitherto of, Sola
Fides, that is, of Only Faith, we hear nothing. Notwithstanding, when S.
Paul excludes al manner Works bisides Only Faith, what else then leaves
he, but Faith alone?

How be it, if it be so horrible an Heresy, to say, We be Justified before
God by Only Faith, that is to say, Only by the Merits and Cross of
Christ, let us see, what the Holy Learned Fathers of the Church so many
hundred years ago, have taught us thereof.

S. Ambrose says, Ambros. in ^pist ad Roman. Cap 4.
Iustificati sunt Gratis, quia nihil Operantes, neque vicem reddentes, Sola
Fide Iustificati sunt dono Dei: They are Justified Freely: Because woorkinge
nothing and requitinge nothing, Ambros. Eode^ loco
they are Justified by Only Faith through the gift of God. Again, Sic
decretum est a Deo, vt, cessante Lege, Solam Fidem Gratia Dei posceret ad
Salutem: This was Gods determination, that, the Law surceasinge, the Grace
of God should require Only Faith unto Salvation. Ambros. in Epist. ad Roma.
Ca. 9. Basil. De Humintlitate: (...). Theodorer. De Curandis Graecorum
affectibus. Lib. 7. Nazia^. (...). Origin. in Epist. ad Roma. C^. 3. Li. 3.
Hesychi. in Leuiti. Li. 4. Chrysostom. in Epist ad Galat. Cap. 3.
And again, Sola Fides posita est ad Salutem: Only Faith is said, or
appointed unto Salvation. S. Bastle says, Nouis se esse inopem Verae
Iustitiae: Sola autem Fide in Christum esse Iustificatum: He knows him self
to be void of True Righteousness: and to be Justified by Only Faith in
Christ.

Theodoretus says, Non vllis Operibus nostris, sed per Solam Fidem Mystica
bona consequuti sumus: Not by any Works of ours, but by Only Faith we have
gotten the Mystical good things.

Nazianzenus says, (...): Credere solum est Iustitia: Only Beleeuinge is
Righteousness.

Origin says, Vbi est gloriario tua? Exclusa est. Dicit sufficere Solius
Fidei Iustificationem: ita vt credens quis Tantu^modo Iustificetur, etia^si
Nihil boni Operis fecerit: Where now is thy boastinge ( of thy good Works)?
It is shut out. Paul says, that the Justification of Only Faith is
Sufficient: So that a man Only Beleeuinge may be Justified, although he have
done no good work at al.

Hesychius says, Gratia ex Misericordia, atque Compassione praebetur, and
Fide comprehenditur Sola: The Grace of God is given only of Mercy, and
Pauoure: and is embraced, and received by Only Faith.

I leave a great number of others, that have written the like, as well Greeks,
as Latins. In steed of them al, S. Chrysostom says thus: Illi dicebant,
Qui Sola Fide nititur, Execrabilis est: Hic contra demonstrat, eum, qui Sola
Fide nititur, Benedictum esse: They said, who so staieth him self by only
Faith, is accursed: Contrar^ewise S. Paul proves, that who so stays him
self by Only Faith, he is Blessed.

Touching the words of S. James, if M. Hardinge well considered the
Equivocation, or double understanding of this word, Justification, he might
soon, and easily have espied his own error. Roma. 4.
For when S. Paul says, Abraham was Justified by Faith without Works of
the Law, he teaches us, how Abraham was received into favor, and Justified
before God: Of the other side, S. James, when he says, Certainetie of Faith.
Abraham was Justified by Works, and not by Faith Only, he speaks of the
works that follow Justification, and of the Fruits of Faith: Without which
Fruits Abraham's Faith had benne no Faith.

S. Augustine says, Non sunt contrariae duorum Apostolorum Sententiae,
August. in. Li 83. quae. Quae. 76. Jacob. 5.
Pauli, and Iacobi: Cum dicit Paulus, Iustificari hominem sine Operibus: and
Iacobus dicit, inanem esse Fidem sine Operibus. Quia Paulus loquitur de
Operibus, quae Fidem praecedunt: Iacobus de ijs, quae Fidem sequntur: The
saieinges of the two Apostles, Paul, and James are not contrary, where as
Paul says, A man is Justified without Works: and James says, Faith
without Works is in vain. For Paul speaks of the Works that go before
Faith: James speaks of the Works, that follow after Faith.

If M. Hardinge shall think, S. Augustines authority herein is not sufficient,
Thomas of Aquine will auouche ye same. His words be these: Thomas Aquin. in
Epist. Iacobi. Cap. 5.
Iacobus hic loquitur de Operibus sequentibus Fidem: quae dicuntur Iustificare,
non secundum quod Iustificare dicitur Iustitiae infusio: sed secundum quod
dicitur Iustitiae Exercitatio, vel Ostensio, vel Consummatio. Res enim dicitur
fieri, quando perficitur, vel innotescit: James in this place speaks of
such works, as follow Faith: which works are said to Justify, not as
Justification is the procuring of Righteousness: but in that it is an
Exercise, or a shewinge, or a Perfitinge of Righteousness. For we say, A
thing is done, when it is perfited, or known to be done.

Now concerning the assurance, or Certainetie of Salvation, the Scriptures
are fulle. S. Paul says, There is no damnation to them that be in Christ
Jesus: Roma. 8.
The Sprite of God bears witness to our Sprite, that we are the Children of
God: I know, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Powers, nor
Principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor Highth, nor
Deapthe, nor duy Creature else shall be hable to remove me from that Love, that
God bears to wards me in Christ Jesus our Lord.

But for as mutche as these words perhaps have not the Sense of the Church
of Room, without which, in M. Hardinges judgment, the Scripture of God is
no Scripture, let us see the Sense, and Exposition of the Holy Fathers.

Tertullian says, Vt certum esset, nos esse Filios Dei, misit Spiritum suum
in corda no^tra clamantem, Tertull. Contra Marcion. Lib. 5.
Abba, Pater. That we might be certified, that we be the Children of God, he
has sent the Holy Ghost into our hearts, crieinge, Abba, Father.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Clemens in Paedagogo. li. 1. c. 6.
Re vera Sanguis Fidei est Spes, in qua continetur, vt Fides in anima. Cum
autem Spes expirauerit, perinde acsi sanguis effluxerit, vltalis Fidei facultas
dissoluitur: In deed Hope is; as it were, the Bloudde of Faith: in which
Faith Hope is contained, even as Faith is contained in the Soul. And when
Hope is gonne, then is all the Lively power of Faith dissolved, as if the
Bloudde were sheadde out of the Body.

S Cyprian says, Et tu dubitas, and fluctuas? Hoc est Deum omnin^ non nosse:
Cyprian. De Mortalita. Sermon. 4.
Hoc est Christum Credentium Magistrum peccato incredulitatis offendere: Hoc
est, in Ecclesia constitutum, Fidem in Domo Fidei non habere: And dooste thou
stagger, and stand in doubt ( of thy Salvation)? That were as mutche as not
to know God: that were as mutche as with the sin of unbelief, to offend
Christ the Master of Believers: That were as mutche as being in the Church,
in the House of Faith, to have no Faith.

Prosper says, Prosper, De promiss and Praedictionib. Dei. Par. 1. Ca. 16.
Securi diem Iudicij expectant, quibus in Cruce Domini gloriantibus mundus
Crucifixus est, and ipsi Mundo: They, unto whom the world is Crucified, and
are Crucified unto the world, wait for the day of Judgment without fear.

But to leave the Ancient Fathers of old time, and to put the matter quite out
of doubt, One Antonius Marinarius in the late Council of Tridente in open
audience said thus: Si Coelum ruat, si Terra euanescat, si Orbis illabatur
praeceps, Council. Tridentin. Act. 1. Anno. 1546.
ego in eum erectus ero. Si Angelus de Coelo aliud mihi persuadere contendat,
dicam illi Anathema. Certainetie of Faith.
O Foelicem Christiani pectoris fiduciam: If the Heaven should fall, if the
Earth should vanishe, if the whole world should come down headlonge, yet
would I stand priest, and bold before God. If an Angel from Heaven would
tell me otherwise, I would accurse him. O the Blessed trust ( and certainetie)
of a Christian Heart.

Certainly, M. Hardinge, it were a very Presumptuous part, to say, that
these Fathers, Greeks, Latins, New, Old, your own, and ours, were al
Presumptuous. If it be so Presumptuous a matter to put affiance in the Merits
of Christ, what is it then, to put affiance in our own Merits? S. Paul has
taught us to say, Galat. 6. Basil in Psalm 32. (...).
God forebidde that I should glory, but only in the Cross of Christ. S.
Basile says, Qui non fidit suis Meritis, nec expectat ex Operibus
Iustificati, Vna^, and Solam spem habet salutis suae, Misericordias Domini: Who
so trusts not in his own Merits, nor looks to be Justified by his own
Works, has his only hope of Salvation in the Mercies of our Lord.

So says Job in all his miseries, Etiamfi me occiderit, sperabo in eum.
Veruntamen vias meas in conspectu eius arguam: Job. 13. Psalm. 70.
Although he kiss me, yet will I put my trust in him: Notwithstanding I will
reprove my ways before his sight. So y^ Prophet David, In thee O Lord have
I trusted: I will never be confounded. This is no Presumption, but a patiente,
and an humble waitinge for the Redemption of the Children of God. It is most
true, Philip. 2.
that S. Paul says, We must work our own Salvation with fear, and
tremblinge. But this fear rises in consideration of our own weakness, and
unworthiness: not of any distruste, or doubt in Gods mercy. But rather
the less cause we find to trust in our selves, the more cause we have to
trust in God. August. De verbis Domi. Sermo. 28.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Praesume, non de Operatione tua, sed de Christi
Gratia. Gratia enim saluati estis, inquit Apostolus. Non ergo hic Arrogantia
est, sed Fides. Praedicare quod acceperis, non est Superbia, sed Deuotio:
Presume thou, not of thine own woorkinge, but of the Grace of Christ: For the
Apostle says, Ye are saved by Grace. Here therefore is not Presumption, but
Faith. To proclaim that thou haste received, it is no Pride, it is Devotion.

Again he says, August. in Johan. Tracta. 22. Basil. De humilitate: (...).
Non mea Praesumptione, sed ipsius Promissione in iudicium non venio: It is not
of my Presumption, but of his Promise, that I shall not comme into Judgment.
S. Basile says, Paulus Gloriatur de contemptione Iustitiae suae: Paul (
presumes, and) boasts of the contempt of his own Righteousness. So says
S. Ambrose: Non gloriabor, quia iustus sum: sed quia redemptus sum, gloriabor:
Non quia vacuus sum a peccatis, sed quia mihi remissa sunt peccara. Non
gloriabor, quia profui, neque quia profuit mihi quisquam: sed quia pro me
Aduocatus apud Patrem Christus est: sed quia pro me Christi Sanguis effusus
est: I will not glory, for that I am a just man: But for that I am redeemed,
therefore will I glory: Not for that I am void of sin: Ambros. de Iacabo,
and vita Beata.
but for that my Sins be forgeeuen me. I will not glory, for that I have
done good to any man, nor for that any man has done good to we: but for
that Christ is my Advocate with the Father, and for that Christ's Bloudde was
shead for me.

Therefore S. Augustine says, August. Confess. Lib. 11. Cap. 7.
Quid retribuam Domino, quo'd recolit haec memoria mea, and anima mea non
meruit inde? What shall I render unto our Lord, for that I call to
remembrance al these my sins, and yet my Soul thereof is not afraid?

To be short, thus says S. Bernarde: Bernard. in Ca^ti. Cantico. Sermo. 61.
Vbi tura firmaque infirmis securitas, and requies, nisi in vulneribus
Saluatoris? Tant^ illic securior hab^to, quant^ ille potentior est ad
saluandum, etc. Peccaui peccatum grande: turbatur conscientia, sed non
perturbabitur: quoniam vulnerum Domini recordabor. Nempe vulneratus est propter
iniquitates nostras: What safe teaste or sur^tie can the weak Scule find, but
in the w^^^des of our Saueour? As he is mightier to save, so dwell I there with
more safety etc. I have committed a great Since: My conscience is troubled:
Yet shall it not be shaken down: because I will remember my Lords wounds.
Esai. 53.
For he was wounded for our Sins.

Thus, M. Hardinge, to be assured of our Salvation, S. Augustine says, it is
no arrogante stoutness: It is our Faith. It is no Pride: It is Devotion. It
is no Presumption: It is Gods Promise.

But your whole Doctine of the trust in Men's Merits leads directly to
Desperation. And therefore S. Cyprian says well of you: Cyprian. De Simpli.
Praela.
Asserunt Noctem pro Die: Interitum, pro Salute: Desperationem; sub obtent
Spei. Perfidiani, sub praetex^u Fidel: Antichristum, sub vocabulo Christi: They
teach^ us Night in steed of Day: Dei struction in tleede of Health:
Desperation under the color: of Hope: Infidelity under the pretense of
Faith: Antichriste under the name of Christ.

Now a little to view the grounds of M. Hardinges long discourse: whereas he
so often and so earnestly tells us of the Sense of the Scriptures, as if we
had Scriptures without Sense, his meaning thereby is only to lead us away
to the Sense of the Church of Rome: Alberius Piggh. Hierar. li. 1. ca. 4.
Ecki^s De Ecclesia.
Which Sense, Albertus Pigghius says, Is the Infallible, and Inflexible Rule
of Truth. Echius says, Scriptura, nisi Ecclesiae Authoritate, non est
Authentica: The Scriptures of God are not Authentical, or of credit, but only
by the warrante and Authority of y^ Church. And Hosius in like manner,
Apostoli, Hosius in Confessione vetricouien. Ca. 80.
cum Symbolum traderem, nunquam dixerunt, Credo Sancta Biblia, aut Sanctum
Euangelium: sed dixerunt, Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam: The Apostles, when they
delivered the Creed, they never said, I believe the Holy Bible, or the Holy
Gospel: but they said, I believe the Holy Church. Thus now the matter is sure
yenough for ever. We have neither Scriptures, nor Sense of Scriptures, but
only from Rome.

I will not here report the unsavory Senses, that they have imagined of the
Scriptures. One example, or two for a taste may be sufficient. Pope Boniface
says thus, De Mayor. and Obedien. Vnam Sanctam. Psalm. 8. Antonen. in Summa,
Par. 3. Titu. 22. Ca. 5. Hebraeo. 2.
Ecce duo Gladij h^c: Behold here are two Swerdes: That is to say, The Pope
has the power both of the Spiritual Sword, and of the Temporal.

An other says: Omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius, id est, Papae: Pecora
campi, id est, homines viuentes in terra: Pisces maris, id est, animas in
Purgatorio: Volueres Coeli, id est, animas Beatorum: These words S. Paul
applies only unto Christ, meaning thereby, that God has auanced him above
al Powers, and Dominions, and that al things are subject unto him. But the
Roman Sense is far otherwise: Thou haste made al things subject unto him,
that is to say, to the Pope: The Cattaile of the Field, that is to say,
Men living in the Earth: The Fishes of the Sea, that is to say, the Souls
in Purgatories The Birds of the Heavens, that is to say, the Souls of the
Blessed in Heaven. I leave M. Hardinges own peculiar Expositions, M. Hard. in
his Former Answer. Artic. 2 M. Hardinge ^ Articulo. 2. and 10.
Drink ye al of this, that is to say, as he geathereth in Conclusion, Drink
ye not al of this: It is the Substance, that is to say, It is the Accidens.

By such pretty Senses, I will not say, as S. Hierome says, De Euangelio
Christi facitis hominis Euangelium, aut, quod peius est, Diaboli: Of the Gospel
of Christ, ye make the Gospel of a Man: or, that is worse, the Gospel of the
Devil: I will not so say: Hieronym. in Epis. ad Gala. Cap. 1
But thus may I say with the Prophet Esal, Ye make Light Darkness: and
Darkness Light.

Yet must we needs believe, upon M. Hardinges Word, that the Scripture
without the Sense of the Church of Rome is no Scripture. Esai. 5. Hosius de
expresso Verbo Dei.
And therefore Hasius says, Si quis ha^eat interpretationem Ecclesiae Romanae
de loco aliquo Scripturae, etiamsi nec sciat, nec intelligat, an, and quomodo'
cum Scripturae verbis conueniat, tamen habet ipsissimum Verbum Dei: If a man
have the exposition of the Church of Rome, touching any place of the
Scriptures, although he neither know, nor understand, whether, and how it
agrees with the words of the Scripture, yet he has the very Word of God.
So says Rabbi Abraham Hispanus, Rabbi Abraham.
speakinge of the expositions of the Rabbines, Licet videantur nobis verba
nostra esse vera, and recta, nobis tamen Veritas abijcienda est in terram: quia
Veritas cum illis est: Not withstanding^ our Expositions seem to us never so
True, and right, Scripture, Tradition.
yet must we throw our. Truth to the ground: For the Truth in deed is
with them. Lyra likewise reports the common opinion the Jews had of their
Rabines: Lyra. in Deuteron. Cap. 17.
Recipiendu^r est, quicquid hoc modo proponatur, etiamsi dicant Dextrant esse
Sinistram: We must needs receive, what so ever they lay unto us, yea
although they tell us, The Right hand is the Left.

Now, gentle Reader, that thou maiste the better see the constancy, and
certainetie of these Senses, and Expositions, whereunto M. Hardinge labors
so earnestly to have thee bound, it may please thee to consider these words
of Nicolaus Cusanus sometime Cardinal in the Church of Rome: Nicolaus Cusanus
De Author. Eccle. and Council. Supra, and Con. Scripturam.
Non est mirum, si Praxis Ecclesiae vno tempore interpre^atur Scripturam vno
modo: and alio tempore, alio modo. Nam lntellectus currit cum Praxi.
Intellectus enim, qui cum Praxi concurrit, est Spiritus Viuificans. Sequuntur
ergo Scripturae Ecclesiam, and non e conuerso: It is no marvel, though the
Practice of the Church expound the Scriptures at one time one way, and at an
other time an other way. For the understanding, or Sense of the Scriptures
renneth with the practice: and that sense so agreeinge with the practice is the
quickeninge Sprite. And therefore the Scriptures follow the Church: but
contrariewise the Church follows not the Scriptures. For such kinds of
Expositions of the Scriptures, S. Hilarie said sometime unto the Arians, Fides
ergo temporum magis est, quam Euangeliorum: The Faith therefore follows the
time, and not the Gospel.

This is the Sense of the Church of Rome, whereby only M. Hardinge wills us
to measure, and to weighe the Word of God. But the Ancient Father Origin
says, Origin. in Matthae. Homil. 25.
Sicut omne Aurum, quodcunque fuerit extra Templum, non est Sanctificatum: sic
omnis Sensus, qui fuerit extra Diuinam Scripturam, quamuis admirabilis videatur
quibusdam, non est Sanctus: quia non continetur a Sensu Scripturae: As what so
ever Gold is without the Temple, is not Sanctified: so what so ever Sense is
without the Holy Scripture, although unto some it seem wounderful, yet is it
not Holy, because it is not contained in the Sense of the Scripture.

To conclude, where as M. Hardinge says, we cannot understand the
Scriptures without Tradition, the ancient Father Irenaeus says, This is one
special mark, whereby we may know an Heretic: These be his words:
Haeretici cum arguuntur ex Scripturis, Ire^a. Li. 3. ca. 2.
in accusationem Scripturarum conuertuntur, quasi non recte habeant, nec sint
ex authoritate, and quod vary fint dictae, and quod ex his non possit inueniri
Veritas ab illis, qui Traditionem nesciunt: Heretics, when they be reproved
by the Scriptures, they fall to the accusinge of the Scriptures, as though
either they were not well and perfect, or wanted authority, or were doubtefully
uttered: or that they that know not the Tradition, were never hable by the
Scriptures to find out the Truth.

The Apology, Cap. 10. Division. 2.
Men say, that Sophocles the Tragical Poet, when in his old days he was by
his own Sons accused before the Judges, for a dotinge and sottishe man, as
one that fondely wasted his own Substance, and seemed to need a governor, to
see unto him: to the intent he might clear him self of the fault, he came
into the place of Judgment, and when he had rehearsed before them his
Tragedy called Oedipus Colonaeus, which he had written at the very time of
his accusation, marvelous exactely and cunningly, did ask the Judges in his
own behalf, whether they thought any sottishe or dotinge man could do the
like piece of Work. In like manner, because these men take us to be mad,
and appeache us for Heretics, as men which have nothing to do, neither
with Christ, nor with the Church of God, we have judged it should be to good
purpose, and not unprofitable, if we do openly and frankely set forth our
Faith wherein we stand, and show all that confidence which we have in
Christ Jesus: to the intent al men may see, what is our judgment of every
part of Christian Religion: and may resolve with them selves, whether the
Faith which they shall see confirmed by the Words of Christ, by the
Writings of the Apostles, by the Testimonies of the Catholic Fathers, and by
the Examples of many ages, be but a certain rage of Furious and mad men,
and a conspiracy of Heretics. This therefore is our belief.

M. Hardinge.
The comparison which ye make between your selves and Sophocles, gladly we
admit. Yet we acknowledge, that as in many respects ye are like, so in some
unlike. Sophocles was a Poet, that is to say, a fainer, and deviser of
things, that be not true, but fabulous: Ye also are fainers, and deuisers of
novelties, and folowers of New devises, that be false. Sophocles was a
Tragical Poet: ye are Tragical Divines. A Tragedy sets forth
thouerthrowes of Kingdoms, Murder of Noble Personages, and other great
troubles, and endethe in woeful lamentations. Your Gospel inuadeth Christ's
Heavenly Kingdom the Church, it murdereth souls bought with a most dear
price, it causethe a hellishe garbotle in men's consciences, in the end it
bringethe to everlasting weepinge and gnasshinge of teethe. We take you not
to be mad. Would God ye were not worse then mad. Were ye mad, ye
should be tied up. Else were ye suffered to goo abroad, for fear folk would
fly from you. And then should ye do little hurt. Now whiles ye offer
venomous kisses with sugered lips, whiles ye cover woluishe cruelty under
Lambs Skins, whiles ye hurt under pretense of benefit, wound under color
of a medicine, begyle unstable Souls with resemblance of Truth: neither stinte
ye to work mischief, nor others can beware of you.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O M. Hardinge, Sophocles him self, if he were alive, were not hable with all
his eloquence to express the Tragical dealinges of your Company. Your whole
life, Marti. Ruceru^. Paul. Phagius.
and Religion is nothing else, but a Tragedy. You have ripte up the graves,
and dug out the dead, and practiced your cruelty upon the poor innocente
cackesses.

Your Pope Stephanus took up Formosus his predecessors Body, chopte of his
forefingers, Platina in Stephano. 6. Sabellicus, Ennea. 9. Lib. 2. Sabellicus,
Enneade 9. Lib. 9. Beno Cardinalis
cut of his head, and threw out the naked carkesse into Tiber.

Your Pope John the twelfth cut of one of his Cardinales right hand, and an
others nose.

Your Pope Vrbanus the sixth thrust five of his Cardinales alive into sackes,
and threw them into the sea.

Your Pope Hildebrande poisoned six other Popes his predecessors, to make him
self room to the Holy Seat. They are so skilful there, in these feats, that
noman can tell, neither what to fly, nor what to take: nor whom to doubt,
nor whom to trust. They have conueighed their poison, I will not say into
their meats, or drinks, for that is over gross, and Common, but even into
their Mass Books, into the Sacrament, into the Chalice. Camotensis one of
their own side says well of them: Heb 9. Agrippa. De Vaeni. Scientiaru^
Sine Sanguinis effusione no^ ingrediuntur in Sancta Sanctorum: Without
sheaddinge of Blood they enter not into that Holy place, the Holy of Holies.

How be it, what spend I these words? It is not possible to say al, that
may be said. They have inflamed Wars: they have raised the Subjects against
their Princes: They have armed the Son against the Father: They have
overthrown Ci^ties, and Countries: They have deposed Kings: They have set
their feet on Emperors necks.

These matters, Mad.
M. Hardinge, be Tragical in deed. And herein stands the^ whole practice,
and Policy of your Church of Rome.

Where you think your self a sober man, in that you can so easily call us
mad, and worse then mad, you may remember, that this kind of eloquence
emo^gst you is Anciente, and Catholic, and may well stand with your
Religion. For so the False Prophet Semeias said, Hierem. 29. 4. Regum. 19.
that Hieremte the Prophet of God raued, and was stark mad. So the wicked
said unto Iehu, of Elizeus the Prophet, What has this mad Bedlem Body to
do with thee? Even so they said of Christ, Marci. 3. Augu. in Psalm. 6.
That he was mad, and spoke in fury, be knew not what. S. Augustine says
of S. Paul: Incidit in istorum sacrilegam dicacitate^: and ab eis, qui sanari
nolunt, vocatur insanus: S. Paul is fallen into their cursed raisinge: and of
them, that will never be made sober, is called a mad man. So says the
Ancient Father Origin, of Celsus the wicked Heathen: Origin. contra Celsum.
Lib. 4.
Videamus igitur nos, qui iuxta hunc insanimus: Let us therefore confider
hereof, that in this man's judgment are stark mad.

But, M. Hardinge, wherein are we so mad? or what tokens of madness have
we showed? Can noman either speak the Truth, or disclose your errors,
without madness? But, I trow, it is even as S. Hierome said sometime:
Delirabat, Hiero. Ad Pammachi. contra errores Johan. Hierosolymit. Leo in
Epiphan. Sermo. 5. Augu. in Psalm. 33.
scilicet, qui in ruo Regno contra tuam sententiam loquebatur: He raued, and
was mad, no doubt, that within thy Dominion spoke any thing against thy
mind. So says Leo, Insarris Magistris Veritas scandalum est, and Coecis
Doctoribus fit caligo, quod lumen est: Unto Frantique Masters the Truth is a
sclaunder: and unto Blind Doctors the light is becomme Darkness.

So says S. Augustine of king David: Insanire videbatur: Sed Regi Achis
insanire videbatur, id est, stultis, and ignorantibus: David seemed mad: But
unto King Achis be seemed mad, that is to say, unto fools, and idiotes.

As for our part, Actor. 26.
we remember, what answer S. Paul made unto Festus in the like case: O good
Festus, I am not mad: but I utter unto thee, the words of Truth, Hiero. in
Epitaphio Paulae.
and Sobriety. Therefore we may comfort our selves, as the Virtuous
Gentlewoman Paula did, when she was likewise supposed to be mad: Nos stulti
propter Christum: Sed stultum Dei sapientius est hominibus: we are judged
fools (and mad folks) for Christ's sake: But the foolishenesse of God is
wiser their men.

But, Cyprian. ad Cornelium.
M. Hardinge, S. Cyprian will tell you thus: Haec est, Frater, Vera dementia,
non cogitare, nec scire, quod mendacia non diu fallant: noctem tam diu esse,
quam diu illuce scat dies: O my Brother, this is madness in deed, not to
think, or know, that ( your) Lies cannot long deceive us: and that it is
Night no longer, but until the Day spring. This in deed is very madness.
And therefore Chrysostom says, Qui in manifestam foueam cadit, non negligens
dicitur, sed insanus: Who so falls into a pit, that liethe wide open, is
not said to be negligente, but stark mad.

The end of the first part.
The Second part.
The Apology, the first Chapter, Division. 1.
We believe, span^
that there is one certain Nature and Divine Power, which we call God: and
that the same is divided into Three equal Persons, into the Father, into the
Son, and into the Holy Ghost: and that they al be of one power, of one
Majesty, of one Eternity, of one Godhed, and of one Substance. And although
these Three Persons be so divided, that neither the Father is the Son, nor
the Son is the Holy Ghost, or the Father: yet nevertheless we believe, that
there is but one very God: And that the smne one God has created Heaven, and
Earth, and al things contained under Heaven.

We believe, that Jesus Christ the only Son of the Eternal Father (as
long before it was determined, before al beginninges) when the fullness of
time was come, did take of that Blessed, and Pure Virgin, both fleashe, and
all the Nature of Man, that he might declare to the world the secret and hid
Will of his Father: which will had benne laid up from before al Ages, and
Generations: And that he might full finishe in his Human Body the Mystery of
our Redemption: and might fasten our sins to the Cross, and also that
Ha^dwritinge, which was made against us.

We believe, that for our sakes he died, and was buried, descended into Hell,
the third day by the Power of his Godhed returned to life and rose again:
and that the fourtethe day after his Resurrection, whiles his Disciples
beheld and looked upon him, he Ascended into Heaven, Augu. Tract. 5^. in
Johan.
to fulfill al things, and did place in Majesty, and Glory the self same
Body, wherewith he was borne, wherein he lived on Earth, wherein he was iested
at, wherein he had suffered most paineful torments, and cruel kind of death,
wherein he rose again, and wherein he ascended to the Right Hand of the
Father, above al Rule, above al Power, al Force, al Dominion, and above every
name, that is named, not only in this world, Actor. 3.
but also in the world to comme: And that there he now sittethe, and shall
sit, til al things be full perfitted. And although the Majesty, and Godhed
of Christ be euerywhere abundantly dispersed, In Epist. ad Darsdanum.
yet we believe, that his Body, as S. Augustine says, must needs be still in
one place: and that Christ has given Majesty unto his Body, but yet has
not taken away from it the Nature of a Body: Co^^ra ^utychen. Lib. 1.
and that we must not so affirm Christ to be God, that we deny him to be
Man: and, as the Martyr Vigilius says, that Christ has leafte us as
touching his Human Nature, but has not leafte us as touching his Divine
Nature: Tulgent. ad Thras^mu^dum.
And y^ the same Christ, though he be Absent from us concerning his Manhed,
yet is ever Present with us concerning his Godhed.

From that place also we believe that Christ shall come again to execute that
General Judgment, as well of them whom he shall then find alive in the Body, as
of them that shall be already dead.

M. Hardinge.
In our Fathers days before any change in Religion was thought upon, Christen
people lived together in perfect unity. Neither is any man now ashamed of the
Apostles Creed.
If accoumpt of belife had been demanded, none was ashamed of the common
Apostles Creed. Every one constantly confessed, I believe in God the Father
Almighty Maker of Heaven and Earth, and in Jesus Christ, and so forth. But
since Luther brought a Untruth It was the Old.
New Gospel into the world, we have seen great diversity among men, not
only of Ceremonies, and Administration of the Sacraments, but also of the
Manifest Untruth: For we keep al one Creed.
Public Confession of the Faith. For as sundry Rulers, Countries, and commonweals received that new Doctrine: so their Preachers and Ministers have
set forth sundry Credes, and Confessions of their Faith.

S. Hilarie in his time complaininge there of, S Hilaries complaint of many
Faithes. One God, one Faith.
Now a days there be (says he) so many Faithes, as there be wills: so many
Doctrines, as there be manners: so many causes of blaspemies spring up, as
there be vices: whiles Faithes either are so written as we list, or so
understood as we list. And where as there is but one God, one Lord, one
Baptism, and according thereto one Faith, we step aside from that which
is the only Faith: and whiles mo faithes be made, they begin to come to
that point, that there be no Faith at al.

But the manner of the utterance of your Faith is strange to Christen ears,
The manner of the utterance of the defenders Faith strange to Christian ears.
who have been accustomed to hear, Credo in Deum, Credo in Iesum Christum,
Credo in Spiritum Sanctum: I believe in God, I believe in Jesus Christ, I believe
in the Holy Ghost. That other form of words, which you use, sounds not
so Christianlike. I believe there is a God, I believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of the Father, I b^liue that the Holy Ghost is God. Although this form
of words do express a right Faith, yet being such as may be uttered by
Devils, and has Untruth. For the Heretics said, I believe in God, as well
as did the Catholics.
always ben uttered by Heretics their Ministers: the Ancient and Holy
Fathers have liked better the Old form and manner, after which every Christen
man says, I believe in God, I believe in Jesus Christ, I believe in the Holy
Ghost. For this imports a signification of Faith with hope and charity:
that other of Faith only, which the Devils have and tremble, Jacob. ^.
as S. James says: wherein as in many other things these Defenders resemble
them. S. Augustine in sundry places putting a difference between these two
forms of words, vpo^s John alleging S. Paul's words, To one that believes
in him who justifies the wicked, his Faith is imputed to righteousness,
demao^deth, what is it to believe in him? It is by his answer, Credendo amare,
credendo diligere, credendo in eum ire, and eius membris incorporari: With
beleuinge to love him, with beleuinge to go into him, and to be incorporate in
his members, that is, to be made a member of his Body.

As this Defender proceeds in declaringe the belefe of his New English
Church, he grateth mutche upon the Article of Christ's Ascension, The Article
of Christ's ascensio^ mutche grated upon ^y the defenders to evil purpose. In
Johan. Tract. 30. Oportet for Potest.
as the manner is of al Zwinglians to do. For their mind gives them, thereby
they shall be able to bring at least many of the simpler sort to their
Sacramentarie Heresy, and to think, that the Body of Christ, wherein he
ascended into Heaven, and suteth at the right hand of the Father, is so absent
from Earth, as it may not be believed to be here present in the Sacrament of
the Altar. Thereto he alleagethe S. Augustine, making him to say, that
Christ's Body wherein he rose again, must needs be still in one place. In which
treatise that Holy Father has not the word, Untruth. For S. Augustines
word is, Oportet. S. Augustine knevve no such Body in the Sacrament.
Oportet, that is, must needs, as this Defender alleges, but this word,
Potest, that is, may, as the books have that be not corrupted by the
mainteiners of that Heresy. And where as he says, Ad Dardanum, alleged by
this defender, though Christ has given Majesty unto his Body yet he has
not taken away from it the Nature of a Body: this is not to be stretched to
Christ's Body in the Sacrament, where, it is not after condition of Nature, but
by the almighty power of his word. And although he has not taken away from
his Body the Nature of a very Body, yet may it please him to do with his Body,
being God nolesse then man, that, which is besides and above the Nature of a
Body. Matthae. 26.
So it pleased him to do, when he said, This is my Body. And so it pleases him
it be done, Vu^truthe. There is neither such Institution, nor such
commasideme^t.
whesoeuer the same Body is offered in the daily sacrifice of the Church
according to his commandment and institution. Diversity of creedes
That Vigilius says, Contra Eutyche^ Lib. 1.
How Christ has left to be now in Earth. 1. Joan. 1. Christ has
left us touching his Human Nature, but has not left us as touching his
Divine Nature: it is to be understood of his visible shape, in which he
showed his Human Nature, when he walked here on Earth, when he was so
co^uersant with men sensibly, that as S. John writethe they heard him with
their ears, they saw him with their eyes, they beheld him, and touched him
with their hands. As touching his Human Nature in this sensible wise,
Expositionis in Epist. Johan. Tract. 10.
Christ has left us, after which S. Augustine says, Iam non inuenis
Christum loqui in Terra: Now thou find not Christ to speak on the Earth.
This manner of Christ's Human Nature being taken from us withstandeth not,
but that we may have the substance of his natural Body and Blood present in the
blessed Sacrament in a mystery by the Almighty power of his word: which
Faith these defenders trauatle to impugn. And (as God would) the Penneman of
this Apology brings un wares, as it semethe, for confirmation of his
Sacramentarie Doctrine, that out of ^ulge^tius, Ad Thrasymundum Regem.
which overthrows all that he went about to build against the real presence.
That Father, as he is by him alleged, says, Christum, cum absit a nobis per
Forma^ Serui, tamen semper esse nobiscum per Forma^ Dei: That whereas Christ
is absent from us according to the Form of a servant, yet he is ever present
with us according to the Form of God. Whereby he means, that Christ is
no more here among men, as he was before his death, in Form and shape of man,
in such wise as we see men live on the Earth. Which words because they
seem to dasshe their whole purpose, Untruth. For Form and Substance are
both one.
the Prelates of this new English Church have altered the sense of them, by
shifting in this word (Manhed) instead of (the Form or shape of a servant)
which the Latin has, and this word (Godhed) instead of (the Form of God).

The B. of Sarisburie.
I marvel, M. Hardinge, that ye can publishe so manifest Untruth without
blusshinge. Ye say, that before these few late years, there was but one
Form of Faith throughout the world. Yet being learned, and having
travailed through the Ancient Writers, you must needs have seen the
Apostles Creed: the Nic^ne Creed: S. Basiles Creed: Damasus Creed: S.
Hieromes Creed: S. Cypria^s. or Rufines Creed: Gregory's Creed: the Creed
called, Quicunque vult, written, as some think, by Athanasius, as some others,
by Eusebius Vercellensis: the Creed contained in the Hymn called, Te Deum,
whether it were written by S. Augustine, or by S. Ambrose: every of these under
several, and sundry fourmes. You know, that in diverse of the Oldest
Councelles, as occasion was offered, so somewhat was either added to the
Creed, or diminished, or altered: as it may appear by Eusebius, Socrates,
Theodoretus, Sozomenus, Euagrius, Nicephorus, and others. You know, that S.
Augustine unto Laurentius, S. Hierome unto Cyrilius, S. Ambrose unto the
Emperor Gratianus, and others more in declaration of the Christian Faith, have
not always used one precise form of Words: and that the Emperor
Constantine makes open Protestation of his Faith, as it is recorded in your
Countrefeite Donation, in Sense, and Substance agreeing with all others, that
were Catholic: but in Words, far disagreeinge from al others, and peculiar
only to him self. To be short, you know, that between your Mass Creed,
and the peoples Common Creed, as touching the Words, there was great
difference. It were too long, to rehearse al. Neither was it necessary, to
say so mutche, sauinge only to show the manifest vanity of your talk. To
express one Substance of Faith in sundry Fourmes of Words, I never heard,
it was forbidden, sauinge only now at the last by this late Decree of M.
Hardinge.

Where you say, the whole people before these few late years had one Faith,
ye should rather have said, they were al taught by you in a strange unknown
Tongue, to pronounce, as they could, a strange unknown Form of Faith. For,
God knowethe, they understood not one word, what they said, nor scarcely
one Article of their Believe. S. Hilarie says, of the people deceived by the
Arians, as these have benne by you, To believe In God.
Credunt, quod non credunt: Intelligunt, quod non intelligunt: They Believe
that, Hilari. ad Constantium Imperatore^^. Coelius Rhodigin Antiquitat. Lib 3.
Cap. 32. August. De cap. (...) contra Dona^ist. Lib 3. Cap 14.
which they Believe not: they Understand that, which they Understand not.
Cardinal Ascanius had a Popiniay, that was taught to say distinctly all the
Articles of the Creed, from the beginning to the end. Yet, I trow, ye will
not say, the same Popiniay Believed in God, or understood the Christian
Faith. For Faith is in the Heart, not in the Tongue. S. Augustine says,
Fieri potest, vt integra quis teneat Verba Symboli, and tamen non recte credat:
It is possible, that a man may pronounce the whole words of the Creed: and
yet not have the right Faith.

In deed S. Hilarie, of whom ye speak, woorthily reproved the Arian He
retiques, for that they had altered the whole Faith of Christ, not only in
Woor^es, but also in Substance. But we having published sundry Confessions
of our Religion, as the Multitudes of your Abuses, and Errors offered
occasion, and that in sundry Countries, and Kingdoms, in such distance of
places, and diversity of Speeches, yet notwithstanding in the Substance, and
grounds of the Truth have evermore joined together, and never altered.

Where we say, We believe, there is one God, M. Hardinge answeareth, He
cannot well allow this Form of Speech. We should rather have said, says
he, we believe In God. Were not this Controller so importune, such simple
petite quarcelles should not be answered. I could never have thought, it had been so great a sin, to Believe, that God is God Verily, M Hardinge, if every
of your Popes, and Cardinals had believed so mutche, I trow, Cornelius the
Bishop of Bito^to in your late Council at Tridente would not so bitterly, and
in so open sort have cried out of them, Cornelius Bitontinus in Council.
Trident.
Vtinam non a Fide ad Infidelitate^, a Deo ad Epicurum, velut prorsus vnanimes
declinassent, dicentes in cord Impio, and ore impudico, Non est Deus: Would
God they were not gonne, as it were with one consent, from the Faith to
Infidelity, from God to Epicure, saieing with wicked h^rte, and shameless
mouth, There is no God.

If no Catholic Writer had ever used this self same Form of speech
before, then might M. Hardinges quarrel seem to have some reasonable ground.
But both S. Paul, and also many other Catholic Fathers have often used it.
S. Paul says, Hebrae. 11.
Accedentem ad Deum oportet Credere, Deum esse: He that comes to God, must
believe, that there is a God: And Hermes, S Paul's Scholar, commonly called
Pastor Nuntius, Pastor Nuntius. Origin. (...), in prooemio. Hilar. De ^rinitat.
Lib. 10. Symbolum Caroli Magni.
Ante omnia creed Vnum Deum esse, qui condidit omnia: Before al other things
believe, that there is One God, that has made al. Origin says, Primum
credendus est Deus, qui omnia creauit: First w^e must believe, there is a God,
that has created al things. S. Hilarie says, In absoluto nobis, and
facilis est Acternitas, Iesum Christum a mortuis suscitatum Credere: Our
everlasting life is ready, and casi, to believe, that Jesus Christ is risen
again from the dead: Likewise Charles the Great in the Creed published in
his name, Praedicandum est omnibus, vt credant, Patrem, Filium, and Spiritum
Sanctum Vnum esse Deum Omnipotentem: The Gospel must be preached unto al, to
the end they may know, that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost is one
God Almighty. To be short, even in our late Fathers days, this was counted a
Catholic Form of Faith, and was commonly taught in all Schools, Vnum Creed
Deum: Believe, that there is One God. If this were then well spoken, and
universally used, even in the Church of Rome, without rebuke, I trust, M
Hardinge of his Courtesy will no more blame us for speakinge well. As for these
Phrases ( I believe In God, I believe In Christ) although in deed they be
better, and more effectual, and carry more force then the other, Exodi. 14.
Exodt. 19. Basilius de Spir. Sanct. cap. 14. (...).
yet are they not, neither so peculiare, and special to God alone, nor so
precisely used, as M. Hardinge imagines. For it is written in the E^odus, as
it is noted by the skilful in the Hebrewe tongue, Populus credidit In Deum, and
In Mosen: The people believed In God, and In Moses: And God him self said
unto Moses, as it is likewise noted in ye Hebrewe: Descendam, vt populus In te
credat: I will go down, that the people mai^ believe In thee. S. Basile
says, Baptizati sunt In Mosen, and crediderunt In illum: They were Baptized
In Moses, and believed In him. And Hosius says, To believe In God. Christ's
Ascension
Quid si In Sanctos quoque recte credi docet Paulus? Hosius in Confessi.
Petricouien. Ca. 58. Socrates Li. 1. Ca. 25. Paschasi. L. 1. de Spiritu Sancto.
What if Paul teach us, that we may also well believe In Saints? And they
of M. Hardinges side have evermore well liked this Form of Speech, Credo in
Sanctam Ecclesiam: I believe In the Holy Church. Wherein also perhaps they
will allege these words of Socrates, and of some others, Credo In vnam
Catholicam Ecclesiam: I believe In one Catholic Church. Notwithstanding
beside S. Augustine, and others, Paschasius says, Credimus Ecclesiam, quasi
Regenerationis Martem: non Credimus In Ecclesiam, quasi Regenerationis
Authorem. Recede ergo ab hac persuasione blasphemiae. Non enim licet, nec In
Angelum Credere: We believe the Holy Church, as the Mother of Regeneration:
But we believe not In the Church, as the Author of Regeneration. Leave
therefore this persuasion of Blasphemy. For it is not lauful to believe, no
not In an Angel. Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 29.
Likewise S. Augustine says, Credimus Paulo, non credimus In Paulum: Credimus
Petro, non credimus In Petrum: We believe Paul, but we believe not In Paul:
We believe Peter, but we believe not In Peter.

Hereby we may see, that whether we say, We believe that God is God, or,
we believe In God, both these phrases are used of the godly, and are therefore
both good, and Catholic. If M. Hardinge find any want, or imperfection in
our words, let him supply it with good favor: so he condemn not either S.
Paul, or Hermes, or Origin, or Hilarie, or Charles the Great, or other
Catholic, and godly writers, as well Greeks, as Latins: who, as I have
showed, have used the like. Certainly the General Confession of al our people,
and of our whole Church, is this, We believe In God: We believe In
Christ: We believe In the Holy Ghost.

But M. Hardinge says, we grate over busily upon the Article of Christ's
Ascension into Heaven. What then? Should we have leafte it out? Verily that
would have benne some good countenance to your cause* An^ therefore when Pope
Nicolas would have brought us your new Article of Trasubstantiation into the
Creed, he should first have utterly removed this whole Article of Christ's
Ascension. For these two Articles may not well stand together by any
construction in one Creed. As for us, we have said nothing herein, but that
has often ben said, and avouched by the Holy Learned Fathers. Damasus the
Bishop of Rome, in his Creed grateth hereon as mutche, as we. His words
be these: Deuicto mortis imperio, Symbolum Damasi, apud Hierony. To. 4.
cum ea Carne, in qua natus, and passus, and mortuus fuerat, and resurrexit,
Ascendit ad Patrem, sedetque ad Dextram eius in Gloria: Having overcome the
empiere of death, with the same fleashe, wherein he was borne, and suffered,
and died, and rose again, he Ascended unto the Father, and sits at his
Right hand in Glory. Which words S. Hierome in larger manner expounds
thus: Ascendit ad Coelu^, Sedet ad Dextram Dei Patris, Hierony. in explicatione
Symboli, To. 4.
manente ea Natura Carnis, in qua natus, and passus est, and in qua Resurrexit.
Non enim exinanita est Humanitatis Substantia, sed glorificata: Christ
Ascended into Heaven, and sits at the Right hand of the Father, the same
Nature of Fleash, wherein he was borne and suffered, and rose again, remaininge
still. For the Substance of his Human Nature was not done away, but
glorified. How be it, gentle Reader, for thy better satisfaction herein, In
the sixthe Article.
I must refer thee over to my Former Reply to M. Hardinge.

Here follows a piteous outcrie, that we have shamefully corrupted S.
Augustines words, shiftinge in, Oporter, in steed of, Potest. What new
fancy is suddenly fallen into M. Hardinges head, I cannot tell. S.
Augustines words, as they be alleged by Gratian, De Consecra. Dis. 2. Prima.
Oportet. Potest.
are these: Corpus, in quo Resurrexit, in Vno loco esse Oportet: The Body,
wherein Christ rose again, must needs be in One place. Here is not,
Oportet, in steed of, Potest, as M. Hardinge says: but, Oportet, as it
should be, for, Oportet. If there have benne any corruption wrought herein, it
has benne wrought by Gratian, welneare four hundred years ago, and not by
us. Christ's Body in one place.
Yet is Gratian one of the highest Doctors of M. Hardinges side. And will M.
Hardinge make us believe, that his own Catholic Doctors would be so bold,
to corrupt S. Augustine?

As for this Verb, Oportet, if it were wanting in the place alleged, yet might
it well, and easily be supplied of other places. S. Peter says, Oportet illum
coelos capere vsque ad tempora restitutionis omnium: Actor. 3. Cyrill. in
Johan. Li. 11. Ca. 3. Augustine. contra Faustem li. 20. Ca. 11. Augustine. ad
Dardan. Epist. 57.
The Heavens Must contain, or hold him, until the time, that al things be
restored. So says Cyrillus, Christus non poterat cum Apostolis versari in
Carne, postquam Ascendisset ad Patrem: Christ could not be conuersante with
his Apostles in the Fleash, after he had Ascended unto the Father. Likewise
says S. Augustine, Christus secundu^ Praesentia^ Corporale^ in Sole, in Luna,
and in Cruce simul esse non potuit: Christ, according to the Presence of his
Body, could not be in the Some, in the Moon, and on the Cross at one time.
And again, Ne dubites, Christum esse in aliquo loco Coeli, propter Very
Corporis modum: Doubt not, but Christ is in some One Place of Heaven, because
of the measure or fourm of a very Body. Therefore the Old Learned Father
Origin says, Non est Homo, qui est vbicunque duo vel tres in eius nomine
fuerint congregati: Origin. in Matthae. tracta. 32.
neque Homo nobiscum est omnibus diebus vsque ad consu^matione^ saeculi: neque
congregatis vbique fidelibus Homo est praesens: sed virtus Diuina, quae erat in
Christo: It is not Christ, as being Man, that is where so ever two or three
be geathered together in his name: neither Christ, as being Man, is with us al
days until the worlds end: nor Christ, as being Man, is Present with the
Faithful every where geathered together: but that Divine power ( or Nature)
that was in Christ. And for that cause S. Augustine says, Augustine. in
Psalm. 46.
Videte Ascendentem: Credit in Absentem: Sperate Venientem: Sed tamen per
Mis^ricordiam occultam etiam sentite Praesentem: See you Christ Ascending into
Heaven: Believe in him being Absent: Trust in Christ, that is to come: And yet
by his secret Mercy feel him Present. Thus, M. Hardinge, thus have the Old
Catholic Learned Fathers used tograte, as ye term it, upon the Article of
Christ's Ascension.

You say, S. Augustine in his Epistle to Dardanus, spoke not of Christ's Body,
as it is now Present in the Sacrament. No marvel. For S. Augustine never
understood any such kind of Presence. And who taught you, M. Hardinge, that
Christ has such change of diverse Bodies: of one manner in the Sacrament,
and of an other manner in Heaven? Christ's Blessed Body, when it was borne of
the Virgin, when it died, when it rose again, when it Ascended into Heaven,
was one, and uniform. How became it afterward so diverse, and so unlike it
self? If either Christ, or the Apostles, or the Anciente Fathers have thus
taught you, why are they not alleged? If they have not thus taught you, how
came you by this knowledge? Or if ye say, ye know, that they knew not, who
will believe you?

Ye tell us, that the Body of Christ in Heaven has the whole Stature, and
Form, and Proportion of a Man. This is true: It is the Doctrine of the
Apostles, and of the Anciente Doctors of the Church. But ye tell us farther of
your self, that the Body of Christ in the Sacrament is utterly void of al
manner either Stature, or Form, or Proportion: that is to say, is neither
long, nor short: nor high, nor low: nor thick, nor thin: and, being as you
say, a very Natural Body, yet has neither likeness, nor shape of a Body. This
is your Doctrine, M. Hardinge: and the more unlikely to be true, the more
likely to be yours.

Such fantastical imaginations the Arian Heretics sometime had of the
Godhed of Christ. Athanas. contra Arianos Sermane 3.
For thus they wrote thereof, as says Athanasius: Creatura est: sed non vt
vlla ex rebus creatis: Opus est: sed non vt vllum ex operibus: Res condita est:
sed non vt vlla ex rebus conditis: It is a Creature: but not as any other of
things created: It is a thing wrought: but not as any other thing, that ever
was wrought: etc.

But what says Athanasius him self to al these fantasies? his answer is
this: Iam videtis vafritiem, and dolos istius Haereseos: quae non ignara, quam
amarulenta sit ista sua malitia, Form and Substance.
fotos quaerit, and ^^nocinium sibi (...) ex verborum disertitudine: Now ye
see the crookedness, and ^subtletie of this Haresae: which knowinge her own
malice how (...) it is, borowith some he wa^ and colo^^e by sleight of words.

This Flauianus repreneth the Heretic Eutyches, Epistola Flauiani ad Leon.
inter Leon. Epistolas.
Adiecit and aliam (...) Corpus Domini quod en Maria factum est, non esse
nostrae Substantiae; He added (...) in other wickedness, saieinge, that the
Body of Christ, that was borne of Mary, is not now of our Substance.

(...) the ma^er thus, Caro Christi ipsa est, per Essentiam: non ipsa per
Gloria^^: Leo. De Resurrect. Domini. Sermo. 1.
The Fleash of Christ in Substance is now the same, it was before: but (...)
Glory it is not the same.

Noman hereof writes either more plainly, or more directely, then S.
Augustine. Augustine. ad Dardanum epiststol. 57.
His words be these, Christus sic Venturus est, quemadmodum ire visus est in
Ceolum, id est, in eadem Carnis Forma, atque Substantia: Cui profecto.
Immortalitatem dedit, Na^turam non abstulit. Secundum hanc Formam non est
putandus vbique diffusus. Cauendum est enim, ne ita Diuinitatem astruamus
Hominis, vt Veritatem Corporis auferamus: Christ shall come again ( to Judge)
even as he was seen goinge into Heaven, that is to say, in the self same
Form, and Substance of his Fleash: Unto which Fleash undoubtedly he has
given Immortality: but he has not taken from it the Nature of Fleashe. For
we must take heed, we do not so maineteine the Godhead of Christ's
Humanity, that we deny the Truth of his Body.

And where ye fantasy, that the Body of Christ in the Sacrament has in it
self neither Form, nor Proportion, nor Limitation of place, nor Distinction
of parts, Augustine. in ead. epist. ad Dardanum.
S. Augustine tells you, Spatia locorum toll Corporibus, and nusquam erunt:
and quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt. Toll ipsa Corpota qualitatibus Corporu^,
non erit, vbi sint: and ideo necesse est, vt non sint: Take away from Bodies
Limitation of place, and the Bodies will be no where: and because they be
nowhere, they will be nothing. Take away from Bodies the qualities of Bodies,
there will be no place for them to be in: and therefore the same Bodies must
needs be no Bodies at al. Hereof we may conclude, that the Body of Christ,
which you have imagined to be contained Grossly, and Carnally in the
Sacrament, for as mutche as, by your own Confession, it has neither
Quality, nor Quantity, nor Form, nor Place, nor Proportion of Body,
therefore, by S. Augustines Doctrine, it is no Body.

Here it is a world to see, what pretty sport M. Hardinge makes him self
with the poor Penneman of this Apology. As God would, the Simple Body
unawares alleged Fulgentius clean against him self. For the words of
Fulgentius be these: Christus, cum Absit a nobis per Formam Serui, tamen semper
est nobiscum per Formam Dei: Whereas Christ is Absent from us by the Form of
a Servant, yet is he evermore Present with us by the Form of God. Whereby,
says M. Hardinges Commentary, he means, that Christ is no more here emonge
us, in Form, and Shape of Man, in such wise, as we see men live in the
Earth. And these words (says he) dasshe their whole purpose: and
therefore the Prelates of this new English Church, have altered the sense of
them, by shiftinge in this word ( Manhood) insteede of ( the Form of a
Servant): and this word ( Godhead) in steed of ( the Form of God).

I beseech thee, Gentle Reader, spare me a little thine indifferent ear,
least in these mysty clouds of M. Hardinges Distinctions, thou happen to
wander, and loose thy way. All this great adoo rises only of some notable
difference, that is fansied to be bitweene these two words. Form, and,
Substance. For M. Hardinge would feign have thee believe, that ye Substance of
Christ's Body is in many places: but the Form of the same Body can be only
in one place, and not in many.

If I should demand M. Hardinge this question by the way, wherefore Christ's
Body in Form may not as well be in many places together, as the same in
Substance: or how he knows it: or what Doctor, or Father ever taught it: or
how we may be well assured of it: perhaps he would take a day, to consider
it better. For thus a man might put him in mind of the grounds of his
Religion: Sir, ye know, God is Omnipotent, and his power Infinite. Ye may not
make him thral, and subject to your senses: That were Natural Reason that were
Infidelity. Christ is as well ^able to dispose of the Form of his Body, as
of the substance: and can as well present the one in many places, as the other.
How be it, thus mutche only by the way.

But now, what i^ all this great imagined Difference be no Difference* What if
these two words, Form, and Substance, as they be used by Fulgentius, be al
one? What then will M. Hardinge do with his pretty Gloss?

Verily Athanalius says thus: Athanas. De Definitionib.
Na^^ura, Essentia. Genus, Forma Vnu^ sunt: Nature, Substance, Kind and Form
be al One thing. Leo says, Leo episio. 97. Cap. 3.
Quid est, In Forma Dei: in Natura Dei: What is it, To be in the Form of God?
He answeareth, It is, To be in the Nature of God. Chrysostom says,
Chrysostom. ad Philippen. Homi. 6.
Forma Dei, Natura Dei est: The Form of God, is y^ Nature of God. S.
Augustine says, Augustian. De Tempor. Sermo. 177. De Ascetsio. Sermo. 4.
Secu^dum Formam Dei Christus ipse de se loquitur* Ego and Pater Vnum sumus: As
concerning the Former of God, Christ him self says of him self, I and my
Father are both One. Augustine. epist. 177.
Likewise again he says, Vna est Forma, quia vna est Diuinitas: The Form
is one, because the Godhed is One.

In like sort of the Form of a Servant, Leo. epi^. 97. Cap. 3.
Leo says, Quaero quid sit Formam Serui accipere? Sine dubio Perfectionem
Naturae, and Conditionis Humanae: What is it, To take the Form of a Servant?
He answeareth, Doubtless it is, To take the perfection of Nature, and state of
man. Chrysostom. ad Philippen. Homi. 6.
Chrysostom says, Forma Serui Omnino est Natura Serui: The Form of a
Servant verily is the Nature of a Servant. Augustine. in Johan. tract. 40.
S. Augustine says, Quando de Forma Serui in Christo cogitas, Humanam
Effigiem cogita, si est in te Fides: Whe^^ thou think of the Form of a
Servant in Christ, think of the Shape of a man, if there be any Faith in
thee. Augustine. De Essentia Diuinitatis.
Again, Christum secundum Humanitatem, Visibilem, Corporeum, Localem, atque
omnia membra Humana veraciter habentem credere conuenit, and confiteri: We
must believe, and confess, that Christ according to his Humanity, is Visible,
has the Substance and Properties of a Body, is contained in Place, and verily
has all the members, and the whole Proportion of a man. To leave al others,
Haimo, in epist. ad Philip. ca. 2.
Haimo says, Forman Serui accepit, id est, in Veritate Hominem accepit: He
took the Form of a Servant, that is to say, In very Truth he took Man.

Ye see, M. Hardinge, by these Testimonies of the Ancient Learned Fathers,
far contrary to your vain Distinction, y^ the Form of God is nothing else,
but God: and the Form of Man is nothing else, but Man. Wherefore then have you
thus divised us this new Difference? Wherefore say you of your own head, y^
Form, and Substance be so contrary, seeing the Catholic Fathers say, they
be both One? Or wherefore be you so busy, to trouble the Penneman without
cause? Certainly S. Augustine ioineth Form and Substance both together,
Augustine. ad Dardan. epist. 57.
and by the one expounds the other: In eadem Forma, atque Substantia: In the
same Form, and Substance: and again expounds the same Form, Veritatem
Corporis: The Truth of a Body.

By these it is plain, that when Fulgentius says, ye Form of God, he
means thereby the Substance, the Nature, and the Divinity of God: And when he
says, the Form of a Servant, he means likewise, the Nature* the Substance,
the Truth, the Perfection, and the Very Manhood of a Man. And the whole
drifte of his discourse is this, that Christ being both God, and Man, by the
Nature, and Substance of his Godhed is euerywhere: but by the Nature, and
Substance of his Manhood, and Truth of his Body, is only in one place, and
not in more: agreing therein with these words of S. Augustine before
rehearsed, De conse. did 2. Prima.
Corpus, in quo Resurrexit, in vno Loco esse Oportet: The Body, wherein he rose
again, must needs be in oue Place.

Here are we terribly charged with guileful dealing, with a special note also
in the Margin, Fulgentius fo why falsified. We have shifted in this word,
Manhed, in steed of, Form of Man, ctc.
the Form of a Seruante: and this word Godhed, in steed of, the Form of
God. And therefore both the Penneman, and the Prelates of our New Cleregie
must needs be brought forth before the bar.

I will not here tell you, M. Hardinge, how lewdely ye have demeaned your self
toward her, whom it likes you so often, and so scornefully to call the Lady
Interpreter: a Lady, I will not say, of what Learning, virtue, and gravity:
but certainly, as far from al vnwoomanly Presumption, wh^rwith ye so rudely
touch her, as you are from al manly modesty: and for ought, that may appear
by these toies, and trifles, ye have sent us over, as full of wisdom, as you
of folly. I beseech you, call your words again to mind, if you can without
blushing: So roughly to handle so soft a Creature. This Phrase of speech your
very friends have mutche misliked, and, as it is in deed, so in plain words
they call it Ruffianrie, a virtue, although mutche agreeable to your Profession,
yet unmeet for a man, either of learning, or of sober wisdom. But this
fault, among many others, as I have said, I will dissemble. Although your
whole Book be utterly void of Divinity, yet at the least some sense of
Humanity had benne commendable.

But the Prelates of this New Cleregie (you say) have foully falsified both ye
words, and the sense of Fulgentius. And wherein, M. Harding? Forsooth in
steed of these words, The Form of Man, and, The Form of God, for y^
better understanding of ye unlearned, they have used these words, as more
commonly known, Godhed, and Manhed. If this be so fault, wherefore then is
the Old Father, Vigilius, Li. ^. Contra Eu^ych^tem.
and Martyr Vigilius suffered thus to say, Dei Filius secundum Humanitatem
suam recessit a nobis; Secundum Diuinitatem suam semper est nobiscum: The Son
of God according to his Manhed is departed from us: according to his Godhed is
ever with us? Or again, Christus est vbique secundum Naturam Diuinitatis suae:
and loco continetur secundum Naturam Humanitatis suae: Christ is in all places
according to the Nature of his Godhed: and is contained in One place, according
to the Nature of his Manhed.

Wherefore does Cyrillus say, Secundum Carnem Solam abiturus Crat: Adest
autem semper virtue Deitatis: Cyrill. in Johan. li. 9. ca. 21. Gregor. De
Pascha. Homi. 30.
According to the Fleash only he would depart: But by y^ power of his Godhed
he is ever present. Wherefore does Gregory say. Verbum Incarnatum Manet, and
Recedit: Manes Diuinitace, Recedit Corpore: The word Incarnate both abides
with us, and departs from us. It abides with us by the Godhed: It departs
from us by the Body (or Manhed?) Wherefore does S. Augustine say, Ibat per
id, quod Homo erat: Manebat per id, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 78.
quod Deus erat. Ibat per id, quod Vno Loco erat: Manebat per id, quod vbique
erat: Christ departed by that he was Man: and aboade by that he was God. He
departed by that, that was in One Place: He abode by that, that is in all Places.

If ye will yet stand in doubt, what these Holy Fathers meante by y^ Manhed of
Christ, that departed from us, let S. Augustine open both his own, and their
meaninges. Thus he writes in express and plain words touching the same:
Secundum Carnem, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 50.
quam Verbum assumpsit: secundum id, quod de Virgin natus est: Secundum id,
quod a Iudaeis prehensus est: quod ligno confixus: quod de Cruce depositus:
quod linteis inuolutus: quod in sepulchro conditus: quod in Resurrectione
manifestatus, me non semper habebitis vobiscum: According to the Fleash, that
the Word received: according to that, he was borne of the Virgin: according
to that, he was taken of the Jews: According to that, he was nailed to the
Tree, taken down from the Cross, lapte in a sheet, laid in the grave, and
was declared in his Resurrection ( these words are true) Ye shall not have me
always with you. Augustine. in Sermo. in feri. 2. Paschat.
Likewise again he says, Dominus noster absentauit se Corpore ab omni
Ecclesia, and Ascendit in Coelum: Our Lord, as touching his Body, Absented him
self from his whole Church, and Ascended into Heaven.

To be short, if it be so heinous an error in this case to use these words,
Godhed, and Manhed, Fulgentius ad Regem Thra^^mun Li. 2.
wherefore is not Fulgentius him self reproved for so often using the same?
These be his words, Secundum Humanitatem suam, Localiter erat in Terra: The
Holy Ghost is God.
Secundum Diuinitatem, and Coelum impleuit, and Terram. Vera Humanitas Christi
Localis es: Vera Diuinitas semper immensa est. Caro Christi absque dubitatione
Localis est: Diuinitas tamen eius vbique semper est. Permansit in Christo
Immensa Diuinitas: Suscepta est ab eo Localis Humanitas. Quomodo Ascendit in
Coelum, nisi quia Localis, and Verus est Homo? Quomodo adest Fidelibus, nifi
quia idem Immensus, and Verus est Deus? Christ according to his Manhood, was
placed in Earth: but according to his Godhed he filled both Heaven, and
Earth. The Manhood of Christ is contained in Place: The Godhed of Christ is
Infinite, and in all places. The Pleash of Christ is doubtelesse in (One)
place: The Godhead of Christ is for ever in every place. There remained still
in Christ the Infinite Godhed: There was received of him a Local Manhood. How
Ascended he i^to Heaven, saving that he is very Man contained in Place? How is
he present with the Faithful, saving that he is Infinite, and True God? Last of
al he says, Vnus idemque Christus, Secundum Humanam Substantiam, aberat
Coelo, cum esset in Terra: and dereliquit Terram, cum Ascendisset in Coelum:
Christ being One, accodinge to the Substance of his Manhood, was absent from
Heaven, when he was in Earth: and forsook the Earth, when he Ascended into
Heaven.

Thus many times, M. Hardinge, ye have these words in one place together in
Fulgentius him self: The Godhed: the Manhood: very God: very Man: The Fleash
of Christ: The Substance of the Manhood. And these ^e the self same words,
that you reprove.

Blotte out therefore for shame that unadvised note in your Margin: Look
better to your Book: Work hereafter more discretely: and trouble not,
neither Pennemenne, nor others, without cause. Otherwise the Penneman will tell
you, what bird bare the feather, that made you a Pen.

The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 2.
We believe that the Holy Ghost, who is the third Person in the Holy
Trinity, is very God: not made, not created, not begotten, but proceeding from
both the Father, and the Son, by a certain mean unknown unto man, and
unspeakable: and that it is his property to mollify, and loften the hardness
of man's heart, when he is once received thereinto, either by the wholesome
preaching of the Gospel, or by any other way: that he does give men light, and
guide them unto the knowledge of God: to al way of Truth: to newness of the
whole life: and to everlasting hope of Salvation.

M. Hardinge.
As we acknowledge this article to be true and Catholic, so we demand of
these Defenders. how they can prove the same. Untruth. As shall appear.
Have they either express Scripture for it, or any of the first four general
Councels, which be esteemed of most Authority? We are sure they have not.
Therefore we do them to understand, and if they hear us not, we advertise the
Readers, that fear God, and love his truth, that al truth necessarily to be
believed O folly. who ever said othervviset
expressed in the Scripture: and that O folly. who ever said othervviset
other Councels be to be received besides the four first, which are allowed in
England by Parliament.

The B. of Sarisburie
Consider, M. Hardinge, notwithstanding ye evermore tell us of Fathers, Fathers,
yet how contrary oftentimes ye are in judgment to the same Fathers. You say,
that the Godhed of the Holy Ghost cannot be proved by express Words of the
Scriptures: and thereof, ye say, ye are right sure. Yet S. Augustine nothing
douteth, Augustine. contra Literas Petiliani, Li. 3. Ca. 48.
but it may well be proved by plain Scriptures. Thus he says, Spiritus Sanctus
est Deus. Vnde Petrus, cum dixisser^ Ausus es mentiri Spiritui Sancto, continuo
sequutus adiunxit, quid esse: Spiritus Sanctus: and ait, Non es mentitus
Hominibus, sed Deo: The Holy Ghost is God. Therefore Peter when he had said
(unto Ananias) thou have enterprised to lie to the Holy Ghost, he followed
readily, and told him, what was the Holy Ghost: and said, Thou have not sied
unto Man, but unto God.

Again he says, Augustine. De Morib. Eccle. Catholi. Li. 1. Cap. 16.
Ostendit Paulus, Deum esse Spiritum Sanctum, and ido non esse Creaturam: S.
Paul shows us, that the Holy Ghost is God: and therefore is no Creature.

Likewise again he says, Ne quisquam Spiritum Sanctum negaret Deum, continuo
sequutus ait, Glorificate, and portate Deum in Corpore vestro: Least any man
should deny, Augustine. Episto. 174.
that the Holy Ghost is God, Paul added immediately these words: Glorify
you therefore, and bear God in your Body. Here have we S. Augustines Yea, and
M. Hardinges Nay. S. Augustine assures us, he has Scriptures, to prove the
Godhed of the Holy Ghost: M. Hardinge says, we are sure, he has none at
al. Judge thou now, Gentle Reader, whether of these Doctors thou will believe.

But what a vain vanity, and folly is this? will M. Hardinge have us believe,
that God cannot be God, unless he be allowed by the Church of Rome, and by
the Pope? Then are we come again to that, ye Tertullian writes merrily of the
Heathens: Nisi Homini Deus placuerit, Tertull. in Apologetico.
Deus non erit: Homo iam Deo propitius esse debebit: Unless God please Man well
(though he be God) he shall be no God. And so now Man must be frendely, and
favorable unto God.

We believe, M. Hardinge, that the Holy Ghost is very God in deed, not upon
the Popes, or his Cleregies credit, but, as S. Augustine says, upon the
special warrante of the Word of God.

And therefore Nazianzene says, Nazianzenus De Spiritu Sancto. (...).
Dicet aliquis, non esse scriptum, Spiritum Sanctum esse Deu^. Atqui proponetur
tibi examen Testimoniorum, ex quibus ostendetur, Diuinitatem Sancti Spiritus
testatam esse in Sacris Literis: nisi quis valde insulsus sit, and alienus a
Spiritu Sancto: Some Man will say, It is not written, that the Holy Ghost is
God. But I will bring thee forth a whole Swarm of Authorities, whereby it
shall well appear that the Godhed of the Holy Ghost is plainly witnessed in the
Holy Scriptures: Unless a Man be very dull, and utterly void of the Holy
Ghost.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 1.
We believe, that there is one Church of God, and that the same is not shut
up (as in times past among the Jews) into some One corner or Kingdom, but
that it is Catholic, and Universal, and dispersed throughout the whole world.
So that there is now no Nation, which may truly complain, y^ they be shut
forth, and may not be one of the Church and people of God: and y^ this Church
is the Kingdom, the Body, and the Spouse of Christ: that Christ alone is the
Prince of this Kingedome: that Christ alone is the Head of this Body: and that
Christ alone is the Bridegroom of this Spouse.

M. Hardinge.
It is a world to see these Defenders: They, which have not kept Unity of
Spirit in the band of Charity, Ephesians. 4.
which S. Paul requires, but have severed them selves from the Body of the
Church, tell us now forsooth, they believe, that there is one Church of God.
But what may we think this one Church to be? Can they seem to mean any
other (what so ever they pretend) then this new Church of late years set up by
Satan, through the ministry of Martine Luther and those other Apostates his
companions, if it may be named a Church, and not rather a Babylonical Tower?
For as touching that Church, whereof Untruth. For the Fathers in the
Primitive Church never took him so.
al Christen People has ever taken the Successor of Peter to be the Head
under Christ, which is the true Catholic Church, in their Apology they
stick not to say plainly, that it is clean fallen down long agone. And
therefore the beginning of Luthers Seditious, and Heretical preaching they call
Herbam, as much to say, as the green Grass, or first spring (this
interpreter names it the very first appearing) of the Gospel, Look in the
leaf H. 7. b.
leaf. F. 7. And in the leaf. F. 8. they say that forty years agone and
upward, that is at the first setting forth of Luther and Zuinglius, the Truth
was unknown and unheard of, and that they first came to the knowledge and
preaching of the Gospel. Likewise in an other place they grant, Leaf E. 2: In
Latin they term it exortam Euangelii.
that certain and very strange sects have been stirringe in the world ever
since the Gospel did spring, meaning the time when Luther first brinced to
Germany the poisoned Cup of his Heresies, Blasphemies, and Sathanismer.

Thus having condemned the Church of God, which was before Luthers time, and
allowinge that for the true Church, the Gospel whereof first sprang out of
Luther: how can they auouche their belefe, and by what reason and learning can
they make good, that there is one Church of God? We would feign know,
which and where it is. Is Luther and his congregation that one Church of God,
or Zuinglius and his rabble, or Osiunder and his sort, or Zuenckfeldius and his
sect, or Stancarus and his band, or Balthazar Pacimontane and his rank? For all these, and certain other sects have Untruth, As shall appear.
Luther for their founder, and for their Radix Iesse, as it were, from whence
they spring: And in deed every learned man easily sees, how the gutters of
their Doctrines run out of Luthers sincke. Of al these there is none, but
stoutly claims the name of the Church.

Then how say ye, Defenders, which Church be ye? name the Child. If ye name
one, we set the others against you. etc.

How often in his books puts Luther you, and your Captains in the roll of
those, that he utterly condemns, naminge roundly together, Infidels, Turks,
Epicures, Heretics, Papists, Sacramentaries? And now if he should hear you
challenge the name of the one Church of God to you, and deny him and his
folowers that claimed title: would he not (think ye) stamp and rage, would he
not whetie his dog eloquence upon you, and call you worse then these above
rekened, yea and if he wist how, worse then some of you be your selves? The
like courtesy maieye look for at those other sects, of which every one
claims the name of this one Church of God.

But ye say, that this One Church is not shut up into some one corner, or
Kingdom, but that it is Catholic, and Universal, and dispersed through out
the whole world. True it is, that ye say, Catholic Church. Why is the
Church called Catholic. Threefold Universality an infallible mark to know
the Church by.
what so ever ye think. But the Holy learned and auncien: Fathers, where they
call and believe the Catholic Church, they mean (as Vincentius Liriuensis
declares) the Church to be Catholic, that is to say Universal, (for so the
word signifies) in respect of a threefold Universality: of places, which
this Defender here touches: of times, and of men, which he touches not. In
the Catholic Church we must have a great care (says he.) that we hold that,
which has every where, evermore, and of al persons ben believed. If these
Defenders prove not the Church, they profess them selves to be of, to have
this threefold Vntuer salitie, then is their Congregation not this one Church,
nor of this one Church of God, but the synagog of Antichriste.

And although the Authors of this Apology crake of the great increase, and
spredding abroad of their Gospel, and now glory in the number of Kingedomes,
Dukedomes, Countries, common Weals, and Free Cities: Yet has it not gone so
far abroad as the Arians heresy did by three parts of four: Which was
at length utterly extinguished, as this shall be.

That the Catholic Church is the Kingedome, Christ alone Prince, Head,
Bridegroom, Spouse of the Church. In respect of outvvard government the name
of Head is attributed to others beside Christ.
the Body and the Spouse of Christ, we acknowledge. Of the same Kingdom we
confess and believe Christ to be Prince alone, so as he is Head of this Body
alone, and so as he is Bridegroom of this spouse alone. For Head and Spouse
alone he is in one respect, not alone in an other respect. According to the in
ward influence of Grace. Christ properly and only is Head of his Mystical
Body the Church: But as touching the outward Government, the being of a Head
is common to Christ with others. For in this respect certain others may be
called Heads of the Church, as in Amos the Prophet the Amos. 6. Reg. 17.
Psalm. 17. and Cor. ^.
great States be called the Heads of the People. So the Scripture speaks of
King Saul, When thou were a little one in thine own eyes, thou wastinade
Head among the Tribes of Israel. So David says of him self, he has made me
Head of Nations.

Men be called Heads, in as much as they be instead of Christ, and under
Christ: after which meaning S. Paul says to the Corinthians, For if I
forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I, it, In
persona Christi, In the Person of Christ. And in an other place, We are
Ambassadors in the stead of Christ, Catholic in many, or fevve.
as though God did exhort you through us. To conclude in few, according to
inward influence of grace into every faithful member, Christ only is Head of
the Church: according to outward gourning the Untruth. what Scripture, or
Doctor ever said so?
Pope vnde Christ and in sted of Christ is head of y^ same.

As touching the Bridegromesbip, we say and believe, that if we would speak
properly, 2. Corin. 5. Christ the true Bridegroom, the Pope vnderbridgrome of
the Church, Joan. 3.
Christ is the only Bridegroom of the Church his spouse of whom it is said he
that has a spouse, is a Bridegroom. For from one of the Church he begets
children to himself. But others are called Bridegromes. Working together with
Christ outwardly to the begetting of spiritual children, whom nevertheless
they begette not to them selves, but to Christ. And such are called the
ministers of the Bridegroom, in as much as they done his stead. And therefore
the Pope, who is instede of Christ the Bridegroom of the whole Church, is
Untruth: For the Aucient Fathers never called him so.
called also the Bridegroom of the universal Church: a man may term him the
vicegerent Bridegroom.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I trust, Gentle Reader, thou will not look, I should answer al M. Hardinges
ordinary idle talk. So should I lose good time without cause, and be over
troublesome to thine eats. O, says he, What a world it is, to see these
Defenders? They, which have not keapt the unity of the Sprite, in the band of
Charity, which S. Paul requires, but have severed them selves from the Body
of the Church, tell us now for soothe, that they believe, that there is one
Church of God. O, M. Hardinge, if we have herein said il, then bear
witness of the il: If we have said well, wherefore make you these vitter
outcries? What so ever ye have conceived us to be, yet might ye suffer us
quietly to say the Truth, specially such Truth, as you imagine makes so
mutche for your self.

Ye say, we confess, that our Church began only about forty years
sithence, and was never before. No, M. Hardinge, we confess it not: and you
your self well know, we confess it not. It is your tale: it is not ours. We
say, and have sufficiently proved, and you know it right well, if ye would be
known of that ye know, y^ our Doctrine is y^ Old, and yours is y^ New, If ye
will needs force your self to the denial, it may easily be proved, and that by
such Authority, as your self may not well deny: unless ye will once again
do now, as ye have twice done before.

We say, that our Doctrine, and the order of our Churches is older then yours
by five hundred whole years and more. If ye will not believe us, yet believe M.
Hardinge: M. Hardinge Foli. 15. a.
he will tell you even the same. Mark well his words: These they be: It
stands not with Christ his promises made to the Church, that he should
suffer his Church to continue in darkness these thousand years past.

And thus by secret confession, he leaves us fiuehundred three score and six
whole years at the least: that is to say, the whole time of Christ, of his
Apostles, and of all the Godly Learned Doctors, and Fathers of the Primitive
Church. Which time notwithstanding is thought a great deal better, and
purer, then all the time, that has followed afterward. In this Division M.
hardinge being attente, and eger upon his cause, and claiming as mutche, as he
thought with any modesty he might be hable, has claimed to him self only a
thousand years of the night: and has leafte us welneare six hundred years
of the day.

This is your own witness, M. Harding: Consider well of it. It is your own.
Therefore ye do your self great wrong, and mutche deface your own credit,
so suddenly to say, our Doctrine is New. Gods name be blessed, it has the
Testimony, not only of Christ, and his Apostles, but also of the old
Learned Catholic Fathers of the Church. And this is it, that so mutche
greeueth you, that we refourme our Churches now according to the pattern, and
samplar of Christ's, and his Apostles first Institution. For thereby the
disorder, and deformity of your Churches the more appears.

Lirinensis says, Vincentius Lirinensis
That thing must be holden for Catholic, that euerywhere, evermore, and of al
men has benne believed. These general notes must be limited with this
special restrainte: Catholic in many, or fevve.
Where as the Churches were not corrupted. For otherwise there was never any
Doctrine so Catholic, ne not the Confessed Doctrine of Christ him self,
that has benne received, Evermore, and, Eueryvvhere, and of al men without
any exception. But, M. Hardinge, these self same notes of Lirinests utterly
euerthrowe the greatest part of that whole Doctrine, that you would so saine
have counted Catholic. For neither reaches to within five hundred years of
the Apostles time: nor has it that Antiquitte indeed, that in face, and
countenance is pretended, as it is plain by your own former Confession: nor
was it ever universally received, as herafter by Particulares it shall be
proved. It had never that universality, neither of al times, and ages: nor of
al places, and countries: nor was it ever universally received and allowed of
al men. Therefore, what so ever ye call it, ye cannot by your own Definition
call it Catholic.

The Catholic Church of God stands not in multitude of Persons, but in
weight of Truth. Otherwise Christ him self, and his Apostles had not ben
Catholic. For his flock was very little: and the Catholic, or Universal
consent of the World stood against it. The Church of God is compared to the
Moon: for that she waxethe, and waneth, as the Moon does, and sometime is
full, sometime is empty: Augustine. de Gene. ad liter. Cap. 1.
and therefore, as S. Augustine says, is called Catholica, quia Vniuersaliter
perfecta est, and in nullo claudicat, and per totum Orbem diffusa est: Because
she is Universally perfect, and halteth in nothing, and is (not now shut up in
one only Country, as was the Church of the Jews, but) powered throughout the
whole World. Though the hearts of men have often changes, yet Gods Truth is
evermore one: and, be it in many, or in few, is ever Catholic. Thus, M.
Hardinge, it is written by one of your own side: Fortalitium Fidei, Li. 5.
Etsi non nisi duo Homines remanerent in Mundo, tamen in eis saluaretur
Ecclesia, quae est Vnitas Fidelium: Although there were but two men remaining
in the world, yet even in them two the Church, which is the Unity of the
Faithful, should be soued.

Luthers dog eloquence, for so, M. Hardinge, it likes you of your modesty
to call it, were it never so rough, and vehement, the just zele of Gods glory,
and of his Holy Temple, which you so miserably had defaced, so enforcing him,
yet was it never any thing comparable to your eloquence. For, I beseech you,
if ye may have leisure, harken a little, and hear your self talk. Behold
your own words, so many, so vain, so bitter, so fiery, so furious, al
together in one place: This new Church, ye say, set up by Satan: Martine
Luther, and other Apostates his companions: This Babylonical Tower: Luthers
seditious, and Heretical preaching: Luther brinced to Germany the poisoned
Cup of his Heresies, Blasphemies, and Sathnismes: Zuing lius, and his rabble:
The gutters of this Doctrine run out of Luthers sincke: Luther would stamps,
and rage, and whette his dog eloquence upon you: You are the Synagog of
Antichriste. These be the Figures, and Flowers of your speech. Yet must we
think, that ye can neither stamp, nor rage: but use only Angels eloquence.
How be it. I trust, no wise man will judge our cause the worse, for that your
tongue can so readily serve you to speak il.

To the matter, ye say, that, touching the influence of Erace, Christ only is
the Head of the Church: but touching Direction, and Government, the Pope only
is the Head. All this is but your own tale, M. Hardinge: Ye speak it only of
your self: Other Authority of Scripture, or Doctor ye bring ve-none.

And yet notwithstanding, ye have alleged Scriptures too, God wot, even as ye
have used to do in other places.

Ye say, 2. Corin. 2. 2. Corin. 5.
S. Paul says, If I forgave any thing, for your sakes I forgave it, in the
person of Christ: We are Ambassadors in the steed of Christ, even as
though God did exhort you through us: Hereof ye conclude, Ergo, The Pope under
Christ, and in the steed of Christ is Head of the Church. If ye conclude
not thus, ye wander idly, and speak in vain, and condlude nothing. These
words of S. Paul nothing touch y^ Pope, but only the faithful, and zealous
Preacher of the Gospel. For wherein does the Pope resemble S. Paul? Head
Wherein doothe he reprosente the Person of Christ? What exhorts he? What
teaches he? What says he? What doothe he? And yet if he would do any one
part of his whole duty, how might this Argument stand for good: S. Paul
being at y^ City of Philippi in Maerdonia, exhorted the Corinthians, as in
the Person of Christ: Ergo, the Pope being at Rome in Italy, although he
neither exhort, nor preach, yet is he the Head of the Universal Church?
Although Divinity go hard with you, yet ye should have seens better to your
Logique.

I grant, Bishops may be called the Heads of their seneral Churches. So
Chrysostom calls Chrysostom in Epist ad Roma. hom. 18.
Elias Caput Prophetarum, The Head of the prophetee: So Amos says, Amos. 6.
The Princes are the Heads of y^ people: So Saul is called 1. Regum. 15.
the Head of the Tribes of Israel: So David was made Psalm. 17.
Caput Gentiu^, The Head of Nations: Sondrie such other like examples I
alleged in my Former Articul. 4. Diui. 32.
Reply to M. Hardinge: As that Cyrillius the Bishop of Alexandria, in the
Council of Ephesus was called Cyrill. tomo. 4. Epist. 5.
Caput Episcoporum congregatotum, The Head of the Bishops, that these were
assembled: That S. Gregory says, Gregor. in. 1. Regum. lib. 4. Cap. 4.
Paulus ad Christum conuersus Caput effectus est Natlonu^m Paul being once
converted to Christ, was made the Head of Nation: That Prudentius says,
Prudentius in Enchiridio.
Sancta Bethlem Capur eitorbis: Holy Bethlem is the Head of the World. In this
sense Optatus says, Optatus Li. 1. and 2.
There be four sorts of Heads in the Church, the Bishops, the Priests, the
Deacons, The Faithful: And all this only in a certain kind of phrase, and
manner of speech. But in deed and verily S. Augustine says, Augustine contra
Liter. Petil. Li. 1. Ca. 5.
Paulus ipse non poterat Caput esse eorum, quos plantauerat: Paul him self
could not be the Head of them, whom he had planted, Therefore Gregory says,
Gregor. Li. 4. Epist. 38.
Petrus Apostolus Primum, Membru^ Sanctae and Vniuersalis Ecclesiae est.
Paulus, Andreas, Johannes, quid aliud, quam singulariu^ sunt plebium Capita?
Tamen sub Vno Capite omnes Membra sunt Ecclesiae, Arque ve cuncta breui cingulo
locutionis astringam, sancti ante Legem, Sacti in Lege, Sancti sub Gratia:
Omnes hi perficientes Corpus Domini in Membris sunt Ecclesiae constituti. Et
nemo se vnquam Vniueisalem vocari voluit: Peter the Apostle is ( not the Head,
but) the chief Member of the Holy Universal Church. Paul, Andrewe, and John,
what are they else, but the Heads of several Nations? Yet notwithstanding
under one Head ( Christ) they are al Members of the Church. And to speak
shortly, the Saints before the Law, Peter was a member of the Church but
not the Head.
the Saints in the time of Grace, al accomplisshing the Lords Body, are
placed emonge the Members of the Church, And there was never yet one, that
would have him self called the Universal Bishop, Therefore where as M. Hardinge
says, Al Christian People have ever taken the Successor of Peter to be the
Head of the Catholic Church under Christ, he speaks it only of him
self. Johan. 8.
And though the comparison be odious, yet Christ says, Cum loquitur
mendacium, ex proprijs loquitur: when he speakethe Untruth, he speaks it of
his own. S. Gregory says, Peter was the chief Member of the Church of
Christ: but not the Head.

But the Bishop of Rome, De Election. ca. Licet Abb.
and his hired Proctours have taught us far otherwise. Panormitane says:
Christus and Papa faciunt vnum Consistortum: and, excepto peccaio, Papa potest,
quicquid Deus ipse potest: Christ, and the Pope make one Consistone, and keep
one Court: And, sin only excepted, the Pope can do, what so ever God him
self can do. This, I trow, is that Head of Direction, and Gouernmente, that
M. Hardinge means.

As for the rest, that the Church is the Kingedome of Christ, and the Pope
the Prince thereof, Extra. Noult ille, In gloss.
M. Hardinge in special words answeareth nothing. Notwithstanding some
others have said, Petro and Coelestis, and Terreni Imperij iura commissa sunt:
Unto Peter was committed the right both of the Heavenly, and also of the
Earthely Empiere.

Last of al he doubts not, Orders.
but the Pope may be called the Spouse, or Bridegroom of the Universal
Church: and yet the same without the Authority of any Doctor. He allegeth
only S. Bernarde: But the same S. Bernarde in the self same place says, and
that by M. Hardinges own confession, that the Pope is not the Bridegroom of
the Church. And therefore he was feign to expound his meaning, and to weigh
him down of the other side with his pretty Gloss. But S. Bernarde, without
Gloss says plainly: Non sunt omnes amici Spousi, qui hodie sunt Sponsi
Ecclesae: Bernard in Council. Remensi. Bernard ad Euigeni. de Considera. Li. 3.
They be not all the Bridegromes friends, that are this day the Spouses of the
Church, O miserandain Sponsam ralibus creditam Paranymohis. Non accici Sponsi,
sed aemuli sunt: O miserable is that Spouse, that is committed to such
Leaders. They are not the friends, they are the enemies of the Bridegroom.

How be it we need not greatly to recke, what styles, and titles the Pope can
vouchesaue to allow him self. As he may be called the Head, the Prince, and
the Spouse: even so, and by like authority, and truth, may he be called the
Light, the Life, the Saueour, and the God of the Church.

God give him an heart to understand, that he may be, although not the
Head, yet a Member of that Body although not the Prince, yet a Subject in
that Kingedome: although not the Bridegroom, yet a Child of the Church of God.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 1.
Furthermore (we Believe) that there be diverse degrees of Ministers in the
Church: whereof some be Deacons, some Priests, some Bishops: to whom is
committed the office to instruct the people, and the whole charge, and
settinge forth of Religion.

M. Hardinge.
Here it had been your part to have declared your faith touching the Holy
Sacrament of Order, Sacramonte of Order By good reason.
agreeable to the faith of the Catholic Church: That there be seven orders in
the Church, four lesser, and three greater: Untruths boldly presumed, as by
the aunsvveare it may appear.
for so by good reason they are called. And as for the institution, authority,
and estimation of the greater, specially of Priesthood and Deaconship, ye might
have alleged the Scriptures: so for the Lesser the example of Christ, the
Tradition of the Apostles, and the testimonies written of the Apostles
scholars, of those that both next, and sone after followed them, namely
Dionys. cap. 3. Hierarch. Ecclesiast. Ignatius epist. 8. ad Ecclesiam
Antiochenam, Tertullian in praescript. aduersus Hereticos, Gaius Pope and
Martyr in Diocletians time, Sozimus in S. Augustines time, Isychius, Eusebius
Caesariensis is his Ecclesiastical history, and Epiphanius in the end of his
Book contra Haereses.

The B. of Sarisburie
Gentle Reader, if I should leave these, and other like M. Hardinges words
vnansweared, thou might happily think, he had said somewhat. Here, he
says, it had benne our Part to have told thee of Seven Orders in the
Church, three Greatter, and four Less: Having in deed him self clean
forgotten his own Part. For notwithstanding this controlment, and accoumpte
of so many Orders, yet he names no more Orders, then we have named. And
verily, if he would have followed his own Authorities, it had benne hard for
him, in any good Order to have made up his own accoumpte.

For his own Anacletus says, Amplius, quam isti Duo Ordines Sacerdotum,
(Episcopi, and Presbyteri) nec nobis a Deo collati sunt, Anacletus Epistola. 3.
Hieronym. ad Euagrium
nec Apostoli docuerunt: More then these two Orders of Priests (Bishops, and
Elders) neither has God appointed us, nor haue^ the Apostles tought us. And
yet of these same Two several Orders, S. Hierome seems to make only One
Order. For thus he writes: Audio, quendam in tantam erupisse vecordiam, Orders.
vt Diaconos Presbyteris, id est, Episcopis anteferret: I hear say, there is
a man broken out unto such wilful fury, Hieronym. in eadem Epistola.
that he places Deacons before Priests, that is to say, before Bishops: And
again: Apostolus praecipue docer, eosdem esse Presbyteros, quos Episcopos: The
Apostle, Paul, specially teaches us, that Priests, and Bishops be al one.
Hierony in Esai, Cap 19. Catechumeni.
The same S. Hierome writing upon the Prophet Esai, reckenethe only five
Orders, or Degrees in the whole Church: The Bishops, the Priests, the
Deacons, the Entrers, or Beginners, and the Faitheful. And other Order of the
Church he knows none.

Clemens says, Clemens Epist. 2. De con. (...) st 3. Tribus gradibus
Tribus gradibus eommissa sunt Sacramenta Diuinorum Secretoru^, id est,
Presbytero, Diacono, and Ministro: The Mysteries of the Holy Secresies be
committed unto three Orders: that is, unto the Priests, unto the Deacons, and
unto the Ministers: And yet Deacons, and Ministers, as touching the name, are
al one.

Dionysius likewise has three Orders, Dionysi Eccle. Hierar. Cap. 5.
but not the same: For he rekenethe Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. And
whereas M. Hardinge makes his accoumpte of Four of the Less, or Inferior
Orders, meaning thereby, Ostiarios, Lectores, Exorcistas, Acoluthos: The Door
keepers, the Readers, the conuerers, and the Waiters, or Folowers: Ignatius ad
Antiochen (...). Hierony. De 7. ordinibus Eccl.
His own Ignatius addethe thereto three other Orders: Cantores, Laboratores,
Confitentes: The Chounters or Singers, the Laborers, and the Confessors.
Elemens adds thereto, Catechistas, The Infourmers, or Teachers of them that
were entringe into the Faith. A little vain Book, bearinge the name of S.
Hierome, De Septe^ Ordinibus Ecclesiae, adds yet an other Order, and calls
them Fossarios, that is, The Sextines, or Overseers of the Graves. And, least
you should think he rekeneth this Order, as emongst other necessary offices
to serve the people, and not as any part of the Cleregie, his words be these,
Primus in Clericis Fossariorum Ordo est: qui in similitudinem Tobiae Sancti
sepelire morruos admonet: The First Order of the Cleregie, is the Order of the
Sextines: which, as Holy Tob^e was woonte to do, casse upon the people for
the burial of the dead.

Likewise to the three greater Orders Isidorus adds an other distinct and
several Order of Bishops: Isidor. Elymolog. Lib. 1. Cap. 12. Scotui in 4.
Sen. Distin. 24. Qu. 1. Ambros in Epist. Ad Ephe. Cap. 4.
unto whom agreethe Gulielmus Altisiodorensis, and Gottofredus Pictauiensis, as
appears by Johannes Scotus. Again of the other Inferior Orders, S. Hierome
leaves out the Coniurers, and VVaiters: S. Ambrose leaves out the VVaiters,
and Door Keepers: The Canons of the Apostles leave out Coniurers, VVaiters,
and Door keepers, al three together.

In this so great dissension, and darkness, what way will M. Hardinge take,
to follow? By Anacletus, there be Two Orders: by Clemens, and S. Hierome, Three:
by Hierome Countrefeite, Seven: by others Eight, by other Nine, by others Ten.

At this notwithstanding, he tells us, our part had benne, to have showed,
that there be just Seven Orders in the Church, Three great, and Four Less,
without doubt, or question.

Here, gentle Reader, it had benne M. Hardinges part to have showed us the
Reasons, and Grounds of this Divinity: These they be, as they are alleged by
the best of that side: Petrus Lombar. senten Lib. 4. Distin. 24.
Christ says, I am the Door: Ergo, there must be in the Church an Order of
Door Keepers. Christ says, I am the Light of the World: Hereupon have they
founded the Order of Acolutes, to carry Tapers. And so for the rest. Thus
mutche may serve for a taste.

Now let us consider, what these Orders have to do, and with how Holy, and
weighty offices they stand charged in the Church of God. First Clemens (of
whoes Authority M. Hardinge maket be no small accoumpte, for he calls him the
Apostles follow) writes thus: Clement consi. Apost. Li. 8. Ca. 15.
Vnus Hypodiaconus det aquam manibus Sacerdotum: Duo Diaconi ex vtaque part
Altaris teneat flabellum confectum ex tenuibus membranis, vel ex Pauonum
pennis, quibus leuiter abigant praeteruclantes bestiolas, Orders.
ne in Pocula incidant: Let one of the Subdeacons give Water to the Priests
hands: Let two Deacons stand at the two ends of the Austore: either of them
with a fan made of fine Parchemente, or of Pecockes taises, therewith softely
to chase away the fl^es, that they fall not into the Communion Cups. The
offices of other Inferioure Orders be these, as they be noted by one of M.
Hardinges own side: Aureum Speculum Pap^.
Ad Minores Ordines haec spectant: Portare Cereos, and Vrceolum: and Canes
expellere de Ecclesia: To the sesse Orders these things belong: to carry
Tapers, and Holy Water stocks: and to dr^ue Doogges of the Church. These, I
trow, be the Mystical Holy Orders, whereof M. Hardinge says, Our part had
benne, to have made sum song discourse: being him self ashamed, as it may
appear by his silence, either to name them in particulare, or to open the
Secrets of their offices.

How be it in deed, good Christian Reader, sundry of these offices in the
Primitive Church were appointed to very good, and sober purposes: The Door
keepers office was then, to keep out Excommunicate persons, that they should
not press in emonge the Faithful: The Psalmistes, or Singers office was, to
singe the Psalms, thereby to move the peoples hearts to devotion: The
Exorcistes office was, by a special gift of God* seruinge only for that time,
to call forth soul Sprites out of the Bodies of them, that were possessed. The
Readers office was, openly, and plainly, and distinctely to pronounce the
Scriptures unto the people: and to this use the Bishop delivered unto him a
Book with this charge: ^ist 23. Lector.
Accipe, and esto relator Verbi Dei: Take thou this Book, and be thou a
pronounc^r of the Word of God. ^ist. 23. Cleros.
And therefore Isidorus says, Tanta, and ^am clara erit eius vox, vt quamuis
long^ positorum aures adimpleat: The Readers voice must be so sowd, and so
clear, that it may be hable to fille the eats of them, that stand far of.
The Acolothes, or VVaiters office was, to attend upon the Bishop, as a
witness of his conversation.

To such good uses these offices then served in the Church of God. But now
there is nothing leafte, sauinge the bare name only, without any manner use,
or Office. For neither doothe the Ostiarius keep out the Excommunicates: Nor
doothe the Acoluthus wait upon the Bishop: Nor doothe the Exorciste cast
forth Devils: Nor doothe the Psalmiste Singe the Psalms: Nor doothe the
Reader openly pronounce the Scriptures: (I might yet step alitle farther, to
open the whole beauty of the Cleregte of Rome) nor doothe the Deacon make
provision for the poor: nor doothe the Bishop preach the Word of God.

This had benne our part to have opened at large: And for leaning of the same,
we were worthy by M. Hardinges judgment, to be reproved.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 2.
Yet notwithstanding, we say, that there neither is, nor can be any one man,
which may have the whole Superiority in this Vuiuersal state: for that
Christ is ever present to assiste his Church, and needs not any man, to
supply his room, as his only heir to al his Substance: and y^ there ca^ be
no one mortal creature, which is hable to comprehend, or conceive in his mind
the Universal Church, that is to wite, all the parts of the world: mutche
less hable rightly, and duly to put them in order, and to Govern them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinges answer hereto is long, and tedious. The Substance thereof in
short is this: Where we say, No one Mortal Man is hable to wealde the burden
of the whole Church of God, M. Hardinge answeareth: Where any thing is in
deed, there whether it may be, or no* to discuss, it is needless. Therefore
whether any one man can be superior, and chief over the whole Church, we
leave to speak: that so it is, thus we prove: Every Parrishe has his
several Vicare, 1.
or Person: And every Dioces his own Bishop. Ergo, what reason is it, there
be not one Chief Gouernoure of the whole Christen people?

When questions be moved in matters of Faith, 2.
through diversities of judgments the Church should be divided, unless by
Authority of One it were kept in Unity.

They, 3.
that say otherwise, take from Christ the Glory of his providence, and the
praise of his great love toward his Church.

The Peace of the Church is more conveniently procured by one, 4.
then by many.

It is most meet, that the Church Militante, touching Government, 5.
resemble the Church Triumphante. But in the Triumphante Church one is
Gouernoure over the whole, that is God: Therefore in the Church Militant order
requires, that one bear rule over al according to that the Holy Captain
Iosue seems to speak, Iosue, 1.
The Children of Judah, and the Children of Israel shall aessemble together, A
great ouerfight: For these be the words, not of the Captain Joshua, but of
the Prophet Osee.
and they shall make to them selves one Head: Thereof our Lord says in S.
John, Johan. 10.
There shall be One Fold, and One Shephearde.

In deed Christ is Head of his Body. Yet need it is, for as mutche as
Christ now dwells not with us in Visible Presence, his Church have one Man
to do his steed of outward rulinge in Earth: And therefore he said unto
Peter, Feed my Flock: Confirm they Brethren.

Thus we see these Defenders Negative Doctrine, That no One Man may have the
Superiority over the whole state of the Church, disproued, as utterly false.

To their second reason, Lo.
we grant, Christ needed not any man to supply his room, that should
succeed in his whole Substance. Neither is Man of Capacity of such
succession: Untruth. For Panormitane says, Papa potest, quic quid Deus ipse
potest.
neither has there any such fond saieinge ben uttered by the Divines.

But because Christ saw the knot of Unity should be most surely kept knit
by Gouernmente of one, he Untruth.
committed the regiment of the whole Church unto One: whoes Visible Ministry
he might use in steed of him self.

To the third we say, that Man is not only hable to comprehend in his
mind, and conceive the Universal Church, but also to put it in order, and to
Govern it so far as is expedient.

Last of al, who so ever will not be fed nor ruled by this one Shepherd, and
breaks out of this one Fold, he is not of the Flock of Christ, but of the
Heard of Antichriste.

Here, Gentle Reader, M. Hardinge has brought thee, not the Authority of any
one Catholic Doctor, or Learned Father, but only a few cold Reasons of his
own, with certain Scriptures unadvisedly alleged, and violently forced from
their meaning, as shall soon appear.

His first Reason concludes very weakly: Every parish is governed by One
Vicare, 1.
or Person: and every Diocese is governed by One several Bishop: Ergo, there
is One Universal Governor over the whole Church of Christ. Here is neither
order in Reason, nor sequel in nature. Therefore if any man would deny the
Argument, M. Hardinge were never hable to make it good. He might as well, and in
as good order reason thus: Every Kingdom, or Common Weal has One Prince, or
Magistrate to rule over it: Ergo, There is One Universal Prince, to rule over
the whole world. Or thus, Every Flock of Sheep bathe One Several Shephearde
to ouersee them: Ergo, all the Flocks through the world are ouerseene by One
General Shephearde. Otherwise, M. Hardinge imagines, this foul absurdity
must needs follow, that the part is better Governed, then the whole.

The other three Reasons, 2. 3. 4. In the fourth Article, and in the 18. and
19.
touching the Providence of God, the Debatinge of questions in Faith, and
conseruinge of Peace, and Unity in the Church, are answered already in my
Former Reply to M. Hardinge. Divisions.
In deed, I remember, to auouche all that M. De Mayor. and Obedien. Vnam
Sanctam. In Glossa.
Hardinge has here said, one sometimes well inclined to that side, said
thus: Non videretur Dominus discretus fuisse (vt cum reuerentia eius loquar)
nisi Vnicum post se talem Vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia posset: Christ
our Lord should not have seemed to have dealte discretely (to speak it with
reverence) unless he had leafte One such Vicare behind him, Unity by one
Pope.
that might have done al these things.

I grant, Dissension, and quarrelles be the sooner ended, when al things be
put over to one Man: So that the same one Man may live for ever, and still
continewe in one mind, and never alter. But oftentimes one Pope is sound
contrary to an other: Platyna in Sabini ano. Sabellicus Enneade. 9. Lib. 1.
Platyna, in Stephano Sexto. Platyna, in Romano. 1.
and sometimes one Pope has benne found contrary to him self. Pope
Sabinianus would have burnte al Pope Gregory's Books: And, as it is said
before, Pope Romanus utterly abolished all the Acts of his Predecessor Pope
Steuin: The same Pope Steuin unburied his Predecessor Pope Formosus, and
defaced, and mangled his naked carkesse, and utterly condemned al, that had
benne done by him before: And Platina geuethe this general judgment of them,
Nihil aliud isti Pontificuli cogitabant, quam vt Nomen, and Dignitatem Maiorum
suorum extinguerent: These little Petite Popes had none other care in the world,
but how to deface the Name, and Estimation of other Popes, that had benne
before them. And thus, that one Pope likes, an other misliketh: that one
allows, an other condemns. And yet by M Hardinges judgment, we have none
other rule to stay by in doubtful cases, but only the Will, and Pleasure of
the Pope.

How be it, this, I trow, is not the readieste way to procure Peace, and to
maintain Unity in the Church. And therefore Gregory says of John the
Bishop of Constantinople, Gregori. Lib 4.
that claimed to him self this Universal Power, Epist. 34. 38.
Si hanc causam aequanimiter portamus, Gregori. Lib. 4.
totius Ecclesiae Fidem corrumpimus: Epist. 76.
Corruit Vniuersa Ecclesia a statu suo, si is, qui Vniuersalis dicitur, cadit:
If we quietly suffer this matter thus to proceed (that one Man shall be called
the Universal Bishop, we seek not ways to maintain Unity, but) we
overthrow the Faith of the whole Church: If be, that is called the Universal
Bishop, happen to fall, the whole Church fallethe from her state. Thus
therefore, to allow any one Man Universal Authority over the whole Church,
is a matter, not behoueful, and profitable, as M. Hardinge fansieth, but, as
Gregory says, doubteful, and dangerous to the Church. For although all the
world either would, or could give ear, and credit to one Man, yet were not
that therefore always Christian Unity. August. De Vera Relig ione Ca. 45
S. Augustine says, Habet and Superbia appetitum quendam Vnitatis, and
Omnipotentiae: Pride it self has a certain desire of Unity, and of
Universal Power.

An other of M. Hardinges Reasons is this: The Church Labouringe here in
Earth must resemble the Church of the Saints Triumphing in Heaven. But in
Heaven God only is the Gouernoure over the whole: Therefore, in the Church
beneathe, the Pope likewise must needs be Gouernoure over the whole. Thus God
must be rated to Govern above, and the Pope beneath: and so, as one sometime
said, Diuisum Imperium cum love Caesar habet.

This is a valiante kind of Argument. It holds from Heaven to Earth: from
Angels to Men: from God to the Pope.

But how knows M. Hardinge, what Orders of Angels, and Archangelles there
be in Heaven? what they do: how they deal: who rules: who are ruled: what
Laws, and Policies they have emongste them? They say, they would frame their
Church according to the Samplar: And yet good men they never knew, nor
saw the Samplar. But only of them selves they imagine Commonweals, and
Orders in Heaven: and according to the same, they would shape, and fashon
their own Church in Earth. The better way, M. Hardinge, had benne, seeinge
the whole matter hangs only upon your fantasies, to say, that God has
appointed one Principal Archangel to be Pope in Heaven: and al other Powers,
Angels, and Dominions to be his Subjects. Thus might ye easily have made
your frame to agree with your Pattern, and the one of your fancies to answer
the other.

For to say, Joshua for Osee.
as you say, Church Triumphante, and Milita^te.
God rules al in Heaven above: Therefore the Pope must rule al in the world
beneath, it is but a sclender kind of reasoninge. S. Augustine says, Quid
aliud in Pompa huius mundi homo appetit, nisi Solus esse, si fieri possit, cui
multa subiecta sint: August. De V^ra Religione, Ca. 4^
Peruersa, scil^^et, imitatione Omnipotentis Dei? In the Vain Pomp of this
world what thing else is (...)* that a man doothe desire, but, if it were
possible, to make him self alone such a one, unto whom many things may be
obedient: and that by a peeuishe countrefeitinge of God Omnipotente?

And this is it, that Gregory says of John the Bishop of Constantinople:
Illum, videlicet, imitatur, qui spreta Angelorum societate, ascendere conatus
est ad culmen Singularitatis: Gregori. Lib. 4.
He follows Lucifer, Epist. 78.
who despisinge the fellowship of the Angels, labored to geate up to the
top of Singularity, and said, I will mount up above the North, and will be
like unto the Highest.

Verily, Dionysius writing purposely of the Policy, and Gouernmente of the
Church, and comparinge the same with the Glorious Gouernmente of the Angels
and powers in Heaven, yet never uttered one Word of the Universal Gouernmente
of the Pope. Nay rather in the late Council of Constance, out of this very
place is Fourmed an Argument to the contrary: In Coelesti Hierarchia tota
Congregatio Angelorum non habet Caput Vnum, In Opere Triparti. Li. 2. Ca. ^
praeter solum Deum: Ergo, a Simili, in Ecelesiastica Hierarchia Hominu^ no^
debet esse Vnum Caput, praeter Solum Deu^: In the Heavenly Gouernemente the
whole Company of the Angels has none other One Head, but only God:
Therefore of the like, in the Ecclesiastical Gouernmente emongste Men, there
ought not to be any One Head, but only God.

Nevertheless M. Hardinge is well hable to fortify al these things by the
Authority of the Scriptures. And here in steed of the first Chapter of the
Prophet Osee, Josua for Osee.
be allegeth the first Chapter of the Book of Joshua. And lest thou should
think, it were only a marginal error, brought in by sum oversight of the
Printer, as he uses sometimes to excuse, and to shifte the matter, he has
thus laid it wide open in his own text, Hereof the Holy Captain Iosue
seems to speak. How be it, one error may the better be dissembled emongst
so many.

In deed the Prophet Osee, and not the Holy Captain Joshua, speaks these
words: but not, as M. Hardinge imagines* of the state of al Christendom
under One Pope, but of that Unity, and Consent, that all the Faithful of the
world, as well Jews, as Gentiles should have under One Christ: as it is most
evident by the whole discourse of the text.

Thus lie the Words: Osee Cap. ^
The number of the Children of Israel shall be as the Sand of the Sea shore,
that cannot be numbered: And it shall comme to pass in the place, where it was
said unto them, Ye are no people of mine, There shall it be said unto them, Ye
are the Children of the Living God. And the Children of Juda, and the Children
of Israel shall assemble together, and shall appointe unto them selves one
Head. Upon which Words S. Hierome Writethe thus: Haec omnia fient, quia
magnus est Dies Seminis Dei, Hierony. in Ose^ Cap. 1.
qui interpretatur Christus: Al these things shall comme to pass, because it
is the great day of the Seed of God, which Seed is expounded ( not the
Pope, but) Christ.

Likewise Nicolas Lyra, Congregabuntur Filij Judah, id est, Apostoli: and Filij
Israel, id est, Nicol. Lyra in Osee Cap 1.
Gentiles conuersi: Pariter, id est, in Vna Ecclesia: and ponent sibi Caput
Vnum, id est, Christum: There shall assemble together the Children of Judah,
that is to say, the Apostles: and the Children of Israel, that is to say, the
Heathens converted: Together, that is to say, in One Church: and shall
appointe unto them selves One Head, that is to say, ( not one Pope, as M.
Hardinge would have it, but) One Christ.

S. Augustine expoundinge the same words says thus: One Shepherd etc. Augu.
De Ciuitate. Li. 18. Ca 28
Recolatur Lapis ille Angularis, and duo illi parietes, vnus ex Iudaeis, and
alter ex Gentibus: Let us remember that Corner Stone (that is Christ, and not
the Pope) and the two Wales, the one of the Jews, the other of the Heathens.

The other words, Johan. 10.
which M. Hardinge allegeth out of S. John, Christ him self expounds, not
of the Pope, but of him self: I am the good Shephearde: I yield my life for my
Sheep: I know my Sheep, and am known of them: I have other Sheep. that be
not of this Flock. Them must I bring, that they may hear my Voice: and so
shall there be one Shepherd, and one Flock. These words Chrysostom
expounds by the words of S. Paul: Ephesians. 2 Chrysostom. in Johan Homil. 59.
Vt duos conderet in Semetipso in Vnum nouum Hominem: That he might work two
people into One new Man ( not in the Pope, but) in him self.

S. Augustine expoundinge the same says thus, Augu. in Johan. Tract. 47.
Duobus istis Gregibus, ta^quam duobus Parietibus, Christus factus est Lapis
Augularis: Unto these two Flocks, as unto two Wales (not the Pope, but)
Christ was made the Corner Stone.

And what should I allege any other the Old Fathers? Nicolaus Lyra in Johan.
Ca. 10.
Nicolas Lyra, as simple an Interpreter, as he was, yet he likewise says the
same: Fiet Vnus Pastor, id est, Christus: There shall be One Shephearde, that is
to say, (not the Pope, but) ( Christ.) Neither is M. Hardinge hable to show
us any Learned allowed Interpreter, Old, or New, that has expounded this
place otherwise.

Al these things notwithstanding, as well these words of Christ, as also
the other of the Prophet Osee, M. Hardinge applies only to the Pope. The
Pope must be the Head: The Pope must be the Shephearde. Both Christ, and
Osee Prophesied these things of the Glory, and Kingdom of the Pope. Judah and
Israel shall choose Christ to be their Head: All the Faitheful through the
world are one Flock, and Christ is the Shephearde: Ergo, the Pope is the
General Head of the Universal Church of God.

Such Logique M. Hardinge is hable to teach us: and with such fear, and
reverence can he use Gods Holy Word. S^e^on. Tra^quil. in Caligula.
And like as the Emperor Caligula sometimes took of the Head of his great
God Iuppiter, and set on an other Head of his own: Even so by these
Interpretations, and Gloses, M. Hardinge smites of Christ, the Only Head of
the Church, and sets on the Pope. For Johannes de Parisijs (out of whom, or
sum other the like, he has borrowed this whole matter) nothing doubts to
tell us, that Christ is not, nor cannot be the Head of this Body, Johan. De
Parisi^s, de potestate Regia, and Papal^, Cap. 3.
or the Shephearde of this Flock. And, lest M. Hardinge should charge me with
untrue report, his words be these: Congregabu^tur Filij Judah, and Filij
Israel, vt pona^t sibi Caput Vnum: Et Johan. 10. Fiet Vnu^ Ouile, and Vnus
Pastor. Quod quide^ de Christo intelligi no^ potest: sed de alio aliquo
Ministro, qui praesit loco eius: The Children of Juda, and the Children of
Isral shall assemble together, to appointe unto them selves One Head: And in
the tenthe of John, There shall be made One Fold, and One Shephearde: Which
thing doubtelesse cannot be expounded of Christ: but must be taken of some
other Minister, that may rule in his steed.

Thus we are taught, that Christ is neither the Head of his own Body, the
Church: nor the Shephearde of his own Flock, but only the Pope. And yet
Chrysostom says, Qui non vtitur Sacra Scriptura, sed ascendit aliunde, id
est, non concessa via, Chrysostom. in Johan. Honal. 58.
hic non Pastor est, sed Fur: Who so ever uses not the Holy Scripture, but
comes (...) an other way that is not lawful, (which is by False Gloses, and
Corruptions) he is not the Shephearde of the Flock: he is the Thief.

So says S. Augustine, Augusti. Contra Donatist. Lib. 6. 1. Q. 3. Vocantur
Cane ^.
Ipsum characterem multi and Lupi, and Lupis imprimunt: The note, or mark of a
Bishop many give unto Wolves, and be Wolves them selves.

M. Hardinge says farther: For as mutche as Christ is Ascendedinto Heaven,
and is now no more conuersante emongst us in Visible Form, Feed my Sheep.
as he was before, it behooued some one man to be put in Commission for
bearinge the charge, and taking care of the whole Church. Therefore he said
unto Peter, Feed my Flock: Confirm thy Brethren. First, what Ancient
Learned Father ever thus scanned the words of the Popes Commission? Or why
does M. Hardinge auouche so great a matter of him self only, without farther
Authority? And if this so large Commission be to Feed, and to Feed so many,
why then doothe the Pope Feed so little? Or rather, why Feeds he nothing at
al? Or how can he claim by Feedinge, that never Feeds?

Again, where learned M Hardinge to reason thus: Christ is Ascended into
Heaven: Ergo, the Pope is Head of the whole World? Or thus, Christ said to
Peter, Feed my Flock: Ergo, the Pope has Universal Power over the whole
Church of God? How can he make these Arguments to hold, I will not say by
Divinity, but by any reasonable shifte of Logique?

But ye say, God speaks not now unto us mouth to mouth: nor sends us
down his Angels from Heaven: nor instructs us now by Visions, as he did
others in Old times. What of that? will it therefore follow, that all the world
must give ear to the Pope? Nay, M. Hardinge, Chrysostom says mutche
better: Chrysostom. In Genesin, Homil. 2.
Because God speaks not now unto us in such familiare sort, Ergo, Suam
erga Homines amicitiam innouare volens, quasi long absentibus literas mittit,
conciliaturus sibi Vniuersam hominum Naturam: Therefore God mindinge to renew
his favor to wards Man, sent (his Holy Scriptures, as it were) his Letters,
thereby to reconcile to him self al Mankind. God speaks not now unto us by
his Angels: but he has already spoken unto us, Hebrae. 1.
as S. Paul says, Cala. 1.
by the mouth, and presence of his Only Son. And therefore he says
again, If an Angel from Heaven would now Preach unto us otherwise, then we
have received, we should hold him accursed.

But for the Unity, and quiet gouernmente of the Church of God, S. Paul
says, Ephesians. 4.
Christ Ascendinge above all the Heavens, has given ( not One Universal Pope
to rule the whole, but) some Apostles, some prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors, some Doctors, for the perfitinge of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the buildinge up of the Body of Christ, that we may al
comme into the Unity of Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God. By
these means God thought it sufficient, to preserve his Church in Unity, and
never made mention of One Universal Pope.

Therefore S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Simplicit. Praelatorum.
Vnus est Episcopatus, cuius a singulis in solidum pars tenetur: There is but
One Bishoprike, part whereof of every several Bishop is holden in whole. And
again, Ideo plures sunt in Ecclesia Sacerdotes, vt, vno Haeresim faciente,
coeteri subueniant: Therefore are there many Bishops in the Church, that if
one fall into Heresy, Cyprian. Lib. 3.
the rest may healpe. Epist 13.
Thus, when Peter walked not uprightly to the Gospel, Galat. 2.
Paul came with healpe, Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 26.
and reproved him openly even to his face: Augusti. Episto. 28.
Thus Irenaeus reproved Pope Victor: thus sundry godly Fathers have reproved
others. Therefore S. Augustine says, Deus docuit Petrum per posteriorem
Paulum. A quocunque enim Verum dicitur, illo donante, dicitur, qui est ipsa
Veritas: Thus God instructed Peter by Paul his p^n^e, that was called after
him. For by whom so ever the Truth is spoken, it is spoken by his gift, that
is Truth it self.

Ye say, the Pope succedeth not Christ in all his Substance, yt is to say, in all his Power: In Council. Lateran. sub Iulio.
neither has there any such fond saying benne uttered (say you) at any
time by the Divines. If this be true, wherefore then be these words written,
and so well allowed of in the Council of Laterane, In Council. Lateranen. sub
Leone, In Oratione Stephani Patracensis.
Tibi data est Omnis Potestas, in Coelo, and in Terra? Unto your Holiness al
Power is given, as well in Heeuen, as in Earth. Wherefore is Bernarde so well
allowed to force the same farther with these words: Qui totum dedit, nihil
excludit: He that has given thee Al, has excepted Nothing. Wherefore is
Panormitane allowed to say, To Foresake the Pope.
Papa potest omnia, quae Deus ipse potest? The Pope is hable by his power to
do, what so ever God him self can do.

For the rest, Panormitan. De Electio. Ca. Licet.
M. Hardinge says, One King is hable to rule One Kingedome: Ergo, One Pope
is hable to rule the whole Church. This Reason is very simple, and is
answered before. Of the gouernmente of Princes we have daily Practice: But of
Popes, that ever exercised this Universal Dominion over the whole Church of
God, M. Hardinge is not hable to show us one. Well were it with him, if he were
but a Member of Christ's Body, and a Sheep of his Flock. S. Gregory said
sometime to John the Bishop of Constantinople, claiminge unto him self the
same Title, and thinkinge him self hable yenough to rule the whole, Gregor.
Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
Quid tu Christo Vniuersalis Ecclesiae Capiti in Extremi Iudicij responsurus es
examine, qui cuncta eius Membra tibimet conaris Vniuersalis appellatione
supponere? What answer will thou make in the trial of the Last Judgment,
unto Christ the Head of his Universal Church, that thus by the name of
Universal Pishop, seek to bring under thee all the Members of his Body?

Last of al, M. Harding concludes without premises: Who so ever will not be
ruled by this Shepherd, the Pope, is of the Heard of Antichriste. So says
one of the Popes hired Proctours: De Maiorlt. and Obedient, Vnam Sanct. In
Gloss.
Quicquid Saluatur, est sub Summo Pontifice: What so ever Soul is saved, it
is under the Pope. This one thing being granted, M. Hardinges whole cause
passes clear.

But, God be thanked, it appears already to al them, that have eles to see,
that we have not departed from the servile Obedience of that See, but upon
just cause, and good advise. And in such sort the Pope him self will not
deny, but it is lawful for any Church to dissente from the Church of Rome.
These he his words, Did. 12. Non. decet.
which must be holden for a Law: Quicquid sine discretione Iustitiae contra
Romanae Ecclesiae Disciplina^ actum fuerit, ratum haberi nulla ratio permittit:
What so ever thing is done without discretion of Justice, against the Order
of the Church of Rome, it may not by any means be allowed. By which words
it appears, Ex contrario Sensu, By an Argument of the contrary, that, what
so ever is done by discretion of Justice, notwithstanding it be against the
Order of the Church of Rome, yet ought it to well allowed.

S. Augustine says, August. De Vnitate Eccle. Catholica, Ca. 10.
Ne Catholicis quidem Episcopis consentiendum est, sicubi forte falluntur, vt
contra Canonicas Scripturas aliquid sentiant: We may not give our consent
unto any Bishops, be they never so Catholic, if they happen to be deceived,
and to determine centrarie to the Scriptures.

And Pope Pius. Abbas Vrsper. Page 443.
2 him self says, Resistendum est quibuscunque in faciem, sieve Paulus, sieve
Petrus sit, qui ad Veritatem non ambulat Euangelij: We are bound to
withstand any man to the face, be it Peter, be it Pause, if be walk not to
the Truth of the Gospel.

To conclude, where the Woulfe is broken in, it is best for the poor Sheep,
to break out. That the Woulfe was broken in, beside the cruel spoil, and
raueninge of Christian Blood, it is plain by the words of S. Bernarde. For
thus he speaks thereof in Open Council, and in the presence of sundry
Bishops: Non custodiunt Gregem Domini, Bernardus in Council. Remen. In eodem
Concilio. Numer. 16.
ses mactant, and deuorant: They keep not the Lords Flock: but they kille
it, and devour it. Again he says, Propterea relinquamus istos, quia non
sunt Pastores, sed Traditores: Therefore set us leave them: For they are not
Postours, but Traitors. And therefore God thus warns us in the like case:
Exite de medio horum hominum, ne cum illis pereatis: Go forth from the
mids of those Men, lest perish al together.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 3.
For all the Apostles, The other Apostles equal with Peter.
as Cyprian says, were of like power among them selves, and the rest were the
same, that Peter was.

M. Hardinge.
Power is double, Peter's Power Ordinary. The Apostles power Extraordinary.
Peter is the Shepherd: The Apostles are the Sheep. Manifest, and mere
Untruths.
the one Ordinary, the other by privilege or Extraordinary. Ordinary Power is
that which contineweth in one and the same course for ever. According to
which Power Peter was Head of the Church, and his Successors after him.
Power by Privilege, or Extraordinary is that which is given besides the common
course by way of dispensation. As where the other Apostles should have
received Ordinarely their Power from Peter, as who had commission over al,
both Lambs and Sheep, among whom the Apostles had their place: Chrisie by
special grace preuenteth ordinary course, and makes them for the time, and in
their Persons equal with Peter in the office of Apostleship. Thus concerning
ordinary Power, Peter is Head of the Apostles, and by that reason they are
subject unto him, as Sheep unto their Shepherd. But by Privilege true it is,
as S. Cyprian says, They were of like power among them selves. Peter has
Power to him, and to his Heirs for ever: The Apostles have Power only for
term of Life.
Now what odds there is berwixt an Ordinary authority of iudginge given to
any Officer, for him self, and his Successors in that Office for ever, and a
special Commission for life time only: so mutche is berwixte Peter and the
rest of the Apostles.

The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Cyprians words be plain: Hoc erant vtique and Coeteri Apostoli, quod
fuit Petrus, Cyprian. De Simplicita. Praelatorum.
pari consortio praediti and Honoris, and Potestatis, Sed exordium ab Vnitate
proficiscitur, vt Ecclesia vna monstretur: The rest of the Apostles were the
same, that Peter was, al endewed with one fellowship both of Honor, and of
Power. Yet the Beginning is taken of One, to show, that the Church is One.
But al these words, ^e they never so plain, are soon shifted by a Pretty
Distinction, such as neither S. Cyprian, nor any other Learned Father, or
Doctor ever knew.

We are taught here to understand, that there are two Powers: The one
Ordinary, the other Ertraordinarie. By Ordinary Power, says M. Harindge,
that is the say, by Order, and of Common Course, Peter appointed all the rest
of the Apostles, and gave them Authority. And Christ also likewise gave them
Authority, but by Extraordinary Power, that is to sat, bistoes Order, and
out of Course. Or, to utter the matter in plainer wise, Peter gave power to the
Apostles by his Usual Authority, and by dowe form of Law: But Christ gave
them Power, as M. Hardinge says, Only for the time, and by way of
Dispensation, and bisides the Law. And thus Peter is the Ordinary Head of
the Apostles: Christ is their Head too, how be it, not in like sort, but
Extraordinary. For, as touching Order of gouernmente, Peter is the
Shephearde, and the Apostles are the Sheep. Al other the Apostles hold their
Power, as by Copy, for term of Life: Peter only holds the same in Fee
Simple, to him, and to his Heirs for ever.

And, good Christian Reader, least thou should think, I have in scorn, and
wilfully wreasted M. Hardinges words, which otherwise might be uttered by
him in some sober meaning: may it please thee by these few to consider, what
certain others of that side have uttered, and published, touching the same.

Petrus de Palude says thus: Petrus de Palude De Potestae. Apostolor. Ar. 2.
Petr. de Palade In eodem Arti.
Dico* quod nullus Apostolorum, praeter Perrum, factus est a Christo Episcopus:
I say, that none of the Apostles, sauinge only Peter, was made Bishop by
Christ. And again, Videretur, in Nouo Testamento, quod alij Apostoli a
Christo Nullam Potestatem Iurisdictionis receperunt: and per consequens
relinguitur, quod Omnis Potestas Iurisdictionis, quam habuerunt Apostoli,
Specialiter post Christi Ascensum, fuit collata eis a Petro: It would appear,
that in the New Testament the rest of the Apostles received no manner Power
of Jurisdiction at Christ's hands: and so consequently it follows, that all the Power of Jurisdiction, that the Apostles had, specially after Christ's
Ascension, was given unto them by Peter. Again, he imagines God the Father
thus to say unto Christ: Petr. de Palude In eodem Cap. Petr. de Palude De
Potestate Curator. Ar. 6.
Constitues eos Principes, non per te, sed per tuum Vicarium: Thou shalt make
the Apostles governors over all the Earth, not by thee self, but by Peter thy
Vicare. And again, Paulus, and alij Apostoli a Petro, non debuerunt praedicare
in Ecclesia specialiter Petro commissa, nisi de eius licentia. Vnde a Christo
habuerunt idoneitatem: a Petro autem Authoritatem: Paul, and the other
Apostles might not Preach in the Church committed unto Pet^r, but with
Peter's License. For of Christ they had only Ability: but of Peter they
received Authority.

In like manner writes Pope Nicolas, Extra. De Elect. and Electi potest.
Fundame^ta.
Petrum in Consortium Indiuiduae Trinitatis assumptum, id, quod ipse erat,
Dominus voluit nominari: Our Lord took Peter into the Fellowship of the Holy
Trinity, and would have him called the same, that he was him self.

By such Amplifications, and outrage in speech, it would appear, Christ
were Peter's Vicare: and not Peter Vicare unto Christ. In this Sense, and
meaning M. Hardinge seems to say, that by Ordinary, and common Course of
Law, the Apostles had al their Power, not from Christ, but only from Peter.

But here M. Hardinge unawares falls into a marvelous inconvenience. For,
these things thus granted, it must needs follow, that duringe the time of
Christ's aboade in Earth, the Apostles had no manner Ordinary Power at al:
neither to Preach, nor to Baptize, nor to Bind, nor to Loose. For Heruaeus a
Doctor of M. Hardinges side says thus, Hernaeus, De Potestate Papae, Ca. 21.
Sciendum, quod, cum Christus conuersabatur cum hominibus, non fuit alius Papa
praeter ipsum: nec Petrus tunc habuit potestatem Papalem: We must
understand, that while Christ was conuersante emongst men in Earth, there
was none other Pope, but be alone: Neither then had Peter the Popes Authority.

So likewise says Petrus de Palude: Petr. de Palude De Potesta. A postolorwn.
Non decebat esse simul, nisi Vnum Summum Pontificem. Vnde, Christo Ascensuro,
debuit Petrus fieri Episcopus Summus, and non antea: It was not meet there
should be more then one Highest Bishop at one time. Therefore, when Christ
was ready to Ascend into Heaven, it was convenient to make Peter the Highest
Bishop, and not before.

For so long time, Christ could not give his Apostles any Ordinary
Authority: for M. Hardinge tells us, that his Power herein was Only
Ertraordinarie: Of the other side, Peter could give them none: for as
Heruaeus, and Paladensis say, Until Christ's Ascension he was not Pope.

But to leave these vain Fantasies, not worth the hearing, S. Paul will
soon remove al these doubts. Gala. 1.
Thus he writes of him self: Paul the Apostle, not of Men, nor appointed
by Men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. And S. Chrysostom hereof
writes thus, Chrysostom in Epis. ad Galat. Ca. 2.
Paulus nihil opus habebat Petro, nec illius egebat voce: sed Honor Par erat
illi. Nihil enim hic dicam amplius: Paul had no manner lack of Peter: nor
stood in need of his voice, or allowance: but in Honor was his Fellow. For I
will here say no more. His meaning is, He was his better.

How be it, what need words? Set contention aparte: the case is clear. For
it was not Peter, that breathed over the Apostles: It was not Peter, that said
unto them, John. 20. Mark. 16.
Go to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel: Receive the Holy Ghost: Go
into all the World, and Preach the Gospel. All this Power was given them by
Christ alone, and not by Peter.

Now, where as M. Hardinge teaches us, that Peter was the Shephearde, and the
Apostles the Sheep, making them al as mutche inferior unto Peter, as the
Sheep is inferior unto the Shepherd, The other Apostles equal with Peter.
S. Hierome says, Dices, Super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia: Licerid ipsum in
alio loco super Omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti claues Regni Coelorum
accipiant, and Ex Aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur: Ye will say,
The Church is founded upon Peter. Notwithstanding in an other place the same
thing is done upon all the Apostles: and al receive the keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven: Hierony. Aduer. Ioui^tan. Li 1. Origin. in Matthae. Tracta. 1.
and the strength of the Church is founded Equally upon them al. Likewise the
Learned Father Origin says, Quod si super vnum illum Petrum tantum existimas
aedisicari toram Ecclesiam, quid dicturus es de Iohanne Filio Tonitrui, and
Apostolorum vnoquoque? If thou think, the whole Church was builded only upon
Peter, what will thou then say of John the Son of the Thunder, and of every
of the Apostles? Therefore S. Chrysostom of Peter says thus: Chrysostom. in
Matthae. Homil. 83.
Duplex crimen erat: ium quia repugnauit, tum quia coeteris seipsum praeposuit:
Peter was in double fault: both for that he withstoode Christ, and also for
that he set him self before the rest. S. Augustine makes Peter Fellow, and
Equal with the other Apostles: Inter se concorditer vixerunt Petrus, August.
Epist. 86
and Condiscipuli eius: Peter and his Fellows lived agreeably together. And
again, Christus sine personarum acceptione hoc dedit Paulo, vt Ministraret
Gentibus, quod etiam Petro dederat, August. in Epist. Ad Galat. Ca. 2.
vt Ministraret Iudaeis: Christ without any choice of Persons, gave the same
(Authority) to Paul, to Minister emongst the Heathens, that he gave to Peter,
to Minister emongst the Jews. And the very Ordinary Gloss geoeth these
words to S. Paul: Non didici ab. alijs, tanquam a Maioribus: sed contuli cu^
illis, tanquam cum amicis, Gloss. Galat. 2.
and Paribus: I learned not of (Peter, and) others, as of my betters: but I had
conference with them, as with my Equalles, and Friends. Likewise Paul him
self says, Iacobus, Petrus, Johannes, qui videbantur Columnae esse, dextras
dederunt mihi, Gala. 2.
and Barnabae Societatis: James, Peter, and John, that seemed to be the
Pillars, gave unto me, and Barnabas the right hands of Fellowship: Which the
Gloss expounds thus, Societatis, id est, Aequalitatis: Of Fellowship, that is
to say, of Equality.

Therefore, notwithstanding M. Hardinges Ordinary, and Extraordinary
Distinctions, S. Cyprians words are plain, and true, The rest of the
Apostles were even the same (in Authority) that Peter was, al end^wed with One
Fellowship, both of Honor, and of Power.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 4.
And that it was said indifferently to them al, Feed ye: indifferently to
them al, Go into the whole world: indifferently to them al, Teach ye the
Gospel.

M. Hardinge.
We deny, that it was said indifferently to them al, Feed ye. Yea, or that
it was said at al, Feed ye. Untruth most vain, and manifest.
To Peter and none else was it said, Feed my Lambs, Feed my Sheep. John. 21.
Which Word of Feedinge so singularly spoken to Peter in the presence of
the other Apostles, proves, that it was not indifferently said to al, Feed
ye. That they were sent into the whole World, and that they were commanded
to teach, Mark. 16.
and in that respect also to Feed, we confess under the distinction of
Ordinary and Extraordinary Power before mentioned.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It forces not greatly, what M. Hardinge deny, or grant, having neither
Reason, nor Authority, but only his own. But if Power were not given
indifferently to all the Apostles, tell us then, wherein is the odds? What had
Peter more? What had the others less? Or what Old Doctor, or Learned Father
ever saw this Difference?

Christ said equally unto them al, Rece^^^ the Holy Ghost: Whose Sins ye
forge^ue, they are forgeeuen: Go into the whole World: Preach the Gospel to
every Creature. These words perteine equally unto al. Peter had no more the
Holy Ghost, no more Power to forgeeue Sins, no more Commission to go into the
whole World, no more Authority to Preach the Gospel, then others had.

M. Hardinge says, To the rest of the Apostles it was not said at al, Feed
ye. John. 21. Marc. 13.
To Peter, and to none else, was it said, Feed my Lambs: Feed my Sheep. Yet
Christ him self says, Quod Vni dico, Omnibus dico: That I say to One, I
say to Al. Hierony. contra Jouinian. Li. 1. 1. Cor. 3.
And S. Hierome says, as it is before alleged, All the Apostles received the
Keys of the Kingedome of Heaven: and the strength of the Church was builte
Equally upon them al. S. Paul says: What is Peter, what is Paul, but the
Ministers of Christ, through whom ye have believed? Paul has planted:
Apollo has watered. He that planteth, Chryso. in Epist. Ad Gala. Ca. 1.
is nothing: He that watreth, is nothing. Chrysostom says: Angeli,
quamliber magni, tamen Serui sunt, ac Ministri: The Angels of God, be they
never so great, yet are they but Servants, and Ministers. Therefore, to
conclude, he says: Ne Paulo quidem obedire Oportet, Chrysosto. in Epist. Ad
Timoth. 2. Homi. 2.
si quid proprium dixerit, si quid humanum: sed Apostolo Christum in se
loquentem circumferenti: We may not believe Paul him self, if he speak any
thing of his own, or of worldly reason: but we must believe the Apostle
bearinge about Christ speakinge within him.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 5.
And, Ad Euagrium.
as Hierome says, Al Bishops where so ever they be, be they at Rome, be
they at Eugubium, be they at Constantinople, be they at Rhegium, be al of like
Preeminence, and of like Priesthood. And, De Simpl. Pelator.
as Cyprian says, There is but one Bishop^ike, and a piece thereof is
perfitely and wholly holden of every particular Bishop.

M. Hardinge.
The Interpreter, not without the will and advise of this Defender, has altered
the Sense of the Latin, Untruth: Read the Answer.
as the Author of the Latin has altered the words of S. Hierome. For
neither speaks S. Hierome of Bishops in the plural number, neither says
the Latin Apology, that the Bishops be al of like Preeminence, which this
Translation has, but of the same Merit, and of the same Priesthood. With the
word Preeminence guilefully shifted into the sentence in place of this word
Merit, these false players thought to win the Game. That is, that al
Bishops, after the mind of S. Hierome be of like Preeminence, and so that al
be of like Power, and authority* and none above other.

Concerning the place alleged, Hieromes place discussed.
S. Hierome in an Epistle to Euagrius speakinge against that, a particular
custom of the Church of Rome should Preiudicate the Authority of the whole
world, in preferringe Deacons before Priests, compares Bishops of great
Cities and little Towns together, and says, that as touching the Honor,
Dignity, and Power of Bishoply Order and Office. and of Priesthood, as good
and as great a Bishop in that respect is the One, as the other: and that the
Bishop of Eugubium, and Rhegium, two little Towns in Italy, and of Thebes an
other little Town in Egypt, are Bishops and Priests, and have as great
This was no part of the question.
Merit in regard of any their Virtues, and as great Power concerning the
order of Priesthood, as the Bishops of Rome, of Constantinople, of
Alexandria. Yet as touching Power and Authority of regiment, the Patriarchs
of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antiochia be above Bishops of other
Dioceses, and the Bishop of Rome Peter's Successor is Untruth: For the B. of
Rome is equal with the other four Patriarchs, as shall appear.
above al. For we being many are one Body in Christ, and every man among our
selves one an others members. This knotte requires a mutual consent of the
whole Bod^e, but chiefly the concord of Priests: Epist. 84. Among Bishops
is difference of Power with likeness of Honor.
among whom although dignity be not common to them al, yet order is general,
as Leo writes. For even among the most Blessed Apostles (says he) in
likeness of Honor there was odds of Power. And whereas the Election of them
al was equal, yet to One was it given to be over the rest. Out of which
platte rose the distinction also of Bishops, and with great Providence it
has benne disposed, Equality of Bishops.
that al should not take al upon them, but that in every province there
should be one, who might first give his sentence among his brethren: and
again that in the great Cities some should be ordained for taking upon
them matters of greater care, through whom the charge of the universal Church
should have course to the one see of Peter, and that nothing should ever
dissent from the Head.

How great, and Honorable so ever the room is, that any Bishop is placed in,
be he Archbishop, Metropolitan, Primat, Patriarch, or Pope himself: He is
no more a Bishop, then any other of those, who occupy the lowest room. The
diversity bitvveene Bishops, wherein it consists.
The diversity consists in this, that they are called to part of charge in
sundry proportions, as the Bishoprikes are greater or lesser: the Pope has
committed unto him Untruth: For Christ never gave the Pope any such charge.
the charge of the whole Fold of Christ, and has the fulness of Power. For if
al were of like Power, as these Defenders teach, Unity could not be
maintained. Wherefore Untruth: For Christ never gave such order.
by very order of Christ himself it has benne ordained, that matters
touching Faith and Religion; at least such as be weighty, be referred to
that one Prince of Pastors, who sits in the chair of Peter, the Highest
Bishop, which has Untruth: For it has not alvvaies benne observed.
always benne done and observed from the Apostles time to our days by
Catholics, and not seldom also by Heretics.

The sentence that this Defender alleges out of S. Cyprian, it seems he
understood it not. Ye say, that a piece of that one Bishoprike is perfitly
and wholly holden of every particular Bishop. But what mean ye by that? If by
this word, In solidum, perfitly and wholly holden, ye mean, that every
particular Bishop without is a Bishop dependinge of any other, then ye speak
against the words ye bring out of S. Cyprian. De Simplicitate Praelatorum.
Who says, that as there are many beams of one Sun, many boughs of one
root* many Rivers of one Fountain: so there are many Bishops of one
Bishoprike. Therefore this Bishoprike is unto particular Bishops, as the
Sun, as the Root, as the Fountain. Vatruth, impudente above measure.
What the Fountain, root, and Sun of this Bishoprike is, S. Cyprian
declares a little before, she winge that it was said to Peter, To thee I will
give the ketes of the Kingdom of Heaven. And, Feed my sheep.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge charge us with two of his own common faults: First with
Corruption: next with Ignorance. With Corruption, in the words, and sense of
S. Hierome: with Ignorance, in the place of S. Cyprian. But if we be hable
sufficiently, and truly to answer both, I trust, M. Hardinge shall have no
great cause, mutche to vaunte him self, either of his plain dealinge herein,
or of his knowledge.

And here, to dissemble these childishe causilati^ns of the altering of
Numbers, the Singular into the Plural: and of the changinge of this word,
Merit, into this word, Preeminence: which great fault, if it were any, by
M. Hardinges own Confession, proceeded only from the Interpreter, and not
from the Author: I say, to dissemble, and to pass by all these seely
quarrels, what S. Hierome meante hereby, Erasmus a man of great Learning, and
judgment, expounds thus: ^rasm, in Schol. in Epist. ad Euagrium.
Hieronymus aequare videtur omnes Episcopos inter se, perinde quasi omnes ex
aequo Apostolis successerint. Nec putat vllum Episcopum alio minorem esse, quod
sit humilior: aut Maiorem, quod sit Opulentior: Nam aequat Eugubiensem
Episcopum cum Romano, Deinde non putat, Episcopum quouis Presbytero
praestantiorem esse, nisi quod ius habeat Ordinandi: Hierome seems to match
al Bishops together, as if they were al equally the Apostles Successors.
And he thinks not any Bishop to be sesse then other, for that he is poorer:
or greatter then other, for that he is richer. For he makes the Bishop of
Eugubium (a poor town) equal with the Bishop of Rome. And farther he
thinks, that a Bishop is no better then any Priest, sauinge that the Bishop
has Authority to Order Ministers.

But S. Hieromes words are plain of them self, and have no need of other
Expositour. Hierony. ad Euagrium.
Thus he writes: Quid facit, excepta Ordinatione, Episcopus, quod Presbyter
non faciat? Nec altera Romanae Vibis Ecclesia, altera totius Orbis existimanda
est. Et Galliae, and Britannia, and Aphrica, and Persis, and Oriens, and India,
and Omnes Barbarae Nationes Vnum Christum adorant: vnam obseruant regulam
Veritatis. Si Authoritas quaeritur, Orbis mayor est Vrbe. Vbicunque fuerit
Episcopus, sieve Eugubij, sieve Constantinopoli, sieve Alexendriae, sieve Tanai,
eiusdem Meriti, eiusdem est Sacerdotij. Potentia diuitiarum, and paupertatis
humilitas vel sublimiorem, vel Inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Coeterum omnes
Apostolorum Successores sunt. Quid mihi profers Vnius Vrbis consuetudinem? What
doothe a Bishop, sau^nge only the Orderinge of Ministers, but a Priest may
do the same? Neither may we think that the Church of Rome is one, and the
Church of all the world biside is another. France, England, Aphrica, Persia,
Leu^nte, India, and all the Barbarous Nations woorship one Christ, and keep
one rule of the Truth. If we seek for Authority, The whole world is
greater then the City of Rome. Where so ever there be a Bishop, be it at
Eugubium, be it at Rome, be it at Constantinople, be it at Rhegium, be it at
Alexandria, be it at Tanais, they are al of one worthiness, they are al of
one Bishoprike. The Power of the Richesse, and the baseness of Poverty,
makes not a Bishop either Higher, or Lower. For they are all the Apostles
Successors. What bring you me the Custom of Rome, being but one City?

Now, if M. Hardinge will steal away in the dark, as his manner is, and
say, that S. Hierome spoke only of the Merit of Life, or of the Office of
Priesthood, set some man tell him, that this was no part, neither of the
question moved, nor of the answer of S. Hierome: And S. Hierome in plain,
and express words says, Si Authoritas quaeritur, If we seek (not for
Merit of Life, but) for Authority in gouernmente, therein the whole world is
greatte, then the City of Rome. M. Hardinge imagines, S. Hierome spoke only
of, I know no what: but S. Hierome him self says, he speaks namely of
Authority.

And whereas M. Hardinge is so highly offended with the chaunginge of this
word, Merit, into this word, Preeminence, and says farther, that these
False Platers thought thereby to win the game, it may please him to
remember, that, how so ever the game go, S. Hierome him self plainly plaide
the self same game: I mean, that S. Hierome vsinge this word, Merit,
without question meante, Preeminence. For thus he says, Potentia Diuitiarum,
and Paupertatis humilitas, vel Sublimiorem, vel Inferiorem Episcopum non facit:
The Power of Richesse, and the baseness of Poverty makes not a Bishop either
Higher, or Lower. M. Hardinge might easily have seen, that Higher, and Lower,
perteine not to Merit of Life, but to Preeminence. Therefore let him look
better upon his Book, before he thus lightly condemn others for corruption.

I grant, it is true, as M. Hardinge says, This quarrel first began about
a particulare Custom of the Church of Rome, where as the Dra^ons Vaunted them
selves, and would be placed above the Priests. But here M. Hardinge, as his
manner is, willingly dissembleth, and suppresseth somewhat. S. Augustine more
lively, August. in quaes. veter. and Noui Testament. quae. 101.
and fully expresses the same. For thereof he writes thus: Quidam, qui nomen
liabet Falcidij, Duce stultitia, and Romanae Ciuitatis Iactantia, Leuitas
Sacerdotibus, and Diaconos Presbyteris coaequare contendit: One Falcidius,
Foolishness, and the Pride of the City of Rome leadinge him thereto,
labors to make the Deacons Equal with the Priests.

This lewd disorder S. Hierome controlleth by the Examples of other Churches,
and says, that therein the Authority of the whole world is greatter, then
the Authority of the Church of Rome: Of which also he seems to speak
scornefully, and with some disdeigne. For thus he says, Quid mihi profers
Vnius Vrbis Consuerudinem? What bring you me the Custom of (Rome, being but)
One City? By which words it seems, Pope Leo.
he made small accoumpte of the City of Rome.

But M. Hardinge says, The Primates had Authority over other Inferior
Bishops I grant: they had so. How be it, they had it by agreemente, and
Custom: But neither by Christ, nor by Peter or Paul, nor by any Kighte of
Gods Word. Hieronym. in Epist. ad Titum. Cap. 1.
S. Hierome says, Nouerint Episcopi, se magis Consuetudine, quam Dispofitionis
Dominicae Veritate, Presbyteris esse Maiotes, and in common debere Ecclesiam
^egere: Let Bishops understand, that they are above the Priests, rather of
Custom, the^ of any Truth, or Right of Christ's Institution: and that they
ought to rule the Church al together. And again, Idem ergo est Presbyter,
Hieronym. eod. loco.
qui Episcopus: Etantequam Diaboli instinctustudia in Religione fierent, and
diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli, Ego Apollo, Ego Cephae, Co^muni
Presbyterorum Consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur: Therefore a Priest, and a
Bishop are both one thing: And, before that by the inflaiminge of the Devil,
parts were taken in Religion, and these words were uttered emonge the
people, I hold of Paul, I hold of Apollo, I hold of Peter, the Churches
were governed by the Common Advise of the Priests. August. Epist. 19.
S. Augustine says, Secundum honorum vocabula, quae iam Ecclesiae vsus
obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio mayor est: The office of a Bishop is above
the office of a Priest, ( not by Authority of the Scriptuces, but) after the
Names of Honor, which the Custom of the Church has now obtained.

As for Pope Leo, ff. Li. 2. De Iurisdict. omnium Iudicum.
his own Authority in his own cause cannot be great. The Emperor says,
Nemo debet sibiius dicere: Noman may minister Low unto him self. And it is
noted thus in the Decrees, Papa non debet esse Iudex in causa propria: The Pope
may not be judge in his own cause.

It is well known, 16. q. 6. Consuetudo: In Mar^gine.
that the Pope has sought for, and claimed this Universal Authority these
many hundred years. Pope Innocentius was therefore reproved of Pride, and
worldly Lordlinesse by the whole Council of Aphrica: Council. Aphrica. Ca. 105.
Superbum saeculi typhum. Inter Decretae Bonifacij 2.
Pope Bonifacius 2. condemned ^. Augustine, and all the said whole Council of
Aphrica, and called them al Heretics, and Schismatiques, for the same, and
said, they were al Instigante Diabolo. Leo Epist. 89.
leadde by the Devil: Pope Zosimus, to maintain this claim, corrupted the
Holy Council of Nice: S. Hilarie, and other Learned Bishops of France, for
vsurpinge such unlawful Authority, charged this same Pape Leo, of whom we
speak, with Pride, and Ambition.

But, gentle Reader, that thou ma^ste the better understand, what credit thou
ought to give to this Pope Leo, specially settinge forth his own
Authority, I beseethe thee, consider, with what Majesty of words, and how
far above measure, he auanceth the Authority of S. Peter. These be his
words: Christus Petrum in Consortium Indiuiduae Vnitatis assumpsit: Christ
received Peter into the Company of the Indivisible Unity: Leo Epist. 89. Leo
Epist. 52. Leo Epist. 89. Leo in cadem Epist.
Authoritate Domini mei Petri Apostoli: By the Authority (not of Christ, but)
of my Lord Peter the Apostle: Deo Inspirante, and Beatissimo Petro Apostolo:
By the Inspiration of God, and of S. Peter the Apostle: Deus a Petro, velut a
quodam Capite, dona sua velut in Corpus omne diffudit: God from Peter, as from
the Head, Leo in Sermo. De Natali Petri and Pauli.
has powered cut his gifts into all the Body: Nihil erit ligatum, aut solutum,
nisi quod Petrus ligauerit, aut soluerit: There shall be nothing bound, or
loosed, but that Peter shall bind, or loose: Nunc quoque Petrus pascit Oues,
and mandatum Domini Pius Pastor exequitur: Leo in Sermo. 3. In Anniucrsario die
Assumptionis.
Even now Peter feeds the Sheep, and as a Godly Shephearde, he fulfilleth
the commoundement of his Master. Such immoderate, and ambitious Dignity Leo
was content to yield to Peter, to the end that the possession, and fruit
thereof might redounde whelely unto him self.

Some others have thought, that as well these Epistles of Leo, as also others
more, Equality of Bishops.
of other the Ancient Bishops of Rome, have benne interlaced, and falsified
by the ambitious Popes, that followed afterward. Which thing is the more
likely, Epist. Iulij 1. Extra De Elect. Fundamenta. Council Aphrica. Cap. 105.
Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 36.
both for that the self same words be likewise alleged, partly under the
name of Pope Julius, partly under the name of Pope Nicolas: and also for that
Pope Zosimus, which was the fifthe before Leo, as it is said before, doubted
not for an advantage to falsify the Holy Council of Nice.

Verily, when the Council of Chalcedon had offered unto this same Leo the Title
of Universal Bishop, as Gregory witnesses, he utterly refused it, and would
none of it.

Now touching that S. Hierome says, the poor Bishop of Eugubium, and the
Bishop of Rome are both of one Authority (For of Authority he speaks,
Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epist. 3. Nisi paucis desperatis, and perditis.
as it is proved before): S. Cyrian also says the same, that the Authority
of the Bishops in Aphrica is as good, as the Authority of the Bishop of
Rome: and calls them al Lewd, and Desperate Persons, that will, as M.
Hardinge doothe, safe the contrary.

Therefore, whereas M. Hardinge says, By very Order of Christ him self it
has benne Ordained, that matters touching Faith, and Religion be referred to
that One Prince of Pastors, who sits in the Chair of Peter, the Highest
Bishop, and that the same has always benne done, and observed from the
Apostles time until our days: He brings us two manifest Untruths
together, without any manner proof at al, only avouched upon him self. For
it appears not, that Christ ever took this Order, or ever made any such
mention, either of any such Prince of Pastors, or of Peter's Chair. And in
the Council of Aphrica it was decreed, that no matters should be removed from
thence to Rome. Council. Aphrican. Cap. 92.
The words of the Council are these, Ad transmarina Iudicia qui pu^auerit
appellandum, a nullo intra Aphricam in Communionem suscipiatur: Who so ever
shall think be ought to appeal to the Judgementes beyond the Seas (that is, to
the Bishop of Rome) let no man within Aphrica receive him to the Communion.

Touching that M. Hardinge calls the Pope the Prince of Pastors, he might
have remembered, that the right of this name belongs only unto Christ. 1.
Petr. 5.
S. Peter says, That when Christ, the Prince of Pastors shall appear, ye
may receive the Incorruptible Crown. Now, to infea^fe the P^pe with Christ's
peculiare Titles, a man might think it were great blasphemy. Certainly S.
Cyprian says, In Council. Carthaginen. Council. Constantinop. 2. Ca. 36. (...).
Cyprian. De Simpl. Praelator.
Nemo nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit: None of us appoints
him self Bishop of Bishops: mutche less the Prince of al Pastors. And in
the Council of Constantinople it was Decreed, that the Bishop there should
have Even, and Equal Authority with the Bishop of Rome.

As for the other Authority of S. Cyprian, M. Hardinge says, we understood
it not: and therefore he wills us, to look better upon our Books. The
counsel is good. But if M. Hardinge will grant, that S. Cyprian him self
knew, what he him self wrote, and understood his own meaning, it shall be
sufficient. Verily the words that he uses, seem not so dark. For thus he
writes: Episcopatus Vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidum pars tenetur:
Ecclesia Vna est, quae in multiudinem lati^s incremento Foecunditatis
ex^enditur: Quomodo Solis multi radij, sed lumen Vnum: and ramiarboris multi,
sed robur Vnum: The Bishoprike is One, a part whereof of every several Bishop
is possessed in whole. The Church is One, which by her great increase is
extended unto many: As in the Son the beams be many, but the light is one:
and in a Tree the boughs be many, but the body is One.

If there appear any great darkness, or doubt in these words, S. Cyprian
him self in other places thus expounds his own meaning in plainer wise: Vna
est Ecclesia a Christo per totum Mundum in plura membra diuisa: One Bishoprike.
Item Episcopatus Vnus, Cyprian. Lib. 4. Epist. 2.
Episcoporum multorum concordi numerositate diffusus: There is One Church
divided by Christ into many Members throughout the world: Likewise One
Bishoprike powered far abroad by the agreeable multitude of many Bishops,
Again, Ecclesia Vna est, Cyprian. Lib. 4. Epist. 9.
and connexa, and cohaerentium sibi inuicem Sacerdotum glutino copulata: There
is One Church, joined, and fastened in One, by the consent of Bishops
agreei^ge together. Again, Quando Oramus, non pro Vno Oramus, sed pro toto
populo: Cyprian. In Oration. Dominicam.
Quia totus populus Vnum sumus: When we pray, we pray not for One, but for
the whole people: For we the whole people are but One. Again, immediately
before these words, which, M. Hardinge says, we are not hable to
understand, he says: Hanc Vnitatem firmiter tenere, Cyprian. De Simpli.
Praelat.
and vendicare debemus, maxim Episcopi, qui in Ecclesia prae^idemus: vt
Episcopatum quoque ipsum Vnum, and Indiuisum probemus: This Unity must we
hold, specially Bishops, that fit as Rulers in the Church: that we may
declare our Bishoprike to be One, Cyprian. Lib. 3. Epist. 13.
and without division. Again, Etsi Pastores multi sumus, Vnum tamen Gregem
Pascimus: and Oues Vniuersas, quas Christus Sangume suo, and Passione
quaesiuit, colligere, and fouere debemus: Notwithstanding we be many
Shepheardes, yet we Feed but One Flock: and we are al bound to geather up,
and to nourrishe all the Sheep, that Christ has won with his Blood, and
Passion.

If either the Author of the Apology, or the Interpreter understood not S.
Cyprian, yet, M. Hardinge, ye may give S. Cyprian leave, to understand him
self.

And in this sense S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Epist. ad Tit. Ca. 1.
Communi Presbyterorum Consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur: The Churches were
ordered ( not by the Universal Authority of the Bishop of Rome, but) by the
Common Advise of the Priests. Likewise S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. Lib. 3.
Epist. 13.
Ideirco copiosum est Corpus Sacerdotum, Co^cordiae mutuae glutine, atque
Vniratis vinculo copulatum, vt si quis ex Collegio nostro Haeresim facere, and
Gregem Christi laccrare, ac vastare tentauerit, subueniant coeteri: Therefore
is the Body, or company of Priests so copious, joined together with consent
of Concord and Unity, that if any one of our Company entreprise to raise an
Heresy, and to scatter and waste the Flock of Christ, Basili. ad
Neocaesarienses.
the rest should healpe. So likewise S. Basile: Interrogate Patres Vestros,
and renuntiabunt vobis, quod etiamsi loci situ diuisae inter se sint Paroeciae,
tamen veluti Coronamento quodam Vnitae, vnaque sententia gubernatae fuerunt.
Assidua quidem populi fuit inter se commixtio: Ipsi vero Pastores tanta
praediti fuerunt mutua inter ipsos Charitate, vt alius alio Praeceptore, ac
Duce vsi fuerint: Ask of your Fathers, and they will tell you, that although
Bishoprikes be divided, and sundred by distance of place, yet were they ever
knitte together as with a Garlande, and ever ruled by One Advise. In deed the
People was ever mingled together: But the Bishops were al so joined in
Charity, that every of them was content to be taught, and to be leadde by
other.

Therefore, as many Faithes in sundry Faithefulles are but One Faith: as many
Churches are but one Church: as many Baptismes are but one Baptism: Even so,
says S. Cyprian, many Bishoprikes are but One Bishoprike: and therein, as well
the Bishop of Rome, as also every other seucral Bishop, has his portion.

I say, The Bishoprike of Rome is not this Whole Bishoprike, but a Part: Not
the Body of the Sun, but a beam: Not the stem of the Tree, but a branch.

And thus, by S. Cyprians mind, neither doothe one Bishop hold of an other:
Nor is any One Bishop Head of the Whole: Nor is One Bishop al in all: but al
Bishops are only One.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 6.
And according to the judgment of the Nicene Council, we say, that the
Bishop of Rome has no more jurisdiction over the Church of God, then the
rest of the Patriarchs, either of Alexandria, or of Antioche have.

M. Hardinge.
If it be a shame to belie the Devil, according to the old Proverb, what is
it to belie the Church of God represented in the Nicene Council?

The sixth Canon among al others of the Nicene Council is that you ground
your surmise upon, The sixth Canon of the Nicene Council declared to make
against the Defenders,
I know well. For that has benne wreasted to your purpose by certain of your
side. And the same rightly construed Untruth: For the express words are
plain to the contrary.
makes most against you. For it seems to acknowledge the Bishop of Rome
his Supremacy and Sovereignty of judgment over other Patriarchs. These be
the words of the Canon rightly Englished head. Let the Ancient custom
continewe in force which is in Egypt, Lybia* and Pentapoli: so that the
Bishop of Alexandria have Power over them al. Quandoquidem etiam Episcopo
Romano hoc consuetum est. (...).
For as much as the B. of Rome has thus used. Likewise in Antiochia also, and
in other Provinces let the Churches keep their Prerogative. What can be
gathered of the words of this Canon, but that for ratefiynge the jurisdiction
of the Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Antiochia, the Fathers of the Nicene
Council thought good to alter nothing: but to follow the Ancient custom of
Old time used and allowed by the B. of Rome? For it is as much to say, as
this: In as much as Untruth Vain and childishe.
the B. of Rome has benne wont from the beginning to grant to the B. of
Alexandria jurisdiction over Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapoli: the This Exposition
is like a sick^ man's dream.
Nicene Council folowinge his authority and rule, or at the least his usage,
wills and grants, that the said Bishop retain and keep his ancient
right. For if the B. of Alexandria had not received such jurisdiction by
Authority and grant of the B. of Rome of old time, what reason should have
moved those Fathers, for confirmation thereof to allege the custom of the B.
of Rome? And in that case, O folly. The words are plain: Quia Episcopo
Romano parilis mos est.
whereto perteined the addition of the cause, Quia Episcopus Romanus hoc
consueuit, because this was the Bishop of Rome his custom? If this had not
benne their meaning, they would never so have spoken. For what was his
custom other, Untruth: For the B. of Rome never had Power, to allotte
Provinces: but him self had his province allotted him, as well, as others. A
Ne Recipiatur.
then to allotte those Provinces to the B. of Alexandria? If any other thing
be alleged to have benne his manner and custom, besides that the words of
the Canon bear it not, what had that benne to the purpose, what so ever it be,
for cause and confirmation of the B. of Alexandria his jurisdiction over
Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapoli? Allege you, Defender, for old custom of the B.
of Rome, what else you list, so that you make no violence to the Canon, and
thereupon make your argument, inferringe of your allegation the Conclusion, (
Ergo, the B. of Alexandria ought to have jurisdiction over Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapoli): and you shall find it to be such an argument, as any Sotte would
be ashamed to make.

Against this if it shall like you to Reply, we warn you before, that neither
ye take advantage of a doubteful interpretation, as we know that Canon to be
found in diverse Books not so plainly Translated, and therefore we require
you to stand to the Original, as it is in Greek: neither that ye defend your
lie with the wrested Exposition of Theodore Balsamon, Theodore Balsamon.
who has written Greek Commentaries upon the Canons of the Councels, since
the schism of the Greeks, him self being a Schismatike. For he being a
Greek borne, and prick^ with the hatred of his Nation against the Latin
Church, and specially the Sea of Rome: in thexposition of that sixth Canon of
the Nicene Council swarueth both from learning, and also from reason.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In deed it is a shame to belie any creature: for that lieinge is shameful of
it self. And therefore, M. Hardinge, ye might do mutche better, to use it
less. You have brought us here an Exposition of the Council of Nice, such,
as I think, from that time until this time has seldom benne heard of. You
say, The Bishop of Romes Custom was, TheConn cel of Nice
to give Jurisdiction to the Patriarchs of Alexandria, of Antioche, and of
Jerusalem: and that they had none Authority of Gouernmente, but only so
mutche, as was limited, and allowed by him. And this, you say, was the only,
and undoubted meaning of that Council. This fantasy is not here avouched by
any Ancient Doctor, or Learned Father. Therefore we must think, what so
ever it be, it is your own. And weighinge the strangeness of the same, I
must needs say of you, as S. Hierome said sometime of one Rheticius in the
like case, Hieronym. ad Marcellam.
Rheticius eloquens quidem est, sed ineptus Interpres: Rheticius is an
eloquente man in deed: and yet but a fond Interpreter. For it is certain,
and known even unto Children, that the Bishop of Rome, before the Council of
Nice, had neither such Custom of Superiority, nor such dealinge of
Jurisdictions. Pope Pius Secundus says, Aeneas Syluius. Epist. 288.
Ante Nicenam Synodum vnusquisque sibi vixit: and paruus respectus ad Romana^
Ecclesiam halebatur: Before the Council of Nice, every Bishop lived to him
self: and there was then small regard had to the Church of Rome.

As for our sortishe Arguments, such as by your judgment any sort would
be ashamed to make, I may leave them well to you, M. Hardinge; not for that ye
lack them greatly, but for that, as it appear the by your Books, ye know
best how to use them.

Touching the sixthe Canon of this Council, which, you imagine, is so dark,
and doubteful, I trust, it shall be plainly, and clearly opened, by them that
were never hitherto accounted sottishe.

The words thereof are plain yenough. The sense is this. The whole Body of
Christendom was divided into four Patriarkshippes: whereof the First was Rome:
the Second Alexandria: the Third Antioche: the Fourth Jerusalem. And each
of these was limited, and bounded within it self: Alexandria, to have the
oversight over Egypt, and Pentapolis: Antioche, over Syria: Jerusalem, over
Jury: Rome, Lipomanus in Praefatione. Copus Dial. 1. 16^ Balsamonem Virum
cerie docte^
over Italy, and other Churches of the Weaste. And herein we have the
Exposition of Theodorus Balsamon, that lived five hundred years ago, and was
Patriarch of Antioche, and, as sum of M. Hardinges trendes have thought, a
man of great Learning. Yet for as mutche as M. Hardinge here utterly refuses
him, not only as a Schismatique, but also as a man both of Learning, and
Reason, let us therefore see sum others.

Nilus, a Greek Author, hereof writes thus: Sed vt etiam liquidius appareat,
Nilus, De Primatu Romani Pontificis. (...)
Papam non imperare alijs omnibus Episcopis, legatur Sextus Canon Synodi
Nicenae: quo Diserte praecipitur, vt alijs Ecclesijs alexandrinus, alijs
Romanus, alijs Antiochenus praesit: vt non liceat alteri alterius prouinciam
inuadere: That it may the more plainly appear, that the Pope has no
Government over al other Bishops, read the Six the Canon of the Council of
Nice. There it is expressly Commanded, that the Bishop of Alexandria shall
have the rule over certain Churches: and the Bishop of Rome over certain: and
the Bishop of Antioche likewise over certain: and that it be not lawful for
any one of them to invade an others Jurisdiction. Farther he says, Quod si
quis suis non contentus, aliena appetit, ille san^ merito and Consuetudinis,
and Sanctorum Canonum violator haberi debet: If any one ( of these Patriarchs)
not contented with his own, crave Dominion over others, ( as doothe the Pope)
he ought of right to be called a breaker both of the Custom, and also of the
Holy Canons.

If M. Hardinge will yet say, Ruffinus Eccle. Historiae Lib. 1. Cap. 6.
this Exposition is sottishe, let us see, in what sort Others have expounded
the same. Rufinus openinge the same Canon says thus: Statutum est in Concilio
Niceno, vt apud Alexandriam, and in V^be Roma Vetusta Co^sue^udo seruetur:
Suburbicaru Ecclesiarum
vt vel ille Aegypti, vel hic Suburbicarum Ecclesiarum solicitudinem gerat: It
was decreed in the Council of Nice, that in Alexandria, and in Rome the Old
Custom should be kept: that the Bishop of Alexandria should rule over Egypt:
and the Bishop of Rome ( not over all the world, but) over the Churches of his
Suburbs.

Likewise it was afterward ordered in the Council holden at Constantinople:
Definimus Sedi Co^stantinopolitanae Paria Iura, Council. Constantinopo. 2. Cap.
36. (...). Nicepho. Lib. 12. Cap. 13.
and Priuilegia cum Sede Veteris Romae: We Decree, that the Sea of
Constantinople shall have Rightes, and Priuiseges Equal ( and one) with the Sea
of Old Rome.

Therefore Nicephorus says, Romano, and Constantinopolitano Episcopo Ex Aequo
Paria sunt, and Dignitatis praemia, and Honorum iura: The Titles of Dignities,
and rightes of Honor, given to the Bishop of Rome, and to the Bishop of
constantinople, are One, and Equal.

For this cause Athanasius says, Athanas. ad Solitariam Vitam agentes. Cod.
De Sacrosanctis Ecclesijs: Omni innouatione. Council. Aphrica. Cap. 105. Nilus,
De Primatii Papa.
Roma erat Meeopolis Romanae Ditionis: Rome was the Moother Church (not of the
Whole World, but) of the Roman Jurisdiction. In like sort the Emporour
Justinian says, Ecclesia Vrbis Constantinopolitanae Romae Veteris
Praerogatiua laetatur: The Church of Constantinople enioieth the Prerogative,
or Privilege of the Church of Old Rome. So likewise S. Augustine, and other
Learned, and Godly Bishops in the Council of Aphrica, understood the same
Canon. And therefore they called the Popes Presumption, crauinge Universal
Jurisdiction over all the World, Fumosum saeculi Typhum, The smoky Pride of the
world. To conclude, Nilus says thus, Nunc, cum aliae Regiones assigna^ae sint
Romano, aliae Alexandrino, aliae Constantinopolitano, non magis hi sub illo
sunt, quam ille sub hisce: Seeinge there be certain Countries appointed out
for the Bishop of Rome, certain for the Bishop of Alexandria, and certain for
the Bishop of Constantinople, they are now no more subject unto him, then he
unto them.

But al these perhaps were Sottes, and their saieinges S^ttishe: and noman is
hable rightly to understand these matters, but he that can say, Consuetudo, is
Latin for a Commission: or, Mos parilis, for Universal Jurisdiction.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 7.
And as for the Bishop of Rome, who now calls al matters before him self
alone, except he do his duty, as he ought to do, except he minister the
Sacraments, except he instruct the People, except he warn them and teach
them, we say that he ought not of right once to be called a Bishop, or so
mutche as an Elder. For a Bishop, as says Augustine, is a name of labor, and
not of Honor: that the man, that seeks to have Preeminence, and not to
profit, may understand, him self to be no Bishop.

M. Hardinge.
Neither the Bishop of Rome, An evil Bishop loses not the name of a Bishop,
though he lose the metite of a Bishop. Vide Augustine. Lib. 2. contra Epist.
Parmen. Cap. 13. Tom. 7. 1. Tim. 2.
nor any other Bishop is worthy of the Name of a Bishop, except he do the
duty of a Bishop. All this we grant. But that he ought not of right to be so
called, of those whom he has charge over, in case of omitting his duty:
thereto we say, that although in respect of his domeanou^ he be not worthy to
be called a Bishop* yet in respect of the Vocation, Degree, and Preeminence,
though he leave his duty undone, for which he incurreth danger of
damnation, that Title pertains unto him of good right, and so continually he
is and ought to be acknowleged for a Bishop, though an evil and an unworthy
Bishop: likewise a Priest. And whereas S. Augustine says, that a Bishop is a
name of labor, and not of Honor, he is to be understand so as the Scripture
is: Which in some places speakinge of two things, that are both in deed to
be affirmed, the one being of more importance then the other, denies the one
in comparison of the other, etc.

Yet it seems to be a secret preparation toward a purpose against such
time, as the Princes Gouernemente shall mislike their fantasies. For where
they Learned this Opinion, concerning Bishops, there Learned they also the
like, concerning Civil Magistrates. I mean VVicklef. Among whose Heretical
articles condemned by the Church in the Council of Constance, A Bishop no
Bishop*
this is rekened for the fiftenth: Nullus est Dominus Ciuilis, nullus est
Praelatus, nullus est Episcopus dum est in peccato mortali. That is to say,
None is a Temporal Lord, none is a Prelate, none is a Bishop, so long as he
is in deadly sin.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This matter shall need no great contention. The like words have benne
uttered by sundry other Holy Fathers. S. Chrysostom says, Multi Sacerdotes,
Chryso. in Matthae. Homil. 43. Chrysostom. in eod. Homil.
and Pauci Sacerdotes: Multi nomine, Pauci Opere: Many Priests there be, and
few Priests there be: Many in name, and few in Labor. Again, Quomodo
potest esse Magister, qui Discipulum non habet? Acquire Discipulum, and esto
Magister: How can he be a Master, Ambro. De Dignita. Sacerdotali, Cap. 4.
Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist 32.
that ^ath no Scholare? Geate thee a Scholar, and then be a Master. S. Ambrose
says, Nisi bonum Opus amplectaris, Episcopus esse non potes: Oulesse thou
embrace the good labor, a Bishop thou canste not be. S. Gregory says,
Sacerdotes nominamur, and non sumus: Priests we are called, but Priests we
are not.

As for VVicklefe, he expounds plainly his own meaning, and that with M.
Hardinges own Construction. For these be his words, even as they are alleged
by his enemies: Papa, In Council. Consta^tien. Session. 15
vel Praelatus malus, and Praescitus, est aequiuoce Pastor: and vere Fur, and
Latro: The Pope, or any other wicked Prelate, in double or doubteful speech is
a Postour: but in very deed he is a Thief, and a Murderer. So Chrysostom
says: Qui ab hominibus ordinatus est, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 53.
quantum ad Deu^ artinet, no^ est Sacerdos, aut Diaconus: He that is appointed
by men ( and not by God) before God, is neither Priest, nor Deacon.

If VVicklefe, upon just zele of the House of God, for that he then saw, the
Bishops either knew nothing, or did nothing, or cared for nothing, either
spoke, or meante more, then Truth may bear, we defend it not.
Notwithstanding, touching that is objected of deadly sin, it seems, he
followed therein the Council of Valentia in France. Council. Valentin. sub Damas.
ca. 4.
The words be these: Quicunque sub Ordinatione, vel Diaconatus, vel
Presbyterij, vel Episcopatus, Mortali Crimine dixerint se esse pollusos, a
supradictis Ordinationibus submouea^tur: Who so eues after the Order, either of
Deaconship, or of Priesthood, or of Bishoprike, shall say they have benne
defiled with Mortal Sin, let them be removed from the foresaid Orders.

So. S. Augustine says, as he is alleged by Gratian, 2. Quae. 7. Qui nec
regiminis.
Qui nec sua crimina detersit, nec filiorum crimen correxit, Canis impudicus
dicendus est magis, quam Episcopus: He that neither has wiped of his own
finnes, nor corrected the Sins of his Children, ought rather to be called a
shameless Dog, then a Bishop.

Yet notwithstanding, to remove al strife, what so ever the Bishop of Rome be,
or what so ever he do, let him hardly be called a Bishop, because, as M.
Hardinge says, he stands in room of a Bishop: Or, as VVicklefe says, let
him so be called. Aequiuoce, that is to say, by a word of double meaning: as
Unsavory Salt is called Salt: Or as the Prophets of Baal are called
Prophets: Or as a painted Man is called a Man: And as S. Gregory says, Let
him he called a Priest, although in deed he be no Priest. Let him be called
a Teacher, although he Teach not: Let him be called a Feeder, although he
Feed not. S. Cyprian says of S. Paul, Ipsum, Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Council. Trident. De Sacrament Ordinis. Athanasius Ad Solitariam Vitam agentes.
Hieron. in Soph^niam, Cap. 1*
quamuis inane Nomen, and Vmbram quandam Sacerdotis cogitans, expauit: S. Paul
was afroide, consideringe only the empty Name, and Shadow of a Bishop. And
in the late Council of Tridente the matter is concluded thus, Qui dicit, cos,
qui non exercent Ministerium Verbi, and Sacramentorum, non esse Sacerdotes,
Anathema sit: Who so ever say, that they, that Minister neither the Word of
God, nor the Sacraments, be no Priests, Accursed be he. But Athanasius
says, Quid opus est hominibus titulo Episcopis? What need have we of these
men, that bear only the name of Eishoppes? Therefore S. Hierome says,
Auferet Dominus Nomina Vanae gloriae, and Admirationis falsae, quae versantur
in Ecclesia. Sed and Nomina Sacerdotum cum Sacerdotibus dotibus aufere^,
Provvde. Name.
qui frustra sibi applaudunt in Episcopali, and in Presbyterij Dignitate, and
non in Opere: The Lord shall take away the names of Vain glory, and of ^^ined
woo^dering, which are in the Church: Yea he shall take away both the names
of those Priests, and the Priests withal, which vaunte them selves in the
Dignity of Bishoprike, and Priestehoode, but not in the Labor.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 1.
And that neither the Pope, nor any other worldly Creature can no more be Head
of the whole Church, or a Bishop over al, then he can be the Bridegome, the
Light, the Salvation, and Life of the Church. For these Privileges, and Names
belong only to Christ, and be properly, and only sfitte for him alone.

And that no Bishop of Rome did ever suffer him self to be called by such a
proud name and title, before Phocas the Emperors time (who, as we know, by
killing his own Sovereign Mauritius the Emperor, did by a Traitorous
Villainy aspire to the Empire) Which was about the sixthe hundredth and
thirteenth year after Christ was borne.

M. Hardinge.
The name of Universal Bishop, Universal Bishop.
which this Interpreter means, being taken in a right sense, is no proud
name, in respect of him, Untruth, For it belongs not unto the Pope.
to whom it belongs. Whether any Bishop of Rome ever suffered himself to be
called by that name, of no, as you deny it, and prove it not, so it forces
not whether any did so, or no. If they refused it of humility, that proves it
not to be Vnla^ful.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If the name of Universal Bishop be a Proud Name in others, why may it not
also be a Proud Name in the Bishop of Rome? Has the Bishop there such a
special Privilege for Pride above al others? May Pride be Humility, and
Humility Pride, only in respect of diverse Persons? You say, This Title
of right belonged to the Bishop of Rome: and therefore in him it was no Pride.
This, M. Harding, is a foul Untruth, as it shall appear by the next
Division. For these be the words of the Council of Carthage, as Gratian
allegeth them: Vniuersalis autem (Episcopus) nec ipse Romanus Pontifex
appelletur: Distin. 99. Primae Sedis.
The Bishop of Rome him self may not be called the Universal Bishop.

That the Old Learned, and Godly Bishops of Rome refused this Name, as
Proud, and Arrogante, it is so plain by S. Gregory, that I marvel, any
Learned man would call it in question. His words thereof be these: Nullus
Decessorum meorum hoc tam Profano Vocabulo vti consensit: Gregor. Lib. 4.
Epist. 32. and 36.
Nullus Romanorum Pontificum hoc Singularitatis Nomen assumpsit: Nos hunc
honorem nolumus oblatum suscipere: None of my Predecessors Bishops of Rome,
ever consented to use this Ungodly Name: No Bishop of Rome ever took upon him
this Name of Singularity: We, the Bishops of Rome, will not receive this
honor being offered unto us.

If the Bishops of Rome in Old times refused this Name, not for want of
right, but only, as M. Hardinge says, of Humility, wherefore then did
their Successors, that followed afterward, so ambitiously labor to geate
the same? Platina says, Platina in Bonifa^io. 3.
Bonifacius Tertius obtinuit a Phoca, Magna tamen Contentione: Pope Bonifacius
the third obtained of the Emperor Phocas y^ Rome should be called the Head
of al Churches) but with Great Contention, and mutche adoo. Wherefore then
does S. Augustine, and the whole Council of Aphrica condemn the attempt of
this usurped Jurisdiction, Provvde Name.
and call it Fumosum Saeculi Typhum? The smoky Pride of the World: And that
even in the Bishops of Rome.

If the Bishop of Rome be so fulle of Humility, as we are here borne in
hand, why auaunceth he him self so High above al General Councelles? Why
says he, that no Creature may judge his dooinges? Why claims he the Sword
and Scepter of all the World? Why says he, that Christ's Consistory, and his
Consistory are al One, and that he can do, all that God him self can do? Why
doothe he say, That the Emperor is but the Proctour, or Bailife of the
Church of Rome: Distinct. 98. Si Imperator. In gloss.
Procurator, sfiue Defensor Romanae Ecclesiae? Why doothe he suffer Kings, and
Emperors to hold his Stirope, to lead his Palfrai, and to kiss his foot?
Verily this kind of Humility in other places might go for Pride. Hesychius
says, Hesychius. Sen. Lib. 4. (...). 17. Curerg^. Did. 40. Mul^i.
Vbi Superbia regnat, and Hypocrisis, Humilitas locum non habet: Where Pride,
and Hypocrisy bear the swaie, there Humility can have no place. Likewise
Chrysostom says, Quicunque desiderauerit Primatum in Terra, inuenie^ in
Coelo confusionem: nec inter Seruos Christi computabitur, qui de Primatu
tractauerit: Who so ever defireth Primacie in Earth, in Heaven he shall find
Confusion: Neither shall he be accumpted among the Servants of Christ, that
will once entreat of Primacie.

To conclude, a Learned Man, one of M. Hardinges own side, hereupon has
noted thus: Heruaeus, De potes^ate Papae. Cap. 13.
Bonifacius obtinuit a Phoca, vt Ecclesia Romana esset Caput Omnium
Ecclesiarum. Ex quo posset modo consimili sumi Argumentum, qu^d ad Imperatorem
pertineat, Primatum Ecclesiae transfer, and de Ecclesijs Ordinare: Pope
Bonifacius the third obtained of the Emperor Phocas, that the Church of Rome
should be the Head of al Churches. Whereof we may in like case geather an
Argument, that it belongs to the Emperor, to translate the Primacie of the
Church, and to take Order for the Churches.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 2.
Also the Council of Carthage did circumspectly provide, that no Bishop should
be called either the Highest Bishop, or Chief Priest.

M. Hardinge.
Here by your leave, Sir Defender, you play false, and are taken, as it were,
with false Dyse, and therefore ye ought justly to lose all that ye have unjustly
won by your false play, Falsefieinge of a Council.
and false Dyse: I mean your shameful falsefieinge of this Council by you
alleged. And for this and other your falsehed it is right you lose the
credit, which unjustly (because by false Teachinge) you have won among the
Unlearned. M. Harding is a merry man.
That your false play might not sone be espted, you do as like to Mais^er
Iuel, as though you were his Fathers Son. For that false slight he uses
more, then any that ever I readde. For where as we have seven Councelles of
Carthage, nether show you, which of them it is that you allege, nor give any
notice of the number, where the Canon may be found. But contrariwise as the
Lap winge with her busy cry leads a man from her neste, so you lead us
from the Place, where it is, by puttinge in the Margent of your Book the
number, 47. that not findinge it by your note, Johan. 5.
we should give over further lookinge for it. Who does evil, hates Light,
says Christ. So here falsefieing Untruth. For, this Canon vvil soon be
found.
and forginge a Canon of a Council, you would feign walk in clouds, that your
lieing might not be deprehended, etc. So had it ben done more circumspectly for
furtherance of your falls head, if the matter should never come to trial of
Learning.

Now, who so ever examineth the place truly, must needs cry out shame on you,
Defender, who are thauctour. The 26. Canon of the thirds Council of Carthage
discus. sed.
The words, if you had listed to have alleged them without falshed, be these,
Which we find in the 26. Canon of the third Council of Carthage, which
Council was Authorized by the sixth general Council holden at Constantinople in
Trullo. Vt primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotu^, aut
Summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodi, Sed ta^tum, Primae Sedis Episcopus. And
thus they are to be Englished. It has liked us (say the Fathers of that
Council) that a Bishop of a First See be not called Prince of Priests, or
Highest Priest, or any such other thing, Higheste Bishop, Prince of Priests.
but only a Bishop of a First see. Now comes me this iotly Defender, and
saith^ the Council of Carthage has by express words, (for so mutche his
Latin foundeth) that no Bishop should be called either the Highest Bishop, or
Chief Pr^est. By which Canon thus by him untruly uttered, he thought to
deprtue the Pope of this Untruth, as shall appear.
Ancient Title, that all the world has ever at^ributed unto him, so as he be
called no more Summus Pontifex.

For the right understanding of this Canon two things are to be considered.
Vile Epistolam (...) 9. ad Petrum and Iohannem Aph^ic^ Episcopos.
How far the Authority of this Council ought to be extended, and what is
meant by a First See. Untruth. For this Council namely restreineth the B. of
Rome.
The Decrees of this Council perteined but to the Province of Aphrike. For
prouinc^al Councelles bind only the provinces, in which, and for Order of
which they be kept. Only the General Councelles are to be received of al.

By these two words, Prima Seeds, what it means.
Prima Seeds those Fathers understood any City, in which a Patriarch of
Primate, who are of one office, though of diverse names, has his see. I call
it a first see, or rather (if it might be permitted) a Primate see. Untruth*
grounded upon a fable
In great Cities where the Highest courts for justice were kept, Distin. 99.
de Primatibus.
and where the chief Pagane Priests of the Latins named, Primi Flamines,
were resident before the coming of Christ, there after Christ's coming
were Patriarchs or Primates placed: by whom the weighte matters of Bishops
should be decided Untruth, grounded as the Former.
Which Order was taken first by commandment of S. Peter, Did. 99. C.
Proninciae.
as Clement writes: by the Apostles and Clement, as Anacletus witnesses: by
the Apostles and their Successors afterward, as Lucius the Pope says.

Now the Council of Carthage by this Defender alleged, and likewise the
Aphrican Council ordained and willed, that a Bishop of any of the Primate Sees
of Aphr^ke should not be called, Princeps Sacerdotum, aut Summus Sacerdos,
Prince or chief of the Priests, or High^st Priest: by which word a Bishop
is there signified: But only a Bishop of the Primate See, whereof he was
Primate. By which Decree they willed Most manifest and most vain Untruth.
For the words of the Council are these: Vniuersalis autem nec etiam Romanus
pontifex appelletur.
only their Primates of Aphrike to keep themselves within their limits, and
not presumptuously to take upon them more gloriouse Titles, and further
Jurisdiction, then to them pertetned, Lest surely they might seem to
preiudicate the Popes Supremacy. Thus it is evident, thauctoritie of that
Charthage Council, being restrained to ^phrike only, that by this Canon the
Popes Prima ie and Title is no Whit dim^n^shed or disproued. And so for all this
Defender, he remains as he has A great Untruth.
ever, Highest Bishop.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What, M. Hardinge, so mutche falsehed upon us at one time? Falsifieinge of
Councelles: Shameful Falsifieinge: False teachinge: False slight: False Dise:
False Play: and al False? Yet Christ says of him self, I am the Truth.
God give you grace, to credit him. For the error of quotation in the margin,
wherein you spend so many words, it may please you to know, that I neither
was the Printer, nor could be present at the Printinge. For the rest, if
there can be any one point of Falsehed found in me, touching the allegation
of this Council of Carthage, I will not refuse to stand charged with the whole.
But if every of these horrible Falseheddes be found an evident, and plain
Truth, then it may please you, to take home al these pretty Titles to your
self again, as in every of these words so often doubled, and so heapte
together, having your self committed a several Falsehedde.

And herein for trial of your courteous dealinge, I am content, your self
shall fit, and be the Judge. For, notwithstanding it be thought of many, that ye
dissemble deeply, and will not bestow your voice to say the Truth: Yet I
doubt not, but in this matter, if ye have eles, ye may easily look up, and
see the Truth.

You say, Sir Defender has falsely alleged the Council of Carthage. And why
so? For that he says, The Council Decreed by express words, that the
Bishop of Rome should not be called the Universal Bishop. This, you say, is
Forged, and Falsified, and is no part of that Council. For indifferent trial
both of the Truth, and of the Falsehed herein, I beseech you, behold the
very words of the Council, Higheste Bishop, Prince of Priests. Disti. 99.
Primae.
even as they are alleged by your own Doctor Gratia^. These they are: Primae
Sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum, vel Summus Sacerdos, vel
aliquid huiusmodi: Sed tantum, Primae Sedis Episcopus. Vniuersalis autem nec
etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur: Let not the Bishop of any of the First Sees
be called the Prince of Priests, Or the Highest Priest, or by any other like
name: but Only, the Bishop of the First see. But let not the Bishop of Rome
him self be called the Universal Bishop. And in ye Gloss thereupon it is noted
thus, In hac Distinctione dicitur, quod Papa non debet dici Vniuersalis: In
this Distinction it is said, that the Pope ought not to be called the
Universal Bishop.

Now, M. Hardinge compare our words, and the Councelles words both
together. We say none otherwise, but as the Council says, The Bishop of
Rome him self ought not to be called the Universal Bishop. Herein we do
neither add, nor minishe, but report the words plainly, as we find them.
If you had lookte better on your Book, and would have tried this matter, as you
say, by your Learning, ye might well have reserved these Uncivil reproaches of
Falsehedde to your self, and have spared your Crieinge of Shame upon this
Defender.

Touching, that you so pleasantly cheer your self with these words, You
do as like to M. Jewel, as if you were his Fathers Son* I must answer
you, as S. Augustine sometime did the Heretic Cresconius: August. Contra
Cresc. Li. 3. Ca. 38
Serua potius Puerilia Pueris: Keep such Childishe toies to play with your
Children. God make us both like unto our Father that is in Heaven.

Where you say, of your self only, without farther witness, that this Title
is the Popes Ancient right, ever geeuen to him by all the world, I doubt not,
but the untruth hereof by my Former Reply, Artic. 4. Gregor. Lib. 7 Epist. 30.
touching the same, may soon appear. Certainly, when the same Title was
offered to S. Gregory, he refused it utterly, as none of his.

In deed, this Council of Carthage notwithstanding, the Title of Highest
Bishop was sometimes given, not only to the Bishop of Rome, and other
Patriarchs, but also unto al other Bishops. M. Hardinge^ Amphilochius.
Rufinus, Lib. 2. Cap. 23.
M. Hardinges own Amphilochius calls S. Bastle Principem Sacerdotum: The
Prince, or Chief of Bishops: Rufinus calls Athanasius, Pontificem Maximum:
The Highest Bishop. Nazianzenus calls the same Athanasius Archisacerdotem
Sacerdotum: The Chief Bishop of Bishops. Lactantius calls every Bishoprike
Summum Sacerdotiu^. Nazian. Ad H^ronem.
Likewise S. Hierome says, Ecclesiae Salus in Summi Sacerdotis dignitate
pendet: The safety of the Church stands in the dignity of the Highest
Priest. Lactan. Lib. 4. Cap. 30.
By which Highest Priest, M. Hardinge him self says, is meante every
several Bishop within his own Diocese. S. Augustine says, Hieron, contra
Luciferianos. M. Hardinge in his Answer to the Apology, Fol. 204. b.
Quid est Episcopus, nisi Primus Presbyter, hoc est, Summus Sacerdos? What is a
Bishop, but the First, or Chief Priest, that is to say, the Highest Priest?
Therefore we may safely spare the Pope this Title, of Highest Bishop, not as
Peculiar to him alone, as M. Hardinge imagines, but as Common, and General to
al Bishops.

All that ye have here alleged of the Jurisdiction of the Flamines, is a mere
fantasy* grounded only upon an unsavory Fable of Anacletus, and Clemens.
Neither are you hable to find, In Quaest. Ex vtroque Testamen* mixtim, Qu. 10^.
either these names, Archiflamines, or Protoflamines, which here are imagined,
in any Ancient allowed Writer, or any such Universal Jurisdiction to them
belonginge.

The First, or Principal, or Mother Sees were limited, not by the Flamines,
but by the Prince. Council. Chalced. Cap. 12.
So it is written in the Council of Chalcedon: Quascunque Civitates per Literas
Regias Metropolitico nomine honorarunt: A Primate See.
What Cities so ever by the Princes Charter, they honored with the name of
the Mother See. And therefore the Emperor Theodosius upon displeasure
conceived, Chrysostom. ad Popul. Antiochen. Homi. 17.
took that Name of Honor from the City of Antioche, mindinge it should be
so called no more. And for that cause was the City of Rome chosen amongst
others to be a Primate, or a Principal Mother See, not for that either Christ,
or Peter had so appointed, as M. Hardinge tells us, but for that it was the
most Noble City, and of greattest renoume in all the world. Council. Chalced.
Ca. 28.
The words be plain: Sedi Veteris Romae Patres merito dederunt Primatum,
Quod illa Ciuitas aliis Imperaret: The Fathers woorthily gave the Chiefetie to
the Sea of the Old Rome: Because that City had the Princehood over others.

Now concerning this Decree of the Council of Carthage, it touched as well the
Bishop of Rome, as other Primates. And therefore Pope Adriane afterward
alleging, and corrupting the same, added thereto this special Prouiso for him
self: Nullus Archiepiscoporum, nisi qui Primas Seeds renent, appelletur
Primas, aut Princeps Sacerdotum, Adri^^. Papa. In Capitulis ex Synodis, and
Canonib. diuer. collec. To. 2. Page 611.
aut Summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid huiusmodi etc. Salua semper in omnibus
Authoritate Beati Petri Apostoli: Let no Archbishop, sauinge such, as heue
the Principal, or First Sees, he called either the Primate, or the Prince of
Priests, or the Highest Priest, or by any other like name, etc. Sauinge
always, and in all things the Authority of Blessed S. Peter the Apostle.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 3.
And therefore sithence the Bishop of Rome will now a days so be called, and
chalengeth unto him self an Authority that is none of his: bisides that he
does plainly contrary to the Ancient Councelles, and contrary to the Old
Fathers: We believe, that he does give to him self, as it is written by his
own Companion Gregory, a Presumptuouse, a Profane, Al these be the Words
of Gregory.
a Sacrilegious and Antichristian name: that he is also the King of Pride,
that he is Lucifer, which prefers him self before his Brethren: that he
has forsaken the Faith, and is the Forerunner of Antichriste.

M. Hardinge.
Here is mutche adoo about naught, and a number of bitter words pyked out of
S. Gregorio^ Epistles, pretended to be written against the Bishop of Rome, to
no purpose. For if we say, Untruth. For Platina says, Bonifacius 3.
Obtinuit a Phoca, Magna tame^ Contentione.
as we may say truly, that he chalengeth to him self no such name, then
what has this Defender to say? Let him show us how many Bishops of that see
ever took the name of the Universal Bishop upon them, specially as Gregory
understands it to signify. If he can show none, why blotteth he so mutche
paper with so impudent lies?

There appears no such matter in all that Counc^l.
In deed the six hundred and thirty Fathers of the general Council of
Chalcedon gave to Pope Leo that name, as Gregory in three sundry Epistles
writes, and certain other in their writings have attributed to the Pope the
same. But that either Leo, or any other his Successor Untruth, As appear^th
by the Former Authority of Platina.
affected so to be called, Gregory denieth^ Untruth, As further appears by
the Answer.
And that any since Gregory's time to our days ever called or wrote him self
Universal Bishop, we deny.

Whereas Pelagius, and Gregory, writing against the Presumption of John the
Bishop of Constantinople for taking upon him this name, are mutche alleged by
the enemies of Unity, against the Authority of Peter's Successor over the
whole Church: we say, that they folowinge the sleppes of their Predecessors
refused the name of Universal Bishop in such sense, as Pelagius, and
specially Gregory oftentimes declares, that where one is called Universal
Bishop, he seems to be called Untruth, and most Vain fantasy. For no Bishop
of Constantinople ever dreamed of such Authority.
Bishop alone, Universal
so as Bishoprike should be taken away from al others. But they refused not so
to be called after this meaning, as though by that refusal the Authority of
the Bishop of Rome should be restrained, and not extend over the whole
Church. They deny, that any man might so be Universal Bishop, as he should be
also the peculiar ruler, and Governor of every particular Church. For so al
other Bishops had been in vain: and that is contrary to Christ's Institution,
who ordained all the Apostles to be Bishops. To say al in few, they refused the
name that might odiously be taken, they refused not the Primacie Untruth. For
Christ never erected any such Primacie.
which Christ to them had committed. Therefore Gregory writing to Morice
the Emperor, alleaginge the words that make for Peter's Authority over the
whole Flock of Christ, says of Peter, The like whole Charge was given to
Paul, John, and Mathevve: as shall appear.
The Charge of the whole Church and Principality is committed to him, and yet
is he not called Universal Apostle. Where it is plain, that Gregory does
both affirm the charge of the whole, and denies the name of Universal. Let
these Defenders grant the thing, and we strive not for the name.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here it pleasethe M. Hardinge of his Courtesy to say, We have blotted our
papers with so many, and so many impudente Lies. His whole discourse stands
only in the Construction of this word, Universal, in what sense it may be
either refused, or claimed. How be it, understand thou, gentle Reader, that all this is M. Hardinges own only Comme^tarie. For other Doctor, or Father he
allegeth none.

First, where it is said, that S. Gregory by this word, Universal Bishop,
meante him, that would be Bishop alone over all the world, excludinge al
others, this exposition is not only strange, but also vain, and fond, and
void of reason. For what Bishop of Constantinople ever was there, that called
him self the Only Bishop, and excluded al others? Doubtelesse John, that
first laid Claim unto this name, as he called him self the Universal
Bishop, so he wrote his Letters unto others, and never refused to call them
Bishops.

But, to leave these Gloses, and fantasies, by the Title of Universal Bishop,
S* Gregory meante such a one, not, as would be Bishop alone, but as would
claim Infinite Authority, and Universal Jurisdiction over al other Bishops
throughout the World: and that, as S. Cyprian says, would call him self,
Episcopum Episcoporum: The Bishop of Bishops.

Therefore S. Cyprian. in Con^cil. Carthagin. Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
Gregory thus writes unto John the Bishop of Constantinople. the First
Usurper of this Title: Quid tu Christo Vniuersalis Ecclesiae Capiti in Extremi
Iudicij responsurus es examine, qui cuncta eius Membra tibimet conaris
Vniuersalis appellatione supponere? What answer will thou make unto Christ
the Head of the Universal Church, when thou shall be examined at the last
Judgment, (not that thou haste called thee self the Only Bishop, but) that
thus go about by the name of Universal Bishop to make al his Members
subject unto thee? It was this Immoderate Universal. Jurisdiction, that S.
Gregory reproved, and not the making of him self Bishop alone, excludinge al
others.

Likewise he writes of him self unto Eulogius: Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 30.
Beatitudo vestra mihi sic loquitur, Sicut Iussistis. Quod Verbum Iussionis,
peto, a meo auditu remouete. No^ Iussi: Sed quae vtilia visa sunt, indicare
curaui: Your Holiness says thus unto me, ( being the Bishop of Rome) As you
have Commanded. Have away this word of Commaundinge from my Hearing, I
beseech you. I Commanded you not: but that I took to be the best, I thought
good to show you. The fault therefore, that Gregory finds with John the
Bishop of Constantinople, stood not in calling him self the Only Bishop, for
so he never did, but in Bidding, and Commanding, and Claiming Universality of
Jurisdiction over the whole Church of Christ. And for that cause he says
unto Eulogius: Gregor. Lib. 7. Epist 30.
Ecce in Praefatione Epistolae, quam ad ^^eipsum, qui prohibui, direxistis,
Superbae Appellationis Verbum, Vniuersalem me Papam dicentes imprimere
Curastis. Universal.
Quod, peto, dulcissima mihi Sanctitas vestra vltra non faciat: quia vobis
subtrahitur, quod alteri plusquam ratio exigit praebetur: Behold even in the
Title of your Letter ye have written this Proud Posee, naminge me The
Universal Pope: notwithstanding I have forbidden it. I beseech your Holiness,
to do so no more. For what so ever is given unto any other above reason, the
same is taken from your selves.

M. Hardinge says, Gregory affirms the Charge of the whole, and denies
the name of Universal. Let these Defenders (says he) grant the thing, and
we strive not for the name. Verily this play had benne to vain for Children:
to allow y^ thing it self, and to cauil only about the name: that is to
receive the Body, and to shun the Shadow: Ma^t. 23. Appianus: (...).
Or, as Christ says, to swalowe a Camel, and to strain a gnatte. So App^an
says, Julius Caesar nicely refused to be called a King: and yet in all manner
Authority, and Gouernmente bare him self none otherwise, then as a King.

It was not the bare Name of Universal Bishop, that so mutche offended the Holy
Fathers: but the Pride, and Tyranny, and Universal Gouernmente, and
Jurisdiction, that is signified by that name. If the name were naught, then was
the Usurpation of the thing it self a great deal worse.

But S. Gregory says, The Charge, and Principality of the whole Church was
committed unto Peter. This is not denied. In like sort Chrysostom says, The
like Charge, and Principality of the Church was committed unto Paul. For
thus he writes, Chrysostom. in Sermo. De Eleemosy. Chrysostom. in Act. Homili. 53.
Paulo Totus Orbis creditus est Paulus gubernat Orbis Ecclesiam: Paulus
Vniuersum gubernat Orbem: Unto Paul the whole World is committed: Paul
governs the Church of the World. Paul rules y^ whole world. And yet
Chrysostom meant not hereby, y^ Paul had the Universal Gouernmente of the
whole: but that his care, and Charge was general, Chrysostom. De Laudibus Pauli,
Homil. 2.
as not bound or limited unto one place, but indifferente, and common unto al.
So he says, Paulus ta^ anxi^ omniu^ salute^ curabat, ^c si Totus Mundus vnica
esset Domus: Paul was so careful for the Salvation of al men, as if the
Whole World had benne but one House. Chrysostom. in Homil. De Profectu Euangelij.
Chrysostom. ad Popul. Antioche. Homil. 73.
Again, Paulum tangebat solicitudo Omnium Ecclesiarum: non Vn^us, aut Duarum,
aut Trium, sed Omnium, quae erant per Orbem Terrarum: Paul was moved with the
care of Al Churches: not of One, or Two, or Three, but of All the Churches
throughout the World. Likewise he says of S. John, Columna erat Omniu^, quae
in Orb sunt, Ecclesia^um. He was the Pillar of All the Churches in the World.
Likewise again of S. Mathewe, Matthaeus Vniuersi Orbis curam gerebat: The
Whole World was under Mathewes Charge. Chrysostom. in Prologo in Johan. Chrysostom.
in Matthae. Homil. 48.


Therefore if M. Hardinge will geather out of these three words of S. Gregory
( Totius Ecclesiae Cura) that Peter had Universal Jurisdiction over al, it
must needs follow by the same words, that Paul, John, and Mathewe had the
same Jurisdiction over al. What other thing he hops to gain by these
Words of S. Gregory, I cannot tell: Unless happily he will found his reason
thus: S. Gregory says, Petrus Vniuersalis Apostolus non vocatur: Peter is
not called the Universal Apostle: Ergo, The pope is the Universal Bishop.

So handsomely these things are geathered together, to serve the Purpose.

Pope Leo, ye say, of Humility refused this Name openly in the Council of
Chalcedon. In deed Pope Gregory so reports it. Notwithstanding it
appears not by any thing done in that Counsel, that this Title was ever
offered him. And to refuse a thing before it be offered, it is no great
point of Humility.

To be short, the best we can geather hereof, is this: John the Bishop of
Constantinople ambitiously craved this name: Pope Leo godly refused it being
offered unto him: The Popes afterward gladly received it without offering. If
it were a good name, Universal
why was it refused? If it were an il name, why was it received?

Now let us see, what they of M. Hardinges side have meante by this word,
Universal, and with what Humility the Popes have received the same. Thus
therefore they write: Abbas. De Co^cess. Praeben. Quia diuersita.
Papa est Ordinarius Totius Mundi: The Pope is the Ordinary of all the World.
Extra, De Appel* Ve debitus, In Gloss.
Papa est Ordinarius Omnium hominum. The Pope is the Ordinary of Al men:
Extra. De statu Regulari, Periculoso. In Gloss.
Papa Totius Orbis obtinet Principatum: The Pope has the Princehood of All the
World: And when the Pope is Consecrate, the Chief Minister says unto him,
Ceremoniar. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
Ego inuestio te de Papatu, vt Praesis Vrbi, and Orbi: I do inueste thee with
the Popedom, that thou maiste rule both the City, and the World.

And whereas M. Hardinge demands, how many Popes have claimed this name, it
may please him to remember, that in the late Council of Constance it was not
only claimed, but also published, as an Article of y^ Faith. The words are
these, Paralipome. Vrspergen. De Disputatione Lipsica.
De necessitate Salutis est credere, Papam esse Oecumenicum: It is of the
necessity of Salvation to believe, that the Pope is the Universal Bishop.

Of this Universality of Power Franciscus Zarabella writes thus: Francis.
Zarabella.
Papa iam occupauit Omnia iura inferiorum Ecclesiarum, ira* vt inferiores
Praelati sint pro nihilo: The Pope has now gotten the right of Al Inferior
Churches, so that the Inferior Prelates stand now for nothing.

For these causes Gregory callethe the name of Universal Bishop. a Profane, a
Presumptuous, a Wicked and Antichristian name: Comparinge the Usurper thereof
with Lucifer, and Antichriste.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 1.
Further we say, that the Minister ought laufully, duly, and orderly to be
preferred to that office of the Church of God, and that noman has Power to
wreaste him self into the Holy Ministry at his own pleasure. Wherefore
these persons do us the greatter wrong, which have nothing so common in
their mouths, as that we do nothing Orderly, and comely, but al things
troublesomely, and without order: and that we allow every man to be a
Priest, to be a Teacher, and to be an Interpreter of the Scriptures.

M. Hardinge.
Ye say, that the Minister ought laufully to be called (for so has your
Latin) and duly and orderly to be preferred to that office of the Church of
God. Why do ye not so? Why is not this observed among you Gospellers? What
so ever ye mean by your Minister, and by that office, Untruth. For it is
known* we have them.
this are we assured of, that in this your new Church, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, Subdeacons, or any other Inferior Orders ye have none.

For whereas after the Doctrine of your New Gospel, like the Forerenners of
Antichriste, ye have Untruth. For we have abandoned neither the Priesthood,
nor the Sacrifice, that Christ appointed.
abandoned thexternal sacrifice, and Priesthood of the New Testamente, and
have not in your Sect consecrated Bishops, and therefore being without
Priests made with lawful laieinge on of hands, as Scripture requires, al
Holy Orders being given by Bishops only: how can ye say, that any among
you can lawfully Minister, or that ye have any lawful Ministers at al?

This then being so, let me have leave to oppose one of these Defenders
consciences. And that for the better Understanding I may direct my words
to a certain person, let him be the Author of this Apology, or because his
name to me is unknown, let him be M. Jewel. For with him gladly would I
reason in this point, the rather for acquaintance, and for that he bears the
name of a Bishop in that Church, where my self had a room. How say you,
Sir Minister Bishop, ought the Minister to be lawfully called? ought he dewly
and orderly to be preferred to that office, or (as the Latin here has)
promoted, or put in Authority over the Church? in the Apology this Defender
says, yea.

How many Bishops can you reckon, whom in the Church of Salesbury you have
succeeded as well in Doctrine, as in outward sittinge in that Chair? How many
can you tell us of, that being your Predecessors in order before you, were of
your Opinion, and taught the faitheful people of that Dioces the Doctrine, that
you teach? Did Bishop Capon teach your Doctrine? did Shaxton^ did Campegius?
did Bishop Audley? Briefly, did ever any Bishop of that See before you teach
your Doctrine? Untruth. For B. Shaxton, and B. Capon taught the same.
It is most certain they did not.

If you cannot show your Bishoply Petigree, if you can prove no Succession,
then whereby hold you? VVil you show us the Letters Patentes of the Prince?
Well may they stand you in some steed before men: before God, who shall call
you to accoumpt for preswninge to take the Highest office in his Church
Untruth. For he was chosen by Canonical Election of the Chapter, as al other
Bishops have benne before.
not duly called thereto, they shall serve you to no propose.

You know what Tertullian says of such as ye be: In praescriptionibus
aduersus Haereticos. These be Tertullians words.
Eda^t Origines Ecclesiarum suarum, etc. We say likewise to you M. Jewel, and
that we say to you, we say to each one of your Companions: Tell us the
Original and first spring of your Church. She we us the Register of your
Bishops continually succedinge one an other from the beginning, so as that
first Bishop have some one of the Apostles, or of the Apostolic men for his
Author, and Predecessor. For by this way the Apostolic Churches show what
reputation they be of. As the Church of Smyrnae tells us of Polycarpe by
John the Apostle placed there. The Church of the Romans tells us of
Clement ordained by Peter. Epist. 165.
S. Augustine having reckened up in order the Bishops of Rome to An astasius
Successor to Siricius, who was the Eighte and thirteth after Peter, says
that in all that Number and roll of Bishops there is not found One, that was
a Donatisie: and thereof he concludes, Ergo, the Donatistes be not Catholics.
So after that we have reckened all the Bishops of Salisburie from Bishop
Capon upward, we shall come at length in respect of Doctrine and Orders to S.
Augustine the Apostle of the English, who was made Bishop by Gregory, and
from Gregory upward to S. Peter. And in all that rewe of Bishops Untruth, By
your own Confession.
we shall find never a one that believed, as M. Jewel believes. Ergo, your
Zwinglian and Caluinian Belefe, M. Jewel, and of the rest of your fellows is
not Catholic.

Therefore, to go from your Succession, which ye cannot prove, and to come to
your Vocation, how say you Sir? You bear your self as though you were Bishop
of Salisburie. But how can you prove your Vocation? By what Authority Usurp
you the Administration of Doctrine and Sacraments? What can you allege for
the right and Proof of your Ministry? who has called you? Who has laid
hands on you? By what example has he done it? How and by whom are you
consecrated? Who has sent you? Who has committed to you th^ffice you take
upon you? Be you a Priest, or be you not? If you be no* how dare you Usurp
the name and Office of a Bishop? If you be, tell us Even he, that gave M.
Hardinge Orders in the time of K. Edward.
who gave you Orders? The Institution of a Priest, was never yet but in the
Power of a Bishop. Bishops have always after the Apostles time, according
to the Ecclesiastical Canons, ben consecrated by Untruths two together in one
Sentence: See the Answer.
three other Bishops, with the consent of the Metropolitan, and
confirmation * of the Bishop of Rome.

Macarius a Priest of Athanasius, Athanas. in Apologia. ^
(as it was laid to his Charge by his accusers) pulled Ischyras from the
Aul^ar as he was at A vain Untruth. For if it had benne any thing, it had
benne a Communion, and not a Mass. But Athanasius says plainly, Neque
Ecclesia ibi erat, neque Sacra ficbant, neque te^pus mysteriorum agebatur.
Mass, overthrew the Holy Table brake the Chalice. The matter brought to
judgment, Athanasius and those Bishops both denied the fact and also though
it were granted, yet defended the same as well done, because Ischyras was not a
lawful Minister of the Church. And why so? because he was not lawfully made
Priest, nor with Churchely laieing on of hands consecrated. By which example
besides other points we are taught, what to judge of your pretensed Communion.

Again what say you to Epiphanius, Contra H^res. ^ Lib a. In Dialog^ contra
Luciferianos.
who writes against one Zacchaeus of his time, for that being but a Lay
man, with wicked Presumption took upon him to * handle the Holy Mysteries, and
rashely to do the office of a Priest? Hereof S. Hierome sa^the not ably:
Hilarious cum Diaconus de Ecclesia recesserit, etc. Hilary for asmutche as he
went from the Church being a Deacon, and is only (as he thinks) the
multitude of the world, can neither consecrate the Sacrament of Thaulter
being without Bishops and Priests, nor deliver Baptism without the
^uchariste. And whereas now the man is dead, Succession.
with the man also the sect is ended, because being a Deacon he could not
consecrate any Clerk that should remain after him. And Church is there
none, Sacerdote^.
which has not a Priest. But lettinge go these few of little regard, that
to them selves be both Lay and Bishops, listen what is to be thought of the
Church. Thus S. Hierome there. In whom leauinge other things I note, that if
there be no Church, where is no Priest, Where is your Church like to
become, M. Hardinges Brethren Apostates.
after that our Apostates, that now be fled from us to you, shall be departed
this Life? Therefore this being true, it remains, M. Jewel, you tell us,
whether your Vocation be Ordinary or Extraordinary. If it be Ordinary, show
us the letters of your Orders. At least show us, that you have received Power
to do the Office, you presume to exercise, by due order of laieinge on of
hands and Consecration. A manifest Untruth: For we have both Order, and
Co^ secration.
But Order, and Consecration you have not. For who could give that to you of
al these New Ministers, how so ever else you call them which he has not him
self? If it be Extraordinary (as all that ye have done hitherto is besides al
good Order) show us some Sign or Miracle. If you fail in all these, why ought
not you to be put away?

Finally what can you answer to that, Li. 1. Epist. 6
which may be objected to you out of S. Cyprians Epistle to Magnus, touching
Nouatian? It was at those days a question, whether Nouatian Baptized and
offered, specially where as he used the Form, Manner, and Ceremonies of the
Church. Cyprian denies it. For he can not (says he) be compred a Bishop,
who settinge at naught the Tradition of the Gospel, Eusebius Eccles. Hist. Li.
6. ca. 43. in Graeco.
and of the Apostles, Nemini succedens a seipso ordinatus est, Succedinge no
man is ordained Bishop of him self. For by no means may one have or hold a
Church, that is not ordained in the Church.

This being so, we do you no wrong, as ye complain, in tellinge you and
declaringe to the World, that touching the exercise of your Ministry, ye
do nothing orderly, or comely, but al things troublesomely and without
Order. Unless ye mean such Order, and comeliness, as Thieves obs^rue among
them selves in the distribution of their Robberies.

Lastly, M. Hardinges modesty.
if ye allow not every man, yea and every Woman to be a Priest, why drive ye
not some of your fellows to recante, An odious Untruth: For touching the
Ministry of the Church, we have neither Preached so, not written so.
that so have Preached? Why allow ye the Books of your New Evangelists,
that so have written?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here has M. Hardinge taken some pains more then ordinary. He thought, if he
could by any color make the world believe, we have neither Bishops, nor
Priests, nor Deacons this day in the Church of England, he might the more
easily claim the whole right unto himself. And in deed, if it were certain,
that the Religion, and Truth of God passes evermore orderly by Succession,
and none otherwise, then were Succession, whereof he has told us so long a
tale, a very good substantial Argument of the Truth. But Christ says,
Matthael* 23.
In Cathedra Mosi sedent Scribae, and Pharisaei: By order of Succession, the
Scribes, and Phariseis sit in Moses Chair. Annas, and Ca^p^as, touching
Succession, were as well Bishops, as Aaron, and Eleazar. Of Succession, S.
Paul says to the Faithful at Ephesus: Actor. 20.
Scio, qu^d post discessum meum intrabunt Lupirapaces. Ex Vobis ipsis exurgent
viri peruersa loquentes: I know that after my departure hence, R^ueninge
Woulues shall enter, and Succeed me. And out of your selves there shall (by
Succession) spring up men speakinge peruersely. Therefore S. Hierome says,
Did 40. Non est Facile.
Non Sanctorum filij sunt, qui tenent loca Sanctorum: They be not always the
Children of Holy Men, that (by Succession) have the places of Holy Men.

Notwithstanding the Pope him self will say, as it is before alleged, In Papa
si desint bona acquisita per merirum, Did. 40. Non nos.
sufficient, quae a Loci Praedecessore Praestantur: If the Pope want good
things gotten by his own merits: the good things, which he has ( by
Succession) of Peter his Predecessor, are sufficient. And the Gloss thereupon,
Petrus fecit Papas Haeredes bouitatis suae: Succession.
Peter made the Popes Heirs of his goodness by Succession. Did 19. Sic
Omn^^: In Gloss.
And again, Papa Sanctitatem recipit a Cathedra: The Pope receives his
Holiness ( by Succession) of his Chair.

Such affiance sometime had the Scribes, and Phariseis in their Succession.
Therefore they said, Johan. 8. Johan. 9.
We are the Children of Abraham: Unto us has God made his promises: Art
thou greatter then our Father Abraham? As for Christ, we know not, from
whence he came, or what he can show for his Succession. And, when Christ
began to refourme their Abuses, and Errors, they said unto him, By what
Power dooest thou these things? Lucae. 20. Mare. 11. Beda in Luc. Lib. 5. Ca.
80. Cyrill. in Cathena in Luc. 20.
And who gave thee this Authority? where is thy Succession? Upon which
words Beda says, Intelligi volunt, Diaboli esse, quod faci^: They would
have the People understand (for that he had no solemn Succession) that all that he did, was of the Devil. And Cyrillus frames their words in this
sort: Tu Ortus ex Judah commissos nobis fasces vsurpas: Thou being of the
Tribe of Juda, (and therefore having no right by Succession unto the
Priesthood) take upon thee the office, that is committed unto us. Likewise
Chrysostom imagines, the Phariseis thus to say: Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homi.
39.
Tu de Sacerdotali Familia natus non es: Senatus tibi hoc non coucessit: Caesar
non donauit: Thou art not of the house of Priests: The Council has not
granted it thee: The Emperor has not geeuen it thee. Thus to maineteine them
selves in credit, for that they had Succession, and continuance from Aaron,
and sat in Moses Chair, they kept Christ quite out of possession: and said
unto him then, even as M. Hardinge says now unto us: Who ever taught us
these things before thee? What ordinary Succession, and Vocation haste thou?
What Bishop admitted thee? Who confirmed thee? Who allowed thee?

Therefore, good Christian Reader, let not these M. Hardinges great words
mutche abasshe thee. The Scribes, and Phariseis in the like cases used the like
language long ago.

Touching the Church of Rome, I will say no more for this present, but only,
that was spoken openly by Cornelius the Bishop of Bitonto in the late Council
of Tridente: Cornel. Episco. Bitontin. in Council. Triden.
Vtinam non a Religione ad Superstitionem, a Fide ad Infidelitatem, a Christo
ad Antichristum, velut prorsus Vnanimes declinassent: VVoulde God they were not
al gonne by consent together, from Religion to Superstition: from Faith to
Jufidelitie: from Christ to Antichriste. These few words, consideringe
either the speaker, or the place, where they were spoken, may seem
sufficient. They are gonne from Faith to Infidelity: from Christ to
Antichriste. And yet al other things failinge, they must hold only by
Succession: and, only because they sit in Moses Chair, they must claim
the possession of the whole. This is the right, and virtue of their Succession.

The words of Tertullian, M. Hardinge, which you have here alleged, were
spoken of certain your Ancient Fathers, that had raised up a New Religion of
them selves, as you have also done, without either Word of God, or example
of the Apostles, and Holy Fathers. And therefore he says, not unto us, but
unto you, and such, as you be, Edant Origines Ecclesiarum suarum: Let them
show forth the Originalles of their Churches. Even so we say unto you,
show us the Originalles of your Doctrine: Show us any one of the Apostles of
Christ, or of the Learned Catholic Doctors of the Church, that ever said
your Private Mass: Show one at the least, either Greek, or Latin. S.
Augustine says, August. Epist. 165.
of so many Bishops of Rome, there could not one be found, that had benne a
Donatiste. Even so in like sort say we to you, of all the same Bishops of
Rome, there cannot one be found, that ever agreed with M. Hardinge in saieinge
Mass. Or if there were any such, show us his name, with other
Circumstances, when, and where, and who were witnesses of the dooinge. Show us
your Originalles, Succession* Confirmation.
M. Hardinge: Confess the Truth: Deceive us no longer: It is a new Divise:
ye have it only of your selves: and not by Succession from the Apostles.

But wherefore tells us M. Hardinge this long tale of Succession? Have these
men their own Succession in so safe Record? Who was then the Bishop of Rome
next by Succession unto Peter? Who was the Second? Who the Third? Irenae.
li. 3. ca. 3. Eusebius li. 5. cap. 5. Epiphan. L^b. 1. De Corpoerat. Optat. contra
Donatist. lib. 2.
Who the Fourth? Irenaeus reckeneth them together in this order: Petrus,
Linus, Anacletus, Clemens: Epiphanius thus, Petrus, Linus, Cletus, Clemens:
Optatus thus. Petrus, Linus, Clemens, Anacletus. Clemens says, that he him
self was next unto Peter: And then must the reckeninge go thus: Petrus,
Clemens, Linus, Anacletus. Hereby it is clear, that of the four first
Bishops of Rome, M. Hardinge cannot certainly tell us, who in order
Succeeded other. And thus talkinge so mutche of Succession, they are not well
hable to blase their own Succession.

I might farther say, that Peter's See Apostolic was over the Jews, and not
at Rome over the Heathene. Calat. 2.
For so S. Paul says, Mihi concreditum est Euangelium Praepuiij, sicut Petro
Circumcisionis: Qui potens erat Petro in Apostolatu Circumcisionis, Potens erat
in me inter Gentes: The Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed unto me, as
the Gospel of the Circumcision unto Peter: God that was mighty in Peter in the
Apostleship of the Circumcision, was mighty in me emonge the Heathens. Therefore
if the Pope this day will claim only by Peter's Title, and require no more,
then Peter had, then must he seek his Primacie emongst the Jews, where Peter
had his Jurisdiction limited, and not at Rome emonge the Heathen Christians,
emonge whom, as S. Paul says, he had not mutche to do.

Where you say, that according to the Ecclesiastical Canons, ever from the
Apostles time, Bishops have evermore benne Consecrate by three other
Bishops, with the Confirmation of the Bishop of Rome, as if without him noman
might be allowed to be a Bishop, ye should not so unadvisedly report so
manifest Untruth. For, I beseech you, where be these Ecclesiastical Canons?
Who divised them? Who made them? Who gave the Pope that singular Privilege,
that no Bishop should be admitted in all the World, but only by him? I
remember, your Canonistes have said, Felin* De Constitu. Ca. Canonum S^atuta.
Colum. 6. Ver. Fallit.
Papa potest Solo Verbo facere Episcopum: The Pope may make a Bishop only by
his Word, without any farther Consecration. And Abbate Panormitane moves a
doubt, whether the Pope by the Fullness of his Power, may deprive all the
Bishops in the World at one time. But thus they say, that care not greatly,
what they say.

Verily, Panor. De Constitution. Translato.
Nilus a Greek Writer says thus, Constantinopolitanus Caesa^iensem
Episcopum, aliosque sibi subiectos ordina^: Romanus vero nec
Constantinopolitanum, nec alium quenquam Metropolitanum: The Bishop of
Constantinople doothe Order the Bishop of Caesaria, Nilus de Primatu Romani
Pontificis.
and other Bishops under him: But the Bishop of Rome doothe Order neither the
Bishop of Constantinople, nor any other Metropolitan. But hereof I have spoken
more at large in my Former Reply to M. Hardinge. Certainly S. Cyprian
wills, Artic. 4. Diu. 25. Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epist. 4.
that Sabinus, being lawfully elected, and Consecrate Bishop in Spain, should
contine we Bishop still, yea although Cornelius, being then Bishop of Rome,
would not Confirm him.

In deed, touching every Metropolitanes several Jurisdiction, Gratianus
notes thus: Did 64. Cap. ^in.
Illud generaliter clarum est, qu^d si quis praeter Sententiam Metropolitani
fuerit factus Episcopus, hunc magna Synodus definiuit Episcopum esse non
Oportere: This is generally clear, that if any man be made Bishop without the
consent of his Metropolitan, the great Council ( of Nice) has decreed, that
such a one may not be Bishop.

So likewise says Socrates of the Bishop of Constantinople: Confirmation.
Consecration.
Praeter Sententiam Episcopi Constantinopolitani Electio Episcopi ne fiat:
Without the Consent of the Bishop of Constantinople let noman be chosen
Bishop. Here is a right specially reserved to the Bishop of Constantinople,
Socrates Lib 7. Cap. 28. (...).
and to every Metropolitan within his own Province: but of the Bishop of
Romes Universal right of Confirmation we hear nothing. Neither doothe M.
Hardinges Countrefeite Anacletus claim all the Bishops through the world, as
belonginge to his Admission, but only a part. These be his words, Omnes
Episcopi, qui huius Apostolicae Sedis Ordinationi subiacent: Ana^let. Episto.
3. Did. 95. Iuxta Sanctorum.
All the Bishops, that are under the Orderinge, or Confirmation of this
Apostolic See. So likewise writes Damasus to the Bishops of Illyricum, Par
est, omnes, qui sunt in Orb Romano, Magistros consentire: It is meet, that all the Teachers within the Roman Jurisdiction, Sozomen. Lib. 6. Cap. 23.
should agree together.

Again, that you say, A Bishop has always benne Consecrate by other three
Bishops, whether it be true, or no, it may well be called in question, as
being of your part hitherto very weakly affirmed. Surely Petrus de Palude,
one of your own Doctors, Petr. de Palude, De Potestate Apost^l.
would have told you thus: In Ecclesia Vnus Episcopus suff^cit ad alium
Consecrandum: nec est, nisi propter Solennitatem ab Ecclesia inuentum, vt Tres
concurrant: In the Church One Bishop is sufficient to Consecrate an other: and
it is nothing else, but for the Solemnity of the matter, that the Church has
divised, that Three Bishops should join together. Likewise Ioha^^es Mayor
an other of your own Doctors would have said unto you, Johannes Mayor in.
4. Sen^. Did. 24. q. 3.
Quis Ordinauit Petrum? Non dabunt Tres Ordinatores. Dico ergo, esse
Constitutionem Humanam, qu^d Episcopus Ordinetur a Tribus. Paulus enim non
quaesiuit Duos pro Ordinatione Titi, and Timothei: Who Ordered Peter, and made
him Bishop? They cannot show me Three Bishops that ordered him. Therefore I
say, that a Bishop be Ordered by other Three Bishops, it is an Ordinance
made by Man. For Paul, when he Ordered Titus, and Timotheus, he sought not
about for other Two Bishops.

Whereas it farther pleases you, to call for my Letters of Orders, and to
demand of me, as by sum Authority, whether I be a Priest, or no: what
hands were laid over me: and by what Order I was made: I answer you, I am a
Priest, made long sithence, by the same Order, and Ordinance, and, I think,
also by the same Man, and the same hands, that you, M. Hardinge, were made
Priest by, in the late time of that most Virtuous Prince King Edward^ the
Sixthe. Therefore ye cannot well doubt of my Priesthood, without like
doubtinge of your own.

Farther, as if ye were my Metropolitan, ye demand of me, whether I be a
Bishop, or no. I answer you, I am a Bishop, and that by the Free and
accustomed Canonical Election of the whole Chapter of Sarisburie, assembled
solemnly together for that purpose. Of which company you, M. Hardinge, were
then One, and, as I was enfourmed, being present there in your own person
amongst your Brethren, gave free, and open consent unto the Election. If you
deite this, take heed, your own breathe blow not against you.

As for the impertinente tales of Ischyras, and Zacchaeus, they touch us
nothing. They were none of ours: We know them not. Our Bishops are made in
Form, and Order, as they have benne ever, by Free Election of the Chapter: by
Consecration of the Archbishop, and other Three Bishops: and by the
Admission of the Prince. And in this sort, not long sithence, the Pope him
self was admitted: and, Platina in ^e^erino Papa.
as Platina says, without the Emperors letters Patentes was no Pope: as
hereafter it shall be showed more at large.

Therefore we neither have Bishops without Church, nor Church without
Bishops. Neither doothe the Church of England this day depend^ of them,
Succession.
whom you so often call Apostates, as if our Church were no Church without
them. They are no Apostates, M. Hardinge: That is rather your own name, and of
good right belongs unto you. They are for a great part learned, and grave,
and Godly men, and are mutche ashamed to see your folies. Notwithstanding,
if there were not one, neither of them, nor of us leafte alive, yet would not
therefore the whole Church of England fice to Louai^e. Tertullian says,
Nonne and Laici Sacerdotes sumus? Scriptum est, Regnum quoque, and Sacerdotes
Deo, Tertullian. (...) Exhorta. ad Castitatem.
and Patri suo nos fecit. Differentiam inter Ordinem, and Plebem constituit
Ecclesiae Authoritas, and honor per Ordinis Consessum Sanctificatus a Deo. Vbi
Ecclesiastici Ordinis non est Consessus, and Offert, and T^^g^^ Sacerdos, qui
est ibi solus. Sed and vbi Tres sunt, Ecclesia est, licet Laici. Vnusquisque
enim de sua Fide viuit: And we being Laiemenne are we not Priests? It is
written, Christ has made us both a Kingedome, and Priests unto God his
Father: The Authority of the Church, and the Honor by the Assembly, or
Council of Order Sanctified of God has made a difference bitwene the Lay, and
the Cleregie. Where as there is no Assembly of Ecclesiastical Order, the
Priest being there alone (without the company of other Priests) doothe
both Minister the Oblation, and also Baptize. Yea, and be there but Three
together, and, though they be Latemenne, yet is there a Church. For every man
lives of his own Faith.

Again, ye demand of me, what Bishop of Sacisburie ever sithence
Augostines time maineteined this Doctrine. I might likewise, and by as good
Authority demand of you, what Bishop of Rome ever before the same English
Augustines time maineteined your Doctrine? Or, as I said before, what Bishop
of Rome ever before that time either said, or knew your Private Mass?
Touching the Bishops of Sarisburie, you your self have already named two,
Bishop Shaxton, and Bishop Capon, both Learned, and grave Fathers, and both
Preachers, and professors of the Gospel. For the rest of the Bishops, that
were before them, what Faith they held, and what they either liked, or
misliked, by their writings, or Sermons it does not greatly appear. I
trust, they held the Fundation, and lived, and died in the Faith of Christ.
If they had lived in these days, and seen, that you see, they would not have
benne partakers of your wilfulness.

To be short, we succeed the Bishops, that have benne before our days. We
are Elected, Consecrate, Confirmed, and Admitted, as they were. If they were
deceived in any thing, we succeed them in place, but not in error. They were
our Predecessors, but not the Rules, and Standards of our Faith. Or rather,
to set aparte al comparison of Persons, the Doctrine of Christ this day,
M. Hardinge, Succedeth your Doctrine: as the Day Succedeth the Night: as the
Light Succedeth Darkness: and as the Truth Succedeth Error.

Now for as mutche, as ye have thought it so good, to examine the Petite
degree of the Bishops of Sarisburie, I trust ye will not think it il, if I
al^tle touch the like in the Bishops of Rome: that we may thereby be the
better hable to see some of the branches of your Succession. Therefore shortly
to say, you know that Pope Marcellinus committed Idolatry: that Pope
Syluester. 2. was a Coniurer, and gave him self whole Body, and Soul unto the
Devil, and by the Devils procuremente was made Pope: That Pope Zosimus for
ambition, and claim of gouernmente corrupted the Holy Council of Nice: That
Pope Liberius was an Arian Heretic: That Pope Leo, as appears by the
Legende, was likewise an Arian: That Pope Coelestinus was a Nestorian
Heretic: Pope Honorius was a Monothelite Heretic: Pope John. 22. was
reproved by Gerson, and the Schole of Parise for an Heretic: Petrarcha
says, Rome is a Sanctuary of al Heresies: Succession of Popes.
Lyra says, that many Popes have fallen into Heresies: Nicol. Lyra in
Matthae. Ca. 16.
you know, that Pope Hildebrande, as he was charged by the Council of Brixia,
was an Aduouterer, a Churcherobber, a Perjured man, a Mankiller, a Sorcerer,
and a Renegate of the Faith: That Platina calls the Popes sometimes in
scorn, Platina in Romano. 1.
Pontificulos, Little Petite Popes: sometimes Monstra, and Portenta, Monsters,
and Unnatural, and il shapen Creatures. Pope Adrian the fourth was woonte to
say, Succedimus, non Petro in pascendo, sed Romulo in Parricidio: We
Succeed, not Peter in Feedinge, but Romulus in Killinge. And to leave Dame
Iohane the woman Pope, with many others more of like Virtue, and Holiness, as
having no pleasure in this rehearsal: And, for as mutche as M. Hardinge began
this matter with Sarisburie, to end it with the same, Johan. Sarisburien. in
Polycratico.
Johannes Sarisburiensis says, In Romana Ecclesia sedent Scribae, and
Pharisaei: In the Church of Rome (by Succession) sit the Scribes, and the
Phariseis.

This is M. Hardinges holy Succession. Though Faith fail, yet Succession
must hold. For unto such Succession God has bound the Holy Ghost. For
lack of this Succession, for that in our Sees in the Churches of England, we
find not so many Idolaters, Necromancers, Heretics, Aduouterours,
Churchrobbers, Perjured Persons, Mankillers, Renegates, Monsters, Scribes,
and Pharisees, as we may easily find in the Church of Rome, therefore, I
trow, M. Hardinge says, we have no Succession: we are no Bishops: we
have no Church at al.

But S. Paul says, Faith comes (not by Succession, but) by hearing: and
hearing comes, (not of Legacy, or Enheritance from Bishop to Bishop, but)
of the Word of God. They are not always Godly, that Succeed the Godly.
Manasses succeeded Ezechias: and Hieroboam succeeded David. By Succession the
Turk this day possesses, and holds the four great Patriarkal Sees of the
Church, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioche, and Jerusalem. By Succession,
Christ says, Matthae. 24.
Desolation shall fit in the Holy place: and Antichriste shall press into the
room of Christ.

It is not sufficient to claim Succession of place: It behooves us rather to
have regard to the Succession of Doctrine. Bernard. in Concilio Remen.
S. Bernarde says, Quid prodest, si Canonice eligantur, and non Canonice
viuant? What avails it, if they be chosen in Order, and live out of Ordere So
says S. Augustine, August. Contra Donatist. Li. 6. 1. q. 3. vocantur Canes.
Ipsum Characterem multi, and Lupi, and Lupis imprimunt: The outward mark, or
right of a Bishop many give to Woulues, and he Woulues them selves. Therefore
the Ancient Father Irenaeus gives us this good Council: Eis, qui sunt in
Ecclesia, Presbyteris, obaudire oportet, qui Successionem habent ab Apostolis,
Irenae. Li. 4. Cap. 43.
qui cum Episcopatus Successione, Charisma Veritatis certum, secundum
beneplacitum Patris, acceperunt: It becomes us, to obeie those Priests in
the Church, which have their Succession from y^ Apostles: and together with
the Succession of their Bishoprikes, according to y^ good will of God the
Father, have received the undoubted gift of the Truth. S. Cyprian being
likewise charged for dissentinge from his predecessors, answeareth thus: Si
quis de Antecessoribus meis, non hoc obseruauit, and tenuit, quod nos Dominus
exemplo, and Magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitati eius venia concedi:
Nobis ver^ ignoici non potest, qui nunc a Domino admoniti, and instructi sumus:
If any of my Predecessors have not observed, and kept the same, that our
Lord has taught us both by his example, and also by his Commandment, his
simplicity may be pardoned. But we ( if we do the like) can hope for no
pardonne, being now admonished, and instructed of our Lord.

Compare the use, and order of our Churches, M. Hardinge, with the Primitive
Church of God, and ye shall easily see the right of our Succession. S. Cyprian
says: Confession not necessary.
Si Canalis aquae, quae copiose prius, and la^g^^^r proflu^ba^, subit^
deficiat, no^ne adfonte^ pergitur? etc. Hoc and nu^c facere oporte^ Dei
Sacerdotes. Praecepta Diuina servants, vt in aliquo si nutauerit, Cyprian. ad
Pompeium contra Epist. Stephani.
and vacillauerit Veritas, ad originem Dominicam, and Euangelicam atque
Apostolicam Traditionem reuertamur: and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, vnde
and Ordo, and Origo surrexit: If the Pipes of y^ Conduit, which before ran
with abundance, happen to fail, do we not use to search to the Head: etc.
The Priests of God keepinge Gods commandments, must do the same: that if
the Truth have fainted, or failed in any point, we return to the very
Original of our Lord, and to the Tradition of the Gospel, and of the Apostles:
that ther^hence we may take the discretion of our dooinges, from whence the
Order it self, and Original first began.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 1.
Moreover we say, that Christ has given to his Ministers power to bind,
to loose: to open, to shut.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The difference, that is bitweene us, and our Adversaries in this whole matter,
is not great: sauinge that it likes well M. Hardinge, to buste him self with
needelesse quarrels, without cause. Three kinds of Confession are expressed
unto us in the Scriptures. The First made secretly unto God alone: The Second
Openly before y^ whole Congregation: The Third Privately unto our Brother. Of
the two former kinds there is no question. Touching the third, if it be
discretely used, to the greatter comfort, and satisfaction of the Penitente,
without superstition, or other il, it is not in any wise by us reproved. The
Abuses, and Errors set aparte, we do no more mislike a Private Confession,
then a Private Sermon.

Thus mutche only we say, that Private Confession to be made unto y^
Minister, is neither commanded by Christ, Chrysostom. ad Hebraeos, homil. 30.
nor necessary to Salvation. And therefore Chrysostom says, Non dico tibi,
vt te prodas in publicum, neque vt te accuses apud alios: Sed obedire te volo
Propherae dicenti, Reuela Domino viam tuam: I will thee not to bewraye thee
self openly, nor to accuse thee self before others: But I counsel thee, to
obeie the Prophet saieinge, Open thy way unto the Lord.

And Gratian, having thoroughly disputed, and debated the whole matter of both
sides, De Poeniten di^^ 1. Quamuit plenitudo.
in the end leaves it thus at large: Cui harum sententiarum poti^s^
adhaerendu^ sit, Lectoris iudicio reseruatur: Vtraque enim fautores habet
Sapientes, and Religiosos Viros: Whether of these two opinions it were better
to follow, it is leafte to the discretion of the Reader: For either side is
favored both by Wise, and also by Godly men. Therefore the Gloss there
concludes thus: De Poeniten. did. 5. In Poenitentia* In Glos.
Meli^s dicitur, Confessionem institutam fuisse a quadam Vniuersalis Ecclesiae
Traditione potius, quam ex Noui, vel Veteris Testamenti Authoritate: It is
better to say, that Confession was Ordained by sum Tradition of the
Universal Church, then by the Authority of the New, or Old Testamente.
Likewise says Theodorus sometime Archbishop of Canturburie a Greek borne:
De Poeniten. did. 1. Quidam.
Quidam Deo solummodo confiteri debe^e peccata dicunt, vt Graeci: Some say,
we are bound to confess our sins only to God, as do the Greci^^s. De
Poeniten did. 5. In Poeniten.
Whereupon the Gloss notes thus: Apud Graecos Confessio non est Necessaria:
quia non emanauit ad illos Traditio talis: Emonge the Grecians Confession is
not Necessary, for that no such Tradition ever came amongst them.

But what need many words? M. Hardinge him self in the discourse hereof is
forced to confess, M. Har. soli. 71. ^
that the Express Term of Auriculare, or Secret Confession is Seldom
mentioned in the Ancient Fathers. His tale had benne truer, if he had said
thus, The Express term of Auriculare, or Secret Confession is Never
mentioned in the Ancient Fathers.

Now to pass over certain other M. Hardinges unnecessary talks, he
grows to the matter in this sort:

M. Hardinge.
Concerning the ministers of the Church, we say that they open and shut
by dispensinge the Sacraments, who have their virtue of the merits of
Christ. For where as the Sacraments have issued and flowed out of the side of
our savior Christ sleepinge on the Cross, (as by allusion we may use the
words of the old figure) wherewith the Church is builded, therefore in the
Sacraments of the Church the efficacy of the Passion remains. And for that
cause to the Ministers also of the Church, The Keie of the Church.
who be dispensours of the Sacraments, a certain power is geeuen to remove
the bar, that excludes us from Gods favor, not through their own, but
through Gods virtue and power, and merit of Christ's Passion. And this power
is called by a metaphore the Keie of the Church, which is the Keie of
Ministry: whereof we shall speak hereafter. This power, so much as
concerns releasse of sins, is exercised in the Sacrament of Penance to
the benefit of them, For whom serves the Sacrament of Penance. Nouatians
denied Penance.
that after Baptism be relapsed, and fallen into sin again. Of which power
no Christen man doubts, unless he hold the Heresy of the Nouatians, who
were condemned for Heretics by the Church, because they denied that Priests
in the Church had authority to remitte sins, This sauoureth of untruth: For
Nouatus denied not private, but open Penance.
and so denied the Sacrament of Penance.

The B. of Sarisburie.
That dewly receiuinge the Holy Sacraments ordained by Christ, we receive
also y^ Remission of Sins, it is not any way denied. For the Substance of al
Sacraments is the Word of God, 2. Corin. 5.
which S. Paul calls Verbum Reconciliationis, The Word of atonemente.
This Word is the Instrumente of Remission of Sin: The Sacraments are the
Seals affixed unto the same: The Priest is the mean. Augustine in Johan.
tracta. (...).
S. Augustine says, In Aqua Verbum mundat. Detrahe Verbum: quid est Aqua,
nisi Aqua? In the Water it is the Word of God, that makes clean. Take the
Word away: and what is Water else, but Water? Hereof we shall have cause
to say more hereafter.

All that is here brought in touching Nouatus, it is utterly from the purpose.
For Nouatus never denied, but a sinner might Confess his Sins, either
secretly to God alone, or publicly, and openly before the whole
Congregation. As for Auriculare Confession to the Priest, for ought that may
appear, he never heard of it. But herein stood his whole error, that he
thought, who so ever had committed any great notorious Sin after Baptism,
notwithstanding any Submission, or Satisfaction, he was hable to make, yet
might he never be reconciled unto his Brethren, or be received again into the
Church: not that he would hereby drive the Penitent sorrowful sinner to
despair of Gods mercy, but (as sum Learned men have thought) only for
example, and terror unto others. And therefore Beatus Rhenanus says, B.
Rhenanus in Argumento Libelli Tertull. de Poenitent.
In hac sententia Veterum permulti fuerunt: and in ijs etiam Augustinus.

S. Augustine says, Caut^, salub^^terque prouisum est, vt locus illius
Humilimae Poenitentiae semel in Ecclesia concedatur: ne medicina vilis minus
utilis esset aegrotis: I^ has benne discretely, Augustinus, Epistola. 54.
and wholesomely provided, that it should not be granted to any man, to do
that most humble Open Penance, but only once in the Church, and never more
afterward: least the Medicine, being made over common, should not be
profitable to the Sick.

Thus mutche difference therefore we see, there was bitweene the Church, and
Nouatus. The Church grants the Open Sinner one only time of Open
Reconciliation, and never more: But Nouatus grants none at al. Therefore the
whole matter of Nouatus might have served M. Hardinge to some other purpose: For
Confession, whether it were Private, or Public, was no part of his Error.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 2.
And (we say) that the office of Loosing consists in this point, that the
Minister either by the Preachinge of the Gospel offers the Merits of
Christ, and full pardon to such as have lowely, and contrite hearts, and do
unfeignedly repent them selves, pronouncinge unto the same a sure, and
undoubted forgeeuenesse of their sins, and hope of Everlasting Salvation:
Or else that the same Minister, when any have offended their Brothers minds
with sum great offense, or notable, and open crime, whereby they have, as it
were, vannished, and made them selves strangers from the Common Fellowship, and
from the Body of Christ, then after perfect amendment of such persons,
does reconcile them, and bring them home again, and restore them to the
Company, and Unity of the Faithful.

M. Hardinge.
The sum of all these gaye words abbridged does attribute Loosinge, or
Absolution first to Preachinge, next to Assotlinge such as be
Excomminicate. As touching the first, these Defenders confound the offices
of Preachinge and of Absolution. The Preacher teaches the hearers, and
reports the words of Christ, as out of the mouth of Christ, saieinge,
Thus says Christ etc: The Priest, which is the Minister of Absolution,
according to the Authority given to him by Christ, in his own person
assoileth the Penitente, saieinge, Untruth. For Christ never gave the priest
any such Commission.
I assoile thee in the name of the Father, etc. Untruth. For S Hierome says,
Soluunt Sermon Dei, and testimoniis Scripturarum.
The Preacher in that he preaches only does not assoile sinners, neither
gives he the Merits of Christ, nor full pardon by pronouncinge unto them the
Gospel. Untruth, By M. Hardinges own Doctrine. Read the Answer.
For if that great benefit consiste in pronouncinge or denouncinge of the
Gospel, then why might not every lay man, yea womenne, yea young boys, and
gyrles assoile sinners? yea why might not every man assoile him self? And
would ye Sirs appointe unto us such for judges constituted by Christ?

For the words of Christ be so plain, as they cannot be so violently
wrested. For Christ said not, To whom ye offer by preachinge of the Gospel my
Merits, and Pardon, or whose sins ye pronounce by the Gospel to be
remitted, but quorumcunque remiseritis, who soeuers sins ye remitte, they are
remitted to them. For as the son of man remitted sins to him that was sick
of the Palsye, Johan. 20.
and to Mary Maudelen, that ye may know (says he) that the son of man
has Power to remitte sins, Li. 3. de Dignitate Sacerdotali.
etc: Even so he has transferred The same power, because they have the same
word: and not otherwise.
the same power unto Priests, says Chrysostom. Which Priests he has
sent, as the Father sent him. And if Absolution consiste in pronouncinge of
the Gospel, which profits so much as it is believed, Untruth. joined
with vain Folly.
then the power of the Keys which Christ has given to the Church,
consists not so much in the Minister, as in the sinner that hears and
believes, and so is forgeuen by Luthers Opinion. And by this means the
Priest has no special power. But we say with the Church, that a
Sacrament has his efficacy of the institution of Christ in him, to whom it
is adhibited. In this sense the Catholic Church of Christ has ever taught,
that God woorketh our Salvation by Sacraments, and in this faith it has
always baptized infantes, that their sins being remitted, they might be
made the children of God Untruth. For the Church assoiled not mad men: but
only pronounced them to be assoiled before, when they were sober.
Like wise by the Keys of the Church it has assoiled persons berefte of
the use of speech and reason, as the Learned and Ancient Holy Father Leo
teaches in his Epistle ad Theodorum Episcopum Foroiuliensem, and S. Augustine
de adulterinis conlugijs, Lib. 1. Cap. 26. and vltimo.

Finally if the office of Loosinge, that is Absolution, consisted in Preachinge
the Gospel, and offeringe the Merits of Christ by pronouncinge the words,
in which the remission of our sins is expressed, as this Denfender teaches:
then had not the Catechumens of old time, neither now should they be in any
danger, if they should dye without Baptism, and the grace of reconciliation,
that is, not being assoiled. For they lacked no preachinge, as now they lack
not where any such be. The contrary whereof the Church has ever taught,
and for witness of the same, Tract. in Johan. 13.
besides other fathers, we have the plain Doctrine of S. Augustine: Who
says, that a Catechumen, how mutche so ever he profitethe, bears still the
burden of his iniquity so long, as he is not baptized.

I deny not, but cases of just necessity be excepted in the one, and the
other, having right and firm wills, and desire in each case: When not the
contempt of Religion, but the point of necessity excludethe the Mystery of
baptism, as S. Augustine says. Then how dangerous, and pernicious is the
Doctrine of these Defenders our New Ministringe Prelates, who more with sweet
and Holy words, then with truth, teach Christen people, that the office of
Loosinge consists in offeringe by preachinge of the Gospel (as they call it)
the Merits of Christ, and full pardon, and by pronouncinge (I know not how)
a sure and undoubted forgeeuenesse of sins and hope of Everlasting Salvation
to such, O dangerous Doctrine.
for soothe, as have lowly and contrite hearts, and do unfeignedly repent
them? The contrition of heart, they seem to speak of, sufficethe not for
Loosinge of sins, unless it be contrition formed with charity, as the
Divines teach. Which charity, seeks and requires the Sacrament of
Penance, and the grace of reconciliation. which cannot be ministered, but by a
priest. Untruth. Read the aunsvveare.
Neither is it possible, the priest to judge truly, who are lowly and contrite
of heart, and repent them unfeignedly, forasmutche as he cannot search the
heart, unless the penitentes humble them selves unto him, and declare their
repentance by simple and lowly confession of their sins. Lib. 50.
Homiliaru^, Homi. 49.
Which confession these New Gospellers have abandoned out of their
Congregations. How mutche is more the Catholic and wholesome Doctrine of S.
Manifest Untruth For S. Augustine speaks these words of Open Confession
before the people.
Augustine to be embraced and followed, which he utters in these words? Do
ye penance, such as is done in the Church, that the Church may pray for
you. Let noman say to him self, I do penance secretly, before God I do It:
God, who forgeeueth me, knows, that I do it in my heart. But what says S.
Augustine hereunto? Why then (says he) it was said in vain, What things
ye Loose in Earth, Mat. 18.
they shall be Loosed in Heaven. Then without cause the Keys be geeuen to the
Church. We make void the Gospel of God: we make frustrate the words of
Christ.

S. Augustine says, do ye penance, not such as likes your selves, not
such as New fangled self pleasinge Preachers teach you, but such, as is
done in the Church, which consists in Contrition of heart, confession of
mouth, and satisfaction of work, that so ye may be assoiled, and perfitely
reconciled.

Touching the second point, we do not attribute the Loosinge of such, as
be excommunicate, to the offeringe of Christ's Merits and pronouncinge of the
Gospel unto them, as you do, but to the power of Jurisdiction by Christ
geeuen to the Church.

By the fathers Excommunication in consideration of the necessitee of it, is
called neruus Ecclesiasticae disciplinae, the sinnowe of Churchely discipline:
by the Canons, Mucro Episcopi, the sword of a Bishop: by S. Augustine,
Episcopalis iudicij damnatio, qua poena nulla in ecclesia mayor est. The
condemnation of a man by Bishoply Judgment, then the which there is no
greater punishmente in the Church.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We commit the Keys of the Kingedome of Heaven only unto the Priesteand, to
none other: and to him only we say, What so ever thou bindeste in Earth,
shall be Bound in Heaven. Yet nevertheless has not every Priest the use of
these Keys. Peter Lombarde him self says, Sane dici potest, quod alteram
istarum Clauium, Senten. 4. Did. 19.
id est Scientiam discernendi, non habent omnes Sacerdotes: We may safely
say, that al Priests have not the one of these two Keys: I mean the
Knowledge to discern. If they have not the Keys, them can they neither Open,
nor Shut.

Neither doothe it follow of Our Doctrine, that either Children, or Lay men
do, A Laiman remitteth Sin.
or may forgeeue sins. And yet Gods Word may be mighty, be the pronouncer
of it never so simple. S. Augustine says, Cum Christus Petro dicerer,
Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 124.
Tibi dabo Claues Regni Coelorum, Vniuersam significabat Ecclesiam: When
Christ said unto Peter, Unto thee I will geeue the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, he signified thereby the whole Church. And again, Quaecunque
ligaueris super Terram, erunt ligara in Coelo. Augustine. De verb. Dom. Secund.
matthae. Sermo. 16.
Coepisti habere Fratrem tuum, tanquam Publicanum: Ligas illum in Terra. Cum
autem correxeris, and concordaueris cum Fratre tuo, soluisti illum in terra.
Cum solueris in terra, solutus erit in Coelo: What so ever things thou shall
Bind in Earth, they shall be Bound in Heaven. Thou ( being a Lateman) have
begone to have thy Brother as a Publicane: Thou Bindest him in Earth. But
when thou have corrected him and have agreed with thy Brother, thou have Loosed
him in Earth. And when thou haste Loosed him in Earth, he shall be Loosed in
Heaven.

Likewise Theophylacte says, Theophylact. in Matthae. Cap. 18.
Si tu offensus habes eum, qui te affecit iniuria, sicut Publicanum, and
Gentilem, erit ille and in Coelo talis: Si autem solueris eum, hoc est, Si illi
condonaueris, erit illi and in Coelo condonatum. Non enim solum, quae soluunt
Sacerdotes, sunt soluta: sed quaecunque and nos iniutia affecti vel ligamus,
vel soluimus, and ipsa erunt ligata, vel soluta: If thou being offended, have
him, that has done thee wrong, as a Publicane, and as an Heathen, such
shall he be also in Heaven. But if thou Loose him, that is to say, if thou
pardonne him, he shall be pardonned also in Heaven. For not only the things,
that Priests Loose, are Loosed: but also what so ever we, ( being Laimonne)
having taken wrong, do Bind, or Loose, the same things shall also be
Bound, or Loosed.

This Doctrine may not seem so strange to M. Hardinge: Unless he be a
stranger amongst his own. For by the Order of his own Church of Rome, an
Old wife, or a Young gyrle may Minister the Sacrament of Baptism. And, I
trow, he will not say, They may Minister Baptism without Remission of Sins.

In his Church of Rome the Power of the Keys is lapped up oftentimes in a
Bulle of Lead, and sent abroad into the world by a Lay Pardoner: and is
thought nevertheless good, and sufficient unto the Receiver for Remission of
Sins. notwithstanding the messenger be no Priest.

Sum of the late Doctors of his said Church have taught us, De Poeniten.
di^ 1. Quem poenitet.
that a man may make his Confession by a bille of his hand: and receive
Absolution by a Trusheman, or by a Broker. Peter Lombarde the Grande Master of
their whole Schole says, Scotus, 4 Sente^. Dis. 17. Arti. 3. Senten. 4. Dis.
17. Nunc priusquam.
Si tamen defuerit Sacerdos, Proximo, vel Socio est facienda Confessio: If thou
want a Priest, thou must make thy Confession unto thy neighbor, or unto
thy fellow. And Beda says, as he is alleged by the said Peter Lombarde,
Coaequalibus quotidiana, and leuia: grauiora vero Sacerdoti pandamus: Let us
open our small, and daily sins unto our fellows: and the greatter unto the
Priest.

And to be short, Senten. 4. Eadem Did.
upon the Decretales it is noted thus, In necessitate Laicus potest, and Audire
Confessiones, and Absoluere: In case of necessity a Lay man may both hear
Confessions, and Absolve.

This is the Order, Extra. De offi. Iudicis ordinar. Pastoralis. In Glossa.
and Doctrine of M. Hardinges own Church. His own Doctors tell him, that
Lay Men, and Weemenne may Absolve the Penitente, and Forgeeue Sins.
Therefore he has the less cause to mislike it.

M. Hardinge says further, Christ says not, To whom ye offer by preaching
of the Gospel my Merits and Pardonne: or, whose sins ye pronounce by the
Gospel to be remitted: but, Quorumcunque remiseritis, whose so ever sins ye
remitte, they are remitted. If M. Hardinge will Conclude of this Negative, Ergo,
Sins be not forgeuen by the preachinge of the Gospel, Sins Remitted by
hearing the word of God.
I trow, it will be but a Simple Argument. For Chrysostom says,
Clauicularij sunt Sacerdotes, quibus creditum est Verbum Docendi, and
Interpretandi Scriptutas: The Keiebearers be the Priests, to whom is committed
the Word of Teachinge and Expoundinge the Scriptures. And S. Hierome says,
Chrysostom. in Matthae. in Opere Imperfect. ca. 23.
Quaecunque Solueritis super Terram, erunt Soluta and in Coelo. Soluunt autem
eos Apostoli Sermon Dei, and testimonijs Scripturarum, and exhortatione
virtutum: What so ever things ye Loose upon Earth, they shall be Loosed also in
Heaven. But the Apostles Loose them by the Word of God, and by the
Testimonies of the Scriptures, and by exhortation unto virtue. Hierony. in
Esai. Li. 6. Ca. 14. Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 80.


Likewise S. Augustine says, Iam vos Mundi estis propter verbum, quod
Ioquutus sum vobis. Quare non ait, Mundi estis propter Baptismum, quo loti
estis? Nisi quia and in Aqua Verbum Mundat: Now are you clean because of the
Word, that I have spoken to you. Why says he not, you are clean because
of the Baptism, wherewith ye are washed? Sauinge that even in the Water, it
is the Word, that makes Clean. Likewise S. Ambrose, Ambrosi. De Cain, and
Abel. Cap. 4. Roman. 1. 2. Corin. 5.
Remittuntur peccata per Verbu^ Dei, cuius Levites est Interpres: Sins be
forgeeuen by the Word of God, the Expounder whereof is the Leuite, or
Priest.

All the Power is in the Word of God, which S. Paul calls the Power of God
unto Salvation: and, Verbum Reconciliationis: The Word, whereby we be
Reconciled unto God.

And for this cause Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. De Sacerdot. Li. 3.
as it is alleged by M. Hardinge, that the Priest has the same Power that
Christ had: For that he Preaches the same Word of God, that Christ
Preached. And in this sense Christ says unto his Disciples, Johan. 6.
As my Living Father sent me, even so, (and with like Commission) do I send
you.

Otherwise the Power of Christ far surmounteth, and passes al Creatures,
not only in Earth, Matthae. 11.
but also in Heaven. Christ him self thereof says thus: Al things are
delivered to me of my Father, And the Prophet Esai says, Ponam Clauem Domus
David super humerum eius. Aperiet, and nemo Claudet: Claudet, and nemo Aperiet:
Esai. Cap. 22.
I will set the Keie of the House of David upon his shoulder. He shall Open, and
noman shall Shut: He shall Shut, and noman shall Open.

Of this Doctrine, says M. Hardinge, follows a great inconvenience. For
then, says he, the Power of the Keys consists not so mutche in the
Minister, as in the Sinner, that hears, and believes. This inconvenience is
nothing so great, as it is pretended. The error hereof stands in the
Equivocation, or doubtful taking of one Word. For one thing may be in an
other sundry ways. As Remission of Sins may be in the Priest, as in the
Messenger: In the Word of God, as in the Instrument: In the Penitente party,
as in the Receiver. The offeringe hereof is in the Minister: but the effect,
and force is in the Sinner. Therefore S. Luke says, God Opened the Heart of
the Silck woman, that she should give Ear unto the words, Act. 16. Mark.
16. 4. Sent. Did. 18. Sed quaritur. Clemens, in Paraenetico. Augustine. in
Johan. tracta. 39.
that were spoken by S. Paul. And Christ says, Who so ever shall Believe,
and be Baptized, shall be saved: but he, that believes not, shall be damned.
Likewise Peter Lombarde him self says, Ex his aperte ostenditur, quo'd Deus
ipse Poenitentem soluit, quando intus illuminat inspirando veram Cordis
Contritionem: Hereby it plainly appears, that God him self Loses the
Penitente, when by geeuinge him in ward light, he inspireth into him the
true Contrition of the Heart. And therefore Clemens Alexandrinus says, Fides
nostra est Clauis Regni Coelorum: Our Faith is the Keie of the Kingedome of
Heaven. And S. Augustine likewise says, Cor Clausum habent, quia Clauem Fidei
non habent: They have their hearts shut, because they lack the Keie of
Faith. Augustine. in Psalm. 101.
Again he says, Suscitari mortuus, nisi int^is clamante Domino, non potest:
The dead man cannot be raised again, unless the Lord Cry within him.
Absolutio^ of Mad men.


And, to comme near to the purpose, Gratian him self says, Voluntas
Sacerdotis nec prodesse, 1. quaes. 1. Dictum est.
nec obesse potest: sed meritum benedictionem poscentis. The will of the Priest
can neither further, nor hinder: but the Merit of him, that desires
Absolution.

Touching the Objection of Frantique Persons, and maddemenne, in what sort,
and how far Absolution takes place in them, for as mutche, as it is an
extraordinary case, Extra. De Baptismo, and etus Effectu. Maiores ecclesiae..
Item quaeritur.
I think it neither needeful, nor easy to define. In deed a question is moved
by Pope Innocentius the third, whether, and in what sort a man, either in his
maddenesse, or in his sleep may be Baptized. And S. Augustine seems to
witness, that Children sommetime were Baptized in their Mothers Womb.
Likewise he writes of a freende of his own, Cum iaceret sine sensu in dolor
laetali, Augustine. Contra Julian. Li. 6. Cap. 5.
and desperaretur, Baptizatus est nesciens: Whereas he lay in a Traunse,
without sense, in deadly pain, and was despaired of, he was Baptized, and
knew not of it.

Bonauentura adds sum force unto the matter, Augustine. Confession. Li. 3.
Cap. 4.
and demands this question, An aliquis possit absolui inuitus: Whether a
man may be Absolved against his will, or no.

But concerning the Absolution of mad men in the time of their phrenesie:
Bonauenturae in 4. Senten. Distin. 18. quaest. 6.
It seems, this was both the meaning of Leo, and the Godly discretion of
the Church at that time, that if a man standinge Excommunicate had happened to
be berefte of his senses, and being in that case, had benne likely to depart
this life, upon proof of his former repentance, he should be restoared, that
he might depart in peace, as a Member of the Church of God. The practice
hereof we find in the Council of Carthage by these words: Si is, Council.
Carthaeginen. 4. Cap. 76.
qui Poenitentiam in infirmitate petit, in Phrenesim versus fuerit, dent
testimonium, qui eum audiuerunt, and accipiat Poenitentiam: If he, that desired
reconciliation by Penance in his sickness, afterward fall Mad, let them,
that heard him, bear witness with him: and so let him receive Penance.

This was only a public Testimony unto the Church, that the party
Excommunicate was repentante before, when his mind was quiet. And what thing
else M. Hardinge can geather hereof, I cannot tell. Certainly in this Order, and
manner they restoared, not only Mad men, but also dead men unto the
Church. 24. quae. 2. De Communione. In Glossa.
For so it is noted upon the Decrees: Ex quo, cum per eum non stabat, el
communicare debemus. Et ita est absoluendus post mortem: Wherefore seeinge
there was no lack in his part, we ought to Communicate with him. And so he
must be Absolved after his death.

The words, that S. Augustine often uses unto Beginners, or Entrers of the
Faith, called Catechumeni, are vttred rather for terror of others, then for
rigor of Truth, Augustine. De Peccator. Meritis, and Remiss. Li. 2. Cap. 26.
Augustine. ad Catechumen. Li. 2. Cap. 1.
as shall appear. For otherwheres he writes thus: Catechumeni secundum quendam
modum per Signum Christi sanctificantur: The Catechumeni, or Beginners, after
their sort, are sanctified by the Sign of Christ. Again he says to them,
Non dum renati estis: sed per Crucis Signum in vtero Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae
iam concepti estis: Ye are not yet borne a new, but by the Sign of the
Cross, ye are already conceived in the Womb of the Holy Church your Mother.

Therefore having thus once entered into ye Faith of Christ, although they
happened afterward to depart this life without Baptism, yet the Church
oftentimes thought it good, Ambrosi. De Obitu Valentiniani.
to Judge well of them. S. Ambrose doubted not, but the Emperor Valentinian
departed hence in Gods favor: And yet was the same Emperor but a
Beginner, and a Nouice in the Faith, and departed hence without Baptism.

M. Hardinge says further, The Judge of Sin.
Unless the Penitente make particulare rehearsal of al his sins, the
Priest, or Minister can be no Judge. Where unto I add also further, Augustine.
Confession. Li. 10. Cap. 3.
Notwithstanding any rehearsal that may be made, yet can the Priest never
be, but a doubteful Judge. S. Augustine says, Quid ergo mihi est cum
Hominibus, vt audiant Confessiones meas, quasi sanaturi sint Omnes Languores
meos? Vnde sciunt, cum a meipso de meipso audiunt, an verum dicam? Quandoquidem
nemo scit Hominum, quid agatur in Homine, nisi Spiritus Hominis, qui est in
Homine. What have I to do with men, that they should hear my Confessions,
as if they wear babble to beale al my griefs? When they hear me speak of
me self, how can they tell, whether I do say the truth, or no? For noman
knows, what is done in Man, but the sprite of Man, that is in Man.

How be it, hereof have grown many unnecessary, and curious questions, what
Years, Beat. Rhenanus in Tertull. De Poenitentia: Vt Sacerdotes Poenitentialem
Librum been calleant.
what Months, what Days, what Hours, what Manner, what Order of Penance
should serve for ever several sin. In Resolution of which doubts stood the
Judgment of the Priest. And therefore Carolus Magnus in in his Laws
straitely commands, that the Priests should be skilful in the Book of
Penance.

But, as touching the Judge of Sins, S. Chrysostom says, Ante Deum
confitere peccata tua. Apud Verum Iudicem cum Oratione delicta rua pronuntia:
Confess they sins before God. Chrysostom. ad Hebrae. Homil. 31. Chrysostom. in
Sermo. De Confessione and Poenitentia.
Before the True Judge with prayer pronounce thine offenses. And again,
Cogitatione fiat delictorum exquisitio: Sine Test sit hoc Iudicium: Solus te
Deus confitentem uideat: Let the examination of thy sins be wrought in thy
Heart: Let this Judgment be Without Witness: Let God Only hear thee, when
thou make thy Confession. And again he says, Medicinae locus hic est, non
Iudicij: non poenas, sed peccatorum Remissionem tribuens. Deo Soli dic peccatum
tuum: Chrysostom. Homil. 9. De Poenitentia.
Here is place of Medicine, and not of Judgment: geuinge not punishment, but
Remission of Sins. Open thy sin to God Alone.

And therefore in M. Hardinges own Canons it is noted thus, Confessio fit ad
ostensionem Poenitentiae: De Poeniten. dis. 1. Omnes qui.
non ad impetrationem veniae: Confession is made (unto the Priest) not thereby
to obtain forgiveness, but to declare our repentance. And again, Confessio
Sacerdoti offertur in Signum veniae acceprae: non Causam Remissionis
accipiendae: Confession is made unto the Priest in token of remission already
obtained: In eod. Capite.
and not as a cause, whereby to procure Remission.

And yet is the Priest a Judge, all this notwithstanding: and pronounces
sentence as a Judge, of Doctrine, of Open Sin, of ye Offense of the Church,
and of the Humility, and Heaviness of the Penitent: and as a Judge, together
with the Elders of the Congregation, has Authority, both to Condemn, and to
Absolve. 4 Senten. did. 18. Non autem.
Peter Lombarde him self says, Etsi aliquis apud Deum sit solutus, non tamen
in facie Ecclesiae solutus habetur, nisi per indicium Sacerdotis: Al be it a
man be Absolved before God, yet is be not accoumpted Absolved in the face of
the Church, but by the Judgment of the Priest.

Likewise says S. Augustine, Augustine. De Ecclesiasti. dogmatib. li. 1. ca.
53.
Horror pritis publica Poenitentia satisfacere, and Sacerdotis Iudicio
reconciliatum Communioni sociari: I exhort you first to make Satisfaction (
unto the Church) by open penance: and so to be restoared to the Communion by
the discretion of the Priest.

The order hereof, Cyprian. Li. 3. Epist. 15.
as it is set forth by S. Cyprian, was this: First the Sinner by many
outward gestures, and tokens showed him self to be penitent, and sorrowful for
his sin: After that he made humble Confession thereof before the whole
Congregation, Origin. in Psalm. 37.
and desired his brethren to pray for him: Lastly the Bishop and the Cleregie
laid their hands over him, and so reconciled him. So says Origin, Qui
lapsus est, procedit in medium, and Exomologesin facit: He that has offended,
comes forth into the mids (of the People) and makes his Confession.
Sozomenus likewise describinge the same Order says thus, Open Confession.
Rei ad terram sese pronos abijciunt cum planctu, and lamentatione. Episcopus
ex aduerso occurrit cum Lachrymis, Sozomen. Li. 7. Cap. 16.
and ipse ad Pauimentum lamentando prouoluitur: and vniuersa Ecclesiae
multitudo Lachrymis suffunditur: They, that have offended fall down flat with
weepinge, and lamentation to the ground. The Bishop comes to him with
tears, and him self likewise falls down: and the whole multitude of the
Church is powered over and over with tears.

I use the more words herein, for that the whole matter is long sithence
grown utterly out of use. Notwithstanding this is the Confession, and
Penance, that S. Augustine speaks of. Of Open Confession, M. Hardinge, he
says, The Keys were not geeuen to the Church in vain. Of Open Confession
he says, What so ever ye Loose in Earth, shall be Loosed in Heaven. Of Open
Confession he speaks al these words: and not of any Auriculare, or Private
dealinge. If M. Hardinge happen to doubt hereof, let him look better upon his
Books. There shall he find, even in the very same place, he has alleged,
these words partly goeinge before, Augustine in Li. 50. Homiliarum, Homil 49.
partly folowinge: Agite Poenitentiam, qualis agitur in Ecclesia, vt oret pro
uobis Ecclesia: Job dicit, Si erubui in conspectu populi confiteri peccata mea:
Propterea Deus uoluit, vt Theodosius ageret Poenitentiam publicam in conspectu
populi: Nolite permittere Viros vestros fornicari: Interpellate contra eos
Ecclesiam: Do Penance, such as is done in the Church, that the Church
may pray for you: Job says, I was not ashamed in the sight of all the people
to confess my sins: Therefore God would, that Theodosius (being the
Emperor of the world) should do Open Penance even in the presence of al y^
people. Ye wives, suffer not your Husbands to live in fornication: Comme
before the Congregation, and cry against them.

This is the Confession, that S. Augustine speaks of: not Secret, or
Private, or in the Ear: but Public, and Open, and in the Sight, and Hearing
of all the people. Ambros. De Poenitentia, Li. 2. Ca. 10.
In like manner says S. Ambrose, Multos necesse est vt ambias, and obsecres,
vt dignentur interuenire. Fleat pro te Matter Ecclesia, and culpam tuam Lachymis
lauet: Thou must needs humble thee self, and desire many to entreat for
thee. Let the Church thy Mother weep for thee: and let her wash thy offense
with her tears.

This therefore, M. Hardinge, was no plain dealinge, with such slight to
turn Public into Private: and the Open audience of the whole people, into
one only man's secret ear: and so mutche to abuse the simplicity of your
Reader. Certainly these words of S. Augustine, Open Penance: Confess
Openly: In the sight of all the people: That the whole Church may pray:
these words, I say, will not easily serve to prove your purpose, for Private
Confession.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 3.
We say also, that the Minister does execute the Authority of Binding and
Shutting, as often as he shuts up the Gate of the Kingdom of Heaven against
unbelieving, and stubborn persons, denouncing unto them Gods vengeance, and
Everlasting punishment: Or else when the does quite shut them out from the
bosom of y^ Church, by open Excommunication. Out of doubt, what sentence so
ever the Minister of God shall give in this sort, God him self does so well
allow it, that what so ever here in Earth by their means is Loosed and
Bound, God him self will Loose, and Bind, and confirm the saine in Heaven.

M. Hardinge.
Untruth. For we coufounde them not.
Hear again you confound the Power of Bindinge and the office of Preachinge,
as you did before speaking of the power of Loosinge. VVhereto we say, as we
said before of that other, that Bindinge and Shuttinge consists not in
denouncinge of Gods engeaunce, but in the exercise of the Keie of
Jurisdiction committed to the Church. The Ministers whereof Bind sinners,
whom for just cause they Loose not, but know that they are not to be loosed.
And to that Keie pertains excommunication, and by the same it is exercised.

What so ever by them is thus Loosed or Bound in Earth, God him self
allows for loosed and bound in Heaven. Untruths, five together, as may
further appear by the answer.
Such Priests because ye 1. have not in your New Church, at least after
this wise 2. vsinge Priestly Authority. 3. and none will suffer to be made, 4.
nor such Authority to be exercised: ye 5. defraude the faithful people of the
great benefit of the Sacrament of penance, kepinge them fast bound to
their sins after baptism committed. And so ye cause their Everlasting
Damnation, for whom Christ has shed his Blood, the Price of their Redemption.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We Confound not these Keys, M. Hardinge, but speak plainly, and
distinctely of either other. We say, that the Power, as well of Loosinge, as
also of Bindinge stands in Gods Word: and the exercise, or execution of the
same stands either in Preaching, or else in Sentence of Correction, and
Ecclesiastical Discipline.

Of the later hereof, there is no question: of the former, M. Harding
pronounces precisely, although, as it appears, not most advisedly:
Bindinge, says he, and Shuttinge stands not in denouncinge of Gods
Vengeance. And hereof he certainly assures us, as of a most undoubted
Verity. How be it, in so saieinge, he seems not to consider the Power, and
Weight of the Word of God.

Christ him self says, John. 12.
If any man shall hear my Words, and shall not Believe, I condemn him not. He
that refusethe me, and receives not my Words, has one, that condemns him.
The Word, that I have spoken, is it, that shall Judge him at the last day.
Like wise says S. Paul, 2 Corin. 2.
We are the good savor of Christ in them, that be saved, and in them, that
perish. Unto them that perish, we are the sauoure of Death unto Death: In
them that be saved, 2 Corin. 4.
we be the savor of Life unto Life. And again, If the Gospel be hidden, it
is hidden from them, that perish. So says God unto the Prophet Ezechiel, If
thou give warninge to the wicked, Ezechiel. 3.
and he will not be turned from his wickedness, he shall perish in the same.
Yet haste thou discharged thine own soul.

To be short, Augustine. epist 49 ad Deogratias.
The whole Scriptures are full hereof. And therefore S. Augustine says,
Praedicatur Euangelium, quibusdam ad praemium, quibusdam ad Iudicium: The
Gospel is Preached, to sum unto reward, to sum unto Judgment.

For the rest, M. Hardinge says, Such Priests because ye have not in your
New Church, at least after this wise vsinge Priestly Authority, and none
will suffer to be made, and such Authority to be exercised, ye defraude the
faitheful people of the great benefit of the Sacrament of Penance, keepinge
them fast bound to their sins after Baptism committed: And so ye cause
their everlasting Damnation, for whom Christ has shead his Blood, the
Price of their Redemption.

These great words are not very well seasoned: They are big in sound, and
small in weight: they are full of terroure, and void of wit. For the Church
of England has Authority this day by Gods Word to Bind, and Lose, as
mutche as ever Christ gave any to his Apostles: And by the same Authority is
hable to Bind, not only M. Hardinge, and his Fellows, as Peter bound Simon
Magus, Sin forgeuen without Confession.
or as Paul bound Elymas the False Prophet: but also the Pope himself, if he
be an Open Offender: and, as S. Paul says, to deliver him over unto Satan:
And undoubtedly beeinge so Bound in Earth, he shall also stand Bound in
Heaven.

Our People remain not Bound, nor perish in their sins, as these men so
uncharitably, and fondly have imagined. They be so certain of the Remission of
their sins in the Blood of Christ, as if Christ himself were present,
and spoke it to them. 1. Johan. 1. Actor. 4.
They are taught, and know that The Blood of Christ, the Son of God has
made us clean from al our sins: and, that there is no name under Heaven,
whereby we shall be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ.

As for Private Confession, Abuses, and Errors set aparte, as it is said
before, we condemn it not, but leave it at liberty. And therein we may
seem to follow the advice of Charles the Emperor in his late Interim:
Interim Caroli 5. anno. 1548.
For thus he writes, Confessio, and Peccatorum Enumeratio, vt non nimis
laxanda est, ita uicissim non nimis est astringenda.

Touching the Priests of your making, M. Hardinge, of whom ye seem to make
so great accoumpte, 4. Senten. did. 19. Post.
your own Peter Lombard says of them, as it is said before, Sane dici
potest, quod alteram Clauem, id est, Scientiam discernendi multi Sacerdotes non
habent. Bonauent. 4. Senten. did. 18. quae. 1. e.
And in like manner says your own Bonauentura, Omnes fere ita sunt
Simplices, and Idiotae post susceptionem Sacerdotij, ficut ante: Al Priests
for the most part are as Simple, and Unlearned after the receiuinge of Orders,
as they were before.

But be it granted, that your Priest be fully furnished with all his Keys. Yet
is it not he, De Poeniten. did. 1. Quis aliqua^do.
that by any his Authority forgeueth sins. Your own Gratian says,
Euidentissime datur intelligi, quod sine Confessione Oris Peccata possunt
deleri: It is evidently geeuen us to understand, that without Confession of
mouth, Sins may be forgeeuen. De Poenit. did. 1. Conuertimin^.
And again, Ore tacente, veniam consequi possumus: Though we say nothing,
yet we may have pardonne. Again, Luce clarius constat, Cordis Contritione,
non Oris Confessione, Peccata dimitti: It is apparente, and more clear then
the light, that Sins be forgeeuen by Contrition of the Heart, and not by
Confession of the mouth. And again, Dominus ostendit, quod non Sacerdotali
iudicio, sed largitate Diuina Peccator mundatur: Our Lord has taught us,
that the sinner is made clean, not by the Judgment of the Priest, but by the
Mercy of God.

Thus, M. Hardinge, it is plain by the Judgment of your own Doctors, that,
were your Auriculare Confession quite abolished, yet might the People
notwithstanding have full Remission of their Sins. But of you it may he
verified, that Christ said unto the Phariseis: Luke 11.
Ye have taken away the Keys of the Kingedome of Heaven: And neither do ye
enter your selves, nor will your suffer others, that would enter. Veselus, de
Subditis, and Superiorib.
Of your Keys Veselus said long sithence, Claues Papae, and Praelatorum non
aperiunt Regnum Dei, sed claudunt potius: The Popes, and the Prelates Keys do
not Open the Kingedome of God, but rather Shut it.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 1.
And touching the Keys, wherewith they may either Shut or Open the
Kingdom of Heaven, we with Chrysostom say, They be the Knowledge of the
Scriptures: with Tertullian we say, They be the Interpretation of the Law:
and with Eusebius we call them the Word of GOD.

M. Hardinge.
The let, The word is the Keie.
where by the whole Nature of man is shut out of Heaven by the sin of our
First Parent, is taken a wait by the Passion of Christ. But because before
that benefit be received. Heaven yet remains shut both for sin
Original contracted, and sin actual committed: we have need of the
Sacraments, and Keys of the Church.

The Holy Fathers for good considerations grounded upon Scripture, have divided
the Keys into the Keie of Order, and the Keie of Jurisdiction: And either of
them into the Keie of Knowledge, which they call also the Keie of Discretion,
and into the Keie of Power.

To these Defenders we say, that they confound the Keys, and seem not to
know, what the Keys are. Verily these be not only the knowledge of the
Scriptures, nor the Interpretation of the law, nor the Word of God, although
these also do open or shute the Kingedome of Heaven in their kind, as
Chrysostom, Tertullian, and Eusebius may well say: and not only these, but
also Miracles, and Plagues, and all other things, which prepare the will, or
understanding of man, whereby he may receive the benefit of those most
principal Keys, that now we speak of.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Gentle Reader, for the better understanding hereof, it may please thee to
consider, that the Word of God, according to the sundry effects, and
properties thereof, has sundry names. For example. For that it increases,
and multiplieth, it is called Seed: For that it cutteth the Heart, and
divides the Fleash from the Sprite, it is called a Sword: For that it takes,
and encloseth us, and brings us together, it is called a Net: For that it
wassheth us clean, it is called Water: For that it Enflameth us, it is called
Fire: For that it Feeds us, it is called Bread. And even so, for that it
opens, and gives us an entry into the House, it is called the Keie. This
House is the Kingedome of Heaven: Christ is the Door: the Word of GOD is
the Keie.

For thus saieinge, M. Hardinge tells us, We confound matters, and seem not
to know, what we say. Notwithstanding herein we imagine nothing of our
own, but only report the very Words, and Sentences of the Ancient Learned
Catholic Fathers.

Tertullian says, Tertull. contra Marc^on. Li. 4.
Quam Clauem habebant Legis Doctores, nisi Interpretationem Legis? What Keie
had the Doctors of the Law, sauinge the Exposition of the Law? S. Hierome
says, Duces Ecclesiae habent Claues Scientiae, vt aperiant Scripturas
creditis sibi Populis. Hieromy. in Esaiam. Li. 6. ca. 24.
Vnde praecipitur, vt Magistri aperiant, and Discipuli ingrediantur: The
Captains of the Church have the Keys of Knowledge, to open the Scriptures
unto the People to them committed. Therefore Commandment is given, that the
Masters should open, Ambros. De Cain. and Abel. Li. 2.
and the Scholars should enter. S. Ambrose says, Remittuntur peccata per Dei
Verbum, cuius Levites est Interpres: Sins be forgeuen by the Word of God,
the Expounder whereof is the Priest.

Thus these, and other like Ancient Fathers have opened the meaning of these
Keys. Chrysostom in Matthae. Homil. 44.
And yet were they never therefore condemned of ignorance, as men, y^ wiste
not, what they said. Certainly Chrysostom says, Clauis est Scientia
Scripturarum, per quam aperitur Ianua Veritatis: The Keie is the knowledge of
the Scriptures, whereby is opened the gate of the Truth. And S. Augustine
says, Clauis est dicenda, Augusti. De Sanctis, Homil. 27.
qua ad Fidem pectorum dura reserantur: That ought to be called the Keie, where
with the hardness of men's hearts is opened unto Faith.

Here has M. Hardinge well multiplied, and increased his Keys, and has
brought us forth a whole bunche of them altogether: Multiplication of Keys.
The Keys of Orders: The Keys of Jurisdiction: The Keys of Discretion: The
Keys of Power: The keys most Principal, and the Keys not so principal. And
thus has he keys of Order without Jurisdiction, and keys of Jurisdiction
without Order: keys of Discretion without Power, and keys of Power without
Discretion. And al these pretty shifts of keys has he divised, to avoid
Confusion: and, to make up his tale, as if the Popes Cross Keys were not
sufficient, Plagues, and Miracles, and, I know not what thing else, are
brought forth unto us in the likeness of Keys. And this distinction, and
limitation of Keys, says he, has upon good considerations benne divised by
the Holy Fathers. And yet of al these Holy Fathers, for modesties sake, he
names none.

What answer were it best to make to such Vanities? In deed, when the
right Keie of Knowledge was lost, and gonne, it was time to divise some other
pretty Pikelockes to work the feate. Bonauentura hereof writes thus, as it
is partly alleged before: Bonauen. 4. Sentent. Did. 18. Quae. 1. E.
Omnes fere Sacerdotes ita sunt simplices, and idiotae post susceptionem
Sacerdotij, sicut ante. Dicendum ergo, quod Scientia non est Clauis
Principalis, nec per se, sed prout iuncta est Authoritati Ligandi, vel
soluendi. Et haec Clauis non est de Esse Ordinis, sed de been esse: Al
Priests, for the most part, are as simple, and as jude after the receiuinge
of Priesthood, as they were before. Therefore we must say, that Knowledge is
not the Principal Keie, not any Keie at al of it self: but as it is joined
with the Authority of Bindinge, or Loosinge. And this Keie ( of Knowledge) is
not of the Substance of the Order of Priesthood, but of the better being of
the same. And therefore, to increase M. Hardinges number of Keys, he says,
Quidam habent Scientiam Clauium: Eodem loco.
quidam Clauiculam: quidam nullam: Sum have the Knowledge of the Keys: sum
a pretty little Keie: sum no Keie at al. In this case it were good for M.
Hardinge to resolve his Reader, when the Priest has nothing else but a Pretty
little Keie, or no Keie at al, what Authority he has, either to Open, or to
Shut.

M. Hardinge replieth farther, We have Remission of Sins in the
Ministration of the Sacraments: Therefore we have it not only by the
hearing of the Word of God. This Objection touched, and partly answered a
little before. S. Augustine calls the Sacraments, Augustine. contra Faustum,
Li. 19. Cap. 16.
Verba Visibilia: Words Visible: for that in them, as in lively Images, the
Death of Christ is sensibly set before our eyes. For the word of God is
the Substance, and Life of al Sacraments: and without the same, Sacraments,
what so ever, are no Sacraments. And therefore S. Augustine says. as it is
alleged before, August. in Johan. Tracta. 80.
Quare non ait, vos mundi estis propter Baptismum, quo lot^ estis: Sed ait,
propter Verbum, quod locutus sum vobis? Nisi quia and in Aqua Verbum mundat.
Detralie Verbum: and quid est Aqua, nisi Aqua? Why says not Christ, you are
clean because of the Baptism, wherewith ye are washed: But, Because of the
Word, that I have spoken to you? Sauinge for that, it is the Word, that
cleanses in the Water. Take the Word away: and what is Water else, but
Water?

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 2.
Moreover that Christ's Disciples did receive this Authority, not that they
should hear the Private Confessions of the people, and listen to their
whishperinges, as the common Massinge Priests do euerywhere now adays, and
do it so, as though in that one point lay all the Virtue, and use of the
Keys: but to the end, they should Go, they should Teach, they should
Publishe abroad the Gospel, and be unto the Beleuinge a sweet Savor of Life
unto Life: and unto the Unbelieving, and Vnfaitheful a Savor of Death unto
Death: and that the minds of Godly persons being brought low by the remorse
of their former Life and errors, after they once begone to look up unto the
Light of the Gospel, and believe in Christ, might be opened with the Word of
God, even as a door is opened with a Keie. Contrary wise, that the Wicked, and
wilful, and such as would not believe, nor return into the right way, should
be leafte still as fast locked, 2. Timoth. 3.
and shut up, and, as S. Paul says, wax worse, and worse. This take we
to be the meaning of the Keys: and that after this sort men's Consciences
be either opened, or shut.

M. Hardinge.
Here ye Harp much upon one stringe, which so iarreth in the ears of the
Hearers, as your confuse Harmony can like noman, unless he be a Minstrel of
your own Sect. The Authority and power of the Keys consists not
altogether, nor Principally in Preachinge, or pronouncinge of the Gospel, as
already we have proved. What may we judge of you? proceeds this of Malice,
or of Ignorance, that thus ye confound the Keys, the Powers, and the
Ministeries?

Preachinge is one thing, to govern the Church is an other, to remitte and
retain sins is an other, to distribute the Sacraments is an other. Does
not S. Paul in clear words speak Severally, and distinctly of Ministeries,
1. Corin. 1.
where he says, that he was not sent of Christ to Baptize, but to Preach
the Gospel? This Doctrine of yours, whereby ye confound the Keys, Powers, and
Ministeries, does not only obscure the Scriptures, and bring the people to
great errors: but also under pretense of a love toward preachinge of the
Gospel, leads them into contempt of the Sacraments, and specially of the
Sacrament of Penance, without which, if after Baptism we have sinned, (not
being let by case of necessity, wherein VVil, Desire, and Vow is
accepted) Untruth, as by the Answer may further appear.
we can not attain to Salvation. As you follow Calvin your Master in this and
sundry other false, and perilous Doctrines, so it is to be feared, if your
wicked temeritie be suffered to proceed, that at length having brought al
Religion to bare Preachinge, ye will abandon all the Sacraments of the Church,
as things not necessary. For so that wicked Master of yours teaches:
Caluines wicked doctrine against the Sacraments.
That, where Christ's death may be remembered otherwise, there A great
untruth, joined with a sclaunder. Read the Answer.
all the Sacraments be Superfluous. And that I seem not to sclaunder him. I
remitte you to his Commentaries upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians, where expoundinge these wooordes, Do this in my remembrance, he
says thus: The Supper is a token of remembrance ordained to lift up, or
help our infirmity: for if otherwise we were mindeful inoughe of Christ's
death, this help (he means the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar) were
superfluous, which is common to all the Sacraments, for they be healpes of our
infirmitte. Lo, by Caluines Doctrine, if we remember the death of Christ,
both the Euchariste, and al other Holy Sacraments be void, and Superfluous.
And then, because no other thing brings to our remembrance the Death of
Christ, more then Preachinge, to what purpose serve all the Sacraments?

Thus these Defenders with their Master Calvin have found a shorter way to
Heaven, then was known before.

In an other place he seems to derogate much of the necessity of Baptism
of Christen men's Children. Contra Interim.
Where he says, that by reason of Gods promise the issue which comes of
Faitheful pare^tes, These be not M. Caluines words, but S. Paul's: Filij
vestri Sancti sunt, 1. Corin. 7.
is borne Holy, and is a Holy Progeny, and that the children of such, being
yet enclosed in the womb, before they draw breathe of life, be nevertheless
chosen into the covenant of life everlasting. This doctrine, when it shall
take place, as by you Defenders it is set in a good furtherance, what shall we
look for, but that the necessary Sacrament of Baptism (without which who is
to be compted a Christen man?) and the most Blessed, and confortable
Sacrament of the Altar, and the Wholesome Sacrament of Penance, Quid ^ Coelum
ruat?
and Absolution, and the rest of the Sacraments, shall be no more esteemed and
used, then now ye esteem, and use the Mass, Holy Bread, and Holy Water?
This being once brought to pass, shall not the people easily be induced either
to receive Mahometes Religion, or sum other, as far from God, as that is:
or to allow the pleasant trade of life of the Otherwise called the Romans.
Epicureans, the most part being already thereto inclined, and no small
number well entread?

But to return again to the Keys, which seem to you to have no force ne use
but in Preachinge: First, as touching the scorneful scoffer uttered by you,
Sir Defender, in Latin, and by your interpreter in English, against Private
Confessions, and against the Ministers of the Church appointed by God for
grace of reconciliation to be imparted to penitentes: your light mockinge
sprite deliteth your selves not so much, as it pitieth us to see you both so
fast bound in Satan's fetters. Next concerning Confession Untruth. For it
is not required of necessity, as shall appear.
necessarely required to the use, and power of the Keys, which you speak of
at your pleasure, thus we say according to the Scriptures: Among sundry
effects, for which Christ gave the Keys to the Apostles, and their
Successors, this is one, that by Power of them they should remitte, Mat. 16.
and 18.
and retain Sins, as himself said, Whose sins ye remitte, they are
remitted unto them: and whose sins ye retain, they are retained, Untruths,
two together. See the Answer.
But sins can not duly be remitted or retained, unless they be known to
him, Johan. 20.
that has authority thereto: and knowledge of sins (specially such as are
privy) can not be had of man, who can not see into the heart of man, ^ but by
Confession of the sinner: Wherefore consequently it follows, that they
received this authority to hear the Confession of Christen people desirous to
be assolted, and reconciled.

Wherefore the Confession, yea of Secret sins, is necessary to Salvation by
Untruth. For M. Hardinges own Doctors say, It was ordained by Tradition,
and not by Christ.
thinstitution of Christ. For in that he instituted the end, he instituted
also the means, which should be necessary to the obteininge of the end:
unless we would make Christ our Lawemaker to have failed his Church in
things necessary. That sins can not either be remitted, or retained,
except the Priest know them, Mat. 16. Comment. in Mat. 16.
we are bold so to say with the Fathers, and specially with S. Hierome, who
so Untruth, In mistakinge, and abbridginge S. Hieromes words.
understood the words of Christ: where he promised the Keys of the
Kingedome of Heaven to Peter. Sacerdos pro officio suo cum peccatorum audierit
Varietates, scit qui ligandus, sit qui Soluendus: The Priest (says he) when
as according to his office he has heard the diversities of sins, knows
who is to be bound, who is to be loosed. Right so as in the time of Moses law
he pronounced not, who was clean of Lepre, who was not, before that he had
vewed the color, the bunches, and al other tokens of that disease. And thus it
follows of the words of Christ, that Confession of al Sins, at least
deadly, must be made to the Priest, before they can be remitted. Which
Priest is the Minister of this Sacrament, and has authority to absolve,
either Ordinary, or by Commission of the Superior.

Again, for proof that Confession is necessary, we sat, that to remitte
and retain sins committed against God, as to bind and to loose, be
judicial acts. And therefore by these words Christ ordained a Court, This
Consistory stood sometime in Excommunication, sometime in Preachinge.
a Consistory, a seat of Judgment in the Church, and appointed the
Apostles and their Successors to be Judges. And that this may appear not to
be a fantasy of our own heads, S. Augustine so expounds those words of
S. John in his Revelation: Et vidi ledes, etc. And I saw seats, and some
sittinge on them, and judgment was given. We must not think (^aithe he)
this to be spoken of the last judgment, but we must understand the Seats
of the Rulers, and the Rulers themselves, by whom now the Church is
governed. And as for the Judgment given, it seems not to be taken for any
other, then for that, whereof it was said, What things ye bind in Earth,
they shall be bound also in Heaven: and what things ye loose on Earth, they
shall be loosed also in Heaven. Sundry other Fathers have uttered in their
writings the same Doctrine. In Mat. Cap. 16.
Hilarious upon the sixtenth Chapter of Matthewe says, Beatus Coeli ianitor,
etc. Blessed is the Porter of Heaven, whose earthly judgment (that is to say,
which is given here on Earth) is a foreiudged authority in Heaven, that what
things be bound, Li. 1. Epi. 2. De dignit. sacerd. li. 3.
or loosed in Earth, they have the condition of the same Statute also in
Heaven. S. Cyprian has the like saying in an Epistle to Cornelius.
Chrysostom says, that Christ has translated al judgment, which he
received of the Father, unto the Apostles, and Priests. Gregory Nazianzene in
an Oration to the Emperor and his Princes, says to the Emperor, Ouis mea
es, and nos habemus Tribunalia: This saieinge pertains, no^ to Confession,
but to the Authority of Gods word.
Thou art my Sheep, and we have our seats of judgment. S. Gregory the Pope
compares the Sacrament of Penance with a court of Justice, in which causes
be first examined and tried, and afterward Judged. That the same is to be
done by the Priest. S. Bernarde shows: Who, as also the learned Father
Hugo de S. Victore, be not afraid to say after S. Cyprian, Hilarie, and
Chrysostom, that the sentence of Peter remittinge Sins, goes before the
sentence of Heaven. This Ordinance of Christ requires, that al. Trespasses,
Offenses, Disorders, Transgressions, and Sins committed against him and his
Laws, be referred to this Consistory.

Whether these Defenders allow Public Confession, or no, we know not: but
whereas they inueigh against Private Confession, and say in spiteful words,
which they have learned in the Schole of Satan, being loathe the Sins of the
People, whereby he holds his Kingdom, should be remitted, that Christ's
Disciples received not the authority of the Keys, that they should hear
private Confessions of the People, and listen to their whisperinges: We tell
them that Confession of al deadly Sins is of the Untruth. As it is proved
before. Confession grounded upon Natural Reason.
Institution of God, not of Man. But concerning the manner of confessinge
secretly to a Priest alone, it is most agreeable to Natural Reason, that
secret Sins be confessed secretly

A vain forgerie.
Clement amongst those things that he acknowledges him self to have
received of Peter, this is One, as he writes in his first Epistle translated
by Rufine the Priest: That, if it fortune either envy or Infidelity privily
to crepe into any man's heart, or any other like evil: he which regards his
Soul, be not ashamed to confess those things to him, that is in Office over
him, to the end that by him, through the word of God, and wholesome counsel,
he may be healed. So as by perfect Faith and good works he may escape the
pains of everlasting fire, and come to the rewards of Life that endures for
ever. No man speaks more plainly of Secret Confession Untruth. For he
speaks only of open Confession.
then Origin, and that in sundry places, to which for Breuities sake I remitte
the Reader. In. 2. Ca. Leuitici, Homil. 2. De Principijs, Lib. 3. In Psalm. 37.
Homil. 2. Where he compares the state of a sinner to a man, that has evil
and undigested humors in his Stomach. And says that as by remaininge of
such evil matter, the man feleth him self very sick, and by vomitinge of it
forth, he is eased: so the sinner by keepinge his sins secret, is the more
greuousely charged in his own conscience, and stands in danger to be choked
with the Fleume and humor of his sins. But if he accuse him self, and
confess his faults, he both vomiteth forth his sins, All this belongs
to open Confession.
and digesteth the cause of the same. S. Cyprian as in many other places, so
most plainly speaks of Secret Confession. Sermon. 5. de lapsis. Although
(says he of certain devout persons) they be entangled with no great Sin,
Confession of evil thought.
yet because at least they thought of it, the same unto the Priests of God
Confess they sorowfully and simply. They make Confession of their Conscience,
they lay forth the burden of their mind, etc.

S. Augustine treatinge of the Power of the Keys in many places, but specially
of Confession in Psalm. 60. Where speakinge much of the necessity of
Confession, he says thus: Why fear thou to be Confessed? If not being
Confessed thou remain hidden, not being Confessed thou shall be damned. And
afterward thus: To this end God requires Confession, to deliver the humble:
to this end he damneth him that confesses not, to punish the Proud.
Therefore be thou sorry before thou be Confessed: being Confessed, Rejoice:
thou shall be hole.

By these and many other Holy Fathers, of whom there is no doubt, but they
had the Holy Ghost for their Teacher and prompter of al Truth, the Catholic
Church has benne persuaded, that the recital and rehersinge of Untruth:
Read the Answer.
al sins before the Priest is necessary to Salvation: unless necessity
for lack of a Priest or other wise, exclude us from it: and that a Untruths,
many, and manifest, as shall appear.
General Confession in no wise suffiseth. True Faith acknowlegeth, that
Confession is to be made of al ^ Sins, as ^ commanded by Christ, and the
Apostles, commended to us by the ^ Fathers of the Primitive Church, by all ^
learned Doctors, and general use of the ^ whole Church. And if the express
term of Secret or auricular Confession be Untruth. For it is never found.
Otherwise let him shevve it.
Seldom mentioned in the Ancient Fathers, as that of Public Confession is
often times, as in the Nicene Council, and in sundry other places: that is
nothing repugnant to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church.

The B. of Sarisburie.
All this great show of Authorities of Fathers, and Doctors, M. Hardinge him
self in the end discharges easily with one Word. For, notwithstanding al,
that be could best divise to say herein, his Conclusion at the last is
this, The Express Term of Secret, or Auriculare Confession is Seldom
mentioned in the Ancient Fathers. Seldom, he says, as if it were sometimes
used, although but Seldom. But if he had leafte, Seldom, and said, Never, I
trow, his tale had benne the truer.

For the rest, we say, as before: We make no Confusion of the Keys. Our
Doctrine is plain, that there be two Keys in the Church of God: The one of
Instruction, the other of Correction. Whereof the one woorketh inwardly, the
other outwardly: The one before God, the other before the Congregation. And yet
either of these stands wholly in the Word of God. And therefore S. Paul
says, 2. Timoth. 3.
Omnis Scriptura Diuinitus inspirata vtilis est ad Doctrina^, ad Redargutionem,
ad Correctionem, ad Institutionem, etc: Al Scriptures inspired from God are
profitable, To teach the Truth: To reprove Falsehedde: To correct the
Wicked: To Nourtoure, and infourme the Godly.

Of the Former of these Keys S. Paul says, Actor. 16.
Believe in the Lord Jesus: and thou shall be safe, with all thy House.

Of the other he says. 2. Corinthians. 10.
The Weapons of our warfare are not Fleashely: but mighty through God, to
throw down holds, castinge down every High thing, that is builded up
against the knowledge of God, and to bring al understanding captive to the
Obedience of Christ.

This Doctrine seems to be simple, and plain, and without Confusion.

Touching M. Calvin, it is great wrong, untruly to report so Reverend a
Father, and so Worthy an Ornamente of the Church of God. If you had ever
known the order of the Church of Geneua, and had seen four thousand
people, or more receiuinge the Holy Mysteries together at one Communion, ye
could not without your great shame, and want of modesty, thus untruly have
published to the world, that by M. Caluines doctrine, the Sacraments of
Christ are Superfluous. Certainly to leave al, that he has otherwise spoken
of the Sacraments in general, Of the Sacrament of Christ's last Supper he
writes thus: Magnum Consolationis, Institution. Cap. 18. 2.
ac suauitatis fructum ex hoc Sacramento colligere possunt piae animae: quod
illic Testimonium habeant, Christum sic nobis adunatum esse, sic nos illi
vicissim insertos, adeoque in vnum Corpus cum ipso coaluisse, vt quicquid
ipsius est, nostrum vocare liceat: The Godly minds may take great fruit of
pleasure, and Comfort of this Sacrament: for that therein they have a
witness, that Christ is so made one with us, and we so graffed into him, and
are so grown both into one Body, that what so ever is his, we may now
call it ours.

But he says, The Supper is a token of remembrance, to lift up, or to healpe
our infirmity. For if otherwise we were mindeful yenough of Christ's Death,
this healpe were Superfluous.

O M. Hardinge, how far may malice bear a man? Because M. Calvin says,
We are weak, and have need of out ward Sacraments, to quicken the dullness
of our Senses, says he therefore, that the Sacraments be Superfluous? If he
had likewise said, Our bodies be weak, and have need to be refreashed with
Meat, and Drink, would ye geather thereof, that Meat, and Drink are
Superfluous? Nay contrariewise he concludes, We have need of Sacraments:
Therefore Sacraments be needeful: and the greatter our weakness is, the more
need have we of such remedies. His words emongst many others of like
sense be these: Sic est exigua nostra Fides, Institution. Cap. 16. 3.
vt nisi vndique fulciatur, atque omnibus modis sustentetur, statim
concutiatur, fluctuet, vacillet: So small is our Faith, that unless it be
borne up of every side, and by all means be maintained, it shakes, it
wauereth, and is like to fall.

If this be so dangerous a Doctrine, as you tell us, why then are the Ancient
Catholic Fathers suffered to hold and maineteine the same? Dionysius, whom
you so often call S. Paul's Scholar, writes thus, Eclesiast. Hicrarch. Cap. 1.
Nos imaginibus sensibilibus, quantum fieri potest, ad Diuinas adducimur
Contemplationes: We, as mutche as may be, by Sensible Images, or Sacraments
are brought unto Divine Contemplations. Likewise S. Augustine says, In
Quaestion. Vet. Testamen.
Sacramenta propter Carnales Visibilia instituta sunt: vt ab illis, quae oculis
cernuntur, ad illa, quae intelliguntur, Sacramentorum gradibus transferamur:
Visible Sacraments are ordained for Carnal Men: that by the steps of
Sacraments we may be leadde from the things, that we see with eye, unto the
things, that we understand. Cap^ian. De Coena Domini. Chrysostom. ad Pop^l.
Antiochen. Homil. 60.
So says S. Cyprian, Fidei nostrae infirmitas Symboli argumento edocta est,
etc. The weakness of our Faith is taught by the understanding of the
Sacrament, etc. So S. Chrysostom, Si incorporei essemus, nuda, and incorporea
nobis haec ipsa daret. Nunc quia Corporibus insertas habemus animas, sub
visibilibus spiritualia tradit: If we were Bodilesse, God would give us these
things bare, and Bodilesse. But for as mutche, as we have Souls fastened
unto our Bodies, therefore God gives us things Spiritual under things
Visible. Chrysostom in Matthae. Homil. 22.
Again he says, Rectis, and Fidelibus Scripturae non sunt Necessariae,
dicente Apostolo, Lex justice non est posita: To the Godly, and Faithful the
Scriptures are not Necessary: For so the Apostle says, There is no Law
provided for the Just. And again, Oportuerat quidem nos nihil indigere
auxilio Literarum, sed tam nudam in omnibus vitam exhibere, Chryso. in Matthae.
Homi. 1.
vt Librorum vice Gratia Spiritus vteremur: It behooued us to have no need of
the Scriptures: but in all things to show our Lives so pure, and clean, that
in steed of Books we might use the Grace of the Holy Ghost. Hieron. in
Pro^^mio in Lamen. Hieremiae.
In like manner S. Hierome says, Cum meruerimus esse cum Christo, and similes
Angelis fuerimus, tunc Librorum Doctrina cessabit: When we shall obtain to be
with Christ, and shall be like unto the Angels, then the Doctrine of Books shall
give place.

Now tell us, M. Hardinge, must we hereof conclude, as you do, y^ these Holy
Fathers, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, held false, and
perilous Doctrines, and with wicked temeritie would abandonne both
Scriptures, and Sacraments, as things not Necessary? Certainly for full
resolution hereof, M. Calvin him self says thus, Johan Caluinus in Antidoto
ad 7. Sessionem Co^cisij Tridentini.
Facile patior, vt, quae Christus nobis dedit, Salutis adiumenta, eorum vsus
Necessarius dicatur: quando, scilicet, datur facultas. Quanquam Semper
admonendi sunt Fideles, non aliam esse cuiusuis Sacramenti Necessitatem, quam
Instrumentalis Causae, cui nequaquam alliganda est Dei vittus. Vocem sane illam
nemo pius est, qui non toto pectore exhorreat, Sacramenta res esse Superfluas:
I can well suffer, that what so ever healpes of Salvation Christ has given us,
the use thereof be coumpted Necessary: I mean, when we may have opportunity,
and time to use them. How be it thus mutche the faitheful must be warned, that
the Necessity of any Sacrament is none otherwise, but as of a Cause
Instrumental: unto which Cause we may not in any wise bind the Power of
God. But that the Sacraments be things Superfluous, no Godly man can abide to
hear it.

Where you further charge M. Calvin, for saieinge, The Children of the
Faithful are borne Holy, ye should rather herewith have charged S. Paul. For
thus he says, 1. Corinthians. 7.
Nunc Liberi vestri Sancti sunt: Now are your children Holy. Ye should have
remembered, M. Hardinge, that these be S. Paul's words, and not M. Caluines.
His meaning is, that the Children of the Faitheful, notwithstanding by Nature
they be the Children of Anger, yet by Gods Free Election they be Pure, and
Holy. This is S. Paul's undoubted Doctrine: Which notwithstanding, be never
neither despised the Sacraments of Christ, nor leadde the people* as you
say, to Mahomete, or Epicure.

Here at the last, M. Hardinge, to return, as he says, to his Keys, first
begins with the spiteful words, and scorneful scoffs, and light Sprite of
Sir Defender: which, he says, he learned in the School of Satan, and now
lies bounds in Satan's fetters.

To answer al s^tche M. Hardinges vanities, it were but vain. Wise men will
not greatly weigh these childishe Tragedies.

But he says, The Priest holds a Consistory, and is a Judge over the
sins of the People. But being a Judge he cannot discern Sins, unless he
know them. Neither can he know them, but by Confession. Therefore, says M.
Harding, We tell them, Institution. Venial.
that Confession of al Deadly Sins is of the Institution of God: and not of
Man. Mary, he says, touching the manner of Confession, secretly to the
Priest alone, it is most agreeable to Natural Reason, that secret Sins be
Confessed secretly.

Here, I beseech thee, good Christian Reader, note this one thing by the way:
M. Hardinge, contrary to common order, has brought us the Institution of God
without any manner Word of God. And thus, he says, We tell them: as if his
bare tellinge should stand for proof.

Verily notwithstanding Christ gave his Apostles Power of Bindinge, and
Loosing, yet it appears not, y^ he spoke any one word of Secret Confession.
And Gratian a Famous Doctor of that side doubts not to say, De POenit.
did. 1. Quis aliqua^do. De Poenit. Disi. 1. Conuertimini.
Latentia peccata non probantur Necessario Sacerdoti Confitenda: It is not
proved, that Privy sins ought of Necessity to be Confessed unto the
Priest. And again, Datur intelligi, quod etiam ore tacente. Veniam Consequi
possumus: We are given to understand, that although we utter nothing with
our mouth, yet we may obtain pardonne, or Absolution of our sins.
Therefore notwithstanding all this M. Hardinges tellinge, his own Doctor
Gratian tells him, that Auriculare Confession is not of Gods Institution.

But wherefore speaks M. Hardinge so precisely, and specially of Deadly
Sins? Or why may not his Venial Sins comme likewise in the rekeninge as
well, Council. Trident. Cap. 5. De Confessione. Rob. Holcot in 4. Senten. Qu. 4.
4. Senten. Qu. 83 Artic. 3.
as others? In deed it is specially provided in y^ late Chapter at Tridente,
that Little Petite Sins need not to be uttered in Confession. And Rob.
Holcote says, De Venialibus Confiteri, magis est Supererogationis, quam
Necessitatis: To make Confession of Venial Sins, is more of Devotion, then of
Necessity. And Thomas of Aquine says, Quidam probabiliter dicunt, quod per
ingressum Ecclesiae Consecratae homo co^sequitur Remissionem peccatoru^
Venialium: Sum say, and that not without good reason, that a man may
obtain Remission of his Venial Sins, only by entri^ into a Church that is
Consecrate. Extra, De p^^niten. and Remiss. Omnis vtriusque. In ^loss^.
And it is pourposely noted in the Gloss upon the Decretales, Venialia
tolluntur, vel per Orationem Dominica^, vel per Aquam Benedictam: Venial Sins
may be removed, either by a Pater noster, or by Holy Water. And therefore
perhaps M. Hardinge will say, according to the judgment of these, and others
his own Doctors, that his Little Pretty Venial Sins ought not of dewtie to be
rekened: but may otherwise be remitted, and have no need of Christ's Blood.
This is a shorter way to Heaven, then either Christ, or his Apostles ever
taught us.

How be it, all this error seems first to have grown of mistakinge these
words of Beda: Beda in 5. Cap. Iacobi. Citatur a Magistro. 4. Senten. Distin.
17.
Coaequalibus quotidiana, and Leuia: grauiora vero Sacerdoti Pandamus: Let us
open our small, and daily Sins unto our fellows: and our great Sins unto
the Priest.

For the rest, M. Hardinges Resolution may stand with good favor. For
seeing his Auricular Confession can hold no better by Divinity, that it may
seem to hold by sum what, he did well, to say, It holds well by Natural
Reason.

M. Hardinge says, The Priest can be no Judge without particulare knowledge
of every Sin: Nor can he know without hearing: Nor can he hear without
Confession. For answer hereto, Chrysostom says, as he is before alleged:
Medicinae locus hic est, Chrysostom. De Poenit. Homil. 9.
non Iudicij: Non Poenas, sed Peccatorum Remissionem tribuens: Deo Soli die
Peccatum tuum: Here is a place of Medicine, and not of Judgment: rendering not
punishment, but Remission of Sins. Open thine offenses to God Only.

But if the Priest can be no Judge without knowledge, then doubtelesse, M.
Hardinge, your Priests for the more part can be no Judges. For your own
Peter Lombarde says, 4. Senten. Did. 19 Posiquam.
Scientiam discernendi Omnes Sacerdotes non habent: Al Priests have not
knowledge to discern bitwene sin, Judge over Sin.
and sin. And many of them be utterly ignorant, and know nothing.

Notwithstanding, be the Priest never so wise, or well learned, yet how is be
hable to enter into the breaste of man, and to know the Secrets of the heart?
S. 1. Cor. 2. 3. Regum. 8. Roma 8. Augusti. Confession Lib. 10. Ca. 3
Paul says, What man knows, what is in man, but the sprite of man, that is
within him? Solomon says, God Only knows the thoughts of men. S. Paul
says, God Only searches the Heart, and reins. And S. Augustine pourposely
speakinge hereof, as it is said before, says thus, Vnde sciunt, cum a me
ipso de me ipso audiunt, an verum dicam? How know they, when they hear me
speak of me self, whether I say Truth, or no? Therefore the Priest
iudginge that, y^ he cannot knowmuste needs wander uncertainly, and be a very
doubteful Judge.

Nevertheless, admittinge the Priest to be a Judge, yet, if it may be proved,
either that he may be a Judge over the sins of the people, without
Particulare knowledge of the same: or that he may comme to certain, and
particulare knowledge thereof without any manner Auriculare Confession, then, I
trust, this whole matter will soon be answered.

First therefore I say, that a Priest having Authority to pronounce the
Word of God, is thereby a Judge over Sin. For the Word, that he speaks,
is the Power of God unto Salvation: Roma. 1. Hebrae. 4. (...).
and a two edged swerd, hable to sunder the Soul* and the Sprite, and the
marie from the bones: and is hable to Judge, (for so S. Paul says) the
thoughts, and cogitations of the Heart. And thus M. Harding him self
grau^teth, that a Priest pronouncinge Gods Word, may therewithe both
Bind, and Loose: that is, in this case, to do the office of a Judge. S.
Augustine says, Clauis ea dicenda est, qua pectorum dura referantur: That
thing ought to be called the Keie, August. De Sanctis, Homil. 27. Tertullian.
De Pudicitia. Actor. 2.
wherewith the hardness of the heart is opened.

So says Tertullian, Ipse Clauem imbuit. Vides, quam? Viri Israelitae,
auribus mandate, quae dico: Iesum Nazarenum Virum a Deo nobis destinatum: He
endewed the Keie. And know you, what Keie? This Keie, I mean: Ye men of
Israel, make, what I say: Jesus of Nazareth, a man appointed unto you from
God. So says S. Augustine. Loquimur in auribus vestris. Vnde scimus, quid
agatur in Cordibus vestris? Quod autem intus agitur, no^ a nobis, sed ab illo
agitur. Prospexit ergo Deus, vt Soluat filios mortificatorum: We speak in
your ears. Augustine. in Psalm. 101.
But how know we, what is wrought in your hearts? How be it, what so ever is
wrought within you, it is wrought, not by us, but by God. God therefore has
looked forth, to Loose the Children of them, that were appointed to death.
Thus is the Priest a Judge, and Bindethe, and Loosethe, without any hearing
of Private Confessions.

Of the other side, I say, that in open crimes, and Public Penance, the Priest
is like wise appointed to be a Judge. For notwithstanding in the Primitive
Church, either the whole people, or the Elders of the Congregation had
Authority herein, yet the direction, and Judgment rested evermore in the
Priest. And in this sense S. 2. Tim. 5.
Paul says unto Timothee, Receive no accusation against an Elder, unless
it be under two, or three witnesses.

And notwithstanding these Orders, for the greatest part thereof, be now
utterly out of use, yet, I trust, it shall not be, neither impertinente to the
matter, nor vnpleasante unto the Reader, to consider, how ye same were used in
old times. Therefore, as it is Learnedly noted by Beatus Rhenanus, The Sinner,
when he began to mislike him self, and to be penitente for his wicked life,
for that he had offended God, and his Church, came first unto the Bishop, and
Priests, as unto the Mouths of the Church, and opened unto them the whole
burden of his heart. Afterward he was by them brought into the Congregation,
and there made the same Confession Openly before his Brethren: and further was
appointed to make Satisfaction by Open Penance. Which Penance being dewly, and
humbly done, he was restored again openly unto the Church, by laieinge on of
the hands of the Priests, and Elders.

Hereof S. Paul says unto the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 2.
If you have forgeeuen any thing to any man, I have likewise foregeeuen it.
For I me self, what so ever I have foregeeuen, I have foregeeuen it for your
sakes in the Person of Christ. In this Limitation of Penance, lest any
thing should pass unadvisedly, and out of Order, the Priest was appointed to
be the Judge. Basili. Quae. 288. (...). Augu. in Enchirid. ad Laurentium, Cap.
65.
S. Basile says, Modus Conuersionis debet esse conueniens illi, qui peccauit:
The Order of Conversion, or Open Penance, must be agreeable unto him, that
has offended. And therefore S. Augustine says, Quia Plaerunque etc. For as
mutche as, for the most part, the grief of one man's heart is unknown unto
an other, neither comes forth into the knowledge of others, either by
words, or by other tokens, as being before him, unto whom it is said, My
mourninge is not hid from thee, therefore it is very well, that by them, that
have the oversight of the Church, certain times of Penance are appointed,
that the Congregation may be satisfied. Again he says, Hortor Prius Publica
Poenitentia satisfacere: Augusti. De Ecclesiast. Dogmatib. Cap. 53. Cassiodor.
Lib. 9 Cap. 35.
and ita Sacerdotis Iudicio reconciliatum Communioni sociari: I Counsel him,
that first he make Satisfaction by Open Penance: that being so reconciled, he
may afterward be restored unto the Communion by the Judgment, and Discretion
of the Priest. Likewise says Cassiodorus, Rei expectant Communionis tempus,
quod decreuit Episcopus: The Peintente parties wait for the Communion time,
appointed unto them by the Bishop.

S. Ambrose demanded of the Emperor Theodosius, being then excommunicate,
Quibus Medicamentis incurabilia vulnera tua, Cassiodor. Lib. 9. Cap. 30.
plagasque curasti? By what Medicines have you healed your wounds, and cuttes,
that were incurable? The Emperor answered, Tuum Opus est, and Docere, and
Medicamenta temperare: Meum vero oblata sucipere: It is your part to Instruct
me, and to Minister Medicines: and it is my part to receive that you Minister.
4. Senten. Did. 18. Non autem.
And therefore Peter Lombarde says, Etsi aliquis apud Deum sit solutus, non
tamen in facie Ecclesiae solutus habetur, nisi per Iudicium Sacerdotis:
Although a man be assoiled before God, yet is he not accoumpted assoiled in the
Face or Sight of the Church, but by the Judgment of the Priest.

By these, M. Hardinge, I doubt not, but ye may see, that the Priest may be
a Judge over Sin, notwithstanding he neither hear Private Confessions, nor
have particulare knowledge of every several sin.

This is that Confession, that the Holy Fathers have so often spoken of. It was
made not secretly, or in a corner: but publicly, and openly, and in the
sight of the Congregation. Origin. in Psalm 37.
Hereof Origin says, as it is reported before: Si quis sibi sit conscius,
Procedat in Medium, and ipse sui accusator existat: If any man find him self
guilty, let him comme forth into the mids of the Church, and let him be his
own accuser. Likewise Tertullian says, Tertullian. De Poenitentia.
Aduolui Presbyteris, and Aris Dei adgeniculari, and Omnibus Fratribus
legationes deprecationis suae iniu^gere: To false down before the Priests: To
kneel before the Altar, or Communion Table: and to desire All the Brethren to
pray for him.

Touching S. Hierome, M. Hardinge, ye lay in his words as faithefully, as
Ananias sometime laid in his money at the Apostles feet. Ye serve us with a
parcel, and hold back the rest. It is true, that S. Hierome says, It is
the Priests part to discern the diversity bitweene sin, and sin, as in
cases of Excommunication, and Public offenses. But wherefore could ye not
epsy: or rather, why would you so closely dissemble so many, and so plain
Words goeinge immediately before? For thus S. Hierome writes of the Power of
the Keys, Heronym. in Matthae. Cap. 16.
and of the use of Confession: Istum locum Episcopi* and Presbyteri non
intelligentes, aliquid sibi de Pharisaeorum assumunt Supercilio: vt vel damnent
innocents, vel soluere se noxios arbitrentur: cum apud Deum non sententia
Sacerdotum, sed reorum vita quaeratur: This place the Bishops, and Priests
not understanding, take unto them sum part of the Proud look of the
Phariseis: thinkinge them selves hable either to Condemn the innocente, or to
Absolve the guilty: Whereas in deed it is not the Absolution of the Priest,
but the life of the Sinner, that is Weighed before God. These words, M.
Hardinge, would not thus have benne dissembled, if ye had meante simple
dealinge. S. Hierome says plainly, that your Bishops, and Priests
understand not the use of the Keys: That ye have taken upon you sum part
of the Proud looks of the Phariseis: And that it is not the Absolution of the
Priest, but the life of the party, that is accepted before God.

In the end, he concludes thus, Alligat, vel soluit Episcopus, vel Presbyter,
non eos, qui insontes sunt, vel noxij: Sed pro officio suo, cum Peccatorum
audierit varietates, scit, qui ligandus sit, qui soluendus: The Bishop, or
Priest neither Binds the innocente, nor Loosethe the guilty: but according
to his office, when he has heard the diversity of sins, ( as in Public
offenses) he knows, who ought to be Bound, who ought to be Loosed. 4.
Senten. Did. 18. Nec ideo.
In like sort writes Peter Lombarde, Dominus tribuit Sacerdotibus potestatem
Ligandi, and Soluendi: id est, ostendendi hominibus Ligatos, vel Solutos: God
has given to Priests Power to Bind, and to Loose: that is to say, to
declare unto men, that the Penitentes be either Bound, or Loosed.

All this notwithstanding, al be it M. Hardinge were hable to prove, that the
Fathers had sommewhere made mention of Confession in Secret, yet should not
that greatly either further his purpose, or hinder ours. For, Abuses, and
Errors removed, and specially the Priest being Learned, as we have said
before, we mislike no manner Confession, whether it be Private, or Public.
For as we think it not unlawful, to make open Confession before many, so we
think it not unlawful. Abuses always excepted, to make the like Confession in
Private, either before a few, or before one alone. And, as the Holy Fathers,
upon good considerations, were forced to remove the use of Open Confession,
even so we say, that upon like good Considerations Private Confession also
may be removed.

Only this we say, that Christ, when he sent his Disciples into the
World, and gave them Authority, to Bind, and to Loose, made no manner
mention of any such Hearing of Confessions, but Only bade them go, and
Preach the Gospel.

Hilarie, Bernarde, and Huge, as ye have alleged them, seem to say, that the
Judgment of Man goethe before the Judgment of God. Other the like, or
rather more vehemente speeches ye might have found in Chrysostom: Chrysostom.
in Esai. Homil. 5.
Coelum accipit Authoritatem ludicandi a Terra. Index seder in Terris: Dominus
sequitur Seruum: Heaven takes Authority of Judgment from the Earth. In
Earth sits the Judge: The Lord follows the Seruante. These, and such
other the like extraordinary speeches, with good Construction, may be
comfortable to the afflicted mind. But, as one said sommetime, they must be
received with a Grain of Salt: For otherwise of them selves they be
unsavory. For S. Hierome says, as I have alleged before, Hierony. in
Matthae. Cap. 16. 11. Quaest. 3. Tunc vera.
Apud Deum, non sententia Sacerdotis, sed reorum vita quaeritur: It is not the
Sentence, or Absolution of the Priest, but the life of the Penitente, that is
accepted before God. And again, Tunc vera est sententia Praesidentis, quando
Aeterni sequitur sententiam Iudicis: Then the Judgment of the Presidente, or
Priest is true, (not when it goes before, but) when it folowethe the
Judgment of the Everlasting Judge. And Gratian him self says, De Poenit.
Did. 1 Conuertimini.
Non Sacerdotali Iudicio, sed largitate Diuinae Gratiae Peccator emundatur: The
Sinner is made Clean, not by Judgment of the Priest, but by the abundance
of the Heavenly Grace.

But Nazianzene, as he is here alleged, said unto the Emperor, Ouis nostra
es: Thou art Our Sheep. Confession nor Commanded.
No marvel. He meante, that the Emperor was One of the Flock, and Fold of
Christ. So S. Ambrose said sometime unto the Emperor Valentinian: Quid
honorificentius, quam vt Ecclesiae Filius dicatur Imperator? Imperator enim
bonus intra Ecclesiam, Ambros. ad Vale^tinian. Epist. 32 Chrysostom. De Verbis
Esaiae, Homil. 5.
non supra Ecclesiam est: What thing is there more honorable, then for the
Emperor to be called a Child of the Church? For a good ^mperour is Within
the Church: but not Above the Church. S. Chrysostom says, Deus ipse
subiecit Caput Principis manui Sacerdotis: God him self has set the Head of
the Prince under the Hand of the Priest. For, as touching Faith, and the
Obedience of the Gospel, the Highest Prince is but a Subject. All this proves
well the Authority, and Dignity of Gods Word: but it makes nothing for
Confession.

To conclude, M. Hardinge says, It has benne persuaded, that the recitinge,
and rehearsal of al sins before the Priest, is necessary to Salvation: and
that a General Confession is in no wise sufficient. And again he says, True
Faith acknowledges, that Confession is to be made of al Sins, as Commanded
by Christ, and his Apostles: Commended unto us by the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, and by all Learned Doctors, and General use of the whole Church.

Good Reader, Thou would think, that amongst so many great Words, there
were sum Truth: and that M. Hardinge of his modesty, and for his Credites
sake, would not speak so boldly without sum ground. But, I beseech thee,
Consider these few: and thereby Judge indifferently of the rest.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Psalm 50. Homil. 2 Chrysostom. in Homil. De
Poeniten. and Confessione. Beat. Rhenan. in Argum. Libelli Tertull. De
Poenitentia.
Non dico, vt Confitearis Conseruo tuo peccata tua. Dicito Deo, qui curet ea: I
will thee not to Confess thy Sins unto the Priest, that is thy fellow
seruante. Confess them unto God, that may heal them. Again, Cogitatione tua
fiat delictorum exquisitio: Sine test sit hoc Iudicium: Solus Deus te
Consitentem videat: Examine thy Sins in thy heart within thee. Let this
Judgment be without witness: Let God only see thee making thy
Confession. Beatus Rhenanus, a man of great readinge, and singular
Judgment, hereof writes thus: Tertullianus de Clancularia ista Confessione
admissorum nihil loquitur. Neque eam vsquam olim Praeceptam legimus: Tertullian
of this Privy Confession of Sins says nothing. Neither do we read,
that the same Kind of Privy Confession in Old times was ever Commanded. M.
Hardinge says, It was Commanded: Rhenanus says, It was not Commanded. If
Rhenanus words be true, as they be in deed, their are M. Hardinges words
most untrue. Likewise it is noted in the very Gloss upon M. Hardinges own
Decrees: De Poenit. did. 1. Petrus. In Gloss.
Forte tunc (tempore Ambrosij) non erat facta Institutio Confessionis, quae
modo est: Perhaps then ( in the time of S. Ambrose, which was four hundred
years after Christ) the manner of Confession, that now is used, was not
appointed. De Poenit. Disc 1. Conuertimini.
And Gratian says, Antequam Sacerdoti Ora nostra ostendamus, id est, Peccata
nostra Confiteamur, a Lepra peccati mundamur: Before we open our mouth unto
the Priest, that is to say, before we make Confession of our Sins, the
Leprosy of our Sin is made clean. De Poenit. did. 1. Quidam.
Theodorus says, Quidam Deo solummodo confiteri debere peccata dicunt, vt
Graeci: Sum say, we ought to Confess our Sins only unto God, as do the
Grecians. Peter Lombarde the Chief Founder of M. Hardinges Divinity, 4
Senten. did 17. Quid ergo.
says thus: Sane dici potest, quod sine Confessione Oris, and solutione
Poenae exterioris, Peccata delentur per Contritionem, and humilitatem Cordis:
We may safely say, that without Confession of the Mouth, and Absolution of
the out ward pain, Sins be foregeeuen by the Contrition, and humility of
the Heart.

Briefly, Gratian having thoroughly debated the matter of both sides, that is
to say, both for Confession, and against Confession, in the end concludes
thus, as it is said before: De Poenit. did. 1. Quamuis.
Cui harum sententiarum potius adhaerendum sit, Lectoris Iudicio reseruatur.
Vtraque enim sententia fautores habet Sapientes, and Religiosos Viros: Whether
of these saieinges it is best to follow, it is leafte to the Judgment of the
Reader: For either Saieinge is maintained, and favored, both by wise, and by
Godly Men. And, whereas M. Hardinge says, Confession of al Sins is
Commanded by Christ, and his Apostles, his own Gloss upon his own Decrees
openly reproves his error, De Poenit. did. 5. In Poenitentia, In Gloss.
and teaches him the contrary. The words be these: Melius dicitur.
Confessionem institutam fuisse a quadam Vniuersalis Ecclesiae Traditione,
potius quam ex Noui, vel Veteris Testamenti Authoritate: It is better said,
that Confession was appointed by sum Tradition of the Universal Church, then
by any Authority, or Comm^undemente of the New, or Old Testamente.

Now, good Christian Reader, I beseech thee, examine alitle the Truth of M.
Hardinges tale. First he says, The Recitinge, and Rehearsal of al Sins
before the Priest is Necessary to Salvation: 1.
Chrysostom answeareth, Let God Only hear thy Confession. There is one
Untruth. M. Hardinge says, General Confession is not sufficient: 2.
Peter Lombarde answeareth, Sine Confessione Oris, etc. Without any Confession
made by mouth our Sins may be foregeeuen. There are two Untruths.

M. Hardinge says, 3.
Confession of al Sins is commanded by Christ, and his Apostles: His own
Gloss says, It is Only a Tradition of the Church, commanded neither in the
Old Testamente, nor in the New. There are three Untruths. 4. 5.
M. Hardinge says, It was commended unto us by the * Doctors, and Fathers of
the * Primitive Church: Rhenanus says, We read not, that this kind of
Privy Confession in the Old times was ever Commanded: And his own Gloss
says, In the time of S. Ambrose (which was four hundred years after
Christ) perhaps it was not used. There are Four, and Five Untruths. M. 6.
Harding says, It has ever ben allowed by all the Learned Doctors: His
own Gratian answeareth him, The Contrary has benne maintained, and favored
both by Wise, and by Godly Fathers. There are six Untruths.

To be short, M. Hardinge says: It has benne Commended unto us by the
General use of the whole Church: 7.
Theodorus answeareth him, The whole Church of Grecia uses it not. There are
Seven apparente, and great Untruths, disclosed by M. Hardinges own Doctors.
He could not have comprised so mutche Untruth in so narrow room without
sum study.

Erasmus a man of great Judgment says thus, Erasm. in Schol. in Epitaphium
Fabiolae.
Apparet, tempore Hieronymi nondum Institutam fuisse Secretam admissorum
Confessionem: quam posted Ecclesia salubriter instituit: si modo recte vtantur
ea and Sacerdotes, and Laici. Verum in hoc labuntur Theologi quidam parum
attenti, quod, quae Veteres scribunt de hurusmodi Publica, and Generali
Confessione, ea trahunt ad hanc Occultam, and long diuersi generis: It
appears, that in the time of S. Hierome ( which was four hundred years
after Christ) Secret Confession of Sins was not yet ordained: Which
notwithstanding was afterward wholesomely, and profitably appointed by the
Church, so that it be well used, as well by the Priests, as by the People. But
herein certain Divines, not consideringe advisedly, what they say, are mutche
deceived: for what so ever the Ancient Fathers write of General, and Open
Confession, they wreaste, and draw the same to this Privy, and Secret kind,
which is far of an other sort.

Here, M. Hardinge, Erasmus tells you, ye are fowly deceived: and shows
you also the cause of your error: for that, as he says, ye consider not
advisedly, what ye either read, or write: but where so ever ye hear this
word Confession, ye imagine straight way, It must needs be your own
Auriculare Confession, and can be none other.

Last of al, ye grant, The express Term of Auriculare, or Secret
Confession is seldom mentioned in the Aunciente Fathers. Here, M Hardinge,
wants sum part of your simplicity. If ye would have your Reader to
believe you, Authority, and Power.
ye should have alleged certain of the Ancient Fathers. One at the least,
if ye could have found so many, that had at any time used the express term
of Auriculare, or Secret Confession. Otherwise it had benne the better, and
plainer way, to have Confessed expressly, that the same express term is
never used in any one of all the Ancient Fathers. How be it, if Auriculare, or
Secret Confession had then benne used, it could never so long have lackte a
name.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 3.
We say, that the Priest in deed is a Judge in this case, but yet has no
manner of Right to challenge an Authority, or Power, as says Ambrose.

M. Hardinge.
Whereas ye make preachinge of the Gospel to be the Keys, how call ye the
Priest Judge in this case? Preach ye never so mutche, the conscience of man
being so secret a thing as it is, how can ye judge, who in wardly and
thoroughly repents, and who repents not? And though one repent, and be
sorry, and have remorse of his former life, though he look unto the light of
the Gospel as ye say, and believe in Christ, what then? how can ye judge of
such a Person? And do ye know his heart by tootinge in his ear?
Do ye know his heart by lokinge in his face?

The Priest dewly vsinge the Keie of knowledge and discretion, does the office
of a Judge, and as he seethe cause, either Loses or Binds. As touching the
Priests Authority, or Power, which to challenge he has no right, De Poenit.
Did. 1. C. Verbu^ Dei.
for so your Interpreter makes you to speak, and impute it to S. Ambrose: we
deny, that S. Ambrose says Untruth. For the vvord^s be these. Nullius
potestatis iura exercet.
even very so* But* as we may gather of his words, as he means that a
Priest exercises not the right of any his own proper power in remittinge
sins: so in the very place by you alleged, he says the contrary to your
Doctrine. For the Right of loosinge and bindinge (says he) is granted to
Priests only, and therefore the Church chalengeth it rightly, which has
true Priests. Lo he uses the word of challenge. Again in the same place he
avouches, that he which receives the Holy Ghost, (whom Priests receive,
when they be Consecrated in the Sacrament of Order) receive also power to Loose
and Bind Sins. For prouse thereof he alleges the Scripture: Johan. 20.
Take ye the Holy Ghost, whole sins ye remitte, they are remitted: and whose
sins ye retain, they are retained. And if you, Defender, were accustomed to
make your humble Confession, and so to be assoiled, you should hear some
Ghostly Fathers say to you, after certain other words, Auctoritate mihi
commissa ego te Absoluo, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In what sense the Priest without hearing Confessions may be a Judge, we
have sufficiently said before. Neither know I, what fancy M. Hardinge can
have in so often rehearsal of one thing. With what words, or color of
Commission, M. Hardinge can furnishe out his Authority, it forces not
greatly. Verily without sum show, or countenance, his credit would not
hold. In deed, Hugo, and Bernarde say, The Judgment of God follows the
Judgment of man. And Pope Julius says, Council. Tom. 1. De Primatis Romans
Ecclesiae.
Habet Sacrosancta Romana Ecclesia Potestatem, singulari sibi Priuilegio
Concessam, Aperire, and Claudere ianuas Regni Coelestis, quibus voluerit: The
Holy Church of Rome has Power grounted unto her by Singul^re Privilege, to
Open, and to Shut the gates of the Kingedome of Heaven, to whom she lists.
And Cardinal Cusanus says, Nicol Cusanus. De Aut^^^^^a. Eccle and on. Supra
and Contra Scripturam.
Haee Ligandi, and ^oluendi Potestas, non minor est in Ecclesia, quam in
Christo: This Power of Bindinge, and Loosing is no less in the Church. then
it is in Christ.

But it is no great wisdom to give over mutche credit unto them, that so
often have deceived us. If their Authority be so great, as they make it, let
them show the words of their Commission. The saieing of S. Ambrose is
clear, and plain: Verbum Dei dimittit Peccata. Sacerdos est Iudex. De Poenit.
dis 1. Verbum Dei.
Sacerdos quide^ officium suum exhibet: Sed nullius potestatis iura exercet.
The Word of God foregeeueth Sins. The Priest is the Judge. The Priest
executes his office: But he exercises the right of no Power. And to this
end in an other place he allegeth the words of the Prophet Esai, spoken in
the person of God, Ego sum, Ambros. De Noe and Arca, Ca 13. Esaiae 4. Augu. De
Scalis Paradisi.
ego sum, qui deleo iniquitates tuas: I am he, I am he, that put a way thine
iniquities.

And to lay more weight to S. Ambroses words, S. Augustine says in like
sense, Officium Baptizandi Dominus concessit multis: Potestatem vero, and
Authoritatem in Baptismo remittendi peccata sibi Soli reseruauit: Our Lord
has granted the office of Baptizinge unto many: but the Power, and Authority
in Baptism to foregeeue Sins, he has reserved Only to him self. Ambros.
De poeviten. li. 2. Ca. 7
So says S. Ambrose, Nostrum est onera remittere: Illius est resuscitare:
Illius est educere de Sepulchro: It is our part, to remove the stone from the
grave ( by Preachinge, by Counsel, and by Exhortation) But it is the Lords
work to raise up the dead: It is the Lords work, to bring him from the
pit. Ambros. Lib. 9. Epist. 76
Likewise again he says, Neque Legatus, neque nuntius, sed ipse Dominus
saluum fecit populum suum. Solus remanet: quia non potest hoc cuiquam hominum
cum Christo esse commune, vt peccata condonet. Solius hoc munus est Christi,
qui tulit peccata mundi. It is not the Embassadoure: It is not the Messenger,
but the Lord him self, that has saved his people. The Lord remains alone.
For noman can be partener with God in foregeeuinge of Sins. This is Christ's
Only office, that has taken away the sins of the World.

And yet is not the Priests office void of Power. He has Power, and
Commission to open the Will of God, 2 Corin 5. Tertull. De Baptismo. Augustinus.
and, as S. Paul says, to speak unto the people, even as in the Person of
Christ. So Tertullian says, Dandi Baptismi ius habet Summus Sacerdos, id
est, Episcopus: The Chief Priest, yt is to say, the Bishop, has Right, and
Power to geeue Baptism. But S. Augustine says, Ministerium dedit seruis:
Potestatem sibi retinuit: God gone the Ministry (of Remission of Sins) unto
his Seru^untes: Luke 10. (...).
But the Power thereof he retained to him self. So, when Christ sent out his
Disciples to Preach the Gospel, he gave them Authority, and Power.

If M. Hardinge will say, There is no Power, or Authority in the Reading. or
Publishinge of Gods Word, his own Doctor Hosius will tell him, that when
the Bishop Orders a Reader, even after the manner of the Church of Rome, he
says unto him, Hosius in Confessione Petricouien. Cap. 52.
Habe Potestatem legendi Epistolas in Ecclesia Sancta Dei, tam pro viuis, quam
pro defunctis: Have thou Power to Read the Epistles in the Holy Church of
God, as well for the quick, as for the Dead.

In deed this is a very special Power, such as, I trow, Christ and his
Apostles never taught us. Neither would I have noted it in this place, saving
that Hosius, the profoundest Proctour of that side, thought it a matter woorthe
the notinge. Such power therefore belongs to Priests, and Ministers in the
Church of God. But the Power of Geuinge Remission of Sin belongs to God
alone, and to none other. Hieronym. in Matthae. Cap. 16.
If any man will presume further, S. Hierome says, as it is alleged before, He
has put on the proud look of the Phariseis: And says further, that such
Priests, and Bishops understand not the Words of Christ. For, says he,
It is not the Judgment or Absolution of the Priest, but the Life of the
Penitente, that is regarded before God: And therefore S. Augustine says, Inde
nata sunt Schismata, August. De Fide and Operibus. Cap. 14.
cum homines dicunt, Nos Sanctificamus immundos: Nos Iustificamus impios: nos
petimus: nos impetramus: Hereof grow Schisms, and Divisions in the Church,
when men say, we Sanctify the unclean: we Justify the wicked: we
desire: we obtain.

How he it, here comes in Richardus de Sancto Victore, God wate, with a full
cold distinction. For thus he says, Christus potuit Dimittere Peccara: Nos
vero' non possumus Dimittere Peccata, sed tantum Remittere.

Peter Lombarde says mutche better: Richa De Sa^cte Victore, De Potesta.
Ligan. and Soluen. Par. 1 Cap. 24.
Christus Sacerdotibus tribuit potestatem Ligandi, and Soluendi, id est,
ostendendi hominibus Ligatos, vel Solutos: Christ has given Power unto
Priests to Bind, and to Loose: that is to say, to declare unto men, who
be Bound, who be Loose.

Sa says Bonauentura of the Priests under the Law of Mases: 4 Senten. did
18. Nec ideo. Bonauen. 4. Sen. did. 1. In Prooemio. 1 qu. 1. Dictu^ est. De
Ioenit. did. 1. Verbum Dei.
Mundare dicebantur, quia mundatum ostendebant: They were said to cleanse the
Leprosy, bicouse they showed, who was cleansed. So says S. Augustine, Nec
voluntas Sacerdotis obesse vel prodesse potest, sed Meritum Benedictionem
Poscentis: The vvil of the Priest can neither further, nor hinder: But the
Merit of him, that desueth Absolutio^.

Thus therefore S. Ambrose means, The Priest is a Judge to discern bitweene
sin, and sin, as well Private, as Public, But Right, Power, or Authority
to foregeeue fianes, he has none.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 4.
And therefore our Saueour Jesus Christ, to reprove the Negligence of the
Scribes, and Phariseis in teachinge, did with these words rebuke them,
saieing: Woe be unto you Scribes, and Phariseis, which have taken away the
Keys of knowledge, and have shut up the Kingedome of Heaven before men.
Seeinge then the Keie whereby the way, and entry to the Kingdom of God is
opened unto us, is the Word of the Gospel, and the Expoundinge of the Law,
and Scriptures, we say plainly, where the same Word is not, there is not
the Keie.

M. Hardinge.
By this we are induced to grant, the knowledge of the Scripture is a Keie.
that the knowledge of the Scripture is a Keie, whereby the gate to the Truth
is opened, the use whereof consisieth in expoundinge of the Law, and
Prophets, as they show Christ. But we say, this not to be the special
Keys, which Christ gave to the church, but one Keie alone. And so Christ
calls it, where he rebuked the Scribes and Phariseis. Though you have put it
otherwise then the Gospel has, in the Plural number. And this Keie is common
to the Law, and to the Gospel. But the Keys, which we speak of, are another
thing. By the name of these leies, We understand the whole spiritual Power,
which Christ first promised to Peter, and afterward gave to the Apostles,
and from them is transferred to al Bishops and Priests. By which Power
Priests teach the Gospel, Consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ, and
Minister the Sacraments, through Authority of the Word Absolve Penite^tes,
and excommunicate Public and heinous sinners. The Keie that you confusely
speak of, naminge it to be the Word of the Gospel, and Expoundinge of the
Law, and Scriptures, is one part perteininge to this spiritual Power: it is
not the whole Power. And where this Word is not, that is to say, where the
Scriptures be not taught, and the Gospel preached, there is not the Keie, say
ye: there is not the exercise of that Keie, say we. Yet there is this spiritual
Power, that is to wit, there be the Keys. Ye we say that a simple Priest
Untruth. The Keie of Knowledge, without knowledge.
though he have no great learning, yet has he the Keys, though he might do
better, and more worthily use them, having learning and knowledge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge mutche and often complains of the Confusion of the Keys: that
we appointe not distinctly each Keie to his several office. Mark therefore, I
beseech thee, Gentle Reader, hew distinctly, and plainly M. Hardinge him
self entreats of the same.

First, confusion of Keys.
of the two Keys, that Christ has delivered us in the Gospel, he has made
a great many of Keys: The Keie of knowledge: The keie of Order: The Keie of
Power: The Keie of Discretion: The Keie of Sacraments: And for as mutche, as
Sacraments by his Doctrine be Seven in number, there must also be of this
sort Seven other several Keys. And yet over and bisides al these Keys being
so many, the Pope has also One Special Master Keie. Afterward by a slight.
and by nimblenesse of his fingers, he conueigheth all this heap of Keys into
two Only Keys: whereof the One he calls the Keie of knowledge, and the
other the Keie of Power: Which two Keys notwithstanding in the end are
suddenly consumed both into One only Keie. For where as the Keie of
knowledge is lost, there, by M. Hardinges Judgment, Power only remains
without knowledge: And that Keie alone discharges al offices, and is utterly
al in all.

This Keie of Power without knowledge, must needs be y^ Keie of Ignorance:
Or, as they them selves have used to call it, Clauis Errans, The Keie of Error.
Or which Keie undoubtedly Christ said sommetime, Luke 22. 4. Senten. Did.
19. Postquam. Alexand. De Hales, Par. 4. Qu. 79.
Hoc est tempus vestrum, and Potestas Tenebrarum: This is your time, and the
Power of Darkness. Peter Lombarde him self says, Many Priests be
Ignorante, and have not the Keie of knowledge: Alexander of Hales says,
Scientia non est Clauis: Knowledge is no Keie at al.

Yet M. Hardinge answeareth us, that the simple ignorant Priest, that knows
nothing, has not only One Keie, but both Keys (for so he calls them in
the Plural number) that is to say, as well the Keie of knowledge, as the Keie
of Power. And thus have they forged a Keie of knowledge without knowledge: and
with the same keie they expound, and open the Scriptures: they Minister the
Sacraments: they Bind: they Loose: and break up a by way into the Kingedome
of Heaven. Yet must we believe, that they speak simply, and plainly of these
Keys, and without confusion.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 5.
And seeinge one manner of Word is given to al, and one only Keie belongs
to al, we say, there is but one only Power of al Ministers, as concerning
Openinge, and Shuttinge. And as touching the Bishop of Rome, for all that his
Flatteringe Parasites singe these words in his ears, To thee will I give the
Keys of the Kingedome of Heaven, (as though these Keys were fit for him
alone, and for no body else) except he go so to work, as Men's Consciences
may be made pliaunte, and be subdued to the Word of God, we deny, that he
does either Open, or Shut, or has the Keys at al.

And although the taught, and instructed the People (as would God he might
once truly do, and persuade him self, it were at the least any piece of his
dewtie) yet we think his Keie to be never a white better or of greater force,
then other men's. For who has severed him from the rest? Who has taught him
more conningely to Open, or better to Absolve then his brethren?

M. Hardinge.
Your ground being false, what ye build thereon some fails. The whole
Power of the Keys pardy (how often times must we tell you one thing?)
stands not in preachinge only, but in sundry other excellent ministeries
also, as we have proved. If the Bishop of Rome preach not, he does neis the
Open, nor shut by preachinge: we grant. Yet men's Consciences being made
plaint and subdued by the Word of God by others, Preach by a Deputy.
that preach at his appointement, he may by virtue of the Keys either Open
or Shut, Loose or Bind, as by discretion he sees cause. And whereas Christ
said to Peter, and therefore to the Bishop of Rome Peter's Successor, To thee
will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: Matthae. 16.
will ye call them flatteringe Parisites, that yield to him that, which Christ
gave to him? Such vomit shows what humor your stomach is charged withal.
Denyinge the B. of Rome, whom for all the spite ye bear toward him, ye must
acknowledge to be a Bishop, to have the Keys at al, unless he preach in his
own Person, ye declare your great ignorance, and foul temeritie. Know ye
not, that a Power annexed to an Order, and Vocation is not taken away from one
by not exercisinge the same in his own Person?

The B. of Sarisburie.
The effect hereof, besides other ordinary idle talk, stands in two
points. First, M. Harding says, The Pope, though he do nothing him self
in his own Person, yet he may sufficiently feed the Flock of Christ, and
Bind, and Loose, and discharge al duties by his Deputies, and Vnderuicars,
that is to say, by his Cardinals, and Bishops, which are as careful, and
zealous for their offices, and tender their charge, as mutch, as he. This
ground, I trow, is not false: and therefore, what so ever M. Harding shall
build thereon, it can never fail. Notwithstanding, I do not remember, that
either Christ, or his Apostles ever used to do y^ like. One said sommetime,
Titus Liuius Decade. 3. Lib. 6.
Impudens est Imperator, qui, cum alienis oculis omnia ei agenda sint, postulat
sibi aliorum Capita, and Fortunas co^mitti: He is a shameless Captain, that,
whereas he must guide al things by the eyes of others, will require other
men's lives, ad goods to be committed to his hands.

Pope Damasus says, Damasus Papa Epistola 4.
Illi Episcopi, qui talia sibi praesumunt, videntur mihi similes esse
Meretricibus. quae starim, vt pariunt, infantes suos al^s nutricibus tradunt
educandos: vt suam citius libidinem explere valiant. Sic and isti Infantes
suos, id est, populos sibi Commissos, alijs educan dos tradunt, vt ipsi suas
libidines expleant, id est, vt pro suo libitu Saecularibus curis inhient, and,
quod cuique visum fuerit, liberitis agant: Such Bishops taking such
matters upon them selves, seem like unto H^rsottes: Which as soon, as they be
once delivered, straight way deliver out their Children unto N^urces, that
they may the rather follow their pleasures. Even so these Bishops diliuer
over their children, that is to say, the people committed to their Charges,
to be reared, and brought up by others* that they may the better accomplish
their pleasures, that is to say, that they may geeue them selves over to
worldly cares, and do what so ever shall like them best.

Further says M. Harding, Christ said unto Peter, To thee will I geeue the
Keys: Feed my Sheep: Confirm thy Brethren: Ergo, the Pope is a Lord
Paramounte, and has a Power Pierclesse over all the world. Peter of Palus
hereof writes thus: Christus dixit Apostolis, Petrus De Palude, De Potestate
collata Apostolis, Arti. 1.
Quaecunque ligaueritis in terra, erunt ligata and in Coelo, Non dixit, In
Coelis, sicut Petro dixerat: Sed in Coelo Vno. Vnde non sunt tantae
perfectionis, sicut Petrus: Christ said unto the Apostles, what so ever ye
shall Bind in Earth, it shall be bound in Heaven. He said not, It shall be
bound in Heavens, as he said to Peter: But in One Heaven. Therefore the other
Apostles were not of such perfection, as Peter was.

Again he says, Petr. de Palude.
Illa verba, Quaecunque ligaueris, intelliguntur de Vtroque Foro, and de
Vtraque Potestate. Illa autem Verba, Quorumcunque ligaueritis, intelliguntur
anum de Foro Conscientiae: These words (spoken unto Peter) What so ever thou
shall Bind, are understood of both Courts, as well of the Court of
Judgment, as of the Court of Conscience. But these other words ( Spoken
unto the other Apostles) What so ever you shall Bind, etc. are understood
only of the Court of Conscience.

This fantasy, Equal Power.
it seems, he learned out of these words of Origin: Non modica differentia
est, Orizen. in Mattha. Tractatu 6.
quod Petro quidem datae sunt Claues, non Vnius Coeli, sed multorum Caelorum:
vt quaecuque I gauerit super tertam, sint ligata, non tantum Vno in Caelo, sed
euam in omnibus Coelis. Ad alios dicit, vt soluant, and ligent, non in Coelis,
sicut Petrus, sed in Vno Caelo. quia no^ sunt in tanta perfectione, sicut
Petrus, vt lige^t, and solua^t in omnibus Coelis. The difference is great: For
unto Peter are geeuen the Keys, not of one Heaven but of many Heavens: that,
what so ever he binds in Earth, shall be bound, not only in One Heaven, but
also in all the heavens. But unto the rest he geeueth Power to Bind, and
Loose, not in the Heavens, as Peter do the, but in One Heaven: for that they
were not in such perfection, as Peter was, to Bind, or Loose in all the
Heavens.

This Multiplication of Heavens, as I have said, is but a fantasy: and yet to
M. Hardinges purpose it makes nothing. For Origin by this word Peter,
meante not Peter the Apostle, but any other Godly Learned Priest, or Bishop:
whom he expresses here under the name of Peter. For it follows immediately,
Ergo, quanto melior fuerit, qui soluit, tanto beatior erit, qui soluitur:
quoniam in omnibus solutus est Coelis: Therefore the better man he is, that
loses, the moore blessed is he, that is Loosed: Origin in Matthae. Tracta. 1.
for that he is Loosed in all the Heavens. Again he says, Quod si nos idem
loquimur, quod Petrus locutus est, efficimur Petrus. Et nobis dicetur, Tu es
Petrus. Petra enim est, quisquis est Discipulus Christi: If we speak the
same, that Peter spoke, we are made Peter: And unto us it shall be said, Thou
art Peter. For he is the Rock, that is the Disciple of Christ.

And again he says, In eodem Tractatu.
Hoc dictum, Tibi dabo Claues Regni Coelorum, Coeteris quoque commune est. Et,
quae sequuntur, velut ad Petrum dicta, sunt omnium Communia: This saieinge, To
thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, is common to the rest of
the Apostles. And the words, that follow, as spoken unto Peter, are common
unto al.

So says S. Augustine, Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 50. Basili. in Vtia Solitaria,
Ca. 23.
Petrus, quando accepit Claues, Ecclesiam Sancta^ significauit: Peter, when he
received the Keys, signified the Holy Church. So says S. Basile, Petre,
inquit, amas me^ Pasce Oues meas: Et consequenter Omnibus Pastoribus, and
Doctoribus eandem potestatem tribuit. Cuius signum est, quo'd omnes ex Aequo
and ligant, and Absoluunt, quemadmodum ille: Christ said unto Peter, ^ouest
thou me? Feed my Sheep. And in like sort unto Al Pastors, and Doctors he
gave the same Power. A toke^ whereof is this, that al others Bind, and Loose
Equally, as well as he.

Likewise says S. Ambrose, Ambros. De Dign^ta. Sacerdotali, Cap. 2.
Dominus dixit Petro, Pasce Oues meas. Quas Oues, and quem Gregem non solum
tune Beatus Petrus suscepit, sed and nobiscum eas suscepit: and cum illo cas
nos suscepimus omnes: Our Lord said unto Peter, Feed my Sheep. Which
Sheep, and Flock, not Only Blessed Peter then received, but he received the
sa ne together with us: And al we have received the same together with
him. Likewise S. Cyprian, Cyprian De Sim peicetrate Praetatorum. Beda in Homil.
in ^uangel. Que^ ine dicunt.
Christus eandem dedit Apostolis omnibus potestatem: Christ gave unto al his
Apostles like and Equal Power.

So likewise says Beda, Potestas Ligandi, and Solue^di, quamuis Soli Petro a
Domino data videatur, tamen absque vlla dubietate noscendum est, quod and
Coeteris Apostolis data est: The Power of Bindinge, and Loosinge,
notwithstanding it seem to be geeuen Only unto peter, yet without al doubt
we must understand, that it was geeuen also to the rest of the Apostles.

Briefly, M. Hardinges own Scholastical Doctors Confess, that the Power of
the Apostles was One, and Equal. But they say, that the whole multitude of the
Church was committed only unto Peter: and not likewise to any other: and that
therein only stands all the difference. Heruaeus De potestate Papae Cap. 12.
Heruaeus says, Quamuis Apostoli eandem habuerint a Christo, and aequalem
potestatem Clauium, and Iurisdictionis, tamen Iurisdictionem, Equal Power.
sieve Materiam subiectam, non habuit, nisi Petrus, and cui eam Petrus
committere voluit: Notwithstanding the Apostles received of Christ equal
Power of the Keys, and Jurisdiction, yet the Jurisdiction, or matter wherein
to use their Power, none had, but Only Peter, and to whom so ever Peter
would commit the same. And thus he imagines, that all the Apostles, sauinge
Only Peter, had Keys given them, but no House to Open: and Jurisdiction, but
no people to govern.

Verily Alphonsus de Castro says, Alphonsus Aduersus Haeres. Li. 2. De
Absolutione.
Quando absoluit Simplex Sacerdos, tantum absoluit de Culpa, sicut Papa: When
a Simple Priest Absolueth, he absolueth as mutche, touching Sin, as doothe
the Pope.

But touching the Pope, how great so ever he fancy his Keie to be above al
others, if he never use the same, and if he either know not, or utter not the
Word of God, we say, as before, well may he shut up the Kingedome of God
before men: Origin. in Matthae Tracta. 1.
but open it he cannot. Origin says, Qui funibus Peccatorum suorum
constringitur, frustra vel Ligar, vel Soluit: He that is bound with the bands
of his own Sins, Binds and Loses but in vain.

To conclude, S. Augustine says, Augustine. De Agone Christiano Ca. 30.
August. De Agone Christiano Ca. 31.
Cum Petro dicitur, Omnibus dicitur, Amas me? Pasce Oues meas: These words of
Christ, Love thou me? Feed my Sheep: when they are spoken unto Peter,
they are spoken unto Al Priests, or Ministers. He adds further, traque
miseri, dum in Petro Petram non intelligunt, and nolunt credere, datas
Ecclesiae Claues Regni Coelorum, ipsi eas de manibus amiserunt: Therefore
wretched men, while in Peter they understand not Christ that is) the Rock,
and while they will not believe, that the Keys of the Kingedome of Heaven are
given (not unto Peter alone, but) unto the Church, they have quite lost the
Keys out of their hands.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 1.
We say, that Matrimony is Holy, and Honorable in all sorts and states of
Persons: as in the Patriarchs, in the Prophets, in the Apostles, in the
Holy Martyrs, in the Ministers of the Church, and in Bishops: and that it is
an honest and lawful thing (as Chrysostom says) for a man living in
Matrimony, to take upon him therewith the Dignity of a Bishop.

M. Hardinge.
Matrimony is Holy and Honorable in all persons, Hebre. 13.
and an undefiled bed, as says S. Paul. Yet is it not lauful for them to
marie Untruths, two together, as better appears by the Answer.
which either have by deliberate vow dedicated al manner their chastity unto
God. Untruths, two together, as better appearcth by the answer.
or have received Holy Order. For the vowed be forbidden Marriage by express
Word of God: Those that have taken Holy Orders, by Tradition of the
Apostles, and Ancient ordinance of the Church.

Touching the first, Psalm. 75.
the Scripture is plain: because a Vow is to be performed, Vouete and reddite
Domino Deo vestro: Vow ye and pay (or render that ye vow) to your Lord God.
Christ also says in the Gospel, Matthew. 19.
there be some Eunuchs that have made the^ selves Eunuchs for the Kingedome
of Heavens sake. He that can take, let him take. Again S. Paul speakinge of
young Widows, which have vowed and promised Chastity, says, that when
they wax wanton against Christ, they will marie, The First Faith, S. Hierome
expounds, The Faith of Baptism. See the Answer.
having danmation, because they have broken their first Faith. Whether
these Scriptures perteine hereto, and be thus to be understood, we refer us
to the Primitive Church, and to all the Holy Fathers.

Such Marriages, or rather slidinges and falls from the holier Chastity,
that is Vowed to God, S. Augustine doubts not but they be worse then
aduoutries. S. Cyprian calls this case plain inceste. S. Basile accompteth
the marriages of veiled virgins to be void, of no force, and Sacrilegious.

She that has despoused her self to our Lord (says S. Basile) is not free.
For her husband is not dead, that she may marie to whom she list. And
whiles her immortal husband lives, she shall be called an Aduoutresse, which
for lusts of the Fleashe has brought a mortal man into our Lords Chamber.

Touching the second, Clerks bound to contine^cie. Lib. 1. C. 11.
Paphoutius Li. 1. Ca. 23.
the Apostles forbid those, that come single to the Cleregie, to marie,
except such as remain in the inferior Orders, and proceed not to the
greater, as we find in their Canons: Can 25. Paphnutius, as Socrates, and
Sozomenus record in their Ecclesiastical story, said at the Nicene Council,
that it was an Old Tradition of the Church, that such as come to the Degree
or Order of Priesthood single, should not marie wives. And this is that Holy
Bishop Paphnutius, whom these Evangelical Vowebreakers pretend to be their
proctour for their unlawful Marriages.

Read who list the Epistle of Siricius ad Himerium Tarraconensem, Cap. 7.
This Pope Siricius shamefully abeseth the words of S. Paul and condemns
al Marriage.
the second Epistle of Innocentius to Victricius Bishop of Roen, Cap. 9. and
his third Episitle to Exuperius B. of Tolouse, Cap. 1. And weighi^ge well these
places, he shall perceive, that these Holy Popes forbad the Ministers of the
Church the use of VVedlocke by the same Reason, by which the Priests of
Moses Law were forebidden to come within their own houses in the time, when
their course came to serve in the Holy Ministeries. 1. Corin. 7.
By the same reason also by which S. Paul requires married folk for a time
to forbear the use of their wives, that they might attend Prayinge.

The place of Chrysostom, Answer to Chrysostomes place. In. 1. Cap. ad Timo.
Homil. 2.
alleged by this Defender, well considered, disproueth no part of the
Catholic Doctrine in this behalf, but condemns both the Doctrine, and
common Practice of his companions these new fleashly Gospellers. His words
be these upon the saieinge of S. Paul, that a Bishop ought to be without
crime, the Husband of one wife. The Apostle (says he) stops the mouths
of Heretics, which condemn marriage, she winge, that it is not an unclean
thing, but so reverend that with the same a man may Ascend to the Holy
throne or seat (he means the state of a Bishop) and herewith he Chastises
and restrains the Unchaste persons, not permittinge them, who have twice
married, to attain such a room. Twice married may not be Bishopes, and why.
For whereas he keeps no benevolence toward his wife Untruth. For M.
Hardinge fovvly mistaketh S. Chrysostomes meaning.
deceased, how can he be a good governor? yea what grievous accusations shall
not he be subject unto daielie? For ye al know right well, that albeit by the
laws the second Marriages be permitted, yet that matter lies open to many
accusations. And therefore he would a Bishop to give no occasion (of evil) to
those that be under him. He puts begamie, Untruth: standigne in false
exposition.
that is to wit, maryinge an other after the first or a VVidowe, to be
lauful rather then commendable.

So we see the impure Bigamie of our Holy Gospellers condemned both by
Chrysostom, and S. Paul, of whom many being Priests, and (as they say)
Bishops, at least presuminge to occupy that Holy seat, for custody of their
Chastity, after their former old yoke fellows decease, solace them selves
with new Strompetes. Stro^petes.
By a better name I would call them, If I wish I should not offend. For what
woman so ever coupleth her self in such damnable yokinge, how can she appear
either to be honest, or to have care of her soul Health? As for the simple
that be deceived by the importunity and craft of those lurdens, as they are
not to be borne withal, so yet I think them to be pitied.

But if this Defender Press us with Chrysostom, we answer, that though
Chrysostom grant, that a married man may ascend to the holy seat, yet he
says not, that a man may descend from that Holy seat to the Bride Bed.
After holy orders received, marriage never coumpted lavvful among Catholics.
Priest^ married in England in the time of Anselmus.
For we deny utterly, that any man after that he has received holy Orders,
may marie. Untruth: For it was undoubtedly coumpted lavvful.
Neither can it be showed, that the marriage of such was ever accounted lawful
in the Catholic Church. In deed we know that in Germany and in England
and certain other Provinces at dissolute times, when the Discipline of the
Church was shaken of, Priests have benne married, as we read of the time in
which Anselinus was Bishop of Cantorbury. But that disorder was always by
That is by allovvinge of Concubines.
due correction of Bishops punished, and readressed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, I grant, M. Hardinge is like to find some good advantage, as having
undoubtedly a great number of the Holy Fathers of his side. For Single life in
the eyes of Politic wise men, for many causes seems worthy of favor.
But, good Christian Reader, that thou maiste be the better hable to see, and
judge, how uprightly, and indifferently the Fathers have dealte herein, either
in the auancinge of Virginity, Marriage Condemned.
or else in the disgracinge of Lawful Matrimony, it may please thee to
consider the form, and manner of their saieinges.

In deed Origin says, Origin. in Epist. ad Roman. Cap. 12. Lib. 9. Hierony.
in Malachi. Ca. 2. Vos autem recessistis.
Potest aliquis de Castitate plus sapere, quam oporteat sapere: A man may
think more of Chastity, then is convenient. Likewise says S. Hierome,
Declinare ad Dextram, est abstinere a Cibis, quos Deus creauit, and Condemnare
Matrimonium: and incurrere in illud, quod dictum est, Noli iustus esse nimium:
To turn to the right hand, is to abstain from meats, which God has made,
and to condemn Matrimony: and to false into the danger of the Words
written by the Wiseman, Never be over just.

First therefore Tertullian in the disproufe of Matrimony says thus: Eccle.
7. Tertull. In exhorta. ad Castitatem. Eodem loco.
Ecquid tibi videtur Stupri affine esse Matrimonium? Quonia^ in illo
deprehendo, quae stupro competunt: Do not thou think, that Matrimony is
like unto Fornication? Certainly I find the same thiinges in the One, that I
find in the Other. Farther he says: Ergo, inquies, iam and Primas, id est,
vnas Nuptias destruis. Nec immerito: Quoniam and ipsae ex eo constant, quod est
stuprum: Then, thou will say, thou condemnest also the first Marriage. Yea
verily, and not without cause: For both Matrimony, and Fornication consiste
both of one thing. Chrysostom says, Haec ipsa Coniunctio Maritalis malum
est ante Deum, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homi. 1.
Non dico, Peccatum, sed malum: The very Copulation of Matrimony is an evil
thing before God. I say not, It is Sin: but I say, It is an evil thing.
And yet immediately after he says, Si in Maritis, and Adulteris vna est
libido, quomodo potest fieri, vt vna, eademque res pro dimidia part sit
Iustitia, pro dimidia autem sit Peccatum? Aut enim tota est Iustitia, aut rota
est Peccatum: Quia res Vna est: If the Married man, and the Aduouterer have one
kind of pleasme, how can it be, that one and the self same thing, for the
one half should be Righteousness, and for the other half should be Sin?
Either it is al Sin, or al Righteousness: For the thing it self is One.

S. Hierome says, Hieronym. aduer. Iouinian, Lib. 1. Ibidem.
Si bonum est, mulierem non tangere, malum est ergo tangere. Nihil enim Bono
contrarium est, nisi Malum: If it be good for a man not to touch his wife,
then is it evil to touch his wife. For there is nothing contrary to Good,
but Evil. Again he says, Quam diu impleo Mariti officium, non impleo
Christiani: As long, as I do the duty of a Husband, I do not the duty
of a Christian man. Again, Non negamus Viduas, non negamus Maritatas Sanctas
Mulieres inueniri. Sed quae Vxores esse desierint: Hieronym. Contra Heluidium.
quae in ipsa necessitate Coniugij Virginum imitentur castitatem: We deny
not, but Widows, and married women may be Holy. But such as have leafte,
and foresaken vviues duties, and in the very necessity of Matrimony do
countrefeite the Chastity, that is in Maidens.

The like accoumpte we may make of sundry others: These few may suffice
for this present.

Now, thouchinge the marriage of Widowers, and Widows, a great many of the
Ancient Fathers seem expressly, and utterly to condemn it.

Athenagoras says, Athenagoras in Apologia pro Christianis. Hieronym. ad
Ceron^iam. Hieronym. contra Iouinian. Lib. 1. In eod. Libr^.
Secundae Nuptiae decorum quoddam sunt Adulterium: The Second Marriage ( of
Widowers, or Widows) is a fair kind of Aduouterie. And S. Hierome calls
Widows so married, Harlottes, and Naughty VVeemen, Malas, and Prostitutas: And
says, Digamia non nascitur in terra bona: Second Marriage grows not in
good soil. Again he says, Tolerabilius est, vni prostitutam esse, quam
multis: More tolerable it is, to be Concubine unto one, then unto many. Again,
Vbi numerus maritorum est, ibi vir, qui proprie vnus est, esse desijt: Where as
there is a number of Husbands, there the husband, that in proper speech is
but one, is no Husband. Likewise again, Non damno Digamos. Etiam Scortatorem
recipio Poenitentem. Quicquid aequaliter licet, aequa lance pensandum est: I
condemn not Widowers, or Widows, that have married again. No, Second
Marriage.
I refuse not the Fornicatoure upon his repentance. Bishops and Priests
married.
What so ever is equally lavvful, must be weighed in One balance.

Nazianzenus says, Nazian. In dictum Euang. Cu^ perfecisset Jesus. Origin. in
Lucam. Homil. 19. Hieronym. De Scriptor. Eccle. Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 11.
Hilarious. Nicephor. Li. 11. Cap. 19. Ruffinus, Lib. 2. Cap. 9. Nazianzen. In
Laudem Patris: (...). Prosper. Eusebius. li. 6. ca. 42. (...). Eusebius. li. 5. ca.
25. Novel. Constitu. 3. finali: E Graeco. Ignat. ad Philadelphien. Clemens
Stromat. 3 Eusebius. li 3. ca 30 Origin in Epist. ad Roman. Ca. 1. Lib. 1. Ambros.
in 2. Corin. 11. Clemens Stroma. Lib. 7. Hieronym. Aduer. Iouinian. Lib. 1.
Distin. 37. Legaxt. Did. 56. Osius.
Hic sermo videtur mihi reijcere Secundas nuptias, Si enim Duo sunt Christi,
Duo ite^ sunt mariti, and Duae vxotes: This saieinge seems to condemn
Second Marriage. For if there be Two Christ's, then one there Two Husbands,
and Two Wives. Origin says, Nunc and Secundae, and Tertiae, and Quartae
nuptiae repetuntur: and non ignoramus, quod tale coniugium eijciet nos de Regno
Dei: Now the Second, and Third, and Fourth Marriage is received. And we
know, that such Marriage shall cast us out of the kingedome of God.

By these few examples we may see, It was hard for these Holy Learned
Fathers, in so large Amplifications of Praisinge, or Dispraisinge, to hold
measure. Yet al those vehemente words, and Amplifications notwithstanding,
partly the same, partly other the like Holy, and Learned Fathers, both used
Marriage them selves in their own Persons, and also otherwise wrote, and
spoke thereof with great reverence.

Tertullian, as S. Hierome witnesses, was a Married Priest. Spiridion the
Bishop of Cyprus, sometime famous in the Council of Nice, was married, and had
Children. So was S. Hilarie the Bishop of Poit^rs, as appears by his Epistle
to his Daughter Abra.

So was Gregory S. Basiles brother the Bishop of Nyssa. So was Gregory the
Bishop of Nazianzum, Father unto Gregory Nazianzene, as appears by Ruffinus.
Yet was he nevertheless a Faithful Seruante, and a Steward of the Mysteries
of God: A man of Spiritual desires: The God of Pharao: the Pillar, and
Buttresse of the Church: and the star of the world. For in such wise his
own Son Gregory Nazianzene reports of him. Such a one was he, his Wife,
and Family notwithstanding. So was Prosper of Aquitania the Bishop of
Rhegium, as it appears by his Epigramme written unto his wife: Mearum Comes
irremota rerum.

So was the Holy Father Cheremon the Bishop of Nilus: Who, as Eusebius writes,
was sent into bannishment with his Wife. So Polycrates being likewise a
Bishop, sometime said, that seven of his Fathers, or Ancesters had benne
Bishops. The Greek word is (...). Ruffinus translateth it, Patres.
Iustinianus the Emperor seems the more to esteem Epiphanius the Bishop of
Constantinople, for that his Father, and other his Ancesters had benne
Priests, and Bishops.

Ignatius S. John the Evangelists Scholar says, Peter, and other the
Apostles of Christ were married men. So writes Clemens Alexandrinus: So
writes Eusebius. Origin says, That S. Paul, and his Wife were called to
the Faith, both at one time. S. Ambrose says, Omnes Apostoli, excepto
Iohanne, and Paulo, vxores habuerunt: All the Apostles had wives, only John,
and Paul excepted. Clemens Alexandrinus says, Perfecti Christiani Edunt,
Bibunt, contrahunt Matrimonium: They that be perfect Christian men, do Eat,
and Drink, and contracte Matrimony. S. Hierome writing against Iouinian,
says thus, Quasi non hodie quoque plurimi Sacerdotes habeant Matrimonia: As
though now a days very many Priests were not Married. And therefore he
says, as he is alleged by Gratian, Legant Episcopi, and Presbyteri, qui
Filios suos saecularibus literis erudiunt: Let Bishops, and Priests read
these things, that bring up their Children in worldly learning, ( and not in
the Scriptures of God.)

Pope Damasus shows us, that a great number of Bishops of Rome were
Priests Sons: As Pope Syluerius: Pope Deusdedit: Pope Adrianus. 2: Pope
John. 15: Pope Felix. 3: Pope Hosius: Pope Agapetus: Pope Gelasius: Pope
Bonifacius: Bishops Married.
Pope John 10: Pope Theodorus. And concludes thus, Complures etiam alij
inueniuntur, qui de Sacerdotibus nati Apostolicae Sedi Praefuerunt: Many others
biside there are found, that being Priests Sons ruled the Apostolic See
of Rome. Aeneas Syluius De gestis Council. Basihen. Lib. 2.
Pope Pius says, A married man, having his wife alive may be chosen Pope.
His words be these: Cur enim disputant Doctores, an Electus in Papam vxori
suae debitu^ soluere teneatur, etc. For wherefore do the Canonistes move this
doubt, Whether a man being chosen Pope be bound to yield marriage duty to
his wife, unless a married man may be chosen to that room? Polydorus in
Historia Anglor. Lib. 6. Anno. Dom. 970. Polydorus De Inuentoribus rer. Lib. 5.
An. Dom. 1100. Fabian, Page 293.
Polydorus Vergilius says, that the restrainte of Priests Marriage was
first attempted in England about the year of Our Lord Neenehundred three
score and ten: and that the same was afterward concluded in the Weaste
Church about the year of Our Lord a thousand and a hundred, and never
before.

Fabian says, that Bishops, and Priests lived a thousand years together
with their VViues, no law being to the contrary.

These two Principles being thus laid, the one of immoderate, and
extraordinary speeches of the Holy Fathers, the other of the continual, and
Ordinary Practice of the Church, we may now be the better hable to
consider the Substance of M. Hardinges reasons.

First of al, his Objection of Vows nothing touches the Cleregie of
England. For it is known, and Confessed, that the Priests of England were
never Votaries.

Yet for further answer, we grant, it is reason, and convenient, that who
so has made a Vow unto God, should keep his promise. Cyrillus says, Si
Castitatem Promiserit, Cyrill. in Leuiticum Lib. 3.
and seruare non poterit, pronuntier Peccatum suum: If he have promised, or
Vowed Chastity, and cannot keep it, let him pronounce, and confess his Sin.

How be it, touching Virginity, or Chastity, we say, It stands not in
our Choice, Matthae. 19. Justinius Apologia. 2.
or Vow, but in the singular gift of God. Christ him self says, Al men
take not this Word: but they, unto whom it is geeuen. Justinius Martyr
says, Multi castrauerunt se propter Regnum Coelorum. Verum hoc non cuius
datum est: Many have ghelded themselves for the Kingedome of Heaven. But this
thing is not geeuen to al men. 32. q. 1. Integritas. Hieronym. in. Matthae.
Ca. 19.
S. Ambrose says, Sola Virginitas est, quae suaderi potest: imperari non
potest: Only Virginity is a thing, that may be Counseled: but commanded
it may not be. So S. Hierome, Vnde infert Dominus, Qui potest capere, capiat:
vt vnusquisque consideret vires suas: vtrum possit Virginalia, and pudicitiae
praecepta implere. Perse enim Castitas blande est, and quemlibea ad se
alliciens. Setd considerandae sunt vires: vt, qui potest capere, capiat. Our
Lord adds, He that can take, let him take: That every man may consider his
own strength, whether he be hable to accomplish the Laws of Virginity, and
Chastity. For Chastity of it self is fair, and pleasante, and hable to
alluere any man unto it self. But we must vveighe our ability: That he
may take it, that can take it.

Hereof the Anciente Father Origin began to complain so long ago in his
time: Origin. in Matthae. Tracta. 24.
Non solum, quae docent, non faciunt, sed etiam crudeliter, and sine
misericordia iniungunt alijs maiora virtute ipsorum, non habentes rationem
Virium vniuscuiusque: vt, qui prohibent nubere, and ab eo, quod expedit, ad
immoderatam munditiem compellunt: Not only they do not, that they teach, but
also crueily, and without mercy they command others, to do, that they be
not hable, not consideringe, or weighinge each man's strength. Such be
they, that forbid men to marry: and from that thing, that is lavvful,
drive, and force men to an immoderate kind of Cleanenesse. S. Hierome
says, Gift of Chastity.
Si quis consideret Virginem suam, Hieronym. Aduersus Iouinian. Lib. 1.
id est, Carnem suam, vows
lasciuire, and ebullire in libidinem, nec refraenare se potest, duplex illi
incumbit necessitas, aut capiendae coniugis, aut ruendi: If any man consider
that his own Virgin, that is to say, his own Fleashe, grows proud, and
boileth unto lust, and cannot stay it, there is laid upon him a double
necessity, either to take a wife, or to fall.

In this case S. Cyril says, Cyrill. in Leuiticum, Lib 16.
Oportet compati, and commetiri doctrinam pro virium qualitate: and huiusmodi,
qui non possunt capere Sermonem de Castitate, concedere nuptias: We must
have consideration of men, and measure our doctrine according to every
man's ability: and unto such men, as cannot take the word of
Chastity, we ought to grant Marriage.

If M. Hardinge will Reply* that this Counsel may take place in all others, but
not in them, that have Vowed, or Promised the contrary, let him understand
his own rule, 22. Quae. 4. In malis.
written in the Popes own Decrees: In malis promissis rescinde fidem: In turpi
Voto muta decretum. Quod incaute vouisti, ne facias. Impia est Promissio, quae
sc^lere impletur: In an evil promise break thy Faith: In an dishonest Vow
change thy purpose. That thou haste unadvisedly vowed, see thou do it not. It
is an evil promise, that is keapte with wickedness.

S. Cyprian having occasion to write of certain Maids, Cyprian. Lib. 1.
Epist. 11.
that had vowed Virginity, and lived in disorder, says thus: Quod si
perseuerare nolunt, vel non possunt, melius est, vt nubant, quam vt in ignem
delicijs suis cadant. Certe nullum Fratribus, aut Sororibus scu^dalum faciant:
If they either cannot, or vvil not contrinevve, better it is for them to
marry, then to fall into the fire ( of Hell) with their pleasures. At the
least, let them breed no sclaunder to their Brothers, or Sisters.

S. Augustine says, August. De Bono Coniugali, Did. 27. Quidam.
Quidam nubentes post votum, asserunt Adulteros esse. Ego autem dico vobis,
quod grauiter peccant, qui tales diuidunt: Some men there be, that say, They
be Aduouterers, that marry after that they have made a Vow. But I tell you,
that they Sin grievously, that put such asunder.

Epiphanius likewise says, Epiphan. contra Apostolic. Lib 2. (...).
Melius est, Vnum habere Peccatum, quam multa. Melius est cadentem a stadio
aperte sibi vxorem asciscere secundum Leges, etc. Et a Virginitate longo
tempore agere Poenitentiam, etc. Et non quotidie occultis iaculis vuluerari:
Better it is, to have one Sin, then many Sins. Better it is, for a man
fallinge from his course, openly to take unto him a wife according to the
Law, etc. And a long time to repent him self of the breach of his
Virginity, etc. And not to be wounded with privy dortes every day.

S. Hierome says, Hieronym. ad Virginem Demetriadem.
Sanctum Virginum Propofitum, and Coelestis, Angelorumque familiae Gloriam
quarundam non been se agentium nomen infamat. Quibus aperte dicendum est, vt
aut nubant, si se non possunt continere: aut contineant, si nolunt nubere: The
name of certain Virgins not well behauinge them selves, defameth, and shameth
the Holy purpose of Virgins, and the Glory of the Heavenly, and Angelical
P^n^lie. Whom we must plainly charge, that either they Marry, if they
cannot Contain: or that they Contain, if they will not Marry.

To like purpose S. Augustine says: August. De Sancta Virginitate, Cap. 34.
Multas earum reuocat a nubendo, non amor praeclati propositi, sed aperti
dedecotis timor, veniens and ipse a Superbia: qua formidatur, hominibus magis
displicere, quam Deo. Nubere nolunt: and ideo non nubunt, quia impune non
possunt: quae melius nuberent, quam vrerentur, id est, quam occulta flamma
concupiscentiae in ipsa conscientia vastarentur: quas poenitet Professionis,
and piget Confessionis: Many of them are keapte from Marriage, not for love of
their goodly purpose of Virginity, but for fear of open shame, which shame
also proceeds of Pride: for that they are more afraid to displease Man* then
God. They vvil not marry: and therefore they marry not, because they cannot
without rebuke, Yet better were it for them to marry, then to burn, that is
to say, then with the flame of their Concupiscence in their own Conscience to
be wasted. They are soary of their Profession: And yet it greeueth them to
Confess. etc. Vows.


It is not sufficient to say, Mark 6.
I have Vowed. Herod Vowed John Baptistes head: Actor. 23.
The Jews Vowed S. Paul's death: Hubaldus, as it is noted by Gratian in the
Decrees, 22. Quae. 4. Inter coetera.
made a Vow, that he would never healpe his own Mother, or Brethren, were
their need never so great.

Alphonsus de Castro, Alphonsus Philippica. 19.
one of M. Hardinges greatest Doctors, says thus: Si quis Vouerit, and
continere non possit, and omnia expertus, nihil promouerit, ego illi author
essem, non vt proprio Consilio, sed vt authoritate Pontificis saluti suae
consulat per Matrimonium: If any man have Vowed, and Cannot contain, and
having assaied al means, yet be never the near, I would advise him, that he
should provide for the safety of his Soul by Marriage: And yet not of his
own Counsel, but by license, and authority of the Pope.

Likewise Thomas of Aquine says, Thomas 22. q. 88 Arti. 10.
Potest contingere, quod in aliquo casu sit, vel simpliciter malum, vel
inutile, vel Maioris boni impeditiuum. Et ideo necesse est, quod determinetur,
in tali casu, Votum non esse seruandum: It may happen, that in sum case a
Vow may be, either utterly il, or unprofitable, or an hinderance unto sum
other good thing of more weight. And therefore it must of necessity be
determined, that in such a case a Vow ought not to be keapte. Therefore it
was thus decreed in the Council of Toledo: Council. Toletan. 8. Can. 2.
Non est seruandum Sacramentum, quod male, and incaute promittitur: A Vow il,
and unadvisedly promised, ought not to be keapte.

Here, M. Hardinge, ye cry out in your inordinate heat, Fleashely
Gospellers: Euangelical Vowebreakers: Impure Bigamie: Filthy railinge rabble:
Lordaines: Strumpettes: and I wot not, what: as if this were the only way,
to win the Victory. Unto this kind of eloquence I will make you none other
answer, then that Demetrius sometime made unto Lysimachus: Scortum apud nos
modestius viuit, quam apud vos Penelope: One of these, whom it likes you, to
call Strumpettes, lives more soberly amongst us, then does amongst you
your Chaste Penelope.

It appears by S. Augustine, M. Hardinge, that your error is Ancient, and
began long ago. For he says, that even then in his time there were sum,
y^ maineteined the same. But he answered them then, as we do you now, They
spoke fondly, and unadvisedly: and understood not, what they said. His
words be these, August. De Bono Viduitatis, Cap. 10.
Qui dicunt, talium Nuptias non esse Nuptias, sed potius Adulteria, mihi non
videntur satis acute, ac diligenter considerare, quid dicant: They that say,
The Marriage of such men, or women, (as have Vowed Chastity) is no
Marriage, but rather Aduouterie, seem unto me not to consider discretely, and
wisely, what they say. And again, Fit per hanc minus consideratam opinionem,
In eod. Capite.
vt cum volunt eas separatas reddere Continentiae, faciant Maritos earum
Adulteros Veros, cum suis Vxoribus viuis, alteras duxerint: It comes to pass
by this Unadvised Opinion, that whereas they will remove these weemen, that so
have Vowed, from their Husbands, and force them to continewe in their Single
Life, they make the Husbands of them Aduouterers in deed, in case they marry
again, their own Wives being still alive.

Thus therefore, M. Hardinge, you may imagine, S. Augustine says unto you,
as he did unto them: Ye speak fondely, and unadvisedly, and understand not,
what ye speak.

And yet one of your Companions there tells us, Dorman fol. 16.
that he is undoubtedly the Diuelles Minister, that will say, as S. Augustine
says, that the Marriage of such persons is true, and very Marriage. Thus
by the Judgment of your late Louanian Cleregie, S. Augustine is becomme the
Minister of the Devil.

But M. Hardinge has further to say, that S. Augustine calls this kind of
marriage VVoorse then Aduouterie: An other calls it Inceste: and an other
Sacrilege. That the Ancient Fathers have thus written, it is true, and not
denied. How be it, VVoorse then Aduouterie.
good Reader, as I have partly showed before, these, and other like words
have proceeded, more of a zele, and heat of mind, then of profounde
consideration, and Judgment of the cause. Neither may we always strain
such saicinges to the vttermoste. For whereas S. Augustine says, Such
Marriage is worse, then Aduouterie, he says nevertheless immediately after
in y^ same place, It is true, and very Marriage in deed before God, and Man,
and no Aduouterie. His words be these: August. De Bono Viduitatis, Ca. 9.
Non quod ipsae Nuptiae vel talium damnandae iudicentur. Damnatur Propositi
fraus: Damnatur fracta Voti Fides: etc. Damnantur tales, non quia Coniugalem
Fidem posterius inierunt, sed quia Continentiae Primam Fidem irritam fecerunt:
Not that the Marriage of such persons is to be blamed. The defraudinge of
their purpose, and the breach of their Vow is blamed. Such are blamed,
not for that they have entered into the Faith of Matrimony: but for that they
have broken their First Faith, or promise of continente Life. So likewise S.
Augustine says of a Woman, August. De Doctrina Christiana, Lib. 4. Ca. 21.
that used to painte her face: Etsi impudica circa homines non sis, tamen
corruptis, violatisque, quae Dei sunt, Peior Adultera detineris: Although thou
be no evil woman, as touching men, yet thus colouringe, and corruptinge thy
face, which thou haste of God, thou art vvoorse then an Aduoutresse. Here, by
way of comparison, and in heat of speech, S. Augustine says. That
paintinge of the face is worse then Aduouterie. Cyprian. De singularitate
Clericorum.
In like sense S. Cyprian says, Diabolo peior est, qui foeminarum aspectibus
feritur: He that is stricken, or moved with the sight of Women, is vvoorse then
the Devil. Likewise again he says, Multo grauior, and Peior est Moechi
causa, Cyprian. Lib. 4. Epist. 2.
quam Libellatici: An Aduouterers case is vvoorse, then is the case of him,
that has betrayed the Faith.

Such comparisons, as I have said, may not well be rackte to al pourposes:
but must be taken so far forth only, as they were meante. Otherwise the same
S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Singularitate Clericorum.
Peius est, quam moechari, Continentiam ducere criminosam: To live Vnchastely
under the color of Chaste life (as your Cleregie does) is vvoorse then
Aduouterie. Here, M. Hardinge, S. Cyprian says, that your unchaste Chastity,
and colored Vaunte of Virginity is vvoorse then Aduouterie.

So S. Ambrose, when he had said, If she have a mind to marry, she
commits Aduouterie, she is made the Handmaide of Death, He adds further,
as of a greater evil, Ambros. Ad Virginem Lapsam, Cap 5.
Si hoc ita est, quid de illa dicendum est, quae occulta, and fortiua
turpitudine constupratur, and fingit, se esse, quod non est? Bis Adultera est:
This being so, what then shall we say of her, that is defiled with secret,
and privy filthiness: and faineth her self to be, that in deed she is not?
She is twice an Aduoutresse. Here S. Ambrose calls your painted Virginity
Double Aduouterie. So S. Chrysostom, Virginitas ista cum Viris plus ab omnibus
arguitur, Chrysostom. to. 5. Quod Regulares Foeminae cum Viris cohabitent.
quam stuprum ipsum: This Virginity of Weemen amongst men, is more
reproved of al men, then Fornication it self.

By these few we may y^ better understand the place, that M. Hardinge has
here alleged, of S. Paul unto Timothee. 1. Timot. 5.
When they wax wanton against Christ, they will marry, having damnation,
because they have broken their First Faith. Notwithstanding in deed S.
Paul spoke these words, neither of Vows, nor of Vowebreakers: but of the
Widows, that were appointed to attend upon the Old, and sick persons, and
therefore were reliued, and found by the Church.

But let us imagine, as M Hardinge would have us, that S. Paul spoke all this
of the breach of Vows. And let Prima Fides, The First Faith, be the Vow of
Chastity. How be it in deed our First Faith is the Faith, that we promise
in Baptism, Hierony. in Proc^^nto in Epist. ad Titum.
and none other. And so S. Hierome seems to take it. For thus he writes, Non
s^nt digni Fide, qui Primam Fidem irritam fecerunt: Marcionem loquor, and
Basilidem: They be not worthy to be believed, that have foresaken their First
Faith: I mean Marcion, and Basilides. These two famous Heretics Marcion,
and Basilides, Vovv annexed etc.
were not condemned for breakinge any Vow of Chastity, but for refusinge the
Faith of Christ: which S. Hierome calls, The First Faith.

S. Paul makes no mention of any Vow, but only rebukes such light, and
waueringe Women, as being of long time found by the Charges of the
Congregation, pourposely to reliue the sick, and the feeble, afterward
foresooke both the Congregation, and Christ too, and became Heathens, and
followed the Devil. For so S. Paul says, Nonnullae iam deflexerunt post
Satanam: Many such women are already gonne after Satan. But if S. Paul
spoke this of the breach of Vows, with what eyes then, M. Hardinge, do you
read his words? Or what advantage can you hope to find in such
Authorities, as do so expressly cry against your self? 1. Timoth. 5.
S. Paul says even there, in the same place, Vidua eligatur non minor annis
sexaginta. Iuniores Viduas reijce. Volo iuniores Viduas nubere: liberos
gignere: domum administrare: nullam occasionem dare Aduersario, vt habeat
maledicendi causam: Let no Widow be chosen under threescore years of age.
Refuse young widow. I vvil, that young widow be married: bring up
their Children: ouersee their house: and give no occasion to the adversary
to speak il.

If these words of S. Paul must deeds be taken of Vows, and none
otherwise, why do you so violently, contrary to S. Paul's commandment,
either force, or suffer young Maids, and girls to receive these Vows? Why
do ye not stay them until they be stricken in age, that they may be
threescore years Old, before they Vow? It is no reason, ye should in one
place claim by one Word, and break so many.

You say, Fol. 79. b.
The Vow of Chastity is annexed unto Holy Orders by the Ancient Constitution
of the Church, and by the Apostles of Christ. For trial of your truth
herein, I beseech you, to consider these sewe in steed of many.

Your own allowed, 26. q. 2. Sors.
and principal Doctor Gratian says thus, Copula Sacerdotalis, vel
consanguineorum, nec Legali, nec Euangelica, nec Apostolica authoritate
prohibetur: Priests marriage is not forebidden by any Authority, either of
the Law of Moses, or of the Gospel, or of the Apostles.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Clemens Stromat. Lib. 3.
Omnes Apostoli Epistolae, quae moderationem docent, and continentiam, cum and
de Matrimonio, and de Liberorum procreatione, and de domus administratione
innumerabilia praecepta contineant, nunquam tamen honestum, moderatumque
Matrimonium prohibuerunt: All the Epistles of the Apostle, which teach
sobriety, and continente life, whereas they contain innumerable Precepts
touching Matrimony, bringinge up of Children, and gouernemente of House, yet
they never forebade Honest, and sober Marriage.

Car^inal Caictanus says, Cardin. Caletan. in Quodlibetis Contra Lutherum.
Nec ratione, nec authoritate probari potest, quod, absolute loquendo, Sacerdos
peccet contrahendo Matrimonium. Nam nec Ordo, in quantum Ordo, nec Ordo, in
quantum Sacer, est impeditiuus Matrimonij. Siquidem Sacerdotium non dirimit
Matrimonium contractum, sieve ante, sieve post: seclusis omnibus Legibus
Ecclesiasticis: stando tantum ijs, quae habemus a Christo, and Apostolis: It
cannot be proved, neither by reason, nor by Authority, speakinge absolutely,
that a Priest sins in marrieinge a wife. For neither the Order of
Priesthood, in that it is Order, nor the same Order, in that it is Holy, is
any hinderance to Matrimony. For Priesthood breaks not Marriage, whether it
be contracted before Priesthood, or afterward: settinge al Ecclisiastical
Laws aparte, and standinge only unto those things, that we have of
Christ, and his Apostles.

Abbate Panormitane says, Panormitan. De Clericus Coniuga. Cum Olim. Antonin.
in Su^ma, Par. 3. Ti 1 Ca. 21.
Continentia non est de Substantia Ordinis, nec de Iure Diuino: Single life is
not of the substance of the Order of Priesthood, nor of the Law of God.

Likewise Antoninus says, Episcopatus ex Natura sua non habet opponi ad
Matrimonium: The office, or Degree of a Bishop, of the Substance of Nature of
it self is not contrary to Matrimony. Lets Prayer.
Hereby ye may easily see, M. Hardinge, how true it is, that you say, The
Vow of Chastity is annexed to Holy Orders, and that by the Apostles Ancient
Constitution.

But this Order, you say, was taken, for that, having the use of Wedlock we
cannot Pray. And to that end ye allege the Authority of S. Paul: Where also
ye might have alleged the names and saieinges of sundry Fathers. Origin. in
Numer. Homil. 7. Extra. De Probationib. In Glossa.
Origin says, The Holy Ghost in time of Copulation forsakes a man, yea
although he were the Prophet of God. An other says, Virginitas Sola potest
animas hominum praesentare Deo: Only Virginity is hable to present the Soul
of man unto God. S. Hierome says. Quotiescunque vxori debitum reddo, orare non
possum: As often as I do my duty to my wife, I cannot Pray. And to this
purpose Pope Siricius indiscreetly, and fondely abuses the Holy Word of
God. Hierony. Aduer. Iouinian. Lib. 1. Inter Decreta Siricij, Cap 7. Romans 8.
Thus he says, Qui in Carne sunt, Deo placere non possunt: They that be in
the Pleashe, cannot please God.

These words seem very hard, and sound mutche to the derogation of Gods
Ordinance. And therefore Ignatius S. John's Scholare says, Si quis Legitimam
Commixtionem, and Filiorum procreationem Corruptionem, and Coinquinationem
vocat, ille habet cohabitatorem Daemonem Apostatam: If any man call lawful
Copulation, and Begeattinge of Children, Ignatius ad Philadelphien.
Corruption, and Filthiness, he has the Devil that fell from God dvvellinge
within him.

In like manner say the Learned godly Bishops in the Council of Gangra: Si
quis discernit Presbyterum Coniugatum, Council Gangren. Cap. 4.
tanquam occasion nuptiarum, quod offerre non debeat, and ab eius Oblatione
abstinet, Anathema sit: If any man make difference of a Married Priest, as if
he may not Minister the Oblation, (or Holy Communion) because of his Marriage,
and absteineth from his Oblation, accursed be he.

Likewise it is written in the Council of Constantinople: Did. 31. Quoniam.
Si quis praesumpserit contra Apostolicos Canones aliquos Presbyterorum, and
Diaconoru^ priuare a Contactu, and Communione legalis vxoris suae, Deponatur.
Similiter and Presbyter, aut Diaconus, qui Religionis causa Vxorem suam
expellit, excommunicetur: If any man, contrary to the Apostles Canons, presume
to remove either Priest, or Deacon from the use, and Company of his lavvful
wife, let him be deprived. And in like manner let the priest, or Deacon be
excommunicate, yt puts away his wife under the color of Religion.

As touching the place of S. Paul, 1. Corin. 7.
Defraude not your selves, One an Other, Unless it be of consent for a
season, that ye may attend unto Fasting, and Prayer. He speaks not this of
that kind of Prayer, that is commonly, and daiely used of all the Faitheful, as
well Married, as Unmarried, but only of the General, and Solemn Prayer of the
whole Congregation, which then, as in time of Persecution, and fear of
enemies, was keapte only in the night: and all the whole multitude of the
Faitheful was charged to be present at the same. At which times it was
necessary, that both the man, and the wife should leave the one the others
company, and resort to Prayer.

So it is written in the Prophet Joel, Joel. 2.
Blow up the Trumpe in Sion: Proclaim a solemn Fast: Call together a
Congregation of the People. Let the Breedegroome leave his bed: Let the
Spouse comme from her Chamber. Let the Priests, the Ministers of God, weep
bitweene the Entire, and the Altar: And let them say, O Lord spare thy
people, and give not over thine Enheritance unto Confusion. Of the like kind
of General, and Solemn Prayer: Tertullian. ad Vxorem. Lib. 2.
Tertullian says thus, Quis Solennibus Paschae abnoctantem Vxorem securus
sustinebit? What man ( being an Heathen,) can without mistruste suffer his
Wife ( being a Christian Woman) to be away from him at the Solemnity of the
Easter Prayer?

Of such Solemn, and Seldom meetinges S. Paul speaks: and not of the
Daiely, Usual, and Common Prayers of al Christians.

Otherwise, Paphnutius.
touching the Purity, and Holiness of Married people, S. Augustine says,
Quod Paulus ait, August. De Bono Coniugali. Li. 1. Cap. 11.
Quae innupta est, cogitat ea, quae sunt Dn^i, vt sit sancta and Corpore, and
Spiritu, non sic accipiendu^ est, vt putemus, non esse Sanctam Corpore
Christianam Coniugem Castam. Omnibus quippe Fidelibus dictum est, Nescitis,
quoniam Corpora vestra templum sunt Spiritus Sancti? Sancta sunt etiam Corpora
Coniugatorum, fidem sibi, and Domino seruantium: Whereas S. Paul says, She
that is Unmarried, thinks of the things, that perteine unto the Lord, that
she may be Holy both in Body, and in Sprite, it may not so be taken, as
though we should think, a Christian wife living Chastely with her Husband,
is not Holy in Body. For it is generally said unto al Faitheful, Know ye not,
that your Bodies be the Temple of the Holy Ghost? Therefore if the Man, and
Wife keep their Faith both bitweene them selves, and to the Lord, their
Bodies are Holy.

But, These Euangelical Vowbreakers, says M. Hardinge, pretend Paphnutius to
be their Proctoure. Whether he be Our Proctoure, or no, it forces not
greatly, Notwithstanding it is plain, He was then the Only Proctoure for
the Truth, and that against the General Consent of all the whole Council
bisides. And although he were but One man alone, yet the whole Council gave
place unto him. Sozomenus says, Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 23.
Synodus laudauit sententiam Paphnutij, and nihil ex hac part sanciuit: Sed
hoc in vniuscuiusque Voluntate, sine vlla Necessitate reliquit: The Council
commended Paphnutius judgment, and, touching this matter of Marriage, made no
Decree at al: but leafte it to each man's own Will, without any force of
Necessity.

Of Our side thus mutche Paphnutius says, (...).
Marriage is Honorable: And the Company of Man, and Wife is (not filthiness,
as these men seem to say, but) Cleanenesse and Chastity.

But, M. Hardinge, if the same Holy Father Paphnutius weighe so mutche of your
side, as you pretend, wherefore then does One of your Companions of Louaine
so lightly, and so disdainefully controlle that whole Story, with the utter
discredit, and condemnation of the Writers? For thus has he not doubted to
publishe his judgment therein to all the world: Copus Dialog^ 1. Pagi. 154.
Mihi, nescio quomodo, in dubium venit fides huius Historiae de Paphnutio. Sunt
enim, quae suspicionem important, eam esse Arianorum, aut Impudicorum hominum
Commentum. Tota enim haec res a Socrate pendet, and Sozomeno: quorum alter
Nouatianus fuit: alter Theodorum Mopsuestensem a quinta Synodo damnatum magnis
laudibus extulit: I know not how, this Story of Paphnutius seems to me to
be of doubteful credit. For there be matters, that make me to suspecte, that
it is but a vain forged tale, either of the Arian Heretics, or of sum
other filthy persons. The whole matter hangs of Socrates, and Sozomenus: Of
which two, the one was a Nouatian Heretic: The other highly commends
Theodorus of Mopsuesta, being condemned by the Fifthe Council.

Thus your Fellows make this whole Story to be but a vain Fable: and the
Authors, and Writers thereof, Socrates, and Sozomenus, to be Heretics,
Nouatians, Arians, Unhonest, and Shameless persons. And therefore, I trow,
ye will not say, they are your Proctours.

Wereas S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Titum Homil. 2.
Marriage is so reverend a thing, that a man may therewith ascend into the
Holy Throne, and be made a Bishop, notwithstanding he have a wife: and that S.
Paul suffers not them, that have twice married, to atteine such a room,
By these words, says M. Hardinge, Chrysostom condemns the impure Bigamie
of Our Holy Gospellers. Again he says, If this Defender press us with
Chrysostom, we answer, that, although Chrysostom grant, that a Married
man may ascend to the Holy seat, yet he says not, that a man may descend
from that Holy seat to the Bridebedde. For we deny utterly, that any man
after that he has received Holy Orders may marry. Neither can it be showed,
that the Marriage of such was ever accoumpted lawful in the Catholic
Church.

I doubt not, Husband of One wife.
good Reader, but it shall easily appear, that M. Hardinge in either of these
two parts was fowly deceived. For first Chrysostom, as it is plain by his
words, Timo 1
which M. Hardinge in his translation has pourposely falsified, expounds
these Words of S. Paul, The Husband of One wife, not of a man, that never
had but one wife in all his time, but of a man, that has but one wife at one
time. If M. Hardinge shall think, this Exposition to be strange, and unlikely,
let him remember, that Chrysostom him self thereof writes thus: Chrysostom. in
Epist. 1. ad Timotheum Homil. 10.
Vnius Vxoris virum. Non hoc veluti sanciens dicit, quasi non liceat absque
Vxore Episcopum fieri, sed eius rei modum constituens. Iudaeis quippe licitum
erat, etiam Secundo Matrimonio iungi, and Duas itidem Simul habere Vxores: The
Husband of One Wife: S. Paul writes not this, as making a Law, as if it
were not lawful for a man to be made a Bishop without a wife: but he appoints
an order in that behalf. For it was lawful for the Jews to be coupled in the
Second Matrimony, and to have Two vviues at one time.

In like sort says S. Hierome, Hieronym. in Epist. ad Titum. Cap. 1.
Quidam de hoc loco ita sentiunt: Iudaicae, inquiunt, Consuetudinis fuit, vel
binas vxores habere, vel plures. Et hoc nunc volunt esse Praeceptum, ne is, qui
Episcopus eligendus est, vno tempore Duas Pariter Vxores habeat: Touching this
place sum men think thus: By the Custom of the Jews it was lawful for a
man, to have Two vviues, or more at once. And this they take to be the Apostles
Commandment, that he, that is to be chosen a Bishop, have not Two vviues,
Hieronym. in Epist. 1. ad Timothe. Cap. 3.
or more together at one time. Again he says, Diaconi sint Vnius vxoris
viri: Non, vt si non habuerint, ducant: Sed ne Duas habeant: Let the Deacons be
the Husbands of One wife: not that they should needs marry a wife, if they
have none: but that they should not have Two vviues together. Catharinus
contra Errores Caietani, Errore 99.
Likewise says Cardinal Caietane, Apostolus Episcopis permittit Vnam Vxorem,
Coeteris plures: The Apostle suffers a Bishop to have One Wife: Others he
suffers to have More.

And to this purpose Isidorus seems to say, Castimoniam non Violati
Corporis perpetuo obseruare studeant: Did. 23. His igitur.
aut certe Vnius Matrimonij vinculo foederentur: Let them study to keep and
continewe the Chastity of their Body undefiled: or else, let them be coupled
with the band of One Marriage.

Of such a one, Pope Leo wrote sometime unto the Bishops of Mauritania, Leo
ad Episcopos Mauritaniae.
Sicut ad nos relatum est, Duarum simul est Maritus Vxorum: As we are
enfourmed, he is at one time the Husband of Two vviues. And therefore he
adds his judgment of him: Priuandum honor decernimus: We think him meet
to be deprived of his promotion.

Of this kind of Second Marriage Chrysostom speaks, I mean of having two
Wives alive together: And not of marrieinge the Second wife after the death
of the Former. 31. Quae. 1. Hac ratione.
And therefore he says, Secundam quidem accipere, secundum Praeceptum
Apostoli licitum est: Secundum autem Veritatis rationem Vere Fornicatio est.
Sed cum* permittente Deo, Public, and licenter permittitur, fit Honesta
Fornicatio: To take the Second wife ( while the first is alive) according
to the Apostles commandment, it is lawful: But by the Judgment of the
Truth in deed it is Fornication. But while as by Gods permission it is
openly, and lawfully suffered, the Fornication is made Honest. This last
Clause the Gloss there expounds thus: Fornicatio cum ea, quam permisit Moses
post repudiatam assumi: Fornication, I mean, with her, whom Moses suffered to
be taken to wife after the Divorce of the First.

Thus therefore S. Chrysostom says, that such a man, as had Two wives
together at one time, or was Divorced from One wife, and had married an other,
might not be chosen to be a Bishop. Tertullian. De Monogamia.
For otherwise, Tertullian says unto the Bishops of the Catholic Church:
Apud vos Episcopi sunt Digami: There be Bishops emonge you (he means emonge
the Catholics) that have married two vviues, the one after the death of
the other.

If all this will not suffice, Marriage in Holy Orders.
I refer me self to Chrysostomes own omes Words. Thus he writes: S.
Paul restreineth Unchaste persons, not permitting them, that have married
two vviues, to be Chosen to the gouernmente of the Church. His reasons be
these, Chrysos. in Epist. ad Tit. Homil. 2. (...)
Nam qui vxori, quae decessit (a se) beneuolentiam nullam seruasse
deprehenditur, quo pacto potest ille esse bonus Praeceptor Ecclesiae? Imo
quibus criminibus non subijcitur in dies? Nostis enim, quod, etsi per Leges
Secundae nuptiae permittuntur, tamen ea res accusationibus multis patet: For he
that is found, to have borne no good will unto his wife, ( not that is dead,
but) that is gonne from him, how can he be a meet Master for the Church of
God? Nai rather to what quarrelles, and accusations ( by mean of these two
Wives) shall he not be subject every day? For you know, although by the Law
the Marriage of the Second Wife ( after the Divorce of the first) be
suffered, yet the matter lies open to many offenses.

It appears, says Chrysostom, that he bare no good will toward his Former
Wife, not, that now is dead, but that is divorced, and so departed from him.
And therefore oftentimes grow many accusations, and griefs, bitweene the
Wives, the Children, the Friends, and others: for partinge of goods: for
restoaringe of dowers, and other like quarrelles. For to have spoken of good
vvil, or affection toward the Former Wife, being dead, it had benne
impertinent, and to no purpose.

Thus mutche, toouchinge Chrysostomes judgment upon these Words of S. Paul,
The Husband of One Wife. Notwithstanding I deny not, but certain other
Ancient, and Learned Fathers have taken it otherwise.

Last of al M. Hardinge unawares falls into the same Negative Divinity, that
he so often, and so mutche abhors. For thus he says, We deny utterly,
that any man, after that he has received Holy Orders, may Marry. Neither can
it be showed, that the Marriage of such was ever accoumpted lawful in the
Catholic Church. It this tale be true. then be all the Greek Priests
Votaries, as well, as the Latins. But it is noted upon the Decrees, Did. 31.
quonia^. In Margin.
Graeci continentiam non promittunt, vel Tacit, vel Express: The Greeks make
no Promise of continente, or Single Life, neither Secretly, nor Expressly.
And in the Council holden at Ancyra it is concluded thus, Diaconi, Conci.
Ancyran. Can. 9.
quicunque ordinantur, si in ipsa Ordinatione protestati sunt, and dixerunt,
velle se Co^iugio Copulari, quia sic manner non possunt, Hi si postmodum Vxores
duxerint, in Ministerio maneant: Propterea quod Episcopus illis licentiam
dederit: Deacons as many, as be ordered, if at the time of receiuinge Orders,
they made Protestation, and said, that they vvoulde Marry, for that they
find not them selves hable so to continewe without Marriage, if they
afterward Marry, let them continewe in the Ministry: for as mutche as the
Bishop has given them license. M. Hardinge, I trow, will not deny, but
Deaconship is one of the Holy Orders. Yet Deacons at the time of their
Consecration making Protestation solemnly before the Bishop, were licenced by
this Council to Marry at any time afterward: and the same Marriage, contrary
to M. Hardinges position, was evermore in the Catholic Church accoumpted
lawful.

So says Pope Steuin, Did. 31. Aliter.
Graecorum Sacerdotes, Diaconi aut Subdiaconi Matrimonio Copulantur: The Greek
Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons are coupled in Matrimony. Gloss. Did. 31.
Aliter.
Upon which words the Gloss notes thus, Multi ex hac litera dixerunt, quod
Orientales possunt contrahere in Sacris Ordinibus: Many have said upon
occasion of this text. that the Priests of the East Church ( contrary to
that M Hardinge so certainly here assures us) may Marry, being within
Holy Orders.

And of the Priests of the Weaste Church Cardinal Caietane says, Catharinus
Co^tra Error. Caietani, Errore. 103.
Papa potest dispensare cum Sacerdote Occidentalis Ecclesiae, vt Vxorem ducat,
nulla existente causa Publicae Vtilitatis: The Pope may dispense with a
Priste of the VVeaste Church, to Marry a Wife, although there be no manner
cause of Common Profit.

Athanasius says, Athanasius ad Dracontium.
Multi quoque ex Episcopis Matrimonia non inierunt: Monachi contra Parents
liberorum facti sunt: Many of the Bishops ( he says not al, but Many) have
not Married. ( By which words he gives us to understand, that Sum have
Married.) Contrarievvise, Monks have becomme Fathers of Children.

Cassiodorus writes thus, Cassiodo. Lib. 6. Cap. 14.
In illo tempore ferunt Martyrio Vitam finisse Eupsychium Caesariensem
(Episcopum) ducta nuper Vxore: dum adhuc quasi Sponsus esse videretur: At that
time they say, Eupsychius the Bishop of Caesaria died in Martyrdom, having
Married a Wife a little before, being as yet in manner a new married man.

Likewise M. Hardinge might have found it noted in his own Gloss, Dicunt,
quod olim Sacerdotes poterant contrahere, Did. 84. Cum in Praeterito, in Gloss.
ante Siricium: They say, that in Old times, before Pope Siricius ( which
was about four hundred years after Christ) it was lavvful for Priests to
Marry.

But we shall have occasion to speak hereof more hereafter. In the mean
season, good Christian Reader, by these few, as by a taste, thou maiste easily
judge, how true it is, that M. Hardinge tells thee, that Marriage in them,
that had received Holy Orders, was never thought lawful in the Catholic
Church.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 2.
And, as Sozomenus says of Spiridion, and as Nazianzene says of his own
Father, we say, that a good and diligente Bishop does serve in the
Ministry never the worse, for that he is Married, but rather the better, and
with more hablenes to do good.

M. Hardinge.
Were it not, that the weight of these matters required an upright, and plain
dealinge, for ciuilities sake, I could be content sommetimes to spare you, and
where ye make manifest lies, to use a softer word, and term them fittens.
But now if I tell you that you use your accustomed Figure Pseudologia, which
is Lyinge in plain English, I trust you will bear with my plainenes: amend
your own fault, and consider the Power of Truth, that causes me to be so
bold with you. This I M. Hardinge is assured, before he know.
am suer of, that neither Sozomenus, nor Gregory Nazienzene, nor Eusebius Li.
10. Cap. 5 as you have caused your books, both Latin and English, to be
noted in the Margent, where ye mistake Eusebius for Rufinus: An unadvised
Untruth. Read the Answer.
Nor Nazianzene either in Monodia, as you note also in the Margent, Sozomenus,
Gregory Nazia^zene, Eusebius, belied by the Author of the Apology.
nor in the funeral Oration that he made of his Father, has any such
sayeinge, as ye report of them. For how could they say, that a Bishop serves
in his ministry never the worse, but rather the better, and with more
hablenesse to do good, for that he is Married, the Scripture being so plain
to the contrary? What, were ye they were either so ignorante, or so forgetful,
or so mutche inclined to promote your Carnal Doctrine of Priests Marriages, as
to say so, notwithstanding that S. Paul writes to the Corinthians? Says he
not of them that be Married, S Paul vvriteth thus, not of Priests, and
Bishops, but of al other Christian men.
that such shall have tribulation of the flesh? Says he not, He that is
without a Wife, cares for the things of our Lord how he may please God? Of
him that has a Wife, says he not, that he cares forth things that be the
worlds, how he may please his wife, and is divided? Finally says he not, I
tell you this thing for your profit, not to tangle you in a snare, but for
that, which is honest, and comely unto you, and that which may give you
readiness to pray to God without let? Wherefore recant for shame that foul
error, that a Bishop serves the better in his ministry, and is the more
able to do good for that he is Married.

Such men, M. Hardinges Modesty.
such Doctrine: fleashly men, fleashly Doctrine.

Now therefore see you not, how great is your impudency, in that you lie your
self, and Father such a foul lie upon sozomenus, Li. 1. Ca. 11.
and that light of the world in his time Gregory Nazianzene? The words of
Sozomenus be these: (...). that is to say, Spiridion was a Husbandman, having
wife and Children, and yet for all that he was never the vvoorse about Gods
service. Of this place we grant, Never the worse.
ye may say with Sozomenus, that Spiridion served God never the vvoorie, for
that he was Married. But how, and whereof gather ye, that he served God the
better, and was more able to do good because of his Marriage? Spiridion obtained
that Privilege through Untruth. For Chrysostom makes the case General.
especial Grace by his exceeding virtue, which is granted to few. And the
Privileges of a few make not a Law for all in general, ye know, as Nazianzene
says.

Furthermore if the words of Sozomenus, The place of Sozomenus alleged by
the Defenders maket utterly against the^. Nazia^zenes words returned upon
the Defender.
that ye build your carnal Doctrine upon, be well examined, ye shall find, that
he makes more against you, then with you. For signifieing that he had Wife
and Children, he adds, (...): Yet for all that he was never the worse about
Gods service. This reuocation or exception negative (yet for all that etc.)
implies a confession affirmative of the contrary.

Neither makes the place of Gregory Nazianzene any whit for you more, then
this of Sozomenus does whose words be these after the translation of Raphael
Volaterranus varyinge mutche from the Greek: An error. M Hardinge takes one
place for an other.
Hic Basilij Pater Basilius item appellatus, etsi matrimonio se vinxit, ita
tamen in eo vixit, vt nihil propterea ad Perfectam Virtutem, ac Philosophiam
consequendam impediretur. Basiles Father, who was named also Basile, although
he put him self in bonds of Matrimony, yet he lived so herein, as he was
let no whit from the atteininge of perfect Virtue and Holy knowledge.
Were not Marriage a let and hinderaunce to perfection requisite in a Bishop,
Nothing hi^^^ dered.
this Learned man could not rightly have said, Ita tamen in eo vixit, etc.
Yet for all that he lived so, etc.

Right so it is easi to put him from the hold he takes of Chrysostom, by
Chrysostom him self. For least any man should think, Timoth. 1.
Whereas S. Paul says, A Bishop ought to be the Husband of one Wife, that
the same order contineweth still in the Church, thereto he says in his
second Homily De Patientia Job: Read the Answer.
No^ ea ratione, quod id nunc in Ecclesia obseruetur. Oportet enim omni prorsus
castitate Sacerdotem ornatum esse. S. Paul (says he) required this, not in
consideration, that the same be now observed in the Church. For it behooves
a Bishop to be garnished with all manner a Chastity.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here comes M. Hardinge in a lofte with, Io Triumph, as having beatten
down all the world under his feet: And, as being already in sure possession
of the Victory, he cries out, Impudencies, Lewd Lies, foul Faults, and
pretty Fittens: And full terribly charge us, like a Conqueroure, to render our
selves, and to recante for shame. This new courrage is suddenly blown upon
him, for that he thinks, we have intruded upon his office, and, as he
says, have corrupted, and falsified and Holy Fathers. But it were a worthy
matter to know, wherein. Forsooth we say, by the report of Sozomenus, and
Gregorius Nazianzenus, that Spiridion, and Gregory Father unto Nazianzene,
being both Married Bishops, notwithstanding their Marriage, Were never
the vvoorse hable to do their Ecclesiastical offices, but rather the better.

Here M. Hardinge of him self, and freely confesses, these Holy Fathers were
never the vvoorse hable to do their offices. For so mutche the words of
Sozomenus importe, (...). But that they were the better hable to do their
offices, because of their Wives, that he denies utterly: and herein, he
says, we are corrupters, and Falsifiers of the Fathers. And thus the whole
difference, that is bitweene M. Hardinge, and us, touching this matter,
stands only in these two poor words, Rather the better, and, Never the
vvoorse. Now, Marriage Healpeth.
gentle Reader, that thou maiste be the better hable to judge bitweene us, I
beseech thee indifferently to weigh these words.

Gregory Nazianzene hereof, Nazianzen in ^pitaphto Patris.
that is, of the help, that his Father, being the Bishop of Nazianzum had by
his Wife, writes thus: Illa, quae dara est Adamo, etc. Eua, that was given to
Adam for a Helper, for as mutche, as it was not good for Man to be alone, in
steed of a Helper became his Enemy. It follows, Meo autem Patri Matter mea
data illi a Deo, (...).
non tantumm Adiutrix facta est, id enim minus esset mirum, sed etiam Dux, and
Princeps, Verbo, Factoque inducens illum ad res optimas. Et alijs quidem in
rebus quamuis optimum esset, subditam esse Viro, propter iura Coniugij, tamen
in Pietate non verebatur, Seipsam illi Magistram exhibere: My Mother being
geeuen to my Father of God, became not only his Helper, for that had benne no
great wonder, but also was his Leader, and Captain, both by Word, and by
deed traiinge him unto the best. And, albeit in other things it were best
for her to be subject unto her husband for the Right of Marriage, (...).
yet in Religion, and Godliness, she doubted not to becomme his Maistresse.

These words, M. Hardinge, be plain, and clear, and without fitton.
Gregarie Nazianzene says, that his own Mother was unto his Father the Bishop
of Nazianzum, a a Helper, and a Directour, both by Word, and deed, to
lead him to the best: and that in all other things being his Inferior, yet
in Religion and Godliness she was his Maistresse. And yet must al these
words, so open, to plain, so clear, be drowned with your simple
distinction, of Rather the better, and never the vvoorse? May we not now
allow you with favor, to take al these, that ye call Fittons, Lies,
Corruptions, and Falsifieinges, home again unto your self?

If you never readde these things before, it is no great marvel. You
must remember, Al Truth may not be measured by your Readinge.

In deed, Marriage, as also al other like outward things, of it self is
neither good, 1 Cor. 7.
nor il: but as it is used. S. Paul says, If the Virgin marry, she
finneth not. He that Marries out his Virgin, finneth not. Therefore Gregory
Nazianzene says, Neutrum horum, Nazianzen. in Epitaphio Gorgoniae: (...).
nec Matrimonium, nec Coelebs vita, prorsus aut Deo nos Mundoue conciliat: aut
a Deo, aut a Mundo alienat: vt alterum natura sua omnino fugiendum sit, alterum
absolute laudandum. Antmus est, qui and Virginitati, and Nuptijs recte imperat:
Neither of these two, nor Matrimony, nor Single life, doothe either join us
to God, or to the World: or withdraw us from God, or from the world: that the
One ought to be refused, and the other absolutely, and of it self ought to be
praised. It is the Mind, that rules boothe Marriage, and Virginity.

I grant, there be more occasions of let, and hinderance in Matrimony, then
in Virginity, and specially in times of Persecution. The natural affection of
Wife, and Children often mollifieth, and melts the heart, and causes a man
to look backewarde. S. Ambrose says, Bona Vincula nuptiatum: Sed tamen
Vincula. Etsi vincula, tamen Vincula Charitatis: Bonum Coniugium: Sed tame^ a
Iugo tractum. Good are the Bands of Matrimony: Yet are they Bands. And
although they be Bands, yet are they Bands of Charity. Coniugium (VVedlocke)
is good, yet it takes his name of the Yoke.

This is that tribulation of the Fleashe, Ambrosius, De Virgini. Lib. 3.
that S. Paul speaks of.

And, al be it these Cares withdraw, and oppress the Mind, as I have said,
and oftentimes be great lettes to Godly pourposes: yet, as it well appears by
these examples of Gregory Nazianzene, and Spiridion, in a Godly man they
hinder nothing. Neither was this any such Singular Privilege, as M.
Hardinge imagines, granted only to these two Bishops, Gregory, and
Spiri^ion, and to none other.

S. Chrysostom says generally of al men, Quamuis Nuptiae plurimum
difficultatis in se habeant, Chryso^tom in 1. Epist. ad Tim. Homil. 10.
ita tamen assumi possunt, vt perfectiori Vitae impedimento non sint.
Notwithstanding Marriage have mutche trouble in it self, yet may it so be
taken (and used,) that it shall be no hinderance to perfect life. Again he
says, Ne excuses te propter Nuptias Dominus tuus Nuptijs interfuit, and
Nuptias cohonestauit. Chrysostom Contra Iudaeos and Gentales, and Haereticos: To.
3. Page 363.
Et tu Nuptias arguis? Et dicis Nuptias esse impedimentum ad Pietatem? Nullum
enim ad Pietatem est obstaculum. Vis cognoscere, quod nihil obsit, habere
Vxorem, and Liberos? Moses nonne Vxorem habuit, and Liberos? Vide and Petrum
Columnam Ecclesiae, quod and ipse Vxorem habuit. Ne accuses Nuptias: Excuse not
thee self by thy Marriage. Thy Lord was at the Marriage Feast, and honored
Marriage with his Presence. And yet do thou blame Marriage? And saiste thou,
that Marriage is an hinderance unto Godliness? I tell thee, Marriage is no
manner hinderance unto Godliness? Will thou know, that it hinders not to have
Wife, and Children? Had not Moses Wife, and Children? Behold Peter, a Pillar
of the Church: He had a Wife. Therefore find no fault with Marriage.

Again, Chryso. in Esaia^, In illa Verba, Vidi Dominum. Tom. 1. Homil. 4.
writing upon these Words of the Prophet Esai, Vidi Dominu^, etc. He says
thus, Quis ista lo^uitur? Esaias ille spectator Coelestium Seraphim, qui cum
Coniugio commercium habuit: nec tamen extinxit Gratiam: Who speaks these
Words? Esaias the Beholder of the Celestial Seraphims: who notwithstanding
he had company with his Wife, yet he quenched not the Grace of God.

Again, Filium habebat, and Vxorem: vt intelligas, non esse malas Nuptias: sed
malam esse Scortationem: Esai had a Son, and a Wife: that thou maiste
understand, that Marriage is not il, but that Pornication is il. And again,
Number obsiabat Matrimonium? Adiutrix tibi data est Vxor, non Insidiatrix: What?
Did Marriage hinder thee? No. Thy Wife is geeuen thee to be thy healper, and
not to deceive thee.

Likewise says S. Augustine, August. in quaestionibus Noui, and Veter.
Testamen. Quae. 127.
Sanctissimus Samuel filios genuit: non tamen ^ustitiae suae merita minuit.
Zacharias Sacerdos Vir lustus in senectute sua genuit filium. Qua ergo ratione
accusatur, quod minime obesse probatur? Most Holy Samuel begat Children: and
yet nothing abated the Merits of his righteousness. Zacharios the Priest in
his Old age begat a Child. Wherefore then is that thing accused, that is
proved to do no manner hurt?

Nicephorus writing of Gregory S. Basiles Brother, Nicephor. Li. 11. Cap. 19.
the Bishop of Nyssa, says thus, Quamuis haberet Coniugem, alijs tamen in
rebus non cessit Fratri: Although he had a Wife, yet in other things he was
Nothing Inferior (to S. Basile) his Brother.

S. Augustine says, August. De Bono Coniugali. ca. 11
as he is alleged before, Sancta sunt etiam Corpora Coniugatorum. Fidem sibi
and Domino seruantium: Where as Married people keep their Faith both to
them selves, and to God, their Bodies be Holy.

Likewise Nazianzene, Nazianzen. in (...) Gorgoniae.
Etiam illa, quae nupsit, and de ijs, quae sunt Mariti, and de ijs, quae sunt
Domini, Solicita est: vt sit Sancta, and Corpore, and Spiritu: Eu^n she, that
is Married, is careful both for the things, that perteine to her Husband,
and also for the things, that perteine to God, that she may be Holy both in
Body, and Sprite. Ambros in. 1. Cor. 7.
Likewise S. Ambrose, Videmus Virgins de Saeculo cogitare: and Matrimonio
iunctos Dominicis studere operibus: We see both Virgins careful for the
world: and Married men Careful for the works of the Lord.

There be troubles in Marriage: It cannot be denied. But so be there also
troubles in Single Life: Specially to them, that fear the Judgments of God,
and have not the gift of Chastity. Chrysostom in Genes Homil. 21.
But Chrysostom says, Matrimonium non solum nihil nobis obstat ad
Philosophandum Deo, si voluerimus esse sobrij, sed and magnam adfert
Consolationem: Comprimit enim insanum Naturae impetum: nec turbari sint, quasi
mare: Sed efficit vt seapha foeliciter in portum appellat. Et ideo Deus
Consolationem hanc tribuit humano generi: Marriage not only hinders nothing
toward the knowledge and Service of God, If we: will be sober, but also
brings us great Comfort. For it oppresses the raginge fury of Nature, and
suffers us not to be dashte, and toste, as the waves of the Sea: but causes
that our ship may luckily arrive into the haven. And for that cause has God
given this Comfort unto mankind. Therefore Gregory Nazianzene says,
Nazianzen in Funere Gorgoniae.
Nuptiae sunt laudabiles propter eam, quae in Nuptijs est, animi
tranquillitatem: Marriage is worthy of Praise, for the quietness, and
contentation of mind, that is in Marriage.

To be short, (...).
Clemens Alexandrinus says, Habet, vt Castitas, ita etiam Matrimonium, propria
munera, and Ministeria, quae ad Dominum pertinent: As well Matrimony, as
Chastity, has either of them their peculiare offices perteinge unto God.

And Chrysostom says, Ne quis praetexat Vxorem, vel Liberos, etc. Haec
excusatio, hic praetextus, Diaboli sunt insidiae: Let noman make his excuse by
his Wife, or Children, etc. This Excuse, and this pretense is the craft, and
deceitefulnesse of the Devil. Thus, M. Hardinge, to conclude with Chrysostomes
words, the Ground, and Fundation of your Doctrine in this behalf, is the
craft, and deceitefulnesse of the Devil.

These things considered, I doubt not, but of your courtesy, ye will take
back your Fittons unto your self. The Conclusion and sum of your whole
talk is this: Spiridion served God never the vvoorse, not vvithstandinge he
had a Wife: And Marriage is no let, or hinderance to perfect Godliness.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 3.
Further we say, that the same Law, which by constraint takes away this
liberty from men, and compels them against there wills, to live single,
is the Doctrine of Diuelles, as Paul says: and, that ever sithence the time
of this Law, a woonderful uncleanness of life, and manners in Gods
Ministers, and sundry horrible enormities have followed, as the Bishop of
Augusta, as Faber, as Abbas Panormitanus, as Latomus, as y^ Tripartite Work,
which is annexed to the Second Tome of the Councelles, and other champions of
the Popes band, yea and as the matter it self, and al Histories do confess.

For it was rightly said by Pius the Second, Bishop of Rome, that he savve
many causes, why VViues should be taken away from Priests: but that he
savve many more, and more weighty causes, why they ought to be restoared to
them again.

M. Hardinge.
There is Manifest Untruth. For all Priests are restreined from Marriage: And
Priests be men.
no Law in the Church, that by constrainte takes away from men liberty to
Marie. For S. Paul's words be plain, 1. Cor. 7. Voluntary Vow imbarreth
liberty of the contrary.
If thou take a wife, thou sinnest not. And likewise, If a Virgin marie, she
sins not. But if any Persons have of their own will, and devotion Vowed to
God chastity, the same have imbarred them selves of this general liberty, and
by their Voluntary Promise, have bound themselves never to Marie. And in
such, not only Marriage it self, but also a will to Marie is damnable, as S.
Paul says of Widows, which have Vowed to live chaste, that they have
their damnation (not for that they Marie, but) for that they will marie. If the
Gospellers allege against this Doctrine the words of S. Paul, If a Virgin
marie, she sins not: We answer with Chrysostom, and other Fathers,
that a Virgin by a Vow of Chastity dedicated to God, if she marry, 1. Cor.
7. Ad Virgine^ Lapsam ca. 5.
doubtless she sins mutche, for that beside Christ she has surmaried an
aduouterer. If they obiecte. It is better to Marry then to Burn: Let S.
Ambrose answer: Who says, that this saieinge pertains to her, that has
not promised, to her that is not yet veiled. And by restraininge them from
Marriage, The Doctrine of Devils.
the Church uses no tyrannic: nor if it teach, that such ought to
forebeare Marriage, is that to be accoumpted the Doctrine of Devils, but of the
Holy Ghost, whereby men are kept from wilful dammation. To forebidde Marriage
wholly, Universally, and altogether, that is the Doctrine of Devils. But to
judge Marriage for sum state, and Order, of less conuenience, then the
Single Life, or after Vow of chastity made, to require perpetual continency,
this is not the Doctrine of Devils. For S. Paul him self did both. If these
Defenders will not admit this answer, and being loathe to forsake their
fleashly pleasure, pretend to be moved with the Authority of S. Paul, who
calls the forebiddinge of Marriage the Doctrine of Devils: I send them to S.
Augustine for an answer in his thirteenthe Book, and Six the Chapter against
Faustus the Maniche. Where for a sufficient solutton of their objection, they
shall find these plain words: Ille prohibet, qui hoc malum esse dicit: non
qui huic bono aliud melius anteponit. That is to sat, He forebiddethe
(Marriage) which says it is evil: not he, which prefers an other better
thing before this good thing.

Now, that I may show in what time, and by what persons this Law of Single
Life was ordained, for breuities sake I will content my self with witness of One
only Council. Which is the Second Council of Carthage, holden in the time
of Valentinian and Theodosius the Emperors. Where we find, that this order
was taken Untruth. For these be the words of the Apostles Canons:
Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus, Vxore^ suam praetextu Religionis ne
abijciat. Aut si abiecerit, a Co^munione segregetur. Canone. 5.
by the Apostles them selves, and that the Antiquity observed, and kept the
same. The words of the council be these, Canone. 2.

Aurelius Episcopus dixit, etc. Aurelius the Bishop said: Whereas in the
Council before this, it was treated of the rule of continency and chastity,
these three Degrees through their Consecrations be annexed to chastitte by a
certain decree written, to wit, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Whom it
is thought good, as it becomes the Holy Prelates, and Priests of God, and
likewise Levites, or such as attend upon Holy Sacraments, to be continent
and chaste in every condition to thintente they may simply obtain, that they
pray to God for, that we keep and observe that, which Untruth. Read the
Answer. M. Hardinge foully mistaketh the Council.
the Apos^les have taught, and the antiquity has kept. Lo Sir Defender.

What if the Bishop of Augusta find fault with Priests lives? (Which
Augusta and which Bishop there ye mean, I know not, neither well can I know,
except I saw your notebooke) what if the Abbot Panormitane, what if one
Faber, and one Latomus, men of our time (I trow) and that zealous man which
wrote the little tripartite treatise annexed to the Laterane Council. What so
ever he was: what if al these (I say) moved with a zeal, and being desirous
of the Clergies Reformation, lamentably complain of their loose life? what
then?

Get you fairer painted, and better filled boxes, then these be, or else shall
ye al be taken for poor Potticartes.

Touching Pius, In Platina ye shall find these words, for one of that Popes
saieinges, Sacerdo^ibus magna ratione sublatas nuptias, maiori restituendas
videri. As mutche to say in English: that Marriage was taken from Priests
with great reason, and that it seemed it were to be restoared again with
greater. This saieinge reports not, that VViues were: taken a way from
Priests, as you report, neither that VViues ought to be restored to Priests
again. A sage exposition. What had this benne to Pius meaning?
It speaks only of Marriage, which as, before a man enter into Holy Orders,
no Vow being made, is lawful: so by orders taken a Vow of chast^tie being
solemly made, is utterly unlawful. If this saieinge had made so mutche for your
pretensed Marriage, as ye would men to believe, Untruth. For if we had
falsified the words, ye would not so simply have touched it.
ye would never have falsified it by such change of words. Whether is be
more expedient, such as come to the clergy, to be required to lead the
Single life, and to bind themselves thereto by Vows, or to enioie the common
liberty of Marriage, Now at last, the Doctour^ stand i^ doubt. ^ Mira vero
Mili ti quae placeant.
that we leave to the Church to discuss and order.

If Pius saw many weightier causes, for Priests to have VViues, then for
their Single Life, as ye pretend he did: why did not he, or you in his steed
show us, what and how substantial they be? If they be no better, then you and
your fellows have uttered in your Sermons, and w^t^inges hitherto, they are not
worthe^a Pipt nootte. This saieing of Pius is well to be weighed and scanned.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Who so ever shall well consider the Fruits that have grown of this tree,
Doctrine of Devils.
may easily judge, by whom it was planted. Certainly S. Paul, when he had
geeuen rules, touching the Cleregie, that Bishops, and Deacons should be the
Husbands of One Wife, immediately afterward, in the same tenoure, and course
of Speech, says thus: 1. Tim. 4.
The Sprite says plainly, that in later times, sum shall depart from the
(...), geeuinge ear unto lieinge Sprites, and to the Doctrine of Devils,
uttering lies under Hypocrisy, having their Conscience burnte with a hot
iron (and thereby made insensible) Forebiddinge Marriage, etc.

But M. Hardinge says, there is no Law in the Church, to restrain
Marriage: and that Marriage is not now condemned by him, and other of that
side, and thought unlawful Universally in all men, (for that, he says, was
the Heresy of Valentinus, Marcion, Montanus, and others) but only forebidden,
and thought unlawful in a few. By this answer, M. Harding may seem to make
him self sommewhat better, then was Valentinus, and Marcion, and other Old
Heretics. But further to healpe him, and thoroughly to clear his Doctrine, it
will not serve. It is a Common known rule in y^ Schools, Magis, and Minus non
mutant Specie^. Verily, as he that kills but a few, men, is called a
Mankiller: Even so he, that Condemns Marriage in a few, must likewise be
called a Condemner of Marriage. Neither does S. Paul, when he prophesies
hereof, say, that sum should Condemn al kind of Marriage Universally, in all
manner of Men: but only he says, There shall be sum, that shall forebidde
Marriage.

Neither did al Heretics Condemn Marriage in one sort. For sum of them
condemned it Generally, and thoroughly, and altogether: Sum others of them
Condemned it only in a few, even as M. Hardinge, and his Fellows do. For
thus S. Augustine writes of the Heretics named the Manichees, Auditores qui
appellantur apud eos, August. Epist. 74.
and Carnibus vescuntur, and agros colunt, and, si voluerint, Vxores habent:
Quorum nihil faciunt illi, qui vocantur Electi: They, that emonge them be
called, Hearers, do both eat Pleashe, and tille the grownde, and Marry
Wives too, if they list. But no such thing may they do, that be called
Electi. The Auditores, or Hearers emonge the Manichees were as the lay people:
The Electi, or Chosen, were as the Cleregie. These Heretics the Manichees
Condemned Marriage, not generally in all sorts, and degrees of men: but
only, as M. Hardinge doothe, in a few. Yet were they Heretics
notwithstanding, and their Doctrine was the Doctrine of Devils.

S. Augustine says unto them, August. De Moribus Mantchae. Lib. 2. Cap. 13.
as he would also say unto M. Hardinge: Non Concubitum, sed vt long ante ab
Apostolo dictum est, Vere Nuptias prohibetis: Ye forebidde, not Copulation, (or
Cocubines) But, even as the Apostle Prophesied long before, Verily, and in
deed ye forebidde Marriage: (Albeit it were but in a few).

All this, M. Hardinge, notwithstanding, that it may plainly appear, whoes
Doctrine ye teach, Chrysostom. in Opere Imperfecto, Hom^l. 1.
it shall be good, and not form the purpose, briefly to disclose sum part of
it. And here, to pass over these words of Chrysostom, Haec ipsa Coniunctio
Maritalis malum est ante Deum: Hierony. Aduersus Iouintan. Lib. 1.
This very Copulation of Man and Wife is evil before God: And these of S.
Hierome, Quam diu impleo Mariti officium, non impleo officium Christiani: As
long as I do the de wtie of a Husband, I do not the devvtie of a Christian:
and other like Saieinges, and Authorities before alleged, Pope Innocentius in
y^ Condemnation of Marriage says thus: Did 82. Proposuisti. Romans 8. Tit. 1.
Qui in Carne sunt, Deo placere non possunt: They that be in the Fleashe (that
is to say, in Marriage) cannot please God And to this purpose he allegeth
these words of S. Paul, To y^ Clean al things are Clean: But to the
filthy, and Infidelles (whereby ye same Innocentius understands Married
people) nothing is Clean, Did 82. Pluri^^s.
But boothe their mind, and their Conscience is defiled. Copus Dialog. 1.
Page 159. Graecos Solos in hac impudicit lae Schola Magistros sequuntur.
Pope Siricius calls Marriage, Virium, Luxuriam, Foedas Cupiditates: Vice,
Lechery, end Filthy Lusts. One of your late English Doctors of Louaine
says, that the whole East Church, mainteining the lawful Marriage of
Priests, evermore continewed there from the Apostles time until this day,
mainteineth, and contineweth a Schole of Filthiness.

Further you may remember, that this rule is written in a Book of your own
Doctrine, Con^^t. Othonis. Licet ad profuga^^m. In Gloss.
and is given in Secret, as a Special Lesson unto your Cleregie, Si non Cast,
tamen caute: If thou deal not Chastely, yet deal not Charily.

From whence had you this Doctrine, M. Hardinge? who set it first abroche? who
taught it? who confirmed it? who allowed it? If ye can say, it is not y^
Doctrine of the Devil: Yet verily, I believe, ye cannot say, it is in any
point like the Doctrine of God. Hierony. in Danielem. Cap. 11. 2. Tim. 3.
S. Hierome having occasion to speak of Antichriste, says thus: Simulabit
Castiratem, vt plurimos decipiat: He shall make a countrefeite show of
Chastity, that he may deceive many. Even so S. Paul says, Habentes Speciem
Pietatis: Virtutem autem eius abnegantes: Having a color of Godliness: but
ye Power thereof denieing utterly.

But, sommewhat to reliue your self, ye allege these words of S. Augustine:
Ille prohibet Matrimonium, August. Contra Eaust. li. 30. ca. (...).
Matrimonium, qui illud Malum esse dicit: non qui huic Bono aliud melius
anteponit: He forebiddeth Marriage, that says Marriage is Evil: and not he,
that before this thing, being Good, sets an other thing, that is Better.
Here, M. Hardinge, I beseech you of your indifferente judgment: He that uses
your words, and says, as you say, They that live in Matrimony, cannot
please God: They be Filthy: They be Infidelles: Unto them nothing is clean:
Their whole Mind, and Conscience is defiled: He y^ says, Matrimony is
Vice, Lechery, and Filthy Pleasure, Says he not, Matrimony is an evil thing?
Thus you say: Thus you write: These Words be apparente, and allowed in you
Books: even in those Books, whereby ye would have us to Order, and to
direct our Lives, and Manners. Briefly this is the Very Substance of your
Doctrine in this behalf. Therefore even by S. Augustines Judgment, Your
Doctrine is the Doctrine of Devils.

And, whereas ye would seem, not utterly to condemn the state of Matrimony,
but only to set Single Life before it, as a Better thing before a Good: it
may please you to understand, that, notwithstanding a thing in it self be
Best, yet is it not therefore Universally Best for every Man. For,
notwithstanding Scarlet be the fairest of al Colors, and the Face the fairest
part of all the Body, yet, I recke^, M. Hardinge, to make your self fair, ye
would not have your Face died in Scarlet.

Single Life for many causes is the Best: I grant. Yet is it not Best for
every body: but only for him, that has the gift of Chastity, and can with
quiet mind, and upright Conscience live Single. Otherwise Matrimony is mutche
better. And therefore God has leafte us indifferently free to both: that, who
so ever cannot use the One, 1. Cor. 7.
may choose the other. S. Paul says, Volo Omnes esse sicut meipsum: I would
every man would live Single, as I do. But he adds withal a Special Prouiso:
Vnusquisque Proprium donum habet a Deo: alius autem sic: Every man has his
own gift of God: One this, an other that. And therefore he says further.
Although Single Life be the better state, Yet, who so ever is not continente,
let him Marry. Better it is to Marry. then to Burn. Although otherwise he
weigh Single Life before Marriage, yet in this case, he says, it is better to
Marry, then to live Single.

M. Hardinge hereto replieth: They, that have Vowed, have lost this liberty:
and by S. Ambrose, and S. Augustines Judgment may not Marry. Hereof I have
partly spoken before: and partly shall have occasion offered to say more
hereafter. In the mean season we are taught here by M. Hardinge, to take S.
Paul's Words by the top, and to turn them quite backwardes: and thus to
frame a New Rule of Life, The Apostles Doctrine.
and to say contrary to S. Paul, Melius est Vri, quam Nubere: It is better,
to burn in Concupiscence, then to Marry.

Yet S. Augustine says even of them, that have Vowed, as it is before
alleged, Quae Nubere volunt, Augu. De Sa^cta Virginit. Ca. 34.
and ideo non Nubunt, quia impune non possant, Melius Nubere^t. quam vrerentur,
id est, quam occulta flamma Concupiscentiae in ipsa Conscientia vastarentur:
They that have a mind to Marry, and yet Marry not, because they cannot
Marry without reproach, Better were it for them to Marry, then to Burn,
that is to say, then with the privy flame of their Coucupiscence to be
wasted in their Conscience.

Further M. Hardinge says, This Order of Single Life was taken by the
Apostles them selves: And therefore, says he, it is not the Devils, but the
Apostles Doctrine. If this be true in deed, then is this matter thoroughly
concluded. But where was this Order taken by the Apostles? By what Writing, by
what Record, by what Tradition may it appear? Or how is it likely, that the
Apostles, being Married Men them selves, would force other men to live
Single?

I have already showed by Ignatius, Ambro. 2 Cor. 11.
by Clemens, by Eusebius, and by S. Ambrose, that the Apostles, S. John Only
excepted, were al Married. Clemens says. that Peter saw his own Wife carried
by y^ Officers to suffer death for Christ's sake: Eusebius. Li. 3. Ca. 30 (...).
Ignatius ad Philadelphien.
and cried unto her comfortably by her Name, O Wooman, Remember the Lord.
Ignatius S. John's Disciple says, Opto Deo dignus inueniri, sicut Petrus, and
Paulus, and reliqui Apostoli, qui Nuptijs fuerunt sociati, qui non libidinis
causa, sed posteritatis surrogandae gratia Coniuges habuerunt: I wish to be
found meet for God, as was Peter, and Paul, and the other Apostles that
were Married: and not for pleasure, but for Posterities sake had VViues.

Chrysostom says, Chryso. In Priorem ad Timoth. Homil. 10.
Cur non ait, Oportet Episcopum Angelum esse, nulli humanae perturbationi
vitioue subiectum? Ne Ecclesiae negotia fructusque perirent. Idcirco moderatam
Virtutem proposuit: non supremam illam, atque Coelestem: Why says not S.
Paul, A Bishop ought to be an Angel, subject neither to any worldly
affection, nor to any Vice? Lest the affairs, and fruits of the Church
should perish, (being without a Gouernoure). Therefore he required of
Bishops a moderate, and a reasonable kind of Virtue (willinge them to be
Husbands of One Wife) and not that other Virtue, so High, and so Heavenly:
(that is to say, utterly to live unmarried.) Again he says, Chrysostom. in
eadem Homil.
Idcirco ait, Vnius Vxoris Virum: Ne nimis in angustum rem eam concluderet, si
exactissimam Virtutem experisset: idcireo moderatiori admonitione maluit vti:
ne ex desperatione perfectae illius inueniendae Virtutis, Ecclesiae sine
Episcopis essent: Therefore S. Paul says, Let a Bishop be the Husband of One
Wife: Lest he should shut up the matter into too great a strait, if he had
required that most perfect purity: therefore he would rather use a
reasonable moderation, or mean ( that a Bishop should be the Husband of One
Wife): Lest of despair of findinge that excellency of Virtue ( to live
Unmarried) the Churches should be leafte without Bishops.

S. Paul 1. Cor. 7. 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. Leo Epist. 87.
says, Touching Virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord: Better it is
to Marry, then to burn: Let a Bishop be the Husband of One Wife. Which
last words Pope Leo expounds thus: Is Episcopus ordinetur, quem Vnius
Vxoris Virum fuisse, aut esse Constiterit: Let him be Consecrate a Bishop, of
whom it may well appear, that either he is, or has benne the Husband of One
Wife.

S. Ambrose expoundinge these words of S. Paul, Ambros. in 1. Cor. 7.
Touching Virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord, says thus, Si Doctor
Gentium non habuit, habere quis potuit? If the Doctor of the Gentiles had no
Commandment of the Lord, touching Virgins, what man else then could ever
have it?

Emonge the Rules, which commonly are called the Apostles Canons, it is
written thus: Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus Vxorem sua^ praetextu
Religionis ne abijciat. Aut si abiecerit, a Communione segregetur: and, si
perseueret, deponatur: Let not either Bishop, or Priest, or Deacon put away
his Wife under color of Religion. Or if he so do, let him be put from the
Communion (of the Faithful): And. if he so continue, let him be utterly deposed
from his office.

S. Hierome expounding these Words of S. Paul, Let every man remain in the
vocation, Hierony. Contra Iouinian. Lib. 1.
wherein he was called, says thus, Ex hoc, habentibus Vxores ^ollit
licentiam dimittendi eas: Hereby S. Paul forebiddeth Married men to put
away their Wives.

In the Sixth Council holden at Constantinople it is written thus: Antiquum
sequentes Canonem Apostolicae diligentiae, Did. 31. Quonia^.
and Constitutiones Sanctorum Virorum, Legales Nuptias Posthac valere volumus,
nullo modo cum Vxoribus suis eorum connubia dissoluentes: Following the old
Order of the Apostles diligence, and the Constitutions, and Laws of the Holy
Fathers, fro^hence forth we will, that the lavvful Marriage ( of Bishops,
and Priests) shall stand in force, not in any wise dissoluinge the VVedlocke,
that they have with their VViues. And herein, they say, they follow the Old
Canon, or Order of the Apostles.

Gratian says, 26. Quae. 2. Sor^.
as he is before alleged, Copula Sacerdotalis, nec Legali, nec Euangelica, nec
Apostolica Authoritate prohibetur: The Marriage of Priests is not forebidden
by any Authority, either of the Law, or of the Gospel, or of the Apostles.

Cardinal Caietane says, Catharinus co^tra error. Caietani, Errore 112.
Clemens stroma Lib. 3.
Dominus Discipulis suis nullum indixit Votum: Our Lord appointed unto his
Disciples no manner of Vow.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, as it is said before, Epistolae Apostoli nusquam
honestum, Moderatumque Matrimonium prohibuerunt: The Epistles of Paul the
Apostle never forebade honest, and sobre Marriage.

Al these things well considered, I beseech thee, gentle Reader, indifferently
to weigh M. Hardinges words: and to demand of him, with what countenance he
could thus tell thee, that the Order of Single Life was taken by the Apostles
them selves, and therefore must be holden as the Apostles Doctrine.

If he happen to tell thee, it is so written in the Council of Carthage, tell him
again, he is deceived. I say, tell him, that the Apostles of Christ never,
neither made any Law, nor gave any order for y^ Single Life of the Ministers.
And therefore tell him hardly, he is deceived. He will say, The words of y^
Council be plain. Quod Apostoli docuerunt, Council. Carthag. 2 Cap. 2.
and ipsa seruauit Antiquitas: Which thing the Apostles have taught, and y^
Antiquity it self has observed. These words be plain in deed, if they
were not peruersly glosed. Therefore tell him again, he should better have
learned, both the manner of the Apostles teaching, and also the scope, and
reach of this Antiquity. Certainly thus mutche his own Gloss could have
told him: Apostoli nihil instituerunt, Did. 84. Cum in Praeterito, in Glossa.
de non vtendo Matrimonio iam contracto: The Apostle took no order, touching
the not vsinge of Matrimony already contracted.

And whereas the Council says, Apostoli docuerunt, The Apostles taught, The
same Gloss says, Apostoli docuerunt exemplo: non Institutione, vel
Constitutione: The Apostles taught it by their Example: but not by
appointemene, nor by commandment. Perhaps M. Hardinge will say, The Apostles
Example is sufficient. Clemens stroma. Lib. 7.
Thereto I will answer, as Clemens Alexandrinus sommetime answered certain
of the Old Heretics in like case: Dicunt gloriosi isti iactactores, se
imitari Dominum, qui Vxorem no^ duxit. Illis dicit Scriptura, Deus Superbis
resistit: Humilibus aute^ dat Gratiam: These glorious Braggers say, they will
follow the Example of our Lord, y^ Married no Wife. Unto them the Scripture
says, God withstandeth the Proud: and gives Grace unto the humble. And to
like purpose S. Ambrose says, Praeceptum quidem Apostolus non habuit: at
habuit Exemplum. In deed the Apostle S. Paul had no Commandment to geeue
of Virginity: but Example he had.

Again whereas the Council allegeth Antiquity, Quod ipsa Seruault Antiquitas,
the same Gloss expounds it thus: A tempore Siricij Papae hic vocat
Antiquitate^: By this word, Antiquity, the Council means the time after
Pope Siricius ( Which was four hundred years after Christ). And again, as
it is alleged before, Ante tempora Siricij Papae Sacerdotes poterant contrahere
Matrimonium: Before the time of Pope siricius it was lavvful for Priests to
contracte Matrimony.

Such good luck M. Hardinge has to his Doctors, and Councelles. By his
own Gloss he has lost four hundred yeeeres of his Antiquity.

Panormitane after he had said, The Commandment of Single life is not of
the Law of God, he added further, Extra, De Clericis Coniugatis. Cum olim.
Quia alias Graeci peccarent: Non enim excusaret eos Consuetudo. Quia illa non
valet co^tra Legem Dei: Otherwise the Graecians were offenders. For no Custom
could excuse them. For as mutche as Custom prevails not against the Law of
God.

Now touching this Council of Carthage, notwithstanding it had benne truly
Construed, yet the Authority thereof must needs seem so mutche the less,
for that it decrees of set purpose quite contrary to the Council of Nice.
For the Fathers in the Nicene Council durst nor to remove Priests, and
Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 23.
and Bishops from their Wives: for that it was written, Whom God has
ioi^ned, let noman sunder. But these other Fathers in the Council of Carthage
without any stickinge, or doubtinge at the matter, only with one word,
utterly removed them: and so by force, and violence, and contrary to the
Commandment of Christ, sundred, and divided them, whom God had joined.
Which thing, Holy Paphnutius says, was not Lawful for man to do.

Touching Bishop Hulderichus, Panormitanus, La^omus, and Iacobus Faber, and
such others, as have spoken, or written in the behalf of Priests Marriage,
M. Hardinge thinks it sufficient for him to answer, What if they complain
of the loose life of the Cleregie? What then? That is to say, What if the
Cleregie live in professed shame, and open filthiness? What then? As if such
Simple Authorities were worthy of none other answer.

Yet was Hulderichus sommetime Bishop of Augusta in Germany, welneare six
hundred years ago, and for his virtue, and Holiness was coumpted a Saint.
Abbas Vrspergensis in his story writes of him in this sort: Abbas Vrsperg.
Anno 925. Pagina 214.
Hiltinus Augustanus Episcopus obijt: Cui Sanctus Vdalrichus (qui idem est
Hulderichus) successit: Histine the Bishop of Augusta died: To whom succeeded
Saint Hulderichus. Abbas Panormitanus was a famous Canoniste, in Judgment
Equal with any other.

Faber, and Latomus both in our time were accoumpted Learned: and either of
them a Special Champion of M. Hardinges side. Verily the woorste, and vileste
of al these is a great deal both sounder in Judgment, and deeper in
Learning, then either Amphilochius, whom M. Hardinge so highly esteems: or
Abdias, or Hippolytus, or Leontius: whom they have lately rakte out of the
duste: Or Clement of Rome, whom he so often calls the Apostles Fellow.

Neither did these writers only complain of the looseness of Priests lives,
as M. Hardinge tells us: But also for remouinge of Public shame, and
sclaunder out of the Church of God, wished, that the Liberty of Marriage
might be restoared: which thing M. Hardinge so closely dissembleth.

Touching that Pope Pius was commonly woonte to say, As Marriage was taken
away from Priests upon great Considerations, even so now upon other
greater considerations it were to be restoared to them again, M. Hardinge,
after mutche other needelesse talk, The fruits of Single Life.
says thus: Why did not he, or you in his steed show us, what, and how
Substantial considerations they be?

Good Christian Reader, loathe I am to disclose, and publishe any thing, that
may sound to the shame of any one man: mutche less, to the open shame of so
great a number. But M. Hardinge over heavily presses us with his
importunity, and requires us upon our credit to show these causes.
Therefore if the report hereof shall seem unpleasant, the fault is M.
Hardinges: It is not mine. I will only show forth simply, and truly, that I
find written in sundry, both of the Ancient learned Fathers, and also in
others of his own side: Which nevertheless, had not M. Hardinge benne,
might mutche better have benne concealed.

First of al, the Ancient Father Origin for his time, which was welneare
fourteen hundred years ago, hereof complains thus: Non solum, quae
docent, Origin. in Marthae. Tracta. 24.
non faciunt, sed etiam crudeliter, and sine misericordia, non secundum
aestimationem vitium vniuscuiusque, iniungunt: Vt, qui prohibent nubere, and ab
eo, quod expedit, ad immoderatam munditiem compellunt. Alligant onera grauia,
and faciunt homines cadere sub eis. Et frequenter videmus, eos qui talia
docent, contraria facere sermonibus suis. Castitatem docent: and Castitatem non
servant: etc. Omnia faciunt propter personas hominum, and glorias vanas, vt
videantur ab hominibus. Et plaerunque sunt tales, qui diligunt primos accubitus
in conuiuijs, and salutationes in foro, and vocari ab hominibus Rabbi: Qui
volunt vocari Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi: Not only they do not, that they
teach, but also cruelly, and without mercy they lay their Injunctions upon
others, not consideringe each man's ability. Such be they, that forbid
men to marry: and from that thing, that is lawful to be done, drive, and
force men to an unreasonable Purity. They bind, and lay on heavy burdens,
and cause men to fall under them. And oftentimes we see them, that teach
such things, to do contrary to their own saieinges. They teach
Chastity: and yet keep not Chastity: etc. They do al things for the
commendation of men, and vain glory, that they may be seen, and noted of
the people. And commonly they be such, as love the highest places at Feasts,
and Banquettes, and to be Saluted, Eusebius li. 4 ca. 23. (...).
and Honored in the Market places, and of the people to be called Rabbi: That
will be called Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

At the very first attempt hereof, Dionysius the Bishop of Corinthe wrote
thus unto Pinytus the Bishop of Gnosus, Noli grave illud onus necessariae
Castitatis imponere Fratribus: Lay not that heavy burden of the necessity of
Chaste life upon the Brethren.

Neither was it for nothing, that S. Cyprian in his time wrote thus, Vt quid
sibi adhibuit mulierem, Cypria. De Singularitate Clericorum.
qui ducere contempsit Vxorem? Peius est, quam Moechari, continentiam ducere
criminosam: Wherefore took he a woman unto him, that disdeined to marry a
wife? To live a continente life with reproach, is vvoorse then Aduouterie.

It is not for nothing, Epiphan. Contra Origenian. Haeresi. 42. (...).
Chrysostom. to 5. Quod Regulares Foeminae cum vi^is cohabitent.
that Epiphanius writes, Repudiant Nuptias: at non Libidinem. In honor enim
est apud illos, non Castitas, sed Hypocrisis: quam tamen appellari volunt
Castitie? They refuse Marriage, but not lust, or pleasure. For they esteem,
not Chastity, but Hypocri^ie: And yet the same Hypocrise they will have called
Chastity.

It is not for nothing, that Chrysostom writes of the Vowed, or Chaste women
in his time: Nuptias magis dicere beatas licet, etc. Posthac melius esset, ne
Virgins quidem esse, etc. Perseuerat adhuc nomen, and appellatio rei: at
nego^ium totum in corpore sublatum est, etc. In delicijs magis viuunt, quam
mulieres in fornice, etc. Frequens, and quotidianus est concursus obstetricum
ad Virginum domos: etc. Virginitas ista cum viris plus ab omnibus arguitur,
quam stuprum ipsum: We may say, that Marriage is a great deal better (
then such Virginity). Herea^t^r it were better, there were no Virgins at
al. The name ( of Virginity) continues still: But Virginity it self in their
body is quite gonne. They live more in pleasure, then Harlottes in the Stevves.
There is often, and daiely renninge of Midvviues to virgins houses. This manner
of Virginity of women amongst men, is more reproved of al men then
Fornication it self.

It is not for nothing, Sulpitius Seuerus Dialog. 3.
that Sulpitius Seuerus says of S. Hierome, Hieronymus de familiaritatibus
virginum, and Monachorum, and Clericorum, quam vera, quam fottia disputauit?
Vnde a quibusdam, quos nominare nolo, dicitur non amari: How truly, and how
stoutely has S. Hierome written of the Familiarity, that these virgins have
with Monks, and Priests? And therefore it is said, that of sum men,
whom I will not name, he is the less beloved.

Neither is it for nothing, Saluianus De Prouidentia, Lib. 5. Ibidem.
that Saluianus says of his time, which was about a thousand years ago,
Sub specie Religionis vitijs Saecularibus mancipantur: Under the color of
Religion, and Holiness, they are made slones to worldly vices. And again,
Nouum prorsus Conuersionis genus: Licita non faciunt: Illicita committunt: A
very strange kind of Conversion: That they may do, they do not: And do,
that they may not do.

Al these, and other like things were written long ago, in the old times,
before the fruits of Single life were thoroughly known.

But after that Pope Hildebrande by Cruelty, and Tyranny had fully
established the matter, and brought it to perfection, Auentinus says, Many
godly learned men utterly foresooke the Ministry, Auentinus in Hildebrando.
Et Falsi Prophetae, Falsi Apostoli, Falsi Sacerdotes emerserunt, qui simulata
Religione populum deceperunt. Maxima pars sub honesto nomine Castimoniae
Stupra, Incestus, Adulteria, passim, and impune committunt: False Prophets,
False Apostles, and False Priests sprange up: which under a cou^trefeite
Religion deceived the people. The most part of them, under the honest name
of Chastity, commit whoredom, Aduouterie, Inceste, commonly, and without
punishment.

S. Bernarde says, Bernardus in Concilio Remensi.
Episcopi, and Sacerdotes huius temporis Castitatis Sanctimoniam, sine qua nemo
videbit Deum, tam in Cord, quam in Corpore, quomodo' student obseruare?
Traditi in reprobum sensum, faciunt, quae non conueniunt. Quae enim in occulto
fiunt ab Episcopis, turpe est dicere: The Bishops, and Priests of this time,
how do they endeavor to keep either in heart, or in body the Holiness of
Chastity, without which noman shall see God? They are given over into a
reprobate mind, and do those things, that are not convenient. For it were
shame to utter, what these Bishops do in Secret.

Again he says, Bernard. De Conuersione, ad Clericos, Ca. 29. In Opere
Triparti. Li. 3. ca. 7.
Abstinentes a Remedio Coniugali, postea in omne flagitium effluunt:
Absteininge from the remedy of Marriage, afterward they flow over into al
kind of wickedness.

He that wrote the little Book, called Opus Tripartitum, joined with the
Council of Laterane, says thus, Tanta immunditia luxuriae notoria est in
multis partibus mundi, non solum in Clericis, sed etiam in Sacerdotibus: imo,
quod horribile est audire, in Praelatis Maioribus: etc. Such Notorious
filthiness of Lechery there is in many parts of the World, not only in the
inferior Clerks, but also in Priests: yea in the greatter Prelates: which
thing is horrible to be heard: etc.

And in the Gloss upon the Constitutions Legantine of England it is written
thus: De Concubinis Cleri. remouendis. Licet ad profligandum. Paralipomena
Vrspergen. Page 403.
Clerici huiusmodi Concubinas tenent Co^muniter, apparatu honesto, nomine
appellationis Sororiae: Clerks commonly hold, and have such Concubines, in
honest haueour, under the name of their Sisters.

Nicolaus de Clauengijs, complaininge hereof, says thus: Capellani, and
Canonici similes Episcopis, Indocti, Ebrij, Scortatores: The Chaplains, and
Canons are like to the Bishops, Unlearned, Dronken, and Fornicatours.

Robert Holcote says, Rob. Holcot In Librum Sapientiae, Lectione. 182
Sacerdotes moderni sunt Daemones Incubi per luxuriam, and Sacerdotes Priapi,
vel Beelphegor, and Angeli Abyssi: The Priests of our time by their Lechery,
are like the Sprites called Incubi, the Priests of Priap^^, or Beelphegor, and
the Angels of the pit of Hell.

Hulderichus in Old times the Bishop of Augusta in Germany, Hulderichus
Episcopus Augustan.
wrote sharply hereof against Pope Nicolas in this wise: Decreta tua super
Clericorum continentia a discretione inueni aliena: Multos confilij tui
assentatores hominibus, non Deo, sub falsa specie continentiae placere
volentes, grauiora vides committere: I have found, thy Decrees, touching the
Single life of Priests, to be void of discretion. Thou see, that many
folowers of thy counsel, willinge under ^ fained color of Continente life,
rather to please Man, then God, commit heinous acts. In the end be concludes
thus, Qua nosti discretionis disciplina, Pharisaicam ab Ouili Dei extirpa
Doctrinam: By such discipline of discretion, as you know best, root this
Pharisaical Doctrine out of Gods Fold.

But for as mutche, VVo^phgangus VVissenburgius in praefatione in Antiologiam
Papae.
as M. Hardinge has no skill in this Epistle of Hulderichus, he may
understand, that his own Pope Pius, otherwise called Aeneas Syluius, makes
evident mention of the same.

Further Mantuanus the Poet says,

Petrique domus polluta fluenti
Marcescit luxu: Nulla hic arcana reuelo.
Sanctus ager Scurris, venerabilis Ara Cynaedis
Seruit: Honorandae Diuum Ganymedibus Aedes.
The matter hereof is such, as is not worthy to be Englished.

But what pleasure can it be, to stand so long in so unsavory a place? They
themselves say thus, 2. Quae. 7. Lator. In Glossa.
Fornicatio Simplex non est digna depositione: S^^ple Fornication (in a
Priest) is no just cause of Deprivation. The cause thereof in an other Gloss
is alleged thus, Quia pauci sine illo vitio inueniuntur: Did. 81. Maximianus.
In Glossa.
Because there be fevve Priests found without that fault.

To be short, Polydorus Vergilius says, Nullius delicti crimen maius Ordini
dede^us, Polyd. Vergil. De Inuentorib. rer. Lib. 5. Ca. 4.
plus mali Religioni, plus doloris bonis attulit: No kind of crime ever
brought either more shame to the Order of Priesthood: or more hinderance to
Religion: or more grief to the Godly, then the life of Single Priests.

These, these, M. Hardinge, were the causes, that moved Pope Pius commonly to
say, as it is before alleged: As Marriage upon good, and great considerations
was taken from Priests, so now upon better, and greatter considerations it
were to be restoared to them again. And therefore he says in his discourse
of the Council of Basile, Aeneas Syluiu^ De Con. Basil^ Lib. 2.
Fortasse non esset peius, Sacerdotes complures vxorari. Quoniam multi
saluarentur in Sacerdotio Coniugato, qui nunc in sterili Presbyterio damnantur:
Perhaps it were not woorste, that many Priests were Married. For many might
be saved in Married Priesthood, which now in barren Priesthood are
condemned. If the former of these two Saieinges be so doubteful, yet this
later is plain, and clear, and void of doubt. In like sense, and sort he
writes upon good advise, Aeneas Syluius Epist. 321. ad Johan. Fontem.
and deliberation to his friend: Quoniam huc ventum est, vt Legi Carnis
resistere nequeas, melius est Nubere, quam Vri: For as mutche as the matter is
grown so far, that ye cannot withstand the Law of the Fleashe, Better it is
to Marry, then to burn.

So says Panormitane, Extra, De Clericis Coniugatis, Cum olim.
Credo pro bono, and salute animarum, quod esset salubre statutum, vt non
valentes continere, possint contrahere. Quia experientia docente contrarius
prorsus effectus sequitur ex illa Lege Continentiae: cum hodie non viuant
spiritualiter, nec sint mundi: Sed maculentur illicito coitu, cum ipsorum
grauissimo peccato: Vbi cum propria vxore esset Castitas. Vnde deberet Ecclesia
facere sicut bonus medicus: vt, si medicina, experientia docente, potitis
officiat, quam profit, eam tollat. Et vtinam idem esset in omnibus
Constitutionibus positiuis: I believe, it were a good Law, and for the
wealth; and safety of Souls, that such, as cannot live Chaste, may
contracte Matrimony. For we learn by experience, that of the Law of
Continente, or Single Life the contrary effect has followed. For as mutche
as now a days they live not spiritually, nor be clean, and chaste: but with
their great Sin are defiled with unlawful Copulation: whereas with their
own vviues they should live Chastely. Therefore the Church ought to do, as
the skilful Physician uses to do: Who, if he see by experience, that his
Medicine hurts rather, then doothe good, takes it clean away. And would
God the same way were taken with all positive Constitutions.

So says Durandus, Durandus, De modo Celebrandi Concilium, Titul. 46.
Vtile esset, vt in Concilio Matrimonium Sacerdotibus romittatur. Frustra enim
hactenus coacti sunt ad Castitatem: It were good, that in a Council Priests
Marriage were set at liberty: For hitherto it has benne in vain, to force
them to Chastity.

So says Martinus Peresius, Martinus Peresius.
Multis pijs visum est, vt Leges de Coelibatu tollerentur propter scandala:
Many godly men have thought it good, that the Laws of Single Life should be
abolished, for auoidinge the offense of the people.

M. Hardinge will say, The Priest has Vowed, and must keep his Vow. But
Pope Pius, as it is said before, gave counsel of Marriage unto a Priest, that
had made a Vow.

It appears right well, both by that has benne already alleged, and also by
the common experience, and practice of the world, that a Vow imports not
always a Chaste life. Optatus Contra Parmenianum Donatist. Lib. 6. Hierony in
Hieremi. lib. 2. Ca. 7. Ambro. De Virginib. Lib. 1.
Optatus Mileuitanus says, In Mirella signum est voluntatis: non Castitatis
auxilium: In the apparel there is a token of the Will: not a healpe toward
Chastity.

S. Hierome says, Quid prodest Corporis pudicitia, animo constuprato? When
the Mind, or Heart is defloured, what avails the Chastity of the Body?

S. Ambrose says, Non imperari potest Virginitas, sed optari. Nam, quae supra
nos sunt, in Voto magis sunt, quam in Magisterio: We may vvishe for
Virginity: but command it we cannot. For the things, that be above us, and
out of our power, are rather of desire, then of Commandment.

Hereof Epiphanius makes this Conclusion: Epiphani. Lib. 2. Haeresi. 41.
Vt ne confundantur apud homines, occulte scortantur: and sub Solitudinis, aut
continentiae specie libidinem exercent. Melius est itaque lapsum a cursu, palam
sibi vxorem accipere secundum Leges: Lest they should be shamed before men,
they keep Harlottes privily: and under the color of Solitary, or Continent
Life, they practice their filthy pleasure. Better is it therefore for a man,
being fallen from his course, openly to take unto him self a wife according
to the Law. So says S. Hierome, as I have before alleged: Huiusmodi
Virginibus aperte dicendum est, Hieronym. Ad Demetriadem.
vt aut nubant, si se non possunt continere: aut contineant, si nolunt nubere:
To such virgins we must say plainly, that either they Marry, if they
cannot Contain: Or else that they Contain, if they will not Marry. Bernardus
ad Sororem. De modo been viuendi. Sermo 62.
So says S. Bernard unto his Sister: Quod incaute vouisti, ne impleas: Impia
est promissio, quae scelere adimpletur: That thou haste unadvisedly Vowed, see
thou keep it not. It is a wicked promise, that is performed with
wickedness.

To be short, 4. Senten did. 36. Quaest. 1.
Johannes Scotus says, Si votum Continentiae est annexum Ordini Sacro solum
ex praecepto Ecclesiae, sequitur, quod non simpliciter illegitimat ad
contrahendum: If the Vow, or promise of Chastity be annexed unto Holy Orders
Only by force of the Constitution, or Commandment of the Church, then does
it not of necessity, and fine force, unable a man to contracte Matrimony.

How be it, hereof we have said already so mutche, as to a reasonable man
may seem sufficient.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 1.
We receive, and embrace all the Canonical Scriptures, both of the Old, and
New Testament, geuinge thanks to our God, who has raised up unto us that
Light, which we might ever have before our eyes: least either by the
suttletie of man, or by the snares of the Devil, we should be carried away to
errors and lies. Also that these be the Heavenly Voices, whereby God has
opened unto us his will: and that only in them man's heart can have settled
rest: that in them be abundantly, and fully comprehended al things, what so
ever be needeful for our Health, as Origene, Augustine, Chrysostom, and
Cyrillus have taught: That they be the very might and strength of God to
attain to Salvation: That they be the Fundations of the Prophets, and
Apostles, whereupon is builte the Church of God: That they be the very sure,
and infallible Rule, whereby may be tried whether the Church do swerve, or
err, and whereunto al Ecclesiastical Doctrine ought to be called to accoumpte:
and that against these Scriptures neither Law, nor Ordinance, nor any custom
ought to be heard: no though Paul him self, or an Angel from Heaven should
comme, and teach the contrary.

M. Hardinge.
But why do ye not here plainly declare, which be the Books of the
Scriptures, that ye allow, and which be they Untruth. For we reiecte no
part of all the Scriptures.
that ye reiecte? In general, ye say, that ye embrace all the Canonical
Scriptures. ^ Macha. 12 Jacob. 2.
Yet if a man press you with the place of the Machabees, for Prayer to be made
for the Dead, and with the words of S. James Epistle against your
Justification of Faith only, and likewise with certain other places of the
Scriptures, which be accounted in the Canon of the Church, against certain
other your false doctrines: in this case Untruth: For we deny no more, then
S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and other Holy Fathers have denied.
your wont is to deny those Scriptures to be Canonical. Yet here ye bear the
world in hand ye allow al. Would God there were in you either more truth.
or less craft. Well, ye give thanks to God for the Scriptures, for that
having them before your eyes, ye are stayed in Truth, assured, that by the
suttelty of man, or snares of the Devil, ye be not carried away into Errors,
and Lies. And is it so in deed? I pray you syrs of what sect be ye? or of
which sect is each one of you? For I dare boldly say, and so the world
seethe, that ye agree not al in one. If ye say, ye be Lutherans, then must
I further demand of you, of which sort of Lutherans? For that puddle
runs out by many sinckes. Be ye Zuinglians, Arians, Osiandrines,
Libertines, Adiaphoristes, Anabaptists, Caluinistes, or Sathanis^es? What
Privilege have ye before your fellows? a match being made between you (I
mean that new Cleregie of England) and the other sects of our time, etc. If
ye have this light of the Scriptures before your eyes, how is it, that ye
agree not within your selves? yea how is it, that each one of you oftentimes
disagreeth with him self? how is it that Childishe, and fond untruth: For
the Communion Book was never but once changed. But see the often changes of
the Mass.
so many times ye have changed your Comm^nion Book, the order of your
Service, your doctrine of the blessed Sacrament, your Homilies, etc. Who
knows not how in the matter of the Sacrament your chief Capitaines have
showed them selves inconstant and mutable, and contrary to them selves. I mean
Cranmere, Ridley, Latimer, and that great Rabbin Peter Martyr him self? As
for the res^, they be not worthy to be named.

But what say ye? be these the Heavenly Voices, whereby God has opened unto
us his will? Then how dare ye to transgress his will declared in these Voices,
where ye read expressly, that he, S. Cyprian says, Non iungitur Ecclesiae,
qui ab Euangelio separatur: De Lapsis Sermo. 5.
which hears not the Church, is to be taken for no better, then a Heathen,
and a Publicane? As ye proceed, ye say, that only in the Scriptures man's
heart can have settled rest, and that in them be abunda^tly and fully
comprehended al things, what so ever be needeful for our Salvation, as Origin,
Augustine, Chrysostom, and Cyrillus have taught. Either you know not, what
you say, sir Defender, nor the things of which you make affirmation, 1.
Timo. 6.
as S. Paul sail of such, as ye are, writing to Timothe, or you are fowly
ouerseene. If the heart of man have settled rest in the Scriptures only, Man's
heart has not settled rest in Scriptures only.
as you say, then in nothing else but in the Scriptures. By this you seem to
trouble and disqutet many hearts. For if this be true, Untruth. For Ab^l
^earde the Word of God. Read the An^^veare.
then had good Abel no better rest in his heart, then wicked restless Cain.

When the Holy Book of Scripture was lost, which God restored by Esdras,
were there none in all that time, whose hearts had settled rest? What foolish,
and absurd doctrine is this? A worthy doubt.
What if it had pleased God, there had never benne letter written of the Old,
or New Testament? should not Gods friends have found his peace that passes
al sense, Philip. 4.
as S. Paul says? Had Paul, Antony, Hilarion, Pambus, and many other Holy
men living in Wilderness Untruth. For S. Augustine says, Antonius
Scripturas Diuinas memoriter audiendo tenuit, etc.
without letters, no rest, ne quiet at their hearts? Nay, who had the like?
And whereas you say, that al things needeful for our Salvation be abundantly,
and fully comprehended in the Scriptures, this is also as false, as sundry
other parts of your Doctrine. For if al things necessary to Salvation be
contained in the Scriptures, then what so ever is not in them contained, the
same is not necessary: If not necessary, why should we be laden with
unnecessary burdens? Then away with all Traditions at a clappe, be they never
so Apostolic, never so Ancient, never so Healthful, never so long time in
the Church continued. Remember you not, what the most renoumed Fathers have
written of the necessity of Traditions? Or if you remember them, what thought
you when you wrote thus? Let Learned and Holy Basil be heard in steed of
many, if not to revoke you from your error, yet to discredit you, and stay
others in the truth. Lib. de Spiritu Sancto. ca. 27.
His words be these: Of the doctrines, which be preached in the Church,
certain we have out of the Scripture written, certain we have received in
secret Mystery by tradition of the Apostles, Yet now the very same
necessary Traditions be quite forgotten, and abolished, yea even in the
Church of Rome.
which both be of equal force to Godliness. Neither concerning these any man
gainesaieth, be he of never so small knowledge. For if we go about to reject
the customs that be not set forth in writing, as being of little regard,
then shall we condemn those things also, which we have in the Gospel
necessary to Salvation. Yea rather we shall bring the preachinge of the Faith
but to a bare name. For so they were taken for Heretics, which regarded not
the solemn fast of Lent Untruth. Read the Answer.
received at the Apostles, Fast of Lent.
as we read in S. Augustine, De Haer. ad Quoduultdeum, cap. 53. and in the
Council of Gangra in an Epistle to the Bishops of Armenia. Even so they which
denied the Untruth. For hereby both S. P^ule, and S. Hierome, and other good
men are condemned of Heresy.
distinction of a Bishop and a Priest, were condemned of Heresy, as we find
in S. Augustine in the Book and Chapter aforesaid, and in Epiphanius Lib. 3.
Cap. 75. In the Council of Constance the same is to be found.

Again if al things necessary to Salvation be Untruth. For we say not,
Al things are there expressed.
expressed in the Scriptures, to what purpose said S. Paul concerning order,
and manner, to be used at the celebration of the holy Sacrament: Coetera cum
venero disponam, 1. Corin. 11. Epist. 2.
As for other things I will take Order for them, when I come? What means S.
John to say, Having other things to write to you of, I would not (write
them) in Paper and ink: for I trust to be with you, and speak to you mouth
to mouth. To conclude much, that might be objected, in few words for
breuities sake, what say you, sir Defender, shall we find al things
necessary to Salvation in the Scripture? Stale, and fond questions.
How think you of the Scripture it self? How know you this to be the
Scripture? How know ye the Gospel of Mathewe, Mark, Luke, and John, to be
theirs, whose names they bear? This can you not find in all the Scripture,
Untruth. For it is not necessary to Salvation.
and yet is the same necessary to be believed. What Scripture have you to
admit these, and to refuse the Book bearinge the name of They were written
by Heretics in de^ogation of the Truth.
Peter, the Gospel of Thomas, of Bartholome we, of Nicodeme? Why admit you
not the Prophets that Basilides would to be allowed, but only the four
great, and the twelve lesser? what authority have you to stay your self by,
concerning these: but only that of the Church? for Scripture have you none
for proof hereof. Then has not Scripture al things in it necessary for a
Christen man. Homousion.
Is it not necessary to believe the Son of God to be Homousion, that is to
say, of the same Substance with the Father? which if you deny, you restore
the old condemned Heresy of the Arians. Untruth. For Epiphamque (...),
Sensus eius notain^s vbique est.
The same can you not find in the Scripture. Where in all the Bible find you
that God the Father is Ingenitus? Where find you, that the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son? that the blessed Virgin Marie
continued in her Virginity? that such as be Baptized of Heretics ought to
be Baptized again? S. Imaes.
That in fantes ought to be Baptized? That the Four Books of the Gospels were
written by Mathewe, Mark, Luke, and John, by what Scripture can you prove it?
To end, where find you expressly in all the Scriptures three Persons to be
one God?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here to weighe down the Authority of Gods Holy Word, M. Hardinge has
brought in a heap of ordinary stale quarrelles, Of the difference bitweene
Priests, and Bishops: of Lent: of the Communion Book: of the Homilies: of
the Order of Service: and of the Perpetual Virginity of Our Lady. His whole
drifte herein is, to bear us in hand, that there is very little, or none
Authority in the Scriptures: and that the whole Credit, and certainetie of
our Faith rests only in the Church of Rome.

He seems to take it in scorn, that the Word of God should be called the
Light. Psalm. 118. Psalm. 18. Theophylact. in Lucam, Ca. 16.
Yet notwithstanding the Prophet David says, Thy Word is a Lantern to my
feet. And again, The Commandment of the Lord is Lightsome, geeuing Light
unto the eyes. And Theophylacte says, Verbum Dei est Lucerna, qua Fur
deprehenditur: The Word of God is the Candel, whereby there Thief (or false
Teacher) is espied.

Whereas M. Hardinge demands of us so pleasauntly, what Scriptures we
allow, and what we reiecte, he troubles him self with an idle, and a
needelesse question. For we embrace, and reverence every parcel, and title of
the Scriptures without exception, not refusinge any part thereof, that has
benne allowed by the Ancient, Learned, Catholic Fathers of the Church of God.

Neither do we so scornefully call Gods Holy Word, Albert. Pigghius,
Lib. 3. Cap. 3. Hierar.
a Nose of wax, a Shipmannes Hose, or a Dead letter: as sundry of that side
have delited to call it.

Touching the Book of the Machabees, we say nothing, but that we find
written by S. Hierome, Johan. Sleidan. Lib. 23.
S. Augustine, and other Holy Fathers. S. Hierome says. Machabaeorum Libros
legit quidem Ecclesia: Sed eos inter Canonicas Scripturas non recipit: In deed
the Church reads the Books of the Machabees: Hieronym. in Prooemio in
Proverb Salomonis. In the first part Chap. 10. Diuis. 2.
but she receives them not emonge the Canonical allowed Scriptures.

Or Prayer for y^ Dead, we shall have place more convenient to speak hereafter.

The place of S. James, touching the Justification of Faith, and Works, is
answered before. Neither do we discredit any part either of the
Authority, or of the Doctrine of that whole Epistle: notwithstanding Eusebius
says, It was written by sum other, Eusebius. li. 2. ca. 23. (...).
and not by S. James. His words be these: Istius Iacobi, qui lustus, and
Oblias vocabatur, dicitur esse Epistola, quae prima scribitur inter Canonicas.
Sciendum autem est, illam Epistolam esse Spuriam: The Opinion is, that the
Epistle, which is reckened the first emonge the Canonicalles, is of this
James, which was called Iustus, and Oblias. But we must understand, that it
is a Bastard Epistle, and not written by S. James.

Likewise S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Catalogo Ecclesiasticor. Scriptorum.
Epistola Iacobi ab alio quopiam sub eius nomine edita asseritur: It is said,
that the Epistle of S. James, was set forth by sum other man under his
name. This therefore is no New fantasy: but the Judgment of the Ancient
Learned Fathers. Nevertheless we do both receive the same Epistle, and also
read it in Our Churches: and allow every Clause, and Sentence, that therein
is written.

M. Hardinge says, If ye have this Light of the Scriptures before your
eyes, how is it, that ye agree no better amongst your selves? And here he
reckeneth up by rote a many of names of his own making, Lutherans,
Zuinglians, Arians, Osiandrians, Libertines, Adiaphoristes, Anabaptists,
Caluinistes, and Sathanistes. In which his so pleasante fancy, he may have
leave to sport him self, while he lists. Word written.
God be thanked, we agree thoroughly together in the whole Substance of the
Religion of Christ: and altogether with one heart, and one Sprite do
glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Certainly S. Augustine, S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and Theophilus, as it appears by their
writings, agreed no better together in their time, then we do now. Yet
had they, and every of them the Word of God: and the same Word of God was a
Light unto their feet.

It was not for any great stoare of better matter, I trow, that M. Hardinge
thus charge us with so often changinge the Communion Book. For of more, then
of one Only Change, he cannot tell us. And if there had benne less then that,
there had benne no change at al. And yet, for that One change, he him self in
the mean season has changed thrice. But the Holy Communion Book, and the
Order of the Holy Ministration stands, and by Gods Mercy shall stand still,
without any further Change.

How be it, Platin. in Sixto. 1 Polydor. Vergil. De Inuentorib. rer. Li. 5.
Cap. 10.
Gentle Reader, if thou will know the often Alterations, and Changes of the
Mass, read, I beseech thee, Platyna, and Polydore Vergil, touching the same:
There shalt thou find, how, and by whom, and upon what occasion, and in
what process of time, all the parts of the Mass were peeced, and set
together: and that in the space of seven hundred whole years scarcely, and
with mutche adoo it was made up at last, and brought to sum perfection.

Christ's Commandment of Hearing the Church is answered before. S.
Augustine says, Augustine. De Fide. and Simbol. Esai. 8.
Credimus Sanctam Ecclesiam: non Credimus in Sanctam Ecclesiam: We believe,
that there is a Holy Church: But we Believe not in the Holy Church. For the
Church is not God, nor is hable of her self to make, or alter any one Article
of the Faith. The Prophet Esaias says, Ad Legem potius, and ad Testimonium.
Si non responderint secundum Verbum hoc, non erit illis Lux Matutina: To the
Law rather, and to the Testimony. If they answer not according to this
Word, they shall have no Morninge Light.

M. Hardinge says further, If quietness of Conscience comme of the Word
of God only, then had Abel no more quietness of Conscience then wicked
restless Cain. Then should Paul the Eremite, and Antonie, and Hilarion, and
Pambus, and other Holy men, living in Wilderness without Letters, have had
no rest, ne quiet at their hearts. And why so? Because they had no Word
written.

Who would think, that M. Hardinge, bearinge such a countenance of
Divinity, would thus go about to deceive him self with a point of
Sophistry? Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. In Genes. Homil. 2. Hebrae. 3.
Deus Conditor Humani Generis ab initio per seipsum homibus loquebatur: God the
Creator of Mankind, from the beginning spoke unto men by him self, in his
own person. And S. Paul says, Deus olim multifariam, multisquemodis
Patribus locutus est: In Old times God spoke many ways, and in sundry sorts
unto the Fathers. And doothe M. Hardinge think, when God him self in his own
person, and presently spoke unto Abel, that Abel bearde not then the Word
of God? We speak not so precisely, and nicely of Gods Word written in
Paper. For so it is a Creature Corruptible, and shall consume, and perish, as
other Corruptible Creatures do. But the Word of God, which we speak of,
endures for ever.

S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Iobum. Ca. 27.
Quomodo Aeternae erunt Scripturae Diuinae, si Mundus certo fine est
terminandus? Verum est quidem, quod Librorum pelliculae cum ipsis Literis
abolendae sunt. Sed, quia subiungit Dn^s, Verba vero mea non praeteribunt,
proculdubio, quod illis apicibus pollicetur, erit Aeternum: How shall the Holy
Scriptures he Everlasting, seeinge the World shall have on end? True it is,
that the parchement, or leaves of the Books with the letters and al,
Traditions.
shall be abolished. But for as mutche as our Lord adds, My Words shall
never pass, doubtelesse ( though the Papers, and Letters perish, yet) the
thing, that is promised by the same letters, shall last for ever. Chrysostom.
2. Corin. Homil. 18.
So Chrysostom says, Paulus Praedicationem non Scrip^am appellat,
Euangelium: Preachinge not written Paul calls the Gospel.

That M. Hardinge adds of Antonius, and Paulus, and Hilarion, and other
Eremites, that they lived in Wilderness without Letters, and therefore
presumes, they lived without the Word of God, it is very unadvisedly
spoken, and utterly untrue. For proof whereof, to name only One in steed of
the rest, S. Augustine says, that Antonius the Eremite was notably Learned,
and perfect in the Scriptures. August. De Doctrina Christiana Lib. 1. In
Prologo.
His words be these, Antonius sine vlla scientia Literarum, Scripturas
Diuinas and memoriter audiendo tenuisse, and prudenter cogitando intellexisse,
praedicatur: It is reported, that Antonius, without knowledge of Letter, both
Learned the Holy Scriptures, and bare them well in mind, by hearing: and also
by Wisdom and study, understood them.

And whereas M. Hardinge would seem to make such an accoumpte of Prayer,
Augus^in. De Scalic Paradisi, Cap. 11.
and Holiness without knowledge, S. Augustine says, Lectio sine Meditatione
arida est: Meditatio sine Lectione erronea est: Oration sine Meditatione tepida
est: Readinge without Meditation, or study is dry, and barren: Meditation, or
study without Readinge is erroneous: And Prayer without Cogitation, or study
is half cold, and unfruitful. Thus we see by S. Augustines Judgment, that
the Force, and Substance both of Prayer, and of Meditation depends of
Readinge.

How be it, what Comfort, and peace of Conscience we have by Hearing the
Word of God, S. Paul can tell us somewhat better, then M. Hardinge. Thus he
says, Romans 15.
Quaecunque Scripta sunt, etc. What so ever things are written, they are
written for our learning, that by Patience, and Comfort of the Scriptures we
may have hope. Even so says Christ him self, Johan. 17.
O Father, this is the Everlasting Life, that they may know thee, the only,
and very God: and Jesus Christ, whom thou haste sent.

But S. Paul says. 2. Thessalon. 2. Basili. De Spiritu Sancto. Ca. 27.
Keep the Traditions, which ye have received, either by Epistle, or by
Word. And S. Basile reckeneth Traditions to be One, and Equal with the
Word of God. First, that S. Basile worte those words rather of zele, then
of Judgment, it may easily appear, by that the self same Traditions, that
he there specially names, and so highely commends, are for the greattest
part already abolished, and quite foregotten, yea and that even in the Church
of Rome. Yet the Word of God endures still, and shall endure for ever. For
example, by one of S. Basiles necessary Traditions, It is not lawful for any
man, to kneel in the Church upon the Sonnedaie: (...).
But every man is bound by the same Tradition, at Sermon, at Prayer, and at
the Communion, to stand upright. And this, he says, was given unto us in
Secret Charge by the Apostles of Christ. This so necessary, and so
Apostolic Tradition is now dissolved, and broken, and utterly foregotten, not
only in Louaine, but also in Rome.

S. Augustine says, Augustinus ad Casulanum.
By Tradition of the Apostles, bitweene Easter, and Witsondaie it was not
lavvful for any man to Fast. Yet now we Fast within the same days so
forebidden, and the same kind of Fast is thought lawful, the Apostles
Tradition to the contrary notwithstanding.

The rest of S. Basiles Traditions stand in halowinge of Water: in Blessinge
of Oil: (...).
in Praieinge toward the East: in vtteringe certain words of Invocation
at the shewinge forth of the Bread of Thankesgeuinge unto the people. These
things, I believe, M. Hardinge him self never thought to be Equiualente with
the Word of God.

But if these, and other like Traditions be so weighty, and so necessary, as
he seems to make them, Traditions.
then let him tell us in good soothe, and without fable: what were these
Mystical Solemn Words of Invocation, that S. Bas^le says were spoken by
the Priest, at the Openinge, or shewinge forth of y^ Sacrament? If they be
so necessary to be used, and continued in the Church of God, why has he, and
his whole Roman Cleregie quite foregotten them? If he, and his Cleregie have
foregotten them, and use them not, and care not for them, how can he say, or
may we think, they are so necessary to Salvation?

This is the Simplicity, and plainness of M. Hardinges dealinge. He tells
us many tales of the Apostles Traditions, being him self the manifest
despiser, and breaker of the same Traditions. Touching the words of S.
Paul, I marvel, that M. Hardinge could so easily be deceived. For S. Paul
him self, even in the same words, and in the self same line would have
told him, that by the name of Traditions, he meante, not unwritten Verities,
and Liuelesse Ceremonies, as he supposes, but the self same Substance of
Religion, and Doctrine, that he had uttered unto the Thessaloniens before,
either by Epistle, or by Preachinge.

These be his Words, 2. Thessalon. 2.
Hold the Traditions, which ye have received either by Epistle, or by Word.
He calls them Traditions, although they were contained in his Epistles, and
delivered to them by Writing. For the Apostles preachinge, and writing,
Nicephor. Lib. 2. Cap. 34.
in ground and substance were al one. Nicephorus says, Paulus, quae praesens
oratione sua dilucide docuerat, eadem absens per compendium in memoriam,
scripta Epistola, reuocare voluit: Paul, what things, being present, he had
plainly taught by Mouth, the same things afterward, being absente, he
shortly called to their remembrance, by writing of an Epistle. The like he
writes also of S. Mathewe, Nicephor. Lib. 2. Cap. 45.
Matthaeus discedens (alio praedicatum) absentiam suam scripto praesenti
compensauit: S. Mathewe departinge ( to preach in other places) recompensed
his absence by present writing.

S. Paul unto the Philippians says thus, Philippen 3.
Eadem scribere mihi quidem non pigrum: vobis au^em necessarium: To write unto
you the self same things, unto me it is not paineful: but in your behalf, it
is necessary. These words S. Hierome expounds thus: Hieronym. in Epistol.
ad Philippen. Cap. 3. Theophylact. in Lucam, Cap. 1.
Eadem scribere, hoc est, eadem repetere, quae praesens dixeram: To write the
same things, that is to say, to make rehearsal of the same things, that I
told you by Mouth, when I was present.

So says Theophylacte, speakinge in the person of S. Luke: Prius te sine
Scripto institui: nunc scriptum tibi trado Euangelium: Atque ita mentem tuam
munio, vt ne obliuiscatur eorum, quae prius sine scriptis Tradita sunt: Before
this time I have instructed thee without writing. Now I deliver unto thee a
written Gospel. And so I furnishe thy mind, that it forgeate not the things,
that were delivered thee before without writing.

So says Irenaeus, Irenae. lib. 3. ca. 1.
Apostoli tunc Euangelium praeconiauerunt. Postea vero per Dei voluntatem,
illud in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, Fundamentum, and Columnam Fidei nostrae
futurum: Then the Apostles preached the Gospel. And afterward by Gods will,
they delivered the same to us in writing, to be a Fundation, and a Pillar
unto our Faith.

And therefore Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in. 2. Corin. Homil. 18.
Paulus etiam non Scriptam Praedicationem, vocat Euangelium: S. Paul calls
his Preachinge not written, by the name of the Gospel.

But me thinks, M. Hardinge, so stoutely striuinge for the bare name of
Traditions, should better have Learned S. Hieromes lesson touching the same.
Hieronym. in 2. Thessalon. 2.
Thus he writes upon these words of S. Paul, Hold the Traditions, which
ye have learned, either by Our Epistle, or by Our Word: Quando sua vult
teneri, non vult extranea superaddi: Whereas S. Paul will have his own
things to be keapte, he will have no strange things thereto to be added.
Traditions.


And, that S. Paul by this Word, Traditions, meante not Ceremonies, or
certain Secret unknown Verities, but the very Substance of the Gospel of
Christ, as it is said before: if M. Hardinge will not believe us, yet let him
believe S. Paul him self. 1. Corinthians. 15.
Thus he writes, Tradidi vobis in primis, quod etiam accepi, quod Christus
mortuus est pro peccatis nostris secundum Scripturas: First I have delivered
to you, (or given to you by Tradition) the same thing, that I received: that
is, that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures. Here by S.
Paul's Words, the Death of Christ is called a Tradition.

So says S. Basile, Basilius De Spiritu Sancto. (...).
Hoc palam impugnat Salutaris Baptismatis Traditionem: Baptismus noster iuxta
ipsam Domini Traditionem est in Nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti:
Per ipsam Baptismi Traditionem habemus Confessionem Fidei: This thing is
plainly against the Tradition of Healtheful Baptism: Our Baptism,
according to the Tradition of our Lord, is in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: By the very Tradition of Baptism we have the
Confession of Faith.

S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. ad Pompeium. contra Epis^^lam Stephani.
Vnde est ista Traditio? Vtrum ne de Dominica, and Euangeliea Authoritate
descendens, an de Apostolorum Mandatis, atque Epistolis veniens? etc. Si igitur
aut in Euangelio praecipitur, aut in Apostolorum Epistolis and Actis
continetur, obseruetur etiam haec Sancta Traditio: From whence have we this
Tradition? Whether comes it from the Authority of Our Lord, and of the
Gospel: or else from the Commandments, and Epistles of the Apostles? etc.
Therefore if it be either commanded in the Gospel, or contained in the
Epistles, or Acts of the Apostles, let us keep the same Tradition. Likewise
Eusebius says, Polycarpus, Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 20. (...).
c^m recepisset ea ab illis, qui ipsi viderant vitam Verbi, nuntiauit eadem,
omnia Scripturis consona: Polycarpus, when he had received these things of
them, that had seen the Life of the Word, vtteted, and showed the same,
being al agreeable unto the Scriptures.

Of such Traditions, it is plain, S. Paul speaks. Now therefore Judge
thou, Gentle Reader, how truly, and handsomely M. Hardinge allegeth these
Words of S. Paul, to serve his purpose.

As for Lenten Fast, the Superstition only excepted, we condemn it not, but
use it still. But how can M. Hardinge say, either that Lent is so necessary,
as he makes it: or else, that it is the Tradition of the Apostles? Verily S.
Augustine says, Augustine. Epist. 86.
Quibus diebus non oporteat ieiunare, and quibus oporteat, Praecepto Domini,
vel Apostolorum non inuenio definitum: Upon what days we ought not to Fast,
and upon what days we ought to Fast, I find it not appointed, or limited by
any commandment, either of Our Lord, or of the Apostles.

So says Socrates, Socrates, Lib. ^. Cap. 22.
Euangelia non imposuerunt iugum seruitutis: Sed homines ipsi suis quisque
locis propter remissionem, and memoriam Passionis, Pascha, and alios Dies
Festos, sicut voluerunt, ex Consuetudine quadam celebrarunt. Non enim hoc vel
Seruator, vel Apostoli Lege aliqua obseruandum esse mandauerunt: The Gospel
has laid upon us no Yoke of bondage: But men them selves in the Countries
where they dvvelte, for release of labor, and Remembrance of the Passion of
Christ, of a certain Custom, keapte the Easter, and other Holy days, each
man, as he vvoulde. For neither Our saueour, nor the Apostles by any Law
commanded these things.

Likewise says Cassiodorus, Cassidor. Lib. 5. Ca. 38.
Alij Pisces solummodo comedunt: Alij vna cum Piscibus vtuntur etia^
Volatilibus: Alij vsque ad No^am ^einnantes, sine discretione Ciborum
reficiuntur. Puto, Apostolos singulorum hoc reliquisse sententiae, vt
vnusquisque Operetur, non timore, aut necessitate, quod bonum est: Sum men
(in the time of the Lenten Fast) eat only Fish: Others use both Fish^, and
Foul too: Sum others, when they have Fasted until three of the Clock in the
afternoon, afterward they refreashe their bodies without difference or
Choice of meats. Lenten Fast.
I think, the Apostles leafte this matter to every man's discretion, that
every man may do good without fear, or Superstition, or necessity.

Tertullian likewise says, Tertull. De Ieiunio, contra Physichos.
De coetero indifferenter ieiunandum, ex arbitrio, non ex imperio Nouae
Disciplinae, pro temporibus, and causis vniuscuiusque. Sic and Apostolos
obseruasse, nullum aliud imponentes iugum certorum, and in Commune omnibus
obeundorum ieiuniorum: Henceforth we must Foste without compulsion, of free
vvil, not by commandment of this New Discipline, accordingly as every man
shall see time, and cause. For so, it appears, the Apostles keapte it,
laieinge on none other yoke of certain appointed Fastes, to be observed in
Common of al men altogether.

Therefore S. Augustine says, Augusti. contra Faustum, Li. 30. Cap. 5.
Per Quadragesimam fere omnes abstinent, non solum a Carnibus, verum etiam a
quibusdam fructibus, quanto magis quisque vel minus, seu voluerit, seu
potuerit: In the Lent season al men for the most part abstain, not only
from fleashe, but also from certain fruits, as every man either vvil, or is
hable to do, more or less.

Al these things being true, and certain, and out of question, how can M.
Hardinge thus assure us, that the Lenten Fast is y^ Undoubted Tradition, and
Commandment of the Apostles?

Certainly, whereas they so often tell us, we ought to Fast Forty Days,
for that Christ him self did the like, and gave us example so to do,
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom in Matthae. Homil. 47.
Christus non iubet, vt leiunium suum imitemur: Christ commands us not to
follow his Fasting, Or, to Fast, as he Fasted.

And touching the number of the Days, Eusebius says, Quidam putant ieiunare
oportere vnum tantum Diem: Eusebius. Li. 5. Cap 26.
alij Duos: alij Plures: alij quadraginta Horas diurnas, noctumasque: Sum
think, they ought to Fast only one day? Others, two days: Others. More:
Some others, Forty whole Hours both night, and day together.

But what meante M. Hardinge here to comme in with the difference bitweene
Priests, and Bishops? Thinks he, that Priests, and Bishops hold only
by Tradition? Or is it so horrible an Heresy, as he makes it, to say, that
by y^ Scriptures of God, a Bishop, and a Priest are at One? Or knows he,
how far, and unto whom he reaches the name of an Heretic?

Verily Chrysostom says, Chrysostom in 1. Timoth. Hom. 11. Hieronym. ad
Euagrium.
Inter Episcopum, and Presbyterum interest ferme nihil: Bitweene a Bishop, and
a Priest in a manner there is no difference. S. Hierome says, sommewhat in
rougher sort, Audio, quendam in tantam erupisse vecordiam, vt Diaconos
Presbyteris, id est, Episcopis anteferret: Cum Apostolus perspicue doceat,
eosdem esse Presbyteros, quos Episcopos. I hear say, there is One becomme so
peeuishe, that he sets Deacons before Priests, that is to say, before Bis
hoppes: where as the Apostle plainly teaches us, that Priests, and Bishops
be al One.

S. Augustine says, Augustine. In quaestiontb. No. ui and Veter. Testamen.
Qu^ol. Ambros. De Dignitate Sacerdot ali. 1. Cor in 7. Johan. 2.
Quid est Episcopus, nisi Primus Presbyter, hoc est, Summus Sacerdos? What is a
Bishop, but the First Priest, that is to soie, the Highest Priest? So says
S. Ambrose, Episcopi, and Presbyteri vna Ordinatio est: Vterque enim Sacerdos
est. Sed Episcopus Primus est: There is but one Consecration of Priest, and
Bishop. For both of them are Priests. But the Bishop is the First.

Al these, and Other more Holy Fathers together with S. Paul the Apostle, for
thus sateinge, by M. Hardinges advise, must be holden for Heretics.

But S. Paul says to the Corinthians, Coetera, cum venero, disponam: For the
rest, I will take order, when I comme. And S. John says, I will not write by
paper, and ink: but I trust to be with you me self, and to speak unto you.
Upon these sewe words. M. Hardinge is hable to build by his Dimi Communion,
his Private Mass, Traditions.
and, what so ever he lists bisides.

S. Augustine says, Augu. in Johan. Tract. 57.
Omnes insipientissimi Haeretici, qui se Christianos vocari volunt, audacias
figmentorum suorum, quas maxim exhorret sensus humanus, hac occasion
Euangelicae sententiae colorare conantur, vbi Dominus ait, Adhuc multa vobis
habeo dicere: Sed ea non potestis portare modo: All the most peeuishe
Heretics, that feign would be called Christians, go about to color the
bold Vanities of their Inucntions, which the very sense and reason of Man
doothe most abhor, with the pretense of this saieinge in the Gospel, where
as our Lord says thus: I have many things to say unto you: but as now ye
are not hable to bear them.

Even so says Tertullian, Eadem dementia confitentur, Apostolos quidem nihil
ignorasse, Tertul. De Praescription. Co^tra Haereticos.
nec diuersa inter se praedicasse. Sed non omnia volunt illos omnibus
reuelasse: Sed quaedam Palam. and Vniuersis: quaedam secreto, and Paucis
demandasse: By a like kind of Madness they Confess, that the Apostles in
deed were ignorante of no thing: nor taught any contrary Doctrine emonge
themselves. But they say, The Apostles reucied not al things to al men: but
showed certain things openly, and to al: and other certain things
secretly, and unto a fevve.

By such right held sommetime the great Heretic Arius. For even so said
he then, Athanasius Co^tra Arian. Oratione 2.
as M. Hardinge says now, Ex Electis Dei secundum Fidem, Peritis Dei,
Rectigradis, oui Sanctum Dei Spiritum acceperunt, ego ita didici: These things
have I learned (not of y^ Scriptures, but) of the Chosen of God, according to
Faith: of the skilful in Godly understanding: of them, that walkte uprightly,
and had received the Sprite of God: that is to sale, by Tradition.

So Epiphanius says, Epiphani. Lib. 2. Haeres. 38.
The Heretics called Caiani, avouched al their solies, and Heresies, not by
the Scriptures, but by Tradition, as they said, from S. Paul: and took upon
them to know al those Secret words, that S. Paul had heard in the Third
Heaven.

If M. Hardinge may have leave, to handle the same weapons, I doubt not, but
he will soon be hable to prove, that both his Holy Bread, and his Holy
Water, and, what so ever shall please him else, came by Tradition directly from
the Apostles, and from Christ him self.

But S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11.
when he said, I vvil comme, and take order, he meante not to divise any other
Scripture, or New Verities, that they had not known before: but only to
appointe them, in what place, at what time, in what order, and with what other
Circumstances, the Holy Ministration, and other like Ecclesiastical Offices
should be used.

As for these fantasies, that M. Hardinge, and his fellows have imagined, S.
Augustine says, Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 96.
cum Christus ipse tacuerit, quis nostrum dicat, Ista, vel illa sunt? Aut, si
dicere audeat, vnde probat? Quis enim est tam vanus, aut tam temeratius, qui,
cum dixerit etiam vera, quibas voluerit, quae voluerit, fine vllo Testimonio
Diuino, affirmet ea esse, quae tunc Dominus dicere noluit? For as mutche as
Christ him self has not reuesed these things, which of us will say, they
be these, or these? Or if he so say, how can he prove it? For who is there,
either so vain, or so rash, who, notwithstanding he speak the Truth, to
whom he lists, and what he lists, will affirm without any Testimony of
the Scriptures, that these be the things, that the Lord then would not Open?

Such things they be, Hieronym In Aggaeum. cap. 1.
S. Hierome says, are cut of with the Sword (that is to say, with the
Word) of God.

M. Hardinge says, these express Words, Persona, Ingenitus, Homousios, are
not found in the Scriptures. So said the Arian Heretics too, as well, as he.
But what foreeth that? Epiphan. Lib 3. Hares. 73. (...).
Epiphanius says, Nomen Substantiae non ponitur nude, nec in Veteri, nec in
Nouo Testamento: Sensus autem eius Nominis vbique est: This very word, Forged
Scriptures
Substantia, is not plainly expressed, neither in the New, nor in the Old
Temente: But the sense and meaning of that Word is eueryvvhere.

So says Anthanasius, Athanas. Tom. 2. Quod Decreta Ni^enae Synodi commodis,
and piys verbis sint exposita.
Tametfi haec voces in Scriptura non reperiuntur, tamen habent earn Sententiam,
quam Scripturae volunt: Notwithstanding these words be not found expressed
in the Scripture, yet have they the same sense and meaning, that the scripture
wills.

Touching the Perpetual Virginity of that Blessed Virgin, the Mother of
Christ, which M. Hardinge says, cannot be proved by any Scriptures,
Gennadius writes thus, Gennadius in Catalogo Illustri. Virorum.
Heluidij prauitatem arguens Hieronymus, Libellum Documentis Scripturarum
Sufficienter factum aduersus cum edidu: S. Hierome repreuinge the wilful
lewdness of the Heretic Heluidius (denieinge the Perpetual Virginity of
Christ's Mother) set forth a Book against him, furnished with sufficie^te
Testimomonies of the Scriptures. Gennadius says, the Perpetual Virginity of
Our Lady is proved sufficiently by the Scriptures: M. Hardinge, only to
maintain his quarrel, says, It cannot be proved by any Scriptures: but
stands only by Tradition.

S. Hierome him self in so vain a contention, moved by an Heretic, thought
it sufficient to answer thus: Hieronym. Contra Heluidium.
Mariam nupsisse post partum non credimus: quia non legimus: We believe not,
that Marie was Married again after her Childebearinge: because we read it
not.

Here M. Hardinge thinks to oppress us with the Old Heretics Ordinary
question: How know you, says he, that the Scriptures be the Scriptures?
How know you, that the Gospel of Thomas, Bartholomewe, and Nicodeme are no
Scriptures? Thus they labor to pulle al credit from the Word of God, and
send us only to their Traditions. Of God, and his Word, they would
evermore have us to stand in doubt: but of the Pope, and his Word, they
say, in any wise we male not doubt. Hosius, De expresso Verbo Dei.
Hosius a special Proctoure of that side says, Quod Ecclesia docet, id est
Expressum Verbum Dei: What so ever the Church teaches, (he means the
Church of Rome) that is the very Express Word of God.

A man might well demand the like question of M. Hardinge: How know you,
that the Son is the Son? Or that the Moene is the Moene? Or how know
you, that the Church is the Church? Or that the Congregation of the Wicked is
not the Church?

Such idle questions the Old Heretics the Manichees demanded of S.
augustine. August. Contra Paustum, Lib. 32. Cap. 21.
But S. Augustine answered them, Si quaeratis a nob is, vnde nos sciamus,
Apostolorum esse istas literas, breuiter vobis respondemus, Inde nos scire,
vnde and vos scitis, illas literas esse Manichaei: If you demand of us, how
we know that these be the Apostles writings, we make you this short
answer, Even so we know, that Our writings are of the Apostles, as you
know, that your writings are of the Heretic Manichee.

But for further answer, I reckon, M. Hardinge cannot be ignorant, that the
Gospel of Thomas, Bartholomevve, Nicodeme, and such others, were never
written by them, whoes names they bear: but were wickedly, and falsely
countrefeited under their names, by sundry Heretics.

S. Ambrose says, Eusebius. Li. 3. ca. 25 Ambro. in Luca^, in Prooemio.
Erant Pseudopropherae, etc. Erat autem populi gratia discernere Spiritus: vt
cogno scerer, quos refer deberet in numerum Propherarum: quos autem, quasi
bonus Nummularius, reprobare. Sic and nunc in Nouo Testamento multi Eua^gelia
scribere conati sunt: quae boni Nummularij non probauerunt: There were False
Prophets, etc. But the people had a Grace geeuen them, to discern Sprites,
and to judge, whom they should receive into the number of the Prophets: and
whom, as skilful exchangers, Forged Scriptures
they should refuse. Even so now in the time of the New Testamente, Many
have taken in hand to Write Gospels: But the skilful exchangers, and triers
of Coins have not allowed them.

So says S. Augustine: Augusti. contra Faustum, Lib. 22. Cap. 80.
Manichaei legunt Scripturas Apocryphas, nescio a quibus Sutoribus Fabularum,
sub nomine Apostolorum scriptas: The Manichees read Secret Hidden Scriptures,
written, I know not by what Cobblers of Fables, under the name of the Apostles.

So says Eusebius of the Gospel countrefeited under the name of S. Peter: Nos
Petrum, Eusebius. li. 6 ca. 12.
and reliquos Apostolos, sicut Christum recipimus. Sed Pseudepigrapha
reijcimus: Veluti gnari eorum sensus, and sententiae: Scientes, quod talia non
recipimus tradita ab Apostolis: We receive Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, as we would receive Christ him self. But Countrefeite Writings
(under their names) we refuse vttersy: as having understanding of their
sense, (...).
and meaning: knowinge well, that we have received no such things delivered
by the Apostles.

Thus had the Church of God the Sprite of Wisdom, whereby to discern the
True Scriptures from the False.

Yet male we not geather hereof, that the Authority of the Church is over,
and above the Scriptures. Did. 4. In istis.
S. Augustine says, In istis temporalibus Legibus, quamuis de illis homines
iudicent, cum eas instituunt, tamen cum fuerint institutae, and firmatae, non
licebit ludici, de illis iudicare, sed secundum eas: In these temporal, or
Worldly Jaws, although men be Judges over the^, while they be a making, yet
after the same Laws be once made, and established, it is no senger lawful for
the Judge to Judge of them: Only it is lawful, to Judge by them.

Likewise again he says, August. Confess. Lib. 13. Cap. 23.
Spirituales, sieve qui praesunt, sieve qui obtemperant, Spiritualiter iudicant:
non de cognitionibus Spiritualibus, quae lucent in Firmamento (id est, de
Scripturis): Non enim oportet de tam sublimi Authoritate iudicare, etc. Homo
enim, licet Spiritualis, factor ramen Legis esse debet, non Iudex. De illis
dicitur Iudicare, in quibus potestatem habet corrigendi: Men Spiritual,
whether they ruse, or be ruled, Judge according to the Sprite. But they Judge
not of the Spiritual knowledge, that shines in the Firmamente (that is to
say, of the Scriptures): For it is not lawful for any man to be Judge over so
high Authority. For be the man never so mutche Spiritual, yet must he be a
Dooer, and not a Judge of the Law. There a Man is said to be a Judge, where
he has Power, and Authority to correct.

The Apology, Cap. 10. Division. 1.
Moreover we allow the Sacraments of the Church, that is to say, certain
Holy Signs, and Ceremonies, which Christ would we should use, that by
them he might set before our eyes the Mysteries of our Salvation, and might
more strongely confirm the Faith, which we have in his Blood, and might
seal his Grace in our hearts. And these Sacraments, together with
Tertullian, Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, Basile,
Dionysius, and other Catholic Fathers. we do call Figures, Signs, Marks,
Badges, Printes, Copies, Fourmes, Seals, Signettes, Similitudes, Paternes,
Representations, Remembraunces, and Memories. And we make no doubt, together
with the same Doctors to say, that these be certain Visible words,
Seals of Righteousness, and Tokens of Grace.

M. Hardinge.
With what face, say ye, that ye allow the Sacraments of the Church?
Untruth. For the things, that vveehaue leafte, were not the Sacram. of the
Church.
Have ye not abandot ned almost all the Sacraments of the Church? Retain ye
any mo by name of the Sacraments then two, Baptism, and your Supper of the
Lord? Of which the one, after that Doctrine, as it is by you taught, and
ministered, avails nothing but to your further condemnation.

The sound, and true Doctrine, which the Catholic Church holds, and
believes touching this point, is this: The sound and true Doctrine of the
Sacraments.
There be seven Sacraments, in which, under coouer of visible things, the
Untruth. As shall appear.
Power of God works man's health. They be these: Baptism, Confirmation, the
Sacrament of the altar, Penance, extreme Unction, Order, VVedlocke. And these
so we call Sacraments, as nevertheless we acknowledge the name of Sacrament may
be extended to many other things. That it be known what a Sacrament is, this
word Sacrament signifies sommetime a holy thing, Seven Samentes.
sometime the sign of a holy thing instituted by God. Sacrament what it
signifies.
As it is taken for a sign only, so is it found generally, not only in the
New Law, but also in the Old Law. But in the New Law these signs after a
Peculiar, and Special manner be called Sacraments, which do not only signify
a holy thing, but also do sanctify and make holy those to who^ they be
adhibited, being such as by institution of Christ contain grace in them, and
Power to sanctify. ^ Untruth. For they are only certain late Scholastical
Sophisters.
Whereof a Sacrament is by the best learned divines defined to be a visible
sign of invisible grace, Definition of a Sacrament.
so as it bear the image of it,* and be cause of the same. For the plain
understanding of this Definition, how a Sacrament bears the form, sign, or
image of invisible grace, it appears evidently in Baptism, where washinge of
the body shows the cleansing of the soul. Also in the Sacrament of the
Altar, Untruth, Vain, and childishe. For no Learned Father ever said so.
where the forms of Bread and Wine out wardly represent the spiritual
nourishing of the soul. The like appears in other Sacraments.

Neither is it a New, and straung Doctrine to say, that the Sacraments of the
Gospel contain grace in them, for the Fathers teach the same not seldom.
Chrysostom expounding the Mystery of the Poole called Bethesda in Hebrewe,
that was in Jerusalem, says, that sick folk were healed at the moving of the
water, to the intent men might be brought to understand the virtue of
Baptism. For then was it coming to pass (says he) that Baptism should be
full of power and grace. Cap. 5.
S. Ambrose in his book de Sacramentis speaking of Baptism, says it is not
every water that heals, but that water heals, which has the Grace of
Christ. Cyrillus upon the foresaid Chapter of S. John says, that in Baptism
it is not Water simply, that works, but when as it has received the grace
of the Holy Ghost. Sermon Dominicae intra octauas Epiphaeniae.
S. Augustine in a Sermon says, the Water in Baptism is enriched with a more
gift in manner, then was the Virgin Mary. For the (says he) deserved
Chastity to her self, this has given to us sanctifications: She deserved
that she sinned not, this that it might purge sins. It is said universally
by S. Cyprian of all the Sacraments, that the fat of Gods anointinge powereth
fulness of grace into the ministerial sanctifications, In sermon de Baptismo
Christi.
whereby he means the Sacraments. Yet we mean, that they contain grace,
and power to sanctify, after such manner of speakinge, as we say of Potions
and drinks prepared for sick Persons, that they contain health, to the
workinge whereof they be effectual.

And as it is said of the Sacraments, that they contain grace, so is it
likewise said, that through their virtue, which they have by Gods
institution, they do not only signify (as by these Defenders Doctrine that
seems to be their special office) but also with signification Untruth. See
the Answer.
work and cause, as an instrumental cause, the effect of that, which they
signify.

After which manner, Power gede to Sacraments to work that they signify by
Gods ordinance.
God has given to the Sacraments of the New Testamente, that they work the
thing signified, through virtue given them by Gods ordinance, to special
effects of grace.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Of the number of the Sacraments, we shall have more conueniente time to
speak hereafter. There, gentle Reader, I trust, thou shall see M. Hardinges
great question easily answered, with what face we say, we allow the
Sacraments of the Church. In the mean season it may please thee, to weigh
these words of Cardinal Bessarion, the Bishop of Tusculum, one of M.
Hardinges especial Catholic Doctors: Bessarion, De Sacramen. Eucharistiae.
Haec Duo Sola Sacramenta in Euangelijs manifest tradita legimus: These only
two Sacraments we read to be delivered us plainly in ye Gospel. Here
Bessarion names, Baptism.
not Seven Sacraments, as M. Harding does, but only Two. Certainly we
refuse no Sacrament, that ever was either ordained by Christ, or used and
practiced by the Apostles.

Your Lords Supper, says M. Hardinge, avails you nothing, but to your
further Comdemnation. So must it needs be, because M. Harding says, it shall
so be. These Tragical terrors are fit only to frale children: In the Date of
the Lord each man's work shall appear. The simpleste of our people
understands the Nature, and Meaning of ye Holy Mystery of Our Lords Supper:
and therefore they receive y^ same together to their great consolation. But
in Your Lady Mass the simple people understands nothing, hears nothing,
and, saving a few unseemly Ceremonies, sees nothing. And therefore they so
seldom Communicate, and that only of custom, without any zele, or comfort
of conscience, as having no sense, or feeling in all these dooinges. Origin. in
Luc^ Homil. 5.
Orige^ says, Nisi Circuncisionis reddatur ratio, nutus est, and Opus mutum.
Pascha, and aliae Solenuitates nutus magis sunt, quam Veritas, vsque hodie
Populus Israel surdus, and mutus est: Unless the reasons, or causes of
Circumcision be opened, Circumcision is but a gesture, and a doumbe kind of
work. The Easter Feast, and other like Solemnities, are rather Ceremonies,
then the Truth it self. Even still until this day, Ambros. in 1. Cor. 11.
the people of Israel is deaf, and doumbe. S. Ambrose says, Indignus est
Domino, qui aliter Mysterium celebrat, quam a Christo traditum est. Non enim
potest deuotus esse qui aliter praesumit, quam datum est ab Authore: He is
unworthy of the Lord, that Ministers this Sacrament otherwise, then
Christ delivered it. For he cannot be devout, that presumes to use it
otherwise, then it was first delivered from Christ the Authoure. These
words seem sommewhat to touch M. Hardinge, and his Company. But here he is
contented, to allow us the very Sacrament, and true use of Baptism, and that
vailable, and of force for the Remission of Sins. Whereby unadvisedly, and
unawares he confesses, that we have the very True Catholic Church of God.
For S. Augustine says truly, Baptismus Ecclesiae potest esse extra
Ecclesiam: De Con. Did. 4 Ecclesia.
munus autem Beatae vitae non nisi intra Ecclesiam inuenitur: The Baptism of
the Church may be without the Church: but the gift of Blessed life is not
found, but within the Church. But why he allows us this Sacrament, rather
then the other, it were a hard matter to discuss. Neither may we justly
require reason of him that speaks so mutche without reason.

Perhaps he will sat, Baptism is but a light Sacrament, and may be ministered
by any Lay Person, even by an old Woman, or by a gyrle, so that she speak
Latin, and understand not, what she say. For otherwise, I trow, her
dooinge may not stand for good. Certainly, whereas M. Hardinge speaks of
the dew Form of Words, according to Christ's Institution, his own
Doctors tell us, De Conse. Did. 4. Si non.
and auouche it for great Truth, that if the Priest say thus, Ego te
Baptizo in nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti, and Diaboli: That is,
I. Baptize thee in the name of the Father, De Conse. Did. 4. Retulerunt.
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and of the Devil: Or if he say
thus, as one ignorante Priest sommetime said, Ego te Baptizo in nomine
Patria, and Filia, and Spirita Sancta, yet the Form of Baptism is very good.

But one great fault M. Hardinge finds in our dooinges, for that we have
leafte out a great many Holy rites, his Chrisme, his Oil, his Salt, his
Spittle, and such other like things: and for that we minister this
Sacrament plainly, and simply, as Christ commanded. This objection being
of no greater weight, may easily discharge it self, and therefore may pass
well without farther answer.

M. Hardinge says, there be Seven Sacraments, which, as he says, do not
only signify a Holy thing, but also do Sanctify, and make holy those, to
who^ they be adhibited, being such as by Institution of Christ contain
Grace in them, and power to sanctify. Here, to leaus the rest, it might be
demanded, how can Matrimony Sanctify a Man, and make him Holy: To Contain
Grace.
or by what Institution of Christ contains it Grace in it self, and Power
to Sanctific? Or if it cannot Sanctify, nor have such Grace, how then can
it be called a Sacrament?

I grant, the Ancient Learned Fathers, entreating of the Sacraments, have
often used vehement, Council Nicen.
and great words. It is written in the Council of Nice, Vides Aquam?
Considera Vim Diuinam, quae in Aquis Latet. Puta, Aquam esse plena^ Ignis
Diuini. See thou the Water? Consider ye divine Power that lies Hid in the
Water, Imagine, that the Water is full of Heavenly Fiere. So S. Ambrose, Spiritus
Sanctus descendit, Ambros. De Samen. Li. 1. Cap. 5. Tertul. De Batismo.
and Aquam consecrat. Adest Praesentia Trinitatis: The Holy Ghost comes
down, and haloweth the Water. There is the Presence of the Trinity. So says
Tertullian, In Baptismo tingimur Passione Christi: In Baptism we are vvasshed
with the Passion of Christ. So says Chrysostom, as M. Hardinge has here
alleged him, Baptism is full of Power, and Grace: So says S. Cyprian: so say
others.

Al these, and other like vehemente speeches M. Harding mitigateth, and
qualifieth in this wise: We mean, says he, that Sacraments contain Grace,
after such manner of speakinge, as we say, Potions, and drinks contain
health. That is to say, Sacraments verily, and in deed contain not the
Grace of God. For drinks, and Potions verily, 4. Reg. 4.
and in deed contain not the health of ye Patiente. In this manner of speech
ye Children of the Prophets said to Elizaeus the Prophet, Mors in olla, Vir
Dei: Prou. 18. Johan. 5.
O thou man of God, Death is in the Pot. So Solomon says, Death, and Life
are in the hands of the tongue. So Christ says unto the Phariseis, Search
the Scritures: for in them you think to have everlasting Life. Therefore one
M. Hardinges School Doctous says, Johan. De Parisijs, De Potestate Regia,
Cap. 26.
In Sacramentis Ecclesiae, specialis Virtus Passionis Christi continetur, sicut
Virtus agentis in instrumento: The special Grace of the Passion of Christ is
contained in the Sacraments of the Church, as the Power of the works is
contained in the instrumente, wherewith he woorketh.

But in deed, it is the Soul of man, and not the Creature of Bread, or
Water, that receives the Grace of God. We have need of Gods Grace: These
corruptible elements need it not. Without Faith of our Part Sacraments be
not only unprofitable to us, Chryso. in Matthae. Operis Imperfe. Homil. 43.
but also hurtful. S. Chrysostame says, Vbi est Virtus Euangelij? In Figuris
literarum, an in intellectu sensuu^? Where is the Power of the Gospel? In the
Fourmes of the letters, or else in the understanding of the meaning?

Likewise Bonauentura says, Bonauen in 4. Sen. did. 1. Qu. 3.
Nullo modo dicendum est, quod Gratia continetur in ipsis Sacramentis
essentialiter, tanquam Aqua in Vase, vel Medicina in Pyxide. Imo hoc
intelligere est erroneum. Sed dicuntur continere Gratiam, quia eam signicant:
We may not in any wise say, that the Grace of God is contained
substantially, and verily in the Sacraments, as Water is contained in the
Vessel, or a Medicine in the Box. For so to say, it were enoneous. But we
say, the Sacraments contain the Grace of God: Eodem loco.
because they signify the Grace of God. Again he says, Gratia est in anima,
non in Signis visibilibus: The Grace of God is, not in the visible Signs, but
in the Soul. And again he says, Ad illud, quod obijcitur, quod remissio
Peceatorum Latet in Baptismo, dicendum est, quod hoc intelligiturede latentia
Signati in Signo: quod quidem habet vlteriorem rationem, quam rationem
Significandi: non tamen essentialiter continendi in se: sed quia ipsum, quod
Signat, continetur in anima: To the Objection, that is made, that the Romission
of Sins is Hid in Baptism, we must answer thus, that it must be taken
of the thing Signified hid in the Sign. Which thing nevertheless has a
farther meaning, then to Signify: yet not to contain (the Remission of
Sins) verily, and Substantially in it self: but that the Grace, that is
Signified thereby, is contained in the Soul.

The Mystical signification, Fourmes, and Accidents.
that M. Harding has imagined, of his Shows, and Accidents, that the
Fourmes of Bread, and Wine outwardely represente the Spiritual nourishinge of
the Soul, is vain, and fantastical, without the witness of any Anciente
Doctor, or Father, confirmed only by the Authority of him self. For what
manner of feedinge is there is these Accidents, and Holy Fourmes? Or how can
that thing, that feeds not the Body, represente unto us the Spiritual
feedinge of the Soul?

The matter is plain yenough of it self, and needs no cauil. The
Signification, and Substance of the Sacrament is to show us, how we are fed
with the Body of Christ: that is, that like as Material Bread feeds our
Body, so the Body of Christ nailed on the Cross, embraced, and eaten by
Faith, feeds the Soul. The like Representation is also made in the
Sacrament of Baptism: that as our Body is washed clean with Water, so our
Soul is washed clean with Christ's Blood. Augustine. Epist. 23.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Nisi Sacramenta similitudinem quandam earum
rerum, quarum sacramenta sunt, haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent: If
Sacraments had not a certain likeness, and representation of the things,
whereof they be Sacraments, then in deed they were no Sacraments. This
Representation Rabanus Maurus expounds thus, Rabanus Li. 2. Cap. 31.
Quia Panis Corpora confirmat, ideo ille congruenter Corpus Christi nuncupatur:
Et quia vinum Sanguinem operatur in Carne, ideo refertur ad Sanguinem: Because
(not the Accidents, or Fourmes of Bread, but) Bread it self confirms the
Body, therefore it is conveniently called the Body of Christ: And because Wine
woorketh blood in the fleashe, therefore it has relation unto the Blood.

So likewise says Druthmarus, Druthmarus in Matthae. ca. 26.
Vinum laetificat, and Sanguinem auget: and ideo non inconuenienter Sanguis
Christi per hoc figuratur: (not the Accidents or Fourmes of Wine, but) Wine
it self reioiceth the heart, and increases blood: And therefore the Blood
of Christ conveniently is thereby signified.

M. Hardinge, for that he cannot utterly deny it, the matter being so plain,
is therefore contented to grant, that the Sacrament is the Figure of Christ's
Body. But to help out, and to shifte the matter, he has divised such a
strange kind of Figure, as seldom has benne heard before. Notwithstanding
the Holy Learned Fathers speak plainly, and simply, and use no kind of
such Gloses. Hierony. aduersus Ruffinum.
S. Hierome says, Ad Tropicam intelligentiam sermo referatur. Quando dico,
Tropicam, docco verum non esse, quod dicitur, sed allegoriae nubilo figuratum:
Let that sateinge be expounded by a Figure. When I say, a Figure, I say, the
thing that is spoken, is not true in deed, but Figured under the cloud of an
Allegory. Likewise Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Genesin, Homi. 35.
Audisti, fuisse Figuram. Ne ergo mirare, neque omnia require in typo. Neque
enim typus esset, si omnia, quae Veritati accidunt, haberentur: Ye have heard,
that it was a Figure. Therefore maiueise not: and being a Figure, require not
al things to agree. Augustine. De Doctrinae Christiana, li. 3. ca. 5.
For otherwise it were no Figure. So likewise S. Augustine says, in Principio
cauendum est, ne Figuratam locutionem ad literam accipias. Ad hoc enim
pertinet, quod ait Apostolus, Litera occidit. Cum enim Figurate dictum sic
accipitur, tanquam prorie dictum sit, Carnaliter sapitur: neque ulla mors
animae congruentius appellatur: First of al thou must take heed, that thou
take not a Figurative Speech according to the Letter. For that is it, whereof
S. Paul says, The Letter Kills. For, when the thing, that is spoken under
a Figure, is so taken, as if it were plainly spoken, there is a Fleashly
understanding. Neither is there any thing, that may better be called the
death of the Soul. Articulo. 12.
All this, and mutche more to like purpose, thou maiste find in my Former
Reply to M. Hardinge.

An other fantasy M. Hardinge has, that the Sacraments of the Nevve Law
work the thing it self, Sacram. Old. Nevve.
that they signify, through Virtue, as he says, given unto them by Gods
ordinance, to special effects of Grace. This, as I said, is but a fantasy.
For the Sacraments of the Old Law, 1. Corin. 10.
and of the Nevve, in Truth, and Substance are al one. S. Paul says, Omnes
eundem cibum Comederunt: Hilari. in Psalnum 67.
The Fathers in the Old Law, did al eat the same meare, that is to say, the
same Christ, that we eat. S. Hilarie says, Sub nube fuerunt, and Christo,
aquam Petra praebente, Leo De Natiuita Domini, Sermon. 3.
potati sunt: They were under the Cloud, and were drenched with Christ, the
Rock geeuinge them water. Likewise says Leo: Mysteria pro temporum ratione
variata sunt: quum Fides, qua viuimus, nulla fuerit aetate diuersa: The
Sacraments are astered according to the diversity of the times. But the
Faith, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 26.
whereby we live, in all ages was ever one. Likewise S. Augustine,
Sacramenta illa fuerunt, in Signis diuersa: in rebus, quae significabantur,
paria: These things were Sacraments, in the outvvarde tokens, diverse: but in
the things tokened, al one with ours.

M. Hardinge will reply: Augustine. in Psalm. 73.
S. Augustine says, Sacramenta Noui Testamenti dant Salutem: The Sacraments
of the New Testament geeue Salvation. But who can better expound S. Augustines
meaning, then S. Augustine him self? He adds immediately: Cum ergo iam
teneas promissa, quid quaeris promittentia Saluatorem? Hoc dico, teneas
promissa: non quod iam acceperimus Viram aeternam, Sed quodiam Christus
Venerit, qui per Prophetas praenuntiabatur: Wherefore, seeinge thou haste the
Promises (of the coming of Christ) already performed, what seek thou
the things, that Promised the Saueoure? I say, Thou haste the Promises
already performed: not for that we have already received everlasting life,
but for that Christ is already comme, that was promised by the Prophets.
Therefore, when S. Augustine says, Our Sacraments give Salvation, his
meaning is this, Our Sacraments teach us, Augustine contra Faustum, Li. 19.
Ca. 14.
that Salvation is already comme into the World. Thus S. Augustine says in an
other place: Illa fuerunt Promissiones rerum complendarum: haec sunt indicia
completarum: The Sacraments of the Old Law were Promises of such things,
as should afterv vard be accomplisshed: Our Sacraments of the New Law are
takens, that the same Promises be already accomplisshed. Thus the Holy Fathers
say, The Sacraments of the New Law work Salvation: because they teach
us, that our Salvation is already wrought. So Bonauentura says of the
Sacraments of the Old Testamente, Bonauentura. in 4. Senten. dis. 1. In
Procemio.
Mundare dicebantur: id est, mundatum ostendebant: They were said to make a
man clean, because they shevved, or signified, that a man was made clean.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 1.
And we do expressly pronounce, that in the Lords Supper there is Truly
given unto the Beleuinge the Body and Blood of our Lord, the Fleashe of the
Son of God, which quickens our Souls, the Meat that comes from above,
y^ food of Immortality, or Grace, Truth, and Life: And the same Supper to be
the communton of the Body, and Blood of Christ: by the partaking whereof we
be revived, streghtened, and fed unto Immortality: and whereby we are
Joined, United, and Incorporate unto Christ, that we may abide in him, and
he in us.

M. Hardinge.
What ye proncunce of this high Sacrament, the wise and careful tenderers of
their souls will be right ware thereof. Of you and such as ye be, because your
Doctrine is In respect of this Corner, the Church of Rome were a simple
corner.
but of a corner of the world in respect of the Universal Church, Matt. 24.
has given us a watch word, Nolite credere, The Sacramentaries Lords
supper.
believe them not. In your the Lords supper, celebrated by the Ministers of
your own creation, Untruths, joined with Heathenishe blasphemies.
there is not geeuen the Body and Blood of our Lord, neither to the believing,
nor to the unbelieving. For at the celebration of your schismatical supper, no
* consecration being done, * nor Faith of the Church, * not right intention
had, * nor Christ's institution observed, what deliver ye to your
communicantes, but * a piece of Bread, and a * sippe of Wine? Neither is it *
your will it be more or better. At the supper of Our Lord ministered in the
Catholic Church by Priests rightly consecrated, Judas received the true body
of Christ, nolesse then thapostles. Math. 26. Chrysostom. Homil. de Proditione
Iudae. Augustine. in Psalm. 10.
and as it has been accustomed in Christ's Church, there is the true and whole
Body of our Lord and saueour geeuen and received, be the receivers beleuinge,
or Vnttuthe, Read tile Answer.
not beleuinge. For when Christ gave this Sacrament to his Disciples at his
last supper, after that he had consecrated the same, saieing, take ye, eat ye,
this is my Body: Judas the traitor, as the * Fathers teach, received his true
Body nolesse then Peter, Andrewe, John, or James did: though they to their
salvation, he to his damnation.

Now it is to be noted, how this Defender in this long sentence affects a
certain holy (as it were) and solemn eloquence, and uses a religious
amplification of Words, to set forth the sacrament, as though he had a
reverent and a godly opinion of it: whereas in deed he takes it Untruth. For
we call the Sign the Sign: and the Truth, the Truth.
but for a poor sign or token, as their Doctoure Zuinglius does. But such
is their craft, to purchase them credit among the people. Thus offer they to
the unlearned their fair cups full of venym, anointinge the brimmes with
Honye of sweet and Holy words, the rather to poison them. Such complainte
makes the grave Father S. Hilary against the Arians of his time, Ingerunt
nobis primu^ nomina Veritaus, De trinit. Li. 6.
vt virus falsitatis introeat. Bonum in Ore est, vt de cord malum subeat:
First (says he) they thrust me forth words of truth, that the venym of
falsehed mate enter in. Good is in their mouth, that out from the heart may
evil proceed. And among al these words (he means the Arians confession of
their faith) I hear no where by them said, Deum dei filium: God the son of
God. Right so among al these fair words concerning the Sacrament, O
merueilous horrible Heresi: what Doctor, or Father ever named your Real
Presence^
we hear never a whit said of the real presence of Christ's Body. Contra
Ariomanitas, Haeresi. 69. De gratia Christi, contra Pelagiu^ and Coelest. li.
1. Cap. 32. Matthew. 13.
Epiphanius notes the like craft in Arius, and so does S. Augustine in the
Pelagians. Nestorius likewise spoke honorably in many places of Christ and his
Mother. But now here would he call her (...), that is, the Mother of God. The
Jews also, as we find in the Gospel, called our savior Jesus the Carpenters
son, confessed Mary to be his Mother, James, Joseph, Simon, and Jude, his
brothers, and that his sisters were among them (by whom his Kinnes folk are to
be understood) but the son of God they would not acknowledge him, nor in
that degree honor him. Better then to those Jews can I not compare these
Defenders, who speak honorably of our Lords Body and Blood in their supper:
Neither did any Doctor or Father Ever say, that Christ's Body is Really, and
Verily in the Sacraments.
but that his Body is really, that it is verily in the Sacrament of the altar,
that will not the Devil who reigns in their hearts, suffer their mouths to
utter.

The B. of Sarisburie.
M. Hardinge tells us, we deliver unto the Faitheful nothing else, but a
piece of Bread, and a slppe of Wine: that we have neither Intention, nor
Consecration: that our fair Cups be full of Venime: That our Supper is
Schismatical: that our Eloquence is Hypocritical: that our Doctrine is
Heretical: that we are like to the Pelagians, to the Nestorians, to the
Arians, and to the jews: and that the Devil reigns in our hearts. If the
Truth of God were evermore joined with vain speech, then might M. Hardinge
be hable easily to win the price. He says, Our Doctrine is but in a Corner
of the world, and that therefore Christ has given this watch word of us,
Believe them not. How be it, if he would advisedly consider the matter, and
look well about him, he should find, that so many Kingdoms, and Countries,
and Commonweales, as this day profess the Gospel of Christ, would make a good
large Corner in the Church of God. Certainly in respect thereof, Rome it
self were a very poor Corner.

Unto whom Christ specially pointed, 2. Thessalon. ^
when he said these words, Believe them not, because it is a Prophecy, it
is hard to judge. But it is very likely, he meante Antichriste, that Man of
Sin, the Child of destruction, that auanceth him self above all that is
called God. Consecration.
Verily Chrysostom thereof says thus: Non dico, Chrysostom. in Mat. Homil. 49.
si dixerint vobis, Ecce in Haereticis Ecclesijs illis, vel in illis apparuit
Christus: sed etiam si in ipsis veris Ecclesijs, quae Dei sunt, id est, domus
vestrae, dixerint vobis, Christum apparuisse, nolite eis credere dicentibus
ista de me: quia non est digna Diuinitatis meae notitla haec: Ostendens per
haec, quomodo ex ipsis Ecclesijs veris frequenter exeunt Seductores. Propterea
nec ipsis omnino credendu^ est, nisi ea dicant, vel faciant, quae conuenientia
sint Scripturis: I say not, if they tell you, Behold Christ has appeared in
these, or these Churches of Heretics: But if they shall say unto you, that
Christ bathe appeared in the very true Churches, that are of God, that is to
say, that are your houses, Believe them not, if they say thus of me: for this
is no worthy knowledge of my Divinity: By these he shows, how that out of
the very true Churches oftentimes come forth deceivers. Therefore we may
not believe no not them, unless they speak, or do those things, that are
agreeable to the Scriptures.

Verily, how so ever M. Hardinge will shifte this matter, the plain words
seem rather to touch him, and his company, then either Luther, or Zuinglius,
or any other. For they can point with their fingers, and say, Here is
Christ, and There is Christ. Behold, In this Pyre are three Christ's: in that
five: in that seven: in that more. Therefore it is likely, that Christ geeueth
us this special watch word of them, and such others, Believe them not.

Here M. Hardinge makes mutche adoo about Consecration: and yet are not his
Fellows well agreed, what to make of their own Consecration. Gabriel says,
Gabriel Biel. Lectio. 36.
Chritus potuit sine verbo tanquam verus Deus, Substantiam Panis, and Vini
Consecrare: Vel, potuit verba quaedam secreto proferre, and per illa
Consecrare: Vel, per haec Verba, Hoc est Corpus meum, Consecrare potuit: Vel,
potuit prius Consecrare, and postea distribuere: Vel, primum distribuere, and
postea Consecrare. Quid autem horum fecerit, ex Sacris Scripturis non constat:
Christ, as being very God, might Consecrate the Substance of Bread and Wine
without word: Or else, he might speak certain words in secret, and by
them Consecrate: Or else, he might Consecrate by these words, This is my Body:
Or else, he might first Consecrate, and after deliver: Or else, first deliver,
and after Consecrate. But which of al these he did in deed, Bessarion de
Sacramen. Eucharistia. Catharinus De Consecratione. Durandus Li. 4. De Sexta
part Canonis. Petrus de Alliaco, in. 4. Senten. quae. 5. Antididagma.
Bonauentura in 4 Senten. did. 8. quae. 2.
by the Holy Scriptures it appears not. Cardinal Bessarion says, that in
the Latin Church Consecration is wrought by the words of Christ: in the
Greek Church by other Prayers, that follow afterward. Catharinus intreatinge
pourposely hereof, says, Christ Consecrated not with the same words, that
are now used in the Mass, This is my Body. Durandus says, Christ
Consecrated by his Divine power, and after Consecration said, This is my
Body. Petrus Alliacensis yeldeth this reason hereof, Quia, nisi ante fuisset
Corpus Christi, Christus non vere dixisset, Hoc est Corpus meum: If it had not
benne Christ's Body before, Christ could not have said truly, This is my
Body. It is concluded in a Book called Antididagma. lately set forth by the
Chapter of Colaine. that the bare words of Christ's Institution, without the
words of the Canon of the Mass, are not sufficient to work Consecration.
Bonauentura says, To have the true Form of Consecration, we must seek,
not to the Gospel of Christ, but to the Canon. How be it, thereof grows a
great inconvenience, that Christ, and his Apostles, for that they had not the
words of the Canon, had therefore no Consecration. Again Bonauentura says,
that these words, Noui, and Aeterni Testamenti, are not of the substance of
Consecration: but are used only as a fourniture. Scotus in. 4. Senten. dis. 8.
quae. 2.
Johannes Scotus says, Quod ergo est consilium? Dico, quod Sacerdos intendens
facere, quod facit Ecclesia, legens distinct verba Canonis, a Principio vsque
ad finem, vere consicit: nec est tutum alicui, reputare se valde peritum in
scienua sua, and dicere, volo uti praecise istis verbis pro Consecratione: The
matter being so doubteful, what then is your Counsel? I say, that the Priest
intendinge to do, what so ever the Church doothe, and readinge the words of
the Canon distinctly, and plainly, from the beginning to the end, doothe
verily Consecrate. Neither is it good for a man to reckon him self very
skilful in his knowledge, and to say, I vvil use precisely these, or these
words to work Consecration. Where also these words are specially noted
in the Margin, Nota, quod de hae materia, Doctor nihil hic asserit, sed
probabiliter aliquid dicens, sub dubio relinquit: Here mark, that touching
this matter (of Consecration) the Doctor avouches nothing: but speakinge
sommewhat by the way of likelyhoode, he leaves the whole matter under doubt.
In the end Scotus uncertainly, and doubtefully concludes thus: Vnde dicunt
aliqui, quod Forma Graecorum, Scotus in. 4. Senten dis. 8. quae. 2.
and Forma nostra, and quaecunque scripta in Euangelijs, sufficiens est ad
Consecrationem: Whereof sum say thus, that the Form of words, that the
Greeks use, and the Form that we use, and any Form else written in the
Gospels is sufficient to Consecration. The like certainetie Bonauentura
teaches us: For thus he ends: Bonauentura in 4. Senten. did. 8.
De hoc est vtilius dubitare: Quis enim potest scire, vtrum Euangelistae, aut
Apostolus ipse intenderint describete Formam? Igitur melius est, hic pie
dubitare, quam praesumptuose definire: Hereof it is best to stand in doubt.
For who can tell, whether the Evangelists, or the Apostle Paul him self,
meante to write us the Form of Consecration? Therefore in this point it is
better, Soberly to doubt, then presumptuously to determine.

By these few, good Christian Reader, thou maiste see the ground, and
certainetie of M. Hardinges Doctrine. He says, We have no Consecration, for
that we lack a Thing: but what Thing it should be, he, and his Fellows
cannot tell.

How be it, in deed we use the same words that Christ used. If Christ,
and his Apostles Consecrated, then do we undoubtedly likewise Consecrate. The
want, that he finds in us, he may also find in them. S. Augustine says,
Augustine. in Johan. tracta 80. Origin in Matt. Cap. 15. Ambros. De ijs qui
intiantur, Cap. 9.
Accedat Verbum ad Elementum, and fit Sacramentum: Join the Word of God unto
the Elemente (or outward Creature) and thereby is made a Sacrament. Origin
says, Parus sanctificatur per Verbum Dei, and Obsecrationem: The Bread is
Consecrate by the Word of God, and by Prayer. S. Ambrose says, Ante
Benedictionem Verborum Coelestium, alia species nominatur: post Consecrationem,
Corpus Christi Significatur: Before the Blessinge of the Heavenly words, it
is called an other kind: After Consecration, the Body of Christ is Signified.

An other quarrel, that M. Hardinge piketh to us, is, that we have no
Intention, or mind to Consecrate. But how long has M. Hardinge benne a
Wisarde? 1. Corinthians. 2. Articulo. 1. Diuisione. 12. Summa Angel. Eucharisita.
26. Gerson in Floretum, Lib. 4. Panormtian. de Celebratione Miss. Quidam.
Or who made him so privy to our Intention? S. Paul says, Noman can tell,
what is in Man, but the Sprite of Man, that is within him. These folies are
answered at large in my Former Reply to M. Hardinge. Verily by the late
Doctors of that side, the Priest may have Intention, to Consecrate the one
half of the Host, and not the other: Or, having thirteen Hosts, he may
have Intention, to Consecrate but twelve. And thereof grows a great
question, when he comes to the reckeninge, and sees his error, which of all that whole Company of Hosts shall go vnconsecrate. Yea Abbate Panormitane
says, Etiamsi Sacerdos celebret, vt Deus perdat aliquem, tamen been
Consecrat: Notwithstanding the Priest say Mass, with Intention, that God
would destroy sum man, yet does he Consecrate nevertheless. Into such
toies these men throw them selves, with their fond Intentions.

Our Intention is, Matthae. 26. 1. Corin. 11.
to do, that Christ has taught us to do, that is, to Minister the Holy
Sacrament in Remembrance of him: and, as S. Paul says, to show forth,
and to publishe the Lords Death, until he comme. And to this purpose one of
M. Hardinges own Doctors says, Non sufficit Intentio Consecrandi absolute:
The wicked Receives.
Sed Oportet, vt sit conformis Intentioni Sacramentum Instituentis: Absolutely
the Intention, to Consecrate, is not sufficient: but it must be ansvvearable
unto the Intention of Christ, Pupilla Oculi, De Eucharistia, ca. 5.
that ordained the Sacrament.

At the Supper of our Lord, says M. Hardinge, ministered in the Catholic
Church, by Priests rightly Consecrate, there is the true, and whole Body of
Our Lord and Saueour given, and received: be the receivers beleeuinge, or not
beleeuinge. De Consecra. Dis. 2. Qui been. In Glossa. Alexand. Halen. Par. 4.
quae. 45. memb. 1.
This is no great marvel in M. Hardinges Doctrine. For they of his side
say, Si dicatur, quod Mus sumat Corpus Christi, non est magnum inconuenines:
If it be said, that a Mouse receives the Body of Christ, it is no great
inconvenience. And Alexander of Hales a notable Schole Doctor says, though in
more vnseeingly, and grosser wise, Si Canis, vel Porcus deglutiret Hostiam
Consecratam integram, non video quare Corpus Domini non simul traijcertur in
ventre^ Canis, vel Porci: If a Dog, or a Sovve should happen to swallow
down the whole Host being Consecrate, I see no reason, but the body of our
Lord may pass withal into the belly of the Dog, or of the Sow.

But S. Augustine says far otherwise, Augustine. in Johan. tracta 26. Origin
in Matt. Cap. 15.
Hoc est manducare illam escam, and illum potum bibere, in Christo manner, and
Christum manentem in se habere: This is the Eatinge of that meat, and the
Drinkinge of that Drink, that a man dwell in Christ, and have Christ
dwellinge in him. Likewise Origin says, Est verus Cibus, quem nemo malus
potest edere. Etenim si malus posset edere Corpus Domini, non scriberetur, Qui
edit hunc panem, viuer in aeternum: The Body of christ is the True Food,
which no evil man can Eat, Fore if the evil man could Eat the Body of Our
Lord, it should not be written, Articulo. 23.
He that Eats this Bread, shall live for ever. But hereof we have spoken
more at large in the Former Reply to M. Hardinge.

The Heretical Doctrine, that M. Hardinge talks of, with all the whole
forniture of Hypocritical Eloquence, we may safely send home, from whence it
came. And I doubt nothing, but he can well tell, how to use it.

As for Pelagius, Arius, and Nestorius, we desie them utterly, and detest
them, as we do also al other sorts, and sects of Heresies.

Of the Sacraments of Christ, we do both speak, and think reverently,
and as it becomes us, and according to the Holy Scriptures. We say, that a
Creature is a Creature: that a Sacrament is a Sacrament, Augustine in Johan.
tracta 59. Contra Maximin. Cap. 22.
and not God, We say with S. Augustine, The Sacrament is not our Lord, but
the Bread of our Lord Again S. Augustine says, In Sacramentis videndum
est, non quid sint, sed quid Significent: In Sacraments we must consider, not
what they be in deed, but what they Signify.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 2.
Bisides this, we acknowledge, there be two Sacraments, which we judge
properly ought to be called by this name: that is to say, Baptism, and the
Sacrament of thankesgeuing. For thus many we see were delivered and
sanctified by Christ, and well allowed of the Old Fathers, Ambrose, and
Augustine, and such others.

M. Hardinge.
Why speak ye not plainly? The Defenders acknovvledge but two Sacraments.
Be there no more but two Sacraments? Though ye say not so expressly, yet
we judge, that so ye mean. For so your scholefelowe of Geneua Theodore Beza
pronounces in plain terms in the Confession of your Geneuian Faith. And so
your selves, Defenders, do affirm in the Articles, which ye agreed upon in
your Convocation holden at London in the year of our Lord. 1562. Which
Articles ye have put forth (...) printe by the Queens Authority, as ye
pretend. Now whereas ye acknowledge there be but two Sacraments, why should
any man believe you, Diversity of Judgment in the Gospellers about the
number of the Sacraments.
rather then the Germans your first Scholemaisters, who Untruth fond and
vain.
in their Confession exhibited to Charles the fifthe then Emperor at Augspurge
in the name of all the Protestants, Anno. 1530. appointe three Sacraments,
Baptism, the Euchariste, and Penance? The next year after, Untruth,
proceedinge of unadvised malice, Read the answer.
Philip Melanchthon in his Apology avouched those three Sacraments: but
afterward in the year. 1552. he found out an other, and made up the number of
four, by addinge the Sacrament of Order to the foresaid three. In Lipsia
they receive three: In Wittenberg, which City is not thence far of, they
have four. At Magdeburg thereby also Flacius Illyricus, and so many as follow
him, will have but two: and the Zwenckfeldians, that spring out of the same
stock, care for none at al.

Forasmuch as ye allege the names of the Old Fathers for you, specially S.
Ambrose, That there be more Sacraments then two by the Doctrine of the
Fathers Cap. 104. The Sacrament of Confirmation.
and S. Augustine, that there be but two Sacraments, let us see how much
they make for maintenance of yo^^ Doctrine, and wheather they teach us not,
that there be more S. Augustine in his second Books ^^ira literas Petiliani,
speakinge of the place of the Psalm, Sicut vnguentum in capite, which the
Heretic had alleged, says thus: In hoc vnguento, etc. In this oinctement
his will is to interpret the Sacrament of Chrisme (he means the Sacrament
of Confirmation) which in the kind of visible signs is Holy, as Baptism is.
Lo, S. Augustine calls cofirmation a Sacrament. S. Eusebius Pope namethe it
a Sacrament in his third epistle written to all the Bis^hoppes of Tuscia and
Campania: Manus impositionis Sacramentum, etc. The Sacrament of imposition of
Hands (says he) is to be kept with great reverence, which cannot be
performed but by the high Priests, (he understands Bishops). Melchiades
next to Syluester before the Nicene Council speakinge much of Confirmation,
among other things says thus. Duo haec Sacramenta, Baptismi, This forged
Melciades auanceth his Oil above the Sacrament of Baptism.
and confirmationis, separanda non sunt: These two Sacraments of Baptism,
and Confirmation, may not be sundered. Though these two Bishops were Popes,
yet they deserve credit, forasmuch as they lived before that corruption crept
into the Church, after your accoumpte, and died Holy Martyrs.

That Penance is a Sacrament, The Sacrament of Penance. Cap. 66. Homil. 20.
in epist. ad Heb.
and so accoumpted among the Fathers, it is so evident, that who doubts of
it, may seem not to have perused their writings. S. Augustine in enchiridio
ad Laurentium speakinge of Baptism and Penance, calls both, Salutaria
Sacramenta, healthful Sacraments. S. Ambrose signifies him self to be of the
same mind, in his first Book de Poentientia, Cap. 6. and. 7. and in the
second Book, Cap. 2. though without puttinge thexpresse name of Sacrament.
But in the third Chapter of that Book he puts the name of Sacrament
expressly.

Touching Order, The Sacrament of Order.
that is a Sacrament, also by verdite of S. Augustine, whom ye allege for
you. Let us hear what he says. In his second Book contra epist. Parmentani
Cap. 13. these be his words, where he speaks of Baptism, and of the Power
to Baptize, which is given in the Sacrament of Order: Vtrunque euim
Sacramentum est, and quadam consecratione vtiunque homini datur, illud cum
Baptizatur, istud cum ordinatur. Ideo in Catholica non licet vtrunque iterari:
Either of them is a Sacrament, and with a certain Consecration either is
given to man: the one when he is Baptized, the other when he takes Orders.
Therefore in the Catholic Church it is not lawful either of them to be taken
twice.

For the Sacrament of wedlock, besides other good and sufficient proufes,
that it is a Sacrament, we have sundry testimonies out of S. Augustine, The
Sacrament of vvedlocke. Lib. de Fide and Operib. c. 7.
and other Doctors. In the Church (says S. Augustine) not only the band
of marriage, but also the Sacrament is so commended, that it is not lauful for
the husband to deliver his Wife to another. He calls wedlock a Sacrament
in many places of his works. De bono coniugali. Cap. 7. 18. and in the. 24.
Chapter of that Book he says: Haec omnia bona sunt, propter quae nuptiae
bonae sunt, Proles, Fides, Sacramentu^: All these things be good, for which
marriage is good, issue, Faith, the Sacrament.

Of extreme Unction, The Sacrament of extreme Unction. Jacob. 5. Lib. 3. de
sacerdo.
who doubts whether it be a Sacrament, let him read the Epistle of
Innocentrus the First ad Decentium Eugubinum Episcopum, Cap. 8. where most
planely treatinge of it, he names it a Sacrament. Chrysostom interprets
the place of S. James epistle for this Sacrament. And so does Bid, alleging
the place of S. James, the sixth of Mark, the Authority of Innocentius, and
the custom of the Church. Saying then we have found the Untruth. For the
Ancient Faneure reckon precisely Seven only Sacraments,
seven sacraments expressly mentioned in the Fathers, Number of Sacraments.
according to the teaching of the Catholic Church: whereas ye teach men to
believe there be but two, and pretend that the Fathers spoke of nomo: As this
is true, so we desire further credit.
I trust from henceforthe they will take better advise, how they believe your
bare Word without al prouse, and with certain danger of their souls,
forsake the Doctrine of the Church, which is the sure Pillour, 1. Timot. 3.
and ground of truth, as S. Paul says. In this great point, Beza, and ye
of that side be manifestly found liars.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To spend words without cause, is affliction of the Sprite, and loss of
time. M. Hardinge here bestows mutche labor, and allegeth many Doctors, to
win that thing, that he might easily have obtained without any such adoo.
For, gentle Reader, left that thou be deceived, and think, there is sum
weight in this heap of feathers, we will grant without force, and freely,
that the Holy Catholic Fathers have made mention, not only of Seven, as M.
Hardinge here accoumpteth them, but also of Seventeen sundry Sacraments.
Tertul. Aduersus Iud. cos.
Tertullian calls the Helue, wherewith Elizaeus recovered the Axe out of the
water, Sacramentum Ligni, ye Sacrament of Wood: And the whole state of ye
Christian Faith, he calls Tertull. contra. Marcionem, li. 4.
Religionis Christianae Sacramentum, The Sacrament of Christian Religion.
Augustine. in Epist. 112.
Augustine. in Sermon De Sanctis. 19.
S. Augustine in many places has Sacramentum Crucis, The Sacrament of the
Cross. Thus he says, In hac Crucis Figura continetur Sacramentum: In this
Figure, or Form of the Cross there is contained a Sacrament. So says Leo,
Leo de Resurrectione Domini, Sermo. 2.
Crux Christi, quae saluandis est impensa Fidelibus, and Sacramentum est, and
exemplum: The Cross of Christ, which was given to save the Faitheful, is
both a Sacrament, and also a Samplar. S. Hierome says, Hieronym. ad Oceanum.
E latere Christi Baptismi, atque Martyrij pariter Sacrament funduntur: Out of
Christ's side the Sacraments of Baptism, and Martyrdom are powered forth
both together. Inter Decreta Leonis, Cap. 14.
Leo calls the promise of Virginity, Sacramentum: Quid eos manebit, qui
corruperine foedera Diuini Sacramenti? What shall becomme of them, that have
broken the Couenante of the Heavenly Sacrament? Augustine. De Peccator merit.
and remiss. Li 2.
The Bread, that was given unto the Nouices, or Beginners in the Faith,
called Catechumeni, before they were Baptized, of S. Augustine is called a
Sacrament, Hilar. in Matt. Canon 11. and. 12. and Canon. 23.
S. Hilarie in sundry places says, Sacramentum Orationis: Sacramentum
Esuritionis: Sacramentum Scripturarum: Sacramentum Fletus: Sacramentum Sitis:
The Sacrament of Prayer: The Sacrament of Fasting: The Sacrament of the
Scriptures: The Sacrament of VVeepinge: The Sacrament of Thirste. Bernard. in
Sermo. De Coena Domini.
S. Bernarde calls the wasshinge of the Apostles foete, a Sacrament: Ablutio
Pedum Sacramentum est quotidianorum peccatorum: The VVasshinge of feet is the
Sacrament of daily Sins.

Thus many, and many more Sacraments, it had benne easy for M. Hardinge to have
found in the Catholic Learned Fathers. Yet, I trow, he will not say, that
either the Helue of an Axe, or the whole Religion of Christ, or a Cross
printed in the foreheade, or Martyrdom, or the Scriptures, or a Vow of
Virginity, or the Bread given to the Catechumeni, or Prayer, or Fasting, of
Weepinge, or Thirste, or Wasshinge of feet, are the necessary seven
Sacraments of the Church.

How be it, we will not greatly strive for the name. It appears hereby, that
many things, that in deed, and by special property be no Sacraments, may
nevertheless pass under the general name of a Sacrament. But thus we say,
It cannot be proved, neither by the Scriptures, nor by the Ancient Learned
Fathers, that this Number is so specially appointed, and Consecrate to this
purpose, or that there be neither more, nor less Sacraments in the Church,
but only Seven.

As for the Reasones, that they of M. Hardinges side have brought us for proof
hereof,, they are too Childishe to be remembered. For thus they say,

The Book in the Apocalypse has Seven Seals: Apocalyp. 5.

The Seven Angels there have Seven trumpettes: Apocalyp. 8.

Christ has in his right hand Seven stars: Apocalyp. 7.

Christ walks in the mids of Seven golden Candlesticks: Apocalyp. 1.

Zachary savve Seven eyes upon a stone: Zachar. 3.

There were Seven Candlestickes in the Tabernacle: Exodus 37.

Ergo, In Compendi^ Theologiae.
say they, there must needs be just Seven Sacraments in the Church of God.

But unto every necessary Sacrament of the Church, two things specially
are required: that is, a Sensible outward Elemente, and the Word of
Institution. And without either of these there is no Sacrament. Therefore S.
Augustine says, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 80.
Accedat Verbum ad Elementum, and fit Sacramentum: Join the Word of Christ's
Institution unto the sensible Creature, or outward Elemente: and thereof is
made a Sacrament. The Element, or Creature in Baptism is Water: the
Elements, or Creatures in Our Lords Supper, are Bread, and Wine: The words
of Institution are common, and known.

The other five Sacraments want, either the Word, or the Elemente, or both
together: As for example, Matrimony, Order, and Penance have the Word of
God, but they have no outward Creature, or Elemente. Extreme Unction, and
Confirmation have neither Word, nor Elemente. Therefore these five later, in
proper use of speech, are not taken for Sacraments of the Church.

For thus Alexander of Hales says, Alexander. Halen. par. 4. qu^. 24. mem. 1.
Sacramentum Confirmationis, vt est Sacramentum, neque Dominus instituit, neque
Apostoli: Sed postea institutum est in Concilio Meldensi: The Sacrament of
Confirmation, as it is a Sacrament, was not ordained, either by Christ, or by
the Apostles: but afterward in the Council of Melda.

So likewise Durandus says, Matrimonium stricte, and proprie loquendo, non
est Sacramentum: Durandus.
Matrimony in dew, and proper kind of speech is no Sacrament.

Now to that, we make accoumpte only of Two Sacraments, as instituted by
Christ, Irenaeus. Justin. Apol. 2. Tertul. 1. and 4. Con. Marcion. Ambros. De
Sacramen. Cyril. in Mystagogicis. Cyprian. Li. 2. Epist. 1. ad Steph. Augustine.
De Doctrina Christian. Li. 3. ca. 9. August. De Symbolo ad Catechumenos.
Paschasius De Coena Domini.
wherewith M. Hardinge finds him self so mutche offended, it may please him
to understand, that the Anciente Learned Fathers, Irenaeus, Justinius Martyr,
Tertullian, S. Ambrose, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, and others, having occasion to
entreat of purpose, and specially hereof, speak only of Two Sacraments,
Baptism, and Our Lords Supper, and name none other. S. Cyprian says, Tunc
demum plane sanctificari, and esse Filij Dei possunt, si vtroque Sacramento
nascantur: Then may they be thoroughly Sanctified, and become the Children of
God, if they be new borne by both the Sacraments. S. Augustine says, Quaedam
Pauca pro multis, eademque factu facillima, and intellectu augustissima, and
obseruatione castissima, ipse Dominus, and Apostolica tradidit disciplina:
sicuti est Baptismi Sacramentum, and Celebratio Corporis, and Sanguinis Domini:
Our Lord, and his Apostles have delivered unto us a fevve Sacraments in
steed of many, and the same in doing most easy, in signification most
excellent, in observation most reverend: as is the Sacrament of Baptism, and
the Celebration of the Body, and Blood of Our Lord. Again, speakinge of
Baptism, and the Supper, he says thus: Haec sunt Ecclesiae Gemina
Sacramenta: These be the Two Sacraments of the Church. Paschasius says,
Sunt Sacramenta Christi in Ecclesia Catholica, Baptismus, and Corpus, Two
Sacraments
and Sanguis Domini: These be the Sacraments of Christ in the Catholic
Church: Baptism, and the Body, and Blood of our Lord. To be short, Cardinal
Bessarion says, Bessarion De Sacramento Eucharistiae.
Haec Duo Sola Sacramenta in Euangelijs manifest tradita legimus: We read,
that these Only two Sacraments were delivered to us plainly in the
Scriptures.

Here has M. Hardinge in express words, Both the Sacraments, and the two
sacraments, and the Only two Sacraments of the Church. Judge thou now
therefore, good Christian Reader, what truth thou maiste reckon to be in him,
that says, Beza, and they of this side are manifestly found liers.

Al these things notwithstanding, the late pretensed Council of Tridente with
most horrible threats, and great Curses, concludes the contrary: Si quis
dixerit, Council. Triden. Session. 7.
Sacramenta Nouae Legis non fuisse omnia a Jesus Christo Domino nostro
instituta, aut esse Plura, vel pauciora, quam septem, aut etiam aliquod horum
non esse vere, and proprie Sacramentum, Anathema sit: If any man shall say,
that the Sacraments of the New Law were not al ordained of Our Lord Jesus
Christ: or that there be fewer, or more then seven: or that any one of the
same, verily, and in proper use of speech is not a Sacrament, accursed be he.

But ye say, Luther, and the Germans admit three Sacraments, Baptism,
the Lords Supper, and Penance: And Philip Melancthon afterward found out the
fourth. O, M. Hardinge, what is it, that thus enflameth your tongue to speak
Untruth? If it had pleased you, to have seen it, Luther, and Melancthon
plainly expressed their own meaning, and utterly removed al manner occasion
of such cauilles. In Captiuitate Babylonica.
Luther writes thus, Proprie ea visum est vocare Sacramenta, quae annexis
Signis promissa sunt: Coetera, quia Signis alligata non sunt, nuda promissa
sum. Quo fit, ut si rigide loqui velimus, tantum duo sint in Ecclesia Dei
Sacramenta, Baptismus, and Panis: cum in his Solis, and institutum diuinitus
signum, and promissionem Remissionis Peccatorum videamus: In Proper speech
those we call Sacraments, which are promissed with signs annexed. The rest,
that have no Signs, are bare promises. Wherefore speakinge hereof precisely,
and strictely, there are Only two Sacraments in the Church of God,
Baptism, and the Bread: for as mutche as in these Only we find both the
Sign ordained by God, and also the Promise of Remission of Sins. In
Apologia Confessionis Augustinae.
Likewise Melancthon says, He can well call Order, a Sacrament, so that it be
known from Baptism, and the Supper, which in Proper speech, and verily be
called Sacraments.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 3.
We say, that Baptism is a Sacrament of the Remission of Sins, and of
that wasshing, which we have in the Blood of Christ: and that no person,
which will profess Christ's name, ought to be restreined, or keapte back
therfrom: no not the very Babes of Christians: forsomutche as they be borne in
sin, and do perteine unto the people of God. Baptism very sclenderly spoken
of by the Defenders. Baptism taught by our Nevve cleregie to be but a Sign
and seal of our nevve birth.


M. Hardinge.
As ye acknowldege few Sacraments, so ye speak of them very slenderly.
Baptism (ye say) is a Sacrament of the remission of sins, and of that
wasshinge which we have in the Blood of Christ. Now whereas ye mean, as
within few lines ye declare, by the name of a Sacrament, Untruth. For we
say no^ so.
no more but a Token or Sign, specially since ye teach in your articles that
Baptism at the best, is but a Sign, and Seal of our new birthe: ye seem not
to attribute to Baptism so mutche, as the Scripture does. Neither is Baptism
only a Sign or Toke^, that sins be remitted, but, we believe, as the
Catholic Church, according to the Scriptures teaches, that in, and by
Baptism sins be fully, and truly remitted, That in Baptism sins be fully
and truly forgeuen. Cap. 36. Timot. 3.
and put away: and that not through the Faith This talk is needelesse, and
out of season.
only of the geuer, or receiver, or of any other, though hereunto it be
necessary in th^se, that be come to age of discretion: but through the power,
and virtue of the Sacrament, and Gods promise. And therefore to whom it is
given, of them it is rightly said, that, they be Baptized for remission of
their sins. The scriptures be plain. First Ezechiel speakinge of this Holy
Sacrament, says in the person of God: I wilshed upon you clean water, and ye
shall be made clean from al your defilinges, and from your Idols will I cleanse
you. Next S. Paul says, That God has saved us by the wasshinge of
Regeneration, and of the renewing of the Holy Ghost, whom he has powered upon
us abundantly by Jesus Christ our Savior. That I may add to these manifest
Scriptures the Authority of a Learned Father, not whereby to strengthen the
truth of them, but to witness our right understanding of them: S. Augustine,
Lib. 3. contra duas epist. Pelagian. Cap. 3. shewinge the sclaunder of the
Pelagians against the Catholics, says thus in their Person: Again they
(that is, after their meaning, the Catholics) auouche, that Baptism makes
not in deed new men again, that is to wit, that it gives not full
remission of sins, etc. Thereto eftsoon answearinge S. Augustine says,
These words may well perteine to M. Har. him self. For we sai not thus.
Mentiuntur, Pelagians belied the Catholics as the Sacramentaries do also
now.
iusidiantur, tergiuersantur. They lie, they study how to deceive, they seek
shifts: we say not this. And after certain sentences retourninge to
Baptism, he concludes thus: Wherefore Baptism wassheth away al sins,
utterly al, of deeds, words, thoughts, be they Original, or Actual: be they
done ignorantly, or wittingly. But it takes not away the infirmity, which
the regenerate resists, etc. Which place does not only set forth the
virtue of Baptism, but also Untruth, joined with gross ignorance. M. Har.
foully mistaketh S. Augustines mind.
destroieth the Doctrine of our New Gospellers, that affirm concupiscence,
which remains after Baptism, to be verily sin* Untruth fond and vain.
Read the Answer.
Wherein they err manifestly against the Scripture, and sense of the Fathers.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Il will is ever plenetiful of ili words. M. Hardinge here makes him self
mutche matter without cause. He teaches our New Cleregie, that Baptism is not
only a Sign, or a Token of Remission of sins: He tells us of the Faith
of the Geeuer: of the Faith of the Receiver: Of the Power of the Sacrament:
Of Concupiscence, that it is no sin. And more, I trow, he would have said,
if more had presently comme to mind. Verily the poor New Cleregie speaks
not one word in all this whole place, neither of Sign, nor of Token, nor of
the Receiver, nor of the Geeuer, nor of the Power of the Sacrament, nor of
Concupiscence, whether it be Sin, or not Sin, nor of any other like thing.
Yet in y^ end he takes S. Augustines words, without his meaning, and
cries against us, They lie, they study to deceive, they seek shifts. And
why so? Certainly because we say, Baptism is a Sacrament of Remission of
Sins: And that the Children of the Faitheful, for that they be borne in
Sin, and perteine to the people of God, ought therefore to be Baptized. Other
causes then these in any Our Words he can find none.

True it is, that the Sacrament depends not, neither of the Minister, nor of
the Receiver, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 5. De Conse. did. 4. Baptismus
talis. Johan. 1.
nor of any other. For though they be all the Children of sin, yet is Baptism
the Sacrament of Remission of Sin. S. Augustine says, Securum me fecit
Magister meus, de quo spiritus eius dicit, Hic est, qui Baptizat: Christ my
Master has assured me, of whom his own Sprite says, this is he, that
Baptizeth.

Nevertheless concerning the Faith of the Parents, Augustine. De Libero
Arbitrio Li. 3. Ca. 22. Augustine. De Verbis Apostol^ Sermo* 10.
and others, the Holy Doctors have sommetimes written otherwise. S. Augustine
says, Satis pie, recteque creditur, Prodesse paruulo eorum Fidem, a quibus
Consecrandus offertur: It is good and Godly to believe, that the Child is helped
by the Faith of them, by whom he is offered, or brought unto Baptism. Again
he says, Accommodat illis Matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes, vt veniant: aliorum
Cor, vt credant: Our Mother the Church lends them other men's fecte, that
they may comme* and other men's hearts, The Faith of the Infantes.
that they may believe. The like saieings might be alleged out of Justinius
Martyr, S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, and others. For thus they write. How truly, I
will not say. But their words be plain. The Prophets Abacuc says, Iustus
ex Fide sua viuet: The Just man shall live, ( not by the Faith of his
Parents, but) by his own Faith.

Of this Faith S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Ezechiel. ca. 16. De Consecra.
Did. 4. Verus. Actor. 15. 1 petri. 3.
Qui plena Fide non suscipiunt Salutare Baptisma, accipiunt quidem Aquam, sed
non accipiunt Spiritum: They that receive not Baptism with perfect Faith,
receive the Water: But the Holy Ghost they receive not. S. Augustine says,
Verus Baptismus constat, non tam ablutione Corporis, quam Fide Cordis: Sicut
Apostolica Doctrina tradidit, dicens, Fide mundans Corda eorum: Et alibi,
Saluos facit Baptisma, non Carnis depositio sordiu^, sed conscientiae bonae
interrogatio in Deum, per Resurrectionem Jesus Christi: True Baptism stands,
not so mutche in wasshinge of the Body, as in the Faith of the heart: As the
Doctrine of the Apostles has tought us, saieinge, By Faith purifieinge
their hearts. And in an other place, Baptism makes us safe: not y^ putting
away of the filth of the Fleash, but the examining of a good conscience before
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Likewise again he says, Vnde ista
tanta Virtus Aquae, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. ^0.
vt corpus tangat, and Cor abluat, nisi faciente Verbo? Non quia dicitur, sed
quia creditur: Whence is all this so great Virtue, or Power of the Water,
that it touches the Body, and wassheth the Heart, but by the woorkinge of the
Word? Not for that it is spoken ( by the Minister) but for that it is
believed ( of the Faitheful).

Sum man will say, Children, or Infantes believe nothing, but are utterly
void of Faith. S. Augustine answeareth, Augustine. Epist. 205.
Qui non crediderit, condemnabitur. Sicut eos renasci per Ministerium
Baptizantium, ita etiam eos credere per corda, and ora confitentium confitemur:
He that believes not, shall be damned. We confess, that as they be borne
again by the Ministry of the Baptizers, so they believe by the hearts, and
mouths of the Confessors. Augustine. Epist. 23. In eadem Episto.
Again he says, Habent Fidem, propter Fidei Sacramentum: Theie have Faith,
because they have ( Baptism, which is) the Sacrament of Faith. For he
says, Quemadmodum Sacramentum Corporis Christi secundum quendam modum Corpus
Christi est, ita Sacramentum Fidei Fides est: As the Sacrament of Christ's
Body, ( not verily, and in deed, but) after a certain manner of speech is
Christ's Body: So Baptism is Faith, because it is the Sacrament of Faith.
Therefore Cardinal Caietane is woorthily blamed by Catharinus, Catharinus contra
Caietanum, errore. 87. and, 88.
in that he says, An Infant for that he wants instruction in Faith,
therefore has not perfect Baptism.

Touching the Virtue, or Power of this Sacrament, if M. Hardinge mean^
thereby the outward Elemente of the Water, he knows, or may easily know, It
is a common resolution amongst al his own Schole Doctors, Gratia Dei non est
alligata Sacramentis: The Grace of God is not tied to any Sacraments. The
meaning thereof is, that God is hable to work Salvation, both with them, and
without them. Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 80.
S. Augustine says, as it is before alleged: Iam vos mundi estis propter
sermonem, quem locutus sum vobis. Quare non ait, Mundi estis propter Baptismum,
quo loti estis: Nisi, quia etiam in Aqua Verbum mundat? Detrahe Verbum: and
quid est Aqua, De Con. dis. 4. Aliud est.
nisi, Aqua? Now are ye clean because of the Word, that I have spoken to
you. But why says he not, Now Ye are clean because of the Baptism,
wherewith ye are washed: saving y^, because in the Water it is the Word,
that makes clean* Take away the Word, and what is the Water, more then
Water? Therefore he says, Augusti epist. 23.
Aqua exhibet forinsecus Sacramentum Gratiae: The Water geueeth us outwardly
the Sacrament of Grace.

Notwithstanding we must consider, that the Learned, Fathers in their
treaties of the Sacraments, sommetime use the outward Sign in steed of the
thing it self, that is signified: sommetime they use the thing Signified, in
steed of the Sign. As for example, The Power of Baptism.
Sommetimes they name Christ's Blood in steed of the Water: Sommetime they
name the Water in steed of Christ's Blood. This Figure is called Metonymia,
that is to say, an exchange of names: and is mutche used emongst the Learned,
specially speakinge of the Sacraments.

S. Augustine vsinge the Water in place of the Blood of Christ, that is
Signified by the Water, says thus: August. Epist. 23.
Soluit vinculum culpae: reconciliat bonum naturae: regenerat hominem in Vno
Christo: It breaks the band of Sin: It reconcileth the goodness of
Nature: It does renew a man in One Christ.

Notwithstanding, in deed, and in precise manner of speech. Salvation must
be sought in Christ alone, and not in any outward Signs. Christ is that
Lamb of God, Johan. 1. 1. Johan. 1. Cyprian. De Baptismo Christi.
that takes away the Sins of the World: The Blood of Christ makes us
clean from al our Sins. S. Cyprian says, Remi^io peccatorum, ^iue per
Baptismum, sieve per alia Sacramenta donetur, Proprie Spiritus Sancti est: and
ipsi soli huius efficientiae Priuilegium mane^. Verborum solennitas, and Sacri
inuocatio Nominis, and Signa Apostolicis Institutionibus attribura, Visibile
celebra^t Sacramentum. Rem vero ipsam Spiritius Sanctus format, and efficit:
The Remission of Sin, whether it be geeuen by Baptism, or by any other
Sacrament, is in deed of the Holy Ghost: and to the same Holy Ghost only
the Privilege of this work does appertain. The solemnity of the Words,
and the invocation of Gods Holy Name, and the outward Signs appointed to
the Ministry of the Priests, by the Institution of the Apostles, wooorke the
Visible outward Sacrament: But touching the substance thereof ( which is
the Remission of Sins) it is the Holy Ghost, that woorketh it. Likewise
says S. Hierome, Hieronym. in Esa^am, Cap. 4.
Homo Aquam tantum tribuit: Deus autem dat Spiritum Sanctum, quo sordes
abluuntur: The Minister, being a man, geeueth only the Water: but God geeueth
the Holy Ghost, whereby the Sins be washte away. And again, Hierony. ad
Galat. Cap. 3.
Si quis Corporeum, and, quod oculis Carnis aspicitur. Aquae tantum accipit
lauacrum, non est indutus Dominum Iesum Christum: If any man have received
only the Bodily vvasshinge of Water, that is outwardly seen with the eye, he
has not put on our Lord Jesus Christ.

Concerning Concupiscence, remaininge in the faitheful after Baptism, whether
it be Sin, or no Sin, there was no great cause, why M. Hardinge should in
this place move question: sauinge that, as he has hitherto denied, that
Falshedde is Falshedde, so he would now deny, that Sin is Sin.
Undoubtedly S. Paul feelinge the same Concupiscence in him self, is forced to
moorne, Roman. 7.
and to cry out, I see an other Law in my members, fightinge against the
Law of my mind, and leadinge me Prisoner to the Law of sin. And again, O
Wretched man, that I am: who shall deliver me from this Body of Death?
Therefore S. Ambrose says, Ambros. Lib. 10. Epist. 84.
Non iuuenitur in vllo hominum tanta concordia, vt Legi Mentis Lex, quae
Membris est insita, non repugnet. Propter quod ex omnium Sanctorum Persona
accipitur, quod Johannes Apostolus ait, Si dixerimus, quod pecca^um non
habemus, nos ipsos seducimus, and Veritas in nobis non est: There is not found
in any man such concord ( bitweene the Fleashe, and the Sprite) but that the
Law ( of Concupiscence) which is planted in the Members. fights against the
Law of the Mind. And for that cause the words of S. John the Apostle are
taken, as spoken in the Person of al Saints, 1. Johan. 1.
If we say, we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no Truth
in us. And to leave al others, S. Augustine says in most plain wise,
Concupiscentia Carnis, August. contra Julian. li. 5. ca. 3.
aduersus quam bonus Concupiscit Spiritus, and Peccatum est, and Poena Peccati,
and Causa Peccati: The Concupiscence of the Fleashe, against which the good
Sprite lusts, is both Sin, and the Pain of sin, and the Cause of sin.
Augu in Johan. Tracta. 41.
And again he says, Quamdiu viuis, necesse est Peccatum esse in membris
ruis: Concupiscence is Sin.
As long, as thou live, there must needs be Sin in thy members.

If M. Hardinge say, we wreaste, and rack S. Augustine, and take his words
otherwise, then he meante, Albertus Pighius his own Principal Doctor will
control him. Albertus Pighiin Controuer. de Peccato Originis.
Thus he writes: Augustinus tradit, hanc ipsam Concupiscentiam Corpori nostro
inspersam, atque innatam in nondum renatis vere, and proprie Peccatum esse:
quae ignoscatur quidem, sed non tollatur in Baptismo: S. Augustine teaches us,
that this same Concupiscence planted in our Body, in them, that be not
regenerate by Baptism, Verily, and in plain manner of speech is Sin: and
that the same Concupiscence is foregeeuen in Baptism, but is not utterly taken
away.

Yet the late blessed Chapter of Tridente, in spite of S. Augustine, has
published the Contrary: Council. Trident. Session. 5.
Hanc Concupiscentiam, quam Apostolus aliquando appellat Peccatum, Sancta
Synodus declarat, Ecclesiam Catholicam nunquam intellexisse, quod vere, and
proprie in renatis Peccatum sit: sed quia ex Peccato est, and ad Peccatum
inclinat. Si quis autem contrarium senserit, Anathema sit: The Concupiscence,
which the Apostle S. Paul sommetime calls Sin, this Holy Council
declares, that the Cathosique Church never understood it to be called sin,
for that it is so in deed, and in Proper manner of Speech, in them that be
Baptized: but because it is of Sin, and enclineth us unto Sin. And if any
man think the Contrary, accused be he. Thus we see, that by the Decree of
this worthy Couente, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, and other Holy Fathers,
that have written the same, are al accursed.

As for that M. Hardinge here touches, as an error defended by certain, I
know not, by whom, that Baptism geeueth not full Remission of Sin, he mai^
command it home again to L^uaine amongst his fellows, and ieine it with
other of his, and their^ Vanities. For it is no part, nor portion of our
Doctrine. We Confess, and have evermore taught, that in the Sacrament of
Baptism by the Death, and Blood of Christ, is geeuen Remission of al manner
Sins: and that not in half, or in part, or by way of Imagination, or by
fancy: but full, whole, and Perfect, of al together: so that now, as S. Paul
says, Roman. 8.
There is no damnation unto them, that be in Christ Jesu.

Now judge thou indifferently, gentle Reader, what Sprite forced M. Hardinge
thus terribly to cry out, They Lie: they study to deceive: they seek
shifts, etc.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 1.
We say, that Eucharistia, that is to say, the Supper of the Lord, is a
Sacrament, that is, an evident Representation of the Body, and Blood of
Christ: wherein is set, as it were, before our eyes, the Death of Christ,
and his Resurrection, and what so ever he did, whilst he was in his Mortal
Body: to the end we may geene him thanks for his Death, and for our
deliverance. And that by the often receiuinge of this Sacrament, we may
daily renew the remembrance thereof, to thintente we being fed with the
Body, and Blood of Christ, may be brought into the hope of the Resurrection,
and of Everlasting Life: and may most assuredly believe, that, as our bodies
be fed with Bread, and Wine, so our Souls be fed with the Body, and
Blood of Christ.

M. Hardinge.
Among al these gay words We utter as many Syllables of Real Presence, as
Christ ever uttered.
we hear not so mutche as one Syllable uttered, whereby we may understand,
that ye believe, the Very Body of Christ to be in deed Present in the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar. Ye confess the Eucharistia, which commonly ye call,
the Supper of the Lord, to be a Sacrament, The Lords supper with the
Defenders is an evident token of the Body and Blood of Christ.
and all that to be none other then an evident token of the Body and Blood of
Christ. As for that ye add to make the matter seem sommewhat, of the Death
of Christ, and his Resurrection, and his acts done in flesh: What reason or
scripture have ye, that a piece of Bread and a Cup of Wine (for Untruth,
joined with sclau^der, and malice.
in your belefe more make ye not of this Sacrament) can set them as it were
before our eyes? Does not rather a fair Painted table set forth the acts of
our Savior before our eyes more lively and more expressly? And be we not
moved therewith to give God thanks for his great benefits, as well as if we
have Bread and Wine on a table? But I pray you, since al is Untruth,
sclaunderous, as the Former.
but Bread and Wine after your teachinge, how shall we by eatinge and
drinkinge thereof be fed with the Body and Blood of Christ? Again can we
by Even as well, as by the Water in Baptism.
Bread and Wine be brought into hope of the Resurrection, and Ever lasting
life, as ye say? And how shall we by Eatinge of Bread and Drinking of Wine
be assured, that Christ's Body and Blood does in like manner feed our souls,
as Bread and Wine feeds our bodies? Though your imagination be never so
strong, yet by eatinge of that, which is Bread only, and Drinkinge of that,
which is Wine only, we see not how your souls can be fed with the True
Body and Blood of Christ, no more then ye be at your common meals.

Verily, when al your tale is told, ye seem to say nothing else touching the
eatinge of our Lords Body, but that the Body of Christ remains in Heaven,
and that we must send up our souls thither, to eat it there by a certain
Imagination, which ye call faith. For this is your Master Caluines Doctrine.
Faith does al.
By this Doctrine al stands upon your faith: your faith does al alone. And
he that believes in Christ, so as ye teach, eats his Body, and Drinks his
Blood. For by your Gospel, to eat the Body, is nothing else, but to believe in
Christ. If this be true, then is your Supper superfluous.

For declaration of the Truth herein, The Catholic Doctrine touching the
Sacrament of thaulter.
it is to be considered that, when we speak of this blessed Sacrament, we
mean specially, the thing received to be the very Real Body of Christ, not
only a Sign or Token of his Body. Yet we think it necessary. Untruth,
contrary to the Ancient Fathers: Read the Answer.
the Doctrine of the Fathers be clearly taught: which is, that here is a
Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament. The Untruth, without sense or
sauoure. No Catholic Father ever taught this peeuishe Doctrine.
Form of Bread and Wine, which is seen, is the Sacrament, that is to say,
a Sign of the Holy thing. For a Sacrament besides the outward shape, which
it represents to the senses, causes an other thing to come into knowledge.
The thing of this Sacrament is of two sorts, the one Untruth, and one of M
Harmystical dreams.
in tho same contained and signified, the other signified, but not contained.
The first is the Body of Christ borne of the Virgin Mary, and his Blood
shed for our Redemption: the Second is the Unity of the Church in these that
be predestinate, A threefold distinction to be considered in the Doctrine of
this Sacrament.
called, justified, and glorified. Which Church is Christ's Body mystical.
So that here are three distinct things understood. The one is a Sacrament
only: the other a Sacrament and the thing: the third the thing, and not a
Sacrament. The first is the visible shape or Form of Bread and Wine: the
second is the proper and very Fleashe and Blood of Christ: the third, his
Mystical Body.

And as there be two things of this Sacrament, so be there also two means or
ways of eating. The one Sacramental, after which both good and Untruth
horrible, and Heathenishe.
evil eat the true Body of Christ: they to salvation, these to damnation. The
other spiritual, after which the good only do eat. These Defenders, as al
other the Sacrament aries, Indistinct speakinge of distinct things.
speakinge of these distinct things indistinctly, cause confusion, and deceive
the unlearned readers. In such a sense and meaning the place commonly
alleged out of S. Augustine, as also many other the like, may well be
understood, without prejudice of the Truth of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament: Vt quid paras dentem and Venttem? Creed, and manducasti. To what
purpose make thou ready teeth and belly? Believe, and thou have eaten. Now
these Defenders harping^^^n^ly upon this one stringe of spiritual eatinge, and
shunninge the Faith of the Catholic Church touching the true presence of the
Body, and Violently wresting the Holy Scripture, and Ancient Fathers to a
contrary sense, Faith Eats.
admittinge Figures for Truth, tropes for the letter, shadows for things:
play us many a false lesson, All this is only M. Hardinges discante. We
admit Figures for Figures, and Truth for Truth.
and teach horrible lies, to the utter subversion of those, that be lead by
them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is no mention, says M. Hardinge, of Real Presence: and thereupon he
plaieth us many a proper Lesson. Notwithstanding here is as mutche mention
made of Real Presence, as either Christ, or his Apostles ever made: or in y^
Primutiue Catholic Church of God was ever believed.

Farther he says, What reason, or Scripture have ye, that a Piece of Bread,
and a Cup of Wine can set the Death, and Resurrection of Christ, as it
were, before your eyes? Verily, when al your tale is told, ye seem to say
nothing else, but that the Body of Christ remains in Heaven, and that we
must send up our souls thither, to eat it there by a certain imagination,
which ye call Faith.

Here ye do great wrong, M. Hardinge, to call the Faith of Christ, an
Imagination, or, as I trow: ye mean, a fancy. S. Paul says, Fides est
Substantia rerum sperandarum: Faith is (not an Imagination, but) the Substance
and ground of the things, that we hope for. If ye travail once again to
Rome, being thus far instructed already, ye will easily learn the Lesson, that
one of your late Popes there, as it is reported, taught his Cardinals: O,
quantum nobis profuit illa Fabula de Christo?

That we ought to send up our Faith into Heaven, and there to embrace the
Body of Christ, it is S. Augustines Doctrine, it is not ours. These be his
words: Dices, Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 52
Quomodo tenebo Christum Absentem? Quomodo in Coelum manum mittam, vt ibi
sedentem teneam? Fidem mitte: and tenuisti. Parents tui tenuerunt Carne: tu
tene Cord: Thou will say, how shall I hold Christ beeinge Absente? How we
shall I reach my hand into Heaven, that I may hold him sittinge there? Send
up thy Faith: and thou hold him. Thy Fathers ( the Jews) held him in the
fleashe: Hold him thou in thy heart.

But for as mutche as H. hardinge thought it sufficient, so pleasantly to pass
over this matter with his Imaginations, and fancies, I think it therefore so
mutche the more needeful, to show the judgment of the Ancient Learned
Fathers in that behalf.

First therefore S Augustine says, Augu. De Trinitate, Li. 13. Ca. 1.
Rerum Absentium Praesens est Fides: and rerum, quae foris sunt, intus est
Fides: and rerum, quae non videntur, videtur Fides: Of things that be Absente,
Faith is Present: of things, that be without, Faith is within: and of
things that be not seen, Augustine in. Psalm. 75.
Faith is seen. Again be says, Cum non obliuiscimur munus Saluatoris,
nonne nobis quotidie Christus immolatur? Ex ipsis reliquijs cogitationis
nostrae, id est, ex ipsa memoria Christus quotidie nobis sic immolatur, quasi
quotidie nos innouet: When we foregeate not ye gift of our Saueoure, is not
Christ offered unto us every day? Of the very remanentes of our thoughts,
that is to say, of our very memory, Christ is so daily offered unto us, as
though he renewed us every day.

And, Hieronym. De 7. Ordinib. Eccle. De gradu 7.
the more lively to express this matter, S. Hierome says, Tibi Conuiuium
Christus est: Cogitatio Christus est: Gaudium Christus est: Desiderium Christus
est: Lectio Christus est: quies Christus est: Christ is thy banquet: Christ is
thy thought: Christ is thy joy: Christ is thy desire: Christ is thy
readinge: Christ is thy reate. Likewise S. Ambrose, Ambros. De Virginib. Lib.
2.
In animis vestris quotidie pro Redemptione Corporis Christus offertur: In your
minds Christ is daily offered for the Redemption of the Body.

And to pass over others, Faith Eats.
for that it pleases M. Hardinge, to make himself such mirthe with
Imaginations, Euthymius a Greek Author writing pourposely of this matter,
says thus, Euthymi. in Johan. Cap 9.
Non oportet simpliciter ea intueri, sed aliud quiddam imaginari, and
interioribus oculis ea perspicere, tanouam Mysteria: We may not sooke barely
upon these things, (that is, upon the Bread and Wine) but must thereof
imagine sum other matter, and behold the same with our in ward Spiritual
eyes, as it is meet to behold Mysteries.

And least M. Hardinge should say, This Imagination is vain, and
fantastical, as is the greatteste part of his Religion, Augu. Epist. 117.
S. Augustine says, Magis sunt illa, quae intelligimus, quam ista, quae
cernimus: The things, that we understand, (or imagine by Faith) are more
certain, then the things, that we see with our eyes.

Neither may you think, M. Hardinge, that these things being granted, the
Ministration of the Holy Supper would be superfluous. For these two Kinds of
Eatinge must evermore necessarily be joined together. And who so ever comes
to the Holy Table, and auaunceth not his Mind unto Heaven, there to feed upon
Christ's Body at the Right hand of God, he knows not the meaning of these
Mysteries, but is void of understanding, as the Horse, or the Mule, and
receives only the bare Sacraments to his Condemnation. Therefore the
Mystical Supper of Christ, notwithstanding this Doctrine, is not superfluous:
But your Transubstantiation, your Real Presence, and a great part of this
your idle talk is most vain, and most superfluous.

But ye say, How can Bread, and Wine bring us to the hope of Resurrection,
or of Everlasting Life? and why may not a man in like manner demand of you,
Haw can a few Drops of cold Water bring us to the hope of Resurrection?
If Water may do it, why may not Bread, and Wine likewise do it?

Touching the Water, Basilius, De Sa^cto Baptismo.
S. Basile says, Baptismus est Potentia Dei ad Resurrectionem: Baptism is the
Power of God to Resurrection. Again he says, Resurrectionis Gratiam in Die
Resurrectionis recipiamus: Upon the Day of Resurrection let us receive (
Baptism, Hieronym. in 1. Cor. 15.
which is) the Grace of Resurrection. S. Hierome says, Non solum propter
Remissionem Peccatorum Baptizamur, sed etiam propter Resurrectionem Carnis
nostrae: We are Baptized, not only for Remission of Sins, but also for the
Resurrection of our Fleashe. And therefore the Greeks call Baptism (...),
Dionysius. Ca. 2.
That is, the VVeede of immortality.

Here, M. Hardinge, it were sum point of skill to show us, how so great
Power may be in so little Water. How be it, it is not the Water in deed,
that woorketh the force of Resurrection, but the Blood of Christ, that is
Signified by the Water. Ambro. in Epist. ad Romans Cap. 6. Ignatius ad
Trallianos.
And therefore S. Ambrose says, Baptismus Resurrectionis Pignus, and Imago
est: Baptism is the Pleadge, and Image of Resurrection. Likewise Ignarius,
Credentes in Mortem eius, per Baptisma Participes Resurrectionis eius
efficimur: Beleeuinge in the Death of Christ, by Baptism we are made
Partakers of his Resurrection. The like we say of the Holy Supper. Neither is
M. Hardinge hable to show us any sufficient cause to the contrary, but Wine
or Bread may have this Power, as well as Water. Of this whole matter we shall
speak hereafter more at large.

But if Bread, and Wine, as M. Hardinge says, have no Power to work
Resurrection, what Power then can his Accidents, and empty Fourmes have to
work the same? For, touching the Body of Christ it self, his own Doctors
could have told him, that it enteth not into our Bodies. For thus it is noted,
and published for sound, and certain Doctrine, upon the Decrees: De Conse.
Did. ^. Tribus gradib. in Glossa.
Certum est, quod quam cito Species teruntur dentibus, tam cito in Coelum
rapitur Corpus Christi: It is certain, Difference bitvvene, etc.
and out of doubt, that as soon as the Accidents, or Fourmes are touched
with the teethe, straight way the Body of Christ is taken up into Heaven.

Hereof we may reason thus: Christ's Body is suddenly taken up into Heaven,
and is not received into our Bodies: and that, as it is noted here, is true,
and certain: The Bread, and Wine, by M. Hardinges Doctrine, are utterly
consumed, no part of the Substance thereof remaining: There is nothing leafte
there, but Fourmes, and Accidents. Hereof it must needs follow, by this
Doctrine, that the same bare Fourmes, and Accidents have Power to work our
Resurrection. But it is well known, and confessed in all Schools, that the
Substance is better, and woorthier, then is the Accidente. Therefore we may
conclude, The Accidente may do it: Ergo. the Substance may mutche more do it.

For the rest, M. Hardinge says, The Substance of the Bread is quite
removed: The roundenesse, and whiteness are the Sacrament: The thing thereof
is of two sorts: The one contained, and signified: the other signified, and
not contained. These Mystical fancies may lie still, until M. Hardinge by sum
Authoriritie, other then his own, have proved them better. True it is, that M.
Hardinge says, Bitweene the Sacrament, and the thing it self, that is to
say, bitweene the Sacrament, and the Body of Christ represented by the
Sacrament, there is great difference. For in deed, and verily, and in precise
manner of speech, neither is Christ's Body the Sacrament: nor is the
Sacrament Christ's Body.

S. Augustine says, August. Epist 23. ad Bonifacium.
as it is alleged before, Nisi Sacramenta similitudinem quandam earum rerum,
quatum Sacramenta sunt, haberent, omnino Sacramenta no^ essent. Ex hac autem
similitudine plaerunque rerum ipsarum nomina accipiunt. Iteque secundum quendam
modum Sacramentum Corporis Christi, Corpus Christi est: Unless Sacraments had
a certain likeness of the things, whereof they be sacraments, without
question they were no Sacraments. And in consideration of this likeness,
oftentimes they bear the names of the things them selves. Therefore after a
certain manner of speech ( and not otherwise) the Sacrament of the Body of
Christ, is Christ's Body.

Hereof I have written more at large, Articulo 21.
as occasion was offered, in my Former Reply to M. Harding. S. Ambrose noting
this difference, says thus, Non iste Panis, qui vadit in ventrem: De Conse.
did. 2. Non iste.
Sed Panis Vitae Aeternae, qui animae nostrae Substantiam fulci^: Not this
Bread ( of the Sacrament) that passes into y^ belly: but (the Body of Christ
it self, which is) the Bread of everlasting Life: which reliueth the
Substance of our Soul, Rabanus, Lib. 1. Cap. 31.
and is signified by the Sacrament. Rabanus Maurus says, Aliud est
Sacramentum, aliud vis Sacramenti. Sacramentum in Corporis alimentum redigitur:
Virtute Sacramenti aeternae Vitae dignitas adipiscitur: The Sacrament is one
thing: The Power of the Sacrament is an other thing. The Sacrament is
changed into the food, or norishemente of the Body: by the virtue of the
Sacrament is gotten the dignity of everlasting Life. Chryso. in Matthae.
Homil. 11.
Likewise S. Chrysostom, In Sacris Vasis, non ipsum Corpus Christi, sed
Mysterium Corporis eius continetur: In the Holy Vessels is contained, not the
Very Body of Christ it self, but a Mystery, or Sacrament of his Body.

So great difference there is bitweene the Sacrament and the Body of Christ.
The Sacrament passes into the Belly: Christ's Body passes into the Soul.
The Sacrament is upon Earth: Christ's Body is in Heaven. The Sacrament is
corruptible: Christ's Body is glorious. The Sacrament is the Sign: Christ's
Body is the thing Signified. For want of this distinction M. Hardinge
wandreth blindely in the dark, he knows not whither. Therefore S. Augustine
says, August. De Doctrina Christiana, Lib. 3. Cap. 5.
speaking purposely hereof, Ea demum est miserabilis animae seruitus, Signa pro
rebus accipere: This is a miserable bondage of the s^ule, to take the Signs in
steed of the things, that he signified.

Whether, and in what sense the wicked may be said to eat the Body of
Christ, it shall be discussed hereafter more at large.

As for M. Hardinges ordinary Conclusion of Wreasting the Scriptures, and Holy
Fathers: Of plaieinge false Lessons: of teachinge, as be says, horrible lies:
and of subuertinge the people, with all other the like furniture, we will leave
it freely, and wholly unto the Author.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 2.
To this Banquet we think the People of God ought to be earnestly bidden, that
they may al Communicate emonge them selves, and openly declare, and testify
both the godly Society, which is emonge them, and also the hope, which they
have in Christ Jesus. For this cause, if there had benne any, which would be
but a looker on, and abstain from the holy Communion, him did the Old
Fathers, and Bishops of Rome in the Primitive Church, before Private Masie
came up, excommunicate, as a wicked person, and as a Pagans. Neither was there
any Christian at that time, which did Communicate alone, whiles other looked
on. For so did Calixtus in times paste decree, that after the Consecration was
finished, al should Communicate, except they had rather stand without the
Church doors. For thus (says he) did the Apostles appointe, and the same
the Holy Church of Rome keeps still.

M. Hardinge.
Let this Banquet be dight as it ought to be: let the best dishe be made ready
in due sort, which is the very Body of our Savior Christ: let the ghestes
be told what is set before them at that Holy Table: let them be taught to
believe rightly, to prove, and prepare themselves, as behooves: then we think
it most convenient the people of God be bidden thereto, not thereby to
Communicate among themselves only, but also, and rather to Communicate with
God, to be incorporate in Christ, and to be made Partakers of all the benefits
of God procured to man by the Death of his Son suffered in that Body, which
at this high Feast they Eat. This Banquet being thus set forth, if some
devout persons think them selves for good causes unworthy to assaie thereof,
Devout lookers on, do Spiritually Communicate.
and to receive that heavenly food Sacrame^tally, findinge the^ selves not so
well prepared, as S. Paul requires in that behalf, yet for love of it desire
to be present, and behold that Table, and spiritually to taste of that
healthful Dishe by Faith, Charitte, Prayer, and fervent Devotion, wherein they
do not wholly abstain from the Holy Communion: such Untruth. For the
Catholic Fathers Condemned them.
are not to be condemned as idle lookers on for so ye make them, nor to be
driven out of the Church. Neither did ever the Old Fathers, and Bishops of
Rome in the Primitive Church (say what ye will Defenders) excommunicate them:
mutche less did they repute them for Untruth. For S. Chrysostom calls them
impudentes, and improbos: Ad [ ^phes. Homil 3.
wicked Persons and Paganes. And Untruth, coldely avouched. Read the
Answer.
not seldom the Priesteat the Mass (which for this respect with
unreasonable novelty ye term Private) when none other were disposed to
receive with him Sacrame^tally, Calixtus alleged for Anacletus. The Defenders
require more of the Catholics then they perform them selves. The place of
Anaclet^ discussed.
but Spiritually only, has received alone the Holy things, which he has
offered.

Neither the Decree of Anacletus, which ye being deceived by Gratian
Untruths three together: As shall appear.
untruly father upon Calixtus, requires that all the people present should
Communicate with the Priest at the Mass. Which thing ye should not have
objected to the Church, seeinge that it is not observed by your own New
order in your Congregations. Read the Epistle of Anacletus, from whence this
Decree is taken, and your selves will confess the same. That Holy Father and
Martyr prescribes the Order which he would to be kept, when Bishops, or
Priests say Mass: Which was, that it be done in places consecrated to God,
that a Bishop at his Mass have witnesses with him more then an other Priest.
In the Untruth three together: As shall appear.
solemn Feasts he requires Seven, Five, or three Deacons, likewise
Subdeacons, and other Ministers, al clothed in hallowed Vestimentes to attend
upon him, to stand of every side of him with a contrite heart, The best
Disshe.
and humble Spirit lookinge downewarde, kepinge him from malicious men, This
Commau^deme^s of receiving the Communion given by Anacket^ pertains only to
the Ministers of the Church in solemn Feasts.
geuinge consent to his Sacrifice. Thus much being declared in that Epistle,
it follows immediately, Peracta autem Consecratione, etc. And when the
Consecration is ended, let them al Communicate, that will not be kept without
the Church doors. For so the Apostles have ordained, and the Holy Church of
Rome observes. Who sees not this request of receiuinge the Communion to be
referred Untruth. plain and manifest. Read the Answer.
to the Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and other Ministers in solemn feasts,
seruinge the Bishop at Mass? For in that place Anacletus speaks never a
word expressly of the Lay people. Therefore ye deceive the unlearned reader
with a lie.

For the better understanding of this Decree, specially whereas Anacletus
alleges the Apostles ordinance for the same, ninthe Canon of the Apostles is
to be considered: In which they require Untruth, For in the Apostles Canons
it is written thus, Quicunque Fideles ingrediu^tur in Ecclesia^, etc. Canone.
10.
every Ecclesiastical person to be partaker of the Sacrifice, that is offered,
or to be excluded from the Communion: See the 9. Canon of the Apostles
onelsse he show just cause for the contrary. The reason whereof in that
Canon expressed is this: Least Clearkes absteininge from the Communion should
be occasion of offense to the people, and thereby raise an evil suspicion
against him. that sacrificed, as though he had not made the Oblation as it
ought to be.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Let this Banquet be deight, says M. Hardinge, as it ought to be: Let the
best Disshe be made ready. Good Christian Reader, the best, the wholesomest,
the most pleasant, and most Comfortable disshe at this Table, is the Death of
Christ, that Lamb of God, that has taken away the Sins of the world.
Thus Christ him self, the Master of this Feast, has willed us to dress
this Dinner: Do this, says he, in Remembrance of me. Likewise S. Paul, As
often as ye shall eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup, 1. Corinthians. 11.
ye shall show forth, and publishe the Lords Death, until be comme.

This Banquet therefore is not the outward, or bare Sacrament, but Christ's
very Body, and Blood, which are represented unto us by the Sacrament: And, as
it is before alleged out of S. Ambrose, De Con. Did. 2. Non iste. Hieronym. ad
Hedibiam.
It is not the Bread ( of the Sacrament) that passes into the belly, but the
Bread of Everlasting Life, which reliueth the Substance of the Soul.
Therefore S. Hierome says, Iudaicas fabulas repellamus, and Ascendamus cum
Domino in Coenaculum magnum stratum, atque mundatum, and accipiamus ab eo
sursum Calicem Noui Testamenti: Let us abandonne from us Iewishe Fables, and
set us Ascend up with our Lord into Heaven, into that great parlar dreste,
and made clean: and there above let us receive of him the Cup of the New
Testamente. Cyprian. De Coena Domini.
In this sense S. Cyprian says, Vident haec Sacramenta Pauperes Spiritu, and
hoc Vno contenti Ferculo, omnes huius mundi delicias aspernantur: and
possidentes Christum, aliquam huius mundi possidere supellectilem dedignantur:
The poor in Sprite see these Sacraments, and being contented with this Only
Disshe, they despise al other the deinty fares of the world: and having
possession of Christ, they disdeigne to possess any worldly Substance. In
like sort speakinge of the Birthe of Christ, he says thus: Cyprian De
Natiuitate Christi.
Ea quae licita sunt, and concessa, tangamus: and circa incunabula Saluatoris
Prima Infantiae eius Fercula degustemus: Let us touch those things, that be
lawful for us to touch: and standinge about the Cradle of our Saueoure, set
us taste of the First Disshe of his Childehoode. August. in Psalmum. 57.
Likewise says S. Augustine, Coecus interius Panem Christum non videt. Et
beatus est? Hoc non dicit, nisi Pariter Coecus: He that is blind in his heart
within, seethe not Christ, that is our Bread. And is he blessed? Noman will so
say, unless it be one as blind, as he.

But what manner of Feast is it, that M. Hardinge prepares for the people?
How is it seasoned? how is it dreste? First, by very discourteous, and uncivil
dealinge, he withdraws the one half, that is, the Cup of the Nevve
Testament, and reserueth it severally to him self: and yet would make the
people believe, they have the whole. Private Mass.
And thus doothe he, when he has greattest company to Suppe with him, and
when his feast is best furnished. Otherwise he suffers his gheastes to
stand aluffe, and he consumes al his provision him self alone. Neither in
deed has he any thing to set before them, sauinge only a cold surcharge of
dead Shows, and doumbe Ceremonies. The poor people hears nothing,
Understands nothing, Eats nothing, Drinks nothing, Tastes nothing:
They publishe not the Lords Death: They know not the Lords Supper.

To such a Banquet Pasetes the Iuggler used sometimes to call his friends.
Suidas.
There was a great show of variety, and plenetie of al manner of Meats, and
Drinks, the table fulle. But when any of the gheastes would have touched any
thing, it vanished suddenly away, and was turned to nothing. And so, when
their eyes were full, they put up their knives, and rose ahungred. Even thus M.
Hardinge feeds, and feasteth the people of God, with Shows and Ceremonies,
and suffers them in the mean while to sterue for hungre. Even as the
Prophet says, It shall be like the dream of a hungry man. Behold he eats,
and makes merry: But when he is awakte, Esai. 29.
his soul is empty.

Good men, says M. Hardinge, withdraw them selves, and are contented to be
present only, and to stand by: but receive not the Sacrament. But
Chrysostom says to such a good devout man. Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. Homil. 3.
If thou stand by, and do not Communicate, thou art wicked, thou art
shameless, thou art impudente. Thou will say, I am vnvvoorthy to be
partaker of the Holy Mysteries. Impudens. Improbus.
Then art thou vnvoorthy to be partaker of the Prayers. Thou maiste no more
stand here, then an Heathen, that never was Christened.

Here, gentle Reader, maiste thou see, a marvelous change in the Church of
God. The thing, that in old times was coumpted Heathenishe, Impudency, and
Wickedness, is now by M. Hardinges New Divinity becomme Godliness, and
great Devotion.

But, Not Seldom.
God wot, here follows a very cold Asseueration. Not Seldom, ye say, the
Priest at the Mass, when none other were disposed, received alone. O M.
Hardinge, the world well seethe, your word is no Gospel. It appears by your
so many Untruths, ye care not greatly, what you say. Thus ye tell us, Not
Seldom the Priest received alone. Not Seldom? what is that? why speak you
so nicely? what means this cold, and doubteful eloquence, specially in him,
that otherwise has acquainted his voice to speak so big? why say you not,
The Priest used daiely, and commonly so to do? Or if ye could not auouche
so great Untruth for very shame, why said you not, The Priest oftentimes, or
at some certain times received alone: at the least at four, or three, or
two sundry times, within the space of six hundred years? At the woorste,
if ye had said, but Once, it had benne somewhat. As for, Not seldomme, it is
too base: it is too simple: it disgraceth the whole course of your pleadinge,
and in plain speech sounds, as mutche, as Never. It had rather benne your
part, taking upon you this countenance of credit, and gravity, to have
told us Substantially, and plainly, what manner of man this Priest was:
where he dwelte: what was his name: when, and where, and in what Company he
said this Mass: who saw it: who heard it: who bare witness to it: by what
Record, or Authority it may be proved. The matter being so great, and of
such Antiquity, is there noman leafte behind, to witness the same, but M.
Hardinge? In your Former Answer ye bring us in Boys, Girls, Sick folk,
Lay people, and Women: and upon such grounds ye stick not to found your
Private Mass. And doubtelesse these examples might have seemed to stand you
in sum pretty steed, if in those days Boys, Anacletus Calixtus.
and Women had benne Priests. For Priest, or Bishop, that ever received the
Sacrament alone, in the Church, before the people, ye are not yet hable to
show us one. As for your Leontius, and Amphilochius, and S. Basiles Mass at
Midnight, and other like folies, and fables, it seems by the silence, ye use
in your late Reioinder, ye are contented wisely, and quietly to give them over.

Ye say, we are deceived by Gratian, and have placed Calixtus in steed of
Anacletus. Here first of al, ye confess, that Gratian your great Rabbin, the
Father, and Fountain of your Decrees might be deceived. And verily such
plainness in dealinge, if ye would vouchesaue to use it oftener, were worthy
of some commendation. For in deed your Gratian, as he was a man of great
readinge, and small judgment, so he allegeth oftetimes, he knows not what:
Hierome for Origin: Cyprian for Augustine: Beda for Ambrose: Iuuencus for
Vincentius: Greek for Latin: New for Old. As for this authority, wherein
you say, De Con. Did. 1. Episcopus. De Con. Did. 2. Peracta.
we are deceived, he allegeth it in two sundry places: first under the name
of Anacletus: next under the name of Calixtus: meaning, I trow, if there
were error in the one, at least to redress it by the other. Therefore, M.
Hardinge, if ye had looked better upon your Book, what so ever opinion ye have
of your Gratian, ye should have found, that we were nothing deceived. Haw be
it, your Gratian, in steed of one error, has made two. For in deed, as it
is true, y^ these words were never written by Calixtus: so of the other side
it is likewise true, they were never written by Anacletus: but were manifestly
forged, and falsified by others, that followed afterward: Artic. 4. Diui. 3.
as in my Former Reply I have declared more at large.

But it is a world to see, what wiles, and shifts these men can find, to
bear out error. First, ye say, these words were spoken of the Priests,
Deacons, and Subdeacons, seruinge the Priest at Mass upon Solemn Feasts.
Pardonne me, M. Hardinge, to say the Truth. For verily, notwithstanding this
solemn tale, it seems, ye know not, what ye say. For it may please you to
remember, that your Anacletus, whose forged Authority ye have alleged, was
Bishop in Rome in the time of S. Peter, shortly upon the Death of Christ,
when the Church was euerywhere under persecution, and full of Blood. Now, I
pray you, who ever told you, either of any office, that your Subdeacons had
in the Holy Ministry, or of any great high Holy Days, of Duplex, or magis
Duplex, or principal Solemn Feasts in the Church of God in all that time?
May we think, that the Blessed Virgins, and the Apostles days were keapte
High and Holy, while the same Blessed Virgin, and Apostles were yet alive?
Though ye had none other regard, either to God, or to your self, yet shame
should force you, to foresee more advisedly, what ye say.

But your greattest folly appears in y^ shiftinge, and glostnge of these
words. For you say, this Calixtus, or Anacletus speaks only of the
Priests, the Deacons, and the Subdeacons: and never a word expressly of the
Lay people: and therefore ye say, w^e deceive the unlearned Reader with a
lie. Touching your discourteous speech, I weigh it none otherwise, but as it
is. The Truth will be hable evermore to bear it self. But that these words
of Anacletus, or Calixtus, touch not the Lay people, but only the Priests,
and the Ministers, the very Gloser him self was never, either so unskillful, or
so impudent, so to say. For, whereas the words be these, Let them al
Communicate, unless they will be removed out of the Church, he sets there to
this Exposition, Hoc antiquum est: Nam hoc hodie relictum videtur arbitrio
cuiuslibet: De Con. Did. 2. Peracta. In Glossa.
This was the old manner: For now adays it is free for every man to do
therein, what he vvil.

The like Decree is found under the name of the Apostles Canons: Quicunque
fideles ingrediuntur in Ecclesiam, Anacletus Calixtus.
and Scripturas audiunt, non autem persuerant in Oratione, Canon. Apostol.
Canon. 10.
nec Sanctam Communionem percipiunt, velut qui ordinis perturbationem
commouent, ab Ecclesiae Co^munione arceri conuenit: As many ( not only of the
Priests, and Ministers, but) of the Faitheful, as comme into the Church, and
hear the Scriptures, but continewe not out the Prayers, nor receive the Holy
Communion, let them be put from the Communion of the Church, as men that
work the breach of Order. Likewise it is noted in the Margin upon the same
Canons, Canon. Apost. Can. 9. In Margin.
Omnes olim, qui intererant. Communicabant: In old times al, that were
present, did Communicate. In the Council of Antioche it was decreed thus:
Omnes, qui ingrediuntur in Ecclesiam Dei, Council. Antiochen. Can. 2.
and Sacras Scripturas audiunt, auersantur autem perceptionem Dominici
Sacramenti, etc. ab Ecclesia abijci oportet, etc. Al, that comme into the
Church of God, Council. Aquisgran. Cap. 70.
and hear the Holy Scriptures, and refuse the receiuinge of the Lords
Sacrament, let them be put from the Church. These Decrees reach not only to
the Ministers of the Church, but also to the whole people.

Clemens that was Bishop in Rome, Clemens Epist. 2.
as it is thought, next after this Anacletus, says thus, Tanta in Altario
Holocausta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debeant: Let so many loves be
offered at the Altar, as may suffice to serve, (not only the Ministers, but
also) the People.

S. Ambrose says, Munus oblatum totius populi fit: quia in vno Pane omnes
significantur. Ambros. in 1. Corinthians. 1^.
Per idem enim, quod vnum sumus, de vno Pane omnes sumere oportet: The oblation
offered is made the whole peoples: for that in one Bread al are signified.
For in that we are al one, we must al receive of one Bread.

S. Chrysostom says unto the people, Neque nos abundantius, vos autem minus,
de Sacra Mensa participamus: Chrysostom. in 2. Thessal. Homi. 4.
Sed pariter, and ex aequo illam vtrique degustamus: ^^ either do we receive
more, and you less of the Holy Table: but we taste thereof equally both
together. The like might be alleged out of S. Hierome, S. Augustine,
Dionysius, and others.

But for as mutche as ye so bitterly tell us, that we misconstrue these words
of Anacletus, and deceive the unlearned Reader with a lie, may it therefore
please you farther to hear, what your own late Scholastical Doctors have
written, and judged in this behalf.

Thomas of Aquine says, In Primitiua Ecclesia, quando magna vigebat deuotio
Fidei Christianae, statutum fuit, vt Fideles quotidie Communicarent: In the
Primitive Church, when great Devotion of the Christian Faith was in
strength, it was ordained, that the Faitheful should receive the Communion
every day. Durandus says, In Primitiua Ecclesia omnes Fideles quotidie
Communicabant: Durandus in Rational. Li. 4. Cap. 55.
In the Primitive Church all the Faitheful daiely received the Communion. Hugo
Cardina in Luc. Cap. 24.
Hugo Cardinalis says, In Primitiua Ecclesia omnes, quotquot intererant
Canoni Missae, singulis diebus Communicabant. Et, si nollent communicare,
egrediebantur post Offertorium: In the Primitive Church, as many as were
present at the Canon of the Mass, did daiely Communicate: and if they would
not, they departed forth after the Offertorie.

If ye think, these authorities are not sufficient, Johan. Cochlae. Contra
Muscul. De Sacrificio.
Johannes Cochlaeus says, Omnes olim, tum Sacerdotes, tum Laici, cum
Sacrificante Communicabant, sicut ex Canonibus Apostolorum, and ex Libris
antiquissimorum Ecclesiae Doctorum perspicue cognoscitur. Hic vnicum hac de re
Canonem recitabo, qui Calixto adscribitur: Peracta, etc. In old times both all the Priests, and all the Lay people received the Communion with the Minister,
that had made the Oblation: as it is plainly perceived by the Canons of the
Apostles, and by the Books of the Ancient Doctors of the Church. One Canon
hereof I will allege written by Calixtus: etc. Likewise says Iudocus
Clichthoueus, In Primitiua Ecclesia Fideles quotidie sumebant Communionem, In.
Clichthoueut in Canon. Missae.
secundum illam Calixit sanctionem, Peracta, etc. In the Primitive Church the
Faitheful received the Communion every day, according to this Decree of
Calixtus: etc.

Here you may see, not only, that these words are alleged by your own
Doctors, under the name of Calixtus, wherein you have noted so great an
error, but also that the same words, by the judgment of the same Doctors,
are thought to perteine no less to the Lay people, then to the Priest.

Now, M. Hardinge, these things considered, I refer the indifferent
judgment hereof to your own knowledge, and Conscience, whether of us two
has deceived the Reader with a lie.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 3.
More over, when the People comes to the holy Communion, the Sacrament ought
to be given them in Both Kinds: for so both Christ has commanded, and the
Apostles in every place have ordained, and all the Ancient Fathers and
Catholic Bishops have followed the same. And who so doothe contrary to
this, he (as Gelasius says) D^ Consec. Did. and Comperio^^s.
commits Sacrilege. And therefore we say, that our Adversaries at this
day, who having violently thruste out, and quite forebidden the Holy
Communion, do without the word of God, without the Authority of any Ancient
Council, without any Catholic Father, without any Example of the Primitive
Church, yea and without reason also, defend, and maineteine their Private
Masses, and the manglinge of the Sacraments, and do this not only against
the plain express Commandment of Christ, but also against al Antiquity,
do wickedly therein, and are very Churcherobbers.

M. Hardinge.
Soft, and fair, Masters. Ye show more heat then wit, more stomach then
learning, more anger then reason. Ye say much, and prove little. But say
ye, and say again, what ye will: we tell you boldly, Communion under both
kinds not commanded expressly by Christ, nor ordained by the Apostles.
that Untruths three together boldly presumed.
neither Christ ever commanded, * nor the Apostles ordained, * nor all the
Ancient Fathers observed, that the Sacrament be given to the people none
otherwise, but under both Kinds only. If Christ had expressly commanded
it, the Church ( of Rome) had not so long time received, and kept the use of
one Kind. The Apostles, and sundry Holy Fathers Ministered both Kinds: we
confess. That the one Kind was not also by them Ministered, and that it is
utterly unlawful, we deny, To prove a Negative, it is a folly. But you shall
never prove the Affirmative.
and the same shall ye never be able to prove. Touching this whole point, and
how little, that ye allege out of Celasius, makes for you, and concerning
Mass not to be omitted for lack of Company, to communicate Sacramentally
with the Priest: Certainly yenough. For in the same two Articles ye have
uttered threescore and four great Untruths.
I have said yuongh in my answer to your fellow M. Iuel his challenge.
Bring ye other stuff, and better then this, or else all the world will see your
haltinge, and the feblenesse of your side. An unshamefast and sclaunderouse
lie*
That we have violently thruste out, and quite forbidden the Holy Communion,
unless ye mean your own Schismatic, mutable, and polluted Communion, if
there were any spark of shame, or hearted of liynge in you, ye would never
impute it unto us. God does know, and the World is not vnwittinge, Untruth,
so sensible, and so gross, that a man may feel it with his fingers.
how much, how often, and how earnestly the Catholic Church exhorts her
Children to prepare themselves, to receive their Untruth. No Learned Father
ever called the Sacrament his God, or Maker.
Maker. And though the people of England of late years resorted not commonly
thereto, yet the devotion of Christen folk in this Country of base Almaigne,
in France, in Italy, in Spain, and in sundry other Christen Provinces, is so
fervent in frequentinge the Holy Communion, as if ye saw it, ye would be
ashamed of your sclaunderous report. Let wise men, and good men judge, whether
we be Churcherobbers, or ye unshamefast liers.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Where nothing is answered, it were not amiss, to reply nothing. If M.
Hardinge can only vouchesaue, to call us sclaund^rous Reporters, ^
unshamefast Liers: Institution in Both Kinds.
and the Lords Supper a Schismatical, Mutable, pollutted Communion, it is
sufficient: the matter needs no farther proof. To this whole matter, M.
Hardinge says, He has sufficiently answered M. Jewel. He has answered, I
grant: but how sufficiently, the matter it self will declare. How be it, he
may not in any wise forgeate, that in the same two short Treaties to M.
Jewel, conteininge only two and forty little leaves of Paper, he has sent
us over, and published threescore and four notable, and great Untruths:
whereof, I think, he has no great cause so mutche to glory.

He says, That the Sacrament should be delivered to the people in both
kinds, neither Christ ever commanded it, nor the Apostles ever ordained it.
Thus M. Hardinge says, only because it likes him thus to say. Yet this
own Catholic Doctors, and the Chief Champions of that side say far
otherwise. De Miss. Publica Proroganda.
Gerardius Lorichius says, Ipsius Sacramenti Institutio vult, vt Omnes vna
manducemus, and bibamus: The very Institution of the Sacrament it self
wills, that we Eat, and Drink al together. And Ruardus Tapper the Deane
of Louaine says thus: Cassander (...) Viraque Specie, Pa. 29.
Habito respectu ad Sacramentum, eiusque perfectionem, magis conueniret, sub
Vtraque specie fieri Communionem, quam sub Altera tantum. Hoc enim magis
consonum est eius Institutioni, and integritati, and refectioni Corporali: imo
and Exemplo Christi, and Patrum Primitiuae Ecclesiae: Consideration had unto
the Sacrament, and to the perfection of the same, it were more convenient,
that the Communion were Ministered under Both Kinds, then under One alone. For
this were more agreeable to the Institution, and fullness thereof, and to the
outward refection of the Body: Yea and to the Example both of Christ, and
also of the Fathers of the Primitive Church.

Certainly these words of Christ, Drink ye al of this: Do this in my
Remembrance, are very plain words of commandment, and Institution.
Therefore Chrysostom says, Et in Pane, Chrysostom. in. 1. Corin. Homi. 27.
and in Calice Christus dixit, Hoc facite in meam Commemorationem: Christ
both in the Bread, and also in the Cup said, Do this in Remembrance of
me. Likewise Theophylactus, Tremendus Calix pari cunctis condition traditus
est: Theophylact. 1. Corinthians. 11. Paschasius.
The Reverend Cup is in equal manner delivered to al. And, whereas Christ
says, Drink ye al of this, Paschasius, to make the matter the plainer,
puts thereto these words: Tam Ministri, quam reliqui Credentes: As well the
Ministers, as the rest of the Faitheful. In like manner S. Augustine says,
De Con. Did. 2. Quia Passus.
Simul hoc sumimus: simul bibimus: quia simul viuimus: We receive together:
We drink together: because we live together.

Notwithstanding any Promise of Constancy, made to the contrary, yet, I
trust, M. Hardinge of his courtesy will believe, either S. Chrysostom, or S.
Augustine, or Theophylacte, or Paschasius, or Lorichius, or Tapper, or his
Nevve Doctors, or the Old, or his own, or others. Otherwise, if he be fully
determined to believe noman, it is reason, that noman believe him.

Perhaps he will say, Notwithstanding Christ's words be plain, yet they are
not of force sufficient, to bind us for ever. For so writes Cardinal Cusanus,
Scripturae ad tempus adaptantur, Nicola. Cusanus Epist. 2. ad Bohaemos.
and vary intelliguntur: ita vt vno tempore secundum currentem Ecclesiae ritum
exponantur: mutato vera ritu, iterum sententia mutetur: The Scriptures are
applied to the states of diverse times, and so are taken in diverse senses: So
that at one time they are expounded according to the currente order of the
Church: But the order of the Church being changed, the sense of the
Scripture is like wise changed. So S. Augustine says of the Heretics the
Manichees: Expendunt ista, August. contra Epist. Parmeniani. Lib. 3 Cap. 2
Hilar. De Trinitaae, Lib. 9.
non in statera aequa Diuinarum Scripturarum, sed in statera dolosa
Consuetudinum suarum: They weighe these matters, not in the equal balance of the
Divine Scriptures, but in ye deceiteful Balance of their own Customs. Of ye
like sort of Her^tiques S. Hilarie says, Qui ea, quae Scripta sunt, negas,
quid testat, nisi vt ea, quae non scripta sunt, credas? Seeinge thou deniest
the things, that be written in the Scriptures, what remains there, but that
thou must believe such things, as be not written in the Scriptures?

But where have these men the Institution of their Half Communion? Who
ordained it? Who commanded it? What Apostle, what Ancient Doctor, what Holy
Father ever used it? M. Hardinge. Page 48. b. Leo, Sermon. 4. De Quadragesima.
M. Hardinge him self is forced to confess, by the report of Leo, that the
First known Diuisers, and Authors of it, were the old Heretics called the
Manichees. Such is the Institution, and Antiquity of their Doctrine. It
sprange first of Heresy, and was founded by Heretics.

Touching Gelasius, I have already in my Former Reply said so mutche, as
then unto me seemed sufficient. The words be plain yenough of them self,
and need no Commentary: De Co^s. Did. 2. Comperimus.
Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris a^ceantur. Quia diuisio
vnius eiusdemque Mysterij sine grandi sacrilegio non potest peruenire: Either
let them receive the whole Sacraments (in Both Kinds:) or else let them be
driven from the whole.

Farther M. Hardinge says, God doothe know, how mutche, how often, and how
earnestly the Catholic Church exhorts her Children, to prepare them selves
to receive their Maker. O M. Hardinge, why should you so fondely mock ye world
with so manifest folies? By what words, by what examples exhort you them?
When ever said you, as Chrysostom says unto the people? Chrysostom. ad
Popul. Antioch. Homil. 61. In Epist ad Ephesians. Homul. 3.
Depart ye hence: ye have no more right to stand here, then Heathens, and
Infidelles: ye are Wicked: ye are shameless: ye are Impudente, that stand
by, and will not Communicate. And if ye Catholic Church do so often, and so
earnestly exhort her Children, how is it then, that y^ Pope, and his
Cardinals do so seldom Communicate, scarcely once through the year? May
we think, that the Pope, and his Cardinals be not the Children of the
Church?

Last of al, ye say, ye exhort the people to receive their Maker I beseech
you, M. Hardinge, what Scripture, what Father, what Doctor ever taught you
thus to say? The Sacrament is a Sacrament: it is not God. It is the Bread
of our Lord, August. in Ioha^nem, tract. 59. Chrysostom. in Johan. Homil. 3.
as S. Augustine says: it is not our Lord. It is a Creature corruptible: it
is not the Maker of Heaven, and Earth. Accursed is he, that gives the name,
and glory of God unto a Creature, that is no God. S. Chrysostom says,
Nolimus quaeso Creatorem cum Creatura confundere: Ne illud audiamus, Seruierunt
Creaturae potius, quam Creatori: Let us not confound the Creature, and the
Creator both together: Lest it be said of us, They have honored a
Creature more then their Maker.

The Apology, Cap. 13. Division. 1.
We affirm that Bread and Wine are holy and heavenly Mysteries of the Body
and Blood of Christ, and that by them Christ him self, being the true
Bread of Eternal Life, is so presently given unto us, as that by Faith we
verily receive his Body and his Blood. Yet say we not this so, as though we
thought, that the Nature and Substance of the Bread and Wine is clearly
changed, and goes to nothing: as many have dreamed in these later times, and
yet could never agree emo^ge them selves upon their own dreams. For that was
not Christ's meaning, that the vvheaten Bread should lay aparte his own
Nature, and receive a certain new Divinity: but that he might rather change
us, and (to use Theophylactes words) In Johan. Ca. 6. De Sacr. Lib. 4. Cap. 4.
might transfourme us into his Body. For what can be said more plainly, then
that, which Ambrose says, Bread and Wine remain still the same, they were
before: and yet are changed into an other thing: Or that which Gelasius
says, The Substance of the Bread, Substance. Accidents.
or the Nature of the Wine cease not to be: Or that, which Theodoretus
says, After the Consecration, In Dialogis 1. and. 2.
the Mystical Signs do not cast of their own propre Nature: for they
remain still in their Former Substance, Form, and Kind: Or that, which
Augustine says, In Sermon. ad Infantes.
That, which ye see, is the Bread, and cup, and so our eyes tell us: but
that, which your Faith requires to be taught, is this: The Bread is the
Body of Christ, and the Cup is his Blood: Or that, which Origin says: In
Matthew. Homil. 15.
The Bread, which is sanctified by the word of God, as touching the
material Substance thereof, goes into the belly, and is cast out into the
privy: Or y^, which Christ him self said, not only after the blessinge of
the Cup, but also after he had Ministered the Communion: I vvil drink no more
of this fruit of the Vine. It is well known, that the fruit of the Vine is
Wine, and not Blood.

M. Hardinge.
In this Sacrament, What is that we call holy and heavenly Mysteries.
after Consecration, the Substance of Bread and Wine being turned into the
Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ, the Untruth. No Doctor, or
Father ever taught such vain for lies.
out ward Forms of Bread and Wine, which remain, are the Sacraments of
Holy things, the Body and Blood of Christ.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In every natural thing, two things are specially to be considered: the
Substance, and the Accidente, or, as M. Hardinge calls it, the outvvarde
Form. For example, In Bread, the Material thing, that seedeth us, and is
changed into the Blood, and nourrishement of our bodies, is called the
Substance of the Bread: The whiteness, the Roundenesse, y^ Thickness, the
Sweetness, and other the like, that are perceived outwardly by our senses,
are called Accidents. Now says M. Hardinge, for as mutche as the Substance
of the Bread, and Wine is removed by Consecration, and for that cause cannot
be the Sacrament: therefore the Accidents, and Fourmes, which remain, must
needs be thought to be the Sacraments. And so upon a false Position, as shall
appear, he lays the fundation of al his Doctrine: by the old Rule, I trow,
that he learned sometimes in his Sophistry, Ex Impossibili sequitur quodlibet:
Of an Impossibility ye may conclude, what ye list: even as aptely, and as
truly, as sum have said, If Christ were not Christ, then Saint Patrike
should be Christ.

If M. Hardinge had alleged, either Scripture, or Doctor, or Father, or
Council, or any other Authority biside his own, he might happily have benne
believed.

To this whole fancy, gentle Reader, in my Former Reply, I have made a
several answer. Verily Chrise says, Matthae. 26. Luc. 22. 1. Corinthians. 10.
1. Corinthians. 11. Cyprian in Oration. Dominicam.
Non bibam ex hoc fructu vitis: I will no more drink, ( not of these Accidents,
but) of this, generation, and fruit, ( and Substance) of the Vine. S. Paul
says, Panis, quem frangimus: ( Not the Fourmes, or Accidents, but) the
Bread, that we break. And again, Quoties manducabitis Panem hunc: As often
as ye shall eat ( not these Accidents, but) this Bread. S. Cyprian says of
the same, I anis ex multorum granorum adunatione congestus: Bread molded, and
made of many corns. I doubt not, but M. Hardinge will confess, that corns
yield Flower, and Augustine. De Fide ad Petrum Ca. 19. Cyrill. in Johan. Lib.
4. Cap. 24.
Substance: and not only Fourmes, and Accidents. S. Augustine calls the
Holy Mystery, Sacramentum Panis, and Vini: The Sacrament ( not of Fourmes,
and Accidents, as M. Hardinge says, but) of Bread, and Wine, Cyrillus
says, Credentibus Discipulis fragmenta Panis dedit: Christ gave unto his
Disciples beleeuinge in him, In, and By.
pieces of Bread, ( not pieces of Accidents).

But M. Hardinge, having in his fantasy removed the whole Substance of the
Bread, in steed thereof has brought us in Holy Fourmes, Holy Shows, and
Holy Accidents. His Accidents be the Mysteries of Heavenly things: His
Accidents be the Instruments of Gods Grace: His Accidents be the causes of
Remission of Sin. We break Accidents: We eat Accidents: We drink
Accidents. we are fed with Accidents: The Substance of our Bodies is
increased with Accidents, And, to be short, he woorketh al his Miracles by
the Power of his Accidents.

M. Hardinge.
Why be ye so loathe to speak, The Defenders refuse to speak as the Church
speaks.
as the Church speaks, that in this blessed Sacrament we receive the Body of
Christ? Why had ye rather say after a Untruth. For this phrase is used
commonly of the Ancient Fathers: as shall appear.
strange manaer, that by Bread and Wine Christ him self is so presently
given unto us, as that by Faith we verily receive his Body and his Blood?

The B. of Sarisburie.
I never thought, it had benne so great an Heresy, to speak, as the Apostles
of Christ, and the Learned Doctors of the Church have spoken before us. S.
Paul says, Roman. 6. Coloss. 2. Hieronym. De Corp. and Sanguine Christi.
Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 50. Cyrill. in Johan. Lib. 11. Cap. 27. Hilarious De
Trinit. Lib. 8.
Consepulti sumus cum Christo Per Baptismum in mortem: We are buried together
with Christ By Baptism unto death. S. Hierome says. Per Aquam Baptismi, vel
per Ignem Spiritus Sancti Aeterni illius Panis Corpus efficitur: By the Water
of Baptism, or By the Fire of the Holy Ghost, he is made the Body of y^
Everlasting Bread. S. Augustine says, Habes Christum in praesenti Per
Fidem: In praesenti Per Baptismatis Sacramentum: In praesenti Per Altaris
Cibum, and Potum: Thou haste Christ in Presence By Faith: In Presence By the
Sacrament of Baptism: In Presence By the Meat, and Drink of the Altar. S.
Cyril says, Corporaliter Filius Per Benedictionem Mysticam nobis vnitur, vt
Homo: The Son of God By the Mystical Blessinge is united unto us, as Man. S.
Hilarie says, Christus est in nobis Per Sacramentorum Mysterium: Christ is
in us By the Mystery of the Sacraments.

And, lest M. Hardinge should think, to take any great advantage by these
words thus uttered, as he, and others of his side have often done, S.
Augustine in most plain wise expounds the same: Si ad ipsas res Visibiles,
quibus Sacramenta tractantur, August. De Baptismo contra Donatist. Lib. 3. Cap.
10.
animum conferamus, quis nesciat, eas esse corruptibiles? Si autem ad id, quod
Per illas res agitur, quis non videat, non posse corrumpi? If we behold the
Visible Creatures, ( as the Bread, the Wine, the Water) wherein the
Sacraments are ministered, who sees not, that they be corruptible? But if we
consider the things, that are wrought thereby, who sees not, that they cannot
be corrupted?

Now judge thou, good Christian Reader, how Childishely these quarrelles be
sought against us, without cause: and what Mystical Catholic ears M.
Hardinge has, that cannot abide the phrases, and speeches of the Anciente
Fathers.

M. Hardinge.
If a man should press you with your own words, What Presence of Christ
in the Sacrament do the Defenders acknovvledge.
and demand, what manner of Presence ye teach, affirminge Christ him self
presently to be given: I ween, ye would be found haltinge. For how say ye?
If Christ be presently given unto us by Bread and Wine in the Sacrament,
then is Christ present. If he be present, which ye must needs grant, tell
us further, how is he present: according to the Substance of his Body, or by
Grace, or according to the Majesty of his Godhed? The first, what shifts so
ever ye seek, ye will not grant. And therefore is your own Apostle Martin
Luther at foul defiance with your masters, Zuinglius, Occolampadius, Calvin,
and you, and so be his Disciples, Ioachimus VVestphalus, Epinus, Pomeran, He
shusius, Brentius, Illyricus, and many others, as ye know. If ye will say, he
is Present by his Grace, so is he Present with all good men: and that not only
when the Sacrament is ministered, but also at al other times. Absente in Body.
Again, how can ye make good, that by Faith we receive his Body, and Blood?
By Faith we receive Grace, and the Merits of his Death suffered in his Body
with sheddinge of his Blood. But the Body and Blood it self, that is, the
very Untruths, two together. For properly, and in Substance, we receive it
not. Read the Answer.
Substance of his Body and Blood: tell us, how by Faith ( Untruths, two
together. For properly, and in Substance, we receive it not. Read the
Answer.
properly and truly to speak) as who should sat by Faith made Present, The
Body of Christ not received by Faith only.
we receive it? Furthermore We answer, It is a peeuishe question.
what have ye to answer to this question? If we receive the Body and Blood
of Christ verily by Faith (for so ye say) we demand whether we receive the
same by Faith only without the Body, or with the office of our Body. If
thoffice of our Body be required to the receiuinge of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, as Christ him self Untruth. For Christ meante no such thing, as
appears by the Fathers.
certainly meante (for else how obeyed the Disciples his commandment, to
whom he said at his Supper, Take and eat, this is my Body, likewise of the
Cup, Take and drink, which cannot be done but by the service of the Body)
hereof then it follows, that his Body is verily present. Now that it is not
received by Faith only, thus we prove it by your own Doctrine: A
Sophistical, and a childishe cauil. Read the Answer.
It is so received* as it is Present: but it is Present by Bread and Wine (as
ye say,) Ergo it is received by Bread and Wine. To conclude, if by Bread and
Wine, then not by Faith only. VVil ye give me leave to say, what I think
of you? Verily it seems by your vain ianglinge, that as S. Paul says of
such other like you, ye understand not, what ye speak, nor whereof ye
affirm.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In what sense we may truly say, Christ is either Present with us, or
Absente from us, the matter is not so doubteful, or dangerous to be answered:
unless M. Hardinge have foregotten the Articles of his Creed. For thus we
are taught to beeeue, Christ is Ascended into Heaven, and fit that the Right
Hand of God. Which Article S. Augustine expounds thus: August. Epist. 57.
ad Dardan.
Noli dubitare ibi nunc esse hominem Christum Iesum, vnde venturus est:
memoriterque recole, and fideliter tene Christianam Confessionem, Quoniam
Resurrexit a mortuis: Ascendit ad Coelum: Sedet ad Dextram Patris: nec aliunde,
quam inde venturus est ad viuos mortuo^que iudicandos: Doubt thou not, but
Christ Jesus, as Man, is there now, from whence he shall comme: And hear thou
well in mind, and faithefully believe the Christian Confession, That Christ is
Risen again from the Dead: And Ascended into Heaven: And Sits at the Right
Hand of the Father: And that he shall comme again from thence, and from no
where else, to Judge the quick, and the Dead. Again he says, Homo,
secundum Corpus, in Coelo est: August. in Johan tracta. 31.
and de loco migrat: and, cum ad alium locum venerit, in eo loco, vnde venit,
non est: Christ, as Man, according to his Body, is in Heaven: and passes
from place to place: and, when he comes to an other place, he is not in the
other place, from whence he came. Likewise again, Secundum Praesentiam
Maiestatis, August. in Johan. tractat. 50.
semper habemus Christum nobiscum: Secundum Praesentiam Carnis, recte dictum
est Discipulis, Me autem non semper habebitis: According to the Presence of
his Majesty, we have Christ evermore with us: But according to the Presence
of the Fleashe, it is true, that Christ said to his Disciples, Me you shall
not have alvvaies with you.

So says the Holy Father, and Martyr Vigilius, Vigilius contra Eutychen, Lib.
1.
Del Filius, secundum Humanitatem suam, recessit a nobis: Secundum Diuinitatem,
ait, Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque ad Consummationem saeculi: The Son of God,
according to his Manhood, is gonne from us: But according to his Godhed, he
says, Behold, I am with you until the end of the world. And again, Et
nobiscum est, and non est nobiscum: quia quos reliquit Humanitate, non Deseruit
Diuinitate: Christ is with us: and yet he is not with us: For whom he
leafte, touching his Human Nature, or his Body, touching his Godhead, he
leafte them not. And again, Verbum vbique est: Caro autem eius vbique non est:
The Word, (or Godhed of Christ) is euerywhere, but his Fleashe, or Body is
not eueryvvhere. So says S. Cyril. Etsi Corpore abfuero, Cyrill. in Iohannem.
Li. 10. Ca. 7.
Praesens tamen ero, vt Deus: Although I be Absente as touching my Body: yet,
as God, I will be Present.

And to leave an infinite number of other Learned, and Catholic Fathers,
Faith Eats.
that have written the like, Origin. in Matthae. Homi. 33.
Origin says thus: Secundum Diuinitatis Naturam non peregrinatur a nobis:
Peregrinatur secundum dispensationem Corporis, quod suscepit: Christ,
according to his Godhed, is not a stranger to us: But he is a stranger,
according to the dispensation of the Body, that he received.

Thus is Christ both Absente, and Present: Present in Majesty, Absente in
Body. And in this sense Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. 1. Corinthians. Homil. 6.
Semper nobiscum est Christus: Neque enim, nisi nobiscum esset Christus,
superesset Ecclesia: Christ is evermore Present with us. For unless he were
present, the Church of God could not continewe.

But M. Hardinge says, How can ye make good, that by Faith we receive his
Body, and Blood? By Faith we receive Grace, etc. This question should
rather have benne demanded of S. Augustine, and of other Learned Doctors, and
Ancient Fathers of the Church. Augustine. in Ioha^nem, tract. 25. Tertull. De
Resurrectione Carnis.
How could S. Augustine say, Quid paras dentem, and ventrem? Creed, and
Manducasti: What preparest thou thy toothe, and thy Belly? Believe: and thou
haste eaten. How could Tertullian say, Christus auditu deuorandus est:
intellectu ruminandus est: and Fide digerendus est? Christ must be devoured
by Hearing: chevved by understanding: digested by Faith.

How could Origin say, Origin. in Matthae. Tracta. 26. Cyprian. De Coena
Domini.
sanguis Tesamenti infusus est in Corda nostra? The Blood of the Testamente is
povvred into our hearts. How could S. Cyprian say, Esus huius Carnis est
quaedam auiditas, and quoddam defiderium manendi in Christo? Quod est esca
Carni, hoc est Animae Fides. Non dentes ad mordendum acuimus: sed Fide sincera
Panem Sanctum frangimus: The Eatinge of this Fleashe is a certain greediness,
and a certain desire to tarry in Christ. That meat is unto our Fleashe, the
same is Faith unto our Souls. We sharpen not out teeth to bite withal: But
with pure Faith we break this Holy Bread. To be short, how could S.
Augustine say, August. in Johan. tracta. 26.
Credere in Christum, hoc est manducare Panem Viuum? To Believe in Christ,
that is the Eatinge of the Bread of Life. And again, Nolite parare fauces,
sed Cor: Prepare not your mouths ( to Eat of this Bread, but) prepare your
Hearts. To these and other like Ancient Catholic Fathers M. Hardinge should
have said, How can ye make good, that by Faith we receive Christ's Body, and
Blood? Thus they witness: thus they write: thus they say: and therefore,
unless M. Hardinge can find untruth in their words, they make it good.

But to force onwarde his matter, he says: Properly, and truly to speak,
how can we Eat Christ's Body by Faith? Here it might have pleased M.
Hardinge to remember, that these phrases, To Eat Christ: To Drink Christ:
To Digeste Christ: To be Fed with Christ: To dvvelle in Christ: To be
cladde with Christ: To be grafte in Christ: and other the like, are not
plain, ordinary, usual, and Common Speeches: but Mystically, and Covertly
uttered under a Figure: thereby to geeue us to understand, that Christ is our
Spiritual Meat: our Spiritual Drink: our Spiritual Sustenance: our Spiritual
house: our Spiritual robe: and our Spiritual stock. Therefore S. Augustine
says, Nisi manducaueritis Carnem Filij Hominis, and Sanguinem biberitis, non
habebitis Vitam in vobis. August. De Doctrina Christiana, Lib. 3. ca. 16.
Facinus, vel Flagitium videtur iubere. Figura ergo est, Praecipiens Passioni
Domini esse communicandum, and suauiter, atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria,
quod pro nobis Caro eius Crucifixa, and vulnerata sit: Unless ye eat the
Fleashe of the Son of Man, and Drink his Blood, ye shall have no life in
you. He seems by these words to command us to do an horrible
wickedness. ( For it is an horrible matter to eat Man's Fleashe, or to drink
Man's Blood.) Therefore this is a Figure, ( or manner of speech)
commaundinge us to be partakers of Christ's Passion, and comfortably to lay up
in our mind, that his Fleashe was Crucified, and wounded for our sakes.

So says Gratian* De Conse. Did. 2. Species.
touching the same, Quidam no^ improbabiliter exponunt Carnis, and Sanguinis
Veritatem, ipsam earundem rerum efficientiam, id est, Remissionem Peccatorum:
Touching these words, The Truth of Christ's Fleashe, and Blood, sum
men not vnaptely understand thereby, the effect, and force of Christ's
Fleashe, and Blood, that is to say, The Remission of our Sins. And so S.
Augustine says, Lauerunt Stolas suas in Sanguine Agni, Augu. in Apoc. Homil.
6.
hoc est, in Gratia Dei per Christum: They washte their cotes in the Blood of
the Lamb, that is to say, in the Grace of God through Christ. This Grace
flowinge from Christ's Body upon the Cross, and given to the Faithful in the
Ministration of the Holy Mysteries, oftentimes bears the name of Christ's
Body, and is the ground, and Substance of the Sacrament: And who so ever is
Partetaker of this Grace, is also Partetaker of Christ's Body. Therefore S.
Augustine says, Cum essent omnibus Communia Sacramenta, Aug. in Psalm. 77.
non Communis erat omnibus Gratia, quae est Virtus Sacramentorum: Whereas the
Sacraments were common to al, yet the Grace thereof was not common to al. And
that is the Power, and strength of the Sacraments. Likewise S. Ambrose, In
similitudinem quidem accipis Sacramentum: Sed Verae Naturae Gratiam,
Virtutemque consequeris: Ambros. De Sacramen. li. 6. ca. 1
Ye take the Sacrament in Representation, or Remembrance: But ye obtain
thereby the Grace and Power of Christ's Very Nature.

Here M. Harding once again moves a very needelesse question. We demand,
says he, whether we receive the same Body of Christ by Faith only,
without our Body, or with the office of our Body. Any child might soon be
hable to assoile this reddle. Rabanus Maurus says, Rabanus Maurus Lib. 1. Ca.
31.
as it is alleged before, Sacramentum ore percipitur: Virtute vero Sacramenti
interior homo satiatur: The Sacrament is received with the bodily mouth: but
withdraw the virtue of the Sacrament, ( which is the Body of Christ) the Inner
man ( that is, not the Body, but the Soul) is filled. So says Augustine, Cum
videbitis Filium Hominis alcendentem, vbi erat prius, certe vel tunc videbitis,
Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 27.
quia non eo modo, quo putatis, erogat Corpus suum: certe vel tunc
intelligetis, quia Gratia eius non consumitur morsibus: When ye shall see the
Son of Man Ascendinge thither, where he was before, then at the least, ye
shall see, that he geeueth not his Body in such sort, as you imagine: Then
shall you understand, that his Grace is not consumed with bitte of mouth.
Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 26.
Again he says, Qui manducat intus, non foris: qui manducat in cord, non
qui premit dente: He that eats the Christ's Body in vvardly, not that eats
( the Sacrament) outwardly: He that eats the Body of Christ it self in
his heart, not that presses ( the Sacrament) with his toothe.

M. Hardinge argues farther, Christ's Body is so received, as it is Present:
But it is present by Bread and Wine (ye say) Ergo it is received by Bread,
and Wine: To conclude, if by Bread, and Wine, then not by Faith only. If M.
Hardinge had better considered the Rules of his Old Sophistry, he might soon
have seen the wantes, and deformities of these reason. Amongst children it is
called Ignoratio Elenchi: Which is the Simplest Fallax of all the rest.

It is true, that of our part, it is not either our hand,, or our mouth, but
Faith only, that receives the Body of Christ: but the same Body of Christ
is offered, and represented unto our Faith by mean of the Sacraments. We
speak of such Instruments of Receiuinge, as are of our self, and be within
us: M. Hardinge answeareth of the Sacraments, that be external Instruments,
and are wholly without us. So in Baptism, notwithstanding we have Christ
Present of our part Only by Faith* yet S. Augustine says, as it is said
before, Habemus Christum in Presenti per Baptismatis Sacramentum: We have
Christ Presently by the Sacrament of Baptism. Thus is Christ Present unto
us: Of his part, Only by his Grace: Of our part, Only by our Faith: By the
Sacraments, Only, Certainetie of Doctrine.
as by mean of outward Instruments, to move our senses. This light, and
childishe error, as I have said before, is called Ignoratio Elenchi, and
therefore seems to proceed of Ignorance. M. Hardinge should have better
examined the force of his Arguments, before he thus suddenly sent them
abroad.

Touching the matter it self, it is not the Bodily mouth, but Faith alone,
that receives, and embraces Christ's Body. S. Augustine says, Panis iste
Interioris Hominis quaerit esuriem. Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 26.
Qui credit in eum, manducat: This Bread requires the hunger of the Inner
Man. He that beleeuth in him, eats his Body.

This is no tangling, as you say, M. Hardinge: It is the Ancient Catholic
Doctrine of y^ Church of God. We be well assured of it, and know certainly,
what we say. But touching y^ certainetie of your Doctrine in this point, I
have briefly touched it in my Former Reply, so mutche, as I then thought
might seem sufficie^te. Sum of you hold, y^ Christ's Body passes down into
y^ stomach: Sum, y^ it enters only into the Mouth, and goes no further:
Sum others say, Quam cito Species teru^tur dentibus, De Conse. Did. 2.
Tribus gradib. In Glossa.
tam cito in Coelum rapitur Corpus Christi: As soon as the Fourmes of the
Bread be grated with the teeth, straight way the Body of Christ is caught up
into Heaven. An other of you says, A Mouse eats the Body of Christ: An
other says, Nay; a Mouse cannot eat it: Peter Lombarde, the Grande Master
of al your School, is piteously confounded in the case, and cannot imagine,
what to say. 4. Senten. did. 13.
For after he had him self moved the question, Quid igitur sumit Mus, vel quid
manducat? What is it then, that the Mouse receives, or what eats it? He
answeareth, Deus nouit: Now God knovveth: ( As for my part, I cannot tell).
Such be your Doctors, M. Hardinge: such is your Doctrine. Therefore, to
conclude with your own words, it appears by your agreemente, and your
answeares, ye understand not the things ye speak of: but both^ affirm, and
deny, ye know not what.

M. Hardinge.
As ye proceed forth, ye give warninge to your Readers, not to take you so, as
though ye held with transubstantiation. And here ye speak thereof as best
becomes your scoffinge sprite, calling it a dream of men of later times,
whereof they could never yet agree within them selves. By which words your
eloquence has set forth your spite and lieing at once. For albeit the term
of transubstantiation be Mark this Antiquity. This Council was holden
tvvelue-hundred and fifteen years after Christ.
of no greater antiquity, Transubsta^tiatio^.
then the Council Laterane under Innocentius the third, where it was by the
Holy Ghost, and the Fathers there devised, as very fit for opening of the
Truth impugned by the Berengarians: yet is the Doctrine thereof no less
Ancient, then the Gospel it self. For maugre the malice of the Devil, and of
all the Sacramentaries, the Old Truth shall prevail, by which we are taught,
that, which was Bread, by the Mystical blessinge to be As in a Mystery, or
Sacrament: but not in Substance: Otherwise it is a great Untruth.
made Christ's Body: and that which was wine, to be made his Blood, as I have
other where is sufficiently declared. And the Church has Untruth manifest, As
shall appear.
always hereupon perfitely accorded, touching the Substance: though certain
schoolmen in their Scholastical Disputations, where oftentimes victory is
sought, and Faith not impugned, about discussion of sum school point, have
without prejudice of our belefe disagreede.

The B. of Sarisburie.
As for the scoffs, and spites, and lies, ye speak of, M. Hardinge, let him
have them, that has best deserved them. Then verily, without great wrong,
you cannot lose them.

Touching your New Fa^tasie of Transubstantiation, whether it be a dream, or
no, and whether the dreamers of it them selves were ever yet hable, rightly to
expound their own dream, it appears partly by your own Confession. Ye
grant, the name and term thereof was never known, or heard of in all the
World, until your late Council of Laterane, holde^ in Rome under Pope
Innocentius the third, Transubstantiation Nevve, and doubteful.
in the year of our Lord a thousand two hundred and fifteen, Anno. 1215.
in the time of King John the King of England, and never before. So long the
Church of God was hable well to stand without your Transubstantiation.

And al be it ye tell us, notwithstanding the newness of the name, yet
nevertheless the Doctrine thereof has still continewed in the Church, and
has benne evermore received, and confessed of all the Faitheful: and that
maugre the malice of the Devil, and of all the Sacramentaries, it is as Ancient,
as the Gospel, or as Christ him self: Yet of y^ other side ye confess
plainly, that for the space of twelve hundred years, and more, Roman wiste,
by what name to call it.

But for as mutche, as you think it lawful for you to auouthe, and affirm,
what you list, true, or false, without controlmente: whereas ye say, this
late Faith of yours is as Ancient, as the Gospel, know you, that sum of
the best learned of your own side, have said, It is a nevve Point in
Religion: and therefore not so Ancient, as you seem to make it: It is a
doubteful Conclusion: and therefore no Faith at al. Cutberbertue Tonstallus*
De Eucharistia, Lib. 1. Page 46,
D. Tonstal thereof says thus, De modo, quo id fieret, fortasse satius erat*
Curiosum quenque suae relinquere Coniecturae: sicut liberu^ fuit ante Concilium
Lateranum: Of the manner, and mean, how this might be (whether by
Transubstantiation, or otherwise) perhaps it had benne better to leave every
man, that would be Curious, to his own Conjecture: as before the Council of
Laterane it was leafte at liberty. You say, it is as Ancient as the Gospel:
D. Tonstal says, It is but new, and came in twelve hundred years, and more,
after the Gospel: You say it is the Catholic Faith: D. Tonstal says, It is
a Conjecture, or a Gheasse (which differs not mutch from a dream) and that
before the said late Council of Laterane, noman was bound to believe it. And
here it may please you to consider indifferently with your self: It it were
leafte at Liberty, as D. Tonstal says, for any man either to receive it, or
to refuse it, as he thought good, how could it then be the Catholic Faith?
If it were the Catholic Faith, as you say, and that maugre the malice of
the Devil, how then could it so many hundred years be leafte at liberty?

Hereof ye say, ye have written sufficiently otherwheres. All this I grant:
your Books are known. How be it, if you would have written no more but
Truethe* ye might have saved mutche time, and spared sum paper. But if it
shall not mislike you, once again more advisedly to view the same, ye shall
find in the very First Division thereof three great Untruths together, al
within the space of Fourteen lines.

Now whether your fantasy of Transubstantiation be a Dream, or no, by the
Constancy, and Certainetie thereof, and by the agreemente of your Doctors, y^
founded it first* it may appear. Petrus Lombardus, y^ only General of all this Camp, Senten 4. did. 11. Si autem, etc.
hereof uses these speeches: Quibusdam ita Videtur: Quida^ dicunt: Quida^
tradunt: Quidam concedunt: Alij putauerunt, Substantiam ibi Panis and Vini
remanere: Sum men Judge thus: Sum say thus: Sum have written thus:
Sum grant this: Sum others have thought thus, that y^ very Substance of
the Bread, and Wine remains still. Here is a strange agreemente of Learned
men, specially in a case of the Catholic Faith. But hereto what says
Peter Lombarde him self, that takes upon him as a Judge to determine these
doubts? How is he resolved? Or how agreethe he in Judgment with him self?
His answer is this, Si autem quaeritur, qualis sit illa Conuersio, An
Formalis, An Substantialis, An alterius generis, definire non sufficio: If a
question were moved, what manner of Conversion, or change this is: Whether it
be in Form, or in Substance, or of sum other sort, I am not hable to
discuss it. Here we may see, the blind leads the blind. He that sets
him self before all the rest, Transubstantiation Nevve, and douteful.
and would be taken for a guide, knows not where to set his own foots.
Gabriel Biel says, Quomodo sit ibi Corpus Christi, Vtrum per Conuersionem
alicuius in ipsum, an sine Conuersine incipiat esse Corpus Christi cum Pane,
manentibus Substa^tia, and Accidentibus Panis, non inuenitur expressum in
Canone Bibliae: How the Body of Christ is there, whether it be by changinge
of sum thing into it, Gabriel. in Canonem, Lect. 40.
Or Christ's Body begin to be there together with the Bread, both the
Substance, and the Accidents of the Bread remaininge still without changinge,
it is not found expreste in the Canon of the Bible. I leave Innocentius,
Scotus, and sundry others of your Scholastical Doctors, with their doubteful
dreams, and gheasses to like purpose.

Whether these be dreams, or no, I leave to you, M. Hardinge, to consider.
Verily Innocentius. 3. says, Fuetunt, qui dicerent, quod, sicut post
Consecrationem vera Panis remanent Accidentia, ita Panis remanet vera
Substantia: There were sum, that said, that as after Consecration there
remain the very Accidents, or Fourmes of Bread, so likewise the very
Substance of the same Bread remains still. And this same Judgment Durandus,
although he him self hold it not, yet he will not have it in any wise to be
condemned.

Now, M. Hardinge, if you dissemble not, but believe constantly, as you say,
then cannot these things stand, without Prejudice of your believe.

M. Hardinge.
But Lord what meant ye to allege Theophylacte, and S. Ambrose, whose Doctrine
is so contrary to yours, Theophylacte contrary to these Defenders.
as light is to darkness? Theophylacte expoundinge these words of Christ in
S. John. As the Living Father has sent me, even so live I by the Father, and
he that eats me, shall live by me, says thus: Do thou not hear a
dreadful saieinge? We eat not pure God, for he is vntoucheable, and
vnbodily. Neither can he be comprehended with eyes, nor teethe. Neither eat we
the flesh of a pure man: for that can profit nothing at al. But now that God
has united unto him self fleashe after a unspeakable contemperament, the
fleashe is also become lifemakinge. Not for that it is passed away into the
Nature of God, This similitude of f^y yro^ quite overthrows the whole
fantasy of Transubstantiation.
beware of that, but after the likeness of fyryyron, which abides iron, and
shows the operation of fire: even so (quoth he) the fleashe of our Lord
abidinge fleashe, is lifemakinge, as being the fleashe of God the word. then
as (says he) I live by the Father, who is life, so he that eats me, shall
live by me, being tempered with me, as also being transelemented into me, who
have Power to viuificate or give life. Which last words your own Doctor
Oecolampadius has thus turned, Dum quodammodo miscetur, and transelementatur
in me, qui viuificare potest, corruptinge the sound Doctrine of the writer
with his forged Untruth, presumed only of ignorance For, Quodammodo, is in
the text: (...).
quodammodo, which he found not in the Greek there placed, and breakinge the
congruitie of the Latin speech, by puttinge that in the third Person, that
ought to be in the first. If faith wrought all this matter, then after your
meaning, might we eat God, which Theophylacte denies. He says, he that
eats Christ's fleash, is te^pered together with him, and transelemented into
him, so as he is made one Body with him, Cap. 3. Ephe. 5.
as Cyrillus expounds the place of S. Paul to the Ephesians: where he
says, that we be Concorporales, that is to say, of one Body with Christ. And
an other where, fleash of his fleashe, and bone of his bones.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Of Theophylactes Authority, we never made any great accoumpte. He is but a
very late writer, in comparison of the Ancient Fathers. For the most part of
that he writes, he is but an Abbridger of Chrysostom. He writes against the
Church of Rome, stoutly mainteininge a known Heresy, concerning the
Procedinge of the Holy Ghost. Notwithstanding, in this place we alleged his
words to good purpose. For, as he says, we are Tra^selemented, or
transnatured. and changed into Christ, even so, and none otherwise, we say,
The Bread is Transelemented or cha^gedinto Christ's Body. But not withstanding
this change. we remain still in Substance, Theophylacte. To eat God.
as we were before: Therefore we say, Notwithstanding the like change, The
Substance of the Bread in like manner remains still.

But what fancy came in your head, M. Hardinge, thus to allege, and so
vehemently to force this place of Theophylacte? What one word speaks he,
either of your Transubstantiation, or of your Real presence, or of your
Corporal, and Fleashely Eating? Verily, as, by any his express words, he
nothing aideth you, so by his example of Fiery iron, he seems quite to
overthrow you. For if ye compare the Sacrament with a piece of Burninge iron,
(which nevertheless was not Theophylactes meaning: and therefore ye are
therein mutche deceived) then, as the iron, although it be fiery, yet
notwithstanding in Nature, and Substance is iron still: Even so the Bread,
although it be made the Sacrament of Christ's Body, and so the Instruments of
the Grace of God, yet, that notwithstanding, in Nature, and Substance in
Bread still.

Here, lest you, geuinge over your Transubstantiation, as knowinge it to be
only a late found fantasy, should hope nevertheless by this Example of
Fiery iron to establishe your Real Presence, and to say, that as the fiere is
Really, and in deed in the iron, so the Body of Christ is in deed, and
Really in the Sacrament: it may please you to call to mind, that in the Holy
Learned Fathers, the same example, and like Form of speech, is used also of
the Sacrament of Baptism. In the Council of Nice it is written thus: Council
Nicen. (...).
Vides Aquam: Cogita de virtute Dei, quae latet in Aqua. Cogita, A quam esse
plenam Ignis Diuini: Thou seeste the Water: Think thou of the Power of God,
that lies in the Water: Think thou, that the Water is full of Heavenly Fire.
Yet, I trow, ye will not have us believe, as an Article of our Faith, that
this fire, whereby is meant the Blood of Christ, is in deed, and Really in
the Water.

These, and such other the like, may not always be taken, as phrases of
Precise Truth: but rather as Amplifications, or heates of speech, the better
to stir up, and to inflame the minds of the Hearers. And in this sort, and
sense, to leave other Authorities, Hosius in Conf. Petruouien. Cap. 48.
Hosius, your own Doctor says, Opera nostra respersa sunt Sanguine Christi:
Our Works be sprinkled with the Eloude of Christ. So says Pope
Innocentius. 3. Virtutes nostiae Crucis Christi Sanguine Purpurantur: Our
Virtues are died, Innocen. De Mysterijs Miss. Li. 2.
as red as Purple, in the Blood of the Cross of Christ. Thus the Holy
Fathers say, The Bread of the Holy Mysteries, and the Water of Baptism are
full of fiere.

Further Theophylacte says, The Body of Christ is Eaten: But the Godheade is
not Eaten: because it is vntoucheable, and incomprehensible unto our senses.
Hereof you would seem to reason thus: If Faith wrought all this matter, then
might we Eat God. For by Faith we believe in God.

First, Psalm 33.
touching the Eatinge of God, 1. Pet. 2.
God him self says, Augu. De Verb. Domini Secund. Lucam, Sermon 29 August.
Confess.
Gustate, and videre, quod suauis est Dominus: Taste, and see that the Lord is
delectable. S. Augustine says, Panis est, and Panis est, and Panis est: Deus
Pater, Deus Filius, and Deus Spiritus Sanctus: It is Bread, It is Bread, and
it is Bread: God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Again he
says, Deus Panis intus est animae meae: God is the Inward Bread of my
Soul. Therefore it is not so thoroughly, and undoubtedly true, that you say,
the Nature of God cannot be Eaten.

Notwithstanding, for sparinge of words, and time, Lib 1. Articulo. 8.
Diuisi. 16.
herein I will refer you to my Former Reply. There shall you find this whole
Objection fully answered.

You say, Theophylactes reason stands thus, God cannot be Eaten: because be
cannot be comprehended, either with eyes, or with teethe. But Christ's Body
may be eaten: To eat God.
Therefore it must follow in the Conclusion, that with our eyes we may see
it: and with our teethe receive it. Here would I feign learn of you, M.
Hardinge, when ye saw Christ's Body visibly in the Sacrame^te with your eyes,
or when ye pressed it with your teeth? Augu. in Johan. Tracta 25.
If your teeth can receive it, why says S. Augustine, Quid paras Dentem, and
Ventrem? Why preparest thou thy Toothe, and they Belly? If your Bodily eye can
see it, why say you, It is Invisible? If it be Invisible, how is it seen? If
it be seen, how is it Invisible? It appears, that either Theophylacte the
Master, or you the Scholare, are deceived: or one of you understands not the
others meaning. Certainly, as Christ's Body is seen in the Sacrament, so is
it eaten in the Sacrament. But it is not Really, or Fleashely seen: Therefore
it is not Really, or Fleashely Eaten.

To avoid error herein, it behooves us to understand, that, To eat God, is
to have the fruition of the Divine Nature, and to be Incorporate into God. But
the Majesty of God so far surmounteth the capacity of man, that as he is in
him self in Nature, and Godhedde, no mortal creature is hable to conceive him,
but only in the Face, Hebr. 1.
and sight of Jesus Christ the Son of God. Therefore S. Paul says,
Christus est Splendour Gloriae, and Character Substantiae Dei: Christ is the
Brightness of the Glory, and the express Image of the Substance of God. S.
Augustine says, Augustine. in Psalm. 134.
Tu quomodo contingis Deum? Quia Verbum Caro factum est, and habitauit in
nobis: How do thou touch God? ( He answeareth) Because the Word became
Fleashe, Augu. in Johan. Tracta 2.
and dwelte in us. Again he says, Si Christus sic veniret, vt Deus, non
agnosceretur: If Christ came so, as he is God, noman could know him. S.
Gregory says, Grego. in Ezech. Lib. 1. Homil. 14.
Dominus murus nobis non esset, si forinsecus non fuisset: Intus nos non
protegeret, si exterius non appareret: Our Lord were no wall unto us, if he had
not benne in the Form of Man: He could not inwardely defend us, if he had
not outvvardely appeared. Eccles. Hierar. Cap. 3.
So says Dionysius, Si cupimus Communionem habere cum Deo, oportet nos in
Diuinissimam illius vitam, quam egit in Carne, intueri: If we desire to have
Communion with God, we must behold that heavenly life, that he leadde in the
Fleashe. Thus, as God is God, in Majesty, and in him self, we understand
him not, we conceive him not, we know him not: That is to say, we have no
fruition of him, Augustine in Psalm. 119.
we eat him not. Therefore S. Augustine says, Iesum Christum secundum id,
quod erat Verbum apud Deum, Paruuli non capiunt. Quomodo ergo capiunt, qui Lac
capiunt? Iesum Christum, inquit, and hunc Crucifixum. Suge quod pro te factus
est: and cresces ad id, quod est: Little ones understand not Jesus Christ,
according to that he was the Word with the Father. How then do they receive
him, y^ receive milk? S. Paul says, they receive Jesus Christ Crucified.
Suck that thing, that he was made for thee: and thou shall grow to that he
is.

Thus in the Holy Mysteries there is represented unto us, not the Divine Nature
of Christ, whereby he is Equal to the Father: But his Death, and Humility,
whereby he abased him self, and was made Equal unto us. This is the Spiritual
Meat, and Drink, and the only feedinge of the Soul. ^ Thereof S. Paul
says, 1. Cor. 11.
As often as ye shall eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye shall
publishe (not the Divine Nature, or Godhedde, but) the Lords Death until he
comme. So says Hesychius, Hesych. in Leut. Lib. 1. Cap. 2. Ambrosi. in 1.
Cor. 11.
Comedimus hunc Cibum, sumentes eius memoriam Passionis: We Eat this Food,
receiuinge the memory (not of his glory, but) of his Passion. So says S.
Ambrose, Quia Morte Domini liberati sumus, huius rei memores, in Ede^do, and
Potando, Carnem, and Sanguinem, quae pro nobis oblata sunt, significamus:
Because we are delivered by our Lords Death, being mindeful thereof, in
Eatinge, and Drinkinge, We Signify, or Represente the Fleashe, and Blood,
that were offered up for us. Thus in the Holy Mysteries we Eat, and Drink
the Sacrament of Christ Crucified in the Humility of his Fleashe. But his
Divine Nature in Godhed, Christ's Body geeueth Life.
and Majesty cannot be Represented, or expressed by any Sacraments.

It was al vain, and lost labor for you, M. Hardinge, so earnestly to
prove, that Christ's Body quickens, and geueeth life. We know it: We
Confess it: Johan. 6.
We feel it: Christ him self says it: I am the Bread of Life: He that
eats of this Bread, shall live for ever.

This talk empeacheth noman, but your self. For you tell us, and would have
it holden, as an Article of your Faith, not only, that the wicked man without
Faith, but also that the doumbe creature void of Reason, may receive the very
Body of Christ, and that Substantially, Verily, and in deed. Thus you divide
and sunder Christ's Body, from his Sprite: and, contrary to Theophylacte, and
to all the Ancient Fathers, and to Christ him self, ye say, It may be Really
received without Life.

But we say, Ambros. De Benedictionib Patriarch. Cap. 6.
with S. Ambrose, Qui accipit hunc Panem, non moritur morte Peccatoris: Quia
hic Panis est Remissio Peccatorum: Who so eats this Bread ( not the
Sacrament of Christ's Body, but Christ's Body it self) diethe not the death
of a Sinner: For this Bread is the Remission of Sins. We say with S.
Augustine, Qui Carnem Domini non sumit, non habet vitam: and, qui eam sumit,
habet vitam, Augu in Johan. Tracta. 26.
and hanc vtique aeternam: He that receives not the Fleashe of Our Lord, has
no Life: and, he that receives it, has Life, and the same Everlasting. Again
we say with S. Augustine, Augu. in Johan. Tracta. eodem.
Huius rei Sacramentum de Mensa Dominica sumitur, quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam
ad Mortem: Res vero ipsa, cuius Sacramentum est, Omni homini ad vitam, Nulli ad
exitium: quicunque eius Particeps fuerit: The Sacrament ( of Christ's Body) is
received from the Lords Table, to sum unto Life, to sum unto Death: But
the thing it self, ( that is, the Body of Christ, whereof this is a
Sacrament) is to al men unto Life, and to Noman unto Death: Who soever
shall be Partetaker of it.

For sum further declaration hereof, it appears by the witness of the
Anciente Learned Doctors, and Fathers, that we are Really, and Corporally
joined, and united unto Christ, not only by the Mysteries of the Holy Supper,
but also by Faith, by Baptism, by the Sprite of God, by Love, and other
ways. Of Faith S. Augustine says thus: August. Epist. 31.
Per Fidem Adcorporamur in Jesus Christo Domino nostro: By Faith we are
incorporate in Christ Jesus our Lord. And again, Qui venit ad me, Augu. in
Johan. Tracta. 25.
Incorporatur mihi: He that comes unto me, is Incorporate into me. Chryso. in
Epist. ad Romans Hom. 25 Chryso. in Epist. ad Colos. Hom. 6.
S. Chrysostom says, Quid nobis esse non vult, omnibus modis nos sibi
conglutinans, and coniungens? What will not Christ be unto us? For by all manner
means he cleaves, and fasteneth him self unto us. Again in plainer sort he
says, Dominum ipsum amplecteris, and Commisceris, and subuectus coniungeris
Corpori illi, quod sursum sedet in Coelis: Thou embraceste the Lord him self,
and art mingled with him, and being here benea the, art ioiued to that
Body, that sits in Heaven above.

In like manner he writteth of the Sacrament of Baptism: Chryso. in Epist. ad
Ephe. Hom. 20.
Quomodo ex Carne eius sumus, and ex Ossibus eius? Quemadmodum ille fine Virili
Congressu natus est ex Spiritu Sancto, ita nos illud efficimur in Lauacro: How
are we of his Fleash, and of his Bones? He answeareth, As Christ was borne by
the Holy Ghost without the knowledge of Man, even so in the Font ( of
Baptism) we are made the same ( that is, his Fleashe, and his Bones).

So says Leo, Leo, De Natiuitate Domi. Sermo. 3.
Sicut Dominus Factus est Caro nostra nascendo, ita nos facti sumus ipsius
(Caro) Renascendo: As our Lord was made our Fleash, by that he was Borne: so
are we made his Fleashe, by that we are new borne.

So says S. Hierome, Hieronym. (...) Viro Perfecta.
De Carne eius sumus, and de Ossibus eius: Ipse enim est Caput Corporis
Ecclesiae: We are of his Fleashe, and of his Bones: For that he is the Head
of His Body, Quodammodo.
which is the Church.

Thus, M. Harding, we are joined together, and temp^ared with Christ, not
only by the Holy Mysteries, but also by the Sacrament of Baptism, and by
Faith. And Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in. 1. Cor. Hom. 8.
Ne simpliciter teneamus Christum, sed etiam illi conglutinemur. Nam si
quicquam secesserimus ab eo, Perimus: Let us not only hold Christ, but also
let us be fast glevved unto him. For if we fall any thing from him, we are
utterly lost. Must we therefore conclude, M. Hardinge, that the Water of
Baptism is Transubstantiate, no part of the Substance thereof remaininge
still: or that Christ's Body is Really, and grossly Present in that
Sacrament, as you have imagined of the other?

Ye find great fanlte with Oecolampadius, for corruptinge, as ye say, the
sound Doctrine of Theophylacte with his forged, Quodammodo, and for breakinge
the Congruitie of the Latin speech, by puttinge the third Person, in place
of the first. Of the Latin Congruitie, I will say nothing. The Learned
think, that Oecolampadius was as skilful both in the Latin tongue, and in
the Greek, as M. Hardinge. But for the forginge of, Quodammodo, why do you
not as well find fault with Theophylacte him self? For if it be a forgerie,
he him self has likewise forged the same, Quodammodo: and if that may be
called Corruption, he has also corrupted his own Doctrine. These be his
words: Theophylact. in Johan. Cap. 6.(...).
Qui manducat me, hic viuet propter me, dum Quodammodo miscetur mihi, and
transelementatur in me: He that cateth me, shall live by me: for as mutche as,
after a sort, he is mingled with me, and transelemented, or changed into me.
If ye doubt, whether, (...), in Greek, may be expounded by, Quodammodo,
then is not your skill herein so great, as ye have thought.

Why find ye not fault with S. Augustine, for saieinge the like? Omnes in
illo, and Christi, and Christus sumus: quia Quodammodo totus Christus, and
Caput, and Corpus est: In him we are al Christ's, and Christ him self: For
after a sort whole Christ is both the Head ( of the Church) and also the
Body. And again, Qui in Christum credit, Augu. in Psalm. 26 August. in Johan.
Sermon. 61. August. Epist. 120. Cap. 18.
credendo in Christum veniet, and in cum Christus, and quoquo modo vnitur in
eum, and Membrum in Corpore eius efficitur: He that believes in Christ, by
beleeuinge comes into Christ, and Christ into him, and after a sort is
united into him, and is made a Member in his Body. And again, Paulum Christus
voce mactauit, and in suum Corpus traijciens, Quodammodo manducauit: Christ
killed Paul with his voice, Cyrill ad Calosyrium.
and after a sort, did eat him, swalowinge him down into his Body. Why find
ye not the same fault with Cyrillus writing thus, Decebat ergo eum Quodammodo
Vniri Corporibus nostris? It was meet, that after a sort Christ should be
United unto our Bodies: Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 84.
Or with S. Chrysostom, writing the like: Christus nos secum in vnam, vt ita
dicam, Massam reducit? Christ mouldeth us. if I may so say, into one lump
with him self.

Why say ye not, these, and other like Holy Fathers were Sacramentaries, and
Heretics? Why say ye not, that S. Augustine, S. Cyril, S. Chrysostom, with
their Forged Quodammodo, corrupted the sound, and Catholic Doctrine of the
Church?

Would ye rather, for the better facinge, and colouringe of your Doctrine, we
should strike out this, Forged Quodammodo, and amend it thus, Qui manducat
me, Reipsa Miscetur mihi, and transelementatur in me? Would ye have us to
believe, that we are wholly, and thoroughly changed into Christ's Body, and that
we are made very Christ, God, and Man, the same, that was borne of the
Virgin, and nailed to the Cross: and that not, Quodammodo, after a sort. or
by sum peculiare phrase of speech: but Substantially, Really, Verily, and in
deed? Quodammodo.
I reckon, your Doctrine is not fully so fond.

S. Paul says, Roma. 12. Cyrill. in Johan. Lib. 11. Cap. 26. Chrysostom. in
1. Cor. Homil. ^
Sumus alter alterius Membra: We are Members one of an other: Cyrillus
says, Nos inter nos vnimur Corporaliter: We are Corporally united together
emonge our selves: S. Chrysostom says, Si quis exuat impudicarum mulierum
animas, videbit malum Daemonem illis admixtum: If a man will open the Souls of
Unchaste, or Filthy Women, he shall see the Devil tempered together, and
mingled with them. And think you, M. Hardinge, that these, and other like
speeches of the Holy Fathers, cannot stand without your Transubstantiation,
and Real Presence? Or, that the Godly be Substantially, and in deed in their
Bodies joined together? Or, that the Ungodly be verily united, and mingled
with the Devil?

You might rather have remembered, that touching this unspeakable Unity
bitweene Christ, and the Faitheful, that is to say, bitweene the Head, and
the Body, Cyprian. De Coena Domini.
S. Cyprian writes thus: Nostra, and Christi Coniunctio nec miscet Personas,
nec unit Substantias: sed affectus consociat, and confoederat voluntates: The
Conjunction, that is bitweene us, and Christ, neither mingleth Persons, nor
unites Substances: but ioineth affections, and knitteth vvilles. Likewise
says S. Cyril, Cyrill. in Johan. Lib. 4. Cap. 29.
Initium, and fundamentum in Sanctificatione Christus est, Per Fidem, scilicet,
and non aliter: Hoc enim modo in nobis habitat: The Beginning, and Fundation
of our Holiness is Christ: By Faith, I mean, and none otherwise. For in
this sort Christ dwells in us. Likewise Lyra, one of your owns late
Doctors: In quantum per Sacramentum Eucharistiae unimur Deo, Nicol. Lyra in
Johan. Cap. 6.
viuimus Spiritualiter: Nostra autem vnio apud ipsum est per Fidem, and
Dilectionem: So far forth, as we are united unto God by the Sacrament of
Thankesgeeuinge, we live Spiritually: But the Union, that is bitvveene him,
and us, is by Faith, and love. And, expoundinge these words of S. Paul,
Nicol. Lira, 1. Cor. 6
Qui adhaeret Deo, vnus Spiritus est: He that eleueth unto God, is one Sprite
with God: He says, Vnus, non secundum rem, sed secundum affectionem: One
Sprite with God, not One in deed, or according to the Truth: but One in
Love, or according to affection.

And yet, sum what farther to remove you from your fantaste of your Real
Presence, Chryso in Epist. ad Colos. Hom. 6.
S. Chrysostom says, as he is alleged before: Dominum ipsum amplecteris: cum
illo commisceris: and subuectus Coniungeris Corpori illi, quod sursum sedet in
Coelis: Thou embraceste the Lord him self: thou art tempered with him: and
being carried up ( by Faith, and affection) thou art joined with that Body,
that fitteth in Heaven. Leo, De Ascensione Domini, Sermon. 3.
In like sense says Leo: Christus ineffabili modi coepit esse Diuinitate
Praesentior, qui factus est Humanitate loginquior: Christ by unspeakable
means began to be the near to us by his Divinity, the further he is made
from us by his Humanity.

I doubt not, M. Harding, but ye may easily see, that hitherto your Real
Presence is but weakly proved.

M. Hardinge.
Again we marvel with what face ye dare allege Theophylacte for you, Not a
Figure, but the Fleashe it self of our Lord, Transubstantiation.
who in most evident words overthrows your figurative tropical, and
energical Doctrine touching this blessed Sacrament. For he says upon this
sixthe Chapter of S. John: Mark well that the Bread, which is eaten of us in
the Mysteries, Untruth. For he manifestely affirms a. Figure. His words be
these, It is not only a Figure. Ergo he grants, it is a Figure.
is not only a certain Figure of our Lords Fleash, but the Fleash it self
of our Lord. For he said not, the Bread that I shall give is the Figure of
Fleashe, but it is my Fleashe. For the Bread is with secret words through
the Mystical blessinge and coming upon of the Holy Ghost, changed into the
Fleashe of our Lord.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Theophylacte says, The Bread is not only a certain Figure of our Lords
Fleashe, but the Fleashe it self of our Lord. This Objection in my Former
Reply is many where is answered. We grant, The Bread is not a bare, or a
naked Figure: but by way of Sacrament, or Mystery, it is the Body of Christ
it self. So the Water of Baptism, is not an empty Figure of the Blood of
Christ: but it is Christ's Blood it self, because it is the Sacrament of
Christ's Blood. Bernard. Super Missus est. Hom. 3 Augusti. Contra Maximi. Lib.
3.
And therefore S. Bernarde says, Lauemur in Sanguine eius: Let us be washed,
(not in Water, but) in the Blood of Christ. S. Augustine gives this general
Rule, as I have often reported, In Sacramentis videndum est, non quid sint, sed
quid Significent: In Sacraments we must consider, not what they be (in
substance, and nature) but what they Signify. Tertullian says, Christus
acceptum Panem, Tertull. Contra Marcion. Lib. 4.
and Discipulis suis distributum Corpus suum illum Fecit, dice^do, Hoc est
Corpus meum, hoc est, Figura Corporis mei: Christ having taken the Bread, and
having delivered the same to his Disciples. Made it his Body, saieinge, This
is my Body, That it to say, This is a Figure of my Body. And to appointe a
corruptible Creature to this use, and to make it an effectual instrumente of
such high, and Hidden Mysteries, it is not the Work of any mortal man, but
the only Power, and woorkinge of the Holy Ghost: as it shall farther appear
in the next Clause, in mine answer to the words of S. Ambrose. beda says
thus, Beda in Octauis Epiphaniae.
Panis, and Vini Creatura in Sacramentum Carnis, and Sa^guinis Christi
ineffabili Spiritus sanctificatione transfertur: The Creature of Bread, and
Wine by the unspeakable Sanctification of the Holy Ghost, is changed (not
into the very Real Body, and Blood, but) into the Sacrament of the Body, and
Blood of Christ.

M. Hardinge.
Neither Makes S. Ambrose, which also ye bring in, any better for you.
VVoulde God ye would admit him for Vmpeere in this point. Verily in the
book, and chapter, that ye refer us unto, he disputes as it were of
purpose against you, as though he foresawe the time, when the Church should
be troubled with the Heresy of Sacramentaries. Tu forte dicis, etc. Perhaps
thou say, De Sacr. Li. 4. Ca. 4. De Pane. Consecration.
My Bread is common: But this Bread is Bread, before the words of the
Sacraments: so soon as consecration comes, of Bread is made the Fleashe of
Christ. Let us then auouche this, how that, which is Bread, may be the
Body of Christ? By Consecration. Then with what words and speeches is
consecration made? Even with those of our Lord Jesus. For what so ever else is
said (he means at the Mass) it is praisegeuinge to God, and prayinge for
the People, for Kings, for the rest. When the Priest comes to the
Consecration of the honorable Sacrament, there he uses not his own words,
but the Words of Christ. Therefore it is the word of Christ, that makes
the Sacrament. God may well be Omnipote^te, without either
Transubstantiation, or Real Presence.
What word of Christ? Soothely that same word whereby al things be made.
Our Lord Commanded, and Heaven was made. Our Lord Commanded, and earth was
made. Our Lord Commanded, and the seas were made. Our Lord Commanded, every
Creature was engendered. See thou then, how woorkeful is the word of
Christ? Operatorius These be the words alleged by the Defender.
Well then, if there be so great Power in the word of our Lord Jesus, that
things began to be, which were not: how mutche more is it woorkeful, S.
Ambrose says, The Bread and Wine are the same things, they were before
Consecration: notwithstanding they be now made a Sacrament.
Vt sint, quae erant, and in aliud commutentur, That things be which were,
and be changed into an other thing? Here, Sir Defender, Constrewe me these
words, and what sense can you draw forth of them, but this: If by the
workinge Power of our Lords word, things have a being, which before were
nothing, and had no being at al, as Heaven, Earth and Seas: how mutche more
Power has it to work, that things which were before, and had a being,
now also be, or have a being, but be changed into an other thing, in Aliud,
Untrue exposition. That were contrary to S. Ambrose. For then were they not
the same things, their were before.
into a thing of an other Substance? For by this phrase is signified a
Substantial chaunginge, Omnipotente Power.
which aptly is called Transubstantiation: And, I pray you, good Sir, The
Elements after Consecration be, or have a being.
who says, that the Elements. I mean Bread and Wine, pass quite away,
and go to nothing? Though you so belie us, we say not so: God forbid. We
say, that after consecration they be: But what? O fond folio. What Being
have things, when the^e Substance is gonne^.
Not theselsesame they were, whereby the Former Substance is excluded, but the
Body and Blood of our Lord. Again in that we say with S. Ambrose, in aliud
commutantur, They be changed into an other thing: follows it not thereof
good logike, Ergo they be? VVil not this argument hold in Schole, the verb
passive being resolved, A (...) truth (...) modesty.
Sunt commutata, Ergo sunt? For that which ceasseth to be, or goes to
nothing, ye cannot properly say of it, that it is changed: but rather that
it is ended, or perishes. Now sir, I report me to every man, that has any
sense, whether I may not lawfully give you the Menti, as for manners sake I
may use the Italian term, and challenge you in plain terms of a lie, for
vtteringe this untruth, upon that Holy Doctors S. Ambrose. specially
speakinge as you do in your English Translation, by your self allowed thus:
For what can be said more plainly, then that, which Ambrose says, Bread,
and Wine remain still the same they were before, and yet are changed into an
other thing? Zeal moves me to say beyond the modesty of my natural
disposition, What is iuggling, what is lieing. what is falshed, what is
falsefieinge, what is wickedness of falsaries, if this be not?

Neither is the saieinge, wherewith this Defender belyeth S. Ambrose, al only
false, and contrary to the Catholic Faith, but also absurd, unreasonable,
and foolish. For if Bread, and Wine remain still after Consecration, the
same they were before, how then are they changed into an other thing?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, unless ye had made S. Ambrose a Prophet, ye thought, he
could not so handesomely have served your turn. But what, and of whom he
prophesied, and how far saw before, we shall see hereafter. Verily, if that he
the Heresy, that you imagine, the^ he needed not greatly any Sprite of
Prophecy in that behalf. For he foretold us of no new Heresy, that was to
comme: but rather told us of his own Heresy, that then was present.
Doubtelesse, the words that we reprote, are not ours: they are this own.

But S. Ambrose says, The Omnipotente Power of the Word, wherewith God
made Heaven and Earth, the same Omnipotente Power of the same word, he
uses now in the Consecration of the Sacrament. Therefore, says M.
Hardinge, it must needs be geathered, he meante Transubstantiation, and Real
Presence: as if without these new fantasies, God could not be Omnipotente. I
may well answer these men, as S. Ambrose upon the like occasion sommetime
answered the wilful blindness of the Jews: Ambros. De Noe and Arca.
Atramentum vident: Spiritum Dei non vident: They see the Ink (of the Letter
written) but the Sprite of God they see not: Even so M. Hardinge, and others of
that side weigh the words of S. Ambrose: but his sense, and meaning they
weigh not.

Certainly God shows his Omnipotente Power, as well in the Sacrament of
Baptism, as in the Sacrament of Thankesgeuinge. Here of I have said
sommewhat, as occasion was offered, in my Former Reply to M. Harding. Leo
says thus, Articulo. 5. Division. 4. Leo in Natiuitate Domini, Sermon. 5.
Chrysosto. in Johan. Homil. 24.
Christus originem, quam sumpsit in Vtero Virginis, posuit in Font
Baptismatis. Dedit Aquae, quod dedit Matri: Christ laid in the Font of
Baptism the same beginning, that he took in the Virgins Womb. He gave the
same preeminence to the Water, that he gave to his Mother. Even so
Chrysostom, Angeli qui adfuerunt (in Baptismo) tam inenarrabilis operis modum
minime possunt enarrare. Adfuerunt tantum, and viderunt: nihil tamen operati
sunt: Sed Pater tantum, and Filius, and Spiritus Sanctus. The Angels, that were
present at the Baptism, are not h^ble to utter the manner of that
unspeakable Work. They were Present only, and saw: but they did
nothing: but only the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Likewise he says, Chrysostom. in Johan. Homil. 24.
Ex Spiritu, and sensibili Aqua omnia haec admirabilia, and humanam excedentia
cogitationem, exoriuntur: Al these vvoonderful works (wrought in Baptism) so
far exceeding the thought of man, spring of the Sprite, and of Sensible Water.

Thus the Holy Fathers used oftentimes to auance, and to magnify the Holy
Mysteries, the better to bring their Hearers to the deep, and inward
consideration of the same: August. Ad Bonifaciu^, Epist. 23
and therefore, as S. Augustine says, Sacramenta tantae rei, non nisi eiusdem
rei vocabulo nuncuparunt: They expressed the Sacramenta of so great a thing,
none otherwise, then by the name of the same thing. So S. Paul says, 1.
Cor. 10. Pachymer. in 4. Cap. Hierarch. S. Germanus. De Corpor. and Sangui.
Christi Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50.
The Rock was Christ: So an other says, as I have otherwheres alleged, The
Oil is Christ: and an other, Manna erat Christus, qui descendit de Coelo: The
Manna (that rained in the Wilderness) was Christ, that came down from
Heaven. So says S. Chrysostom, reportinge the story of David: Accipiens
Aquam allatam bibere noluit: Sed semetipsum reprehendit, and Domino eam
libauit. Non enim Aqua erat, sed Sanguis: David receiuinge of the Water, (that
his men had gotten with great danger from the mids of their enemies)
would not drink of it: But found fault with him self, and powered it out
unto the Lord: For it was not Water, but Blood.

I beseech thee, 2. Reg. 23.
good Christian Reader, mark well these Words. The story is clear. It was
in deed only a Cup of Water, and nothing else. Yet Chrysostom says, It
was Blood: It was no Water.

In those days, it was no danger, thus to say. The people was instructed,
and well acquainted with this phrase, or manner of speech, and knew the
meaning. They were taught, that the Rock, the Oil, and the Manna in the
Wilderness, were only Sacraments of Christ: and that, notwithstanding they
were called by thy name of Christ, yet in deed, and in Substance they were
not Christ.

Therefore I may answer M. Hardinge herein, as S. Augustine sommetime
answered the Pelagian Heretics: August. Contra Iulianum, Lib. 1.
Vobis Pelagianis nondum litigantibus, securius loquebantur Patres de his
Articulis: Before that you Pelagians began to quarrel, the Fathers, and
Doctors spoke without fear, and freely of these Articles.

Athanasius says of the Arian Heretics, Athanasi. Contra Arian. Sermon. 4.
Incorporalia Corporaliter excipientes, quae probe dicta erant,
interpretationibus deprauauerunt: Taking Spiritual things in a Corporal, or
Fleashely meaning (as doothe M. Hardinge, and other his fellows) by their
interpretations they have depraved the things, that were rightly spoken. S.
Ambrose says of the Breads, and the Wine, Sunt, quae erant, and in aliud
mutantur: They remain the same, that they were, and are changed into an other
thing. Now is the filde woonne: M. Hardinge blows a Maigne Triumph. Here,
says he, Sir Defender, Construe me these Words, Soothely, good Reader, I
distruste not greatly, but this poor Defender might easily Construe these
Words, were he never so simple a clerk. The Natural Creatures of the Bread,
and Wine in the Supper of our Lord (says S. Ambrose) remain still in
Substance, as they were before: yet are they changed into an other thing, that
is to say, they are made the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ:
which before they were not.

Notwithstanding this short Construction, being clear, and plain, may
seem sufficient, yet for that M. Hardinge so deeply apposeth us, and wills
us to Construe him these Words, we will both Construe, and Pars them too for
his pleasure.

Therefore, Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 80.
to warrante our former Construction, S. Augustine says thus: Accedat Verbum
ad Elementum: and fit Sacramentum: Let the Word be added to the Elemente,
Changed into an other thing.
or outward Creature: and it is made a Sacrament, that is to say, an other
thing. Again he says, Sacramenta sunt Signa rerum, Aliud existentia, Aliud
Significantia: Sacraments are Signs, or Tokens of things, being by
Substance One thing, August. Contra Maximi. Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
and Signifieinge an other thing. So says Chrysostom of the Water of
Baptism, Cum hoc Elementum acceperit Spiritum Sanctum, fit Sacramentum: Et iam
non erit Aqua Potationis, sed Sanctificationis: Non erit Aqua communis, sed
Refectionis: Chrysostom. in Psalm 22.
When this Creature of Water has received the Holy Ghost, it is made a
Sacrament: and now it is not Water to drink, but water to Sanctify: Not
common Water, but Water to Refreshe.

Thus the Elemente, or outward Creature both remains, and is changed: It
remains in proper, and plain kind of speech: It is changed improperly,
that is to say, by the way of a Sacrament, or a Mystery. So M. Hardinges
own Gloss says upon the Decrees: De Con. Did 2. Hoc est. In Glosae.
Coeleste Sacramentum dicitur Corpus Christi, sed Improprie. Vnde dicitur, Suo
modo: Non rei veritate, sed Significante Mysterio: vt sit sensus, Vocatur
Corpus Christi, id est, Significat Corpus Christi: The Heavenly Sacrament is
called the Body of Christ, but improperly ( that is to say, not in plain,
and simple manner of speech). Therefore S. Augustine says, It is so called
after a sort: that is, not in truth of matter, but by a Mystery signifieinge:
that the sense may be this, It is called the Body of Christ, that is to say,
It signifies the Body of Christ. August. De Doctrina Christia. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
So says S. Augustine, De Signis differens, hoc dico, Ne quis in eis
attendat, quod sunt, sed potius, quod Signa sunt, id est, quod Significant:
Intreatinge of Signs ( or Sacraments) thus I say: Let noman consider in
them, that they be in Substance, but rather, that they be Signs, that is to
say, that they Signify ( sum other thing). In this sense, and meaning S.
Augustine says again, Dominus ait, Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 4.
Ipse (Johannes) est Elias: Johannes autem ipse ait, Ego non sum Elias. Recte
ergo Johannes proprie respondit: Nam Dominus Figurate: Our Lord said of John
the Baptiste: This is Elias: But John him self says, I am not Elias.
Therefore John answered well in plain manner of words: For our Lord spoke
in a Figure. Thus in sundry sorts of speech, John is Elias: and the same
John is not Elian: and both are true.

But what better expositoure of S. Ambrose can we find, then S. Ambrose him
self? I trust, M. Hardinge will not say, that so Holy a Father was a
falsifier, and a lier, specially in declaringe his own mind. Thus therefore
he says: Ante Benedictionem Verborum Coelestium, Ambros. De ijs qui
initiantur, Cap. 9.
alia species nominatur: post Consecrationem, Corpus Christi Significatur. In
comedendo, and potando, Carnem, and Sanguinem, quae pro nobis oblata sunt,
Significamus. In Similitudinem accipis Sacramentum. Est Figura Corporis,
Ambros. 1. Corinthians. 11. Ambros. De Sacrament. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. and 5.
and Sanguinis Domini. Similitudinem pretiosi Sanguinis bibis: Before the
Blessinge of the Heavenly words, it is called an other Kind: After the
words of Consecration, the Body of Christ is Signified. In Eatinge, and
Drinkinge, we Signify the Body, and Blood, that were offered for us. Thou
receiuest the Sacrament for a Similitude, or for a likeness. It is a Figure
of the Body, and Blood of our Lord. Thou drinkest the likeness of the
precious Blood.

Thus like form of words the same S. Ambrose uses of the Sacrament of
Baptism: Ambros. De Sacramen. Lib. 1. Cap. 5.
Vidisti Aquam? Sed non omnis Aqua sanat: Sed Aqua sanat, quae habet Gratiam
Dei. Aliud est Elementum: Aliud Consecratio: Haste thou seen the Water? But
of Water heals not. But that Water heals, that has the Grace of God. The
Elemente ( or Creature of Water). One thing: and the Consecration is an other
thing.

Thus the Bread remains: and thus it is changed. It remains in Substance:
but it is changed in Mystery.

But M. Hardinge heavily presses these Words, Mutantur in Aliud: that is,
says he, Changed into an other thing.
into a thing of an other Substance. For by this phrase is signified a
Substantial changinge, which aptely is called Transubstantiation. I will not
here use your courteous eloquence, M. Hardinge: nor say unto you, as you say
to others, I pray you, good Sir: but thus I say, I pray you, M. Hardinge,
who gave you this rule? who taught you this Lesson? De Coelo est, an ex
Hominibus? Came it from Heaven, or is it of Men? Have the Holy Fathers thus
taught you, or is it only you own fantasy? What Grammar, What Logique, What
Philosophy, What Divinity ever told you, that, Aliud, evermore signifies a
thing of an other Substance? If ye have an Author, why comme you without him?
If it be only of your self, why should we believe you?

If, Aliud, signify only a Substance, and nothing else, why doothe S.
Augustine say, August. Contra M^^imi. Lib. 3. Cap. 12.
as it is before alleged, Sacramenta sunt Signa terum, Aliud existentia, aliud
Significantia? Why says S. Augustine again, Aliud est Sacramentum, Aliud
Virtus Sacramenti? Why says S. Ambrose, Aliud est Elementum, Aliud
Consecratio? August. in Johan. Tracta. 26. Ambros. De Sacram. Lib. 1. ca. 5.
For by your Divinity the Sacrament, the Form, the Consecration, be
Accidents only, and may not be taken for the Substance. Verily for ought,
that I can learn, Aliud, is nothing else, but Res alia, an other thing,
whether it be the Substance, or the Accidente. For, I think, ye have no^
forgotten the Old rule, Vnumquodque in suo genere est quid.

We say, The Nature, and Substance of the Bread, and Wine is not clearly
changed, or consumed into Nothing, as many have dreamed in these later days.
Here M. Hardinge comes roughly in, as his manner is, and says, ye belie us:
we say not so: God forebid. Thus he cries out, before he be stricken.
Solomon says, Proverb. 28.
Impius fugit, nemine persequente: The gilty flees, before he be chased. For,
notwithstanding there be multitudes of folies in his Doctrine, yet with this
folly we charge him not. But whether any of his Fellows have so said, or no,
4. Senten. Did. 11. Quidam.
I report me to his Master, Peter Lombarde. His words be these, Quid ergo
fit de Substantia Panis, and Vini? Illi dicunt, vel in praeiacentem materiam
resolui, vel in nihilum redigi: What then becomes of the Substance of the
Bread, and Wine? They say, either that it is resolved into the matter, that
was before, or else, that it is consumed into nothing.

Mary God forebid, says M. Hardinge. So coye, and careful he is, for his holy
Fourmes, and his kingedome of Accidents. He says, The whole Substance of the
Bread is clean abolished, not one part thereof remaininge: yet may it not
be turned into nothing. And, as if the matter were well woorthe somewhat, be
assures the same sadly with a great detestation, God forebid. Hereof
something might be said, if it were any thing woorthe the hearing. But,
good Reader, thou shall lose nothing by the silence: For, I assure thee,
verily it is woorthe nothing.

Yet M. Hardinge first gives us his courteous menti: and afterward, in his
familiar manner, charge us by plain terms with a lie: and suddenly cries
out, as he says, beyond the modesty of his natural disposition, What is
Iuggsinge: what is Lieinge: what is Falsehedde: what is Falsifieinge: what is
wickedness of Falsaries, if this be not? I might say: O Sirs, Hold the man.
Good Christian Reader, in all these Whattes, thou will happily think, there
should be somewhat. Now be it, in deed it is but a pangue of M. Hardinges
Rhetorique: lest thou should think, that having spente so many waste
words, in the end he had said nothing.

But, what is the matter, M. Hardinge? What moves you, to make this piteous
outcrie? For soothe because we say, The Bread, and Wine remain the same,
they were before. But these be S. Ambroses own words: they be not ours: we
make them not: we change them not: but report them simply, as we find them.
As they were written in Latin by the Author, these they are: ( Panis, and
Vinum) sunt, quae erant, Changed into an other thing.
and in aliud mutantur: The Bread and Wine are the same, that they were: and
are changed into an other thing. Therefore, it appears, al these
Exclamations, of what is lugglinge? what is Lieinge? etc. perteine unto S.
Ambrose the Authoure hereof, and not unto us.

Now, for so mutche as it has pleased M. Hardinge so earnestly to call us
forth to construe him these words, I beseech thee, good Reader, mark
well, what Constructions he, and his Fellows have imagined, and fansied upon the
same. First of al Lanfrancus, the chiefest Champion of that side, thought it
the wisest way, Lanfrancur De Eucharist.
utterly to deny these words, and to say, They were never written by S.
Ambrose. For thus he stormeth against Berengarius: O mentem amentem: O hominem
impudenter mentientem: O puniendam temeritatem: Ambrosium accire testem
praesumis, quod Panis, and Vinum Altaris, per Consecrationem non definant esse,
quoderant, sed commutentur in aliud, quod non erant? Et quidem si de
Sacramentis, seu de coeteris, de quibus Ambrosius scripsit, omnes reuoluat
Libros, quos Ecclesia in vsu nunc habet, tale quid ab Ambrosio dictum,
taliterque expositum, nusquam repetire valebit: O mad mind: O impudent Lier:
O rashenesse worthy of pounishement: Dare thou to allege S. Ambrose for a
witness, that the Bread and Wine of the Altar leave not by Consecration, to
be that they were before: but are changed into an other thing, that they were
not? Now truly if he peruse all the Books, that S. Ambrose has written,
either of the Sacraments, or of other matters, I mean such Books, as the
Church has no we in use, he shall never find any thing so written by S.
Ambrose, and so expounded.

But M Hardinge thought, he might not well thus do without empeachement of his
modesty. For the very same words are to be found extante, and apparent in
every Book. Therefore allowinge the words, he thought it best to follow his
Master Peter a Soto, and to delaie, and qualify the same with some
Construction.

Thus therefore he says, Sunt, quae erant, and in aliud mutantur: Doothe it
not follow by good Logike, Mutata sunt, ergo sunt: They be changed: Ergo they
be? In Louaine, perhaps: In other Universities, I doubt, whether it have
hitherto benne allowed, or no. For by this Logique, where as S. Hierome says,
Superbia mutata est in Humilitatem, Hieronym. in Matthae. Cap. 18.
M. Hardinge may conclude, as he doothe now, Superbia mutata est: Ergo est:
Pride is changed into Humility: Ergo Pride is, Roman 1.
or remains still. And, whereas S. Paul says, Commutauerunt Veritatem Dei
in mendacium: By this Logique M. Hardinge may say, Mutata est, Ergo est: The
Truth of God is changed into a Lie: Ergo, It is Gods Truth still
notwithstanding.

And to take further view of M. Hardinges Construction, thus he says, Panis,
and Vinum sunt, quae erant, id est, qualia erant: The Bread, and Wine be in
Substance the same, that they were: that is to say, They be in qualities, or
Accidents, as they were. They are changed, in Aliud, into an other thing:
that is, Into an other Substance. They are Changed: that is, They are
Transubstantiate. They be: that is: They be not: That they were: that is, that
they were not. Thus Substance, is Accidens: Accidens, is Substance: Being, is
not Being: Not Being, is Being: Remaininge, is not Remaininge: Changinge, is
not Changinge: And the same thing, is not the same.

With such pretty Constructions M. Hardinge can teach us to expound the
Anciente Fathers. These be their keys of the Kingedome of Heaven. Herewith
there is nothing so cluse shut, but they can open it: There is nothing so
open, but they can shut it. Here might I conclude with M. Hardinges own
words, and rightly say, as he says, what is Iugglinge? what is Lieinge?
etc. But it shall be best to leave his own eloquence, and modesty to him self.

M. Hardinge.
The places of Gelasius, and Theodorite in appearance seem to make mutche for
you, and more then any other Doctors. And though these two doctors were
altogether of this opinion, that after Consecration the Substance of Bread
and Wine remains, what reason is it, they only in so great a matter
should preiudicate all other Holy and learned Fathers, and which is more, the
general Councels, and Untruth. For this fantasy was never allowed through
the whole Church of Christ: as it shall appear.
the whole Church of Christ? The Catholic Faith we find in them both
within few lines after the words of this Defenders objection, first by
Gelasius thus expressed: Sacramenta Corporis and Sanguinis Domini in diuinam
transeunt, Spiritu Sancto perficiente, Substantiam: permanent tamen in suae
proprietate Naturae; The Sacraments (says he) of the Body and Blood of our
Lord pass over into a Divine Substance by the woorkinge of the Holy Ghost.
Yet remain they still in the propriety of their own Nature. By divine
Substance he means the ^leas he of our Lord assumpted of the Word. The
truth confessed by Theodorit' Dialog. 1.
Now says Theodoritus, the Mystical tokens, be understood to be the
things, which they be made, and are believed, and adored, as being the
things which they are believed to be. But every man knows they are believed
to be made the Body and Blood of Christ, and therefore be duly adored and
woorshipped: so after the mind of Theodorite, they be the Body and Blood in
deed, not Bread and Wine, as before Consecration.

The Substance or Nature of Bread and Wine ceasseth not to be, says
Gelasius: (Whereas your interpreter adds of his own head this word So)
Untruth. Without question it is so. For the words be, Non definit esse
Substantia Panis.
we tell you and him, in Theodorite it us not so. Ergo it remains, say ye.
We grant the Substance, or Nature of Bread and Wine remains after
Consecration, so as Gelasius understands by the name of Substance, A peeuishe
untruth. It had benne too great a folly.
which is nothing else but the very Nature (as commonly we speak of Nature)
that is to say, Nature i^ Gelasius, and Substance in Theodorite is taken for
natural property. Dialog. 2. In Logi^s Cap. 23.
the natural properties of Bread and Wine: for so he expounds him self
afterward, saying, Yet they remain in the propriety of their own Nature.
They remain (likewise says Theodorite) in their Former Substance, Figure,
and Form, and be seen and felt as before.

And there to may Damascenes definition of Substance perteine, who says,
that Substance is every that, what so ever by it self is being, and has not
being in an other. And therefore Untruth manifest: Read the Answer.
sht be the Accidents have their being by themselves in this Sacrament, and
be not stayed on any other thing: in this consideration, Substance of them
may so be reported, as if them selves were Substance. Which Substantial
consistinge of Accidents: O folly.
substantial consistinge of the Accidents lackinge a propre name, because it
is the mighty and extraordinary hand of God, is also extraordinarely called of
Gelasius, and Theodoritus by the name, which the thing had before, to wit,
the Substance of Bread and Wine. And no marvel if they spoke not in O exact
folly. A heap of Untruths without sense.
most exact wise of this secret point of Doctrine ( of Fourmes and
Accidents) at what time it was not as yet by the Church so clearly, and fully
discussed: ( as it was never pet until this day). But since of the
Schoolmen ( ignorante and Fantastical Sophisters) it has benne more
distinctly named the existence of Accidents without their Subject, that is,
without an other thing whereupon they might stay.

Again whereas Bread and Wine by their nature do nourrishe, Untruth. M.
Harding by one dream expounds another.
this virtue also remains in the Accidents given to them by the Almighty
Word of God, who changes Creatures to their betteringe, not to their
impairinge. This was the meaning of Gelasius, and The doritus, where they
say, the Bread and Wine to remain in their Former Substance or Nature.
Otherwise should they be contrary to them selves, as they, which also do
acknowledge the nature of Bread and Wine to be changed into a more excellent
Substance, by the workefull word of Christ.

The B. of Sarisburie.
As for these two Fathers, Gelasius, and Theodoretus, notwithstanding M.
Hardinge would saeme to make small accoumpte of them, for that they be, as he
says, but only two, yet he rather catches hold in sum dark, or
doubteful word by them uttered, then he would seem utterly to give them
over. Gelasius says, The Sacraments pass over into a Divine Substance: If
he had said, They pass over into a Divine Accidente, it would somewhat
better have shadowed these men's purpose. But other Divine Substance M.
Hardinge can imagine none, sauinge only Christ's Body Substantially, and
Really contained under the Fourmes of Bread and Wine. And this fantaste,
notwithstanding Gelasius never knew it, must needs be allowed against, al,
that Gelasius him self can say to the contrary.

But if M. Hardinge had better remembered the placinge, and meaning of this
word, Substantia, and, that as well Gelasius, as other learned Fathers use the
same as Divines, and not as Natural Philosophers, he should easily have found
his own error.

It may please thee therefore, good Christian Reader, to understand, That the
Promise of Mercy, The Grace of God, Our Faith in Christ, Gods Word, and
the Holy Sacraments, that are the aides, and healpes of our Faith, are of the
Holy Anciente Writers called a Substance. Cyprian. De Simplicit. Praelatorum.
So S. Cyprian says, Substantiam Salutis amittunt: They lose the Substance of
Salvation. So says Irenaeus, Quamuis sint in Operibus materialibus, tamen
putant se non amittere Spiritualem Substantiam: Although they live in worldly,
Irenae. lia. ca. 1. In eodem Cap. (...). Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Hebrae.
Homil. 21.
or filthy works, yet wey think, they lose not the Spiritual Substance.
Likewise again he says of the folies, and Vanities of the Valentinian
Heretics, Insubstantiuum ostendit figmentum ipsorum: He showed, that their
Inventions, and Diuises were void of Substance. So S. Chrysostom, Fides dat
Substantiam rebus: Imo potius non dat Substantiam, sed ipsa est Substantia
earum: Faith gives things their Substance: Or rather it gives not
Substance unto things, but it self is their Substance. In like manner says
Tertullian, Deus Idololatriae Substantiam cohibuit: Tertull. Aduersus Marcion.
Lib. 2.
God forebade the Substance of Idolatry. So says Abbate Panormitane,
Continentia non est de Substantia Ordinis: Single, or lose life is not of the
Substance of Holy Orders. And an other says, Abbas Extrae. De Clericis
Coniugatis. Cu^ Olim. Pupilla Oculi. Page 14.
Enim, non est de Substantia Consecrationis: This word, Enim, is not of the
Substance of Consecration. By these, and other like examples, it may appear,
that in cases of Religion, substance is not evermore taken for Christ's Body
covered with Accidents.

If al these examples will not yet suffice, to grow near to our purpose, S.
Ambrose says, Ambros. De Elia, and Ieiunio. Cap. 3.
Quid est Ieiunium, nisi Substantia, and Imago Coelestis? What is Fasting,
but a Substance, and an Image of Heaven?

Likewise Tertullian calls Baptism, Diuinam Substantiam, A Divine Substance.
His words be these: Tertull. De Baptismo. This is one of Tertullians errors.
Quid festinat innocens aetas ad Remissionem Peccatorum? Cautius agitur in
saecularibus: Vt cui Substantia terrena non creditur, Diuina credatur? Why
hastes this innocente age ( he means Children) to the Remission of their
Sins? We are mutche more wary in worldely things. Is it meet, we should
commit the Sacrament of Baptism, which is a Divine Substance, unto them,
unto whom we would not commit the Substance of the Earth?

By these we may see, in what sense Gelasius calls the Sacrament of
Thankesgeuinge, A Divine Substance. Verily none otherwise, but even as S.
Ambrose calls Fasting, A heavenly Substance. And as Tertullian calls the
Sacrament of Baptism, by the same words, A Divine Substance. And what can
all this avail M. Hardinge, to prove, either his Transubstantiation, or his
Real Presence?

But why deals he so doubly? Wherefore dissembleth he the words of
Gelasius, that immediately in the same sentence went before? For Gelasius him
self so clearly, and plainly expounds his own mind, as no Louanian
Doctor can do it better. Getasius contra Eutychetem.
Thus he says, Non desinit esse Substantia Panis, vel Natura Vini. Et certe
Imago. and similitudo Corporis, and Sanguinis Christi in Action Mysteriorum
celebratur: There leaves not to be the Substance of Bread, or the Nature of
Wine. And in deed the Image, or Representation, and likeness of the Body,
and Blood of Christ is published in the Ministration of the Mysteries. And
again in the words next immediately folowinge, Sacramenta transeunt in
Diuinam, Spiritu Sancto perficiente, Substantiam: permanent tamen in suae
proprietate Naturae: The Sacraments, by the woorkinge of the Holy Ghost,
pass into a Divine Substance: yet notwithstanding, they remain still in the
property of their own Nature.

This Image, or Representation, or Likeness, or Memory of the Body, and
Blood of Christ is it, that Gelasius calls the Divine Substance.

And in like sense S. Augustine calls the same, Coelestem Panem: The Heavenly
Bread. Thus he writes, as he is alleged by Gratian: Coelestis Panis, De Con.
Did. 2. Hoc est. quod dici^us.
qui Caro Christi est, suo modo vocatur Corpus Christi: cum reuera sit
Sacramentum Corporis Christi: Cyprian. De unction Chrismatis.
The Heavenly Bread ( of the Sacrament) which is the Fleashe of Christ,
after his sort is called the Body of Christ: whereas in deed it is the
Sacrament of Christ's Body. Likewise says S. Cyprian, Diuersa Nomina, vel
Species ad Vnam reducuntur Essentiam: and Significantia, and Significata eisdem
vocabulis censentur: Diverse names, or kinds ( of things) are brought unto
one Substance: That is to say, The things, that do Signify, and the
things, that be Signified, are reckened both by one name: That is, as y Body
of Christ is called Bread: so is the Bread called Christ's Body.

To be short, as Gelasius calls the Sacrament, A Divine Substance, even so
Gratian says to the same purpose, Quidam non improbabiliter exponunt hoc
loco, Carnis, De Con. Did. 2. Species.
and Sanguinis Veritatem, ipsam earundem efficientiam, id est, peccatorum
Remissionem: Sum there be, that in this place, not without good reason, by
these words, The Truth of Christ's Fleashe, and Blood, understand the
Effect, or vvoorkinge of the same, that is to say, The Remission of Sins.

For answer unto Theodoretus, it may please thee, for sparinge of time, to
read my Former Reply to M. Hardinge. Arti. S. Diul. 26. Et Articul. 10 Diuis.
4.
It is true, that Theodorete says, The Mystical Tokens, that is to say, the
Sacraments, be understood to be the things, which they be made, and be
believed: That is, That they be Mysteries of Christ's Body: or that in a
Mystery, or by way of a Sacrament, they be the Body of Christ. But it is
true also, that he says, both immediately folowinge in the same place, and
also before: Signa Mystica post Sanctificationem non recedunt a Natura sua:
Theodoret. in 2. Dialogo, Inconfusus. August contra Maximin. Lib. 3. Cap. 22.
Manent enim in Priori Substantia, and Figura, and Forma: The Mystical Tokens
(or Sacraments) after the Consecration depart not from their own Nature.
For they remain still in their Former Substance, and Form, and Figure. And,
as I have often alleged orte of S. Augustine, In Sacramentis videndum est, non
quid sint, sed quid Significent: In Sacraments we must consider, not what
they be (in deed, and of their own Nature) but what they Signify. So says
S. Chrysostom, Antequam Panis Sanctificetur, Panem eum nominamus: Chrysostom.
Ad Caesarium.
Diuina autem illum Gratia sanctificante, mediante Sacerdote, liberatus est
quidem ab appellatione Panis: Dignus autem habitus est Dominici Corporis
appellatione: Etiamsi Natura Panis in illo remanserit: Before the Bread be
Sanctified, we call it Bread. But after that by the mean of the Priest the
Heavenly Grace has hallowed it, it is discharged from the name of Bread, and
is vouchesaued to be called by the name of our Lords Body: notwithstanding
the Nature of the Bread remain still. So says Theodorete him self, Seruator
noster commutauit nomina: and Corpori quidem Symboli nomen dedit, Theodoret,
Dialo. 1.
Symbolo vero nomen Corporis: Our Saueour has made exchange of y^ names: And
unto his Body has given y^ name of (Bread, which is) the Sacrament: and unto
the Sacrament has given the name of his Body.

Nevertheless, notwithstanding these words both of Theodoretus, and of
Gelasius, (The Substance of Bread, and Wine, after the words of
Consecration remains still) be so plain, Nature: Virtue.
that noman without blusshinge may deny them, Yet has M. Hardinge one good
shifte least in stoare. The Substance, says be, sommetimes is used for the
Accidente: even as discretely, and to so good purpose, as if he had said, Fire
is Water, or, Light is Darkness. And so by this Construction, Substance
sommetimes is no Substance. This is M. Hardinges own peculiare Divinity,
without the witness of any of all the Learned Fathers, Greek, or Latin, one,
or other. For, good Reader, thou maiste not think, that any man, either well
advised, or learned, would say the like.

The Fathers, says he, spoke not hereof in most exact wise. Perhaps they
had not Learned their Logique Rules, or understood not the Principles of
Natural reason, no not so mutche, as a child may easily understand: but used
Substance for Accidents: Accidents for Substance: and one thing for an
other: as men that knew not, what they said. In deed, M. Hardinge, this is
not, as you say, Exact wise: It seems rather to be, Exact folly.

Ye add further, Damascene says, Substance is every that, what so ever by it
self is being, and has no being in an other. What needed you here to
allege Damascene? Children know, that Aristotle, and others long before him
wrote the like. Notwithstanding to this Mayor ye set a Minor of your own.
These Accidents, say you, have their being by them selves: and be not
staide in any other thing. O, M. Hardinge, this thing would have had sum
better proof. Why allege you not, either S. Augustine, or S. Ambrose, or S.
Chrysostom, or S. Hierome, or sum other Catholic Father to this purpose?
Your simple word is no good warrante. Ye prove that thing, that is
Universally confessed, and needed no proof: but that ye should prove, ye
leave unproven. This in Sophistry is called Petitio Principij. The simplest
shifte, that can be used.

Damascenes Mayor is Confessed, and true. But your Minor, and Conclusion, are
both Untrue. For whereas you say of your self: The Accidents have their
Being by them selves: we say, the same Accidents have their Being in the
Bread, and Wine, as in their Subjects. Sundry of your own fellows have
said, De Con. dis. 2. Species. In gloss.
Accidentia illa sunt in Aere, tanquam in Subiecto: These Accidents are in the
Air, as in their Subject. Therefore by their judgment, they have not
their Being, as you say, by them selves. You may also remember, that your
Master him self never durst precisely to determine this matter: but only
passes it over darkely, and doubtefully, as being not well resolved, what to
say. His words be these: Mihi videtur fatendum, Accidentia illa existere sine
Subiecto: It seems unto me, 4. Senten. dis. 22 Si autem.
or, es I can gheasse, these Accidents have their Being without a Subject.

M. Hardinge.
We must (...) behold, says Euthymius, a Greek Doctor, the Nature of
the things, which be set before us: What is the Virtue, and Power of your
Accidente^*
but the virtue, or power of them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Euthymius, although one of the meanest Doctors, says right well, and as the
Learned Fathers said before him. But, M. Hardinge, do you take your Authors
at al adventures, as they comme to hand: or do you consider, what they saie^
Tell us. I beseech you in your fantasy, what are those things y^ Euthymius
says, are set before us? Whether are they the Body, and Blood of Christ, or
clarour Accidents? If it be Christ's very Body and Blood substantially,
Really, and in deed, Why should we not consider the Nature of them? what
have they offended you? Cyrill. in Johan. Lib. 4. Cap. 12.
Or what imperfection find you in them? Cyrillus says, Caro Christi Natura
viuifica est: The Fleashe of Christ by Nature has power to give Life. Came
not to destroy
And Christ him self says, My Fleashe is Verily Meat: and My Blood is
Verily Drink. Therefore the Nature hereof is well worthy to be considered. But
if there be nothing there set forth, but only your bare, and naked
Accidents, What Power, What Virtue is there in them? What Doctoure, or Father
ever taught us, that we should have Remission of Sin, and be saved by your
Accidents?

But, as I said, Euthymius writes well, folowinge herein the Doctrine of the
Ancient Learned Fathers. Basilius De Spiritu Sancto. Cap. 15. (...)
S. Basile says, Si qua Gratia est in Aqua, ea non est ex Natura Aquae, sed
ex praesentia Spiritus: If there be any Grace in the Water, ( of Baptism) it
is not of the Nature of the Water, but of the presence of the Sprite. Cyprian
speaking of y^ Oil, says thus: Sanctificatis Elementis iam non propria Natura
praebet effectum: Sed Virtus Diuina potentius operatur: It is not Nature, that
gives effect, or force unto the Elements being Sanctified: but the Divine
Power woorketh more mightily. Cyprian. De Unction. Chrismatis.
So says S. Chrysostom. Petra erat Christus: Non enian ipsius Petrae Natura
Aqua scatutiebat: Sed alia quaedam Spiritualis Petra omnia operata est, hoc
est. Christus: The Rock was Christ. For it was not by the Nature of the
Rock, Chrysostom. 1. Cori. Homil. 18.
that the Water gusshed out: but a certain other Spiritual Rock wrought al
these things, that is to say, Christ. In like manner the Anciente Father
Origin speakinge of the Power, Origin in Matt. Cap. 15.
and Virtue of Our Lords Supper says thus, Illud, quod Sanctificatur per
Verbum Dei, and per Obsecrationem, non suapte Natura sanctificat vtentem: The
thing, that is Sanctified by the Word of God, and by Prayer, sanctifies
not him, that uses it, by the Nature of it self. By these, and other like
aduertisementes, these Godly Fathers meante to withdraw Our minds from the
outward corruptible Creatures, to the Spiritual, and Inward understanding of
the Sacraments. Therefore Euthymius in the same place says, Panis habet
Similitudinem quandam ad Corpus, Euthymius in Math. Cap. 64.
and Vinum ad Sanguinem: The Bread has a certain Likeness unto the Body,
and the Wine a certain Likeness unto the Blood.

M. Hardinge.
When it pleased our Savior Christ at his last Supper to institute this
blessed Sacrament, at which he took Bread and Wine, The Doctrine of
transubsta^tiation. Li. 83. quae.
and turned them into his Body and Blood, he would in such wise advance these
Creatures to a much excellenter condition, as they should lose no whit of
their former Virtues Untruth, fon le and Childishe. As though Christ had died
to save Accidents.
For the son of man came not to destroy, but to save: and, as S. Augustine
says, is not cause that any thing tend unto not being.

The B. of Sarisburie.
At the last M. Hardinge has found sum Scripture: and that, God wot, full
aptely he applteth to serve his purpose. The Son of Man, says be, came not
to destroy, but to save: Ergo, The Bread, and Wine lose no white of their
Former Virtues. Luke 9.


Here, I beseech you, M. Hardinge, what came the Son of Man to save? Must
we believe, be came from Heaven, to Save your Accidents? Was this the cause
of Chrictes coming? It this the Religion ye have Learned in Louaine? S. 1.
Corin. 6.
Paul says, Nenquid de bubus cura est Deo? Has God any special care for
Oxen? Might not one mutch beter say, Has God any care for your Fourmes, for
your Shows, for your empty Accidents?

Perhaps ye will say, I press you over heavily. Ye meante, that Christ came
to Save Bread, and Wine. How be it, so ye cannot say: For by your Doctrine
the Nature, and Substance of the Bread, and the Wine, by the coming, and
presence of Christ, are quite abolished, nothing remaining, but only the
Accidents. But be it, that Christ came, to Save these Creatures, Then is your
Religion mutche like unto the Divinity of the Old Heretics called the
Manichees. Change in Accidents. Augustine. ad Quoduustdeum.
Of them S. Augustine writes thus: Herbas, atque arbores sic putant viuere, vt
ea and sentire credant, and dolere, cum laeduntur: nec aliquid inde sine
cruciatu little quenquam posse vellere: They think, that Herbs, and Trees have
life, so for forth, that they believe, they have sense, and feelinge, and
suffer gnefe and pain, when they be hurt: Ibidem.
and that noman can pull, or pluck ought from them without their smarte: And
again he says, Nec oua sumunt, quasi and ipsa, cum frangunturt, expirent:
They Eat no Bgges, imagining, that, when they be broken, their life, or Soul
passethe from them.

These be mere folies, M. Hardinge. Christ him self says, He came to Save,
not your Accidents, but Sinners: not Bread, and Wine, but the thing, that
was lost. And will ye tell us, that your Accidents were lost? Or that Bread,
and Wine were such sinful Creatures?

O, M. Hardinge, have more reverence to Gods Word. It is Holy: It is it,
whereby you shall be Judged. Have better regard hencefoorthe, to that ye write.
Christ him self says, Filius Hominis non venit, Luke. ^
vt perdat Animas Hominum, sed vt seruer: The Son of Man came not to destroy
the Souls of men, but to Save them. Here in favor of your Accidents, ye
have leafte out the Souls of Men, which was the knot of the whole. And so
there must needs appear in you, either gross ignorance, or wilful
corruption.

M. Hardinge.
Seeinge then there is a change by all consent, Untruth, euidente, and sensible
Read the Answer.
and certain it is that the change is not in the Accidents, because we see
them remain as they were before, Change in Substance.
and God deceives not our lenses in their true and proper obiecte, which is
color, taste, smell, etc. It musts needs be, that the change be in substance,
Untruth, trifinge, and Sophistical. For Substance is perceived by the senses,
although by mean of the Accidents.
which is to sense incomprehensible.

The B. of Sarisburie.
There is a change in the Bread, says M. Harding: But not in the Accidents
thereof: Ergo, in the Substance. In like order of reason he might have said,
It is not a Fearnbushe, Ergo, it is a Fox. Ye may not look, M. Hardinge, to
steal thus away with so simple Sophismes. This poor shifte emonge Children
is called Petitio Principij.

Your Minor, wherein stands the whole doubt, and which by sum Authority,
or show of reason, one way, or other, ye should have proved true, ye have
paste it steily over without any manner of prouse at al, and presume it only
to be true. And so the whole weight hereof stands not by Truth, or Reason:
but hangs only by presumption.

For what Doctoure, or Father ever told you, or made you so certain, that in
the Bread there is no change touching the Accidents? Ye say, your senses tell
you, that the Accidents remain still, as they were before. And the same senses
also tell you, as S. Augustine says, that the Substance of the Bread
remains still, Ad Infantes: Quod vide^is Panis est: quod etiam oculi
renuntiant. Chrysostom. in Mas. Homi. 83.
as it was before. But will you so suddenly forsake your old Lesson? Will you
now put this matter in Compromisse to your senses? How often, and how sadly
have you told us, that these be cases of Only Faith, and that in the
Judgment hereof, both Sense, and Reason must be abandoned? And have you
forgotten that Chrysostom says, Nihil sensibile traditu^ nobis est a Christo
Quaecunque Christus tradidit, insensibilia sunt: There is no sensible thing
delivered unto us by Christ (in these Mysteries). And again, What so ever
things Christ has geeuen us, they are insensible. If they be things utterly
insensible, how then can they be judged by your senses? Why comme ye not
forth with the Learned Doctors, and Catholic Fathers, of whom, ye say, ye
have such plenty. If it be true, as you say, Change in Accidents.
that there is no change in Accidente, why is it not proved? If it be ralse,
why is it avouched? Tell us, how long shall we be bound to your bare word?

Verily, S. Augustine would have told you, that this change is in Accidente,
Augustine ad Bonifacium Epist. 23.
and not in Substance. For thus he says, as it has benne often remembered,
Nisi Sacramenta Similitudinem quandam haberent earum rerum, quarum Sacramenta
sunt, Omnino Sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem Similitudine plaerunque rerunt
ipsaeum nomina accipiunt: Unless Sacraments had certain likeness of the
things, of which they be Sacraments, then in deed they were no Sacraments.
And of this likeness oftentimes they bear the names of the things them
selves. In eadem Episin.
Again he says, Secundum quendam modum Sacramentura Corporis Christi Corpus
Christi est: The Sacrament of Christ's Body after a certain manner is Christ's
Body. Augustine contra Adimantum Cap. 12.
And again, Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum daret
Signum Corporis sui: Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he
give a token of his Body. Likewise says Tertullian, expounding, and openinge
the meaning of Christ's words. Hoc est Corpus meum, Hoc est, Figura Corporis
mei: This is my Body, that is to say, Tertull. contra Marcionem li. 4.
This is a Figure of my Body. You know, M. Hardinge, that Modus, Simile,
Dissimile, Signum, and Figura, be in the Predicamente of Quality: and
therefore perteine to Accidente, and not to Substance.

So Chrysosstome. where as he amplifieth the Change of the Bread in the
Sacrament of Thankesgeuinge, he adds inmediately withal, Sic etiam in
Baptismo: Chrysot. in Mat. Homi. 13. Ambros. De Sacrament, Li. 4. Cap. 4.
Even so is it, that is to say, The like change there is in the Water of
Baptism, In these Mutations the Substance remains still: But the Respect, or
Quality, or Accidente is changed. And this is it, that S. Ambrose said
before, Sunt, quae erant: and in aliud mutantur ( In Substance) they are the
same, they were before: But (in Accidente, or Quality) they are turned into an
other thing.

M. Hardinge.
And here we put you in mind of your falsefieinge of Theodorites words,
Theodrite falsefied by the Defender.
in that ye make him to say in your English, The Mystical Signs to remain
in their former Substance, Form and Kind, where he says Untruth. Even so
he faith. Otherwise M. Hardinge has a Substance without Kind.
not so, but in their former Substance, Figure and Shape. Ye know pardy,
there is great difference between the Kind of a thing, and his Shape. The
oftener ye use that falsebed, as ye use it very often, the more shall ye be
espied to be false teachers, and grow out of credit, where truth is loved.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If there be any falsehoode, or fault herein, by your own Confession, it is
the Interpreters, and not the Authors. You know well, Our contention is not of
the Shape of Bread, but of the Substance. Theodoretus says, The Bread
departs not from his own Nature, but remains still in the former Substance,
Figure, and Form: Sat you, as Theodoretus says: Confess plainly, as he
doothe, that the Substance of the Bread remains still, and, with good leave,
take the Shape unto your self.

And yet I see no great cause, why ye should so mightily cry out, False
Teachers, Falsehed, Falsifieinge, for that the Interpreter has expounded this
Latin word, Forma, by this English word, Kind, For, as it is proved
before by sundry examples more at large, before, in the second Part. I. ca.
1. Division. Athana. De Definitionib.
in the Anciente Fathers these two words, Forma, and Natura, are often used
for one thing. Athanasius says, Natura, Essentia, Genus. Forma. vnu^ sunt:
Nature. substance, Kind, and Form be al one. Certainly, if the very Substance
of the Bread should remain, as Theodoretus says, and yet the Kind of y^
Bread should not remain, it were awo^nder. For, as there is no Kind without
Substance, So is there no Substance without Kind.

M. Hardinge.
The words which ye recite out of S. Augustines Sermon Ad Infantes, we find
in Bedevpon the tenthe Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. The
whole place is this: This thing which ye see in the Altar of God, ye have
seen it also in the night paste. But what it was, what it means, the
Sacrament of how great a thing it contains, Answer to the place alleged
out of S. Augustine.
as yet ye have not heard. That then which ye saw, is Bread and Chalice,
which even your eyes tell you. But that which your Faith requires to be
instructed of, Bread is the Body of Christ, the Chalice his Blood. If the
Substance of Bread remained, as before Consecration, what need had they to
learn, what it were? For of them selves, they might know we the things
proponed to be Bread, and Wine. But S. Augustine, ye say, calls that they
saw Bread, and Wine. Yea Sir, so it was, so far as their eyes told them.
But what their faith ought to tell them, he instructs them, saieinge: Bread
to wit, is the Holy Body of Christ. To this Construction must we stand,
by S. Augustine him self so set forth.

The B. of Sarisburie.
S. Augustines words are plain yenough: how so ever it like you to shaowe
them with your Gloses. Thus he says, Quod vidistis, Panis est, and Calix:
quod vobis etiam Oculi vestri renuntiant: The thing, that you saw, is the
Bread, and the Cup: which thing your eyes do report unto you. Where also
may be noted, as by the way, that S. Augustine, contrary to your Doctrine,
M. Hardinge, refers the Iudgmente hereof to the report, and trial of the
senses. And again he says of him self in the like case, Vereor, ne ipsis
sensibus nostris facere videamur iniuriam, Augustine. ad Dardanum, Epist. 57.
quando id loquendo suademus, vbi omnes Vires, officiumque Sermonis facillime
superat euidentia Veritatis: I fear me, we should do wrong unto our
Senses, if we would go about to prove that thing by speakinge, wherein the
evidence of the Truth it self passes al dewtie, and power of Speech.

How be it, S. Augustine says further, Quod autem Fides vestra postulat
instruenda, Panis est Corpus Christi, Calix Sanguis: This Objection may be
answered by that is said before. These two saieinges are both true.
Hesychius says, Hesythius in Leui. li. 12. ca. 8.
Mysterium nostrum simul and Panis, and Caro est: Our Mystery is both Bread,
and Fleashe. It is Bread in Substance, and in deed: It is also the Body of
Christ, not in Substance, but in a Mystery. Your own Gloss says, as it is
before alleged: Dicitur Corpus Christi, De Con. Did. 2. Hoc est quod. In Gloss.
sed improprie: Vt sit sensus, Vocatur Corpus Christi, id est, Significat
Corpus Christi: It is called the Body of Christ: but improperly, or, not in
dowe and usual form of speech: The meaning thereof may be this: It is
called Christ's Body, that is to say, It Signifiethe Christ's Body.

In a Sacrament we must behold, not only the outward Elemente, but also
the thing it self, whereof it is a Sacrament. S. Augustine says, Si ad
ipsas res visibiles, Augustine. De Baptismo contra Donatis. Li. 3. Cap. 10.
quibus Sacramenta tractantur, animum conferamus, quis nesciat, eas esse
corruptibiles? Si autem ad id, quod per illas res agitur, quis non videat, non
posse corrumpi? If we consider the visible Creatures, wherein the Sacraments
are ministered, who knows not, they be things corruptible? But if we
consider the thing, that is wrought thereby, who sees not, It cannot be
corrupted?

And in the same place before alleged, S. Augustine fully expounds his own
meaning, in what sense the Bread may be called the Body of Christ. These be
his words: Augustine. in Sermon ad Infantes.
Christus leuauit Corpus suum in Coelum, vnde venturus est, vt iudicet viuos,
and mortuos. Ibi est modo sedens ad Dextram Patris. Quomodo est Panis Corpus
eius? Et Calix, vel, quod habet Calix, quomodo est Sanguis eius? Ista, Fratres,
ideo dicuntur Sacramenta, quia in eis aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur:
Christ has lifted up his Body into Heaven: from whence he shall comme to
judge the quick, and the dead. There is he now sittinge at the Right Hand
of the Father. How then is the Bread his Body? And the Cup, or that is in
the Cup, how is it his Blood? His answer is this: O my Brethren, these be
called Sacraments, for that in them one thing is seen, and an other thing
is understood.

Thus therefore, the thing, that we see with our Bodily eyes, is the very
Nature, and Substance of Bread: but the thing, that we see with our Faith,
is the very Natural Body of Christ sittinge in Heaven, and represented unto us
in the Mysteries.

Now, I beseech thee, good Christian Reader, mark, what Discante M. Hardinge
plaieth upon these words. S. Augustine says, Believe the Judgment of your
eyes: M. Hardinge says, Senses be deceiteful: Believe not the Judgment of
your eyes. S. Augustine says, The thing, that you see is Bread: M. Hardinge
says, It is not so: it is no Bread. So handsomely this Gloss grows to the
Text.

The Apology.
Or, that, which Origin says, The Bread, which is Sanctified by the Word
of GOD, as touching the Material Substance thereof, goes into the Belly, and
is cast out into the privy.

M. Hardinge.
In alleginge Origin, Sir Defender, ye play your accustomed false play,
Untruth. For we have Corrupted, nor word, nor Sentence. To that Material: A
proper translation.
corruptinge his sentence, and falsifieinge his words. For they be not as you
recite them, but thus: Ille cibus, qui sanctificatur per Verbum Dei, Origens
words examined. Origin falsefied by the Defender.
perque obsecrationem, iuxta id quod habet materiale, in ventrem abit, and in
secessum eijcitur: That meat, which is Consecrated by the Word of God, and
by Prayer, according to that Material, which it has, it goes into the
belly, and is voided forth into the Privy. Here neither names he Untruth.
For he names it Bread seven times in that one place.
Bread, as you do (to cause the people to think, it is but very Bread) but
meat. And that you have in your Latin* Quod quidem ad Materiam attinet:
which is by your Interpreter, As touching the Material Substance thereof,
Untruth, O^lesse ye vvil rather call it the Material Accidente.
it is not Origens, but your own forged stuff, to deceive the ignorante
withal, to the end they might be moved by your false handlinge of that Doctor,
to believe, the matter and Substance of very Bread to remain. He speakethe not
of the Untruth: For in the same place he says, Nec Materia Panis.
matter of Bread, but of that which is Material in this Sacrament, meaning
the Accidents or Qualities remaininge after Consecration, which be Material,
but not the matter it self of Bread (as Matter is taken for the one part of a
perfect Substance) Untruth, shameless, and without sense: For what
Accidents he voided forth.
and the same Accidents be voided forth, as Origin had good cause by
occasion of Christ's word to declare, you had none to record the same. But
it liked your filthy sprite with vile words to bring that Holy Mystery,
and Blessed Sacrament into contempt. Wherein ye do the Devil Author of al
Herisies the greatest service, that may be devised.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Heresies, false play, Falsehed, Falsifieinge, Vile words, Filthy Spirits,
are now becomme M. Hardinges ordinary, and usual Eloquence. Here have we
corrupted, as he says, and belied Origin, for that we place this word.
Panis, in steed of Cibus: And, for that we say, Panis, quod ad Materiam
attinet, in steed of these words, Cibus iuxta id, quod habet materiale. This
is Forges stuff: This is Homble, and shameful corruption, to deceive the
ignorante. He that kn^we not M. Hardinges modesty, and manner of writing,
would think these Tragical terms should bear sum weight. For sober men
seldom use thus to cry, without sum cause. Touching these words, Cibus,
Panis, Materiale, Materia, if there be any thing, that may mislike him, it
shall be laweful for him to refourme the same, Cibus, panis, Materiale, Materia.
and to use either the one word, or the other, at his pleasure. We stand
only upon the Substance of matter, and seek no such wanton advantages by
shifte of words.

Nevertheless, Origin him self, as it appears, was not so dangerous in the
case. For, whereas M. Hardinge so sharply ouerlooketh us, for once vsinge this
word Panis, in steed of Cibus, Origin him self uses the same word,
Panis, 1. Corin. 11. Cyril. in Johan. Lib. 10. Cap. 13
Seven times together in the self same place, without reproufe: Like as S.
Paul also five times in one place calls it, Panis: And S. Cyril calls the
portions thereof, fragmenta Panis: pieces of Bread. And yet were none of these
ever condemned therefore, as Corrupters, and Falsifiers.

But I beseech you, M. Hardinge, if this word, Cibus, Meat, which Origin
uses, and you seem to allow, were not Bread, what kind of Meat then will
you call it? Irenae. Li. 5. Augetur, and Consistit Carnis nostrae Substantia.
Rabanus Maurus. Li. 1. Cap. 31.
Pleashe, Fish, or Fruit, I trow, it was not. You safe, Origin meante
thereby your Fourmes, and Accidents, and Shows of Bread. Now verily, this
was but a quaisy Meat: and I marueil, that ever any wise man would call it
Meat. Irenaeus says, Of the same Meat is increased, and consists the
Substance, of Our Fleashe. And Rabanus says, Sacramentum in alimentum
Corporis redigitur: The Sacrament (which is the Bread) is turned into Our
Bodily nourishemente.

Touching the other foul fault, M. Hardinge says, his Accidents, and
Qualities be things Material: but the Matter it self, he says, they be not.
But where learned he this strange Doctrine? What Divine, what Philosopher, what
Logician, what Sophister, what wise man ever taught him thus to say?
Certainly Accidents, and Qualities be Accidentales Formae, and in the Schools
are called things Formal: which are as far from things Material, as Fire
from Water. Notwithstanding, these men have power to make of Accidents,
Substance: Of Fourmes, Matters: Of things Formal, things Material: and of one
contrary, to make another: all this only of them selves, without any manner
other Authority.

M. Hardinge says, that the Meat, whereof Origin speaks, is a Material,
(for this is the Light, and clearenesse of his Eloquence) but not Materia: and
by this pretty distinction he thinks, the whole matter is fully discharged.
And emongste the ignorante, that cannot judge, perhaps he may seem to say
somewhat. But Origin him self, that best understood his own meaning,
calls the same Meat, in the same place, by express, and plain words, not
only a thing Material, but also the very Matter of Bread it self: His
words be these: Nec Materia Panis, Origin. in Matt. Cap. 15.
sed super illum dictus sermo est, qui prodest non indigne Domino comedenti: It
is not the Matter of the Bread, but the word spoken over it, that profits
him, that Eats not unworthily for the Lord. Now Judge thou indifferently.
Gentle Reader, how just causes M. Hardinge had, to move these Tragedies.

Further he says, It liked our filthy Sprite, with vile words to bring the
Holy Mysteries into contempt, and therein do the Devil great service. O, M.
Hardinge, some other speech would better become a man of your gravity. Such
liquoure seldom flows from the Sprite of God. We neither increase, or
diminishe, nor any way alter the words of Origin: but lay them forth
plainly, and simply, as we find them. For thus he writes: Ille Cibus, qui
sanctificatur per Verbu^ Dei, and per Obsecrationem, iuxta id, quod habet
Materiale, in Ventram abit, and in secessum eijcitur. Coeterum iuxta
precatione^, quae illi accessit, pro portione Fidei fit vtilis: The Meat that
is Sanctified by the Word of God, and by Prayer, according to that Material
part, that is in it, passes into the belly, and so forth into the Privy,
etc. If there be any Filthiness or Villainy herein, it is this Ancient
Fathers, whom ye ought not so discourteously to revile for Uncleanness of
Sprite: it is not ours.

How be it, Vile Speech.
this is not Origens only Judgment: but the general, and agreeable Doctrine
of al others the Catholic Fathers. And to allege one in steed of many, S.
Augustine says, as he is before alleged, Si ad res ipsas, quibus Sacramenta
tractantur, animum conferamus, quis nesciat, eas esse corruptibiles? Si ad id,
quod per illas res agitur, Augustine. De Baptismo contra Donatis. Li. 3. Cap. 10.
quis non videat, non posse corrumpi? If we consider the things them selves,
wherein the Sacraments be Ministered, who knows not, that they be things
corruptible? But if we consider the thing, that is wrought thereby, who
seethe not, that it cannot be corrupted? The Holy Fathers speak not thus of
Christ's Body, but of the Bread, which is the Sacrament of Christ's Body. So
says S. Ambrose, Non iste Panis, qui vadit in Corpus: sed Panis Vitae
Aeternae, De Con. Did 2 Non iste.
qui animae nostra Substantiam fulcit: (The Bread that I mean, is) not this
Bread (of the Sacrament) that passes into the Body: but the Bread of
Everlasting Life, that maineteineth the Substance of the Soul.

Now if there were such filthiness, as you have imagined, in the Holy
Learned Bishops, and Doctors of the Church, for vtteringe these, and other
like words, of the corruptible Creatures of Bread, and Wine, what clean
Sprite then is there in them, that speak so filthily of Christ's Body it
self, being now Incorruptible, In the. 23. Article. Alexand. Halen. par. 4.
quae. 45. Mem. 1.
and Glorious, at the Right Hand of the Father? Hereof I had occasion to
speak sommewhat in my Former Reply.

Alexander of Hales says, Quidam dicunt, vbicunque ponantur Species, sieve in
mundo loco, sieve in immundo, sieve in Ventre Muris, ibi est Corpus Christi:
Sum say, where so ever the Fourmes, or Accidents be laid, whether the
place be clean, or unclean, yea though it be in the Mouses belly, yet there
is the Body of christ. Again he says, Si Canis, vel Porcus deglutiret
Hostiam Consecratam integram, non video, quare Corpus Domini non simul
traijceretur in ventrem Canis, vel Porci: If a Dog, or Hog should swallowe
down the Host Consecrate being whole, I see no cause to the contrary, but
the Body of Christ may pass withal into the belly of the Dog, or of the
Hog.

Likewise your own Clemens, whom ye so often call the Apostles Fellow, writes
thus, Clemens. epist. 2.
Ne Murium stercora inter fragmenta Dominicae Portionis appareant: Let not Mise
dounge be found among the fragmentes, or peecces of the Lords Portion. He
means the Sacrament. Your own Catholic allowed Gloss says, Corpus
Christi potest euomi: De Con. Did. 2. Si quis. In Gloss.
The Body of Christ may be vomited up again.

It abhors my heart to utter these words: They be so horrible, and full of
Filthe. Yet this, M. Hardinge, is your own Doctrine: This is your Sprite: This
is it, that ye have so long maineteined with Fire, and Sword. By such
unclean, and uncivil speech, ye bring Christ's Body it self into
contempt, and lothesomenesse in the hearts of the people.

But that you may the better see the consent, and certainty of your own
Doctrine, whereas you are well content to expound these words of Origin, as
undoubtedly spoken of the Sacrament of Christ's Body, your Instructor, and
Master, Doctor Gardener, tells you, that the same words perteine nothing
at al unto the Sacrament: And yet, unto what thing else they should perteine,
it seemethe by the doubtefulnesse of his answer, he was never well resolved.
His words be these: Mar. Anton. Constantius, ad obiectum 166.
Non de Eucharistia loquitur Origenes, sed de Pane sanctificato per Verbu^ Dei,
and Oratione^, quem communiter manducamus: vel de eo, qui solebat dari
Catechumenis, de quo Augustinus: Origin speaks not (these words) of the
Sacrament: but either of the Bread, that is sanctified by Our Lords word,
and by Prayer, which We commonly use to Eat: or else he speakethe of the
Bread, that was geeuen to the Nouices, called Catechumeni, Whereof S.
Augustine speaks. Holy Fourmes.
If this tale be true, then is yours Untrue, M. Hardinge, and al your long
Commentary of Fourmes, and Accidents, is but in vain. It were good, ye took
a day, that ye may be better agreed upon that, ye tell us.

And, whereas, to shift the matter, ye put your poor Spiritual Fourmes, and
Holy Accidents to all the pains, to pass into y^ belly, and so forth into
the draught, and auouche the same in such sober wise, as if ye partly
understood, what ye said, it may please you to understand, that by the
Judgment of your own Schoolefelowes the Canonistes, ye are fowly deceived.
For thus they determine y^ matter, De Con. Did. 2. Tribus gradibus, in Gloss^.
quite against you: Species illae alijs cibis non permiscentur: Non enim in
stomachum descendunt: quare per secessum non emittuntur: These Fourmes, or
Accidents are not mingled with other meats. For they go not down into the
stomach: and therefore they pass not into the Privy.

Heareby it may appear, that either the Gloss, or M. Hardinge, is in error.
But the Gloss is allowed, and coumpted Catholic: therefore the error must
be M. Hardinges. How be it, to say the truth, M. Hardinge, and his Gloss too,
are both in error.

The Apology.
Or that, which Christ him self said, not only after the Blessinge of the
Cup, but also after he had Ministered the Communion, I will drink no more of
this Fruit of the Vine. It is well known, that the Fruit of the Vine is Wine,
and not Blood.

M. Hardinge.
Christ (say they) him self said, not only after the blessing of the Cup,
but after he had Ministered the Communion, I will drink no more of this Fruit of
the Vine. Hereunto they add of their own heads, Untruth. For these be S.
Chrysostomesvvords. and not ours.
It is well known, that the Fruit of the Vine is Wine, and not Blood. By
this they would signify, that in the Chalice we have not Christ's Blood, as
him self said, but mere Wine, as against Christ they labor to persuade.

But we say, Cap. 22.
that those words (I will not drink from hence forth of this generation of
the Vine) either were spoken M. Hardinge refuses S. Matthew's, and S. Marks
Order.
only before the communion, This is M. Hardinges Undoubted Certeintie.
As by way of a Sacrament. Otherwise it is Untrue.
or only after, or in both times. If they were spoken before the Communion.
(which opinion is the more probable) it is very clerly proved by them, that
wine remains not, as it shall hereafter be deduced.

For these causes it may well be said, that we should rather follow the order
of Luke, who witnesses that Christ spoke these words before his maundie, *
then Mathewe, and Mark, who tell it, as spoken after. Secondly the order of
Luke is confirmed by the circumstance of the things, that he describes, more
then the other Evangelists. Now because in the Chalice of the Old Law there
was certainly not Blood, but Wine, (whereas Christ teaches, that in his
Chalice his own Blood is * contained) let* he discrete Reader judge, whether
we must not rather think, that these words of Christ* I will not from
hencefoorthe drink of this generation of the Vine, do not rather perteine to
the Cup of the Old Law, (as Luke places them) then to the Chalice of
Christ after the Consecration, whereof Mathewe, and Mark rehearse them.

Fourthly, and lasily, when Mathe we, and Mark rehearse that Christ said, he
would not from hencefoorthe drink of that generation of the Vine, they both,
in much like sort of speakinge, add thereunto these words, Mathae. 26.
Mark. 14. Nevve drinkinge.
(which in the Apology were guilfully left out) Until that day, when I will
drink it New with you in the Kingedome of God my Father. If Christ speak of
a New drinkinge, which is to come, by likelyhoode the drink paste is Old.
What exclamation would be sufficient to express, that in this A weighty
point of Salvation. Yet M. H. him self, by his Confession, understands i^
not.
weighty point of Salvation, our English Cleregie are content Vantruthe, vain
and arro^ gantc.
to blind the people, Untruth, vain and arrogante.
the right worshipful, yea the Honorable of our Country in so vile a sort,
that after many Fathers words misreported, and wrongfully wrested, they
doubt not to attempt the same in Christ's own saieinges, and in those
saieinges of his, which evidently prove the contrary.

But now let us grant of our free liberality, The Fruit of the Vine.
contrary to so many good and strong reason^, that Christ said after
consecration. I will not from hencefoorthe drink of this generation of the
Vine, until the Kingedome of God come. Then it must be further understood,
that the Kingedom of God is taken in Scripture sommetime for the present state
of the Church, The Kingdom of God taken two ways. Matthew. 3.
after Christ's resurrection in this world, according to that is said
oftentimes, in Scripture, The Kingedome of God draws nigh: sommetimes also
for the joy of Heaven: as when Christ says, I dispose for you a Kingedome,
as my Father has disposed for me, that ye may eat and drink at my table,
etc. Now if we take these words of Christ, spoken before Consecration, it is
not inconvenient, to understand them of either of both Kingedomes: that is to
say, of the Kingedome of Resurrection, or of Glory, as Chrysostom and other
do witness, because both were to come at that time. But if we take them
spoken after consecration, Luc. 2^.
as we rather upon confidence of the truth, then for necessity, at this time
do grant, then these words (Until the Kingdom of God come) are to be meant
only of the Kingedome of Glory. For these holy Mysteries belong to the
Kingdom of Christ's Resurrection and Ascension. Neither were they practiced by
the Apostles in the Church of Christ, until the Holy Ghost came down upon
them.

And so the newnes of it there, is fruition of it, not under the fourmes of
Bread, and Wine, Untruth, grounded upon a mere folly.
as we have it now, but face to face without al figure and form. Then is it
to be noted that Christ said not, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the
Vine, But, I will not from hencefoorthe drink of this generation of the Vine:
Of this I say, whereof now I have dronken, Untruth, threapte upon Christ him
self.
which is under the form of wine my Blood, which am the true Vine. For
whereas this Apology says (it is well known, that the fruit of the Vine is
Wine, and not Blood) it seems to declare that the Authors thereof are
ig^orant in the holy Scriptures, where A fond Cauil. For we speak only of a
Natural Vine.
they might have found the fruit of some Vine to be called Blou^^. Gene. 49.
For Iucob said to his son Iadas, bearing the Figure of Christ, He shall
wasshe his robe in Wine, and his cloak in the Blood of a Grape. Lo, a Grape
has his Blood: a Grape is the fruit of the Vine: and therefore it is not
well known, that the fruit of the Vine is not Blood. The Holy Ghost did in
these words of Jacob prophecy, In. 1. Cori. 10.
that Christ the true Vine should give the Grape of his Body to be pressed
upon the Cross, from whence the Wine was shed, As in a Mystery. Otherwise
it is Untrue.
which is in our Chalice as Chrysostom also notes. And now is it no wonder
if we expound y^ word (Vine) mystically.

O what strength Truth has? how plainly she dares to show her face, r^tt
nipping the Scriptures, nor misenglishinge them, nor dissemblinge any jot,
that may seem to make against her.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Mark, 1.
Gentle Reader, how mightily M. Hardinge wrastleth, and what pains he
takethe, to draw this place to his purpose. First he assures us for
certain, that Christ spoke these words Before the Consecration, and that
therefore they perteine nothing to the Sacrament. 2.
Nevertheless, afterward he grants, as he says, of his free liberality,
that Christ spoke the same words After the Consecration, 3.
and that they perteine specially to y^ Sacrament. And yet again upon further
affiance, and boldness of the cause, he seems to say, It may be, that
Christ spoke the same words at both times: that is, as well After the
Consecration, as Before.

Again, he says, S. Lukes rehearsal is more likely, then S. Mathewes: For
that S. 4.
Luke writes each thing in Order: and S. Mathe we out of Order.

Again, 5.
One Cup is first the Wine of the Old Testamente: and immediately after the
same Cup is the Wine of the New Testamente.

Again, 6.
The Kingedome of God, sommetime is the state of the Church, sommetime it is
the state of Glory. 7.
Again, The Fruit of the Grape sommetime is very Natural Wine, Anton.
Constantius ad Obiectum. 27.
sommetime it is the very Blood of Christ. Notwithstanding Steuin Gardener
says, that neither the Natural Wine, nor Christ's very Blood, but the
Accidents, and Fourmes are the Fruit of the Vine. 8.
Yet again he says, Christ Drank his own very Blood at the Supper: and
even now him self Drinks the same his own Blood in the kingedome of
Heaven. The Fruit of the Vine.


In the end M. Hardinge, after he has well wandered, and walked him self,
both Before, and After: In Order, and out of Order: This Way, and that Way:
with the Old Cup, and with the New: and has well stated him self by
conjectures, and likelihoodes: at the last be blows up the Tr^umphe, with a
jolly corrage, and cries out, O what strength Truth has, and how plainly
she dares to she we her face.

Here, by the way, a man might demand of M. Hardinge, notwithstanding the
great Confidence he pretends in his cause: If Christ spoke these words,
Before the Consecration, of the very Natural Wine of the Grape, and of the
Ceremonial Cup of the Old Law, Before.
how drank he then afterward of the same Natural Wine of the Grape, after a
New Sort? or how was the same Natural Wine fulfilled in the Kingdom of God?
If Christ spoke y^ same word? After the Consecration, After.
the Substance of Wine, by these men's fantasy, being utterly abolished, and
nothing there remaininge, but only the Accidents, how was it then the
Fruit, or generation of the Vine?

But, to leave these unfruitful gheasses, until M. Hardinge have better agreed
with him self upon sum certainetie, we say, that the Cup of Blessinge,
which Christ calls the Cup of the New Testamente, not withstandinge it
were made in a Mystery the Sacrament of Christ's Blonde* yet in Nature, and
Substance was very Wine still, and, as Christ him self ^^lleth it, the very
Fruit, and generation of the Grape, as it was before.

The words of the Euangeliste S. Matthae. 2^
Mathewe are very pl^^ne: He took the Cup: and, when he had given thanks,
he gave it them, saieinge, Drink ye al of it: For this is my ^loude of the
New Testamente, that is shed for many* for the Remission of Sins. I say
unto you, that I will not Drink hencef^ourthe of this Fruit of the Vine, until
that day, when I shall Drink it New with you in the Kingedome of my Father.
To avoid the manifest truth of this rehearsal, M. Hardinge says, S.
Mathewe uttered one thing for an other: the Later for the Former: the Cup
Consecrate, for the Cup Vnconsecrate: and placed his matters out of order. And
by this poor shifte, he thinks the Story of the Gospel is fully answered.

But let us see, what the Learned Fathers have judged, and written in this
behalf. So shall the weight of these coniectural gheasses, and the Face of M.
Hardinges Truth, which he so mutche magnifieth without cause, the better
appear. Clemens in ^^^dagogo. li. 2. Cap. 2.
Clemens Alexandrinus hereof writes thus, Quod Vinum esset, quod benedictu^
est, Christus ostendit, dicens Discipulis, Non bibam ex Fructu Vitis huius,
donec bibe^o ipsum vobiscum in Regno Patris mei: That it was Wine, that was
Blessed ( at the Supper) Christ him self showed his Discipses, saieinge: I
vvil no more Drink of the Fruit of this Vine, until I shall Drink it with you
in the Kingedome of my Father. What so ever it shall Please M. Hardinge to
think of the sense hereof, he must needs confess, the words are very
plain. Likewis^. says S. Cyprian, Dominus Sanguinem suum Vinum appellauit,
de botris, and acinis plurimis expressum, atque in Vinum coactum: Cyprian. Lib.
1. Epist. 6.
The Wine pressed our of Clusters, and many Grapes, and so made Wine, Our
Lord called his Blood. S. Augustine says, Et Vinum fuit in Redemptionis
nostrae Mysterio, cum Dominus diceret, Augustine. De Eccles^ast. Dogmatibus Ca.
75.
Non bibam amodo de hoc genimine Vitis: There was Wine in the Mystery, or
^acramente of Our Redemption, when Our Lord said, I vvil no more Drink
hencefoorthe of this Fruit of the Vine. Here note thou, good Reader, how
handsomely S. Augustine, and M. Hardinge agree together. S. Augustine says
plainly, it was the Sacrament: M. Hardinge says plainly, it was not the
Sacrament. S. Augustine says, These words were spoken after the
Consecration: M. Hardinge finds fault with S. Mathewes order, and says,
They were spoken before the Consecration. S. Augustine following the plain
words of Christ, says, It was Wine: M. Hardinge folowinge his own
words, against both S. Augustine, and Christ too, says undoubtedly, It
was no Wine.

Again S. Augusti. Quae. Euangelicar. Li. 1 Cap. 43.
Augustine says, Dominus per Vini Sacramentum, commendat Sanguinem suum. Quid
enim aliud, Nouum Vinum, nisi Immortalitatem renouandorum Corporum intelligere
debemus? Our Lord by the Sacrament ( not of Fourmes, or Accidents, but) of
Wine, commends unto us his Blood. For what other thing may we
understand the Nevve Wine to be, but the Immortality of our Bodies, that
shall be reuewed? S. Chrysostom says, Cum Dominus hoc Mysterium traderer,
Vinum tradidit. Chrysostom. in Mat. Homi. 83.
Etiam post Resurrectionem sine Mysterijs in simplici mensa Vino vsus est. Ex
genimine, ait, Vitis: quae certe Vinum, non Aquam producit: Our Lord, when he
delivered this Mystery, delivered ( not Accidents, but) Wine. And after his
Resurrection, being at a plain table without the Mysteries, he used Wine. For
so he says, Of the fruit of the Vine: Which vine surely bears, not
Water, Cyprian. Lib. 2. Dionysius, and Lyra in Matthew. ca. 26.
but Wine. M. Hardinge says: Who so ever expounds these words as spoken
of y^ Mysteries, belieth both the Holy Fathers, and Christ him self. S.
Chrysostom expounds the same words, as spoken of the Mysteries, and to
that p^urpose applies the words of Christ. Therefore, by M. Hardinges
Conclusion, he belieth both the Holy Fathers, and Christ him self.

In like manner S. Hierome says, Christus in Typo Sanguinis sui non obtulit
Aquam, Hiero^y aduersus Iouinian. Lib. 2.
sed Vinum: Christ in the Signification of his Blood, offered, not Water, but
Wine. By these few, I trust, it may easily appear to the indifferent
Reader, how just cause M. Hardinge had, thus to proclaim, and publishe the
Face, as he says, of his Truth: and with such courrage, and countenance to
cry out, that we have wilfully corrupted the words of Christ.

M. Hardinge says further. These Defenders add of their own heads, It is
Well known, that the Fruit of the Vine is Wine, and not Blood. I thought
M. Hardinge would not have piked so simple a quarrel to these words, of whose
head so ever they had benne added. For, I trow, he has but seldom heard,
or seen, that a Natural Vine has borne Natural Blood. Now be it, these
words proceeded not altogether of our own heads. Chrysostom. in Mat. Homi. 83.
S. Chrysostom also of his head uttered the same. For thus he writes, Ex
genimine Vitis: quae cert^ Vinum producit, not Aquam: Of the Fruit of the
Vine: which Vine verily brings forth, not Water, cyprian. 2. Epist. 3.
Dionysius and lyra in Matthew. ca. 26.
but Wine. S. Cyprian says, Inuenimus Vinum fuisse, quod Dominus Sanguinem
suum dixit: We find, it was Wine, that our Lord called his Blood. And
Dionysius, Lyra, and other like Doctors of M. Hardinges own side, say, De
hoc genimine Vitis: id est, de Vini, quod generatur in Vinea: Of this Fruit of
the Vine: that is to say, Of the Wine, that grows of the Vine.

Again M. Hardinge says, It is to be noted, that Christ said not, I will
drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine: But, I will not from hencefoorthe
drink of this Generation of the Vine: as if there were sum maruilous great
difference bitweene these two words, Fruit, and Generation. And this
thing, he says, is well worthy to be noted. Verily the difference bitwene
these two words is as great, as is the difference bitweene Ensis, and
Gladius: or Liber, and Codex: bitweene which words, sound only excepted, it
is hard to discern, whether is other. M. Hardinge says, It is to be noted,
that Christ said not, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine: Hilari.
in Mat. Canon. 30.
Yet S. Hilarie says, Bibentes ex Vitis istius Fructu: Drinkinge of the
Fruit of this Vine. If these words, as being doubtefully spoken, may be
shifted into some other sense: Yet Clemens Alexandrinus, Clemens in Paedagogo,
Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
as he is before alleged, and as he is translated by Gentianus Heruetus, says
plainly, Non bibam de hoc Fructu Vitis: I will no more Drink of this Fruit of
the Vine. And S. Cyprian somewhat in plainer wise says, Non Bibam ex ista
Creatura Vitis: I will no more Drink of this Creature of the Vine. Therefore, I
think, M. Hardinge him self will say, This note was not greatly woorthe the
notinge.

Yet farther he says, Cyprian. Lib. 2. Epist 3.
These Defenders seem to be Ignorante of the Holy Scriptures: Where they
might have found the Fruit of sum Vine to be called Blood. For Jacob said
of Christ, He shall wash his Robe in Wine and his Cloak in the Blood of a
Grape. It is a hard shifte, M. Hardinge, so suddenly to conueie ye matter
from ordinary use of speech, unto an Allegory, We speak of a Natural
grovvinge Vine, which, we say, bears not Blood, but only Wine. But, as
touching that ye say, Christ is called a Vine in the Holy Scriptures, it is
only an Allegory, or a Figure of speech. For although Christ, for certain
properties, may be resembled unto a Vine* yet is he not therefore verily, and
in deed a Natural grovvinge Vine. Therefore it was great violence, thus to
force yewoordes of the Scriptures to this purpose. Otherwise, by ye like phrase
of speech, one says, Lachryma est quidam Animae Sanguis: A tear is a
certain Blood of ye Soul. And S. Augustine says, Vident Sanguine^ Corpoiu^:
Animarum Sanguinem non vident: They see ye Blood of ye Bodies: but the Blood
of the Souls they see not. Androcides.
An other called Wine, Terrae Sanguinem, the Blood of the Earth. Yet may not
M. Hardinge say, that either the Soul of Man, or the moulde of the Earth, in
deed has Natural, and Real, and very Blood. These be only certain Figures,
and Fourmes of speech. But Christ, when he said, I will no more Drink of this
fruit of the Vine, Spoke plainly, and simply, and without Figure. And
therefore Chrysostom says, as it is alleged before, Ex genimine Vitis: quae
certe Vinum producit, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 83.
non Aquam: Of the Fruit of the Vine: which Vine verily brings forth, not
Water, but Wine. But Chrysostom says, The Wine, yt was shed from Christ's
Body, that is to say, the Blood of Christ, is in the Cup. Chrysostom. 1.
Corin. 10.
This is true, as in a Mystery, or by a Figure of speech: because Christ's
Blood is represented in the Cup. Otherwise, if we speak simply, and
plainly, and without Figure, Chrysostom says, In vasis Sanctificatis non est
ipsum Corpus Christi: sed Mysterium Corporis eius continetur: Chrysostom. in
Matthae. Homil. 11.
In the Sanctified vessels, there is not the very Body of Christ in deed: but
a Mystery of that Body is therein contained.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 1.
And in speakinge thus, we mean not to abase the Lords Supper, or to teach,
that it is but a cold Ceremony only, and nothing to be wrought therein: (as
many falsely sclaunder us, we teach) For we affirm, that Christ does
truly, and presently geeue him self wholly in his Sacraments: In Baptism,
that we may put him on: and in his Supper, that we may Eat him by Faith,
and Sprite, and may have Everlasting Life by his Cross and Blood. And we
say not, this is done slightly and coldely, but effectually and truly. For
although we do not touch the Body of Christ with teethe, and mouth, yet
we hold him fast, and eat him by Faith, by Understanding, and by Sprite.
And it is no vain Faith, that comprehends Christ: neither is it received
with cold devotion, that is received with Understanding, Faith, and Sprite.
For Christ him self altogether is so offered, and geeuen us in these
Mysteries, that we may certainly know we be Fleashe of his Fleashe, and
Bone of his Bones: and that Christ continues in us, and we in him.

M. Hardinge.
It is easy to be perceived, By whom is our Lords Supper more abased, by
the Defenders, or by the Catholics.
who abaseth more our Lords Supper, whether ye, that teach it to be very
Untruths two together: For we never called it either Bakers Bread, or
only Figure.
Bakers Bread and Wine with the What so ever corruptible Creature is
honored as God, it is an Idol.
only Figure of Christ's Body and Blood, or we who believe it to be his true
Body and Blood, with the only Fourmes of Bread and Wine ( Of which Fourmes
neither Christ, nor his Apostles ever told us one word). Weather ye, that
will have it a Figure of Christ's whole Body absent, or we, who will have
Christ's Body present in deed, with a Figure of his Death, which Untruth.
For Christ's Death is as Present, as his Body.
Death is absente only. Whether ye, that call it an Untruth, grounded upon a
dream. No Learned Doctor ever said thus.
Idol when it is worshipped, or we that do according to our dueitie adore it,
because that Roial Body (as Chrysostom says) which is set before us
Untruth, standing in wrong Exposition. For Chrysostom says, Ascend ad
Coeli portas: imo non Coeli, sed Coeli Coelorum.
to be seen now in Earth, is worthy of the most high Honor. But whether of
those two is the colder Ceremony and more simple Supper, to have Bread and
Wine with a Sign only of Fleashe and Blood, or to have Real Fleashe and
Blood with such forms of Bread and Wine, as Untruth, grounded upon a
dream. No Learned Doctor ever said thus.
by the Power of God do nolesse bodily nourishe us, then the Substance it self
would have done: we doubt not of wise men's judgment. Ye have your carnal
Bankettes fat and full inoughe of the best fleashe, and it is with you
superstitious to Eat dry and Lenten meats. But ye will have your spiritual
Bankettes so lean, and Carreine, as a man may well discern, whether ye have
more fantasy to your Fleashe, or to your Spirit.

Ye write, The Sacramentaries teach nothing to be wrought in their lords
Supper. 1. Corin. 11. What is Supper properly.
that many falsely sclaunder you, saying that ye teach nothing to be wrought
in the Lords Supper, whereas ye affirm, that Christ does truly and
presently give his own self in his Supper, that we may eat him by Faith and
Spirit. And other work in the Lords Supper ye show none. And this which ye
show, a man may doubt, whether it be a thing wrought in the Lords Supper,
or no. Well may ye say, that it is a thing wrought in the^ which come to the
Supper: but that it is wrought in the supper it self, ye show it not: the
Supper being that which is called Coena, to wit, the meat recetued, not
Coenatio, which is the act of suppinge. For since that supper is nothing else
but meat and drink set upon the Table to be received by such as come unto
it, that which is wrought in the Lords Supper, must be wrought The Bread is
for us, not we for the Bread.
in the meat and Drink, which our Lord has at his table. And as the matter
whereof our Lords Supper is made, is Bread and Wine: so the Supper made
thereof is our Lords Body and Blood, into which the Bread and Wine by the
Almighty power of the Word is changed. So that if ye will show Christ him
self to be Christ made: Christ VVroughte: A strange Divinity.
made or Untruth. For M. Harding well knovveth, that this fond folly was
never Catholic.
wrought in our Lords Supper, ye must show Bread and Wine to be changed
into Christ him self, and so to be Eaten of his faithful at his Table. But
whereas there are three things, christ, taht makth the Supper, the
Communicantes that receive the Supper, and the Supper it self: ye say that
Christ for his part gives his own self verily present, likewise that
Co^municantes for their part Eat him by faith and spirit. And so ye show,
that the maker of the Supper works, and that the Co^munica^tes work. But all this while ye show us not what is wrought in the matter of the Supper, that is
to say, in the Bread and Wine, nor what is made. O great sclaumder that ye
were charged withal, which not so much as by your own word ye are
discharged of.

How much sounder is the Such unchristian scorns, against Christ's
ordinance are very unseemly.
Catholic doctrine, The proper work of our Lords Supper.
which reaches the proper work of our Lords Supper to be the turninge of
the Substance of Bread and Wine into his Body and Blood? Which work
because ye will not confess, ye have devised a work of your own workinge,
which is not propre to our Lords Supper. For if I can receive Christ in my
house at home by Faith and Spirit, how is that work Christ offers him
self unto our Faith: and by our Faith he is received.
proper to his Supper, which may be Wrought without his Supper? Or can I not
believe in Christ, or lift up my Spirit unto him Suthche unchristian
scorns, against christ's ordinance are very unseemly.
except I come to Supper? Or If I do call for Christ, does he not give him
self by grace unto me?

But (say ye) at the Lords Supper Christ gives him self verily present.
How make the Defenders Christ verily Present in his Supper.
To what purpose? I pray you. That we may Eat him (say ye) by Faith, and
Sprite. Well reasoned forsoothe. Have ye foregotten the geuinge to eat, and
eatinge that, which is given, to be Relatiues, one of them having relation to
the other? If Christ do exhibit him self verily present, as your Latin
Text has, or gives his own self verily and presently, as your Interpreter
tells your tale for you: Christ offers him self unto our Faith: and by
our Faith he is received.
does not he so exhibit or give himself, as he will be received? Or does he
show in one hand a piece of Bread, and with the other strike us on the head
with a stone? If he give us him self verily present, as ye say, we take him
verily Present. And then (unless ye mean by him self, his grace, which is
of Christ, and not Christ him self) we eat him verily Present, not only
by Faith, and Sprite, but by taking him into This is the Caniballes
Divinity. S. Ambrose says, Non hic Panis. qui vadit in ventrem.
our Mouth, and Body. If it please him at any time to be Eaten by Fatthe and
spirit alone, (after which sort he is dately eaten by those that humbly call
upon him) then he gives not him self verily Present, but by Faith and
spirit, other wise named grace, or some spiritual effected of his workinge.
But in our Lords Supper the Scripture requires a special and peculiar
presence of christ, to wit, of his fleashe, so as it may be Eaten. If then
he geeue him self verily present, as ye say, he is present in his own
person, God and Man, with Body, with Blood, with Soul, with Godhed. If ye
mean the very presence of his Godhed, that presence belongs no more to
Christ, them to the Father, and to the Holy Ghost. And so have ye not
declared any pecultar presence belonginge to his Supper. For by Presence of his
Godhed he is always verily present, as well before Supper, as at, or after
Supper: because he fills Heaven and Earth. It remains that either ye
understand not your selves, or wilfully deceive that infinite number of
Souls, for Whose sake Christ has shed his Blood.

Untruth. For the finest, and best Learned Fathers have maineteined the same:
As shall appear.
Your error in making the Presence of Christ in Baptism like to his
presence in the Supper is to gross. The presence of Christ in Baptism and in
the Supper is distinct, which the Defenders make to be like.
For although Christ work both our Regeneration and our nourrishment by his
Divine Sacraments, yet in Baptism our Regeneration is by name attributed in
the Gospel to the Holy Ghost also, to show that Christ's presence there is
spiritual. But his Supper consists of his Body and Blood, which are so
united to Christ, as they are peculiar to the second person in Godhed.
Again for as much as they are received into us, as food to nourrishe our
Bodies to Resurrection, Untruth. For there is no such word in all the Gospel.
as the Gospel says, and nomans Body is otherwise nourished then by Eatinge
in deed that meat whereof he is nourrished, and the Fleashe of Christ, as
him self says, is S. Cyprian says, Cibus mentis, non Ventris.
meat in deed, and his Blood Drink in deed: We are forced to believe an
other manner of presence in the Sacrament of the Altar, then in Baptism. And
therefore ye have handled this matter to slightly and coldely.

Where as ye say, we do not touch the Body of Christ with Teeth and Mouth,
Heathenishe, and Unchristian scoffinge.
are ye so accustomed to swallowe down whole morselles, That we touch
Christ's Body, and eat it with our mouth, and how. In. 1. Corin. Homi. ^4.
as ye never touch them with your Teeth? Or have ye learned to eat that,
which ye touch not with your Mouth? If Christ said, Take, Eat, this is my
Body, and the Apostles took and Eat the same, neither could they take and
Eat without touching: it seems ye handle eatinge to slightly and coldely,
when ye will have it without touching. Chrysostom a more Substanital handler of
things then any of you is, says of Christ's Body, Quod omnium maximum est
atque praecipuum, in terra non conspicaris tantum, sed tangis: neque
sliontangis, sed comedis, and ^o accepto domum redis. Of al things that be in
earth, what is the greatest, and the chiefest, As you See Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, even so ye Touch it, and so ye Eat^ it: and none otherwise. S.
Ambrose says, Fide Christus tangitur: Non tangitur Corpore.
that do thou not only see, but touchest: neither only do thou touch
it, but also eat it, and having received it, thou go home again. How we
touch it we know, for it is not now a mortal and corruptible Body, wherein
we may fasten our Teeth, but glorious, and immortal, Untruth, Childishe, and
unsavory. The Learned Fathers never knevve these folies.
and therefore we touch it by the reason of the Accidents of Bread and
Wine* with whose Forms (as S. Augustine speaks) it is covered or veiled, In
Lib. Sentent. Prosp. The Defenders imaginary holdinge of Christ holds not
Christ as he is in the Sacrament. Matthew. 26.
and so comes it to our Teethe, and to our Mouth, and nourrisheth both our
Bodies and Souls to life Everlasting. Nay but we say ye) hold him fast,
and Eat him by Faith, by Understanding, and by the Spirit. I pray you be not
to has^^e to hold him, before ye have him. How came ye by him? His grace he
gives diverse ways, but him self Bodily and presently as man, he never
promised to give otherwise, then when he said, Take, Eat, this is my Body.
And then Judas Judas had a very mean Faith.
(who had but a very mean Faith) because he received the Sacrament, received
him also. And our Blessed Lady although she had a most persitte Faith,
received him not after that sort, because then she received not the
Sacrament. How can ye assure your selves, that your Faith takeht the Body of
Christ, Untruth, As shall appear. But where was Christ's Body promised to
your Mouth*
which was never promised to your Faith? If your Faith take him not as he is
in the Sacrament, how can your Faith hold him fast there?

As here before ye have said much and proved little against the Real
Presence, wrestinge and stretchinge certain Fathers sentences and the
Scripture it self to that purpose, not wholly and Faithfully, but by piecemeale
and p^tchedly alleged, so as ye might best make them serve to the
mainetenance of your false Doctrine: right so in the conclusion of that part
of your Apology, with a like grace ye heap a number of mangled auctorities
together, whereby to persuade, that for as much as the Fathers have advertised
us to lift up our minds to heaven ward, Bakers Bread.
we should not think we Late the Fleashe of Christ as being here present
with us under the Form of Bread. Therefore whereas ye lay to the Catholics
charge, as though by their Sacrilege the people were berefte of a great
benefit, in that they be taught to be content with the one kind, under the
same receiving nolesse then if they had both: how much more woorthely are ye
to be charged with the crime of Sacrilege, that Untruth For we rob them
not, but offer them in deed, and verily the Body of christ: and shevve them
where, and vvherevvith they may receive it.
rob them of the greatest Treasure that is in the Church, so much as in you
lies, the Body and Blood of our Lord: and in steed thereof pretend to
deliver unto them a piece of Bakers Bread, and a cup of wine? But let us see
what good reason or authority ye bring out of the Fathers against the true
presence of Christ in the Blessed Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O M. Hardinge, your conscience knows, and will testify against your self,
that we never called the Holy Sacrament of Christ's Body, Bakers Bread,
no more then we call the Sacrament of Baptism, a paile of Water. We have
always spoken honorably, and reverently hereof, as it was meat we should
speak of the Mysteries of the Death of Christ, and as the Holy Catholic
Fathers have evermore used to speak before us.

These wild, and wanton, and unseemly speeches agree rather with your
Doctrine. For, call your own words alitle to remembrance. In your First
Answer, M. Hardinge Articulo. 24.
ye call the Holy Sacrament, as it is used, and Ministered by us, according to
the Order of the Holy Fathers, A piece of Bread not vvoorthe a point: In this
place ye call the Holy Ministration so used by us, A lean, and a Carrien
Banquet: In the next division, ye cat it A Toie. These be your words, M.
Hardinge, and may well stand, both with the Sobriety of your Sprite, and
also with the whole Substance, and tendure of your Religion.

We call it, The Sacrament of Thankesgeuinge, and the Sacrament of Christ's
Body, and Blood. And with the Holy Father S. Augustine we say, In
Sacramentis videndum est, August* Contra Maximin. Lib. 3. Cap. 22.
non quid sint, sed quid Significent: In Sacraments we must Consider, not
what they be ( in them selves) but what they Signify.

We have no special regard to the Bread, Wine, or Water: For they are
Creatures Corruptible, as well after Consecration, as they were before: But we
direct our Faith Only unto the very Body, and Blood of Christ: not as
being there Really, and Fleashel^ Present, as ye have imagined: but as
sittinge in Heaven at the Righthande of God the Father. The Holy Father
Chrysostom says, although in general words, not speakinge specially of this
Sacrament: Oculi Fidei, Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 24.
quando vident haec ineffabilia bona, ne sentiunt quidem haec visibilia. Tantum
inter haec, and illa interest: The eyes of our Faith, when they behold these
unspeakable good things, they do not so mutche, as mark these out ward
things, that we see with our Bodily eyes So great is the difference bitvvene
these things And herein rests the grossness of your error, y^ ye divide
not the one thing from the other. S. Augustine says, August. in Johan.
Tracta. 26. Augustine. De Doctrina Christiana. Lib. 3. Cap. 5. Origin. In
Prologo in Cantica Canticor.
Aliud est Sacramentum, aliud res Sacramenti: The Sacrament of Christ's Body
is one thing: and the Substance of the Sacrament, ( or Christ's Body
represented by the Sacrament) is an other thing. And again he says, Ea
demum est miserabilis animae seruitus, Signa pro Rebus accipere: To take the
Signs ( or Sacraments) in steed of the things them selves, ( that be
Signified) is the miserable bondage of the Soul. In like manner Origin says,
Simpliciores nescientes distinguere, ac secernere, quae sint, quae in
Scripturis Diuinis Interiori Homini, quae vero Exteriori deputanda sint,
vocabulorum similitudinibus falsi. ad ineptas quasdam Fabulas, and figmenta
inania se contulerunt: Simple men, not hable to discern in the Holy
Scriptures, what things ought to be applied to the utter Man, and what to the
Inner, being deceived by the likeness of words, have turned them selves to
a sort of peeuishe Fables, and vain Fantasies.

Ye call our Doctrine naked, Figure. Christ's Death. Absente or Present.
and cold, for that we say, The Sacrament is a Figure. And yet because ye
cannot in any wise deny, but the same word, Figure, to the same purpose is
commonly used of all the Anciente Catholic Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church, Therefore ye thought it good to qualify, and to mince the matter, and
to say, It is a Figure, not of the Body, but of the Death of Christ. And
here it is a world to see, how pitifully ye trouble your self with your
variety, and change, and shifte of Figures.

First you say, The Sacrament, by the Judgment of Damascene, is called a
Figure before the Consecration, M. Hard. Artic. 12. Division. 2.
that is to say, before the Sacrament be a Sacrament. Afterward upon better
advise ye say, The Fourmes only, and the Shows, and Accidents are the
Figure of Christ's Body. Again you say, Christ's Body Invisible, is a Figure
of Christ's Body Visible: that is to say, A thing uncertain, is a Figure of
a thing most certain. Now last of al ye say, as, I think, noman ever
said before, The very Body of Christ it self is a Figure of the Death of
Christ. Thus many pretty strange unknown Figures ye are drtuen to divise,
thereby to avoid one simple, plain, usual, and common Figure. For, to leave
an infinite number of other Anciente Fathers, Augustine. in Psalm. 3.
S. Augustine says, Dominus Figuram Corporis sui Discipulis suis commendauit,
and tradidit: Our Lord commended, and delivered to his Disciples a Figure
(not, as ye say, of his Death, but) of his Body.

Whereas you say, The Body of Christ is present in deed, and that his Death
is Absente only: If ye list to cauille, as ye do, and, as your manner is,
idly to play with the words, and phrases of the Ancient Fathers, ye might
as well, and by as good warrante, say, that Christ's Death is as Present, as
his Body. For S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. Lib. 2. Epist. 3. Chrysotom. in Acta,
Homil. 21. Hieronym. in Psalm. 97. De con. Did. 2. Quid sit.
Passio Christi est Sacrificium, quod offerimus: The Sacrifice, that we offer,
is the Passion of christ. Chrysostom says, In Mysterijs Mors Christi
perficitur: The Death of Christ is wrought in the Mysteries: S. Hierome
says, Christus nobis quotidie Crucifigitur: Unto us Christ is Crucified
every day. And S. Gregory says, Christus iterum in hoc Mysterio Moritur: In
this Mystery (of ye Holy Communion) Christ is put to Death again. By these
words thus pressed and rackte, as your manner is, ye may easily prove, not
only y^ Christ's Body, but also that his Passion, and Death, and Blood
sheddinge is verily Present.

Ye say, ye Adore the Sacrament with godly Honor. We answer you, as
Christ sometime answered ye woman of Samaria, Vos Adoratis, quod nescitis: Ye
Adore, Johan. 4.
and woorship, ye know not what. For who ever willed you thus to Adore the
Sacrament? Who taught you, who bade you so to do? What Prophet? What
Apostle? What Father? What Doctor of the Church?

But here, M. Hardinge, ye do us great wrong, to say, we call Christ's Body
an Idol. Chrysostom. 1. Corin. Homil. 24.
For we know, and have evermore Confessed with Chrysostom, that the Body of
Christ is worthy of the highest Honor: and we Adore it, and woorship it,
even as the very Body of the Son of God. How be it, as it is said before,
Christ's Body is one thing, and the Sacrament is an other. The Sacrament is
in Earth: Christ's Body is in Heaven, at the Right Hand of God the Father.
Chrysostom. in eadem Homilia.
And therefore Chrysostom says in the same place, A scende ergo ad Coeli
portas, and diligenter attend: imo non Coeli, sed Coeli Coelorum: and tunc,
quod dicimus, intueberis: Mount up therefore unto the gates of Heaven, and
diligently consider: Naie, I say not, unto the gates of Heaven, but unto the
gates of the Heaven of Heavens: and so shall ye see the things, that we speak
of.

But what meante you, M. Hardinge, thus out of season to press in with your
Lenten Argument, and to say, It is Superstitious with you, to Eat dry, and
Lemen Meats? If ye say, there can be no Superstition in choice of meats,
either ye are deceived your self, or else seek occasion by the way, to
deceive others.

Tertullian says, Lenten meats. Tertull. in Epistola De Cibis Iudaicis.
Deus ventre non colitur, nec cibis, quos Dominus dicit perire, and in secessu,
naturali Lege purgari. Nam qui per Escas Dominum colit, prope est, vt Dominum
habeat ventrem suum: God is not honored with the Belly, nor with meats,
which the Lord Christ says, do perish, and are purged in conueiance by
Natural Order. For who so by Meats honors the Lord, in a manner makes
his Belly to be his Lord. Hilari. in Psal^um. 64.
S. Hilarie says, Haeretici sicco Panis Cibo viuunt. Sed quis tandem oriosi
huius propositi profectus est? Totum hoc inane, atque ridiculum est, and cum
ipsis Superstitionis causis miserabile: Heretics live by dry Bread. But
what profit is there in this idle purpose? It is altogether vain, and
foolish, and in respect of the causes of their Superstition, it is also
Miserable.

S. Hierome says, Hieronym. ad Nepotianum.
Quid prodest oleo non vesci, and molestias quasdam, difficultatesque ciborum
quaerere, Caricas, Piper, Nuces, Palmarum fructus, Similam, Mel, Pistacia?
Audio praeterea, quosdam contra regulam, hominumque Naturam, aquam non bibere,
nec vesci Pane: sed sorbitiunculas delicatas, and contrita olera, betarumque
succum, non Calice sorbere, sed Concha: Pro pudor. Non erubescimus istiusmodi
ineptijs? nec taedet Superstitionis? Insuper etiam famam abstinentiae in
delicijs quaerimus: What avails it, to eat no Oil, and with pain, and
mutche adoo, curiousely to seek for meats, Figs, Peper, Nuttes, Dates, fine
white Bread, Hoony, and Pistacia? Biside this, I hear say, there be sum,
which contrarle to the common order, and Nature of men, will neither drink
water, nor Eat bread: but seek for delicate suppinges, and Herbs shridde
together, and the juice of Beetes, and receive the same, not out of a Cup,
but out of a Shelle. Phy for shame. Do we not blusshe at such
foolishness? Are we not vveery of such superstition? And yet biside all this, living in such curiouse delicacie, we look to be praised for our
Fasting. To leave al others, Erasmus, Erasm. in Anno. in 14. ad Roma.
a man of great Judgment, says, Mayor est in his rebus Superstitio apud
Christianos, quam vnquam fuit inter Iudaeos: There is more Superstition herein
emonge Christians, then ever was emonge the Jews. We weighe not the choice of
Fish, or Fleashe: but the burden of the mind, and the snare of the
Conscience.

But, to pass over your needelesse Lenten talk, the Feast, that we set
before the people, is neither dry, nor carrien, (notwithstanding it likes
you, by your uncivil terms, so to call it) but Spiritual, Holy, and Heavenly:
I mean, the very Body of Jesus Christ the Son of God, to the comfort, and
reliuinge of Body, and Soul. And yet, for as mutche as it so well deliteth your
ears, to call it carrien, we refuse not the name. Chrysostom likewise,
although in more reverend, and Civil sense, calls it Carrien. These be his
words, Vbi est Cadauer, ibi sunt Aquilae. Chrysostom. 1. Corin. Homi. 24.
Cadauer Domini corpus est propter Mortem. Aquilas autem appellat, vt ostendat,
ad alta eum opotere contendere, qui ad hoc Corpus accedit, and nihil cum terra
debere illum habere commune, nec ad inferiora trahi, and repere, sed ad
superiora semper volare, and in Solemn Iustitiae intueri, mentisque oculum
habere acutissimum. Aquilarum enim, non Graculorum, est haec Mensa: Where as
the carrien is, there are the Egles. The Carrien is the Body of Christ, in
respect of his Death. But he names Egles, to show, that, who so will
approach to this Body, must mount alofte, and have no dealinge with the
Earth, nor be drawn, and creep dovvnevvarde: but must ever more flee up,
and behold the Son of Justice, and have the eye of his mind quick and
sharp. For this is a Table of Egles, that flee on high: not of Iaies, that
creep beneathe.

Ye add further, But, say ye, at the Lords Supper Christ gives him self
verily present. To what purpose? I pray you. That we may Eat him (say ye)
by Faith, and Sprite. Well reasoned forsoothe. Now forsoothe, M. Hardinge,
this is Hicke Scorners Logique, far unmeet for a man of your gravity.

Have ye foregotten (say you) the geuinge to eat, Verily Present.
and eating that which is given, to be Relatiues, one of them having relation
to the other? If Christ do exhibit him self, verily present, does not he
so exhibit or give him self, as he will be received? If he give him self
verily present, we take him verily Present. And then we eat him verily
Present, not only by Faith, and sprite, but by taking him into our Mouth,
and Belly. Verily, M. Hardinge, this, of your part, was not very well reasoned.
For a man may have Christ verily Present, although he have him not in his
mouth. Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 50.
S. Augustine says, Habes Christum In Praesenti, per Signum: In Praesenti,
per Fidem: In Praesenti* per Baptismatis Sacramentum: Thou haste Christ in the
time Present, by his Sign, or Token: In the time Present, by Faith: In the
time Present, by the Sacrament of Baptism. And S. Augustine imagines
Christ thus to say unto the people of Caper^aum, Augu. in Psalm. 9^
Non hoc Corpus, quod videris, manducaturi estis: Ye shall not eat (with your
bodily mouth) this Body of mine, that you see. We remember well the Relation,
that is bitweene Giving, and Receiving: and therefore we marvel so mutche
the more, that you so unskillfully would abuse it. For as Christ offers his
Body Spiritually to our Faith, and Sprite: even so Spiritually by our Faith,
and Sprite we receive it. And where ye say. We take Christ's Body into our
Mouths, and Bodies, as having foregotten that Christ says, The words,
that I have spoken, be Sprite, and Life, S. Augustine would soon have removed
you from this gross error. For thus he says unto you, Quid paras Dentem,
and Ventrem? Creed: and manducasti: What pre^arest thou thy Tooth, and thy
Belly? (This Eatinge is Spiritual). Believe (in Christ) and thou haste eaten.

S. Ambrose says, Ambros. in Lucam, Li. 6. Ca. 8.
Fide tangitur Christus: Fide videtur. Non tangitur Corpore: non oculis
comprehenditur: By Faith Christ is touched: By Faith he is seen. He is not
touched with Body: He is not seen with eye.

Likewise says Gregorius Nyssenus S. Basiles Brother, Gregor. Nyssen. De
Creatione Hominis, Cap. 20
Ego aliam Escam agnosco, quae Similitudinem quandam proportionis escae huis
corporis gerat: Cuius voluptas atque suauitas ad animum solummodo transeat: I
know an other kind of Meat, bearing the Likeness, and resemblance of our
bodily Meat (for y^ this inwardly feeds the mind, as the other outwardely
feeds the body) The pleasure, and sweetness whereof (goes not into y^
Mouth, or Belly, but) passes only into the soul. Thus we understand our
selves, M. Hardinge: and deceive not, as you say, the Souls, that Christ
has bought. God foregeeue you, and others, that so have done, that the Blood
of many be not required at your hands.

Your error, ye say, in making the Presence of Christ in Baptism like to
his Presence in the Supper, is too gross. Here is one error more, then any
of the Learned Catholic Fathers ever noted. S. Chrysostom says, In the
Sacrament of Baptism we are made Fleashe of Christ's Fleashe, Chryso. in
Epist. ad Ephe. Hom. 20 Bernard. Super Missus est. Hom. 3 Leo in Sermon. de 4.
Feria. Ca. 1.
and Bone of his Bones. S. Bernarde says, Lauemur in Sanguine eius: Let us be
vvasshed in his Blood. Leo says, Christi Sanguine rigaris, quando in Mortem
ipsius Baptizaris: Thou art vvashte in the Blood of Christ, when thou art
Baptized in his Death.

By these few it may appear, that Christ is Present at the Sacrament of
Baptism, even as he is Present at the Holy Supper: Unless ye will say, we
may be made Fleashe of Christ's Fleashe: and be washte in his Blood: and be
part^takers of him: and have him Present, without his Presence. Therefore
Chrysostom, when he has spoken vehemently of the Sacrament of the Supper, he
concludes thus, Sic and in Baptismo, Even so is it also in the Sacrament of
Baptism. The Body of Christ is likewise Present in them both. And for that
cause Beda says, Beda in 1. Cor. ^^
Nulli est aliquatenus ambigendum, tunc vnumquenque Fidelium Corporis
Sanguinisque Dominici participem fieri, quando in Baptismate Membrum Christi
efficitur: Noman may doubt, but every Faitheful man is then made partetaker
of the Body and Blood of Christ, Spiritual Eatinge.
when in Baptism he is made the Member of Christ. As for your Real, and
Fleashely Presence, it has benne often talkte of on your part, but never
proved.

We say, We touch not christ's Body with our Mouth, or Teeth. What, say
you, be ye used to swallowe down whole morselles? Such childishe, and wa^ton
talk, M. Hardinge, specially in the debatinge of matters of Religion, would
better becomme sum lighter Person. We know, that, as S. Augustine says,
Gratia Christi non Consumitur morsibus: Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 27. Augu. in
Johan. Tracta. 25.
The Grace of Christ is not Consumed by moreselles. Ye might have made the
like answer to S. Augustine: For he says to you, as I have alleged him
before, What prepareste thou thy Toothe, and thy Belly? O M. Hardinge, the
Eatinge of the Body of Christ, is a work Spiritual, and needs neither
brusinge of toothe: nor swallowinge of throat: nor healpe of the owtwarde, and
bodily mouth. If ye know thus mutche, why do you dissemble it? If ye know it
not, ye comme too rathe, to speak of these things.

S. Basile says, Basili in Psalm. 33. (...). Basili in eund. Psalmum (...).
Cyprian. De Coena Domini. Augu in Psalm. 48 Augu in Johan. Tracta 26. 4. Senten.
Did. 10 Secundum hos. Chryso. in 1. Cor. Homil. 24.
Est Spirituale Os Interioris Hominis, quod nutritur recipiens Verbum vitae,
quod Verbum est Panis qui descendit de Coelo: There is a Spiritual Mouth of
the Inner man, which is nourished by receiuinge ( Christ) the Word of Life,
which is the Bread that came from Heaven. Again he says, Gustare, and
vide^e, quod suauis est Dominus. Saepe obseruauimus, vires animi habere nomina
ab aliqua similitudine Membrorum Corporis. Quoniam ergo Dominus noster est
Verus Panis, and eius Caro est Verus Cibus, necesse est, eam voluptate^, quae
ex illius Panis delectatione affertur, in nobis per gustum existere
Spiritualem: Taste ye, and see, that our Lord is groceous. We have oftentimes
marked, that the Powers of the mind have their names, from sum likeness of
the parts of the Body. Therefore seeinge our Lord is Bread in deed, and his
Fleashe is Verily Meat, it cannot be chosen, but the pleasure, and sweetness
of that Bread must be wrought in us ( not by our bodily mouth, but) by the
Spiritual taste of the soul.

S. Cyprian says, Esus Carnis eius, quaedam est auiditas, and quoddam
desiderium manendi in eo: The Eating of that Fleashe, is a certain
greediness, and a certain desire to dwell in him. S. Augustine says, Ipse
est Panis Cordis nostri, Christ is the Bread ( not of our Belly, but) of our
Heart. And again, Intus Esuri, Intus siti: Hunger thou within: Thirste thou
within. Likewise again he says, vide^e, Fratres, Panem Coelestem:
Spirituali Ore manducate: O my Brethren, behold this Heavenly Bread: Eat it
with the Spiritual, or Inner Mouth of the Mind.

Thus are we taught to eat that Spiritual Meat, without chewinge, or
swallowinge, or use, or office of the bodily Mouth. Therefore S. Augustine
says, Non manducans, manducat: and manducans, non manducat: He that eats
not, eats: and he that eats, eats not.

But Chrysostom says, Quod omnium Maximum est, atque Praecipuum, in terra non
conspicaris tantum, sed etiam tangis: nec tangis tantum, sed etiam comedis: The
greattest, and woorthiest thing that is, thou dooste not only behold in the
Earth, but also toucheste it: Neither dooste thou only touch it, but also
catest it. Here, I beseech you, M. Hardinge, dissemble no l^nger: but speak
plainly. How do you behold the Body of Christ in the Sacrament? With what
senses? With what eyes do you see it? If ye say, with your bodily eyes, why
say you, Christ's Body is there Invisible, covered with Accidents, and cannot
be seen? If ye say, (as it is in deed) that ye see the same Body only with
the Spiritual eyes of your Mind. then ye allege Chrysostom directely, and
plainly against your self.

But S. Augustine says, Habet Fides oculos suos, Faith has her eyes, to see
vvithal. August. Epist. 84. Bernard. Meditation. Cap. 6.
And S. Bernarde says, Visio animae, intellectus est: The seeinge of the
Soul, is understanding. With these eyes we see Christ, that is to say, we
understand Christ, or believe in Christ. S. Augustine says, Velamen positum
erat contra faciem eorum, Judas.
ne viderent Christum in Scripturis: Augu. in Euaengelium secund. Lucam Sermon.
49 Chry^osto. in Genesim, Homil. 10.
There was a vele laid over their face, that they should not see Christ in
the scriptures.

Chrysostom says, Non tantum praestare possunt Corporales oculi, qui
visibilia cernunt, quantum oculi piritus, qui ea, quae non videntur, neque
subsistunt, videre possunt: These bodily eyes, that see things visible, cannot
do so mutche, as the eyes of the Sprite. For these eyes are hable to see the
things, that be not seen, and have no beeinge. Likewise again he says,
Chryso. De Verb. Esai. Vidi Domi. Homil. 3.
Oculi animi, etiamsi Parietes, etiami moenia, etiamsi montium moles, etiami
coelorum Corpora compererint obstantia, omnia facile praetercurrunt: The eyes
of the mind, notwithstanding they find Wales, or Mountains, or the Bodies
of the Heavens to stand against them, yet will they easily pass through them
al. With these eyes, says Chrysostom, we see that most worthy, Chryso. in
Marcum Homil. 6. Hierony. in Amos. Lib 3. Ca 9. Ambros. in Oratione* De Fide
Resurrectionis.
and most glorious Body of Christ. Therefore he says, Credamus, and videmus
Praesentem Iesum: Let us believe: and we see Jesus Present before us.
Likewise S. Hierome says, Est intelligentia Spiritualis, qua Christus
cernitur: There is a Spiritual understanding, vvherevvith Christ is seen.
Otherwise, S. Ambrose says, Christum nunc secundum veritatem videre non
possumus: As now, according to the Truth, ( with bodily sight) we cannot see
Christ.

Now, as the Body of Christ is seen, so is it touched: and, as it is
touched, so is it Eaten. But it is not seen with Bodily eyes: It is not
touched with bodily fingers: Ambros in Lucam, Li. 6. Ca. 8.
For S. Ambrose says, Fide tangitur Christus: Fide Christus videtur: By Faith
Christ is touched: By Faith Christ is seen: Therefore the Body of Christ
is not Eaten with the bodily mouth, but only by Faith, which is the
Spiritual mouth of the Soul.

Judas, ye say, who had but a mean Faith, because he received the
Sacrament, received Him also. O, how mutche is poor Judas beholden to these
men? Christ calls him the Child of Perdition: Johan. 6. Johan. 13.
S. John says, The Devil was entered into him. Again Christ says, He was a
Devil. Therefore this Mean Faith, that you allow him, must needs be a very
little pretty Faith: even such a Faith as ye might well allow the Devil.

Yet with the same Mean Faith, ye say, Receiuinge the Sacrament, he received
Christ also. First it is not well and thoroughly agreed upon, that Judas
received the Sacrament, or was present at al at the Last Supper. S. Hilarie
says plainly, He was gonne forth about his wicked purpose, Hilar. in
Matthew. Canon. 30.
and received it not. But be it, that S. Hilarie were deceived, and that Judas
received the Sacrament. Yet, as it is said before, Christ's Body is one
thing: and the Sacrament of Christ's Body is an other thing. S. Augustine
says, Discipuli manducabant Panem Dominum: Judas Panem Domini, Augu. in
Johan. Tracta. 59.
contra Dominum: The Disciples did eat the Bread, which is the Lord: But
Judas did eat ( not the Lord, but) the ( Sacrament, which is the) Bread of
the Lord, Augu. in Psalm. 3.
against the Lord. And yet in plainer sort he says, Christus adhibui^ Iudam
ad Conuiuium, in quo Corporis, and Sanguinis sui Figuram Discipulis suis
Commendauit, and tradidit: Christ admitted Judas unto his Table, whereat he
gave, and delivered unto his Disciples a Figure of his Body. Again S.
Augustine says, as in the Person of Christ, Augu. De Ciuita. Li. 21. Cap.
25.
Qui in me non manet, and in quo ego non manco, ne se dicat, aut existimet
manducare Corpus meum, aut Sanguinem meum bibere: He that abides not in me,
and I in him, let him not say, or think, that he either eats my Body, or
drinks my Blood.

The objection that ye make of the Resurrection of our bodies, is light, and
vain, and to small purpose. For if noman shall have part in the Resurrection,
but only they that have received the Sacrament of Christ's Body, then are all the Holy Fathers, Patriarchs, and Prophets of the Old Testamente, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron, and such others: then are infinite numbers of
Christian Children: Promise made to Faith.
then are many Godly Martyrs, which, being Baptized in the Blood of Christ,
were taken out of this life, before they could receive the Sacrament, utterly
excluded for ever from al hope of Resurrection. But Christ, when he spoke
these Words, meante not the reciuinge of the Sacrament, but the Spiritual
Eatinge of his Very Body, and the Spiritual Drinkinge of his Very Blood:
Whereof he is made partetaker unto Resurrection, and Life Everlasting, who so
ever believes in the Death of Christ. And therefore S. Basile says of the
Sacrament of Baptism, Basilius, Des ancto Baptismate. (...).
Baptisma est vis, and efficacia ad Resurrectionem: Baptism is a Power, and a
strength unto Resurrection. But hereof we shall have occasion offered to say
more hereafter.

Further, How can ye assure your selves, say you, that your Faith receives
the Body of Christ, Which was never promised to your Faith? By the way, I
beseech you, M. Hardinge, when, or where was Christ's Body ever promised to
your Mouth? Verily Christ promised his Body to he received by Faith, and by
Faith Only, and none otherwise. Johan. 6.
For thus he says, Ego sum Panis ille Vitae: qui venit ad me, non esurier:
and qui credit in me, non sitiet vnquam: I am that Bread of Life: He that
comes unto me, shall never hunger: and he that Believes in me, shall never
thirste. Here have you, M. Hardinge, a plain promise made unto our Faith.
But of your Mouth, we hear nothing. If you have ought to show out of the
Scriptures, Doctors, or Councelles, let it appear, and that in plain
words, without color. Otherwise, if ye cauil in words, we must say, ye
have nothing. Therefore the Ancient Father Origin says, Idcirco dicitur
Panis vitae, vt habeat Gustus Animae, quod deguster: Origin. in Cantica, Homil.
2.
Therefore is Christ called the Bread of Life, that (our Faith which is)
the Taste of our soul, may houe, what to taste.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Clemens in Paedagog^, Lib. 1. Cap. 6.
Comedite Carnes meas, and Bibite Sanguinem meum: Euidenter Fidei, and
Promissionis, quod est Esculentum, and Poculentum dicens allegorice: Eat my
Fleashe, and Drink my Blood: Meaning hereby under an Allegory, or, by way
of a Figure, the Meat, and Drink, that is of ( our) Faith, and ( his)
Promise.

Tertullian says, Tertullian. De Resurrectione Carnis.
Eundem Sermonem Christus etiam Carnem suam dixit: quia Sermo Caro factus est.
Proinde in causa vitae recipien dus: Deuorandus auditu: Ruminandus intellectu:
and Fide Digerendus est: The same Word, Christ called his Fleashe: For the
Word was made Fleashe. Therefore he must be received in cause of Life: He
must be Devoured by hearing: He must be chevved by understanding: He must
be Digested by Faith.

S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Coena Domini. Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 26. Augu.
De Verb. Apostol. Sermon. 2.
Quod est esca Carni, hoc est Animae Fides: As Meat is to the Fleashe, so is
Faith unto the Soul. S. Augustine says, Credere in eum, hoc est, Manducare:
Illud Eibere, quid est, nisi viuere? To Believe in him, is to Eat him. That
Drinkinge of him, what is it else, but to live by him?

I trust, M. Hardinge, it may appear hereby, there is sum promise made
hereof unto our Faith. Now show you as euidente Promise made to your
Mouth, and Belly: and then your Reader happily will believe you.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 2.
And therefore in celebratinge these Mysteries, the People are to good purpose
exhorted, before they comme to receive the Holy Communion, to lift up their
Hearts, and to direct their minds to Heaven ward: because he is there, by
whom we must be fed, and live.

M. Hardinge.
I pray you, Sursum Corda.
Which these Mysteries mean ye? Those that ye have in your new communion, or
those that we have at the altar of God in the Catholic Church of Christ? If
ye mean your own new devised toye, thereof ye cannot bring any sufficient
reason against the Church, pardy, which condemns the same. If ye mean the
Holy Mysteries of the Catholic Church, ye misreporte the matter. For by that
exhortation, ye speak of, Untruth. Here M. Hardinge misreporteth his own
Masse-booke.
the people are not prepared to receive the Communion only, nor chifely: but
to dispose them selves accordingly and as it becomes them to pray: for to
that end be these words, Sursum corda, up with your hearts, pronounced by
the Priest in the Preface before prayer. Read S. Cyprian in Sermon 6. De
Oratione Dominica. And ye shall find him to refer the whole to prayer. But
what if we admit your words, refusinge your Heretical meaning? We
grant, the people are to good purpose so exhorted, as ye say, and that he is
in Heaven, whose fleash we feed on in this Sacrament, thereby to attain to
life Everlasting. What conclude ye of this? Ergo he is not here? For at that
mark ye shoot, every man may see. Here we tell you, that your Rhetorike is
better stuff, A foolish argument. In Epist. ad Heb. Homil. 17. Christ is
both in Heaven and also here in the Sacrament.
then your Logike: for your argument is foolish. With the one ye may lead
the simple perhaps, with the other ye move the Learned to laugh at you. For
Christ is in Heaven, and also here, as Chrysostom says, Et hic plenus
existens, and illic plenus, Vnum Corpus. Christ is in Heaven, by the Substance
of his Body: and here by vvorkinge, or by Grace.
He is here fully, and there fully, one Body. These two propositions, Christ
is in Heaven, and Christ is here, may well stand together, without iuttinge
the one the other out of place. He is there at the right hand of the Father
visibly, he is here under the Forms of Bread and Wine, inuisibly: there in
glory, here in Mystery* yet as truly and fully here, as there, concerning
his Untruth. For Chrysostom never, neither vvrote so, nor meante so.
Substance, as Chrysostom says. Ye proceed forth, and say.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It may becomme you, M. Hardinge, as well to call the reverend Ministration of
Christ's Holy Mysteries, a Toie, as to call the Gospel of Christ, Error, and
Heresy. So likewise Libanius the Heathen, although a man, I trow, not of your
Profession, said sommetime, that all the Books, either of the Scriptures, or
of any y^ Christian Fathers, Socrat. li. 3. ca. 22 Christianorum Libri
ridiculi* and nugaces, si cum Iuliani Libris conferantur.
in comparison of Iulianus the Renegates Books, were toies. and trifles. How
be it, Our Toies be the same Toies, that were once used, and allowed
universally throughout the Catholic Church of God, before your Mass was
ever known, and were then thought no Toies.

Touching these words, Sursum corda, Lift up your Hearts, ye say they were
applied in old times unto prayer, and not only, or chiefly to the
Ministration of the Sacrament: and that, as ye seem to say, by the witness
of S. Cyprian. As for these empty Words, Only, or Chiefly, ye use them
only as a false light, to blind your Reader. For in our Apology ye found
them not.

Touching S. Cyprian, Ye thought it best to dissemble, and to shifte his
words, and to command him to silence. For thus he says, even directely
against the whole practice of your Church: Cyprian. in Oratione Domini.
Sacerdos ante Orationem, Praefatione praemissa, parat Fratrum mentes, dicendo,
Sursum Corda: vt dum respondet Plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, admoneatur, nihil
aliud se, quam Dominum, cogitare debere: Before Prayer, the Priest with a
Preface prepares the hearts of the Brethren, saieinge unto them, Lift up your
Hearts: that, when the People ansvveareth, We lift them up unto the Lord,
they may be put in mind, to think of nothing else, but of the Lord. Where is
this order, M. Hardinge, where is this Ecclesiastical Tradition now becomme?
Throughout your whole Territory of Rome, in what Church, in what Chaple is it
keapte? Where doothe your people answer the Priest at the Common Prayer? Or
where does the people understand, either the meaning of the Sacraments, or
any thing, that is pronounced by the Priest? Or why are you so unadvised, to
allege manifest Authorities against your self?

Ye say, Sursum Corda.
the people was taught by these words, not to consider, what was meant only
by y^ Sacraments, but to give attendance unto y^ Prayer: Wherein your own
Massebooke is cas^ly hable to control you. And in the Greek Liturgies, not
before any other public Prayer, but immediately before the Holy Ministration,
the Priest says, (...), Let us lift up our Hearts. And Chrysostom says,
Chryso. ex varijs locis in Matthae. Homil. 9. Augu. in Psalm. 39
Clamamus in conspectu Sacrificij, Sursum Corda: We cry alowde in the sight
of the Oblation, Lift up your Hearts. S. Augustine says, Sursum Corda
Habeamus. Si Resurrexistis cu^ Christo, dicit Fidelibus Corpus, and Sanguinem
Domini accipientibus, dicit, Si Resurrexistis cum Christo, quae sursum sunt,
sapite: vbi Christus est in Dextra Dei sedens: Quae sursum sunt, quaerite: no^
quae super terram: Let us lift up our Hearts. If ye be risen again with
Christ, he says unto the Faitheful, he says unto them, that receive the
Body, and Blood of our Lord, If ye be risen again with Christ, sauer those
things, that are above: where Christ is all the right Hand of God: Seek for
the things that be above: not for the things, that be in Earth. August. De
Bono Perseueran Li. 2 Cap. 13. August. De Bono Viduitatis, Cap 16. Alexander
Halen. 4. Quaest. 37. mem. 1. Arti. 3. Par. 1. Cap. 9.
Again he says, In Sacramentis Fidelium dicitur, vt Sursum Corda habeamus ad
Dominum: At the Ministration of the Sacraments of the Faithful, it is said,
Let us lift up our Hearts unto the Lord.

Likewise again, Inter Sacra Mysteria Cor habere Sursum iubemur In the time of
the Holy Mysteries, we are commanded to Lift up our Hearts.

But what need we to rehearse the Ancient Fathers? Your own late New Doctors
have said y^ like. And to leave the rest, your own Manipulus Curatorum, that
is to say, the Ordinary, and Direction of al your whole Cleregie. says thus,
Sacerdos ante Canonem dicit, Sursum Corda: Quasi dicat, quod volens sumere
istud Sacramentum, debet habere Cor suum eleuatum ad Deum: Before the Canon the
Priest says, Lift up your Hearts: As if he vvoulde say, who so vvil
receive this Sacrament, ought to have his Heart lifted up unto God.

These words be plain, and can in no wise be denied. It were wisdom, M.
Hardinge, in such cases, to auouche no more, then ye know. Otherwise your
words will go for Toies.

How be it, the matter being granted, that these words perteine to the
Holy Ministration, yet if we would reason thus, Christ's Body is in Heaven:
Therefore it is not Really, and Fleashely in the Sacrament, Ye say, We
should make a foolish Argument: Our Rhetorique is better stuff, then our
Logique.

This Argument, M. Hardinge, is taken of the Nature of Christ's Humanity:
which being the Very Natural Body of a Man, by the Judgment of the Ancient
Fathers, must needs be in one only place at one time, and can reach no
further. For otherwise it were not a Very Natural Man's Body. Therefore S.
Augustine says, De Conse. Did. 2. Prima. Augusti. Contra Faustum, Lib. 20.
Cap. 11.
as he is alleged by Gratian, Corpus Domini, in quo Resurrexit, in vno loco
esse oportet: The Body of our Lord, wherein he rose again, must needs be in
one Place. Like wise again he says, Christus secundum Praesentiam
Corporalem, simul and in Sole, and in Luna, and in Cruce esse non potuit:
Touching Bodily presence, Christ could not be in the Soon, in the Moon,
and upon the Cross, al at once.

And again, Augu. Epist. 221.
Christus vbique est, Virtute, non Opere: Diuinitate, non Carne: Christ is
every where, By his Power, not in deed: By his Godhed, not by his Fleashe.

S. Cyril says, Cyrill. in Johan. Lib. 9. Cap. 22.
Christus cum Discipulis suis, etfi non Corpore, tamen Virtute Deitatis semper
futurus est: Christ will evermore be with his Disciples, by the Power of his
Divinity: although not in his Body. Therefore, to conclude, S. Augustine
says, Videre Ascendentem: Aug^ in Psalm. 46
Credit in Absentem: Sperate venientem: Tamen per Misericordiam occultam etiam
sentire Praesentem: Behold Christ Ascendinge: Beleaue in Christ being
Absente: Trust in Christ, that shall comme again, And yet by his privy
mercy feel him Present. Christ's Body in one place.
Believe, says S. Augustine, in Christ, Being now Absente, and not here.

Thus the Ancient Catholic Fathers were bold reverently to reason of
Christ's Humanity: yet was not M. Hardinge yet borne, that should so bitterly
charge them with Foolish Arguments. Ruffini in Hieronym. Inuectiua Prior.
Nay, rather Ruffinus says, Stulta adinuentio Calumniae est, Corpus Humanum
aliud esse putare, quam Carnem: It is but a Foolish findinge of a Cauil, to
say, that the Body of a Man is any other thing, then Fleashe.

But Chrysostom says, Christ is whole here, and whole there. But
Chrysostom in the same place many ways expounds his whole meaning: For thus
he says, Chrysos. in Epist. ad Hebr. Hom. 17
if it would have pleased M. Hardinge to have seen his words, Offerimus
quidem, sed ad Recordatione^ facientes Mortis eius: Hoc Sacrificium Exemplar
illius est: Hoc, quod nos facimus, in Commemorationem fit eius, quod factum
est. Idipsum semper offerimus: Magis autem Recordationem Sacrificij Operamur:
We offer in deed: But in Remembrance of his Death. This Sacrifice is a
Token, or Figure of that Sacrifice. The thing, that we do, is son in
Remembrance of that thing, that was done before. We offer alvvaie the same
thing ( y^ Christ offered). Nay rather, we work the Remembrance of that
Sacrifice ( that Christ offered). Notwithstanding, to spare time, Artic. 6.
Diui. 8.
this Objection is answered more at large in my Former Reply to M. Hardinge.

But, whereas M. Hardinge says, Christ's Body is as fully here, as it is in
Heaven, concerning the Substance, as Chrysostom says, He would, under the
name of that Holy Father, wilfully warrante a great Untruth. For Chrysostom
says not, Christ's Body is Present in Substance: He has no such words:
He says not so: He says the contrary: as namely, where he says, as it is
before alleged, The very Body of Christ it self is not in the Holy vessels:
Chrysostom in Matthew. Homil. 11.
but the Mystene, or Sacrament thereof is there contained.

Touching these words, Unless ye can divise a New Grammare, and make
Sursum to be Deorsum, and contrary to Nature, turn al things vpsidedown, and
thus make your Construction, Sursum Corda, Look dovvnevvarde, they will but
meanly make for your purpose. S. Hierome says, Secundus Aduentus Saluatoris
in Gloria demonstrandus est. Stultum est ergo illum in paruo, aut abscondito
loco quaerere, Hieron. in Matthae. Cap. 14.
qui totius est Mundi Lumen: The Second Coming of our Saueoure shall be
declared in Glory. Seeinge therefore he is the Light of the World, it is
great folly, to seek him in any small Corner.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 3.
Cyrillus says, when we comme to receive these Mysteries, al gross
imaginations must quite be baunished.

M. Hardinge.
Why do ye not by your quotation direct us to the place, where this saieinge
of Cyrill may be found? Know ye not that we have good cause to suspecte
your dealinge? Do we not almost every where find you in manifest lies? This
is a quainte east of M Hardinges Copia Verberu^.
If ye mean plain Truth, why deal ye not plainly? Christ's saieinge must
needs be true, Cyril guilefully alleged. Johan. 5. The place of Cyril turned
upon the Defenders.
Who evil does, hates light. Because ye knew the place makes directely
against you, and subuerteth your whole Sacramentarie Doctrine, ye thought it
good policy, to take a word or two for your purpose, and leave the rest,
trustinge it should not be espied. Wherein ye do like the Scorpion, that
casts forth his venim with the spirte of his tail, and forthwith creapeth
away into a hole. VVoulde God as ye abuse the name of Cyril, so ye would
stand to the Truth by him even in that place, which ye allege, Substantially
declared Who lists to see the place, let him read Cyrilles answer to
Theodori^es reprehension of the eleventh anathematisme against Nestorius. There
he shows, that Nestorius destroyed the mean of the Union of be the Natures
in Christ, to the intent the Body of Christ might be found but a common body
as men have, and not a Body propre of the Word, The Heresy of Nestorius.
having power to viuificate, or quicken al things. Nestorius Heresy stood
neither in Transubstantiation, nor in Real Presence.
For Nestorius divided Christ, and taught the word to be the Son of God,
not of Mary: and Christ Man the Son of Mary only, as Man: and dissolved the
whole Mystery of the incarnation so, as Christ should be an other certain
Son beside the Word. And because the The meaning is this: We cannot be
fed, or nourished by Christ, as he is in his Divine Nature: but only by the
Faith that we have in his Fleashe Crucified.
Nature of Godhed cannot be eaten, thereof he talked vainly and profanely,
that in the Sacrament we eat Fleashe, and not Godhed. For confutation of
this detestable Heresy, Cyril brings him to the consideration of the Blessed
Sacrament, and opposes him, whether he thought, that in the Sacrament
Christ being (by his Doctrine) Man besides God the Word, we eat a man,
as one would say, after such sort, as the Barbarous people of the new
found Land America, called Caniballes, eat one another. But because that
were absurd, and beastly, Cyril says that we eat not a common Body, though
the Nature of Godhed Untruth guilefully enclosed: For neither the Fleash of
Christ in pro per speech can be Eaten.
properly be not eaten, but that Body which is Proprium verbi, the proper Body
of the Word, which quickenethe al things, by receiuinge whereof We
receive whole Christ, God, and Man, not with our Mouth, but by Faith, and
Sprite.
we receive whole Christ, God, and man. And here Cyril lays to Nestorius
charge, as though he drove men to gross cogitations touching this Sacrament.
The gross imaginations that Cyril would to be eschevved in receiving the
blessed Sacrament.
The words be these: Number hominis comestionem, etc. What do thou pronounce
this our Sacrament to be eatinge of a man (the Greek is (...)) and driueste
irreverently the Mind of them as have believed unto gross imaginations, and
attemptest with human imaginations, to treat of those things, which are
attained by an only, pure, and exquisite Faith? These be the gross
imaginations, which Cyrill would to be bannished at the receiving of this
Sacrament, and that we eat the Body of Christ, not as being a common Body,
as the Body of every mortal Man: And though the Nature of Godhed be not eaten,
that yet we eat that Body, which is the proper Body of the Word, that
quickens al thing. Now as A fond ^uasio^. For the grossness hereof stood
not in Christ's Body, but in the manner of Eatinge.
we have not that gross imagination of eatinge a common Body, (which of the
Greeks, by a term plainer to the learned, is called (...)) when we receive
this Sacrament: so it is evident by Cyril, that in the same With Our mouth
we receive Only the Sacrament: With our Faith we Eat the Body of Christ
Incarnate, Verily, and in deed.
we eat verily, and in deed the Body of Christ, the Word incarnate. For
otherwise his saieinges had not made ought against the Heresy of Nestorius.
And thus receiuinge Christ's Body in the Sacrament, we receive it truly, and
with Faith, and without gross imaginations. All this weighed, how prove ye
now, Christ to be so lodged in Heaven, that notwithstanding his own Word,
O fond grossness. We lack not Christ: Although we have him not
Fleashely Present in our mouths.
we lack him here in these Holy Mysteries? But let us consider your other
Authorities.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching the quotation in the margin, escaped in the Printe, that fault, I
trust, shall be amended. But how will you amend your fault, M. Hardinge, so
often alleginge such things, as your Conscience knows to be most Untrue?
I will not wander far, to put you in mind. In the last line of your Former
Division, ye auouche that upon Chrysostom, that you know, Chrysostom never,
neither Wrote, nor meante. As for the manifest Lies, wherewith ye so sharply,
and so often charge us, though there were sum Truth in your challenge, as
there is none, yet might not we therein in any wise compare with you.
Concerning the affiance, ye would seem to have in these words of Cyril, ye
thought it good skill, thus to crow out with sum courrage, before the fight.

In what sense the Godhed may be eaten, or not eaten, I have already said so
mutche, as then seemed sufficient, in my Former Reply to your First
Answer. The meaning of Cyrillus is this, We cannot, neither know, nor
believe on, nor feed upon the Divine Majesty of God, as it is pure, and
Simple, and in it self: But al our knowledge, and al our Faith, which is our
Spiritual Feedinge, and Life, is derived unto us through Jesus Christ, and
stands only, and wholly in this, that the Son of God has taken the Very
Nature, and Substance of our Corruptible Fleashe, and joined the same in One
Person unto his Godhed. Nestorius. Hila. in Psalm. 14^.
Therefore S. Hilarie says, Cognitus fieri Deus hominibus, nisi assumpto
Homine, non potuit. Quia Incognoscibilem cognoscere, nisi per Naturam nostram,
Natura nostra non potuit: God could not be known unto men, but by the
Receiuinge of Man unto him. For God that sourmounteth al knowledge, Our Nature
could not know, August. Confessionu^. Li. 7. Ca. 18
but by the mean of our Nature. So says S. Augustine, Quaerebam viam
comparandi roboris, quod effect idoneum ad fruendum te: Nec inueni, donec
amplecterer Mediatorem Dei, and Hominum, Hominem Christum Iesum: I sought a
way to geate strength, whereby I might be hable to enioie thee: But I found
it not, before that I embraced Jesus Christ, which is the Mediatoure
bitvveene God, and Man. Again he says, Christus Cibum, cui capiendo
inualidus eram, miscuit Carni: Quoniam Verbum Caro factum est, vt infantiae
nostrae lactesceret Sapientia tua: Christ tempered, and mingled his Meat
(which is his Godhed) with his Fleashe: which Godhed otherwise I was not
hable to receive. For the Word was made Fleashe, that thy wisdom (o God)
might becomme milk unto our chilhoode.

Nestorius Heresy stood not either in Transubstantiation, or in Real Presence:
but only in the dissolution of the Person of Christ, in that he divided the
Manhed of Christ from his Godhed: and so concluded in the end, that Christ
was only a bare Natural Man, in all respects, as others were. If it had benne
so, then could we not have benne saved by the Death of Christ, no more then
by the Death of Codrus, and Decius: who being nothing else, but Very Natural
Men, Hieronym. ad Ephesios, Cap. 1.
gave them selves to Death for the safety of their Countries. Neither could
we believe in Christ Crucified: that is to say, we could not Eat, nor
Feed upon the Body of Christ, Cyrillus ad Reginas: Ex Epist. ad Hebrae.
or have life by it. Cyrillus says: Quomodo purgabi^ nos ab operibus mortuis?
Sanguis enim Communis Hominis nihil habet maius, quam Sanguis Tauri, aut Hirci:
How then shall Christ deliver us from deadly works? For the Blood of Common
Man has nothing more, (to work Salvation) then the Blood of a bulle, or a
goat. And therefore the same S. Cyril imagines Christ to say thus: Cyrill.
in Johan. Lib. 4. Cap. 18.
Mortalem Carnem assumpsi: Sed quia Naturaliter Vita existens habito in ea,
totam ad meam Vitam reformauli I have taken Mortal Fleashe upon me self. But,
for as mutche, as I Naturally being Life, dwell in the same. I have reformed
that whole Fleash unto my Life. Leo De Passion* Domi. Sermo. 13.
So says Leo, Verus venerator Dominicae Passionis, sic Crucifixum Iesum
Oculis Cordis aspiciat, vt illius Carnem suam esse cognoscat: Let the true
woorshipper of our Lords Passion so behold Christ Crucified with the eyes of
his heart, yt he may understand, that the Fleashe of Christ is his Fleashe.
But hereof, I trow, M. Hardinge will move no great question.

Further it is fully Confessed of either side, that we by Faith Eat the very
Body of Christ, not as the Body of any other Common Natural Man, but as the
Body of the Son of God: and, that the same Body so eaten by Faith, and none
otherwise, geeueth Life. But, how that Body may be Eaten, therein stands the
whole doubt. Hereunto S. Cyril answeareth thus: Number Hominis Comestione^ hoc
nostrum Sacramentum pronuntias? Cyrill. Anathematismo. 11.
Et irreligiose ad Crassas Cogitationes vrges mentem little, qui crediderunt? Et
attentas humanis rationibus tractare ea, quae Sola, Pura, and Exquisita Fide
accipiuntur? Dooste thou say, that our Sacrament is the Eating of a Man? And
do thou irreverently, and without Religion force the mind of the Faithful
unto gross, (and Fleashely) cogitations? And go thou about with Natural
imaginations to deal those things, that be received by Only, Pure, and
Perfect Faith? These words seem plain, and free from quarrel. Yet hereof
may grow an other doubt. For, by M. Hardinge Judgment, to think, that
Christ's Body is to be received into our Mouths, and Bellies, is no manner
Gross Imagination. But we say, as Cyrillus says, to avoid al such
uncomely, and Fleashly Vanities, Christ's Body, and Blood, Spiritual Eatinge.
are a Spiritual food, and must be received, not with Mouth, or Teethe, but
with Only, Pure, and Perfect Faith.

Concerning M. Hardinges fantasy, Pope Nicolas under a Solemn Protestation
would have us to say, De Conse. Did. 2. Ego Bere^garius.
Ego Cord, and Ore profi^eor, non tantum Sacramentum, sed etia^ Corpus Christi
in Veritate, sensualiter manibus Sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and dentibus
Fidelium atteri: I profess with Heart, and Mouth, that not only the
Sacrament, but also the Body of Christ it self in very Truth, and deed is
sensibly touched, and broken with the Priests hands, and torn with the
Teeth of the Faithful. But this talk is so fond, and so utterly void of
discretion, that the very Barbarous Gloss is feign to co^trol it in this sort:
Nisi sane intelligas (ista) Verba Berengarij, in maiorem incides haeresim, quam
ipse habuit: Unless thou wisely understand these Words of Berengarius, thou
will fall into a greatter Heresy, then ever he held any.

S. Cyrils words be plain, Sola, Pura, Exquisita Fide.
Sola* Pura, and exquisita Fide accipiuntur: These things be received ( not by
Mouth, but) by Only, Pure, and Perfect Faith. Likewise again he says,
Initium, and Fundamentum in Sanctificationem, and Iustitiam, Christus est,
Cyrill. in Johan. Lib. 4. Cap. 39.
per Fidem, scilicet, and non aliter. Hoc enim modo in nobis habitat: Christ
is the Beginning, and Fundation unto Holiness, and Righteousness: I mean by
Faith, and none otherwise. For by Faith Christ dwells in us. So says
Clemens Alexandrinus, Clemens in Paedagogo, Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
Hoc est Bibere Jesus Sanguinem, participem esse incorruptionis eius: This is
the Drinkinge of the Blood of Jesus, to be made partetaker of his
Immortality. Origin says, Est ergo ipse vulneratus: Cuius nos Sanguine^
bibimus, id est, Origin. in Numer. Homi. 16. Athana. in illud Euangelij,
Quicunque dixerit verbum.
Doctrinae eius verba suscipimus: He was woounded: whoes Blood we Drink,
that is to say, the Words of vvhoes Doctrine we receive.

But what is there so plain, as these words of Athanasius? Quot Hominibus
suffecisset Corpus eius ad Cibu^, vt Vniuersi Mundi alimonia fieret? Propterea
Ascensionis suae in Coelum mentionem fecit, vt eos a corporali intellectu
abstraheret: Unto how many men could Christ's Body have suffised for meat,
that he should be y^ Food of all the World? Therefore he made mention of his
Ascension into Heaven: that he might withdraw them from corporal, and
Fleashely understanding.

Here, M. Hardinge, I beseech you, tell us by the way, when ye teach us, that
Christ's Body is Fleashely Present: that it is received into the Mouth: that
it is chevved, and bruised with teethe: and that it passes further into the
belly, how do you withdraw our minds from Fleashely, and Corporal
understanding? If this Eatinge be Spiritual, what Eatinge may be coumpted
Corporal?

Hereof S. Augustine says thus, Cum videritis Filium Hominis ascendentem, vbi
erat prius, Augustine. in Johan. Tractat. 27.
Certe vel tunc videbitis, quod non eo modo, quo putatis, erogat Corpus suum:
Certe vel tunc intelligetis, quod Gratia eius non consumitur morsibus: When ye
shall see the Son of Man Ascendinge up, where he was before. Then shall ye see,
that he geeueth not his Body ( to be Eaten) in such sort, as you imagine:
Then shall ye understand, that his Grace is not consumed by morselles. And
therefore again he says, August. De Verbis Domi. Secu^d. ^uc. Sermon. 33.
Nolite Pauces parare, sed Cor: Prepare not your Jaws, but your Heart.

This is the Very, True, Spiritual, and Only Eating of Christ's Body: and,
what so ever fantasy M. Hardinge has divised bisides, of his Mouth, and
Teethe, is, as S. Cyril says, a Vain, Vnreuerente, Gross, and Fleashely
Imagination.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 4.
The Council of Nice, as it is alleged by sum in Greek, plainly forebiddeth
us to be basely affectioned, or bent toward the Bread, and Wine, which are
set before us.

M. Hardinge.
As the former part of the sentence, which ye bring out of the Nicene
Council, Untruths two together. Read the Answer.
sounds nothing against the Catholics, (for they also teach the same):
Untruths two together. Read the Answer.
so the later part is directly contrary to your Doctrine, which ye thought
good to leave out, lest thereby ye should have marred your whole matter. Such
nipping, A mark to know Heretics by. The words of the Nicene Council,
which make plainly for the Catholic Doctrine touching the Sacrament of the
Altar.
and roundinge of sentences has ever ben taken for a mark to know Heretics
by. Among wise men such practrise worthily brings you into suspicion of
Untruth. The words of the Council truly reported be these: Let us not at the
Divine Table basely behold the Bread and Cup set before us: but liftinge up
our mind, let us by Faith understand on that Holy Table to be laid the
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World, of Priests
Sacrificed vnbloudely. And receiving his precious Body, and Blood verily, let
us believe these to be the pledges of our Resurrection. For in consideration
hereof we take not mutche, but a little, that we may know, we receive not to
fillinge (of the Body) but to Sanctimonie. Take the end with the beginning,
and what makes this decree of that Holy Council for defense of your
Sacramentarie Doctrine? And here, who be more basely affectioned and bent
toward the things set on that Table, ye, that make them but Bread, and
Wine, or we, that, after Consecration, believe under the forms of Bread, and
Wine verily to be made Present the Body, and Blood of Christ? Whether is a
baser exercise, to feed on Untruth* vile, and s^lau^^^rous: We ee^e not upon
^ommon Brea^^, and Wine: We fe^de upon the Very Body, and Blood of Christ.
common Bread, and Wine, and to dwell in the judgment of the senses, or to
eat the very Fleashe of Christ, the Bread of Life, that came down from
Heaven, to immortality of the Body, and Soul, to forsake the senses, and
folowethe understanding of Your Faith, without Gods Word, is no Faith.
Taithe? Well we agree with you, not to be over basely intent to the Bread,
and Cup. But why do not ye perform that, as follows there after your own
allegation out of that Council? Why do ye not with those. 318. Holy Fathers,
and with the whole Church of Christ understand by Faith on that Holy Table
to be laid the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World? Why
do ye not recante your wicked Doctrine against the blessed Sacrifice of the
Mass? Read the whole sentence, ioyninge the end to the beginning. Say not
al those Holy and Learned Fathers, the Lamb of God on this sacred Table (they
mean the Altar) to be Sacrificed of the Priests vnbloudely?

Again why bring ye the Christen people from the Body of Christ whereby they
are redeemed, to a Untruth. For we t^ache neither bare Bread, nor bare
Figure: Read the Answer.
bare piece of Bread, Al Tropes and Figures of the Sacramentaries be excluded
by Verdite of the Nicene Council.
teachinge it to be Untruth. For the Learned Doctors, and Fathers used
commonly the same Tropes, and Figures.
but the Figure of his Body? Says not this Council, that we receive the
Precious Body, and Blood of our Lord We receive Christ Verily, and in
dee^e: although neither Fleashely, nor with bodily mouth.
(...), that is, verily, and in deed, Untruth. For the Learned Doctors, and
Fathers used commonly the same Tropes, and Figures.
whereby in deed al your tropes, and Figures be quite excluded? Again if these
were but Bread, and Wine, as ye teach, would the Council say, that we take
them not to sacietie, but to Sanctimonie and Holiness? What Holiness can we have
of Bread, and Wine? What, Holiness obteine^ we not by eatinge of the Body of
Christ, being the proper Body of the Word, or God the Words own Body,
that has Power to viuificate, and quicken al things? Thus we come within
you, Defenders, as it were, and claspinge with you, wringe your O brave
Captain.
weapon out of your hands, and with the the other end of it stricke you down. As
it is not hard to us by learning to overthrow you, so we beseech God to
strike down the pride, Act. 9.
and stubbernes of your hearts, as he did Paul, wherewith ye resist the
manifest Truth.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We allege this place, although briefly, yet simply, and truly, and without
any manner fraud, or guile. But if roundinge, and clippinge of the Holy
Fathers be the mark of an Heretic, as it is here avouched, then have we one
mark more, whereby to know M. Hardinge. For this is his ordinary usage, and
practice of course.

Touching either the Beginning, or the End of this Decree, there is no
cause, wherefore any Word therein written should of out part be dissembled.
The Holy Fathers in that Council teach us, utterly to withdraw our eie^ from
the Bread, and Wine, being nothing else, but Creatures transitory, and
corruptible: and by Faith to behold the Very Body of Christ, which is
Represented in the Mysteries. To like purpose S. Augustine says, as it is
alleged before, Ea demum est Miserabilis animae Seruitus, The La^be laid upon
the Table.
Signa pro Rebus accipere: August. De Doctrina Christiana, Lib. 3. Cap. 5.
and supra Creaturam Corpoream oculum Mentis ad hautiendum Aeternum Lumen
leuare non posse: This is the Miserable Bondage of the Soul, to take the
Signs in steed of the things, that be Signified: and not to be hable to
lift up the eye of the Mind, above the Corporal Creature, to receive the
Light Everlasting. And therefore immediately before the Holy Ministration, the
Priest says unto us, as it is said before, Lift up your Hearts. In this
sort the same Fathers speak of the Water of Baptism: Council. Nicen. (...).
Baptisma nostrum Oculis Sensibilibus spectandum non est, sed oculis
Intellectus. Vides Aquam? Cogita Vim, and potestate^ Dei, quae in Aquis latet:
Our Baptism may not be considered with the Sensible, or Bodily Eyes, but with
the Inner Eyes of the Mind. Seeste thou the Water? Think of the Might, and
Power of God, that lies Hidden in the Water. Thus, as in the One Sacrament
they withdraw us from the Water, even so in the Other Sacrament they
withdraw us from the Bread.

But it follows in the same Decree, Let us by Faith understand, on that Holy
Table to be laid the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World.
If y^ Ancient Fathers, to the end to stir up, and to inflame the Hearts of
the people, had not sommetimes used vehemente phrases, and extraordinary
kinds of Speech, M. Hardinge might many times spare his pen, and keep
silence. But he does the Fathers great wrong, that presses only their
^are words, and dissembleth their meaning. Gregory Nyssene S. Basiles
Brother discreetely, and learnedly opens this whole matter. Thus he writes:
Gregor. Nyssen. De Anima, Ca. 11
Cum in habitudine loci alicuius, vel negorij in loco existentis,
intelligibiliu^ aliquod extiterit, Abusiue id ibi esse dicimus, propter
operatione^ eius, quae ibi est, locum pro habitudine, and operatione
accipientes. Cum enim dicere deberemus, Ibi Operatur, dicimus, Ibi est: When
any Spiritual thing is in ye consideration of sum place, or else in
consideration of sum matter being in a place, We say, the same Spiritual
thing is there, by an Abuse, or by an Extraordinary use of speech: because of
the effect of that Spiritual thing, that there is wrought: taking the place
in steed of Consideration, of Workinge in ye Place. For, where we should
say, There it VVoorketh, thus we say, There it is. Even so, where as these
Fathers should have said, The Effects, or Graces, y^ we have by Christ's
Body, are laid before us upon y^ Table, by Abuse of Speech they say, the Body
of Christ is laid upon y^ Table. De Conse. Did. 2. Species.
Likewise says Gratia^. Quida^ no^ improbabiliter exponu^t, Carnis, and
Sanguinis Veritatem, Ipsam ^orundem efficientiam, hoc est, Remissionem
Peccatorum: Sum men not without good reason, by the Truth of Christ's
Fleashe, and Blood, understand the Effect, or vvoorkinge of the same, that
is to say, the Remission of Sins.

And as these Fathers say, Christ is Laid upon the Table, even so, by like
phrase of speech, De Conse. Did. 2. Quid sit.
S. Gregory says, Christ is killed upon the Table: Christus iterum in hoc
Mysterio moritur: Eius Caro in populi salutem patitur: Christ dies again in
this Mystery: His Fleashe suffers for the Salvation of the people. So says
Chrysostom, Vt in Coelo coelatur Deus, Chrysostom in Matthew. Homil. 4.
sic in Scripturis absconditur. Non omnes intelligunt Deum Veritatis, positum
in Scripturis: As God is covered in Heaven, so is he covered in the Scriptures.
Al men understand not God, that is laid in the Scriptures. So says
Athanasius, Athanas. De Interpreta. Psalm. Hieronym. De Vita Eremitica.
Hieronym. ad Gaudentium.
Est etiam in Verbis Scripturarum Dominus: Our Lord is in the Words of the
Scriptures. So says S. Hierome, Supra nudam metuis humum ex esa ieiunijs
membra collidere. Sed Dominus tecum iacet: Thou art a fraide to lay thy body,
worn out with fasting, upon the bare ground. Yet the Lord lies with thee.
Again, Nudus, atque esuriens ante fores nostras Christus in paupere moritur:
Christ naked, and hungry, lieinge before our gate, dies in the poor.

And, to leave other like saieinges, and sentences of the Ancient Fathers, Pope
Adrian says in your late Council of Nice, The Lamb laid upon the Table.
In Scripturis Sanctarum imaginum Agnus Praecursoris digito ostensus
depingitur: De Con. Did 3. Sextam Sancta^.
In the Scriptures of the Holy Images, is painted the Lamb of God, that John
Baptiste showed with his finger.

These saieinges must be qualified with a gentle Exposition: and may not be
rackte extreemely to the sound, and rigor of the Letter. Chrysostom thus
expounds these words of S. Paul to the Galathians: Chrysostom. in Epist. ad
Gala. Cap. 3.
Quibus Christus ante Oculos prius depictus erat, in vobis Crucifixus. Atqui
Christus non apud Galathas, sed Hierosolymis fuit Crucifixus. Quomodo igitur
dicit, in vobis? Vt ostendat vim Fidei, quae potest etiam procul dissita
cernere: indicans, quod illi oculis Fidei, exactius cernerent, quam nonnulli,
qui praesentes adfuerant, eaque, quae gerebantur, conspexerant: Unto whom
Christ was painted out, and Crucified emonge you before your Eyes. Yet was not
Christ Crucified in Galathia, but at Jerusalem. How then says S. Paul unto
the Galathians, Christ was Crucified emongst you? His meaning was, to show
the strength of Faith, which is hable to see things, though they be far
away: and that they by the Eyes of Faith saw the Death of Christ more
plainly, and perfitely, then many, that were present at his Death, and saw
those things that were done.

Thus the Fathers in this Council said, Christ's Body is Laid forth upon
the Communion Table, that is, not unto our bodily Eyes, or senses, but unto the
eyes of our Faith: I mean, by way of a Mystery, or Sacrament: but not
verily, or in deed. In this sense S. Augustine says unto the people, Vos
estis in Mensa: De Con. Did. 2. Quia passus.
Vos estis in Calice: You are laid upon the Table: you are in the Cup. As
the people is laid upon the Table, so is Christ's Body laid upon the Table:
And as the People is in the Cup, so is Christ's Blood in the Cup. The
people is there by way of a Mystery: even so is Christ's Body and Blood
there by way of a Mystery, and none otherwise. Thus M. Hardinge, we
withdraw not the people of God, as ye untruly say, from Christ's Body to a
piece of Bread: But rather we lead them, as the Ancient Fathers ever did,
from the Creature of Bread, to the Beholdinge, Receiuinge, and Eatinge of
Christ's very Body, and Blood.

In what sort, and sense Christ is now Vnbloudily Sacrificed by the Priest,
for shortness sake, Arti. 17. Diui. 14
gentle Reader, I must refer thee unto my Former Reply to M. Hardinge.

How the Holy Mysteries be pledges of our Resurrection, it has partly been
said before, and partly shall be said hereafter more at large.

How we may receive the Body of Christ in deed, and verily, without either
Transubstantiation, or Real Presence, I have both touched before in this
Treaty, and also in my Former Reply. Artic. 4. Diui. 8.
Certainly S. Augustine says, The Receiuinge of Christ's Body in deed, and
the Receiuinge of the Sacrament, are sundry things. Thus he writes,
Ostendit Christus, quid sit, non Sacramentotenus, sed re vera Corpus Christi
Manducare, August. De Ciuit. Li. 21. Ca. 21.
and eius Sanguinem Bibere: Christ shows, what it is, to Eat his Body, and
to Drink his Blood, not by way of Sacrament, but verily, and in deed. For
the Eatinge of the Sacrament with Mouth, and Toothe, is not the very True
Eatinge of Christ's Body: but a token, or Mystery of the same. S. Augustine
says, Qui Manducat Intus, non Foris: qui Manducat in Cord, Augustine. in
Johan. Tractat. 26.
non qui premit Dente: He that Eats Within, not he that Eats Without: He
that Eats (Christ's Body) in his Heart, not he yt bruseth (the Sacrament)
with his Toothe. Who so by Faith receives the Body of Christ, receives it
Substantially, Really, Verily, and in deed: and dwells in Christ, and
Christ in him. Thus is Christ's Body received, as these Holy Fathers say, not
to the fillinge, or contentation of the Body, but unto the Holiness, and
Sanctification of the mind.

Thus ye comme within us, M. Hardinge, as ye say: and clospe with us: and
overthrow us by Learning: and wringe our weapon out of our hands: and with
the other end thereof ye strike us down. Thraso in Lunucho.
Me thinks, I hear one say, Denique metuebant Omnes iam me: If some Gnato
stood by you, I trow, we should have a pretty play. But insensible men
are we, that feel none of these deadly blows. I will answer you, as S.
Augustine sometime answered Pascentius the Arian Heretic, Facile est, vt
quisque Augustinum vincat: August. ad Pascent. Epist. 174.
videris, vtrum Veritate, an Clamore: It is an easy matter to overcome
Augustine: But see you whether it be by Truth, or by noise of words. And
again, Non bonum Homini est Hominem vincere: Sed bonum est homini, vt cum
Veritas vincat volentem: quia malum est Homini, vt eum Veritas vincat muitum.
Nam ipsa vincat necesse est, five negantem, sieve confitentem: It is not good
for a man, to conquer a man: but it is good for a man, that the Truth may
conquer him with his good vvil. For it is il for a man, that the Truth
should conquer him against his will. But whether he will, or will not, the
Truth must needs Conquer him.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 5.
And, as Chrysostom very aptely writes, we say, that the Body of Christ is
the Dead Carkesse, and we our selves must be the Egles: meaning thereby,
that we must fly on high, if we will come to the Body of Christ. For this
Table, as Chrysostom says, is a Table of Egles, and not of Iaies. Cyprian
also: This Bread, says he, is the food of the Soul, and not the meat of
the Belly.

M. Hardinge.
In deed Chrysostom says, as ye report But Sirs, what mean ye? To Eat
the Body of Christ, which is the dead Carcas, in respect of his death (for
unless he had fallen, we had not risen again) must we so be Egles, as we use
no office of man's Body to this kind of Eatinge? Must we fly so hie, as we
look not to find this Body in Earth? Can we not Eat this Body, except we
fly up to Heaven? In. 1. Corin. Cap. 10. H^mil. 24.
Can we not come by it, but there? Can we not Eat him, but there? Yes
forsoothe. O Earthly Divinity: Then have you little to do in Heaven.
We need not go out of the Earth for the matter. For Chrysostom him self
in the same Homily. from whence ye fetch this, What Egles must we be, and
how hie must we fly to come to the Eatinge of Christ's Body.
says, that whiles we be in this life, this Mystery is cause, that the Not
by pullinge Christ down to us: but by liftinge up our Hearts to him.
Earth to us is become Heaven. He that desires to know, what Egles we must
be, and how hie we must fly to come to the Eatinge of this Body woorthely,
let Chrysostom even there expound Chrysostom. He names Egles (says he) to
show, that he must get him up on high, that comes to this Body, and that
he must have nothing to do with the Earth, neither be drawn downewarde to
base things, and creape, but always fly upward, and behold the Sun of
righteousness, etc. Will ye yet hear him more plainly declare, what he
means by this high Egles flight? Wipe away (says he) all filthe from thy
Soul, prepare thy mind to receive these Mysteries. If the Kings Child
arraied in purple and Diadem were delivered unto thee to bear, would thou
not cast down on the ground all that thou hold, What is meante by the
hie Egles Flight. Chrysostom acknovvlegeth Christ's very Body Present in the
Sacrament.
and receive him? But now, when thou receiuest not the Kings Child, With
thy Faith, not with thy Mouth.
but the only begotten Son of God, tell me, I pray thee, art not afraid?
And do not cast away all love of worldly things, and garnishe thy self
with him only, but do thou yet look down on the Earth, art thou yet in
love of thy money? art thou yet given to the Earth? If it be so, what
forgiveness, what excuse shalt thou find? This spiritual flyinge up
requires Chrysostom: and yet in that Homily he declares Untruth. For
Chrysostom speaks only of the Presence of Grace: of this gross and
fleashly Presence, he says nothing.
the Body of Christ to be present here in Earth, meaning in this Holy
Sacrament, yea that very Body, which was Nailed, Beaten, which was not
overcome by Death, which the Son saying Crucified, turned away his
beams, for which the veil of the Temple was rent asunder, stones and all
the Earth quaked, the Body that was made all Bloody, To Receive, or Bear
Christ.
and being thruste in with a spear, powered forth Fountains of Blood and
Water to all the world healthful. Thus ye see, how far Chrysostom is
from your strange Doctri^e, concerning the very and Untruth. For Chrysostom
not once names Real Presence. Read the Answer.
Real presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament of the Altar. Of which
Altar, and of the Sacrifice of that Body made and offered by the Priests, and
of the Adoration due thereto, in that Homily he speaks most plainly: That
to prove your purpose, ye must seek for an other Homily, which ye are
never like to find: for Chrysostom serves not your turn. As neither
Cyprian, whom ye allege, and against whom, God knows. Verily we confess
with Holy Cyprian, Cyprian al^^aged by the Defen^^^^ to no ^^^pole.
and the Fathers of the Nicene Council, that the Body of Christ, which we
receive in the blessed Sacrament, is the food of the Soul, and not common
meat to fille the panche. And therefore of the outward Forms we take but
little, Untruth. For the Nicene Cosicel makes no mention of any such Fourmes.
And, being but idle Fourmes, and Shows, how are they ^ Spiritual food, or
how can they serve to make you Holy:
according to the Nicene Decree, acknowledginge, that spiritual food to serve
to Sanctimonie, not to Sacietie. Lastely ye bring for you S. Augustine in
these words.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge casts his colors, to shadow that thing, that will not be
hid. Whereas Chrysostom says, Thou receiuest not the Kings child, but
the only begotten Son of God, he so racketh, and presses these words, as
if the Fathers in their writings had never used any kind of Figure: and as if
we were bound under pain of damnation, to receive what sentence so ever they
have spoken, according to the very rigor, and extremity of the Letter.

But the better to disclose the sensible grossness of this error, I trust,
Gentle Reader, it shall not be neither paineful, nor unprofitable for thee, to
consider a few other such examples, and phrases of speech, commonly, and
familiarely used by the Catholic Learned Fathers to like purpose. Therefore,
as Chrysostom says, we receive in the Holy Mysteries the Only begotten
Son of God, meaning by Faith Only, not by Mouth, even so he writes of
the Sacrament of Baptism, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Colossen. Homil. 10.
Si quis tibi Purpuram, aut Diadema dedisset, nonne prae quouis auro
accepisses? Ego vero tibi non Ornatum Regium tribuam, sed ipsum Regem induendum
exhibeo. Et quomodo, inquies, Christum poterit quis induere? Audi, quid Paulus
dicat: Quotquot in Christum Baptizati estis, Christum industis: If any man had
geeuen thee a Princely Robe, or a Crown, would thou not set more by it,
then by any Gold? But I will geeue thee, not a Princely Robe, but the Prince him
self, to put upon thee. Thou will say, how may a man put on Christ upon
him? Hear, what S. Paul says: As many of you, as are Baptized in Christ,
have put on Christ. S. Cyril says, Discant omnes, Cyrill in Johan. LIb. 2.
Cap. 36.
ne, antequam firmiores sint Catechumeni, Christum eis, antequam oporteat,
Baptismi Mysterio commendent^: Let al men take heed, that they deliver not
Christ, in the Sacrament of Baptism, unto the Beginners, or Nouices, before
they be strong in the Faith, and before it be convenient.

S. Augustine says, August. in Apocalyp. Homil. 11. Chrysostom. De Sacerdot.
Lib. 3.
Sancti Christum accipiunt in Manu, and in Front: Holy men receive Christ
both in their Hand, and in their Foreheade. S. Chrysostom says, Adest
Sacerdos, non Ignem gestans, sed Spiritum Sanctum: The Priest is present,
Bearinge, not Fire, but the Holy Ghost.

S. Ambrose says, Ambros. De Iosepho Patriarcha.
Portant in Typo Christi munera: portaturi in Euangelio munerum Largitorem:
They carry Christ's gifts in a Figure: In the Gospel they shall carry (
Christ him self) the geuer of the gifts. And again, Mortem non timebis, si
geras Christum: Ambros. De Puga Saeculi, Ca. 9. Athan. Oration. Prima Contra
Arianos.
Thou shall not fear Death, if thou bear Christ.

Athanasius says, Apud nos seruatur Puerulus ille, quem Herodes interficere
saiagebat: The same Child is keapte amongst us, whom Herod labored so
earnestly to destroy. S. Chrysostom says, Ciedo Apostolo Paulo, Christum in
se loquentem circum ferenti: I believe the Apostle P^ule, carrieinge Christ
about speakinge within him. Chrysostom. in. 2. Timoth. homi. 2.


S. Augustine says, Concionatores tradunt Christum Discentibus: The Preachers
deliver Christ unto their Learners. To Receive, or Bear Christ.
S. Cyril says, Verum Manna Christus erat: qui per Figuram Mannae Priscis
illis a Deo dabatur: Christ was the very True Manna: August. De Doctrina
Christiana, Lib. 4. Ca. 16. Cyrillus, in Euang. Johan Lib. 3. Cap. 34. Historia
Longobardica, Legenda. 59.
whom under the Figure of Manna God gave unto the Fathers of the Old
Testamente. It is written in M. Hardinges own Legende, Christophorus portauit
Christum in Humeris, and in Ore per Confessionem: Christopher bare Christ on
his shoulders: and he bare Christ in his Mouth by his Confession.

An other of his Doctors says, Christus venditus fuit in Iosepho: Ligatus in
Sampsono: Suspensus in Botro, and in Serpente Aeneo: Crucifixus in Isaaco:
Christ was sold in Iosephe: He was bound in Sampson: He was Hanged up in
the Cluster of Grapes, and in the Brazen Serpente: and he was Crucified in
Isaac.

Chrysostom says, Fortalitium Fidei, Lib. 1.
Quocunque quis peruenerit, Paulum videbit vbique in omnium Ore circumferri:
Whither so ever a man comme, he shall see Paul carried about every where,
Chrysostom. ad Populam Antiochen. Homil. 16.
in the Mouth of every man. And to end this long rehearsal, S. Augustine
says, Detractor Diabolum portat in Lingua: The Sclaunderer carries the Devil
upon his tongue.

I doubt not, August. De Salutaribus Documentis. Cap. 26.
but M. Hardinge will better bethink him self, and not require us, to take al
these saieinges, without any manner of favorable exposition, barely, and
nakedly, as they lie. Otherwise he must needs encombre him self with a
great number of inconveniences.

Of these phrases, and manners of speech, S. Augustine geeueth his judgment
in this sort: August. De Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 18. Cap. 48.
Omnia Significantia videntur quodammodo earum rerum, quas Significant,
sustinere personas: Al Signs, or Tokens seem in a manner to bear the
persons of the things them self, that they Signify. As for example he
says, Sicut dictum est ab Apostolo, Petra erat Christus: quoniam Petra illa,
de qua hoc dictum est, Significabat Christum: So the Apostle says, The Rock
was Christ: For that the Rock, whereof it was spoken, Signified Christ.

Likewise Athanasius says, Athana. Oration. Contra Sabellij Gregales.
Qui Regis Imaginem videt, Regem videt: and dicit, En tibi Regem. Neque tamen
duos Reges constituit: neque Imaginem particulam esse Regis, neque Regem
particulam Imaginis esse iudicat: He, that sees the Image of a King, sees
the King: and says, Behold, there is the King. And yet ( so saieinge) he
makes not two Kings: Nor thinks he, either that the Image is a parcel of
the King, or that the King is parcel of the Image.

S. Gregory in plainer wise says thus, Gregor. in Job. Lib. 29. Cap. 16.
Eundem Agnum Johannes ostendendo, Esaias praeuidendo, Abel offerndo loquutus
est. Et quem Johannes in ostensione, quem Esaias in loquutione, Hunc Abel
Significando in Manibus tenuit: John the Baptiste by pointinge with his finger,
Esaias by foreseeinge, Abel by offeringe, spoke al three of One Lamb. And Abel
by Singnifieinge, held the same Christ in his hands, whom John held by
pointinge, and whom Esaias held by Prophesieinge. Gregor. in. 1. Regum, Ca. 2.
Li. 2.
Again he says, Intus ad Christum respicit, quem per considerationem portat
in Cord: In wardely he beholds Christ, whom by Meditation he Bears in his
Heart.

Such Amplifications, and vehemente, and extraordinary speeches,
notwithstanding in some cases they may be dangerous, yet oftentimes they
seem necessary, the better to quicken the dullness, and negligence of the
people. And therefore Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. De Sacerdot. Lib. 3.
Behold, The Lamb of God is slain: The Blood even now is drawn from his
side: and the whole people is colored, and made rid and Bloody with the
same: Not for that it was so in deed: but to lift up, and to withdraw the
Hearts of the people, from the outward Corruptible Creatures of the Bread,
and Wine, to a Spiritual, and Mystical understanding, that is to say, to the
Eatinge, and Drinkinge of the very Body, and Blood of Christ. And to that
end he says, Aquilas appellat, vt ostendat, ad alta eum oportere contendere,
qui ad hoc Corpus accedit: He calls us Egles, to show, that he must mount
on high, and flee alofte, who so will approach near to that Body. Likewise he
says, Chrysostom. in. 1. Corin. Homil. 24. Chrysostom. Ad Popul. Antiochen.
Homil. 61. Hieronym. ad Hedibiam. August. Quaest. Euangelicar. Lib. 1. Cap. 42.
In Coelum, vocat nos, ad Magni Regis Mensam: Christ calls us up into
Heaven, unto the Table of the great King. And again, illum Sursum sedentem
hic degustamus: We being here beneath, taste him sittinge in Heaven above. So
says S. Hierome, Ascendamus cum Domino in Coenaculum Magnum, stratum, atque
mundatum: and accipiamus ab eo Sursum Calicem Noui Testamenti: Let us Ascend
up with our Lord into that great Dininge Chamber adourned, and made clean:
and there above let us receive of him the Cup of the New Testamente.

So says S. Augustine, Vbi fuerit Corpus, illuc Congregabuntur Aquilae, id
est, in Coelum: Illuc Congregabuntur Aquilae: dictum est de Spiritualibus, qui
eius Passionem, Humilitatemque imitando, tanquam de eius Corpore saturantur:
Where as the Carkesse shall be, thither shall the Egles resort together: that is
to say, Into Heaven: Thither shall the Egles resort together: This is spoken
of the Spiritual Faitheful men, that folowinge his Passion, and Humility, be
filled, as it were, with his Body.

So says Leo, De Con. Did. 2 In quibus.
Circa hoc Corpus Aquilae sunt, quae alis circumuolant Spiritualibus: About
this Body there are Egles, that flee about with Spiritual vvhinges.

Thus are the Faitheful made Egles: Thus is the Earth become Heaven: Not for
that Christ's Body is pulled down, as M. Hardinge imagines, but for y^ our
minds, and affections be lifted up. For so Chrysostom him self expounds
his own meaning: Chrysostom. in Homil. De Pentecoste.
Hodie nobis Terra facta est Coelum, non stellis de Coelo in Terram
descendentibus, sed Apostolis ad Coelum Ascendentibus. Quia effusa est Copiosa
Gratia Spiritus Sancti, and vniuersum Orbem operata est Coelum: non immutans
Naturam, sed voluntatem emendans: This day the Earth is made Heaven: not by
the Stars coming down upon the Earth: but by the goeinge up of the
Apostles into Heaven. For the abundante Grace of the Holy Ghost is powered out,
and has turned the whole World into Heaven: not by changinge of Nature, but
by correctinge the vvil of Man. Chrysostom. Ad Hebraeos, Homil. 16.
Likewise again he says, Apostoli in Terra constituti, in Coelo
conuersabantur. Et quid dico, in Coelo? Altiores erant Coelo: etiam al^o Coelo:
Et ad ipsum Dominum peruenerunt: The Apostles dwellinge in the Earth, had
their conversation in Heaven. But what say I, In Heaven? They were higher then
Heaven: yea then the Second Heaven: and came even unto the Lord him self.
Again he says, Chrysostom. De Foenit^n. Homil. 6. Chrysostom. in 1. Corinthians.
Homil. 24.
David Terram in Coelum vertit: and Homines facit Angelos: David turns the
Earth into Heaven: and of Men he makes Angels. Again he says in this
self same place by M. Hardinge alleged; Vt Terra nobis Coelum sit, facit hoc
Mysterium. Ascend igitur ad Coeli Portas, and diligenter attend: Imo non
Coeli, sed Coeli Coelorum: and tunc, quod dicimus, intueberis: This Mystery
couseth, that unto us the Earth is Heaven. Ascend up therefore unto the Gates
of Heaven: and mark diligently. Naie, I say not, Unto the Gates of Heaven:
but, Unto the Gates of the Heaven of Heavens. And so shall thou see the
things, that I tell thee.

Now judge thou, good Christian Reader, how true it is, and how agreeable
with S. Chrysostomes Doctrine, that M. Hardinge says, Must we flee so
high, that we look not to find this Body in Earth? Can we not Eat this
Body, except we flee up into Heaven? Can we not comme by it, but there? Can
we not Eat him, but there? Yes forsoothe: We need not go out of the
Earth for the matter.

Verily, Chrysostom, when he says, We receive the Son of God, makes
mention, neither of Transubstantiation, nor of Real, and Fleashely Presence,
nor of Eatinge with Mouth, or Teethe: But only sends us to the force, and
woorkinge of Faith, To touch, to Hold Christ.
and Sprite: whereby only, and by no way else, we receive and Eat in deed,
and Verily the Body of Christ.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 6.
And S. Augustine says, How shall I hold him, being Absent? How shall I
reach my hand up to Heaven, In Johan. Tracta. 50.
to lay hold upon him sittinge there? He answeareth, Reach thither thy
Faith, and then thou haste laid hold on him.

M. Hardinge.
Upon these words of S. John, Johan. 1^.
The Bishops and Phariseis gave Commandment, that if any knew, where Jesus
were, he should show it, that they might apprehende him, S. Augustine
expoundinge the same, in a contrary sense, says: Let us now show the Jews,
where Christ is: would God they would hear, S. Augustine speaks not of
receiuinge Christ in the Sacrament, but by Faith only.
and lay hold on him. Where he speaks not of receiuinge Christ, so as we
receive him in the Sacrament, And by Faith Only we receive Christ in the
Sacrament.
but of receiuinge him by Faith Only. And there he wishes and exhorts the
Jews to come to the Faith, and teaches them how they may profitably lay
hold on Christ, whom their Forefathers laid hold on with violent hands to
their damnation. Let them come to the Church (says he) let them hear, where
Christ is, and lay hold on him. After certain words, he makes this
objection to him self: Well, the Jew answers me, how shall I hold him,
that is Absent? How shall I reach up my hand to Heaven, that I may lay
hold on him, which sits there? Reach thither thy Faith (says
Augustine) and then thou haste laid hold on him. Then follows in the same
line that, which plainly declares all this to be meante of layinge hold of
Christ by Faith, He speaks not of the receiuinge of the Sacrament: but he
speaks of the receiuinge of the Very Body of Christ: which is wrought only
by Faith.
not by receiuinge the Communion. Parents tui tenuerunt carne, tu tene cord.
Thy Forefathers (thou Jew) took hold on Christ in Fleashe: take thou hold
on him in thy Heart. There he shows how Christ may be holden, though
concerning the visible and sensible presence of his Body, he be in Heaven at
the Right hand of the Father. All this, and what so ever is said there, upon
the Text before recited, implies not so much as any color of argument
against the Truth of Christ's very Body in this most Blessed Sacrament. And
thus all your allegations and reasons concerning this matter besufficiently
answered.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is true, that M. Hardinge says, S. Augustine in this place speaks
nothing of purpose and specially of the Sacrament. Certainly it had benne
great vanity for him, to will his Hearers, to seek for the Sacrament in
Heaven above. But he speaks of the embracinge, and holdinge the very Body of
Christ, being now in Heaven. Which thing is wrought only by Faith, and
none otherwise: Whether it be in the Sacrament, or without the Sacrament.
Infinite sentences have benne uttered by the Holy Fathers to like purpose.

S. August. Aduersus Iudaeos. ca. 9.
Augustine says, Accedite ad eum, and illuminamini: Quid est, Accedite, nisi,
Credit? Comme unto him, and receive the Light: What is, Comme unto him, but,
Believe in him? Again, Ambulando non laborabitis: Ibi enim Acceditis, vbi
Creditis: Your walkinge shall not be paineful to you: For there ye Comme to him,
where ye Believe in him. Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 48 Augustine. in Johan.
Tracta. 121. August. De Natura and Gra. Ca 69.
Again he says, Exijt de Manibus eorum: Non enim apprehendere eum potuerunt,
quia Manus Fidei non habuerunt: Christ departed out of their hands. For they
could not lay hold on him, because they had not the Hands of Faith.
Again, Christus non recte tangitur: id est, non recte in eum Creditur: Christ
is not well touched: that is to say, Christ is not well Believed. Likewise
again he says, Sunt in Cord Spirituales Manus: There be certain Spiritual
Hands in the Heart. And therefore S. Ambrose says, Stephanus in Terris
positus, Christum tangit in Coelo: Ambrosius Sermon. 98.
Steuin being in the Earth, ( by Faith) touches Christ being in Heaven.

But as S. Faith receives, etc.
Augustine so often says, we Embrace, and Hold Christ by Faith: so is not
M. Hardinge able to show, that he ever once said, We Hold Christ with
Mouth, or Teethe, or receive him down into Our Bellies. And therefore S.
Ambrosius in Lucam. Lib. 10. Cap. 24.
Ambrose says, Non Corporali tactu Christum, sed Fide Tangimus: We touch
not Christ by Bodily touching: but we touch him by Faith. And again,
Fide Christus Tangitur: Fide Christus videtur. Non Corpore Tangitur: non Oculis
comprehenditur: Ambrosius in Lucam, Lib. 6. Cap. 8.
By Faith Christ is touched: By Faith Christ is seen. He is not touched
with our Bodies: He is not holden with our Eyes. Likewise S. Augustine says,
Dominus consolatur nos, qui ipsum iam in Coelo sedentem Manu contrectare non
possumus: August. in Epist. Johan. Tracta. 1.
Sed Fide contingere (possumus). The Lord Comfort us, that cannot now
Touch him with Hand, sittinge in Heaven: (...) by Faith we may touch
him.

Now, for as mutche as M. Hardinge says, S. Augustine in this place makes
no mention of the receiuinge of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, it shall not be
from the purpose to consider, what he has written otherwheres, touching the
same. Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 7.
Thus he says, Christus est Cibus noster, quo nihil dulcius: Sed si quis
habeat Palatum sanum in Cord: Christ him self is our Meat, then which
there is nothing more sauerie: so that a man have a sound taste in his Heart.
Again he says, Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 26.
Dominus dixit se Panem, qui de Coelo descendit, hortans vt Credamus in eum.
Credere enim in eum, hoc est Manducare Panem viuum. Qui Credit in eum,
Manducat: Inuisibiliter Saginatur, quia Inuisibiliter renascitur. Infans Intus
est: Nouus Intus est: vbi nouellatur, ibi satiatur: Our Lord called him self
the Bread, that came from Heaven, exhortinge us to Believe in him. For to
Believe in him, that is to Eat the Bread of Life. He Eats, that Believes in
him. He is fed Inuisibly, because he is new borne Inuisibly. In wardely he
is an Infant: Inwardely he is New. Where he is renewed, there is he filled.

So says Eusebius Emissenus, De Con. Did. 2. Quia Corpus.
as he is alleged by Gratian: Cum ad Reuerendum Altar Coelestibus Cibis
satiandus accedis, Sacrum Dei tui Corpus, and Sanguinem respice, Honora,
Mirare: Mente Continge: Cordis Manu Suscipe: and maxim haustu Interiori
assume: When thou come unto the Reverend Aultare, ( or Communion Table) to
be Fed with the Heavenly Meats, behold the Holy Body, and Blood of thy
God: Honor it: Wonder at it: Touch it ( not with thy Bodily Mouth, but)
with thy Mind: Receive it ( not with thy Bodily Hand, but) with the Hand
of thy Heart: and specially take it with thy Inner taste.

Therefore S. August. Feria. 2. Paschatis.
Augustine says, Quisquis cum Fide, and timore Verbum Dei audis, consolatur
te Fractio Panis. Absentia Domini non est Absens. Habeto Fidem: and tecum est,
quem non vides. Ideo Dominus absentauit se Corpore ab omni Ecclesia, and
Ascendit in Coelum, vt Fides aedificetur: Who so ever thou be, that with
Faith, and Fear hear ye Word of God, the Breakinge of Bread doothe
Comfort thee. The Absence of our Lord is not Absente. Have thou Faith: and
he, whom thou see not, is with thee: Therefore our Lord, as touching his
Body, has Absented him self from al his Church, and is Ascended into Heaven,
that our Faith may be edified.

And in this self same place, that M. Hardinge says, makes so little for our
purpose, he says thus: Quomodo tenebo Absentem? Quomodo in Coelum manum
mittam, Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 50.
vt ibi sendentem teneam? Fidem mitte: and Tenuisti. Parents tui tenuerunt
Carne: Tu tene Cord. Quoniam Christus Absens, etiam praesens est. Nisi
Praesens esset, a nobis ipsis teneri non posset. Sed, quoniam verum est, quod
ait, Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque ad Consummationem Saeculi, and abijt, and hic
est: Et redijt, and nos non deseruit. Corpus enim suum intulit Coelo:
Maiestatem autem non abstulit Mundo: How shall I hold Christ, being Absent?
How shall I thruste my hand into Heaven, that I may hold him Sittinge there?
Send up thy Faith: and thou hold him. Thy Fathers ( the Jews) held him
in Fleashe: Hold him thou in thy Heart. For Christ being Absente, is also
Present. Unless he were Present, we could not hold him. But, for as
mutche as it is true, that he says, Behold, I am with you until the end of
the world, Therefore he is gonne, and yet is here. He is comme again, and
has not forsaken us. For he has auanced his Body into Heaven: but he has not
vvithdravven his Majesty from the World.

Al these things well considered, whereas M. Hardinge in the end concludes
with these words: Thus al your Allegations, and Reasons, concerning this
matter, be sufficiently answered, I doubt not, but his discrete, and
indifferent Reader will think, He crewe long, before it was day.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 1.
Neither can we away in our Churches with these Shows, and sales, and
markettes of Masses, nor with the carrieinge about, and woorshippinge of the
Bread: nor with such other Idolatrous, and Blasphemous fondness: which
none of them can prove, that Christ or his Apostles ever ordained, or leafte
unto us. And we justly blame the Bishops of Rome, who without the Word of
God, without the Authority of the Holy Fathers, without any example of
Antiquity, In Ceremoniario Roma. Eccles.
after a New guise, do not only set before the People the Sacramental Bread
to be woorshipped as God, but do also carry the same about upon an amblinge
Palfraie, whither so ever them selves journey: in such sort, as in old
times the Persians fire, and the Relics of the Goddess Isis were solemnly
carried about in Procession: and have brought the Sacraments of Christ to be
used now as a stage play, and a solemn sight: to the end, that Men's eyes
should be fed with nothing else but with mad gasinges, and foolish gaudes,
in the self same matter, wherein the Death of Christ ought diligently to be
beaten into our Hearts, and wherein also the Mysteries of our Redemption ought
with all Holiness, and reverence to be executed.

M. Hardinge.
The things, which it likes your Sathanical Sprite with blasphemous words
to Untruth For we honor the Holy Mysteries: and you profanely dishonor
them.
dishonor, and bring in contempt, are such, as neither your praises can make
more praise worthy, nor your vpbraidinges any whit of less estimation. If any
by the stinkinge breath of your vile words be puffed away into your damned
side, Matthew. ^. Luc. 3. A Priest may justly enjoy his necessary living for
seruinge at thaulter, and for saying Mass. We know no VVoorshippers of
Bread.
who so ever they be, they show them selves to have benne light chafe, not
sound wheat. Yet for good folks sake, that I may leave your vile eloquence
to your selves, and answer the matter by you railed at, and belied, and other
wise not disproued: I pray you, good Sirs, the Untruth. For, as it is now
used, there is no viler dishonor, nor greatter Bla^phemie.
Mass being the highest and most Honorable Service, that is done to God in
his Church (which other where is being already proved, I treat not of in this
place), why should not a Priest, by whom only it is, and may be done,
Untruth. For Christ never called his Disciples, or sent them abroad, to
say Mass.
being called to that vocation, and state of life, have reward, and living
for it? Rail against the Mass, and Priests seruinge at the Altar of God
until your tongues burn in your head in Hell Fire: We tell you, Priests of
the Catholic Church sell Alas, they have it not. Otherwise for moonie it
should away.
not the Fruit and Merit of Christ's Blood offered in the Mass, but only
for their ministry and labor require necessary sustenance of Life.

But for your Defense, ye confess that ye cannot away with the carryinge
about and woorshippinge of Bread. No more cannot we. To whose charge lay ye
this? Be there any such Idolaters now, that woorship Bread? They would be
known. God forebid, there should be water in the Sea.
God forbid we should suffer Idolaters to live amongst us. Soothely in the
Catholic Church we know none. If ye cannot away with the Honor which
Untruths, and most fond, and blasphemous folies.
all devout Christen people do to the blessed Sacrament, (we mean to
Christ's Body, and Christ him self present in Substance under the Form of
Bread) then can not we take you for Christians. Mock, scoff, ieste, and
rail at us with the Jews, we dare not, but Honor our Lord Christ, where so
ever our Faith finds him verily and in Substance present.

If through fervent zeal (as sometimes it happens) abuses in certain places
have crepte in, no good Catholic man Yet not one of your Catholic Prelates
ame^deth them.
defends them. Mary we know all is not to be abrogated that misliketh your
corrupt taste. Untruth, fond and Heathenishe. For God him self says, in
vain they woorship me. etc.
And much is right Holy Devotion pleasant in the sight of God, and therefore
allowed in the Church, which your hot sprite calls Idolatrous, and
blasphemous fondness. And though the Ceremony and manner, whereby such
devotion is showed, cannot be proved by ordinance of Christ or of the
Apostles expressed in Scripture, yet Christen people doubt not but God
accepts their good hearts.

The Bishop of Rome ye blame unjustly, I might say also proudely. For
procuringe Untruths four together. For he dishonors Christ. He has
neither Gods word, nor the Authority of all the Fathers, nor the examples
of Antiquity.
Honor and worship to Christ in the Blessed Sacrament, he has the * word
of God, * the authority of al Holy Fathers, and the * examples of antiquity,
as Note, that in the same one little Article, M. Hardinge has sent us twelve
great Untruths.
I have at large proved in my answer to your companion Master Iuel his eight
negative Article. But the amblinge Horse offends you. Why be ye not also
offended with the Ass and her fool, that bare the Untruth. For this is only
the Sacrament of that same Body.
same Body at Jerusalem, which the Horse bears at Rome: Then Visible and
weighty, now Invisible, and of no weight? That was done in Pomp to the
honor of Christ, and so is this. Ye say this is done after a new guise. So
then was that. Neither is it true which ye say, that the Bishops of Rome
do carry about with them the Sacrament whither so ever they journey. Do the
M. Hardinge scoff at these games, or speaks he in earnest?
Ye might have learned in that Book, our of which ye allege that matter to
scoff at, Lib. Ceremoniarum Ecclesiae To. Sectione. 12. Ca. 1. Baldachinu^.
that such a solemnity is used specially, when the Pope rides in
Pontificalibus. Then (as the Book tells) a white Palfrey trapped, gentill,
and faier, with a clear soundinge bell hanginge at his neck, is lead, which
carries the Monstrance, or Pixe with the most Holy Body of Christ, over the
which noble Citizens shall bear a Canopie. Thus the Book of Ceremonies.

Why should a wise man speak so fondely? Read the Answer.
And I pray you, what evil is this? If it be good to carry about that most
holy Body, by which as Christ once redeemed us, so by the same deuotely
honored of faithefull people, and carried abroad and brought to certain
places, has in old times (as yet also does continually) to the great
comfort and help of sundry persons being in distress, wrought miraculousely
healthful remedies: If the Israelites found healpe at Gods hand by They did
it against Gods vvil: and spedde thereafter. Read the Answer.
bringinge the Arc into the field with them, as they marched forewarde
against the Philistians: 1. Reg. 4. 1. Reg. 5.
if the Philistians cried out for fear when they perceived the Arc to be in
the Israelites army, and said, Venit Deus in Castra. Vae nobis. God is come
into their Tents. Alas we are undone, etc.

And concerning the order of the Ceremony, whereas Grave Considerations.
the people be desirous to behold the Body of their Redeemer with their Faith
by their carnal ete directed to the Form of Bread, In the order of this
Ceremony nothing appears to a Christen man unseemly or unreasonable.
no man is able to hold up on hie the Sacrament, so as convenient it were to
be done both to satisfy their Devotion, and to mainetaine their Faith: for
the Pope him self commonly is an aged man, and therefore over weak A Horse
supplieth the Pope^ es^ice.
for that Service, specially arraied in Pontificalibus, as in such solemnities
he is. Again the instrument that serves for that purpose is so great and
weighty (for so it apperteineth to the honor of Christ,) the way so long,
the air for the more part there so hot: as no other man is well able for
lack of strength to bear it so as meet it is to be borne. In this case why
may not a Horse be put to that service, to supply that which by natural
weakness fails in man? Wherein he serves not, as one that bears a male,
but as the Ass that bare Christ, as the Kine that drew the Arc.

Neither ought the custom of bearinge the most Holy Body of Christ, The
custom of carryinge the Sacrament, where the Pope goes, is neither Nevve nor
Strange.
where the Pope goes, seem New and Strange. For we Read in the life of the
Blessed Martyr Steven the first, who was Pope of Rome above thirtene hundred
years past, that Tharsitius the Deacon (who at length also suffered death for
Christ) bare our Lords Body, at what time he attended upon the Blessed Man
Pope Steven, as he went to his Martyrdom. Who desires to see this described
at large, the same may he find in ( that Great fond Fabulare) Simeon
Metaphrasies a Greek writer, well approved, and highly esteemed in the Greek
Church, In vita Stephani Primi.

For witness whereof we have S. Sale of Masses.
Ambrose, who describes how certain faithful persons carried It was a great
abuse of the Sacrament: and yet without either Pyxe, or Pomp: And therefore
was afterward utterly taken away throughout the whole Church of God.
this blessed Sacrament with them, In Oratione funebri in Satyrum Fratrem.
Innocent. 3. De Mysterijs Missae. Lib. 6.
when they went to the Sea, of whom his Brother Satyrus obtained the same in
a Shipwreck, and by help thereof, hanginge it in a stole about his neck,
seekinge for none other succoure, cast him self into the Sea, and
miraculously escaped safe to land. Neither is the same by him done without a
special Mystery, though unknown to the more part. Although, says a
learned Pope, a reason cannot be given of al things, what so ever have benne
brought in ure by our Forefathers: yet I think, quoth he, that therein lie
hidden profounde Mysteries.

I report me now to the secret consciences of good Christen people, whether
the Bishops of Rome use not the Blessed Sacrament reverently and bonorably or
no, This Defender follows Julian, Lucian. Porphyriabus;, Celsus, and such
other wicked Infidels.
but rather If ye had not these games from thence, then tell us, from whence
ye had them.
as the Persians Fire, and the Relics of the Goddess Isis, as a stage Play,
mad gasinges, and foolish Gaudes, as it likes this wicked Chammes brood to
rail. Wherein they follow the sheppes, which Julian the Apostata, Lucian,
Porphyrius, Celsus, and such other Profane Helhoundes have trodden before
them. For after the like manner they railed at the Holy Mysieries of Christen
Religion, namely Celsus, who as Origin writes of him, objected to the
Christians the Sacrifices of Mithra, (which was an Idol that the persians
woorshipped, and called by the name of the Sun) from whence he said they had
taken all their Sacraments, Co^tra Celsum Lib. 6. De Mithra vide Suidam in
dictione.
Rites, and Ceremonies. And right so (as we find in S. Augustine writing
against the Manichees) the Payn^mes found fault with the Christen people for
Most vain untruths. For S. Augustine speaks neither of Honor, nor of
Adoration, nor of Christ's Body, nor of Fourmes.
Honor done to the * Body and Blood of Christ under * Forms of Bread and
Wine, saitinge that they Honored Bacchus and Ceres.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Concerning these Satanical Sprites, and stinkinge breathes, and vile Words,
and such other like flowers of your Eloquence, M. Hardinge, I confess me
self to be far inferior, and never hable to make you answer. It is true,
that ye say, The Woorkeman is worthy of his hiere. 2 Corinthians. 9.
S. Paul says, The Lord has appointed, that who so Preaches the Gospel,
should live by the Gospel. But where did Christ ever say unto you, Go into
all the world, and say Private Mass, and offer me up unto my Father, for
Remission of Sins? What Apostle, what Prophet, what Doctor, what Father
ever taught you so to do? If ye set your self a work without Commission,
and run forth, when noman bids you, then are ye your own men: and of
reason ought to pay your selves.

If your Masses, as you say, were never set to open sale, wherefore then was
this Decree written in the Council of Oxforde, Constitution Othonis Legate inae,
Folio. 143.
Venalitatem Missarum districte inhibemus? We streitly forbid the Sale of
Masses. Think you, that so many wise Fathers would forebidde that thing, ye
never was used? In the late Conference holden at VVoormes, the Bishop of Sidon,
being there present, durst not say, as you dare say, there was no such
unlawful sale, but only said, In Colloquio VVormatien. Con^essis. 5.
It was out of season to talk thereof. His words be these, Quid attinebat
de Missis venalibus, de Mercatu Indulgentiarum, etc. mentionem intempestinam
inducere? What was it to the purpose to speak of the Sellinge of Masses and
Pardonnes, out of season?

The Priests, ye say, of the Catholic Church sell not the fruit, and
Merit of Christ's Blood. No marvel: For they have it not to sell. But if ye
had Christ him self, ye would set him to sale, as other your Fathers have
done before you. Such a one was he, Gregor. Lib. 2. Epist. 33.
of whom S. Gregory writes, Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum Haeretico, accepta
Pecunia, venundedit: He took Money, and sold Jesus Christ our Lord unto an
Heretic. And, when the Bishop of Rome sells his Pardonnes, what other
thing would he seem to sell, but only the Fruits, and Merits of the Blood
of Christ?

Ye say further, God forebidde, we should suffer Idolaters to live amongst
us. And yet your near friends have thought, ye have not benne far from the
mainteinance of Idolatry. Vain Devotion.
Polydorus Vergilius intreatinge of the woorshippinge of Images, says thus,
Polydor. De Inuentorib. Rer. Lib. 6. Cap. 13.
Eo insaniae deuentum est, vt haec pars Pietatis parum differat ab Impietate:
They are so far proceeded in madness, that this part of Holiness is not far
from wickedness. And Ludouicus Viues says, He sees no great difference
bitweene certain Christians Woorshippinge their Images, and the Old Heathens
adouringe their Idolles.

Ye say, The Carrieinge about of the Sacrament is right Holy devotion,
pleasante in the sight of God: and Christian People doubt not, but God
accepts their good Hearts. Even so, no doubt, as when he said sometime unto
the Jews, Esai. 1.
Quis requisiuit ista de manibus vestris? Who required these things at your
hands?

S. August. De Consen. Evangelist. Lib. 1. Cap. 18. August. In quae. ex veteri
Testament. quae. 43. Chrysostom. in Acta, Homil. 49. Gabriel. Lect. 26.
Augustine says, Socratis sententia est, Vnumquenque Deum sic coli oportere,
quomodo se ipse colendum esse praeceperit: The Judgment of Socrates is this,
That every God ought so to be woorshipped, as he him self has commanded.
Again he says, Constat, Fidem stultam non solum minime prodesse, sed etiam
obesse: It is certain, that a foolish Faith, not only does no good, but
also hurts. Chrysostom says, Tales sunt Diabolo vena^di arts: qui
praetextu Pietatis laqueos tegit: Such sleightes of huntinge has the Devil.
Under the Color of Holiness he hides his snares.

But, as touching the solemnitte of carrieinge ye Sacrament, your own Doctor
Gabriel Biel could have told you, Christus no^ dedit Discipulis Sacramentum,
vt ipsum honorifice conseruarent: sed dedit in sui vsum, dicens, Accipite, and
Manducate: Christ gave not the Socramente to his Disciples to the end they
should keep it with Honor: But he gave it to them for their use, saienge to
them, Take, and Eat. Likewise says Humbertus, Citatur a Cassandro in
Liturgijs.
Christus non tantum Benedixit Panem, and reseruauit frangendu^ in crastinum:
nec fregit tantum, and reposuit: sed fractum statim distribuit: Christ did not
only Bless the Bread, and reserve it to be broken the next day: nor did he
only Break it, and lay it up: but being broken straight way he delivered
it.

All this strange solemn Festiual guise Pope Vrbanus the fourth learned, not
of Christ, or Paul, but only by the Revelation of Dame Eua the Ancharesse:
and by her good advise founded the New Feast of Corpus Christi, and caused
the Sacrament to be borne about in Procession.

But the Anciente, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 51.
and worthy Father Chrysostom says, Discamus, Christum ex ipsius voluntate
honorare: Nam qui honoratur, eo maxim honor laetatur, quem ipse vult: non
quem nos optamus: Let us learn to honor Christ after his own vvil. For he
that is honored, deliteth most in that honor, that he him self vvoulde
have: not in that honor, that we can Fa^sie. Notwithstanding, when ye
Sacramental Bread is carried only upon a horse, and the Pope him self is
borne alofte, in a Chair of Gold, upon the shoulders of six, or eight Noble
men, I pray you, whether of them has greatter Honor?

For the rest, The Pope, says M. Hardinge, is and old Man: he rides in his
Pontificalibus: he is laden with Apparel: The Pyxe is weighty: The VVeather is
hoate: there is none other Creature to supply his room: Therefore it is
lately concluded in Louaine in great solemn sadness, that a Horse must be
had in, to play the Popes part, and to carry the Monstrance.

Here, for as mutche as M. Hardinge has purposely made mention of the Popes
ridinge in his Pontificalibus, and the Solemnity, and Pomp thereof is known
to few, it shall not be impertinente, briefly to disclose the order thereof.
Thus therefore it is written in the Ceremoniarie of Rome: Ceremoniar. Section.
12. Cap. 5.
Sic Papa equitat in Pontificalibus in aliquam Ciuitatem. Cardinales descendunt
ex equis, and accedunt reuerenter ad Papam, and osculantur illi pedem.
Episcopus Ciuitatis accedit ad Papam cum debitis reuerentijs, and offers illi
Crucem osculandam: quam Pontifex reuerenter, cum Mitra tamen, osculabitur. Non
enim commode poterit ei abstrahi equiti ab equestribus. Miracles. Si tamen
placuerit and Mitram deponere, non erit inconueniens. Deinde Praelatus incipiat
Antiphonam, Ecce Sacerdos Magnus: Thus the Popes Holiness rides into any
City in his Pontificalibus. The Cardinals light from their Horses, and
comme reverently unto the Pope, and kiss his foot. The Bishop of the City
comes likewise to the Pope with dew reverence, and offers him the Cross
to kiss: which the Pope shall kiss reverently, keepinge on his Miter
notwithstanding. For while be sits on horse back, his horsemenne cannot
very easily take of his Miter, and set it on again. Howbeit, if it shall like
him to put of his Miter, it shall be no great inconvenience. Afterward the
Bishop shall begin this Antheme, Behold the Great Priest. And so he
pricketh forth in his Pontificalibus.

The carrieinge out of the Ark of God into the field in the time of Eli the
High Priest, 1. Regum. 4.
boadeth no very good Argument for the carrieinge of the Sacrament. For at
that time the Army of Israel was overthrown, thertie thousand Soldiers were
slain, and amongst them the two Sons of Eli: The Arc was taken: Eli him
self fell back from his Chair, and brake his neck. Therefore, M. Hardinge,
ye shall have mutche adoo to make good your Procession by this example.

This matter, ye say, has benne proved by sundry Miracles. First, whether
there have benne any such Miracles wrought, or no, it is uncertain. But were
it granted, yet may not your Miracles always stand for good proufes. Your
own Doctor Alexander de Hales says, Alexand. Halen. Part. 4. quae. 53.
Mem. 4. Arti. 3.
Miracula fiunt aliquando humana procuratione: aliquando Diabolica operatione:
Miracles be wrought sometime by the woorkinge, and procurement of men: and
sometime by the conueiance of the Devil. So says Nicolaus Lyra, an other of
your own Doctors, speakinge likewise of your own Miracles: Nicol. Lyra, in
14. Ca. Danielis.
Fit aliquando in Ecclesia maxima deceptio populi in Miraculis fictis a
Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus, propter Lucrum temporale. Et talia
extirpanda sunt a bonis Praelatis, sicut ista extirpata sunt a Daniele: In the
Church (of God) the People is oftentimes mutche deceived by Feined Miracles,
either by the Priests, or by Priests familiars, for Temporal gain. And
such Miracles must be rooted out by good Bishops, as these were rooted out
by Daniel. These words I am the more willinge to rehearse in this place,
Reioinder, Page 9. a. Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 13.
for that it likes you, to carpe, and to pike quarrels at the same in your
Reioinder.

To like purpose S. Augustine says, Contra istos, vt sic loquar,
Mirabiliarios, cautum me fecit Deus meus, dicens, In nouissimis temporibus
exurge^t Pseudopropherae, facientes Signa, and Portenta, vt in errorem
inducant, si fieri potest, etiam Electos. Ecce, Praedixi vobis. Ergo cautos nos
fecit Sponsus: quia and Miraculis decipi non debemus: My God has warned me to
be ware of these Moungers of Miracles, saieinge, In the last days shall rise
up False Prophets, woorkinge Signs, and Woonders, to the end, if it be
possible, to bring the Elect into error. Behold, I have fore warned you.
Therefore the Bridegroom has willed us to beware: For we may not be
deceived, no not by Miracles.

The tales, that ye allege, of Tharsitius, and Satyrus, make nothing, either
for the Adoration of the Sacrament, or else for the Popes Palfraie. Women, and
Children, and Lay men used then to carry home the Sacrament in their
Naptekinnes, Articulo. 1.
and to keep it in forcelettes, as in my Former Reply it is largely showed.
But these were Abuses of the Mystery: and therefore afterward were abolished.

It greeueth you mutche, that we say, The Pope causes, the Sacramental
Bread to be carried before him upon a horse, as the Kings of Persia used in
old times to carry the Fiere, which they called Orimasda, and imagined the
same to be their God. And therefore ye cry out in your Passion, Chammes
brood, Helhoundes, and what so ever might serve you best: even with like
Sobriety, and modesty, The carricinge of the Sacrament.
as they, who sommetime in the like case cried out, Magna Diana Ephesiorum:
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. How be it, other example more agreeable to
resemble your folly, we could find none.

Neither may you justly, Actor. 19.
and truly say, ye have received none of your Orders, and Vsages from the
Heathens. Your own Gloss notes upon the Decrees, Clerici euntes ad Tumulos
mortuorum portabant secum Sacramenta Corporis, De Con. Did. 1. Non oportet, In
Glosa.
and Sanguinis Christi: and super tumulos ea distribuebant. Et haec Consuetudo
facta fuit a Gentibus: The Clerks ( or Priests) goeing to the graves of the
dead, carried with them the Sacraments of the Body, and Blood of Christ:
and made distribution thereof over the graves. And this same Custom was used
among the Heathens. Nicolaus Leonicenus says, Nicola. Leonicenus, In Varia
Historia, Libr. 2. Cap. 21.
Isidis Sacerdotes in Aegypto vteba^tur Lineis vestibus, and semper era^t
deronso capillo: quod etiam per manus traditum ad nostra vsque tempora
peruenisse videtur. Siquidem ij, qui apud nos Diuino Cultui, and Sacris
Altaribus praesident, barbam, comamque nutrire prohibentur: and in Sacris
vtuntur lineis amictibus: The Priests of ye Goddess Isis in Egypt used to
wear linen surplesses, and evermore had their head shaven: Which thing
seems to have benne derived from them unto our time, from hand to hand. For
they, that emonge us Minister Gods Service, and serve the Holy Aultars, are
forebidden to suffer the hear of their head, or their bearde to grow: and
in their Divine service use Linen Garments. Epiphani. Lib. 3. Haeresi. 51. De
Collyridienis, (...). Nazianzen. ad Heronem.
Epiphanius says, that the Heretics called Collyridiani, used to set
forth, and to carry about Bread (no doubt, but the Sacrament) in ye
Honor of ye Blessed Virgin Marie. Nazianzenus seems thus to complain of
sum such unseemly behaueours in his time: Quid referam, says he, (...)?
What shall I speak of the Holy Mysteries turned now into a play, or a Comedy?
For so Claudius Du Saints your own Doctor expounds these words,
Mysteria in comoedias conuersa.

Of the like disorder of the Heathens, Apuleius seems to say, Dicimus Deos
incedere humanis pedibus: We tell you, that our Gods go on men's feet. The
whole difference bitweene you, and them, in this behalf, stands only in
this, that your God goes on Horse feet, Claud. Du Saints, De Liturgijs. In
Praefat. Apuleius, Lib. 11.
and their on man's feet.

But the Holy Sacrament of Christ's Death was never appointed unto us to this
end, to be carried thus about in open show: but only to be received, as
Christ him self commanded, in remembrance of his Body, and Blood. And
therefore S. Cyprian. De Coena Domini. Augusti. Contra Faustum, Lib. 20. Cap.
13.
Cyprian says, Recipitur, non includitur: It is received: it is not shut up.

That ye allege, as out of S. Augustine, that the Painimes found fault with
the Christian people, for Honor done to the Body, and Blood of Christ,
under your Fourmes of Bread, and Wine, it is an open, and a manifest
Untruth. For S. Augustine in that place speaks not one word, neither of
the Body, and Blood of Christ: nor of your Fourmes, and Accidents: nor of
any manner Adoration, or honor done unto the Sacrament. It shall behoue you
to write hereafter more advisedly: Otherwise the Learned will say, ye either
know not, or care not, Artic. 8. Diui. 24
what ye write. This Objection of S. Augustine is answered more at large in my
Former Reply.

Touching the matter, Augu. De Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 1. Cap. 29.
S. Augustine says, Deus meus vbique Praesens est, vbique totus, nusquam
inclusus: qui possit adesse secretus, abesse non motus: My God is euerywhere
Present, euerywhere whole, shut up, or enclosed novvhere: Hable secretly to
be Present, Chrysostom. De Ieiunijs. and Lectione Geneseos.
and to be Absente without mouinge. And S. Chrysostom says, Magnum, creed
mihi, bonum est, Scire, quid sit Creatura, and quid sit Creator: and quae sint
Opera, quis vero Opifex. Si enim hoc diligenter scirent discernere Haeretici,
nunquam vtique omnia confunderent, and, quae Sursum sunt, facerent Deorsum. Non
dico, quod Coelum, and Stellas deorsum, terram autem sursum ducerent: sed quod
Regem ab excelsis Sedibus deducentes cum Creaturis, and Operibus collocauerint:
Creaturam vero Diuinis honoribus affecerint. Believe me, it is a great matter,
to understand, what is the Creature, and what is God the Creatoure: what are
the Works, and what is the VVoorkeman. For, if these Heretics could make
diligente difference hereof, they would not thus make confusion of al things,
nor place those things beneathe, that be above. I mean not, They either pulle
down the Heaven, or the Stars, or set up the Earth ( in their Place): But
that they pulle down the King him self from his high throne, and place him
amongst his works and Creatures: and of the other side, vvoorshippe a
Creature with Godly Honor.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 2.
Bisides, where they say, and sommetime do persuade fools, that they are
hable by their Masses to distribute, and apply unto men's commodity all the
Merits of Christ's Death, yea, although many times the parties think nothing
of the matter, and understand full little, what is done, this is a Mockery, a
Heathenishe fancy, and a very joy. For it is our Faith, that applies the
Death, and Cross of Christ to our benefit, and not the Act of the Massinge
Priest. Faith had in the Sacraments (says Augustine) does justify, and
not the Sacraments. Origin. ad Roma. Li. 3. Cap. 3.
And Origin says: Christ is the Priest, the Propitiation, and Sacrifice:
which Propitiation comes to every one by mean of Faith. And so, by this
reckeninge, we say, that the Sacraments of Christ, without Faith, do not
once profit these, that be a live: a great deal less do they profit those
that be dead.

M. Hardinge.
Untruth enclosed. For this is your Catholic Doctrine, as shall appear.
Least any piece of your Apology should be without a witness, for proof that
ye are his children, who is the father of lies: ye make us to affirm, that by
our Masses we distribute and apply to men indifferently, how: so ever they be
disposed, for so ye mean, as it appears partly by that ye say here, and
special by your Doctrine other where is uttered, all the Merits of Christ's
Death. But tell us, Your own Scholastical Catholic Doctoures, M. Harding.
Read the Answer.
who ever taught this Doctrine in the Catholic Church?

Yea, God is so good, and prone to bestow his mercy, that, not only when a
man is through faith prepared for it, he gives it abundantly unto him: but
also though he of his own part have no faith presently, yet for others sake,
which are Gods derely beloved friends, he farethe the better, and has that
gift obteigned to him. A proper shifte. We speak of Sacraments: M.
Hardinge ansvveareth us of Prayer.
As, when S. Steven prayed at his death for those, that persecuted him, for
whom prayed he then, but for those, who had no Faith at al in Christ? And
when this grace was given unto them, as that from their Iewishnes they came to
the faith of Christ, who shall exclude that blessed Martyr from this worship
and honor, that through his prayer, as by one special mean, that grace was
applied unto them?

What effect his prayer took, The effect of S. Steue^s Prayer. Act 9. Sermon.
1. de Sanctis. Co^tra duas Epist. Pelagian Ad Bonifacium, Lib. 1. Ca. 19 Heb. 5.
if any man thereof doubt, he may think it to have wrought mutche for the
benefit of others of less malice, saying that it did so mutche in Paul. Who
as the Scripture says, yet breathinge out threatninges and slaughter against
Christ's Disciples. was so changed and converted, that of a Persecutour he
became an Apostle. For, as S. Augustine writes, Si Sanctus Stephanus sic non
orasset, Ecclesia Paulum non haberet: If S. Steven had not prayed so, the
Church should not have had Paul. Now, if those that be no Priests, without
public Authority of Consecrating the Body and Blood of Christ, yet by way
of prayer do obtain, that men be converted to the Faith, which is the
applyinge of one fruit of Christ's merits, mutche more the public Minister,
and Bishop, which assumpted from among men, is ordained for men, in matters
belonginge to God, that he may offer up gifts and Sacrifices for sins.

And now if ye list to learn what kind of applyinge we use in our Masses,
The Applieing of Christ's Death
we do offer up unto God first, What kind of applying is in the Sacrifice
of the Mass. Lib. 1. de vocat. Gentium, Ca. 4.
Untruth, P^asphemous, and horrible
his Son, representinge his passion, and celebratinge the memory of the same
Untruth. For Christ ^eu (...) bade you to offer him up unto his Father.
according to Christ's institution.

But what measure of good we procure them, to God only is that known. If (as
the Learned Bishop Prosper says) the grace of our Savior pass over some
Persons (as we see it to happen) and if the Prayer of the Church (wherein the
Sacrifice is contained, after S. Augustines Mind) be not admitted for them: it
is to be referred to the secret judgments of Gods justice, and it is to be
acknowledged, that the depth of this secret may not be opened in this life.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Thus ye say, M. Hardinge: Ye make us to affirm, that by our Masses we
distribute; and apply to men indifferently the Merits of Christ's Death:
how so ever they be disposed in token, that ye are the Children of him, who is
the Father of lies. Therefore ye say, Tell us, who ever taught this Doctrine in
the Catholic Church?

If ye be so unskillful, M. Hardinge, and so far to seek in your own Doctors,
then it may please you to understand, that the most Catholic Pillars of
your Catholic Church have even thus taught us. Thomas de Vio, otherwise
called Caietanus, a Catholic Cardinal of your Catholic Church of Rome, in
the Conference he had at Augusta in Germany with Doctor Luther, said thus,
Fides non est necessaria accessuro ad Eucharistiam: Paralip. Vrsper. Anno. 1518.
Faith is not necessary for him, that will receive the Sacrament of thanks
geuinge. Notwithstanding otherwheres he acknowledges, this was an error: and
confesses, it was commonly received and believed of many, even in your
Catholic Church of Rome. Thus he writes. In hoc videtur communis multorum
error, Cardinal Caie^anus, De Vsis Spiritualium, Quae. 3.
quod putant, hoc Sacrificium ex solo Opere Operato habere certum Meritum, vel
certam satisfactionem, quae applicatur huic, vel illi: Herein stands the
Common Error of many, that they think, this Sacrifice has a certain Mente,
or Satisfaction, which is applied to this man, or to y^ man ( not by mean of
the Faith of the receiver, but) by the Only mean of the Work, that is
wrought ( by the Priest). Biel. Lection 81. Jacob. De Valentia, Sermo. 2. De
Epiphania.
Gabriel Biel says, The Priest receives the Sacrament: and the virtue
thereof passes into all the Members of the Church. Iacobus de Valentia says,
The Priest is the Mouth of the Body. Therefore, when the Priest receives
the Sacrament, all the Members are refreased. Again he says, Nos
Communicamus Ore Sacerdotis: We, that be of the People, do Communicate, or
receive the Sacrament, by the Mouth of the Priest. Thom. De venerabil.
sacramet. Aliar. Cap. 1
Thomas of Aquine your Angelical Doctor says thus, Sicut Corpus Domini
semel oblatum est in Cruce pro debito Originali, ita offertur iugiter pro
quotidianis delictis in Altari: As the Body of our Lord was once offered upon
the Cross for the debte of Original Sin, so it is daily offered upon the
Aultare for the debte of Daily Sins.

This Doctrine, not long sithence, was holden for Catholic, and was strongly
maintained by your Catholic Doctors. Catharinus, one of the woorthies of
your Late Chapter of Tridente, Catharinus, De Incruento Sacrificio Noui, and
Aeterni Testamentes.
says, Apparet, quod pro peccatis sub Nouo Testamento, post acceptam Salutaris
Hostiae in Baptismo efficaciam commissis, non habemus pro Peccato Hostiam
illam, quam Christus obtulit pro Peccato Mundi, and pro delictis Baptismum
Praecedentibus: Non enim nisi semel ille Mortuus est: Et ideo semel duntaxat
hostia illa ad hunc effectum applicatur: It appears, that for the Sins
committed under the New Testamente, after that we have received in Baptism
the Power of the Healthful Sacrifice, we have no more that sacrifice for
Sin, which Christ once offered for the Sin of the World, and for
sins committed before Baptism. For Christ never died but once. And
therefore that Sacrifice of Christ Crucified is applied unto us once only to
this effect.

Hereby M. Hardinge, ye may see, that this Doctrine lacks no defense
amongst your Catholics. The Applieing of Christ's Death.
The sum, and meaning hereof is this, That our Sins committed after
Baptism, are not foregeeuen by the Death of Christ, but Only by the
Sacrifice of the Mass. Which thing, what it seems to you, I cannot tell:
But unto al Godly ears it seems an horrible great blasphemy.

Here, to speak of Prayers, specially in so large a sort, it was far
impertinente to your purpose, as being utterly no part of this question.

The Merits of Christ's Death, whereof we entreat, are conveyed unto us by
God, and received by us. God conueieth them to us only of his Mercy: and we
receive them Only by Faith. But the ways, whereby either to procure Gods
Mercy, or to enkendle our Faith, are many and sundry. Gods Mercy is
procured sommetime by Prayer, sommetime by other Means. But to breed, or
increase Faith in us, there are more ways, then can be reckened. Sum men
are moved Only by the Hearing of Gods Word: Sum others by the
beholdinge, Eusebius. Li. 4. Ca. 8
and weighinge of Gods Miracles. Justinius the Martyr was first alluered to
the Faith by the cruelty of the Tyrannes, and by the Constancy, and Patience
of Gods Saints. Cyprian. De Laud Martyrij.
S. Cyprian says, Tanta est vis Martyrij, vt per illam credere etiam cogatur,
qui te vult occidere: So great is the Power of Martyrdom, that thereby even
he is forced to believe, that would kille thee. S. Augustine says, August.
Confess. Lib 3. Cap. 4.
He was sturred up to comme to Christ, by readinge a Heathen Book written by
Cicero, called Hortensius. Thus he says, Ille Liber mutauit affectum meum,
and ad ^eipsum, Domine, mutauit Preces meas: That (Heathen) Book changed my
mind, and turned my prayers, o Lord, unto thee.

Emonge other causes, the Sacraments serve specially to direct, and to aid
our Faith: August. Contra Faustum. Lib. 19. Cap. 16.
For they are, as S. Augustine calls them, Verba visibilia, Visible Words:
and Scales, and Testimonies of the Gospel.

All this notwithstanding, we say, It is neither the Work of the Priest,
nor the Nature of the Sacrament, as of it self, that makes us partetakers of
Christ's Death, Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 80.
but only the Faith of the Receiver. S. Augustine says, Vnde est ista tanta
Virtus Aquae, vt Corpus tangat, and Cor abluat, nisi faciente Verbo? Non quia
dicitur, sed quia creditur: From whence has the Water this great power, that
it touches the Body, and wassheth the Heart, sauinge by the VVoorkinge of the
Word? Not for that it is pronounced, but for that it is believed.

So says Hesychius, Helych. in Leuit. Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Cyrill. in Leuit. Lib.
3.
Gratia Dei comprehenditur Sola Fide: The Grace of God ( of our part) is
received by Only Faith. So says Cyrillus, Siclus Fidei nostrae Formam
habet. Si enim Fidem obtuleris, ta^quam Pretium, a Christo, velut Ariete
immaculato in hostiam dato, accipies Remissionem Peccatorum: The Sicle has the
Form of our Faith. For if thou offer up thy Faith, as the Price, thou shall
receive Remission of thy Sins, from Christ that unspotted Ram, that was
geeuen for a Sacrifice.

Where ye say, ye offer up Christ, the Son of Godde, Really, and
Substantially unto God the Father, If ye speak in your dream, it is a very
pleasante fantasy: but if ye be awake, and know, what ye say, then is it a
great blasphemy: as in my Former Reply it may appear more at large.
Art^^eul. 17.


The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 1.
And as for their bragges, they are woonte to make of their Purgatory,
though we know, it is not a thing so very late risen emo^gest them, yet is it
no better then a blockishe, and an old Wives devise.

M. Hardinge.
Purgatory seems not to us a thing, that we should mutche brag of, no
more then ye^ will brag of Hell. Power over Purgatory.
We tremble at the remembrance of it rather then brag of it. Well, how so
ever it be, Purgatory acknovvleged by the Defenders to be of antiquity. Apoc.
21.
will ye, nil ye (we see) No marvel. It was received of the Painimes, long
ere the Apostles were borne.
ye be driven to confess the same to be no new thing.

In deed if you call them Papists, among whom the Doctrine of praieing for the
dead, Untruth. Read the Answer.
whereof necessarely follows the Doctrine of Purgatory, is delivered, taught
and holden: then are the Apostles, who delivered it by Tradition, (as
Chrysostom and Damascene report) Papists. First, This fantasy were
sommevvhat, if we had no Purgation in Christ's Blood.
forasmutche as nothing that is defiled comes into the Kingdom of Heaven,
and some depart out of this Life, though in the Faith of Christ, and
Children of the Everlasting Kingdom, yet not thoroughly and perfitly clean:
it remains, that such after this Life before they come to the place of
Everlasting joy, 2. Cor. 7.
have their Purgation. Furthermore the Apostle says, Seeinge then we have
these promises derely beloved, let A doughty Argument, to prove Purgatory.
us cleanse our selves from al filthiness of the Fleashe, and Spirit, making
perfect our satisfaction in the fear of God. Who sees not hereof to follow,
that to many, which be justified, somewhat of satisfaction, and Holiness
lacks? Which if they be taken from hence, before they atteine to the
measure of Holiness requisite, be they not then after this Life in state to be
purged and cleansed?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here are we comme to the Paper Wales, and Painted Fieres of Purgatory. For
so it liked M. Harding, not long sithence, pleasantly to sport at it in the
Pulpites, as a bugge meet only to fraie Children. Yet now, upon better
advise, and deeper study, he tremblethe, God wot, and quaketh for fear, to
remember the torments, that sum body has sithence told him to be there.
How be it, Let him not so mutche dismaie him self. The Pope, as he either
first made it, or received it by hand from the Heathens, and first allowed
it, even so has he the whole Jurisdiction, and Power over it, and commands
in, and out at his pleasure.

Whether ye make bragges hereof, or no, I leave it in question. Certainly for
this, Panormi. De Electione. Cap. Licet.
and other like causes, One of your fellows says, Papa potest, quicquid Deus
ipse potest: The Pope can do, what so ever God him self can do. An other
says, Animae existentes in Purgatorio, sunt de Jurisdiction Papae: and Papa,
si vellet, Johan. Angelus.
posset totum Purgatorium euacuare: The Souls being in Purgatory, are (in the
Popes Peculiare, and) under the Popes Jurisdiction: and the Pope, if it might
stand with his pleasure, were hable (to make jail delivery, and) to avoid
al Purgatory. And to this purpose, Clemens Pap. 6. in Bulla.
The Pope him self Commands, and Charge the Angels of God, to fetch
forth from thence, whom so ever, and how many so ever he will have delivered,
as hereafter in a place more convenient it shall better appear. If these seem
to be no bragges, then let them hardly be called by sum other name, that may
seem to please you better.

Ye take good hold, in that we Confess, This Imagination of Purgatory is no
New fancy. How be it, your advantage herein is not so great. There have
benne errors, and great errors from the beginning. S. Augustine says,
Origenes ipsum Diabolum, atque Angelos eius post grauiora pro Meritis, and
diuturniora supplicia, August. de Cluitate Dei, Lib. 21. Cap. 17.
ex illis Cruciatibus eruendos, atque sociandos Sanctis Angelis credidit: The
Ancient Learned Father Origin believed, that the Devil him self, and his
Angels, after great, and long pounishement suffered for their wickedness,
shall be delivered from their torments, and shall be placed (in Heaven) with the
Holy Angels of God. Origin. in ^pist. ad Roman. Ca. 6 Lib. 5.
Origin him self says, There were sum, that thought, that Christ should
go down into Hell, and there be Crucified again, to save them, that by his
Preachinge, and Former Death could not be saved. Again ye same Origin says of
him, self, Ego puto, quod post Resurrectione^ ex mortuis indigebimus
Sacramento cluente nos* Origin. in Luca^ Homil 14.
atque Purgante: I think, that after we shall rise again from the Dead, we
shall have need of the Sacrament (of Baptism) to wash us, and to Purge us
clean.

S. Augustine says, The Antiquity of Purgatory.
Quidam nullas Poenas, nisi Purgatorias, volunt esse post Mortem: Sum men
will have no pounishemente to be after Death, but only the pains of
Purgatory.

Even in Paul's time there were sum, August. de Cluitate Dei, Lib 21. Cap.
13. 1. Cor. 15. Council Cartha. 3. Canon. 6.
that, being alive, were Baptized for the dead. And by the Council of Carthage
it appears, there were sum, that used to thruste the Sacrament into the
Mouth of the Dead Body, meaning thereby, as it may be thought, to procure
sum relife for the Soul. The words be these: Placuit, vt Corporibus
defunctorum Eucharistia non detur. Dictum est enim a Domino, Accipite, and
Edite. Cadauera autem nec accipere possunt, nec Edere: We think it good, yt
the Sacrament be not given to the Bodies of the Dead. For our Lord says,
Take, and Eat. But Dead Bodies can neither Take, nor Eat. These were Ancient
Errors in old time, as it is easy to be seen.

As for the fantasy of Purgatory, it sprange first from the Heathens, and
was received amongst them in that time of darkness, long before the coming
of Christ: as it may plainly appear by Plato, and Vergile, in whom ye shall
find described at large, Plato in Timaeo. Aeneid 6. August. De Ciuita. Li. 7.
Ca. 7.
the whole Common Weal, and all the Orders, and Degrees of Purgatory. S.
Augustine says, The Old Heathen Romans had a Sacrifice, which they called
Sacrum Purgatorium, A Purgatory Sacrifice.

You say, If they be Papists, that Defend Purgatory, then must Christ's
Apostles needs be Papists. For they have taught us Purgatory, (not by any
word that ever they wrote, but) by Tradition. This is as true, as that S.
Peter said Mass in Rome with a Golden Cope, and a Triple Crown. Unless
perhaps sum man will think, 1. Tim. 6.
where as S. Paul says, Homines Priuati Veritate, existimantes quaestum esse
pietatem: They be men void of Truth, thinkinge that their gain is
Godliness: 2. Pet. 2.
Or, where as S. Peter says, Per auaritiam fictis sermonibus nego^iabuntur de
vobis: Through covetousness by fained talk they shall make sale of you, that
by these words they gave us Warninge of the very Form* and Doctrine of your
Purgatory. For better Authorities, then these be, I reckon, ye can lightly
find none.

As for Prayer for the Dead, which, ye say, ye have received by Tradition
from the Apostles, notwithstanding it were granted to be true, yet does it
not evermore importe Purgatory. For Chrysostom, and Basile in their
Liturgies make their Public, and solemn Prater in this sort: Offerimus tibi
rationalem hunc cultu^, Basil. and Chrysostom. in Liturgijs.
pro in Fide requiesce^tibus, Maioribus, Patribus, Patriarchis, Prophetis, and
Apostolis, Praeconibus, and Euangelistis, Martyribus, Confessoribus, etc.
Praecipue vero pro Sanctissima, immaculata, super omnes benedicta, Domina
nostra Deipara, and semper Virgin Maria: We offer, O Lord, unto thee this
reasonable service for them, that reaste in Faith, Our Elders, Our Fathers,
The Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, the Preachers, the Evangelists,
the Martyrs, the Confessors, etc. Specially for the most Holy, without
spotte, blessed above al, our Lady Gods Mother, and ever Virgin Marie. S.
Cyprian says in like manner, Sacrificamus pro Martyribus, Cyprian. Lib. 3.
Epist. 6.
We make Sacrifice for the Martyrs. Yet, I trow, ye will not conclude hereof,
that the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, Evangelists. Martyrs,
Confessors, and the Blessed Virgin Marie, were al in Purgatory. Otherwise ye
would mutche enlarge the Popes Dominion.

Of the other side, in your Masses for the Dead, ye have used to pray thus:
Libera eos a Tartaro: e profundo Lacu: ex Ore Leonis: Deliver them O Lord (not
from Purgatory, but) from Hell: from that deep Doungeon: from the Lions
Mouth. I trow, ye are not so mutche thral unto the Pope, that ye will turn,
the Lions Mouth, the Deep Doungeon, and all the world, and Hell it self,
into Purgatory. Thus ye see, M. Hardinge, by your own Doctrine, ye may pray
for the Dead, Uncleansed.
and yet be never the near of your Purgatory.

But to healpe forewarde the matter, at the least by sum Natural reason, ye
say thus, For as mutche as nothing, that is defiled, comes into the
Kingdom of Heaven, and sum depart out of this Life, though in the Faith
of Christ, and Children of the Everlasting Kingdom, yet not thoroughly and
perfitely clean, it remains, that such, after this Life, before they comme
to the Place of Everlasting toie, have their Purgation. To warrante your
Minor in this Argument, ye bring in the words of S. Paul, as rightly, and
as well to purpose, as your manner otherwise is commonly to handle the
Scriptures: Though our outward man be corrupted, 2. Cor. 4.
and weakened ( which words S. Ambrose expounds thus, By Oppression, by
Stripes, by Hunger, by Thirste, by Cold, by Nakedness) Yet our Soul is
renewed, and made stronger day by day. And again, Let us cleanse our selves
from al filthiness of Fleashe, 2. Cor. 7.
and Sprite. Ergo, say ye, We must confess by force of these Words, that
there must needs be a place, wherein to Purge us clean after this Life. Here
may we a little put you in remembrance by the way: If we cleanse our selves,
according to these words of S. Paul, from al manner filthiness, both of
Fleashe, and of Sprite, I beseech you, what remains there then further, to
be Purged in Purgatory?

How be it, to prove the Imperfection, and corruption of Nature, that evermore
hangethe in our Fleashe, ye might, in my Judgment, have alleged many other
Authorities, Esai. 64. Job. 15.
far more pregnante, and clearer, then these. Esai says, Al our
righteousness is like unto a foul stained cloute: Job says, Inter Sanctos
eius nemo est Fidelis: Et Coeli non sunt mundi in Conspectu eius: Emonge the
Saints of God, there is none Faitheful: Roman. 7. Augu. in psalm. 143
The Heavens are not Clean in his sight. S. Paul says, I know there is no
good thing in my Fleashe. S Augustine says, Let the Apostles of Christ them
selves say, O Lord, foregeeue us our offenses.

Such imperfections, and Corruptions, while we live, we evermore carry in
our Fleashe. Therefore, say you, To be Purged hereof, that we may be clean,
and fit to enter into Heaven, we must needs pass thoroughe the Fieres of
Purgatory. By this mean ye have well enlarged the Popes Jurisdiction. For this
being true, neither is there, nor never was there any Creature, neither
Prophet, nor Apostle, nor Martyr, nor Angel, nor Archangel, nor Heaven it
self, Christ only excepted, but of force must be cleansed in your
Purgatory. Origin. in Psalm. 36. Homil 3.
And therefore Origin, a great fautoure of this error, says thus, Vt ego
arbitror, Omnes nos necesse est venire in illum Ignem: etiamsi Paulus aliquis
sit, vel Petrus: As I suppose, al we must needs comme into that Fiere: Yea
although it be Paul, or Peter. Origin. in Luca^ Homil. 14.
And therefore he says, as it is alleged before, Ego puto, quod and post
Resurrectionem ex Mortuis, indigebimus Sacramento eluente nos, atque Purgante.
Nemo enim absque sordibus Resurgere poterit. Neque vllam puto posse animam
reperiri, quae vniuersis statim vitijs careat: I think, that after the
Resurrection from the dead, we shall need the Sacrament ( of Baptism) to
wash us, and to make us clean. For noman can rise again without filthe.
Neither do I think, there can any Soul be found, void from al manner of
Sin.

But al these be vain fantasies: I mean, as well these of M. Hardinge, as also
the other of Origin. 1. Johan. 1.
S. John says, Sanguis Jesus Christi Filij Dei purgat nos ab omni Peccato: The
Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God Purges us, and makes us clean from
al our Sins. The Prophet says, In what hourre so ever a sinner shall
repent, and mourn for his sins, he shall be safe. Esai says, If your Sins
shall be as red as Scarlet, Esai. 1. Hebrae. 1.
yet shall they be made as white, as snow. S. Paul says, Christus
Purgationem Peccatorum nostrorum fecit: Christ ( by his Blood) has wrought
the Purgation of our Sins. Uncleansed.
Therefore. S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Passione Christi.
Sanguis tuus, Domine, non quaerit vltionem: Sanguis tuus lauat crimina,
Peccata condonat: Thy Blood, o Lord, seeks no revenge: Thy Blood vvassheth
our Sins, and Pardons our trespasses.

And, whereas you tell us, out of sum Heathenishe fantasy, that Sins
cannot be washte away, but with long tracte of time, and pain in Purgatory,
S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Coena Domini.
In eodem articulo temporis, cum iam anima festinet ad exitum, and egrediens ad
labia expirantis emerserit, Poenitentiam Clementissimi Dei benignitas non
aspernatur. Nec Serum est, quod Verum est: In that very moment of time, even
when the Soul is ready to pass, and is even at the lips of the party
ready to yield up the Sprite, the goodness of our most merciful God refuses
not repentance. And what so ever is truly done, is never too late.

S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 27.
Latro in Cruce neque vno die opus habebat. Et quid dico, vno die? Neque breui
hora. Tanta est Dei erga nos Misericordia: The Thief on the Cross needed not
so mutch as one day, to repe^te him self. What speak I of one day? No, he
needed not one hour. So great is the Mercy of God toward us.

Of the other side, if any man depart hence without repentance, S. Augustine
says, August. Epist. 80.
Imparatum inueniet illum Dies Domini, quem Imparatum inuenerit suae vitae
huius vltimus dies: Him shall the day of the Lord find unprovided, whom the
last day of this life finds unprovided. Ambrosi. De Bono Mortis.
S. Ambrose says, Qui hic non accipit Remissionem Peccatorum, ibi non erit:
He that here in this life receives not Remission of his Sins, shall not be
there. And S. Hierome expoundinge these words of Christ, Thou shall not go
forth thence, until thou have paid the last farthinge, says, thus,
Hierony. in Lamentationes Hieremiae, Li. 1. Cap. 1. August. De Sermon. Domini
in Monte, Lib. 1.
Significat semper non exiturum else: quia semper soluat nouissimum quadrantem,
dum sempiternas Poenas terrenorum Peccatorum luit: Christ's meaning is, that
he shall never comme out: for that he must evermore pay the last farthinge,
whiles he suffers everlasting pounishemente for his Sins committed in this
world.

So says S. Augustine, Donec soluas nouissimum quadrantem: Miror, si non came
significat poenam, quae vocatur Aeterna: Until thou pay the last farthing: I
marvel, but he m^^^eth that pain, which is called Everlasting.

Hereby, M. Hardinge, I think, it may partly appear, that you maintain
your painted Fire, and Paper Wales, with painted Authorities, and Paper
Reasons. Verily the Christian people of the East Church of God, which
sommetime was as great, and as famous, as the Church of the Weast,
notwithstanding they believed in God, and his Christ, and knew there was
boothe Hell, and Heaven, yet in your Purgatory they had no skill. One of your
Doctoures says, Alphonsus De Haeresibus. Li. 8. De Indulgetijs.
Vsque in Hodiernum diem Purgatorium non est a Graecis creditum: Until this
day, of the Grecians, or of the East Church, Purgatory was never believed.
Therefore ye cannot justly say, that your fantasy herein was evermore
accoumpted Universal, or Catholic.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 2.
Augustine in deed sommetime says, Augu. in Psalm. 85.
there is such a certain place: sommetime he denies not, but there may be
such a one: sommetime he doubts: sommetime again he utterly denies, there
is any at al, and thinks, that men are therein deceived by a certain
Natural good will, they bear their friends departed. But yet of this one
Error has there grown up such a harvest of those Massemongers, that, the
Masses being sold abroad commonly in every Corner, the Temples of God became
shoppes, to geate monei: and selie souls were borne in hand, that nothing was
more necessary to be bought. In deed there was nothing more gaineful for
these men to selle.

M. Hardinge.
Well railed. If your reasons, or Authorities were so piththy, as your mockes
and scoffs be spiteful, ye were to be heard. But thanks be to God, that
such shrewed beasts have short horns. Act. 25.
Now to S. Augustine. And as Festus said to S. Paul, Haste thou appealed to
Caesar? to Caesar shall thou go: So say we to you, though not having that
Authority over you, which Festus had over S. Paul: To Augustine ye refer
this matter, and by Augustine shall ye be judged.

I would allege unto you sundry places of the It was a good point of skill,
with a good countenance to pass the^ over.
Scriptures, which may Sufficiently prove Purgatory to a Christen man, that
is not contentious, but that will we do hereafter as occasion serves. Now to
Saint Augustine. S. Augustine affirms Purgatory in plain and express
words. 1. Cor. 3.
We say plainly, that S. Augustine affirms Purgatory, and that it
Untruth. It shall be shevved. Read the Answer.
cannot be showed where he doubts of it, mutche less where he utterly
denies any such to be. In sundry places of his works he expounds the
words of S. Paul to the Corinthians of Purgatory, where the Apostle says,
that the works, which be builded upon the fundation (which is Christ)
shall be tried by Fire. In the 21. Book de Ciuitate Dei, after that he has
declared his judgment touching pains of diverse sorts, which men suffer
for Sins committed, he says thus: But pains temporal some suffer in this
life only: some after their Death: some both now and also then, yet before
that most severe and last judgment.

May it therefore please you Syrs, to read S. Augustine in some such places
(for to read all that he has written to that end were very mutche, O, so
careful this good man is for our cares.
and a great let to your domestical cares) and I think verily ye will
secretly agree in judgment with us, though for shame and consideration of
the stage ye play your part on, openly the same ye will not confess. And
therefore in his book de Haeresibus ad Quoduultdeum, he condemns Aerius of
Haeresie (and so consequently al others that be of his opinion) because to the
Heresies of the Arians he had added this, also, that none ought to pray, or
make oblation for the dead.

Where ye make S. Augustine very uncertain in this point, as though he said
sommetime there is such a certain place, sometime there may be such a one,
sometime he doubted of it, sometime plainly denied any such to be: either ye
understand not S. Augustine, or ye say contrary to your own knowledge.
Verily ye be too bold with him. Untruth Manifest. Read S. Augustines
words in the Answer.
First that he denies Purgatory, that is false. And where ye allege
Hypognostica in the margent of your book, read it once again at my request,
and your selves will say: the place proves not your purpose. Lib. 5.
Hypognostic^n.
The Author of that work, whether he were S. Augustine, which Erasmus
believes not, or who so ever he was, denies not Purgatory: but that after the
day of general judgment there is any place of Everlasting rest, or pain,
but the Kingdom of Heaven, and Hell, that he denies. Which we also deny.
And there he speaks against the Pelagians, Haeres. 88.
who, as S. Augustine writes of them ad Quoduultdeum, promised to infantes
dyinge without Baptism a certain everlasting and blessed life without and
besides the Kingedome of God. Which Heresy in sundry places he reproves. It
seems the word Purgatorium, noted in the margent of that book Untruth.
For the margin was so noted by Erasmus.
by thunlearned Printer, begiled you. Which shows how profoundely ye be
seen in the Doctores. What is that S. Augustine doubted of touching
Purgatory.
The thing, he doubted of, touching this matter, is this: Whether those
temporal pains do only punish for the Untruth, blasphemous against the
Blood of Christ. Read the Answer.
Satisfaction of the Justice of God, or also do purge and correct the souls
of the dead in such wise, as temporal pains are wont to do in this life.
But now, whether the smarte, and sorrow of things left behind, which
proceeded in this life of Carnal affection, remain also to the souls after
their departure from the Body, whereof S. Augustine shows him self to
stand in doubt in Enchiridio ad Laurent. cap. 68. and 69. and whether the
fire which souls feel in Purgatory as it paineth them, O grave Commentary:
and a vvi^e matter to be called in question.
so also do by degrees diminishe and correct those venial and Secular
affections, which they carried with them at their Death, or whether death
it self do so end them, as there remain not any correction of the mind yet
being vicious, Scriptures to prove Purgatory.
but only the punishemente of the sin paste: that is the thing, whereof S.
Augustine This whole matter is concluded with seeminge, and likely hoode.
seems to have doubted. In effect his question is, whether the Fire of
Purgatory be not Double Fire in Purgatory: Double Folly.
double. The one which punishes the Venial sin past: the other which
diminishes and takes away thaffection of sin yet remaininge. Of the first
he doubts not: of the other he says, non redargno, De Ciuita. Dei, Lib. 21.
Cap. 26.
quia forsitan verum est, I say not against it, for per adventure it is true.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We raite at you, M. Hardinge, even as Christ railed at certain others, in
whoes steps ye seem to tread, for that they had made of the House of God a
Cave of thieves.

The places of the Scriptures, which ye thought it best to pass over, and
whereby your Purgatory by your judgment undoubtedly may be proved, if a man
be not very contentious, Johan 5.
I trow, be these: Verily, Verily, I say unto you, he that hears my Word,
and believes in him, that sent me, has Everlasting Life: and shall not comme
into damnation: but has passed from Death unto Life. Or, that Esai the
Prophet says of Christ: Esai. 53.
He was wounded for our transgressions: He was broken for our iniquities: The
chastisemente of our Peace was upon him: and with his stripes we were made
whole. Or, that S. Paul says, Christ has taken the Obligation, that was
against us, Coloss. 2. Apocal. 14.
and has fastened it unto his Cross. Or, that S. John says, Blessed be the
Dead, that die in the Lord. Even so says the Sprite. For they rest from
their labors: and their Works follow them. He says not, they be in
Purgatory: but, they rest from their Labors. Apocal. 7.
And again, They shall hunger no more: They shall thirste no more. For the Lamb,
which is in the mids of the throne, shall govern them, and shall lead them (
not into Purgatory, but) unto the lively Fountains of Waters: and God shall
wipe a way al tears from their eyes. These, or such other like Places, I
trow, they be, whereby ye assure your self so certainly of your Purgatory.

But unto S. Augustine, we have appealed: and to S. Augustine, ye say, we
shall go. How be it, if ye consider the matter well, ye shall find, that our
appeal liethe not unto S. Augustine. It had benne more indi^ferente dealinge,
to have said with S. Bernarde, Bernard. in Cantica, Sermon. 65.
Ad Euangelium appellasti: and ad Euangelium ibis: Ye have appealed unto the
Gospel: and unto the Gospel ye shall go.

As for S. Augustine, notwithstanding his Authority be great, and his
learning deep, yet in these cases, as it shall well appear, he can be but a
doubteful Judge. And a doubteful Judge, so far forth, as he doubts, is no
Judge. August. ad Laurenti. Ca. 67. and Did. 29. Sciendu^.
Your own Canon tells you, In erroris Labyrinthum nonnulli intricando
impingunt, cum ante iudicant, quam intelligant: Many men geuinge Judgment
before they can understand, by entanglinge them selves, fall into a Maze of
error. For how can he pronounce sentence of that, he confesses, he knows
not? Or how can he assure us, August. In 8. qu. ad Dulcitiu^ q 1.
that is not hable to assure him self?

Touching the certainetie of this Doctrine, to allege one, or two places out
of many, S. Augustine writes thus: Tale aliquid, etiam post hanc Vitam fieri,
incredibile non est: and, vtrum ita sit, quaeri potest: Sum such thing ( he
means the Fire of Purgatory) to be after this Life, Augu. De Ciuit. Lib. 21.
Cap. 21.
it is not incredible: And whether it be so, or no, It may be a question.
It may be a question. Again, Quod Spiritus Defunctorum, etc. ignem
transitoriae Tribulationis inueniant, non redarguo: quia Forsitan Verum est:
That the Sprites of the Dead find a Fire of transitory Tribulation, I
reprove it not: For Perhaps it is true.
Perhaps it is true. Augu. De Fide and Operib ca. 16


Again, Sieve ergo in hac Vita tantum homines ista patiuntur, sieve etiam post
hanc vitam talia quaedam iudicia subsequuntur: non abhorret, Quantum Arbitror,
Quantum arbitror.
a ratione Veritatis iste intellectus huius sententiae: S. Augustine doubts.
Therefore whether men suffer such things only in this Life, Or else sum
such Judgments follow even after this Life, As mutche as I think.
As mutche as I think, Augu. De Ciuit. Lib. 21. Cap. 27.
the understanding of this sentence disagreeth not from the order of the
Truth.

And again he says, Quis sit iste modus, and quae sint ista Peccata, quae
ita impediant peruentionem ad Regnum Dei, vt tamen Sanctorum amicorum meritis
imperrent indulgentiam, difficillimum est inuenire: Periculosissimum definire
Ego certe vsque ad hoc tempus, cum inde ^atagerem, ad eorum indaginem peruenire
No^ potui.
non potui: What mean this is, and what Sins these be, which so let a
man from coming unto the Kingdom of God, yt they may notwithstanding obtain
Pardonne by the Merits of Holy friends, is it very hard to find: and very
dangerous to determine. Certainly I me self, notwithstanding great study,
I could never attain to the knowledge.
and travail taken in that behalf, could never attain to the knowledge of
it.

By these it is plain, that S. Augustine stood in doubt hereof, whether
there be any such Purgatory Fire, or no. Therefore undoubtedly he took it
neither for an Article of the Christian Faith (for thereof it had not benne
lawful for him to doubt) nor for any Tradition of the Apostles.

Ye say, S. Augustine never doubted, whether there were any such Place of
Purgatory, or such Fire, or no: But only, whether the torments there do
satis^ie the Justice of God for Sin, or no: and whether the same torments
do by degrees diminishe the Venial Sins, and Seculare Affections, which ye
Parties carried with them, or no. Notwithstanding what should any question be
raised hereof? Plato, and Vergile, and other Heathen writers, from whom this
Doctrine first flowed abroad, would soon have put you quite out of doubt.
Vergile hereof amongst others says thus:

Quin and supremo cum lumine vita reliquit, Aeneid. 6.

Non tamen omne malum miseris, nec funditus omnes
Corporeae excedunt pestes: Penitus^ue necesse est
Multa diu concreta modis inolescere miris.
Ergo exercentur poenis, veterum^ue malorum
Supplicia expendunt: Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos: alijs sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.
But read you S. A^gustine, M. Hardinge: you, I say, that, to use your own
words, are so profoundely seen in all the Doctors, that ye may boldly
despise al others what so ever: Read, I say, S. Augustine: examine better the
Places, and weigh the words: And ye shall find, that he never neither
mentions, nor touches any of these your pretty fantasies: but says
plainly, whether it be so, or no, it may be a question: I reprove it not:
For perhaps it is true.

And are ye so Profoundely seen in all the Doctoures, and Scriptures, M.
Harding, that ye think, there is either Fire, or Water, or any other Creature,
wherewith to satisfy the Justice of God against Sin, sauinge only the
Blood of the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sin of the World? Or
think you, that S. Augustine would turn us from the Satisfaction of Christ,
and send us to seek for any other? Certainly S. Augustine him self says,
Valeat mihi ad Perfectionem liberationis tantum Pretium Sanguinis Domini mei:
Augustine. in Psalm. 25.
Let Only the Price of the Blood of my Lord avail me to the Perfection of
my delivery.

Again he says, Double Fiere.
Quando aliquis se conuerterit ad Deum, Prorsus illi omnia dimittuntur. Nemo
sit sollicitus, Augu. De Verbis Domini, Sermon. 59
quod aliquid ei non dimittatur: When so ever any man turns him self unto
God, al things utterly are foregeeuen him. Let noman be doubteful, lest any
thing happily be not foregeeuen. Chrysostom imagines God thus to say of a
sinner: Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 44.
Vnum tantum requiro, vt confiteatur peccata, and ab eis desistat: Nec vltra
infero Poenam peccatis: This thing only ( says God) I require of a Sinner,
yt he confess his Sins ( unto me) and leave ye same. Afterward I lay
no more pounishemente upon his Sins. Chrysostom. De B. Philogonio.
Likewise again he says, Ego Fideiubeo: Si quis nostrum recedat a Peccatis
ex animo, and vere Promittat Deo, se ad illa non rediturum, nihil Deum
requisiturum ad Satisfactionem: I will stand bound in Gods behalf: If any
of us foresake his Sins with all his heart, and make true promise unto God,
that he will no more return unto them, that then God shall require nothing else
unto Satisfaction. He, that knows not thus mutche, has no great cause to
vaunte him self of his profound knowledge in the Doctors. But it Gods Justice
against your sin be fully satisfied by the Blood of Christ: If the Only
price of our Lords Blood have wrought the perfection of your delivery: If
there remain nothing vnforegeeuen: If God require no further pounishemente:
What should you seek for other Satisfaction in your painted Fires, and smokes
of Purgatory?

To conclude, ye say thus, In effect, S. Augustines question is, whether the
Fire of Purgatory be not double. O M. Hardinge, it ye were simple, and meante
simply, ye would not so vainly double the point. I beseech you, what double
Fire of Purgatory meante S. Augustine? Or where was he ever so double in
dealinge? By your double Divinity, and Profounde knowledge in the Doctoures,
ye have at the last skilfully found out a Double Purgatory Fire, and a
Double Purgatory. How be it, as you are now troubled about the Fire of your
Purgatory: so were sum others of your friends, not long sithence, as mutche
troubled about the Water. Sir Thomas Moore. Zachar. 9.
Sir Thomas Moore said, and held for certain, that in all Purgatory there is
no Water: no, not one drop. And that, he said, he would prove by the words
of the Prophet Zachary: Eduxisti vinctos tuos de lacu, in quo non erat Aqua:
Thou haste delivered thy Prisoners out of the Doungeon, wherein there is no
Water.

Of the other side, The Bishop of Rochester. Psalm. 65.
Roffensis says, Yes, there is in Purgatory good stoare of Water. And that,
he says, he can prove by the Prophet David: Transiuimus per Ignem, and Aquam:
and eduxisti nos in Refrigerium: We have passed through Fire, and Water: and
thou haste brought us forth into a Place of refreasshinge. Albertus, and
Roffensis say, The Executioners, and Ministers of Purgatory, be Holy Angels:
Sir Thomas Moore says, Out of doubt, they be no Angels, but very Devils. So
handesomely these dreams agree together.

To return to the matter, where ye say, We mutche mistook the place of S.
Augustine, being deceived by the Ignorante note in the Margin, where also ye
so pleasantly sport your self with our Profounde knowledge in the Doctoures,
the Words of S. Augustine, August. Hypognosti. Lib. 5.
that ye mean, be these, Primum Locum Fides Catholicorum, Diuina Authoritate,
Regnum credit esse Coelorum: vnde non Baptizatus excipitur: Secundum, Gehennam:
vbi omnis Apostata, and a Christi Fide alienus Aeterna Supplicia experietur:
Tertiu^ Penitus ignoramus: imo nec esse in Scripturis Sa^ctis inueniemus: The
First Place the Catholic Faith, by Gods Authority, believes to be the
Kingdom of Heaune: From whence, who so ever is not Baptized, is excluded: The
Second Place, the same Catholic Faith believes to be Hell: Where al
Renegates, and who so ever is without the Faith of Christ, shall taste
Everlasting Pounishement. As for any Third Place, we utterly know none:
neither shall we find in the Holy Scriptures, that there is any such. S.
Augustine denies Purgatory.
If these words make not against your Purgatory, yet truly, in any
appearance, they make but sclenderly for your Purgatory. S. Augustine says,
Any other Third place ( after this life, bisides Heaven, and Hell) we
utterly know none. Neither can we find in the Holy Scriptures, that there
is any such.

But if al these three places, Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory, had benne
certainly known, and Universally received in the Church, and yet bisides
these three places, the Pelagian Heretics would have divised, as you imagine,
an other several Place, to receive the Souls of such Children, as departed
out of this life without Baptism, then could not S. Augustine have truly
said, Tertium locum ignoramus: We know no Third place: But rather he
should have said, Fourth place.
Quartum locum ignoramus, Fourth place we know none. For, by your
judgment, the doubt had benne, not of the Third place, but of the Fourth.
And it had benne a great oversight for S. Augustine, in the reckeninge only
of Four places, to have forgotten One: and specially such a One too, as has
benne found more gaineful of late years, then the other Three: But his
words be plain: Heaven we know: and Hell we know: But any Third
place bisides Heaven, and Hell, we know none.

This word, Purgatorium, was noted in the Margin, not by the Printer, as you
say, but by Erasmus, a man of famous memory: whose name for learning, and
judgment, has at al times emonge the Learned, benne mutche esteemed: with
whom your young Louanian Cleregie may not well compare, in the profounde
knowledge of ye Doctors, without great blusshinge. And thus mutche, touching
this one place of S. Augustine, wherein it has pleased you so deeply to
charge us with gross ignorance. But for better trial of his judgment herein,
ye should have considered, what he has written otherwheres to like purpose.

In his Epistle to Hesychius he says thus: August. Epist. 80.
In quo quenque inuenerit suus nouissimus dies, in hoc eum comprehendet mundi
nouissimus dies. Quoniam qualis in die isto quisque moritur, talis in die illo
iudicabitur: In what state his own last day shall find each man, in the
same state the last day of the world shall find him. For such as every
man in this day shall die, eue^ such in that day shall he be judged. Again,
Qualem inuenit Dominus, August. in Apocalyp. Homil. 11. August. ad Petrum
Diacon. Cap. 3.
cum hinc vocat, talem and iudicat: As our Lord finds a man, when he
calls him hence, even so he judges him. And again, Qui in hac vita Deo no^
placuerit, habebit quidem Poenitentiam in Futuro Soeculo de malis suis: sed
indulgentiam in conspectu Dei non inueniet. Quia etsi erit ibi stimulus
poenitudinis, nulla tamen erit correctio voluntatis: Who so in this life shall
not please God, shall in the world to comme have Repentance for his Sins: but
Pardonne in the sight of God he shall not find. For although there shall be
there the prick of Repentance, Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 49. Olympiodorus in
Ecclesiast. Ca. 9.
yet there shall be no amendment of the will. Again he says, Vnusquisque cum
causa sua dormiet, and cum causa sua resurget: Every man shall die with his own
cause, and rise again with his own cause. Olympiodorus says, In quocunque
loco etc. deprehendetur homo, cum moritur, in eo gradu, atque ordine permanet
in Aeternum. In what place, or state so ever a man shall be found, when he
dies, in the same state, and degree he shall remain for ever.

But to reckon up al, that might be said in this behalf, it would be long.
A simple man, M Harding, without any profounde knowledge of ye Doctoures, may
easily, see, that these saieinges will hardly stand with your Doctrine of
Purgatory. Your own Roffensis says, Polydor. De Inuentorib. Lib. 8. Cap. 1.
Nemo nunc dubitat Orthodoxus, in Purgatorium sit: De quo tamen apud Priscos,
vel nulla, vel quam rarissima fiebat mentio. Sed and Graecis ad hunc vsque diem
non est Creditum: Quamdiu enim nulla esset cura de Purgatorio, nemo quaesiuit
Indulgentias: No Catholic man now doubts of Purgatory: Ceremonies.
Whereof notwithstanding emonge the Ancient Fathers there is either no mention
at al, or very seldom. Yea even until this day the Grecians Believe it not.
For so long as there was no care for Purgatory, noman sought after
Pardonnes. By which witness it appears, that Pardonnes, and Purgatory were
brought in iointely both together. And as the case now stands, and as
most men think, the Pope could be contented to lose both Heaven, and
Hell, to save his Purgatory.

The Apology, Cap. 17. Division. 1.
As touching the multitude of vain, and superfluous Ceremonies, we know,
that S. Augustine did greuousely complain of them in his own time: and
therefore have we cut of a great number of them: because we know, that
men's consciences were encumbred about them, and the Churches of God
ouerladen with them. Nevertheless we keep still, and esteem, not only those
Ceremonies, which, we are sure, were delivered us from the Apostles: but
sum others too bisides, which we thought might be suffered without hurt
to the Church of God: for that we had a desire, that al things in the Holy
Congregation might, as S. Paul commands, be done with comeliness, and in
good order. But, as for all those things, which, we saw, were, either very
superstitious, or utterly unprofitable, or noisome, or mockeries, or contrary
to the Holy Scriptures, or else unseemly for sober, and discreet people,
whereof there be infinite numbres now a days, where the Roman Religion is
used, these, I say, we have utterly refused without al manner exception:
because we would not have the right worshippinge of God to be any longer
defiled withsutche folies.

M. Hardinge.
S. Augustine, whom ye allege wrongfully against the Ceremonies of the
Catholic Church. speaks only of the cuttinge away of such manners, and
rites, as be crepte into some one particulare Country, neither contained in
Holy Scriptures, nor established by Councels of Bishops, nor confirmed by
Custom of the whole Church. But how prove you by that place, that you may
pull down Aultars, and Images: disallowe the Vow of Poverty, Lent, Oil?
etc. S. Augustine refers the taking away of any Custom, or manner unto
dew Authority, exhortinge it to be done. Vbi faculras tribuitur: Where
Power is given to do it. Neither else may it be done lawfully at al, etc. Ye
think, we have many ridiculous, and fond things, in our Ceremonies. If we
had, Untruth. For S. Augustine, speakinge of his time, says, Tam multis
Praesumptionibus ita plena sunt omnia, etc.
as in deed we have not, would ye laugh at them, as Cham did at the
nakedness of his Father Noe? etc. Laugh on ye cursed Chananees: but we will
dance before the Arc: we will Then be ye circumcised, as Paul was. For
this was only a Ievvishe Ceremony.
shire our head with Paul, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This matter had benne over cold, had not M. Hardinge a little enflamed his
Choler in the end, and cried out upon his Cursed Chananees. His Aultars, his
Images, his Vows, his Lentes, and his Otles be answered sufficiently
otherwheres.

S. Augustines words, August. Epist. 119
concerning this matter, are pregnante and plain: H^cnimis doleo, quia multa,
quae in Diuinis Libris saluberrime praecepta sunt, minus curantur: and tam
multis Praesumptionibus sic plena sunt omnia, etc. This thing greeueth me,
that so many things, whole somely commanded in the Holy Scriptures, are not
regarded: and of things are full of so many presumptions, August. in ead.
Epistol.
etc. And again, Quamuis ista contra Fidem non sint, tamen ipsam Religionem,
quam Paucissimis, and Manifestissimis Celebrationum Sacramentis Misericordia
Dei liberam esse voluit, seruilibus oneribus ita premunt, vt tolerabilior sit
conditio Iudaeorum: qui etsi tempus libertatis non agnouerint, Legalibus tamen
sarcinis, non humanis Praesumptionibus subijciuntur: Al be it these things be
not against the Faith, yet with servile burdens they so oppress our very
Religion, which God of his Mercy would have to be free, under very fevve,
and most manifest Sacraments of Divine Service, that the state of the Jews
is mutche more tolerable ( then the state of the Church of Christ). For the
Jews, notwithstanding they knew not the time of Liberty, yet were they
subject to the packes, and burdens of the Law ( of God): and not unto the
Diuises, and Presumptions of Men.

Of such Diuises, Chrysostom in Matthae. Homil. 52.
and Presumptions, Chrysostom says, Non dicunt, Cur Legem Mosi, sed Cur
Traditionem Seniorum transgrediuntur? Vnde patet, eos multa innouasse, cum Deus
contra vetuisset, ne quid adderent, aut minuerent. Sed illi, cum timerent, ne
Principatum amitterent, ceu legum Latores, vt Maiores esse viderentur, plurima
innouarunt. Quae res ad tantam peruenir nequitiam, vt praecepta sua custodirent
magis, quam Praecepta Dei: The Phariseis say not unto Christ, Wherefore do
thy Disciples break the Law of Moses, but, Wherefore do they break the
Traditions of the Elders? Whereby it appears, that they had altered many
things: whereas God had commanded, that they should neither add, nor
diminishe. But fearinge, lest they should lose their Authority, as if they
had benne Law Makers, to the end they might seem the greatter, they altered
mutche. Which thing ( in the end) grew to such a wickedness, that they
keapte their own Commandments, more then the Commandments of God.

In like manner says S. Cyril, Cyrill. in Johan. Lib. 8. Cap. 1.
Vellent suam Doctrinam, and Paternas Traditiones ab hominibus potius suscipi,
atque in admiratione, honoreque haberi. Quicquid igitur Christo credentium
accesserit, sibi detractum putant: The Phariseis would, that men should
receive, and magnify their Doctrine, and the Traditions of the Fathers:
Therefore how many so ever Faitheful came unto Christ, they thought so many
were lost from them.

It is not true, yt ye say, Traditions may not be changed, or abolished
without the general Consent of the whole Church. For Ceremonies, as they
never grew together at one time in all places, so can they not lightly be
abolished together at one time in all places. Socrates, Lib. 5. Cap. 22. (...).
Socrates, eod. loco.
Socrates says plainly, Videtur mihi, Multa modo in his regionibus, modo in
illis Consuetudinem obtinuisse: It seems unto me, that many things have
benne received by Custom, now in one Country, and now in an other. Again
he says, In vniuersum certee, and in omnibus Obseruationibus piarum precum,
non possunt duae Ecclesiae inueniri, quae prorsus inter se consentiant: Verily
to speak Universally, in all manner of Observations, or Fourmes of Common
Prayer, there cannot two Churches be found, that agree thorovvly bitvvene
them selves. S. Augustine says plainly, Omnia talia, etc, vbi facultas
tribuitur, sine omni dubitatione resecanda existimo: Al such things, in my
judgment, ought to be cut of, August. Epist. 19. Did. 63. Quia Sancta.
as soon as just occasion, or Power is geeuen, without any manner of
doubtinge. So says Pope Steuin, Si nonnulli ex Praedecessoribus, and
Maioribus nostris fecerunt aliqua, quae illo tempore potuerunt esse fine culpa,
and postea vertuntur in errorem, and Superstitionem, sine tarditate aliqua, and
cum magna Authoritate a posteris destruantur: If sundry of our Predecessors,
or Elders have done certain things, which at that time might well be done
without hurt, and afterward are turned into error, and superstition,
without any staggeringe, and with great Authority let them be destroyed,
and abolished by the Successors.

We laugh not, as, ye say, at the nakedness of our Father, M. Hardinge. Our
Father is in Heaven, the Father of Light, the God of Glory: and in him there
is no nakedness. We laugh not at any of these things, but we say with S.
Augustine, as it is alleged before, Hoc nimis doleo, etc. This thing very
mutche greeueth me, August Epist. 119
that so many things wholesomely commanded in the Holy Scriptures, are not
regarded: and that al things are full of so many presumptions: And that, as S.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom in Matthae. Homil. 52. Hieremi. 23.
These things are called upon, and more regarded, then the Laws, and
Commandments of our Father. Our Father says of you, and of your Fellows:
Volunt facere, vt obliuiscatur Populus meus Nominis mei propter somnia sua:
They will cause, that my people shall foregeate my name, for love of their
Dreams. Our Father says, Hieremi. 2.
Two-euils have my people done: They have foresaken me the Fountain of the
Water of Life: and they have ripte up to them selves broken Cesternes, yt can
hold no Water. Our Father says, Hieremi. 23. Esai. 1. Matthae. 15.
What is chafe unto the Corn? Who has required these things at your Hands?
To be short, hereof Christ him self says thus, Every plant, that my
Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be pluckte up by the Roots.

The Apology, Cap. 18. Division. 1.
We make our Prayers in that tongue which al our people, as meet is, may
understand, to the end they may (as S. Paul counsels us) take common
commodity by Common Prayer: even as all the Holy Fathers, and Catholic
Bishops, both in the Old, and New Testamente did use to Pray them selves,
and taught the people to Pray too: lest, as S. Augustine says, Like
Parottes, and Ouselles we should seem to speak, that we understand not.
Neither have we any other Mediator, and Intercessour, by whom we may have
access to God the Father, but only Jesus Christ, in whose only name al
things are obtained at his Fathers hand. But it is a shameful part, and full
of Infidelity, that we see every where used in the Churches of our
adversaries, not only in that they will have innumerable sorts of Mediatoures,
and that utterly without the Authority of Gods Word: (So that, as Jeremy
says, the Saints be now as many in number, Ierem. Cap. 2. and 11.
or rather above the number of the Cities: and poor men cannot tell, to
which Saint it were best to turn them first: And though there be so many,
as they cannot be told, yet every one of them has his peculiare duty, and
office assigned unto him by these folks: what thing they ought to ask, what
to geeue, and what to bring to pass) But bisides this also, in that their do
not only wickedly, but also shamefully call upon the Blessed Virgin Christ's
Mother, to have her remember, that she is a Mother, and to command her Son,
and to use a Mothers authority over him. There is but one Mediator of
Salvation, who is Christ only: But the Saints his friends be Mediators of
Intercession. 2. Corin. 1.


M. Hardinge.
We have but only one Mediator to Salvation Jesus Christ, by whose merits
God is reconciled unto us. But where ye say, that besides the same one
Mediator* ye have none other, that This is M. Hardings legierdumaine. For we
speak only of such Mediators, as we ought to pray unto.
may Prai or make Intercession for you, that point of false belief ye may
keep for your selves. We had rather hold with As if S. Paul had ever
willed us to Pray to Saints.
S. Paul, who as he prayed for all Christen men, so he doubted not to say to
the Corinthians, that he hoped to escape danger, A diuuantibus vobis in
Oratione pro nobis, by the help of you in Prayer for us. If one good man may
help an other in this life by Prayer, whiles he has yet some what of his own
to be careful for: much more the Saints, which are dissolved, and reign
with Christ, can healpe us with their perfect Prayer. Ye can tell (I trow)
that S. Hierome made this argument within little of twelve hundred years
paste. Mediator of Salvation.
Neither make we them Gods, as ye would seem to say by the place (which
being spoken by the Prophet Hieremie of very Idolles) ye apply to the
friends of Christ. Psalm. 138.
Whom David says to be unto him most honorable, and their dominion to be
most strong. There is no cause why ye should wonder, if diverse Cities do
gladly acknowledge some one Holy Angel, Saints be peculiar patrones of
certain places. Sapien. 3.
Apostle, Martyr, or Confessor, as their chief Patron and Friend. For if (as
it is written) Michael the Archangell was once Prince of the Jews: and stood
always for the children of Gods people: it is not to be doubted but that
Christen people have now also their Untruth, procedinge of vain dotage.
Patrones. To this purpose A grave Authority, taken out of the very Portuise.
some apply that which is written, Fulgebunt iusti, and tanquam scintillae in
arundineto discurrent, iudicabunt nationes, and dominabuntur populis, and
regnabit dominus illorum in perpetuum: The just men shall shine, and like
sparks of fire in dry kickes shall run abroad: they shall judge nations, and
bear rule over peoples, and our Lord shall reign over them for ever. S.
Ambrose is of that opinion plainly, where he says, writing upon S. Luke, In
fine Lib. S. comme^t. in Lucam.
Sicut Angeli praesunt, ita and ij qui vitam meruerint Angelorum. As the Angels
be over Nations, so they also which deserve the Life of Angels.

Concerning the offices that, ye say, we appointe unto the Saints, ye
must understand, that as God has showed by any Miracle, what good work he
has wrought by this Saint, rather then by that: so the people desire to
obteigne of God by the same Saints Prayer that thing, wherein they may This
is the certainetie of M. Hardinges Prayer. It hangs of a blind conjecture.
conjecture, that God has given him most grace. And because our Lady the
blessed Virgin Mary has more grace given to her, Intercession of the blessed
Virgin Mary.
then any other Creature (except ye can name It is a greatter Grace to be the
Child of God.
a greater grace then to be the Mother of God): therefore all Christen Nations
are most bold to desire in Prayer to be reliued by her Intercession, and
Mediation of her Prayer made to her Son Jesus Christ, who (we doubt not)
hears her most, gladly, as nolesse intendinge to do good by her continually
to us, then we are sure, that by her he has done for us those great
benefits, which continually we do receive, for so much as he took Fleashe
of her. And saying that Christ is the first begotten among many Brothers,
Roman. 8. Marie Mother to all that love Christ. Johan. 19. Spiritual
familiarity with the mother of God, in excess of mind and sovereign
Devotion.
we that are called into one Heretage with him and by him, may take heart to
account Christ's Mother, for our Mother, specially whereas he said unto John
his Disciple, and in him to all the Children of Grace, behold thy Mother.

If now any spiritual man such as S. Bernarde was, deeply consideringe the
great honor and dignity of Christ's Mother, do in excess of mind Open
Blasphemy, is Spiritual dalliance: O vvheu vvil M. Hardinge confess a fault?
spiritually sport and dally (as it were) with her, biddinge her to remember,
that she is a Mother, and that thereby she has a certain right to command
her Son, and require in a most sweet manner, that she use her right: is
this either impiously, or impudently spoken? Is not he rather most impious and
impudent, that finds fault there with? If ever any of you had practiced in
contemplation any of that swetenes, which is in Canticis Canticorum, ye
should have found, that there the spiritual Soul is bolder with God her
Creator and, spouse, then S. Bernarde ever was with our Lady, being but a
Creature, and a member of the same Church with him.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye say, There is one only Mediatoure of Salvation: but there are many
Mediatoures of Intercession. And thus with this pretty simple distinction, ye
conueigh your self away invisible in a cloud. But to cut of quarrels, M.
Hardinge, Let us have that one only Mediatoure of Salvation: and then
afterward take to you your other Mediatoures of Intercession at your pleasure.

How be it, if Christ only be the Mediatoure of Salvation, wherefore then
do you thus call upon the Blessed Virgin Christ's Mother, Salua omnes, qui te
glorificant? Save thou al them, that glorify thee. Here ye intrude upon
Christ's office: and make the Holy Virgin a Mediatoure, not only of
Intercession, but also of Salvation. Wherefore say ye thus of Thomas Becket,
of whose Saincthoode, for ought that I know, ye may well stand in doubt: Tu
per Thomae Sanguinem, quem pro te impendit, Fac nos Christ scandere, qu^
Thomas Ascendit: O Christ, make us to Ascend unto Heaven, whither Thomas is
Ascended, even by the Blood of Thomas, Mediator of Intercession.
that he sheadde for thy sake. Here you seek, not only Intercession, but also
Salvation in the Blood of Thomas. Wherefore doothe S. Ambrose say, Ambrosi in
Sermon 6. De S. Margareta.
if it were S. Ambrose, that wrote the Book, Reddere debemus Sanctis
honorificentiam, qui nobis Salutem profusione sui Sanguinis pepererunt: qui tam
Sacra Hostia pro nostra propitiatione Domino sunt oblati: We must yield
honor unto the Saints, which have procured Salvation for us, by the
sheaddinge of their Blood: Which also were offered up unto the Lord so Holy
a Sacrifice for our Salvation. If we have Salvation in the Blood of Saints,
then is not Christ the Only Mediatoure of our Salvation.

He is no indifferente Vmpeere, that first divides Offices equally bitweene
two, and afterward alloteth both offices to One alone.

Notwithstanding, the end, and office as well of Intercession, as also of
Salvation, is, to Reconcile us unto God, and to procure us Mercy. But this is
Christ's only office: He reconcileth us unto God: He presents us unto the
Throne of Grace. Romans 8. 1. Timoth. 2.
And therefore, as S. Paul says, he evermore makes Intercession, for us.
And for that cause also he says, Vnus est Mediator Dei and Hominum, Homo
Christus Jesus: There is One Mediatoure bitweene God, and Man, Christ Jesus
being Man.

S. Paul requires the people to make Intercession, and to pray for him. This
is true. And God has commanded, that all the Faitheful should pray one for an
other. But S. Paul never required the people to pray to Saints. S.
Augustine says, Augustine. Contra Epist. Parmeniant, Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Augustine.
in eod. Lib.
Paulus non facit se Mediatorem inter Populum, and Deum: Sed rogat, vt pro se
orent inuicem omnia Membra Coporis Christi: Paul makes not him self a
Mediatoure bitweene God and the people: but requires, that they Pray al one
for an other, being all the Members of the Body of Christ. Again he says of
S. John, Si Johannes ita diceret, Hoc Scripsi vobis, vt non peccetis: et si
quis peccauerit, Mediatorem me habetis apud Deum, and ego Exoro pro peccatis
vestris, Sicut Parmenianus quodam loco Mediatorem posuit Episcopum inter
Populum, and Deu^, quis eum ferret bonorum, atque Fidelium Christianorum? Quis
sicut Apostolum Christi, and non sicut Antichristum intueretur? If S. John
would say, This have I written unto you, that ye Sin not: and if ye Sin,
ye have me your Mediatoure before God, and I vvil entreat for your Sins, As
Parmenian ( the Heretic) in a certain place made the Bishop a Mediatoure
bitweene God, and the People, what good, and Faitheful Christian Man could
abide him? Who would look upon him, is the Apostle of Christ: and not rather
think him to be Antichriste? Here, M. Hardinge, your sely distinction of
Intercession, and Salvation, cannot save you. For Parmenian never thought, the
Bishop was a Mediatoure of Salvation. And yet S. Augustine says, If S. John
would have said so mutche of him self, he had not benne the Apostle of
Christ: but rather should have benne judged, and taken for Antichriste.

Ye think, the words of the Prophet Hieremie spoken of Idolles, and False
Gods, may not justly be applied to the Saints of God. In deed of the
Saints part, it were great blasphemy, to call them Idolles. For they see
God face to face, and evermore be with God in Glory. But in respect of your
horrible Abuses, and vain fantasies, the Words of the Prophet be rightly
applied. For you, in your imagination, of the Saints of God have made
Idolles: and have so multiplied, and increased the same, that the number of
them has far passed the number of al your Towns, and Cities. And therefore
the Anciente Father Epiphanius applies the like words of the same Prophet
Hieremie, unto the Blessed Virgin Marie, being then idolatrousely abused by
the Heretics called Collyridiani, Distinct Offices.
even as the same Blessed Virgin, and other Saints are by you abused now.
Thus he writteth, Epiphani. Li. 3. Hares. 59.
Ne quis comedat de errore, qui est propter S. Mariam. Tametsi enim pulchrum
sit lignum, tamen non est ad Cibu^. Etsi Pulcherrima est Maria, and Sancta, and
Honorata: at non ad Adoratione^. Hae ver^ Mulieres, colentes Mariam, rursus
renouant Fortunae Mixturam, (...).
and praeparant Mensam Diabolo, non Deo: Quemadmodum scriptum est, Pascuntur
Cibo impietatis. Et rursus, and Foeminae terunt Pollinem, and Filij colligunt
ligna, vt faciant Placentas oleo subactas Reginae Coeli. Compescantur a
Hieremia tales Mulieres: and ne turbent Orbem terrarum. Ne dicant, Honoramus
Reginam Coeli: Let noman Fate of this Error, touching S. Marie. For though
the tree be fair, yet is not this Fruit to be Eaten. Although Marie be
bew^ieful, and Holy, and Honorable, yet is she not to be Adoured. But these
Women, vvorshippinge S. Marie, renew again the Sacrifice of Wine mingled in
the Honure of the Goddess Fortuna, and prepare a Table for the Devil, and not
for God. As it is written in the Scriptures. They are fed with the Meat of
Wickedness. And again, Their Women boulte flower: and their Children
geather sticks, to make fine Cakes in the Honor of the Queen of Heaven.
Therefore let such Women be rebuked by the Prophet Hieremie: and let them
no more trouble the world. And let them not say, we Worship the Queen of
Heaven.

Here we see, the words, that were spoken of the Heathenishe Idolles, are
applied by Epiphanius unto the Mother of Christ: not to deface that Blessed
Virgin, but to declare the fond errors of those Heretics.

As for the distribution of offices, and several duties, limited, and
appointed to each Saint in his degree, it shable best for modesties sake to
say nothing. S. Augustine speaking of the Heathens, from whom this part of
your Divinity, M. Hardinge, was first derived, says thus, Dicebat, ita esse
vtilem cognitionem Deorum, Augusti. De Ciuita. Li. 4. Ca. 22
si sciatur, quam quisque Deus vim, aut potestatem habeat cuiusque rei. Ex eo
enim poterimus, inquit, scire, quem cuiusque rei causa Deum aduocare, atque
inuocare debeamus: ne faciamus, vt Mimi solent, and optemus a Libero Aquam, a
Lymphis Vinum: Varro said, The knowledge of the Gods is Profitable, if a man
understand, what Power, and Authority each God has in every thing. For so,
says be, we may know, whom to call upon, and whom to pray unto: Lest
happily we do, as certain Mimi are wont to do: that is to say, Lest of
Bacchus, the God of Wine, we beg Water, or of Lymphae, the Goddesses of
Water, we beg Wine.

These things having their beginning emonge the Heathens, have sithence
benne brought even into the Church of God: and all the Saints in Heaven have
benne appointed, each one in Order to his Several Office: Lest any one should
intrude into an others room. Antoninus says. in his time. where S Paul and
Freere Dominike were painted together, the manner was, under y^ Image of S.
Paul to write these words, Per hunc itur ad Christum: We may come to
Christ, by this Saint: But under y^ Image of Freere Dominike, they wrote
thus, Sed magis per istum: Yet mutche rather by this Saint: Whereby was
meante, that Freere Dominikes Office, and Authority before God, was sommewhat
better, then S. Paul's.

Whereas ye teach the people thus to pray unto the Blessed Virgin, Monstra te
esse Matrem: Command thy Son: Use thy Motherly Authority over him: Let him
know thee to be his Mother, this you say, is no blasphemy, but a Spiritual
dallicinge. Now verily, M. Hardinge, this must needs be a blessed kind of
Divinity, that can turn Prayer into Dalliance.

One of your Beaupeeres of Louaine, as a man carrieing his face in his hand,
says boldly, Copus Dialog. 3. Page 340.
these words were never used in your Church. And therefore he says with good
courrage, Interim a bonis istis viris quaero, Cur non nominant illas Ecclesias,
quae Virginem Matrem tam impudenter appellant? Mother of God. Child of God.
Cur eas, inquam, non nominant? In the mean season, says he, this question I
demand of these honest men: Why name they not those Churches, which so
impudently call upon that Virgin Christ's Mother? I say, Why do they not name
them? Your modesty herein, M. Hardinge, is more praisewoorthy. You are
contented to graunde the fact: and pleasantly to excuse it by a Spiritual
Dallieinge.

But ye may tell your said Fellow, that this kind of Prayer was Universally
used throughout al your whole Church of Rome: that Men, Women, and Children,
Learned, and Unlearned were taught, and forced thus to pray: Thou art the
Queen of Heaven: Thou art the Lady of Angels: Command thy Son: Shevve
thee self to be the Mother. Ye may tell him, y^ Cardinal Bembus, sometime the
Popes Secretary, Bembus in Epist. ad Carolum. 5. Council. Trident. Session. 2.
calls y^ same Blessed Virgin, Dominam, and Deam nostram: Our Lady, and
Goddess. Tell him, that Ambrosius Catharinus in your Late Chapter at Tridente,
representing, as you say, your whole Catholic Church, calls y^ same
Blessed Virgin Gods Felovve, by these words, Fidelissima eius Socia:
Gods most Faitheful Felovve.

Ye may further tell him, Council. Oxoniens.
that in your Council of Oxforde, Christ's name is quite forgotten, and leafte
out: and Our Ladies name put in place: For thus it begins, Authoritate Dei
Patris, and Beatae Virginis, and omnium Sanctorum, etc. By the Authority of
God the Father, and of the Blessed Virgin, and of al Saints.
Notwithstanding ye may well answer, as before, that all this was no manner
blasphemy against God, but only a Pretty Spiritual Dalliance: even such
Dalliance, 1. Corin. 10.
I trow, as S. Paul means by these words, Sedit Populus ad manducandum,
and bibendum: and surrexerunt ad Ludendum: The People sat down to eat, and
drink: and rose up again to Play, or Dally, that is to say, to commit
Idolatry.

You say, Our Lady, the Blessed Virgin has more grace given her, then any
other Creature, except ye can name a greatter Grace, say you, then to be the
Mother of God. Verily, M. Hardinge, to be the Child of God, it is a great
deal greatter Grace, Augustine. De Sancta Virginitate, Cap. 3
then to be the Mother of God. S. Augustine says, Beatior ergo Maria fuit,
Percipiendo Fidem Christi, quam concipiendo Carnem Christi. Materna
Propinquitas nihil Mariae profusset, nisi foelicius Christum Cord, quam Carne
gestasset: Marie was more Blessed ( or suller of Grace) in that she Received
the Faith of Christ, then in that she Conceived the Fleashe of Christ.
Motherly kinreade could have done Marie no good, unless she had borne
Christ more Blessedly in her Heart, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 10.
then she bare him in her Fleashe. And again he says, Matter mea, quam
appellastis Foelicem, inde Foelix est, quia Verbum Dei custodtuit: Non quia in
illa Verbum Caro factum est: My Mother, whom ye have called Blessed, therefore
is Blessed, because she has keapte the Word of God: Not because the
Word in her was made Fleashe.

Therefore says Epiphanius, Epiphani. Li. 3. Hares. 59. Contra Collyridian.
Christus dixit, Quid mihi, and tibi est Mulier? Non dum venit hora mea. Qu^
non putarent aliqui, magis eximiam esse Sanctam Virginem, Mulierem eam
appellauit: veluti prophetans, quae essent futura in terra Sectarum and
Haerese^n genera: vt ne aliqui nimium admirati Sanctam, in hanc Haeresim,
eiusque deliramenta dilabantur. Est enim Ludibrium tota res, and anicularum
fabula, and, vt ita dicam, tota Haeresis tractatio: Christ said unto his
Mother, Woman, what have I to do with thee? My hour is not yet comme. Left
any man should think, Our Lady was of greatter excellency. he called her
Woman: as it were prophesieing of the Kinds, and Sects of Heresies. that
were to comme in the world: Lest any man having too great opinion of that Holy
Saint, should fall into this Heresy, and into the dotage of the same. For in
deed the whole materis but a mockery, and an Old VViues tale, and soothely to
say, nothing else, but the handelinge of an Heresy. Origin. in Lucam, Homil
25.
Origin hereof says, Si mensuram transcenderit Charitatis, and qui diligit,
and qui diligitur, in Peccato est: If Love pass the measure of charity, as
well he, that Loves, as also he, that is Loved, is in Sin.

But touching the matter it self, Ambros. ad Roma. Cap. 1.
S. Ambrose says, Ide^ ad Reges itur per Tribunos, and Comites: quia Homo
vtique est Rex: and nescit, quibus debeat Rempublicam credere. Ad Deum autem,
quem nihil later, Omnium enim Merita nouit, Promerendum, suffragatore non est
Opus, sed mente deuota. Vbicunque enim talis loquutus fuerit ei, respondebit
illi: Therefore we are brought unto the presence of Kings by Lords, and
Officers: Because the King is a Man, and knows not, to whom he may commit
his Realm. But to obtain Gods favor, from whom nothing is secret, as
knowinge, what every man is meet to have, we need no spokesman, but a
devout mind. For, where so ever such a one speaks unto God, God will
answer him.

The Apology, Cap. 19. Division. 1.
We say also, that every person is borne in Sin, and leads his life in
Sin: that no body is able truly to say, his heart is clean. That the most
righteous person is but an unprofitable servant: That the Law of God is
perfect, and requires of us perfect, and full obedience: That we are able by
no means to fulfill that Law in this worldly life: That there is no one mortal
Creature, which can be justified by his own deserts in Gods sight: And
therefore that our only succor, and refuge is to fly to the Mercy of Our
Father by Jesus Christ, and assuredly to persuade our minds, that he is the
obteiner of forgiveness for our sins: And that by his Blood al our spots
of Sin be vvasshed clean: That he has pacified and set at one al things by
the Blood of his Cross: That he by the same One only Sacrifice, which he
once offered upon the Cross, has brought to effect, and fulfilled al
things, and, that for y^ cause he said, when he gave up ye Ghost, It is
finished, as though he would signify, that the price, and ransomme was now
full paid for the Sin of al Mankind. If there be any, that think this
Sacrifice not sufficient, let them go in Gods name, and seek a better. We
verily, because we know this to be the Only Sacrifice, are well content with
it alone, and look for none other: and, forasmutche as it was to be offered
but Once, we command it not to be renewed again: and, because it was full and
perfect in all points, and parts, we do not ordeine in place thereof any
continual succession of offeringes.

M. Hardinge.
Ye make a Sophistical argument, when ye teach, because the Law of God
requires of us full obedience, that therefore it cannot be satisfied in this
life by any means. For when ye say, it requires of us full obedience, if ye
mean A vain folly. For Gods Law was written for Men in Earth, not for
Angels in Heaven.
such full obedience, as is required only in this life, then conclude ye
falsely, that we can by no means satisfy it. But if ye mean such full
obedience, as is only performed in Heaven, then ye conclude well, that we in
this life cannot fulfill such perfection, as is required in Heaven. But then
have ye said nothing to the purpose. For we know, God commands not that
which is impossible to a man in grace.
what mark ye shoot at, by your Doctrine uttered in other places. Your
meaning is A horrible heresy. S. Augustine says, Deus iubet aliquae, quae
non possumus facere.
that no man in this Life is able by the Grace of God to fulfill the
Commandments. We believe, God commands us nothing impossible to us. A
fond question For God punishes Infantes for their Original Sin: yet are
theie by no means hable to avoid it.
Otherwise how could he justly punish for not doing that commandment,
which by no means we were able to fulfill? We are sure that God punishes
noman unjustly: for, Non est apud dominum Deum nostrum iniquitas: There is no
iniquity in Our Lord God.

Moises speakinge of the fulfillinge of the Commandments of God, Deuteronomy. 30.
Romans 10.
which also S. Paul repeteth, says that they are not above us in Heaven,
neither far from us beyond the Sea: but hard by thee (says he) is his
word in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou maiste do it. And Christ
says, Matthae. n. 1. John. 5.
Iugum meum suaue est, and onus meum leave: The cause hereof is Gods Mercy S.
Augustine says, Omniae mandata facta deputantur, quando quicquid non factum
est, ignoscitur.
My Yoke is sweet, and my burden light: and S. John, His Commandments be
not heavy. He then, that says, we can by no means fulfill the Law of God,
makes Untruth. For we make not god Unjust: but we Confess our selves to
be finners.
God unjust, and evil, or impotent, and not able to give so mutche grace, as
may help to fulfill his Law. Let the discrete reader judge, what blasphemy
your words contain. Belie us no more hereafter. This is our Doctrine. better
founded in the word of God, and in the Tradition of the Apostles, and in the
custom of the whole Church, then that ye shall ever be able to overthrow it.
Blaspheme, and bark against it ye may: overcome it ye cannot.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Al other things here by you touched, M. Hardinge, I will pass over: thinkinge
it sufficient, to note a few words of the possibility, and perfourmance of
the Law: and so mutche the more, for that ye seem therein in sum part, to
renew the Pelagian Heretics Old condemned error.

As touching that full and perfect Obedience, that is required of us by the
Law, ye answer, there are sundry sorts of Perfection: namely, that there
is Perfection in Children: Perfection in Men: Perfection in Angels: and
Perfection, in God. And further ye say, that in this life we cannot fulfill
such Perfection, as is required of the Angels of God in Heaven. And this
answer ye make, touching the Obedience, and perfourminge of the Law: As if
ye would say, The Law of God was geeuen to Angels: and is to be performed,
not in the Earth, but Only in Heaven: And, as if God had said to those Blessed
Sprites, Thou shall not Kill: Thou shall not commit aduouterie: Thou shall not
steal: Thou shall not couete, etc.

In your sundry Perfections, of Children, Men, Angels, and God, I have no
skill. The Apology meante only of that Perfection, that is required in Man.
How be it, in every kind they say, Perfectum est, cui nihil deest: That
thing is Perfect, that is full, and absolute, and wants nothing.

And here, lest ye should deceive your self by wrong measure, God him self
has showed you, Deuter. 6. Matthae. 22. Deuter. 17. Deuteron. 27. Calat. 3.
Jacob. 2. Matthae. 5.
what Perfection he requires. Thus he says, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy Power: Ye shall not turn,
neither to the Right hand, nor to the Left: Accursed is he, that stands not
in every thing, that is written in the Law, to perform the same. And S.
James says, Who so offends in one Commandment, is guilty of al. And
Christ says, Be ye Perfect (not measuring your selves by your own
ability, but) as your Father is Perfect, which is in Heaven. And yet hereby
he means not the Perfection, that is in God, and his Angels, but only that
Perfection, that is required in Man.

S. Hierome says, The Pelagian Heretics in Old times used the same
shifts, that you use now. For where as the Catholic Learned Fathers said,
Noman is Perfect, and void of Sin, they answered then even in such sort,
as you do now, Hieronym. ad C^esiphons. contra Pelagianos.
Noman is Perfect in such degree of Perfection, as God is Perfect. S.
Hieromes words be these, Aiunt, ad Comparationem Dei, nullum esse Perfectum:
Possibility of the Law.
Quasi Scriptura hoc dixerit: They say ( even as you, M. Hardinge, say) that
in Comparison of God, noman is Perfect: Asthough this were the saieinge of the
Scriptures. And therefore he says unto them, Nunquid Praecepit mihi Deus, vt
essem, quod Deus est? Vt nihil inter me esset, and Dominum Creatorem? Vt mayor
essem Angelorum fastigio? Vt haberem, quod Angeli non habent? I beseech you,
has God Commanded me, that I should be the same, that God is? That there
should be no difference ( in Perfection) bitweene me, and my Lord the
Creatoure? That I should be above the Highness of Angels? Or that I should
have, that the Angels have not? It was in vain therefore, M. Hardinge, thus to
borrowe the Pelagians Weapons, and to make matter of this Perfection. For we
speak not of Angels, but only of Men.

Further, tointreate of the Perfect fulfillinge, and accomplisshinge of the
Law, I mean, so far as the Law requirethe, the Pelagian Heretics herein
also said, Augustine. De ^^ati. and libero Arbitr. Cap. 4.
even as you say: and none otherwise. S. Augustine thereof reports thus:
Magnum aliquid Pelagiani se scire putam, quando dicunt, Non iuberet Deus, quod
Sciret ab homine non posse fieri. Quis hoc nesciat? Sed ide^ iubet aliqua, quae
non possumus, vt nouerimus, quid ab ipso petere debeamus: The Pelagians think
them selves Cunninge men, when they say, God vvoulde not command that
thing, that he knovveth, a man is not hable to do. And who is there, that
knows not this? But therefore God Commands us to do sum things, that
we are not hable to do, that we may understand, what we ought to crave
of him.

S. Hierome says unto one of the same Pelagians, Hieronym. ad Ctesiphont.
contra Pelagianos.
Facilia esse dicis Dei mandata: and tamen nullum proferre potes, qui vniuersa
compleuerit: Ye say, Gods Commandments be easy: And yet ye are hable to
show us noman, that ever fulfilled them al together.

Therefore again he says unto them, Hieronym. co^tra Pelagianos. li. 1.
Noli ponere in Coelum os tuum, vt per Esse, and Esse posse, stultorum auribus
illudas. Quis enim tibi concedit, posse hominem facere, quod nullus vnquam
hominum potuerit? Set not thy face against Heaven, to mock fools ears
with these words, Be, and Can be. For who will grant you, that a man can do
that thing, that noman ever was hable to do?

Likewise S. Augustine says, Augustine. De Spiritu, and Litera, Cap. 1.
Dixi fieri posse, vt sit homo sine peccato, si Voluntas ei non desit, open
Diuina adiuuante: Sed tamen Praeter Vnum, in quo omnes uiuificabuntur, neminem
vel fuisse, vel fore, in quo hic viuente esset ista Perfectio: I said, It is
possible, that a man may be without Sin, if he want not will, the Power of
God assistinge him: And yet I said, that bisides Only Christ, in whom al
men shall be quickened to Life, there was never man, nor never shall be, who
being in this life, shall have this Perfection. S. Augustine says, Noman can
atteine to this Perfection: and he speaks of the Perfection, that is
required, not of Angels, but of Men.

Ye will say, as the Pelagians did, wherefore then doothe Christ say, Be ye
Perfect? Matthae. 5. Philip. 3. Hieronym. Aduersus Pelagian Lib. 1.
Wherefore doothe S. Paul say, As many of us, as be Perfect? etc. Hereto S.
Hierome answeareth thus: Quid ergo sapimus? imo quid sapere debemus, qui
Perfecti non sumus? Imperfectos nos esse Confiteri, and nondum comprehendisse,
nec dun acccepisse. Haec est hominis vera Sapientia, imperfectum esse se nosse.
Atque, vt ita loquar, Cunctorum in Carne Iustorum Imperfecta Perfectio est:
What then do we think, or what ought we to think, that be not Perfect?
We ought to Confess, that we are Imperfect, and that we have not yet
gotten, nor taken ( that Perfection) that is required. This is the true
wisdom of a Man, to know him self to be Imperfect. And, as I might say,
the Perfection of al Just men living in the Pleashe is Imperfect. Imperfect
Perfection.
Again he says, Iusti appellantur, non quod omni Vitio careant, Hieronym ad
C^esiphont. Augustine. ad Bonifacium Li 3. Cap. 7.
sed quod Maiori part Virtutum commendentur: They are called Just men, not
for that they be void of al manner Sin, but for that they are furnisshed
with the greatter part of Virtues. So likewise says S. Augustine, Virtus,
quae nunc est in homine Iusto, hactenus Perfecta nominatur, vt ad eius
Perfectionem pertineat etiam ipsius Imperfectionis, and in Veritate agnitio,
and in humilitate Confessio: The Virtue, that is now in a just man, so far
forth is called Perfect, that it pertains to the Perfection thereof, both
in truth to know, and in humility to Confess, that it is Imperfect. Again
he says, Omnia mandata facta deputantur, Augustine. Retracta. li. 1. ca. 19.
Augustine. De Spiritu, and Litera, Cap. 35.
quando, quicquid non fit, ignoscitur: All the Commandments of God are
accoumpted to be done, when that thing, that is not down, is forgeeuen. To
conclude, he says, Multum in hac vita ille profecit, qui quam long sit a
Perfectione Iustitiae, proficiendo cognouit: He has mutche profited in this
life, that by his profitinge has learned, how far he is from the
Perfection of Righteousenesse.

Yet nevertheless we may truly use S. Hieromes words, uttered in the
defense, and right of this same cause: Haec dicentes, non adulamur vitijs: sed
Authoriratem sequimur Scripturarum, Hieronymus. ad A^gasiam.
quod nullus homo sit absque Peccato. Sed conclusit Deus omnia sub Peccato, vt
Omnium misereatur: Notwithstanding we say thus, yet we flatter not Vices:
but we follow the Authority of the Scriptures, that there is nothing
without Sin. But God has shut up al things under Sin, that he may
have Mercy of Al. Hieronym. in Ezechiel. li. 14. Cap. 46.
Again he says, Perspicuum est, omnem hominem, quamuis ad Perfectionem
venerit, tamen indigere Misericordia Dei: and plenam Perfectionem ex Gratia,
non ex Merito possidere: It is most certain, that every man, yea although he
be grown to Perfection, yet needs the Mercy of God: and that he enioieth
full Perfection, not of his own Deserving, but of Grace.

Even so S. Augustine says, Augustine. De Ciuita Lib 19. Cap. 27.
Ipsa Iustitia nostra tanta est in hac vita, vt potius peccatorum Remissione
constet, quam Perfectione Virtutum: Our very Righteousenesse it self is so
greet in this Life, that it stands rather in Forgeeuenesse of Our Sins,
then in Perfection of Righteousenesse.

The Apology, Cap. 20. Division. 1.
Bisides, though we say, we have no meede at al by our own works, and
deeds, but appointe all the means of Our Salvation to be in Christ alone, yet
say we not, that for this cause men ought to live loosely, and dissolutely:
nor that it is yenough for a Christian, to be Baptized only, and to Believe:
as though there were nothing else required at his hand. For True Faith is
lively, and can in no wise be idle. Thus therefore teach we the people, that
God has called us, not to follow riot, and wantonness, but, as S. Paul
says, unto good works, to walk in them: That we are delivered from the
Power of Darkness, to the end that we should serve the Living God: to
cut away all the remnauntes of Sin, and to work Our Salvation in fear,
and tremblinge: that it may appear, that the Sprite of Sanctification is in
Our Bodies, and that Christ him self dwells in Our Hearts.

M. Hardinge.
With what face can these Defenders affirm, Merit, and Mercy.
that they teach the people to walk in good works, whereas beginning the
treatise of works in this present Apology, they say, that we have No aid
or help unto Salvation. Otherwise this report is Untrue.
no help, or aid in our works, and deeds? For so their Latin word
Praesidium doothe signify, which in the English, is turned into Meede.
What, Masters, is this the way to make men work well, to tell them before
hand, that their works be nothing worth, and that they help them never a
whitte? Why then let the Laborers Proverb take place, I had rather play for
nothing, then work for nothing. Nazianzen. Si mercenarius es, tantum
expecta mercedem. De Sancto Baptism.
Is there any Labourer so mad, as to work for nothing? First ye tell the
Laborers, that there is no help for them in their works, and then ye cry
unto them to labor: Is not this a folly, M Hard. Gods Truth is no mockery.
yea forsoothe, as hard as they list. Is not this to mock God and the
world? Whereas ye speak to Christian men, to those that be Baptized, to
such as have Faith: Yet ye tell them, they may work as mutche, as they will,
Untruth. For we: say with S. Paul, your works shall not be in vain in
the Lord.
but al in vain, etc. Ergo then, although a lively Faith cannot be idle, and
sum true Faith is lively, yet in an other sense. Untruth. Read the
answer.
there is a true Faith which is not lively, but idle. Which true Faith
shall become lively and have great aid in works, if it well learn to leave
idleness, and practice that in will and heart, which it believes in
understanding.

But whereas these Defenders would no help or aid to be in Christian men's
works, that Untruth. For it is no Heresy: it is the Faith of Christ. Read
the Answer.
Heresy may not so escape. That good works help us. Matthae. 19.
Christ being demanded of one, what good he should do to obtain
Everlasting life, said: If thou will enter into Life, keep the
Commandments. To keep the Commandments is a work: to enter into Life
is sum help to a man. Therefore it is falsely spoken, that in our works
there is no help for us. Again, Christ says, Who so ever forsakes his
house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands for my sake, be shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit Life
Everlasting. S. Paul says, God will render to every man according to his
work. To those that seek for glory, and honor, and incorruption,
according to the sufferance of good works, (he will render) Life Everlasting.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here ye trifle, M. Hardinge, although not mutche bisides your common woonte,
yet sommewhat above your ordinary. Our Doctrine herein is grounded upon these
words of Christ, Luc. 17.
When ye have done al, say, that ye be unprofitable* Servants, and
therefore have deserved nothing. In deed, of late years this has been the
General Doctrine of your Schools: Vita Aeterna est Merces debita pro nostris
Meritis: Vita Aeterna, nisi esset Merces debita, esset incerta. Quia debitum
certum est: Misericordia incerta: Everlasting Life is a reward dew for our
deseruinges. If Everlasting Life were not a dew reward, it were uncertain.
For dew debte is certain: Mercy, or sauoure is Uncertain. Thus have you
utterly drowned the Grace of God, and the Salvation that we have only in Jesus
Christ: and have turned the most Comfortable Doctrine of the Gospel into a
doungeon of Desperation.

Then, Gregori. Nazia^. De Sancto Baptismate. (...).
say you, Let the Laborers Proverb take place, I had rather plate for
nothing, then work for nothing. Verily, M. Hardinge, when other reason
could not serve you, it was reason, your Laborers idle reason should take
place. How be it, if ye will do nothing at Gods request, of good will,
without reward, but must be hyered only for your Penny, then may your
Labourer, be he never so simple, easily tell you, ye are not the Child of God,
but only a Hyrelinge, and a Labourer. For the Natural louinge Child will Obey
his Father, not for reward, but of love, only because he is his Father.

Gregory Nazianzene says, Si Seruus es, time plagas: Si mercenarius, tantum
specta Mercedem. At, si supra hos es etiam Filius, reuerere tanquam Patrem
tuu^. Been facito, quia pulchrum est obsequi Patri. Et, quamuis nihil aliud
futurum sit, Merit, and Mercy.
tamen vel hoc ipsum erit Merces tua fecisse quod gratum esset Patri: If thou
be a bond Slave, then fear the whippe: If thou be a Hyrelinge, then look
only for thy reward: But over, and bisides these, If thou be a ( Natural)
Child, then reverence ( GOD) as thy Father. Do well, because it is good to
Obey thy Father. Yea, and although thou shall have nothing else, yet even this
shall be thy reward, that thou haste benne Obediente to thy Father.

S. Hilarie says, Hilari. in Psalm. 118.
Nos, si semel ieiunamus, satisfecisse nos arbitramur: Si aliquid ex horreo
domesticarum facultatum inopi damus, implenisse nos iustitiam credimus, etc.
Sed Propheta totum a Deo sperat: totum a Misericordia eius expectat: If we
fast once, we think, we have satisfied: If out of the barnes of Our
household stoare we geeue sommewhat to the Poor, we believe, we have
fulfilled the measure of Righteousenesse. But the Prophet hops al of God:
and trusts al of his Mercy. Christ says to his Disciples, Matthae. 5.
Augustine. Confession.
Let your Light so shine before men ( not that ye may be rewarded, but) that
they may see your good works, and glorify yur Father, which is in Heaven.
S. Augustine says, Minus diligit te, qui diligit aliud praeter te: O God,
Basil. in Psalm. 32. (...).
he the less loves thee, that loves any other thing, bisides thee. Likewise
S. Basile says, Qui non fidit suis recte factis, nec expectat ex operibus
iustificari, Sola^ habet spem salutis, Misericordias Dei: He that trusts not
to his own good deeds, nor hops to be justified by his works, has the
Only hope of his Salvation, the Mercies of God.

Further ye say, A true Faith may be idle, and utterly without works: and
therefore ye think it not true, that we say, A true Faith is Lively, and
can in no wise be idle. Here perhaps ye will set Faith upon the Last, and
Rack her to a larger ^ise. For so Latomus, one of your Fellows, says, that
Socrates, and Plato, and other Heathen Philosophers had as good understanding,
and Faith in Christ, as had Abraham. And Andradius, an other of your Fellows,
says, that the Heathen, and Infidel Philosophers had the Righteousness of
Faith, and Everlasting Life. Illyricus De Sectis Page 93. Kemnitius in examine
Tride^t. Concilij. Page 535. Copus Dialo. 1. Page 51.
His words be these, Philosophi, qui ab inani Deorum multitudine abhorruerunt,
etc. illos tu illa Fide, Deique cognitione destitutos dices, per quam,
scilicet, impius iustificatur, and ex qua iustus viuit? The Philosophers, that
abhorred, and shunned the vain multitude of Gods, etc. will thou say, they
lacked that Faith, and that knowledge of God, whereby the wicked is
justified, and whereby the Righteouse lives? An other or your near Fellows
says, Petrus, non Fidem Christi, sed Christu^, Salua Fide, negauit: Peter
denied, not the Faith of Christ: but he denied Christ, his Faith
nevertheless being safe. If ye call this True Faith, M. Hardinge, that may
be found in Heathens, and Infidels, and may well, and safely stand with the
abiuringe of Christ, then, without question, your True Faith may be without
good works. 1. Timothe. 5. Fidem abnegauit.
But S. Paul, whose words we ought rather to credit, says far
otherwise: He, that has no regard to his own, specially such, as be of
his household, has denied the Faith, and is worse, then an Infidel. Again
he says: Tit. 1 1. John 2. Jacob. 2.
They say, they know God: but by their works they deny God. S. John
says, Who so says, he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments,
is a liar, and the Truth is not in him. S. James says, Faith without
works is dead: And the Devil believes, and tremblethe for fear. But a
Dead Faith is no more a True perfect Faith, then a Dead man is a True
perfect Man. As for the Faith of Devils, in deed, and verily it is no Faith.

Certainly S. Augustine says, Augustine in Euangel. Johan. Sermo 61.
Augustine. De Fide and Operib. Cap. 23.
Qui Fidem habet sine spe, and dilectione, Christum esse credit: non in
Christum credit: He that has Faith without Hope, and Charity, Believes,
that there is Christ: but he Believes not in Christ. Again he says,
Inseparabilis est Bona uita a Fide, quae per Dilectionem operatur: imo vero ea
ipsa est bona vita: Good Life can never be divided from Faith, which woorketh
by Love: Naie rather that same very Faith it self is good Life, S. Ambrose
says, Ambros. Li. 6. Epist. 36.
Vbi quis coeperit luxuriari, incipit deuiare a vera Fide: As soon as a man
begins to live wantonly, he begins to flee from the True Faith. Origin
says, Origin. in Epist. ad Roman. Li. 8. Cap. 10.
Omnis, qui credit in cum, non crubescit. Erubescit autem Omnis, qui peccat:
Ergo, qui adhuc ruborem peccati incurrit, credere non videtur: Who so ever
Believes in God, blussheth not: But every man blussheth, that woorketh Sin:
Therefore he, that yet blussheth for his Sin, Origin in Ezechiel. Homil. 9.
seems not to Believe. Again he says, Male credit, quicunque peccat: Who
so ever sins, Believes il.

To be short, S. Cyprian says, Quomodo dicit, se credere in Christum, qui
non facit, quod Christus facere praecepit? How doothe he say, He Believes
in Christ, that doothe not the thing, that Christ Commanded?

Hereby it is plain, that True Faith is lively, and woorkeful: and, that an
Idle Faith is in deed no Faith at al.

But you say, Good Works have their reward: and therefore, ye say, This
Heresy may not so esc^pe. Whether Good Works shall be rewarded, or no, it was
no part of Our question. For we undoubtedly believe the words, that are
written by S. John, Apocalyp. 14. Matthae. 10.
Opera illorum sequuntur illos: Their Works follow after them: We believe
the words, that Christ says to his Disciples, He, that geeueth a Cup of
cold Water to any of these little Ones for my sake, shall not lose his reward.
We believe that, 1. Corin. 15.
that S. Paul says, Your Work shall not be in vain in the Lord. We
grant, Good Works have their Reward: But the same Reward stands in
Mercy, and Favor, and not in Dewtie.

Thus therefore we say, Consideringe the weakness, and sinful corruption of
Our Nature, there can be no Works in us so pure, and perfect, that we may
thereby of right, and of dewtie deserve Everlasting Life. And this, M.
Hardinge, is no Heresy, but the very plain Sense, and Substance of Gods
Word, and the undoubted Doctrine of the Anciente Catholic Fathers of the
Church.

Job says, Job 9.
Si Homo velit contendere cum Deo, non poterit ei respondere vnum pro mill: If
a man will dispute with God, he is not hable to answer him one for a
thousand. And therefore he says, Verebar omnia Opera mea: I stood in
doubt, and was afraid of al my Works. Job. 9.
Again he says, Although ^ were perfect, yet my soul shall not know it:
Esai. 64.
If I would justify me self, mine own Mouth shall condemn me. The
Pro^phete Esai says, Al our Righteousenesse is like a foul stained clowte.

Therefore S. Augustine says, Augustine. De Tempore, Sermo. 49.
Non intres in Iudicium cum Seruo tuo. Quid est, Non intres in iudicium cum
Seruo tuo? Non stes mecum in iudicio, exigendo a me omnia quae praecepisti, and
omnia, quae iussisti. Nam me inuenies reum, ^i in iudicium intraueris mecum.
Opus ergo est Misericordia tua, potius, quam liquidissimo iudicio tuo: O Lord,
enter not into judgment with thy Servant. What means that, Enter not into
judgment with thy Servant? Thus mutche it means: Stand not with me in
judgment, requiringe of me all that thou haste commanded. For if thou enter
into judgment with me, thou shall find me guilty. I have need therefore,
not of thy upright Judgment, Augustine. Epist. 52. ad Mac^don.
but of thy Mercy. Again he says, Merita quorumlibet hominum quae sunt?
Quandoquidem ille, qui non cum Mercede debita, sed cum gratuita Gratia venit,
Omnes peccatores, solus a peccato liber, and liberator, inueuit: What be the
Merits of any men? For Christ that came, not with his dew reward, but
with his Grace, that was not dew, found al men sinners, being him self
only free from sin, Augustine. De Spiritu, and Litera. Cap. 33.
and a deliverer of Sinners. Again he says, Coronat te in Misericordia, and
Miserationibus. Hoc fiet in iudicio: vbi cum Rex iustus sederit in thro^o,
redditurus vnicuique secundum opera eius, quis gloriabitur, castum se habere
Cor? Aut quis gloriabitur, mundum se esse a peccatis? Ideo illie necessarium
fuit co^memorare Miseratione^, and Misericordiam Domini, etc. God crowns with
Favor and Mercy. That shall be down in the last judgment: where as, when
the Just King shall sit in his Throne, to render to every man according to
his works, who shall boaste, that his heart is chaste? Or who shall boaste,
that be is clean from Sin? Therefore it was needeful to make mention of the
Pity, and Mercy of Our Lord. And again, Augustine. in Psalm. 137.
Opera manuum mearum non Commendo. Timeo enim, ne cum inspexeris, plura
inuenias peccata, quam Merita: Lord, I commend not the works of my hands.
For I am afraid, lest, when thou shalt behold them, thou shall find more
sins, then good deseruinges.

So says S. Hierome, Hieronym. in Esai. Cap. 64. Origin. ad Roma. Li. 4 Cap.
4. Origin. in Matt. tracta. 8.
Si consideremus nostra Merita, desperandum est: If we behold our own
Merits, we must be driven to desperation.

So says Origin, Ego vix mihi persuadeo, vllum opus esse posse, quod ex
debito remunerationem deposcat: I do scarcely believe, that there can be any
work, that may of devvtie require reward. Again he says, Dicite, vos
esse Seruos inutiles. Nam etsi Omnia fecerimus, quae praecepta sunt, non tamen
bonum aliquod fecimus. Nec enim, si vere bona essent, essemus inutiles. Omne
autem bonum nostrum, non proprie, sed abusiue bonum dicitur: Say ye ( says
Christ) that ye be unprofitable Servants. For notwithstanding we have
done al things, that are commanded. yet have we done no good thing. For,
if our dooinges were good in deed, then were we not unprofitable. But any
good deed of ours is called good, not rightly, or devvly, Augustine. in Psalm
94. Walden. contra VViclefum.
but by abuse of speech. So says S. Augustine, Si Deus vellet pro Meritis
agere, non inueniret, nisi quod damnaret: If God would deal with us according
to that we have deserved, be should find nothing, but that he might
condemn. Therefore, M. Hardinge, Waldensis, one of your great Doctors,
having well, and circumspectely weighed the matter of every side, at the last
concludes thus, Quid dignum facimus, Roman. 8.
vt participes Coelestibus fieri inueniamur? Apostolo dicente, Existimo, quod
non su^t condignae passiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam, quae
reuelabitur in nobis: Reputo igitur saniorem Theologum, fideliorem Catholicum,
and Scripturia Sanctis magis concordem, qui tale Meritum simpliciter abnegat:
What worthy thing do we, that we may be found in the Fellowship of the
Heavenly Sprites? The Apostle says, I Judge, that the afflictions of this
time are not worthy of that Glory, that shall be reveled in us. Therefore I
take him to be the ^ounder Divine, the Faithefuller Catholic, and more
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, that utterly denies al such kind of
Merit.

But ye will say, If we find Our selves void of Merit, how then shall we
stand, Apocalyp 22.
and be justified before God? S. John says, Blessed are they, that have
washed their Roabes (not in their own Merits, but) in the Blood of the
Lamb. Apocalyp. 21.
And God says, I will geeue the thirsty to Drink of the Well of Life (not for
his Deserts, but) for nothing.

The Ancient Father Origin says, Origin ad Roman. Li. 9. ca. 12.
Quia Omnia conclusa sunt sub peccato, nunc non in Meritis, sed in Misericordia
Dei Salus Humana Consistit: For as mutche as al men are shut up, and Closed
under Sin, now the Salvation of Man stands, not in man's Merits, but in
Gods Mercy.

S. Augustine says, Augustine. Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
Deus in fine Coronabit nos in Misericordia, and Miserationibus: God in the
end will crown us ( not with the price of our deseruinges, but) with Favor,
and Mercies.

Again he says, Augustine De Verbis Apostoli, Sermo. 15.
Pro nihilo saluos facies eos. Quid est, Pro nihilo saluos facies eos? Nihil in
eis inuenis, vnde salues: and tamen saluas. Quia nihil inuenis, vnde salues:
and multum inuenis, vnde damnes: For Nothing thou shall save them. What is
meante by these word, For Nothing thou shall save them? (This is the meaning)
Thou findeste Nothing in them, wherefore thou should save them: and yet
thou sauest them. Thou find nothing, wherefore thou shouldeste save them:
but thou find mutche, wherefore thou should condemn them: And again,
Omnes in Mortem poena debita praecipites ageret, Augustine. De Ciuitate. Li. 14.
Cap. 1.
nisi inde quosdam indebita Dei Gratia liberaret: Deserved pain would throw
al men into Death, unless the Undeserved Grace of God delivered sum from
it.

S. Basile says, Basil. in Psalm. 32.
Non erit Iudicium sine Misericordia: Quia non potest homo purus inueniti a
sorde: ne si vnus quidem tantum dies sit ab eius natali: Judgment shall not be
without mercy: For noman can be found pure, and clean from al filthe: no,
though he be but one day old. Basil. De Humilitate.
Again he says, Haec est nostra integra, and perfecta gloriatio in Deo,
quando propriae Iustitiae nos inopes agnoscimus: Sola autem Fide in Christu^
Iustificari: This is our full, and perfect reioicing in God, when we
acknowledge, that we are void of any Our own Righteousenesse, and are
Justified by Only Faith in Christ. So says S. Hierome, In Christo Jesus
Domino nostro: in quo habemus fiduciam, Hieron. in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 3.
and accessum, and confidenttiam per Fidem eius: non per nostram Iustitiam, sed
per eum, cuius Fide nobis peccata dimittuntur: In Christ Jesu Our Lord: in
whom we have boldness, and liberty to comme ( to God), and trust, and
affiance by the Faith of him: not through Our Righteousenesse, but through
him, in whose name Our Sins be forgeuen.

Hereof S. Bernarde in most godly, Bernard. in Psalm. Qui habitat.
and comfortable wise concludes thus, Meritum meum. Miserationes Domini. Non
sum ego inops Meriti, quam diu ille non est inops Miserationum. Si Miserationes
eius multae, multus ego sum in Meritis. Hoc totum est Hominis Meritum, si totam
spem suam ponat in Domino: My Merit is the Mercy of God. So long as God is
not poor of Mercy, so long cannot I be poor of Merit. If his Mercies be
great, then am I great in Merits. This is the whole Merit of Man, if he put
his whole affiance in the Lord.

This is these Defenders Horrible Heresy, M. Hardinge, which, you say,
might not so escape your handed.

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division. 1.
To conclude, we Believe, that this our self same Fleashe, wherein we live,
although it die, and comme to duste, yet at the last shall return again to
Life, by the means of Christ's Sprite, which dwells in us: and that then
verily, whatsoever we suffer here in the mean while for his sake, Christ will
wipe away al tears, and heaviness from our eyes: and that we through him
shall enioie Everlasting Life, and shall for ever be with him in Glory. So be
it.

M. Hardinge.
Last of al, believe (as ye say) that this very Fleashe shall return to Life,
and that for the Spirit of Christ, which dwells in us. There is no doubt
but the Spirit of Christ is sufficient to raise up their bodies, in whom it
dwells. But we say, that the raising of our Fleashe is also assigned in
Holy Scripture Untruth. For so the Fathers of the Old Law and al Christan
Infantes should be utterly excluded from Resurrection.
to the Real, and Substantial eatinge of Christ's Fleashe, because it is
written: He that eats my Fleashe, and drinks my Blood, has Life
Everlasting. And I will raise him again in the last day. Therefore the
Resurrection of the Fleashe is not only assigned in Holy Scripture to the
Spirit of Christ, but also to the worthy eatinge of his Fleashe. And thus we
have confuted the Doctrine, wherein ye declare your Faith: and the chief
grounds, whereon ye build your New Gospel, we have disproued.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The words, The cause of Resurrection.
wherein ye find fault, M. Hardinge, are not ours, but S. Paul's. If they be
false, why did he write them? If they be true, why do you blame them? Here ye
seem to check S. Paul, and not only us. Ye say, The raising of our Fleash
is also assigned in the Holy Scripture to the Realle, and Substantial Eating of
Christ's Fleashe. But whence had ye these words, M. Hardinge? Where found ye
these Scriptures? Dissemble no longer: Deal plainly and simply: It is Gods
cause. For a show, John 6.
ye allege these words of Christ, written by S. John: He that Eats my
Fleashe, and Drinks my Blood, has Life Everlasting: And I will raise him
up again in the last day. These words we know: and the Eatinge of
Christ's Fleashe we know: But where is your Real, and Substantial, and Carnal
Eatinge? Where did S. John ever tell you, that Christ's Body is Eaten with
Teethe, and conveyed further in such gross, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 25.
Idem, tracta. 26.
and fleashely wise into the belly? S. Augustine expoundinge the same words,
says thus, Creed, and Manducasti: Credere in Christum, hoc est Manducare
Panem Viuum: Iste Panis Interioris Hominis quaerit esuriem: Believe thou (in
Christ): and thou haste Eaten (Christ). To Believe in Christ, that is the
Eatinge of the Bread of Life: This Bread requires the Hunger of the Inner
Man. Nicola. Lyra in Psalm. 111.
And Nicolas Lyra, one of your own Doctors, says, These words of S John
perteine nothing to the Sacrament. Thus he says, Hoc Verbum nihil direct
pertinet ad Sacramentalem, vel Corporalem Manducationem: This Saieinge (of the
Sixthe of John) pertains nothing directely to the Sacramental, or Corporal
Eatinge. It was sum oversight of your part, M. Hardinge, to seek to prove
the Eatinge of the Sacrament by those words, that, by your own Doctors
judgment, perteine nothing to the Sacrament.

Christ says further, John. 6.
Unless ye Eat the Fleashe of the Son of Man, and Drink his Blonde, ye
shall have no Life in you. If there be none other Eating of Christ's Body,
whereby we shall live, but only your Fantastical, and Fleashely Eatinge with
Mouth, and Teethe, then, I beseech you, what Life has Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Moses, Aaron, and other Holy Patriarchs, and Prophets, that were before
the coming of Christ? What Life have a great number of Holy Martyrs? What Life
have Christian Children, that being Baptized in the Blood of Christ, depart
this Life before they can receive the Sacrament: that is to say, by your
strange Exposition, before they have Really, and Substantially Eaten the
Fleashe of Christ? Will ye say, They have no Life? Or will ye condemn them al
to Everlasting Death? Or must we think, they shall never rise again?
Certainly S. Augustine says precisely, Augustine. in Johan. tracta. 26.
Qui Manducat, habet Vitam: and, qui non Manducar, non habet Vitam: Who so
Eats (the Fleashe of Christ,) has Life: and who so Eats it not, has no
Life. Hereof we must needs conclude by your Divinity, that Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Moses, and other Godly Fathers, that never received the Sacrament, have
no Life, but are dead for ever, without hope of Resurrection.

But, to leave your Fantasies, M. Hardinge, the cause of Our Resurrection, as
S. Paul says, 1. Corin 15. Origin. Ad Roma. Ca 8. Li. 6. Augustine
Meditation. Cap. 14.
is the Sprite of God, that dwells in us. Origin says, Resurgemus propter
Spiritum habitantem in nobis: Necesse est enim Spiritui reddi habitaculum suum:
We shall rise again because of the Sprite, that dwells within us: For of
necessity the Sprite must have his House resto^red unto him. S. Augustine
says, Haec mea tota Spes est, and omnis fiducia. Est enim in ipso Jesus
Christo Domino nostro Vniuscuiusque nostrum portio, Caro, and Sanguis. Vbi ergo
portio mea regnat, ibi ego me regnare credo: This is my whole hope, and al my
trust. For in Christ Jesu our Lord is Fleashe, and Blood, which is a
Portion of each of us. Therefore where a Portion of mine reigns, there I
believe, that I reign too.

S. Cyril says, Quamuis Mors propter peccatum in Naturam nostram insilijt,
tamen, Cyrill. in Johan. Li. 4. Ca. 15. Cyril. in Johan. Lib. 8. Cap. 47.
quia Filius Dei Homo factus est, omnes profecto Resurgemus: Although Death be
fallen into our Nature, yet because the Son of God is made Man, doubtelesse
we shall al rise again. Likewise again he says, Sic vos effeci participes
Diuinae Naturae, cum Spiritum meum fecerim habitare in vobis, Christus enim in
nobis est per Spiritum, Corruptionem nostram in Incorruptionem Co^mutans: So I
made you Partetakers of the Divine Nature, when I caused my Sprite to dwell in
you. For Christ is in us by his Sprite, changinge our Corruption into
Incorruption. Thus the Sprite of God is the Cause, and the woorker of our
Resurrection. And, to comme near unto you, y^ Sacraments of Christ are also
Means, and Instruments, and Seals hereof: but not the Causes. S. Cyril
says, Quod Mystica Communio Resurrectionis quaedam fit Confessio, Cyril. in
Johan. Lib. 12. Cap. 58.
verbis Christi ipsius probatur. Ait enim, Hoc est Corpus Meum: Hoc in Memoriam
Mei facite: That the Mystical Communion is a certain Confession of y^
Resurrection, it is proved by the words of Christ him self. For he says,
This is my Body: Do this in Remembrance of me. And therefore in the Council
of Nice, Council. Nicen.
the Holy Mysteries are called Resurrectionis nostrae Symbola: The Pleadges, or
Tokens of our Resurrection. And S. Ambrose, De Con. Did. 2. Non iste.
speakinge distinctely hereof, says, Non iste Panis, qui vadit in Corpus, sed
Panis Vitae Aeternae, qui animae nostrae Substantiam fulcit: It is not this
Bread ( of the Sacrament) that passes into the Body: but it is the Bread of
Everlasting Life, that susteineth the Substance of our Soul.

And to put the matter further out of doubt, the same force unto Resurrection,
that is applied unto the Sacrament of Christ's Body, is also, and in as ample
sort given to the Sacrament of Baptism. Basil De Sancto Baptismate. (...).
Ignatius ad Trallien. Council. VVormatien. Cap. 5.
S. Basile says, Dies Paschatis est Pignus Resurrectionis: Baptisma vero est
potentia, and vis ad Resurrectionem: Easter Day is a pleadge of Resurrection:
But Baptism is a power and strength unto Resurrection. Again he says,
Resurrectionis Gratiam in die Resurrectionis excipiamus: Upon the day of
Christ's Resurrection, Let us receive ( Baptism, which is) the Grace of
Resurrection. Ignatius says, Vt Credentes in Mortem eius, per Baptismum
participes eius Resurrectionis efficiamini: That beleeuinge in his Death, by
Baptism ye may be made Partetakers of his Resurrection. Therefore in the
Council of VVoormes it is written thus: In Aquas demersio, in Infernum
descensio est: Et rursus, ab Aquis emersio, Resurrectio est: The Dippinge into
the Water, is the goeinge down into Hell: and the coming out of the Water,
is the Resurrection.

In the end, M. Hardinge, ye blow up merrily your own Conquest: And thus ye
say, We have confuted the Doctrine, wherein ye declare your Faith: and the
Chief grounds, whereon ye build your New Gospel, We have disproued: But,
with so simple proufes, and so many Untruths, as, for Honors sake, may not
well be showed in your Triumph.

Here ends the Second Part.
The Third Part.
The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 1.
Behold, these are the horrible Heresies, for the which a good part of the
world is at this day condemned by the Bishop of Rome: and yet were never
heard to plead their cause. He should have commenced his suite rather
against Christ, against the Apostles, and against the Holy Fathers. For
these things did not only proceed from them, but were also appointed by them:
Except perhaps these men will say (as, I think, they will in deed) that
Christ never instituted the Holy Communion, to be divided amongst the
Faitheful: Or, that Christ's Apostles, and the Ancient Fathers said Private
Masses, in every corner of the Temples, now ten, now twenty together in
one day: Or, that Christ and his Apostles bannished all the Common People from
the Sacrament of his Blood: Or, that the thing, that they them selves do at
this day every where, and do it so, as they condemn him for an Heretic,
which does otherwise, is not called of Gelasius their own Doctoure, plain
Sacrilege: Or, that these be not the very words of Ambrose, Augustine,
Gelasius, Theodorete, Chrysostom, and Origene, The Bread and Wine in the
Sacraments remain still the same, they were before: The thing, which is
seen upon the Holy Table, is Bread: There cease not to be still the
Substance of Bread, and Nature of Wine: The Substance, and Nature of Bread,
are not changed: The self same Bread, as touching the Material Substance,
goes into the belly, and is cast out into the privy: Or, that Christ, the
Apostles, and Holy Fathers prayed not in that tongue, which the people might
understand: Or, that Christ has not performed al things by that one
offeringe, which he once offered upon the Cross: Or, that the same Sacrifice
was Imperfect, so that now we have need of an other.

M. Hardinge.
What crake ye of a good part of the World? The greater is the number of
those ye have seduced, the more grievous shall be your judgment. There be not
yet many years paste, that ye boasted of your poor small flock, alludinge to
the fewness of the Flock, that lived with Christ in Fleashe, and made their
fewness an argument of the sincere Truth But now that through your evil
teachinge, Who so wants dissolutio^, and wickedness, may seek it at
Rome.
the world grows more to be dissolute and wicked, ye boast of your number.
This is certain, touching grounds of truth, the Church erreth not, as that
which enjoys Christ's promise: and your Congregation teachinge the contrary,
must therefore be taken for the Children of the Father of Lies. Though ten,
or twenty Masses were not said in one day by Christ, the Apostles, or
Fathers, as ye scoff, when the Faith was first Preached, Untruth. For in
the time of Augustine, Ambrose* Hierome, etc. there were more Christians in the
world, then be at this present.
and few believed, no Churches (which here not without profane malice ye name
Temples) yet being builie: this is no sufficient reason, why we may not now,
Fevve, or many.
where the Faith is generally received, have sundry Masses in one Church in
one day. Ye make much a do about both Kinds, and to aggrauate the matter
ye use the odious term of bannishinge the people from the Cup. We teach
the people for Good causes against God.
good causes to be content with one Kind, doing them to understand, they
receive the whole Body of One Dream to prove an other.
Christ, Fleashe and Blood, no less, then if they received Both Kinds. The
Sacrilege which Gelasius speaks of, consists Untruth. For it stood in
diuidinge of the Sacraments.
in diuidinge Christ, and the same he imputes to the Manichees, as I have an
other where declared. To M. Iuelles Challenge, Artic. 2.
And therefore as that touches not us, who do not divide Christ, but in the
Sacrament give to the people whole Christ, so it shows you to be either
sclaunderous, or ignorant.

As for the tongue of the Church Service, How so ever Christ, and his
Apostles did, the Pope, and his Cleregie can not do amiss.
how so ever Christ, the Apostles, and Holy Fathers prayed, the use of the
Latin tongue used in the Service of the Latin Church is not by any reason or
Authority ye can bring yet, so far disproued, that the Church ought to
condemn the order Untruth plain, and sensible. For this Order was not from
the beginning.
from the beginning received, and hitherto continewed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We make no crakes of our numbers, M. Hardinge, but humbly geeue God thanks,
that, maugre al your practices, and policies, has published, and proclaimed
the name of his Son in every place through the world. The forth, and force
thereof greeueth you now, as it did others your Fathers before you, that cried
out in an agony, John. 12.
What shall we do? All the world renneth after him. Of them S. Cyril says,
Cyrill. In Johan. Lib. 8. Ca. 1.
Quicquid Christo credentium accesserit, sibi detractum putant: As many
Faitheful Believers, as are gotten to Christ, so many, they think, are lost
from the selves.

Notwithstanding, the Truth of God hangs neither of many, nor of few.
Liberius the Bishop of Rome said sometime to the Arian Emperor Constantius,
Theodoret. Li. 2. Cap. 16. (...).
Non, si ego solus sum, idcirco minor est ratio Fidei: Although I be alone, yet
the accoumpte of Faith is therefore no white the less. Christ compares the
Kingedome of God unto a piece of Leaven, which being little in quantity the
woman takes, and laiethe in a great Lump of dough, until the whole be al
Leauened. Chrysostom says, Nemo paucitatem vestram deploret. Magna enim est
virtus Praedicationis. Matthae. 13. Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 47.
Et quod semel fermentatum est, rursus fermentum ad coetera efficitur: Let
noman bewail the small number of you. For great is the Virtue of Preachinge.
And who so is once Leauened, is him self made Leaven to Leaven others. It is
noted in the Gloss upon the Clementines, Veritas pedetentim cognoscitur: Truth
is known by Little, and by Little. In Prooemio Clemen. in Gloss. Ambros. De Noe,
and Arca, Ca. 17. Origin. in Psalm. 36. Homil. 2.
And S. Ambrose, Constat Diluuium eodem numero, quo cumulatum est, esse
diminutum: It is known, that the ^loudde in the time of Noe, as it grew by
degrees, so by degrees it abated. Origin says, Ego concitabo eos in non
Gentem. Nos sumus non Gens: qui pauci ex ista Ciuitate credimus, and alij ex
alia. Et nusquam Gens integra ab initio credulitatis videtur assumpta: I shall
provoke them by them, that are no people. We are they, that were no people,
that Believe in Christ, a few in this City, and a few in an other. And
never was there any Nation, that was taken whole at the first beginning of the
Faith. The meaning hereof is this, that God calls men, not al together,
but now a few, now more, as unto his secret wisdom seems best. So is it
written in the late Council of Basile, In Con. Basil. in Episto. Synodali. Page
152.
Spiritus Sanctus non illuminat omnes eodem tempore: Sed vbi vult, and quando
vult, spirat: The Holy Ghost doothe not geeue light to al men at one time:
but breaths where it will, and when it will.

This is the Counsel, and the hand of God, M. Hardinge. We may say unto
you, Tertull in Apolog^t.
as Tertullian said sometime unto the Heathens: Exquisitior quaeque crudelitas
vestra, illecebra est magis Sectae. Plures efficimur, quoties me^imur a vobis.
Semen est Sanguis Christianorum: Your earnest cruelty is an entisemente, and a
provocation unto this Sect: As often as ye reckon us, ye find us more, and
more. The Seed hereof is Christian Blood. Fevve, or many, Church. Temple.
Arnobius said sometime unto the enemies of the Cross of Christ: Nonne haec
saltem fidem vobis faciunt argumenta credendi, qu^d iam per omnes terras, in
tam breui tempore, and paruo, immensa nominis huius Sacrame^ta diffusa sunt? At
the least, Arnobius aduer. Gentes, Li. 1. Proverb. 21.
do not these proufes make you believe, that, ye see, the great Secrets of
this Name ( of Christ) are powered abroad in so short space through al
Countries?

Fight not against God, M. Hardinge. There is no Wisdom, there is no
Counsel against the Lord.

This is certain, ye say, touching ye grounds of Faith, the Church erreth
not. Whether your Church have erred, or no, and in what grounds, it shall
better appear hereafter. Truly S. Bernarde says of your Church, even of
your Church of Rome, Bernard ad Cle^^^ In Council. Rhemen.
Intestina, and insanabilis facta est plaga Ecclesiae: The wound of the
Church is within the bowelles, and paste recovery. And again, Haec sunt
infoelicissima tempora, quae praeuidit Apostolus, in quibus homines sanam
Doctrinam non sustinent: Bernard. super Salve Regina.
These be the unhappy days, that the Apostle saw before, when Men cannot
abide sound Doctrine. This was S. Bernardes judgment of your Church: that
it would hear no sound Doctrine: and that it for that cause seemed utterly
paste recovery. Therefore so certainly to assure your self of a thing
uncertain, it was no wisdom. We may say of your Popes, and Bishops,
whom only ye mean by the name of your Church, as S. Hierome said sometime
of certain others your Fathers long ago: Hieronym. in Sophoni. Ca. 3.
Non tam indignentur ^obis haec exponentibus, and Prophetis vaticinantibus,
quam Dominum deprecentur, and studios^ agant, ne de Sacerdo^ibus, qui violant
Sancta Domini, esse mereantur: Let them not take stomach against us, that
expound these things: nor against the Prophets, that foretold these
things: But let them pray unto God, and take good heed, that they be not of
those Priests, that defile the Holy things of the Lord.

Churches, ye say, not without profane malice, ye call Temples. Malice comme
unto him, M. Hardinge, that Malice means. The Prophet David says, The
Lord in his Holy Temple: Psalm. 10. 1. Corinthians. 3.
S. Paul says, Your Bodies be the Temples of the Holy Ghost: Know ye not,
that ye be the Temple of God: If any man defile the Temple of God, 2. Corinthians.
6.
the Lord will destroy him: Ye are the Temple of the Living God: What
agreemente is there bitweene the Temple of God, and an Idol? So many times S.
Paul names Temples together in one place: and yet, I think, without any
great profane Malice. But it shall be lawful for you, M. Hardinge, to make new
Sins, and to say, The Apostles of Christ were malicious, and wicked, only
for that they called the Church of God by the name of Temple. Would God, ye
had not turned Gods Temple into the Synagoge of Satan. We see by your
practice, it is true, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 38.
that S. Chrysostom says, Sicut de Templo omne bonum egreditur, ita etiam de
Templo omne Malum procedit: As every good thing proceeds from the Temple, so
every il thing proceeds likewise from the Temple.

In defense of your Half Communion, ye say, For good causes ye teach the
people to be content with one Kind. And thus ye force the poor people,
contrary to the express Word of Christ, contrary to the example of the
Apostles, and all the Holy Fathers in the Primitive Church, and contrary to
the general use, and order of a whole thousand years, to geeue care to your
good causes. But these causes, no doubt, are great, and worthy: Otherwise
ye would not weigh them against God. Alphons. Aduersus Hares. Li. 6. De
Eucharist.
But wherefore are they dissembled. Why are they not told us? Your own
Doctors, Alphonsus de Castro, and John Gerson, have laid them out in this
wise Particularely, and at large: The danger of sheaddinge: The carriei^ge
from place to place: Section vltima. Johan* Gerson De Communione Laico^.
The fowlinge of the Cups: The trouble of Men's Beardes: The Reseruinge for
the Sick: The turninge of the Wine into Vinegar: The engendringe of Plees:
The Corruption, or Putrefaction: The Lothesomenesse that may happen, for so
many to Drink of one Cup: Halfecom munion.
The impossibility of prouidinge one Cup, that may be sufficient to serve
all the People: In sum places Wine is dear: in sum other places the Wine
will be frorne. These, M. Hardinge, be the fairest, and greattest of your good
causes. And yet have you thus concluded in your late Chapter at Tridente, Si
quis dixerit* Council. Trident. De Commun sub vna specie, Can. 2.
Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam non justice causis, and rationibus adductam
fuisse, vt Laicos, atque etiam Clericos non conficientes, sub Panis tantummod^
specie Communicaret, aut in eo errasse, Anathema sit: If any man shall say,
that the Holy Catholic Church, without just Causes, and reasons her
mouinge, doothe Communicate both the Laity, and also Priests, unless they
Minister, under the only Form of Bread, Tertul De Praescription.
or that the Church has erred in the same, Accursed be he. Therefore
Tertullian says rightly of you: Credunt sine Scripturis, vt Credant Contra
Scripturas: They Believe without the Scriptures, that they may Believe
against the Scriptures.

But specially, I beseech you, M. Hardinge, consider well these words of S.
Hierome, Hieronym. in Sophoni. Cap. 1.
and see, whether ye may apply them to your selves, or no: In Consummatione
Mundi scrutabitur Dominus Jerusalem, id est, Ecclesiam suam cum Lucerna, and
vlciscetur super viros Contemptores, qui noluerunt Seruare Custodias suas, id
est, Mandata Domini Contempserunt: and insuper Ratione se peccare dicentes,
blasphemauerunt in Cordibus suis: In the end of the World our Lord shall
search Jerusalem, that is to say, his Church, with a Candel, and shall
wreake him self upon the despisers, that would not keep their watches, that
is to say, that despised the Commandments of God: and over, and bisides
this, saieinge, they had good Causes, and Reasons, wherefore they should
offend, ( and break Gods Commandments,) they blasphemed in their Hearts.

That ye surmise of Gelasius, is most untrue. He speaks not one Word
there, of the diuidinge of Christ, as you imagine: nor had he any cause so to
speak. But he says in most plain wise, It is Sacrilege to do the same
thing, that you do, that is to say, to divide the Sacrament, and to
Minister the One part, as ye do, without the other. Look better on your
Books: and Confess the Truth, De Consecrat. Did. 2. Comperimus.
as ye shall find it. The words be these: Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant,
aut ab integris arceantur. Quia diuisio vnius eiusdemque Mysterij sine grandi
Sacrilegio non potest peruenire: Either let them receive the whole
Sacraments, or else let them be driven from the whole. For the Division ofone
and the same Mystery (or Sacrament) cannot happen without great Sacrilege.
He speaks not of the division of One Christ, as you tell us, but of the
division of One Mystery.

Otherwise, touching Christ, 1. Corinthians. 8. Euagri. Lib. 2. Cap. 17.
we say with S. Paul, Vnus Dominus Jesus Christus, There is One Lord Jesus
Christ: And we proteste with the Bishops of the East in the Council of
Chalcedon, Accursed be he, that parts Christ: Accursed be he, Council.
Chalcedon. Actio 2. (...).
that divides him.

That you say, The order of your Latin Service has evermore benne used in
the Latin Church from the beginning, it is utterly untrue. For proof
whereof, I remitte you to my Former Reply in the third Article, and the
fifteenth Division.

The rest, that ye allege, is not woorthe the answearinge.

The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 2.
Al these things must they of necessity say, unless perchance they had
rather say thus, That al Law, and Right is locked up in the treasury of the
Popes breaste, and that, as once one of his soothinge Pages, and Clawbackes did
not stick to say, the Pope is hable to dispense against the Apostles,
against a Council, and against the Canons and Rules of the Apostles: and that
he is not bound to* stand, neither to the examples, Dispense against Gods
word.
nor to the ordinances, nor to the Laws of Christ.

M. Hardinge.
To say, that al Law and right (your Latin term is Fas) is locked up in the
treasury of the Popes breas^te, it were absurd and unreasonable. Mary to
say, that the Laws rest in the Popes breaste, It is no reason that Divines
be required to make good what so ever is written by the Canonistes or
Schoolmen.
after a certain meaning, as hereafter shall be declared, it is Not altogether
biside truth: A Cold Defense.
not altogether beside truth and reason. But Sirs, what if some mean writer,
or Gloser upon the Canon Law speak somewhere out of square, if al should be
exactly tried by Scripture, will ye lay that to our charge? Shall the Faith of
the Catholic Church thereby be called in doubt and question? We take not
upon us to Defend all that y^ Canonistes, or Schooleme^ say or write: etc. In
this kind or order be many things, which may rather be called rules of
manners, then Principles, or such as we term Axiomata of our Faith. These
although they be found written in the Scripture, for as much as they have
benne commanded by an occasion, and for some cause, they may for cause, and
occasion, and, as we find in C. Lector, for necessity, by Gods depute, and
Vicare be supplied, helped, expounded. And if the case so require, he in the
same for a certain cause, with a certain person, for a certain time, with
certain circumstances may dispense, by the same spirit, they were first
founded and instituted withal, and with the same intention, to wit, for some
special good, and furtherance of Godliness. Such administration of Gods
Law, and such dispensation thereof, as of a precious Treasure, not free or at
Liberty and pleasure, but an even, just, and good dispensation, they do
attribute to Gods Vicare, whom this Defender calls the Popes Parasites,
Pages, and Clawbackes, him self a very Page, Slave, and clawbacke to the Devil.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, ye rome, and wander, and go masket, as a man, that were
benighted, and had lost his way. In sum cases, ye say, the Pope may
dispense against Gods Word: In sum cases he may not. Feign would ye,
for shame, somewhat limite, and restrain his Immoderate Authority: but ye
know not, where to lay the bounds. 15. q. 6. Authoritatem. In Glossa. Did.
82. Presbyter.
Ye make small account of your School Doctoures, and Canonistes, that is to
say, of the Principal Pillars of your Catholic Church: and think them not
worthy to be your guides. How be it, your labor cannot al be lost: For they
will think as light of you.

But, Felin. De Constitutionib. Cap. Statuta Canonum. Colum. 6. 6. q. 1.
Quicunabque;. In Clossa.
for as mutche, as, ye say, they flatter not the Pope, nor be his Pages, or
Parasites, but speak roundely to him, and tell him his own, it shall not be
mutche amiss, to harken a little, what they say.

One of them says thus, Papa potest Dispensare contra Ius Natural: The Pope
may Dispense against the Law of Nature. An other says, Papa Dispensat
contra Canones Apostolorum: The Pope Dispenses against the Canons, or Rules of
the Apostles. Panormi. Extra De Diuortijs. Ca. Fin.
An other says, Papa potest mutare formam Verborum in Baptismo: The Pope may
change the form of Words in Baptism. An other says, Priuilegium dari
potest contra Ius Diuinum: The Popes Privilege may be granted against the
Law of God. Summa Angel. In Dictione Papa.
An other says, Papa ex Maxima Causa potest Dispensare contra Nouum
Testamentu^: The Pope upon a very great cause may dispense against the Nevve
Testamente. An other says, Papa potest Dispensare de omnibus praeceptis
veteris, Felin. De Constitution. Ca. Statuta Canonum. Felin. De Maioritate, and
Obedient. Ca. 2.
and Noui Testamenti: The Pope may Dispense for any commandment of the
Old, or Nevve Testamente. An other says, Papa potest Dispensare contra
Epistolas Pauli: The Pope may Dispense against the Epistles of S. Paul. And
somewhat to qualify the outrage of the matter, an other says, Papa potest
Dispensare contra Ius Diuinum in Particulari, non in Universally: The Pope may
Dispense against the Law of God, in Particulare, not in General. Idem De
Maioritate, and Obedien. Ca. fin.
And again, Papa potest tollere Ius Diuinum ex Part, non in Totum: The Pope
may abolishe the Law of God, in part, but not in whole.

An other says, Dispense against Gods Word.
Martinus Papa. 5. Dispensauit cum quodam, qui acceperat Germanam suam in
Vxorem: Pope Martine, the. 5. dispensed with a man, y^ had taken to Wife his
own Sister. Whether this report be true, or false, I refer me self to
the credit of the Authoure. Summa Angel. In Dictione pp. Panormita. Extra, De
Electione, and Electi potest. Venerabile^.
An other says, Papa potest Dispensare cum omnibus Personis, nisi cum Patre,
and Matre: The Pope may dispense with al Persons ( touching Marriage)
sauinge only with Father, and Mother (to Marry, or to be Married to their
Children). An other says, Papa potest supra Ius Dispensare: Et de Iniustitia
potest facere Iustitia^: and Sententiam, quae nulla est, facere aliquam: Et de
nihilo, facere aliquid: The Pope may dispense above the Law: ye Pope of
Wrong, may make Right: De Translatione Episco. Quanto. Hostien. De
Translatione Episcop. Qua^to. Heruaeus de Potestate Papae.
The Pope of no Sentence, may make a Sentence: The Pope of nothing, may make
sum thing. The cause hereof, as an other says, is this, Quia Papa potest,
excepto Peccato, quicquid Deus ipse potest: Sin only excepted, the Pope may
do, what so ever God him self may do.

An other says, Papa habet Authoritatem declarandi Scripturas, ita, vt non
liceat oppositum tenere, vel opinari: The Pope has Authority so to expound,
and to declare the Scriptures, that it may not be lawful for any man to hold,
or to think the Contrary. For Cardinalis Cusanus says, Cardina. Cusan. De
Authoritat. Eccle. and Conci. Supra and co^tra Scripturam.
as it said before, Scripturae ad tempus adaptatae sunt, and vary
intellectae, ita, vt vno tempore secundu^ currente^ Vniuersalem ritum
expona^tur: mutato ritu, iterum sententia mutetur: The Scriptures are applied
unto the time, and are diversely derstanded: so that at one time they are taken
according to the Universal Currente order: which order being changed, the
meaning of the Scripture is changed too.

An other demands a question, Francis. De Maron. in 4. Did. 19 q. 1.
Articul. 2. 9. quae. 3. Nemo. In Glossa.
Vtrum Papa ex Plenitudine Potestatis possit omnia: Whether the Pope by the
Fullness of his Power may do al things.

An other says, Si totus mundus sententict contra Papam, videtur, quod
standum esse^ sententiae Papae: If all the World vvoulde give sentence
contrary to the Pope, yet it seems, we ought to stand to the sentence of
the Pope. These, M. Hardinge, by your Judgment are neither Pages, nor
Parasites: but good sad, and earnest friends: such as love roughly, and
plainly to utter their mind, without flattery.

This doubtelesse is it, that Daniel so long before Prophesied of him, Dabitur
illi os loquens grandia: Daniel. 7.
He shall have a mouth given him vtteringe great, and presumptuous matters. For
in deed, notwithstanding all this glorious glitteringe of painted Authority,
Johan. Andreas. De Iudicijs. Cum venissent.
yet one of the Popes own men says, Papa non potest facere de quadrato
rotundum: The Pope cannot make a square thing, round. S. Bernarde says, An
Regula non concordat cum Euangelio, vel Apostolo? Alioqui Regularam non est
Regula: Bernar. in Apologia ad Guliel. Abbatem.
quia non est recta: Does not the Rule agree with the Gospel, or with the
Apostle? Otherwise that Rule is no Rule at al: for it is crooked, it is not
straight.

And therefore Pope Zosimus in more sober wise says thus, Contra Statuta
Patrum condere aliquid, Inter Decr^ta Zosimi.
vel mutare, ne huius quidem Sedis Authoritas potest: The Authority of this
See cannot order, or change any thing contrary to the orders of our Fathers.

Isidorus says, Is qui praeest, si praeter voluntatem, vel praeter quod in
Scripturis Sanctis euidenter Praecipitur, 11. q. 3. Si is qui.
vel dicitaliquid, vel imperat, tanquam Falsus Testis Dei, and Sacrilegus
habeatur: He that is in Authority, if he speak, or Command any thing,
besides the will, or meaning of Gods Word, or otherwise, then is expressly
commanded in the Scriptures, let him be taken as a Churcherobber, and as a
false witness against God.

The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 3.
We, for our part, have learned these things of Christ, of the Apostles, of
the Devout Fathers: and do sincerely with good faith teach the people of
God the same. Which thing is the only cause why we at this day are called
Heretics of the chief Prelate (no doubt) of Religion. O immortal God, has
Christ him self then, the Apostles, and so many Fathers, al at once gonne
astraie? Were then Origene, Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, Gelasius,
Theodoretus, foresakers of the Catholic Faith? Was so notable a consent of
so many Ancient Bishops, and Learned men, nothing else, but a conspiracy
of Heretics? Or, is that now condemned in us, which was then commended in
them? Or, is the thing now, by alteration only of men's affections, suddenly
becomme schismatique, which in them was coumpted Catholic? Or, shall that,
which in times paste was undoubtedly true, now by and by, because it likes
not these men, be Judged false? Let them then bring forth an other Gospel,
and let them show the causes, why these things, which so long have openly
benne observed, and well allowed in the Church of God, ought now in the end
to be called in again. We know well yenough, the^ the same Word, which was
opened by Christ, and spreadde abroad by the Apoistles, is sufficient, both
to our Salvation, and also to uphold, and maintain al Truth, and to confound
al manner of Heresy. By that Word only do we condemn al sorts of the
Old Heretics, whom these men say, we have called out of Hell again. As
for the Arians, the Eutychia^s, the Marcionites, the Ebionites, the
Valentinians, the Carpocratians, the Tatians, the Nouatians, and shortly al
them, which have a wicked opinion either of God the Father, or of Christ, or
of y^ Holy Ghost, or of any other point of Christian Religion, for so mutche
as they be confuted by the Gospel of Christ, we plainly pronounce them for
destable, and damned Persons, and defy them even unto the Devil. Neither do
we leave them so, but we also severely, and streitely hold them in by lawful,
and politic pounishementes, if they fortune to break out any where, and
bewraie them selves.

M. Hardinge.
We for our part know, as now we have proved, that ye have not learned
these things of Christ, nor of the Apostles, nor of the Fathers: but of
Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Bucer, and such
other Apostates: and that ye do most falsely, and wickedly lead the people
into the Pit with you. And therefore ye are justly condemned by the Church,
and demed Heretics, etc.

How condemn ye the Donatistes, saying with them ye break, and throw down
the Holy Aulters of God, on which (as Optatus writes) the Body, and Blood of
Christ was wont to be laid? etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Hereto, M. Hardinge, the whole gross sum of your Answer in effect is
this: Ye Falsely, and wickedly lead the people: ye are Apostates: ye are
Heretics: ye are Impupudente, and rebellious Children: ye are Despisers of
God: Mockers of your Mother: and peruerters of the Apostles: ye utter Lies: ye
speak blasphemies. At the last ye say, The Devil dwells in our hearts, as
in his shop. This is a hasty kind of Logique, M. Harding: He must needs be
hard hearted, that will not yield to such Arguments.

To leave other your waste words, Auttars.
of Vigilantius, Iouinian, Manichee, Aerius, and such others, in the end ye
pronounce your Definitive Sentence, as a Judge, and condemn us for Heretics,
for that we have taken down your Shoppes, and gaineful Boothes, which ye call
the Holy Aultars of God. Verily, this must needs be thought, either extreme
rigor, or great folly, of the remoninge of a stone to make an Heresy.
Such Heresies, I trow, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, Optatus, and other Learned
Fathers knew but few.

Neither is there any good sufficient reason to be showed, wherefore it should
more be Heresy in us, to take down your needelesse, and Superstitious Walls,
which ye had erected of your selves, without Commission, then it was lately in
you, to tear in sunder, and to burn our Communion Tables: in the erection,
and use whereof we had the undoubted example, both of Christ him self, and
also of the Aunciente Catholic Fathers. I say nothing of your Cruelty in
burninge so many Bibles, and Books of Gods Holy Word: so many of your
Bretherns Bodies: so many Temples of the Holy Ghost.

As for the Aultars, which, Optatus says, the Donatistes brake down, they
were certainly Tables of VVood, such as we have: and not Heaps of stones,
Artic. 3. Diui 20. August. Epist. 50. Ad Bonifacium. Athanasi. in Epist. ad
Solitaria^ Vitam agentes.
such as ye have as in my Former Reply, made unto you, it may better
appear. S. Augustine reportinge the same story says, the Donatistes in
their fury brake down the Aultare Bourdes: His words be these, Lignis
eiusdem Altaris effractis. Likewise says Athanasius of the like fury of the
Arians: Subsellia, Thronum, Mensam Ligneam, and Tabulas Ecclesiae, and coetera,
quae poterant, for as elata combusserunt: They carried forth, and burnte the
Seats, the Pulpite, the VVoodden Bourde, the Church Tables, and such other
things, as they could g^ate.

Touching your Stone Aultars, Beatus Rhenanus says, B. Rhenan. in Epistola
praefixa^ Liturgiae Chrysostom.
In nostris Basilicis Ararum Superaddititia structura nouitatem prae se sert:
In our Churches the buildinge up of Aultars, added to the rest, declares a
novelty.

We have such Aultars, M. Hardinge, as Christ, his Apostles, S. Augustine,
Optatus, and other Catholic, and Holy Fathers had, and used: whoes examples
to follow, we never thought it to be such Heresy.

But Optatus says, The Body, and Blood of Christ was woonte to be laid
upon the Aultare: and with these words ye would feign affonne your simple
Reader, as if Christ's Body lay there Really, Fleashely, Verily, and in deed.
But ye should Augu. ad Bonifaci. Epistiol. 23.
remember, that S. Augustine says, Sacramentum Corporis Christi secundum
quendam modum Corpus Christi est: Et Sacramentum Sanguinis Christi secundum
quendam modum Sanguis Christi est: The Sacrament of Christ's Body (not verily,
and in deed, but) after a certain manner of speech is Christ's Body: and the
Sacrament of Christ's Blood, after a certain manner of speech is the Blood
of Christ. De Conse. Did. 2. Hoc est, quod. in Glossa.
This manner of Speech your own Gloss thus expoundethe, Vocatur Corpus
Christi, id est, Significat Corpus Christ: It is called the ^ody of Christ,
that is to say, It Signifies the Body of Christ. And, as Optatus says,
Christ's Body and Blood were laid upon the Aultare, or Communion Table, even
to S. Aug^stine says, The whole people was in the Communion Cup, and laid
upon the Holy Table. August. ad Infantes. Citatur a Beda in 1. Cor. 10.
These be his words, Vos estis in Mensa: Vos estis in Calice: You are upon
the Table: You are in the Cup. As the people is upon the Table, so is
Christ's Body upon the Table. The People is not laid, there verily, and in
deed, but only in a Mystery: Even so the Body of Christ, as Op^^us says,
is laid there, not verily, and in deed, nor in Real, and Fleashly Presence,
but in a Mystery.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 1.
In deed we grant, that certain new and very strange sects, as the
Anabaptists, Libertines, Menonians, and Zvvenckfeldians have benne stirringe
in the World, ever sithence the Gospel did first spring. But the World sees
now right well, thanks be geeuen to our God, that we have neither breadde,
nor taught, nor keapte up these Monsters. In good folowship, I pray thee, who
so ever thou be, read our Books, they are to be sold in every place. What
has there ever benne written by any of our company, that might plainly bear
with the madness of any of those Heretics? Naie, I say unto you, there is
no Country this day so free from their Pestilent infections, as these be,
wherein the Gospel is freely, and commonly preached. So that, if they weigh the
very matter with earnest, and upright aduisemente, this thing is a great
Argument, that this same Doctrine, which we teach, is the very Truth of the
Gospel of Christ. For lightly neither is cockle wont to grow without the
wheat, nor yet the chafe without the Corn. For from the very Apostles times,
who knows not, how many Heresies did rise up even together, so soon as the
Gospel was first spreadde abroad? Who ever had heard tell of Simon, Menander,
Saturninus, Basilides, Carpocrates, Cherinthus, Ebion, Vale^tinus* Secundus,
Marcosius; Colorbasius, Heracleo, Lucianus, Seuerus, and other like, before the
Apostles were sent abroad? But why stand we reckeninge up these? Epiphanius
rehearses up four score sundry Heresies: and Augustine many more, which did
spring up even together with the Gospel. What then? Was the Gospel therefore
not the Gospel, because Heresies sprange up withal? Or was Christ therefore
not Christ?

And yet, as we said, does not this great croppe, and heap of Heresies
grow up amongst us, which do openly, abroad, and frankely teach the
Gospel. These poisonnes take their beginninges, their encreasinges, and
strength amongst Our Adnersaries, in blindness and in darkness, amongst
whom Truth is with tyranny, and cruelty keapte under, and cannot be heard,
but in Corners, and secret meetinges. But let them make a proof: Let them
geeue the Gospel free passage: Let the Truth of Jesus Christ give his clear
light, and stretche forth his bright beams into al parts: and then shall
they forthwith see, how al these shadows straight will vanishe, and pass
away at the light of the Gospel, even as the thick Miste of the night
consumes at the sight of the Son. For whilst these men sit still, and
make merry, and do nothing, we continually repress, and put back al those
Heresies, which they falsely charge us to nurrishe, and maintain.

M. Hardinge.
As for Libertines, what other Substance has your Gospel, Liberty.
bisides carnal liberty, and licentious living? Libertines. The Doctrine of
the Libertines Gospel.
To break the vow of chastity solemly made to God, by whose grace, and your
endeavor it might well have benne kept, and to break it for wantonness, and
to satisfy lust: is not that proper to Libertines? To give over fasting,
watchinge in prayer, and ConfesSion of Sins, which should be made to a
Priest, by Most Vain Untruth. See the Answer.
whom only (except in case of necessity) God promises forgeuenes: To
regard no Tradition, though it came from the Apostles: briefly, to teach that
al kind of outward Godliness is superstitious, and Pharisaical, and that every
man must without staggaring, or doubting believe, that him self shall be saved,
if he have Faith, Untruth, joined with vile sclaunder.
do he what him list, is this no point of liberty? What made so many
malepert Prentises, pleasante Courtiers, discoursinge Parlamente
Machiauellistes, and al other what so ever fleash worms, Mercha^tes, idle
artificers, to embrace your Gospel, rather then the grauer and deuouter sort
of men, which be weaned from the pleasure of this life: but that it was
plausible to the World, and pleasant to the Fleashe, from which that kind
of men are most hardly drawn? And yet foresoothe do not ye foster up
Libertines.

Who can reckon the sects that be in Germany, Bemelande. Silesia. Morauia.
being Four great Untruths al together.
sixteen or more professed in some one town? Bemelande is almost as full of
Heresies, as of Houses. Silesia is as bad, and Morauia a Country there
adIoininge is never a whit better. And yet do not these Sects bud, where your
Gospel is freely, and openly preached?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Harding, I have purposely leafte out a great heap of your talk,
not thinkinge it needeful, to answer al your void words. Having no more
regard, what ye say, it was no hard matter for you to call us Libertines, and
to say, The Gospel, that we Preach, has none other Substance, but Carnal
Liberty, and Licenceous Living. If ye had remembered, either y^ City of
Rome, where ye have benne, or the Town of Anwarpe, or Louaine, where ye now
dwell, ye could not well, without blusshinge, have charged us with Carnal
Liberty.

Our Wantons, and Fleashevvoormes, for so it likes you to call them, have
benne contented to forsake Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Children, goods, and
Liuinges, and meekely to submit them selves to the extreme terroure of al your
Cruelties, and to yield their bodies unto the Death: to be sterued for
hunger: and to be burnte in Fiere: Only for the name, and Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Ye will say, as your woonte is, when ye have nothing else to say,
They died stubbernly in wilful error. Yet, I reckon, ye will not say, They
died in great pleasance, or Carnal Liberty. It is a strange kind of
Fleashely Wantonness, for a man to deny him self, and to take up his
Cross, and to follow Christ. And yet is this the whole Substance of our
Gospel.

Justinius the Martyr, notwithstanding he was an Heathen, and thought then,
even as you do now, that the Professors of the Name of Christ, were
nothing else, but a sort of VVanton, and willful people, yet when he saw,
how Constantely they died, and how patiently they suffered, what so ever was
laid upon them, he was at length converted him self, and by their example
became a Christian: Eusebius. Li. 4. ca. 8. (...)Sozom. Li 1 Ca 1. (...)
Thus Eusebius reports his words, Ego ipse Platonis Disciplinis delectatus,
etc. ^ me self taking pleasure in Platoes Doctrine, and hearing the
Christians is spoken of, and seeinge them to go courrageously, and boldly to
their Death, and to suffer al such things, as were thought most terrible,
I thought it a thing impossible, that such men should live wickedly, or
in Wantonness.

So likewise writes Sozomenus touching the same, The Christians being
spoiled of their goods, and regardinge nothing, that they had, being
h^nged on gibbett^s, and suffering al manner torments so without care, or
sense, as if their bodies had not benne their own, one Head. one Judge
neither allured with flattery, nor amazed with threats, they gave al men
hereby to understand, (...). Psalm. 119.
that they suffered these things ( not of Wantonness, but) for sum great
reward.

The Prophet David says, In quo corriget adolescens viam suam? In
custodiendo Sermones tuos: Whereby shall a young man (not grow to be a Fleashely
wanton, but) amend his life, and correct his way? He answeareth: (O Lord)
by the keepinge of thy words.

Therefore we may justly say to you, Cyrill. Contra Julian. Lib. 7. Page 162.
as Cyrillus said sommetime to Iulianus the Renegate in like case, Etiam pueri
in Sacris Literis enutriti, statim fiunt religiosissimi, etiamsi minus
eloquentes: Even our Children being brought up in the Holy Scriptures,
straight way becomme most Godly: although not so eloquente, or welspoken.

If there be any such Fleashe vvoormes, and Wantons this day, they be not
the Gospellers, which word so mutche offends you: they be of you, and of
yours, M. Hardinge, that is, not the professors, but the Mockers, and wilful
despisers of the Gospel.

Ye say, Confession should be made unto the Priest, By whom Only (ye say)
God has promised forgiveness of Sin. I beseech you, where find you this
Promise? Show the words: Allege the Place: Regard your Credit. Otherwise,
ye will be noted of Untruth. Where did God, or Christ, ever say,
Forgeeuenesse of Sin is geeuen only by the Priest? If it be so in deed,
then why doothe Chrysostom say, Chrysostom. De Poeniten* and Confession.
Nunc necessarium non est, Praesentibus Testibus confiteri? Solus Deus te
confitentem videat: Now it is not needeful, to make Confession in the Presence
of vvitnesses. Let God Only See thee making thy Confession. Why does S.
Hierome say, Hieron. in Matthae. Cap. 16.
Apud Deum, non Sententia Sacerdotum, sed reorum vita quaeritur: It is not the
Sentence, or Absolution of the Priest, but the Life of the Sinner, that is
regarded before God. How be it, hereof we have sufficiently said before.

Luther, ye say, First procured, that men should acknowledge no One Head,
and Judge: Whom, as by your report, S. Cyprian says, they might obeie, as
the Vicare of Christ. Of this One Head, and One Judge, neither Christ, nor
his Apostles ever told us. S. Cyprian, Cypria. De Sim Praelatorum. Chrysostom
in Matthae. Hom. 35*
as it is said before, says thus, Christus Parem dedit Apostolis omnibus
potestatem: Christ gave unto al his Apostles Equal Power. And S. Chrysostom
says, Quicunque desiderat Primatum in Terra, inueniet in Caelo confusionem:
Who so ever seeks the Primacie in Earth, he in Heaven shall find Confusion.

The place of S. Cyprian, touching One Head, and One Judge, is well alleged by
you, M. Hardinge: but il applied. It is true, that S. Cyprian says, The
People ought to obeie One Judge, or One Head, as the Vicare of Christ. But
that by the same One Head, or Judge, he meante either the Bishop of Rome, or
any one other certain several Bishop, it is most untrue. S. Cyprians meaning
is, In the Former Reply, Artic. 4. Diui. 5.
as I have otherwhere more largely declared, that in every Diocese the People
ought to know One Bishop, as Head, and Judge, and him to obeie, as the Vicare
of Christ. One Head, or Judge, I say, in every Diocese: not One Universal
Head over all the World. For proof whereof, M. Harding, read S. Cyprians
Epistle unto Florentinus Pupianus: and ye shall find, that he uses the self
same words of him self, and not of the Pope: and I doubt not, but ye will
mutche marvel, and mislike your own error. His words be these, Vnde
Schismata, and Haereses obortae sunt, Cyprian. Lib. 4. Epist. 9.
and oriuntur, nisi dum Episcopus, qui Vnus est, and Ecclesiae praeest. Superba
quorundam praesumptione contemnitur? Where hence have Schisms, and Heresies
spronge up, or wherehence do they spring, unless it be, that the Bishop,
which is One, and ^uleth the Church, by the proud presumption of certain is
despised?

Here S. Cyprian calls him self that One Bishop, and that One Head, and
Judge of the Church. Dissensions among the Fathers.
Yet was he only the Bishop of Carthage in Aphrica: and not the Pope, or
Bishop of Rome. Hereof I have spoken more at large in my Former Reply.

Touching the Pope, Artic. 4. Diui. 5.
wherein he may be known for Christ's Vicare, it were hard to say: Unless
it be for that, where so ever ye Pope is present, there Christ is away.
Chrysostom in Matthae. Homil. 6.
Chrysostom says, Qui vanam gloriam non desiderat, ille debet Christi
Vicarius factus, Christi Iustitiam praedicare: He, that desires not vain
glory, being made Christ's Vicare, ought to preach the Justice of Christ.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 1.
Where they say, that we have fallen into sundry Sects, and would be
called, sum of us Lutherans, and sum of us Zuinglians, and cannot yet well
agree among our selves, touching the whole Substance of our Doctrine, what
would these me^ne have said, if they had benne in the first times of the
Apostles, and Holy Fathers: when one said, I hold of Paul: and other, I
hold of Cephas: an other, I hold of Apollo? When Paul did so sharply rebuke
Peter? When upon a fallinge out, Barnabas departed from Paul? When, as Origin
mentions, the Christians were divided into so many factions, as that they
keapte no more, but the name of Christians in common among them, being in no
manner of thing else like to Christians? When, as Socrates says, for their
dissensions, and sundry Sects, they were laughed, and iested at openly of the
people in their stages, and common gameplaies? When, as Constantine the
Emperor affirms, there were such a number of Variances, and braulinges in
the Church, yt it might justly seem a misery far passing al y^ former
miseries? When also Theophilus, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Augustine, Ruffine,
Hierome, being al Christians, being al Fathers, being al Catholics,
quarrelled one against an other, with most bitter, and most remediless
contentions without end? When, as says Nazianzene, the parts of one Body
were consumed and wasted one of an other? When the whole East part of the
Church was divided from the Weast, only about leauened Bread, and only for
the keepinge of Easter day: which were in deed no great matters to be
striued for? And when in all Councelles New Creedes, and New Decrees
continually were divised?

The B. of Sarisburie.
The sum of M. Hardinges answer hereto is this, that the bitter
dissensions, that in Old times fell out amongst the Learned, and Godly
Fathers, stood rather A manifest Untruth of M. Hardinges.
in matters of manners, and other small quarrels, then in cases, and questions of
the Faith. For trial of the truethe herein, it may please you to consider well
these few.

Papias, Hieronym. in Hierem. Lib. 4. Irenae. li. 4. ca. 73. Clemens Stromat.
Lib. 3. and 5. Justinius in Apologia.
Apollinarius, Victorinus, Tertullianus, Irenaeus, Lactantius, and others,
desended the Heresy of the Chiliastae, that said, Christ after the General
Judgment should dwell here a thousand years together upon the Earth.
Irenae us held, that Man at the beginning, when he was first created, was
imperfect. Clemens Alexandrinus, and Justinius held, That the Angels fell, and
effended God, in that they desired the company of Women. But it shall be in
vain to stand long herein. Dissensions among the Fathers.
For of such examples there is great stoare.

To comme near the purpose, Theophilus calls Epiphanius Haeresiarcham, that
is, The Grande Captain, and Father of Heretics: Gennadius says, S.
Augustine was not far of from being an Heretic. S. Hierome, Erasm in Vita
Chrysostomi.
writing unto S. Augustine, says thus. In Epistola tua quaedam Haeretica esse
iudicaui: I judged, that there were certain Heretical errors in your Epistle.
Gennadius De Ecclesiast. Scriptoribus.
Pope Bonifacius 2. said, that Aurelius the Bishop of Carthage, and S.
Augustine, and other Godly, and Learned Fathers in the Council of Aphrica, were
prickte on, and inspired by the Devil. S. Augustine wills S. Hierome to
acknowledge his error, Hieronym in Epistola ad Augu. Bonifac. 2. in Epist. ad
Eulaltu^. August. ad Hieronym Epist. 9.
and to recante. Thus be says, Accipe Seueritatem Christianam ad illud opus
corrigendum, atque emendandum: and (...) vt, dicitur, Cane: Take unto you
Christian Severity, to correct and amend that Book (of yours): and recante
your Error.

Thus mutche I thought good briefly to touch: not meaning thereby to deface
the Authority of the Aunciente Fathers: but sommewhat to open the truth of M.
Hardinges tale, and to show, that these, and other like Bishops, and
Fathers, notwithstanding they were Learned, and Godly, and worthy Members of
the Church of God, yet were they not void of their infirmities.

Erasmus, Erasm. in Praef. in Tom. 2. Hieronymi. Ibidem.
a man of great Judgment, says thus, Illis temporibus ingeniosa res fuit,
esse Christianum: In those days it was a great point of Wisdom, to know,
how to be a Christian Man.

And again, Illa aetate in Chartis erat Fides potius, quam in animo: ac pene
tot erant Symbola, quot Professores: At that time (of the Ancient Fathers) the
Faith was in Books rather, then in the Heart. And in a manner there were as
many sundry Creedes, as there were Professors of the Faith.

Therefore Clemens Alexandrinus says, the Heathens thus vpbraided the
Christians, Clemens, Stromat. Lib. 7.
for the strives, and dissensions, that were among them: Vos Christiani
dissidetis inter vos, and tot Sectas habetis: quae licet omnes Christianismi
titulum sibi vendicent, tamen alia aliam execratur, and condemnat. Quare vestra
Religio vera non est: nec a Deo originem ducit: Ye Christians dissente emonge
your selves: and maintain so many Sects. Which Sects, notwithstanding they
al Claim the title of Christian Religion, Yet one of them curses, and
condemns an other. Therefore your Religion is not true, nor has her
beginning, or ground from God.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 1.
What would these men (trow ye) have said in those days? Which side
would they specially then have taken? And which would they then have
foresaken? Which Gospel would they have believed? Whom would they have
accoumpted for Heretics, and whom for Catholics? And yet, what a stir,
and revel keep they this day, only upon the two poor Names of Luther, and
Zvvinglius? Because these two men are not yet fully resolved upon sum one
certain point of Doctrine, therefore would they needs have us think, that
both of the^ were deceived: that neither of them had the Gospel: and that
neither of them taught the truth aright.

M. Hardinge.
After many things by these Defenders alleged, for proof of Dissension to
have been among the Apostles, the faithful people in S. Paul's time, the
Bishops and Holy Fathers of the primitive Church, whereby they would persuade,
if they could, that their own division into sects, and dissensions, is not
a mark of false Doctrine: at length, as though they had won the filde, and
tried them selves proper men, triu^phing over us, as though we had nothing to
say, with a great courage they demand this question of us, which though it
be but one in effect, yet with a kind of bravery they seem to divide into
sundry branches, and thus they say: What would these men (they mean the
Papists) then, trow ye, have said in those days? Which side would they
then have taken, and which would they have foresaken? Which Gospel would
they have believed? Whom would they have accoumpted for Heretics, and whom
for Catholics?

Touching these four interrogatories, A fourefold answer to the four
questions.
if we had then ben alive, being of the mind we be now of, we would have
requirred you with four answeares of the Holy and most Learned Father S.
Hierome, and would have said, as in the like state of times in a Learned
Epistle he said to the Learned Pope Damasus, touching the Heresies, which he
found in Syria at his first cominge thither from Rome. Epistolaru^ Tomo. 2.
The first answer.
First, Mihi Cathedram Petri, and fidem Apostolico ore laudatam censui
consulendam: inde nunc meae animae postulans cibum, vnde olim Christi
Vestimenta suscepi.

Which words, taking upon me the Person of al Faithful and Catholic
folks, thus I English: In these controversies, I have thought good for
counsel (what I ought to believe) to repair to the Chair of Peter, and to the
faith of the Roman Church praised by Paul the Apostle own Mouth. And
from thence now require I the food of my soul, from whence I received the
garments of Christ. To speak the same more shortly, and more plainly, In
the Catholic Church I look to have the food of my soul to everlasting
Life, in which I was first Christened.

Secondely we would with him have said, one speakinge for all, directinge our
words (as he did) to those that be of the Catholic faith, The second
answer.
whom ye call Papists: Vos estis lux mundi, vos sal terrae, vos aurea vasa and
Argentea: h^c testacea vasa vel lignea, Virgam ferream, and Aeternum operiuntur
incendium. Ye are the Light of the World, ye are the Salt of the Earth, ye
are Golden and Siluerne Vessels: here (emonge the Gospellers) are the Earthen
and VVoodden Vessels, which must abide the iron Rod, and flame Everlasting.

Thirdly with him (one likewise bearing the person of al) we would have said
to Pius the fourth that now sits in the Peter's Chair, The third answer.
as he then said to Damasus: Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens,
beatitudini tuae, id est, Cathedrae Petri, Communione consocior. Super illam
Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio. Quicunque extra hanc Domum agnum comederit,
Prophanus est: Si quis in Arca Noe non fuerit, peribit regnante Diluuio.
Making none, but Christ first of al whom to follow, I join in fellowship of
Communion with thy holiness, that is to say, with the sea of Peter. Upon that
Rock I know the Church is builded. Who so ever eats the Lamb without the
compass of this house, he is Profane. If any remain without the Ark of Noah,
he shall be lost, when the flood reigns.

Fourthly touching the Authors of this New Gospel, The fourth answer.
with the same Hierome we say, al under the Person of one: Non noui Vitalem,
Meletium respuo, ignoro Paulinum. Quicunque tecum non colligit, spargit, hoc
est, qui Christi non est, Antichristi est* Vitalis I know not, Melerius I
refuse, Paulinus I wot not what he is (these were head Heretics in S.
Hieromes time). Who so ever gathers not together with thee (Holy Pastor)
he scatters abroad, that is to wit, who is not of Christ's side, he is of
Antichrists side. To transfer this to our selves, the names changed, the
case remaininge like, for our answer to our Gospel prelates, we say: Luther
we know not: Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Latimer, Ridly,
Cranmer, Hooper, we reiecte and refuse: Calvin, Beza, Iuel, Pilkinton,
Grindal, Horn, and their fellows, what they are, we wot not. We see they
are not gatherers with the supreme Pastor of the Catholic Church, but
scatterers.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It appears by that has benne already said, that the Gospel of Christ is
now misliked, and doubted of you, as it was in Old times of the Infidels, and
Heathens. Chryso. in Acta. Homil. 33.
Chrysostom there of says thus, Venit Gentilis, and dicit, vellem fieri
Christianus: Sed nescio, cui adhaeream. Multae inter vos sunt pugnae,
Seditiones, ac tumuitus. Nescio, Dissensions among the Fathers.
quod dogma eligam, quod praeferam. Singuli dicunt, Ego Verum dico: The
Infidel, or Heathen comes, and says, I vvoulde be a Christian man: but I
know not, whom I should follow. There is mutche strife, and dissenssion,
and trouble amongst you. I cannot tell, what Doctrine to choose, to set before
other. For every one of you vvil say: I say the Truth. As ye agree well with
them in Form of Words, so, I pray God, ye agree not with them in Faith,
and Sprite, and contempt of God. The same Chrysostom speaking, not only of
the Heretics, but also of the Faithful Christians, that were in his time,
says thus* Chryso. in Epist. ad Galat. Cap. 1.
Hanc ob causam ridiculi facti sumus, and Gentibus, and Iudaeis: dum Ecclesia
in mill parts discinditur: For this cause we are scorned, and laughed at,
both of Jews, and Gentiles: while as the Church is thus rent into a
thousand parts.

Therefore it was not amiss, M. Hardinge, to demand you this question,
which of these sides ye would have followed: and which of al these Gospelles
ye would have believed. For it may well be thought, that being minded as they
were, ye would have answered, as they did.

But ye say, ye would rather have said, as S. Hierome sommetime said to
Pope Damasus, touching the Heresies, which he found in Syria.

If ye would use S. Hieromes answer, M. Hardinge, and say unto the Pope, as
S. Hierome said, Perhaps ye should deserve no great thanks for your
labor. For S. Hierome in that self same place, biside sundry others,
utterly denies the Primacie of the Bishop of Rome. Hieronym ad Damasum. Nullum
Primu^.
His words be plain, Ego Nullum Primum, nisi Christum, sequens, Beatitudini
tuae, id est, Cathedrae Petri Communione Consocior: I following no First Man,
(that is to say, No Head, or Chief) but Only Christ, am joined as a
felovve in Communion unto thy Blessedness, that is to say, to Peter's Chair.
S. Hierome tells the Pope, He knows No First, No Chief, No Head, no not
the Pope him self, but only Christ. Again, he says not, I am thral, and
subject to thy commandments: But, I am joined, Beatitudini tuae Communione
Consoctor.
as a Felovve, in Communion unto thy Blessedness. Fellowship will hardly stand
with that Universal power, which you imagine, the Pope ought to have over the
whole Church of God. Verily the Pope him self would take it in scorn, if you
this day would follow S. Hierome, and call him your Fellow.

But S. Hierome says, He agrees in Faith, and Religion with Damasus. And
what great marvel is this, that being a Godly Learned man, he would leave
Vitalis, and Meletius, and other Heretics, and join him self to that
Bishop, whom he knew to be Godly, and Catholic? Hereof he writes thus him
self, Vineam Christi exterminant vulpes: Vt inter lacus contritos, qui aquam
non habent, difficile, Hieronym ad Damasum.
vbi Fons Signatus, and Horrus ille Conclusus sit, possit intelligi. Ideo mihi
Cathedram Petri, and Fidem Apostoli Ore laudatam censui consulendam: The Foxes
destroy the Vineyarde of Christ: so that emonge these broken cesternes, that
have no Water, it is hard to understand, where is that Sealed Fountain, and
that Enclosed Orchard. Therefore I thought it good, to harken to S. Peter's
Chair, and to that Faith, which was commended by the Apostles mouth.

S. Hierome from his youth was brought up in Rome: He was Christened in Rome:
He had benne a Studente in Rome: He had taught a Schole in Rome: He had benne
Secretary to Damasus the Bishop of Rome: He was a Priest of Rome: And of late
they have furnished him with a Cardinals Hatte, as if he had benne a Cardinal
of Rome: In Vita Hieron.
And as it is thought by sum, sauinge for sum displeasure, that certain of
the Cleregie had conceived against him, he was like to be chosen the Bishop of
Rome. What great maruelle therefore is it, if he had sum special affection
to the Sea of Rome? Alphonsus de Castro sa^the, That the Franciscane Freers be
sworn to Duns: Recourse to Peter's. Chair.
and that he heard a Dominicane Freere say openly in his Sermon, that he was
to be suspected, as an Heretic, Alphonsus Aduers. Haeres. Li. 1. Cap. 7.
that in any thing dissented from Thomas of Aquine. There is noman lightly,
but has a special credit in sum One man before al others.

But how holds this Argument, M. Hardinge: S. Hierome joined with a Godly
Bishop: Ergo, We must join with a wicked Bishop? Or, S. Hierome agreed in
Faith, and Religion with Damasus: Ergo, we must agree with one, that doothe
al things of purpose contrary to Damasus. So might you say, The Godly
people of the Jews were bound to obeie Aaron, and Moses: Ergo, al others,
that followed afterward, were likewise bound to obeie Annas, and Caiphas.

The Faith of Christ, M. Hardinge, goes not always by Succession. The
Bishops of Rome have benne Arians, Nestorians, Monothelites, and otherwise
found in horrible Heresies: as hereafter shall be showed. Would ye in such
cases have recourse to him, that sits in Peter's Chair? Would ye say to
such a one, You are the Salt of the Earth: You are the Light of the World?
Would ye say, This is the Faith, that was commended by the Apostles Mouth?

Truly, S. Hierome him self, when he saw Abuses, or Errors maintained in the
Church of Rome, made small accoumpte of S. Peter's Chair. For thus he says,
Hierony. ad Euagrium.
Quid mihi profers Vnius Vrbis Consuetudinem? Potentia Diuitiarum, and
paupertatis humilitas, vel sublimiorem, vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit.
Coeterum omnes Apostolorum Successores sunt. What telleste thou me of the
Custom of that One City (of Rome?) The Power of Richesse, and the humility
of Poverty, cannot make a Bishop either Higher, or Lower. Al Bishops are the
Successors of the Apostles.

As for Luther, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Calvin, and others, ye say, ye know
them not. Neither does it so greatly force, whom you list to know. God geeue
you Grace to know your sel^^s. 2. Tim. 2.
The Lord is hable to know his own.

Touching the dissensions in Religion, which ye imagine to be amongst us, I
will say nothing. It greeueth you full soar, to see, that in all the Articles
of the Faith, and in the whole Substance of Doctrine, we do so quietly join
together. The Ancient Father Leo, Leo in Epiphania, Sermo. 6.
of the like case, says thus* Diabolus Gentium vocatione Cruciatur, and
quotidiana potestatis suae destructione torquetur: dolens vtique se deseri, and
Verum Regem in locis omnibus adorari. Parat frauds: Fingit dissensiones: The
Devil is soar grieved with the calling of the Heathens (to the Faith) and
with the daily decreasinge of his power: sorowing to see him self foresaken,
and (Christ) the True King to be woorshipped in all places. Therefore he
diuiseth guiles: and imagines dissensions.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 1.
But, Good God, what manner of fellows be these, which blame us for
disagreeing? And do al they the^ selves, ween you, agree well together? is
every one of them fully resolved, what to follow? Have there benne no strives,
no quarrelles, no debates amongst the^ selves at no time? Why then do the
Scotistes and the Thomistes about that they call Meritum Congrui, and Meritu^
Condigni, no better agree together? Why agree they no better emonge them
selves concerning Original Sin in the Blessed Virgin: Concerning a Solemn
Vovv, and a Single Vow? Why say their Canonistes that Auriculare Confession
is appointed by the positive Law of man: and their Scholemen contrariwise,
that it is appointed by the Law of God? Why does Albertus Pius dissente from
Caietanus? Why does Thomas dissente from Lombardus, Scotus from Thomas,
Occamus from Scotus, Alliacensis from Occamus? And why do their Nominalles
disagree from their Realles? And yet say I nothing of so many diversities of
Freres and Monks: how sum of them put a great Holiness in eatinge of
Fish, and sum in eatinge of Herbs: sum in wearinge of shoes, and sum
in wearinge of Sandalles: sum in goeinge in a Linen garmente, and sum in
woollen: sum of them called white, sum black: sum being shaven broad,
and sum narrow: sum stalkinge upon Patens, sum goeinge barefooted: sum
girte, and sum vngirte. They ought yewis to remember, there be sum of
their own company, which say, that the Body of Christ is in his Supper
Naturally: Contrary other sum of the self same company deny it utterly.
Again, that there be others of them, which say, the Body of Christ in the
Holy Communion is rent and torn with teethe: and sum again, that deny
the same. Sum also of them there be, which write, that the Body of Christ
in the Sacrament is quantum, that is to say, has his perfect quantity in
the Sacrament: Sum others again say, naie. That there be others of them,
which say, Christ did Consecrate with a certain Divine Power: sum, that
he did the same with his Blessinge: sum again that say, he did it with
uttering Five Solemn chosen words: and sum, with rehearsinge the same
words afterward again. Sum will have it, that, when Christ did speak
those Five words, the Material wheate^ Bread was pointed unto by this
Demo^stratiue Pronoune, Hoc: Sum had rather have, that a certain vagum
indiuiduu^, as they term it, was meante thereby. Again, others there be, that
say, Dogs and Mise may truly, and in very deed eat the Body of Christ:
and others again there be, that steadfastly deny it. There be others, which
say, that the very Accidents of Bread and Wine may nourishe: others again
there be, which say, that the Substance of the Bread retourneth again by a
Miracle. What need I say more? It were over long, and tedious, to reckon up
al. So uncertain, and full of doubts is yet the whole Form of these men's
Religion, and Doctrine, even amongst them selves, from whom it sprange, and
grew up first. For hardly at any time do they well agree between them
selves: except it be peradventure, as in times paste, the Phariseis, and
Saduceis: or as Herod and Pilare accorded together against Christ.

M. Hardinge.
What so ever ye bring* The dissensions, with which the Defenders charge
the Catholic Church.
for some show of diversity and dissension to be found among the
Caetholikes, it may be reduced to two heads. The one contains a diversity
in points of lerninge: the other in trades of Life. Concerning matters of
lerninge, thanked be our Lord, for that the very enemies of the Catholic
Church, cannot charge the Catholics with dissension in any of the grou^des,
and Articles of our Faith. As for small matters, and questions disputable on
both sides, they may therein dissent one learned man from an other without
blame, the Faith remaininge inuiolated.

But, good sir Defender, what meante you to name the Nominals and Reals?
Understand you what they be? If a man should upon the sudda^ne demand of
you that question, A great doubteful question. Every poor Logician may
easily know it.
perhaps you would be to seekinge of an answer. Sir if you be an Oxforde man,
as I suppose you be, you may remember, if ever you learned your Logike after
that trade it was taught in, when we resorted to the Paruis there, what adoo
was made in daily disputations for exercise of young wits, about Genus and
Species, and the rest of the Universals: Whether they were termini Primae, or
Secundae intentionis, whether they were entia Realia, or Rationis. Which is a
matter perteigninge to Logike, not to Divinity. Now some Schoolmen be of the
opinion, that the five Universals be termini, or nomina secundae intentionis:
And they be called thereof Nominals. Some hold opinion, they are entia realia,
and thereof they be named Reals, etc. In the behalf of those Holy Religious
men, The Catholic Religious men put no holiness in outvvarde obserua^ces.
we tell you, ye are to blame to belie them. For what Discipline and order of
Life so ever they have addicted them selves unto, for better opportunity to
serve God: truth is truth, they put not great Holiness (as ye say) in
eatinge of Fish, nor of Herbs: in Shoes, nor in Sandals: in Linen, nor in
VVollen garments: in white, nor in black: in broad, nor in narrow Crowns:
in goinge on Patens, nor on the bare ground: in girdinge them selves, nor in
being Vngirded. They be not so ignorant, as to put Holiness in such outward
things, though their obedience performed in the humble observation of these
outward things according to their rule, To what end be those obseruances
of the Religious. Elias.
be an Holy thing. These things they use for restrainte of their will, and
for discipline, according to the order, and rule, under which, the better to
serve God, they have promised obediently and humbly to live. Neither put they
more holiness in the things by you scoffed at, them Elias did in his Mantell
and letherne girdle, wherewith he girded his loins: then John Baptist did in
Eatinge of Locustes and wild Honey, in wearinge a garmente of Camelles hear,
and in girdinge him self about the loins with a skin.

But I pray you, 4. Reg. 1. John Baptist.
Sirs, who be ye? if we would follow your lightness, have we not like matter of
diversity in outward things, Matthew. 3.
to twite you withal: but that your diversity is with breach of due order,
and Law, and that of religious men is according to order, and rule? If ye
think diversity in things of their own Nature indifferent, as meats,
apparel, shauinge, etc. worthy to be reprehended, and deduce from thence an
argument of mutual dissension: among your ministringe Cleregie is not
likewise diversity found? Do not some among you wear square Cappes, some
round Cappes, some butten Cappes, some only Hattes? Do not some wear side
gowns having large sleeves, with Tippettes, which is not well liked of your
sect, some of more perfection Turkey gowns, Gaberdeines, Frockes, or night
gowns of the most lay fashion for auoidinge of Superstition? The thing is
indifferent, and may be yielded unto, says the one sect: They be the Popes
rags, and may not be worn, says the other Sect. And therefore they will
rather be justly put from that which justly they cannot keep, then yield one
jot. Neither her Majesty's commandment, nor their Metropolitans decree care
they for. They had rather seem to the people, whom they use for their
Clawebackes, and to whose judgment they stand or fall, stout Champions of
their own Gospel, then meek folowers of Christ's Gospel. Such mighty
Samsons, such constant Laurences, your ioyly Gospel breeds.

Some say, Christ's Body torn with teeth, how is it understood?
the Body of Christ in the Communion is torn and crusshed with Teethe, some
deny it. Yea forsothe, and both mean right well. The hundred and thirtene
Bishops assembled in Council at Rome under Pope Nicolaus the second,
prescribed such form of Recantation to Berengarius the first Auctor of the
Sacramentarie Heresy, openly there to pronounce, acknowledge, and with
subscription to ratify, as he should confess the very true Body of Christ,
not only the Sacrament thereof, Berengarius Recantation.
sensibly and in verity to be handled with the hands of the Priests, This
was a blasphemous, and horrible error.
to be broken and crusshed with Teethe of the Faithefull. By which words
these Fathers mind was to express a verity of Real Presence, The true
Eatinge of Christ's Body is Spiritual: This imagined Eatinge with Mouth, and
Teeth, is Heathe^nishe, and Fantastical, and has no truth.
a true Eatinge of Christ's Body in deed, and to exclude the only spiritual
eatinge, so as the old Fathers did Eat Christ in their Manna. Neither is
thus Doctrine dissonant from the Fathers, Nominales Reales.
specially from Chrysostom, who has the like words, Homilia. 45. in Johan.
How so ever our Savior Christ consecrated, Curious questions not defined by
Holy Church in any Council.
with a certain divine power, or with his Almighty Blessinge, or with
utterance of words, or with repetinge the same words: what so ever the
Pronoune ( Hoc) points or signifies in the words of Consecration: what so
ever your Dogs, and Mise have Eaten, or your selves have trodden under your
wicked feet: whether the Accidents do nourrishe, or Substance return: what
narrow points so ever the schoolmen after tossinge of arguments too and fro,
as their manner is, have agreed or disagreed upon: the matter is subtle and
curious, neither determined by definitive sentence of the Church in any
Council. And therefore since is contains no Article of our Faith, let us not
be offended with the whettinge and sharpeninge of their subtle wits in
matters neither to the Truth of Gods word prejudicial, nor to the
understanding and judgment of any man, hurtefull.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching your Nominalles, and Realles, M. Hardinge, if ye had benne so
cunninge, and skilful, as ye make your self, ye would not have sent us back
to learn your First, and Second Intentions amongst Children. But, that ye
may understand your own error, and certainly see, that these two Houses,
your Nominalles, and your Realles have heretofore keapt a stir, not only in
Logique, but also in your Scholastical matters of Divinity, without further
searchinge of y^ bottom thereof, I pray you only to consider these few
Authorities.

Veselus, Veselus.
sometime for his great fame in Learning, named Lux Mundi, writes thus, In
Nominalibus si quid Fidei contrarium putarem, hodie remearem, vel ad Formales,
vel ad Realles: If I thought there were any thing in the Nominalles contrary
to the Faith, I would presently leave them, and go, either to the Formalles,
or to the Realles. Illyricus De Sectis. Page 80.
An other says, Ex Sententiarijs, alij Terminales, aut Nominales esse volunt:
alij Reales: Of the Doctors of the Scholastical Divinity, sum will be called
Terminales, or Nominales, and sum Reales. An other says, Citius e
Labyrinthis temet explices, Erasm. in Moria.
quam ex inuolucris Realium, Nominalium, etc. in quibus omnibus tantum est
cruditionis, vt putem Apostolis ipsis opus fore alio Spiritu, si cogerentur
istis de rebus cum hoc Nouo Theologorum genere conserere manus: Ye may sooner
wind your self out of a Maze, then out of the shifts, and Corners of these
Realles, and Nominalles etc. in whom there is such abundance of Learning,
y^, I think, the Apostles them selves should have need of an other Sprite, if
at any time they should be driven to encounter with this Nevve kind of
Divines: Here, M. Harding, your Nominalles, and Realles, are called a Nevve
kind, not of Logicians, but of Divines. Vdal. Zasius, De Generum obligatione.
And if ye consider well Vdalrichus Zasius, ye shall find, that your said
Nominalles, and Realles have intruded them selves, not only into Divinity,
but also into the Civil Law. Therefore it was somewhat out of season, to tell
us this tale, of your Second, and First Intentions.

Concerning apparel, ye say, ye set not great Holiness neither in shoes,
nor in Sandales, etc. Whereby ye would seem to geeue us to understand, that
ye set sum Holiness in these things, although not Great. Neither doothe
it appear, that the Phariseis ever made any great accoumpte of Holiness of
their garments. Yet notwithstanding under the color, and shadow thereof,
they deceived the people. And therefore Christ says unto them, Woe be unto
you, ye Scribes, Matthae. 23. Marc. 12. Luke 20. Seneca. Macrobius.
and Phariseis: And unto the people he says, Beware of them, that love to go
in long Roobes. Of such men, Seneca says, Personam habere malunt, quam
faciem: They will rather wear a Visarde, then a Natural face. An other says,
Dolosi Hominis dolosae vestes: Crafty man, Crafty Cote.

But if noman ever reckened any Holiness to be in your apparel, wherefore then
was this Decree so long ago written in the Council of Gangra, Si quis Virorum
putauerit Sancto proposito, Obedience.
id est continentiae, conuenire, vt pallio v^atur, Holiness in Apparel.
tanquam ex eo Iustitiam habiturus, etc. Anathema sit: If any man think it
agreeable to his holy purpose, Council. Cangren. Cap. 12. Chrysostom. in
Matthae. Homil. 43.
of Continente life, to wear a Cloak, as though thereby he may be Justified,
etc. Accursed be he. Or, wherefore doothe S. Chrysostom cry out against
such folly, used, as it may appear, in his time? O impietatem: Maiorem
Sanctitatem in vestimentis suis volunt ostendere, quam in Corpore Christi etc.
Vt desperans de Misericordia Dei, confidat in vest Hominis. O the wickedness
hereof: They will show more holiness in their own apparel, then in the Body
of Christ, etc. That he, that despaireth in Gods Mercy, should put his
trust in the garmente of a Man.

Or, wherefore doothe Thomas of Aquine tell us so certainly, Thom. Aquinas.
that the wearinge of Francise, or Dominikes Cowle had power to remove Sin,
as well as the Sacrament of Baptism? Or, wherefore doothe your Bishop, in
halowinge the Priests Vestimentes, In Pontifical. In Benedic. ad Vestimenta
Sacerdotal.
say thus, Vt Sacerdotes tui hac Sacra Vest induti, ab omnibus impulsionibus,
seu tentationibus malignorum Spirituum muniti, and defensi esse Mereantur: That
thy Priests wearinge this Holy vesture, may deserve to be shielded, and
defended from al assaults, and tentations of the wicked Sprites.

Your Doctoure Durande furnishes out your Priest at Mass in his Complete
Harness, Durand. in Rationali, Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
a Capo a Pie. Amictus est pro Galea etc. His amice, says he, is his
Headpeece His Albe, is his Coat of Maile: His Gyrdle, is his Bow: His
Subcingle, is his Quiver: His Stole, is his Spear: His Maniple, is his Clubbe:
His Chisible, is his Targette. And in the end he says, Haec sunt Arma,
quibus Pontifex, vel Sacerdos armari debet, contra Spirituales nequitias
pugnaturus: These be the Pieces, wherewith the Bishop, or Priest must be
Harnessed, that vvil fight against the Spiritual wickedness. Thus mutche, I
trow, he would not have said, without sum opinion of special Holiness.

To be thorte, wherefore do your Doctors keep such hot Schools amongst
them selves, Extra De Conse. Eccle. vel Allaris. Quod in dubijs.
whether, if the Sextine happen to mende his hallowed Vestimente with a threede
unhallowed, the whole Vestimente be not thereby becomme unhallowed? How could
these so doubteful matters ever have fallen in question amongst your Fellows,
if ye had benne fully, and thoroughly persuaded, that there is no Holiness in
your apparel? Lactant. Lib. 6. Cap. 25.
The Anciente Father Lactantius says, Vestes, Gemmas, and coetera, quae
habentur in pretio, si quis puret Deo chara, is plane, quid Deus sit, nescit:
If any man think, that Apparel, Precious Stones, or other like things, that
we have in estimation, are pleasant, or delectable unto God, undoubtedly he
knows not, what is God.

But, ye say, what so ever your Apparel be, yet your Obedience is very Holy.
The Obedience, In vita Iohannis Damasceni.
ye mean, is, to too what so ever your Abbate shall bid you do: as, to
carry baskettes from Palestina to Damasco: To sit Seven years together in
silence, without speakinge of any word: For y^ space of tweluemoonethes,
twice every day to water a dead tree: and briefly, Cassand. Lib. 4 Cap. 27.
to do what so ever fond business ye be commanded: As it is written of one,
that at the Commandment of his Abbate, threw out his child into the
stream. This, I trow, is that Obedience, that ye commend to be so Holy.

But S. Paul says, 1. Corinthians. 7. Ambros. 1. Corinthians. 7. Esai. 1.
Ye are bought with price: Make not your selves Sclaues unto Men. And S.
Ambrose says, Scrui Hominum sunt, qui humanis se subijciunt Superstitionibus:
They are the Sclaues of Men, that make them selves subject unto Men's
Superstitions. God him self says unto you, Who required these things at
your Hands? Hieronym. ad Lustochium, De virginitate seruanda.
S. Hierome says, Viros fuge, quos videris Cathenatos: quibus foeminei,
contra Apostolum, sunt crines: hircorum barba: nigrum pallium: and nudi
Patientia frigoris pedes. Haec omnia argumenta sunt Diaboli: Plee those men,
that thou shalt see go in Chains: that, contrary to the Apostles
commandment, wear long hear, as Weemen: Choice of Apparel.
that are bearded like Goats: that have upon them a black Cloak: that go
barefoote, patiently bearinge the cold. Al these be tokens of the Devil.
Alphonsus de Castro, Alphonsus Aduer. Haeres. Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
one of your own, says, Paulus quidem iussit Captiuare intellectum nostrum,
sed in obsequium Christi, non autem in obsequium Hominum: In deed Paul bath
Commanded us to submit our understanding, but unto the Obedience of
Christ, not unto the Obedience of Men.

The Godly learned men, at whose persons it pleases you so rudely to
scoff, that refuse either to go in your Apparel, or otherwise to show them
selves like unto you, have age sufficient, and can answer for them selves.
Notwithstanding, thus mutche I may say in their behalf: Neither do they
commend any manner of Apparel, as Holy: nor do they condemn any Apparel, as
Unholy. That is your proper, and peculiare error, M. Hardinge, to make so
deep accoumpte of outward Shows.

They know, Eusebius. Lib. 4. Cap. 11. (...)
that Eusebius says, Justinius Martyr Preached the Gospel of Christ, beeinge
apparelled as an Heathen Philosopher. They know, that John the Evangelist
preached Gods word at Ephesus, wearinge upon him the Bishops Brouche, as
if he had benne a Bishop of the Jews. S. Augustine says, Nihil sane ad istam
pertinet Ciuitatem, quo Habitu, vel more viuendi, si non est Contra Diuina
praecepta, istam Fidem, qua peruenitur ad Deum, quisque Sectetur. Vnde ipsos
quoque Philosophos, Eusebius. li. 3 ca. 41. (...). Augustine. De Ciuita. Lib. 19.
Cap. 19. Helar. in Psalmum. 67.
quando Christiani fiunt, no^ Habitum, vel consuetudinem victus, quae nihil
impedit Religionem, sed falsa Dogmata mutare compellit: It pertains nothing
unto this City ( of God), in what kind of Apparel, or in what order of
Life, so that it be not against God, any man follow this Faith, whereby we
comme unto God. Therefore, when Philosophers becomme Christians, y^ Church
compels them not to change their Apparel, or manner of Living, which can
nothing hinder Religion, but only she compels them to change their False
Opinions. S. Hilarie says, Ad Ecclesiae decus detracta a Diabolo Gentium
spolia diuiduntur: The spoils of the Heathens, taken from the Devil, are
divided to the Furniture, and Ornamente of the Church of God.

S. Hierome says, Hieronym. Aduersus Pelagia. Lib. 1.
Episcopus, Presbyter, and Diaconus, and reliquus Ordo Ecclesiasticus in
Administratione Sacrificiorum, Candida Vest procedit: The Bishop, Priest, and
Deo^on, and the other Ecclesiastical Company, at the Administration of the
Sacrifice, comme forth in white Apparel. S. Chrysostom unto the Priests,
and Deacons says thus, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homi. 83.
Haec est dignitas vestra, haec Corona: non quia, induti Tunicam candidissimam,
per Ecclesiam ambulatis: This is your dignity: this is your Garlande: not that
ye walk through the Church in white Apparel.

They say not therefore, that the Apparel is either Holy, or Unholy. But they
may truly say, The same Apparel of your part has benne fowly abused to
filthy purposes. They may justly say, they would not gladly in any
appearance show them selves like unto them, that have so untruly, and so
long deceived the world. And herein they are not without sundry Authorities,
and Examples of the Godly Fathers. August. Confess. Lib. 6. Cap. 2. Quod
Superstitioni Gentilium essent suntlima. ^regor. Lib. 1. Epist. 41.
S. Augustine says, His Mother leafte bringinge of Wine, and Cakes to the
Church, not for that it was ungodly, or unlawful of it self so to do, but
only for that she was warned, It was a resemblance of the superstition of the
Heathens. S. Gregory speakinge of the three Sprinklinges, or Dippinges into
the Holy Font, says thus, In Vna Fide nihil efficit Consuetudo Ecclesiae
diuersa. Tamen, quod Haeretici id facerent, negant idem esse a Catholicis
faciendum: The Faith being One, the diversity of Customs hurts nothing.
Yet for as mutche as Heretics have thus done, they say, that the
Catholics may in no wise do the some: Not for that the thing it self was
il, but for that they would not seem to follow Heretics.

Gabriel Biel says, the Church of Rome thought it good, to use common
Leauened Bread at y^ Ministration of the holy Mysteries, lest in vsinge
unleavened Bread, Gabriel Lectio. 38.
they should be thought to follow Ebion the Heretic. Tertullian reasons
vehemently, Tertul. De Corona Militis.
that a Christian man ought not to go with a Laurel Garlande upon his Head:
and that for none other cause, but only for that the Heathens used so to go.
Whereupon Beatus Rhenanus gives this note: Non solum ab his temperandum fuit,
B. Rhenan. in Librum De Corona Militis.
quae manifestam prae se ferrent impietatem, sed etiam ab illis, quae possent
indifferentia vocari, hoc est, quae essent, neque Bona, neque Mala: partim, ne
quisquam infirmior ex Christianis offenderetur: partim, ne Ethnici in suis
erroribus confirmarentur, dum rectius putant esse, quod etiam Christianos
obseruare vident: It was meet for them to refrain, not only from such
things, as have a manifest show of wickedness, but also from such
things, as might be called indifferent, that is to say, neither Good, nor
il: partly, lest any of the weaker Christians should be offended: partly
also, lest the Heathens should be encourraged in their errors, thinkinge that
thing, for that the Christians them selves do it, to be the better. Tertul.
De Idololatria.
Again Tertullian says, De hoc primo consistam, An cum ipsis quoque
Nationibus Communicare in huiusmodi Seruus Dei debeat: sieve habitu, sieve victu,
vel quo alio genere laetitiae eorum: Herein will I first stand, whether it be
lawful for the Servant of God, to Communicate with whole Nations in such
things: either in Apparel, or in Diet, or in any other kind of their Mirthe.
And S. Basile says, (...): Let needelesse, Basil. De Natali Christi. Origin.
in Hieremi. Homil. 3.
and superfluous things be put to Silence in the Church of God. To be short,
Origin says, Quaerendum est, quid hoc sit, quod sequitur, Non fiant ei
reliquiae: Ne aliqua, inquit, rescindatis Chaldaeorum, aliqua reseruetis. Ob id
iubet, ne pusillum quidem relinquatur in ea: We must examine, what is meante
by this, that follows, Leave her no manner of remnante. The meaning is this,
Abolishe not certain of the Superstitions of the Chaldees, reseruinge
certain: Therefore he commands, that nothing be least in her, be it never
so little. How be it, I take not upon me to enter into the Conscience of others:
Roman. 14.
Let each man abound in his own sense.

Yet, M. Hardinge, for as mutche as ye make such a reckeninge of your
Antiquity, as if al your Orders, and Ceremonies had undoubtedly benne conveyed
over unto you from Christ him self, and his Apostles, may it therefore
please you to understand, that at the beginning there appears no such
distinction, or difference of Apparel in the Ministry. Valafredus Abbas
says, Veteres Communi indumento vtentes Celebrabant Missas: The old Fathers
said Mass (that is to say, Ministered the Holy Communion) having on their
own common Apparel.

S. Augustine in his Rule to his Clerks, August. In Regula Monachor. Hieronym.
ad Marcellam, vt commigret Bethleem.
or Monks, writes thus, Ne sit Notabilis habitus vester: Let not your Apparel
be Notable. S. Hierome, describinge the order of the Church at Bethleem,
says thus: In vest, nulla discretio: nulla admiratio: Vtcunque placuerit
incedere, nec detractionis est, nec laudis: In Apparel, there is no difference:
there is no woonderinge. How so ever any man list to go, it is neither
sclandered, nor praised. And Pope Coelestinus the first says, Discernendi
sumus a plebe, Coelestin. I. In Episto. ad Episcopas Gallia, Ca. I.
Doctrina, non Vest: Conuersatione, non Habitu: Mentis puritate, non cultu. Si
enim studere incipiemus Nouitati, Traditum nobis a Patribus ordinem calcabimus,
vt Iocum vacuum Superstitionibus faciamus. Docendi potius sunt rudium animi,
quam illudendi. Nec Imponendum est illorum oculis, sed Mentibus infundenda
praecepta sunt: We must be known from the Lay people, by our Doctrine, not
by our Coat: By our Conversation, not by our Apparel: By the pureness of our
Mind, not by the attiere of our Body. For if we once begin to divise
Novelties, we shall tread our Fathers Orders under foot, and make room for
Superstition. The minds of the ignorante ought to be taught, and not to be
mocked. Neither may we go about to dosel the^ ^ies: but rather ought to
power wholesome Doctrine into their Hearts. To conclude, it is noted in your
own Gloss upon the Clementines, Choice of Apparel.
Clerici Saeculares non habent certum habitum, Cl^^ p^ ^^ct. Cap. 1. Gloss.
vl^^ms.
cum non fit expressum in iure de Color, vel Forma: per quae, vel quorum
alterum oportet habitum discerni: Seculare Priests have no certain Apparel
appointed them, for as mutche as there is no express mention made, neither of
the Color, nor of the Form: by which two differences, or by the one of
them, Apparel must be discerned.

Gods name be Blessed. The Religion of Christ may stand both with, and
without these things. But without such proppes, the whole rooffe of your
Religion must needs comme down: as having nothing else, but shows, and
vanities, to bear it up.

But lest ye should conceive over great opinion of so small a matter, and
think, there can be none other Apparel meet, and comely for the Cleregie, but
only youres, or, that without the same, the whole Church of Christ must
needs go to waste: may it like you therefore to remember, what y^ Ancient
Father Origin has written of you in this behalf: Origin. in Matthae. Tracta.
25.
Non solum apud Iudaeos, sed etiam apud nos, multos est inuenire, peccata
huiusmodi peccantes, and glutientes Camelos, in eo, quod maxima delicta
committunt. Et oportet huiusmodi homines frequenter considerare, Quomodo in
rebus minimis Religionem suam ostendant: Et been eos Hypocritas appellat: We
may find, not only amongst the Jews, but also amongst our selves, men
y^ offend in such faults, swalowinge down whole Camels, in that they
Commit great offenses. And we ought well to mark such manner of Men, how
they countenance out their Religion with small matters. Very well, and justly
Christ calls them Hypocrites.

Posidonius, Posidoni. in vita August
writing the life of S. Augustine, says thus, Vestis eius, and calceamenta,
and lectualia ex moderato, and compe^enu habitu erant: nec nitida nimi^mx, nec
abiecta plurimum. Quia his plerunque vel iactare se nimium homines solent, vel
abijcere: ex vtroque non quae Jesus Christi, sed quae sua sunt, quaerentes:
Augustines Apparel, shoes, and Beddinge were of a Competente, and mean
making: neither over freashe, nor over homely. For in such things men use
oftentimes, either to vaunte, or to abase them selves above measure: in either
side seekinge their own, and not that pertains to Jesus Christ.

S. Augustine says, August. De Serm^^. Domini in ^onte, Lib. 2.
Ex coeteris eius operibus potest conijci, vtrum hoc Co^temptu superflui
cultus, an Ambitione aliqua faciat. Quia and sub ouina pelle cauendos Lupos
Dominus praecepit: We may geather by the rest of his works, whether he do
thus ( attiere him self) in contempt of Superfluous Apparel, or else for
Ambition, that he ^aie be noted. For our Lord has commanded us to bevvare of
the VVoulfe, even under the Sheep skin. August. in eodem Libro.
Again he says, Illum parcum habitum, ac necessarium etiam Simulatores
saepius vsurpant, vt incautos decipiant: That homely kind of Apparel,
standinge only in necessaries, Hypocrites, and dissemblers do for the more
part countrefcite, to the end they may deceive men, before they bew^re.
Thus mutche only by the way, lest ye should think more of your Coat, then
it is worthy.

Some say, The Body of Christ in the Sacrament is Torn, and crusshed with
Teethe: and sum deny it. Yea forsoothe, say you, and both mean right well.
Thus would ye not say, M. Hardinge, if ye know, what it were to Eat the Body
of Christ.

S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Coena Domini.
Est Cibus Mentis, non ventris^ It is the Meat of our Mind, not of our Belly:
we Eat it with the Spiritual Toothe of our Faith, not with the Material
Toothe of our Body. Your very Gloss, be it never so blind, was able to see,
that these words, To tear, and to Crusshe Christ's Body with your bodily
Teethe, can hardly have so Catholic, and so good a meaning, as you imagine.
De conse. Did. 2. Ego Berenga. in Glossa.
The words thereof be these, Nisi sane intelligas verba Berengarij, in
Maiorem incides Haeresim, quam ipse habuit. Et ideo omnia referas ad Species
ips^s: Unless thou discretely understand these words of Berengarius, Dogs,
and Mise.
Christ's Body Torn, and Crusshed with Teethe.
thou shalt fall into a greater Heresy, then he had any. Therefore these
words must have relation to the Fourmes, and not unto Christ's very Body. It
follows therefore that the Catholic Construction, that you geather hereof,
must needs be this: Christ's Body is Crusshed, and Torn with Teethe, that is
to say, Christ's Body is not Crusshed, nor Torn with Teethe. Germans lips
be not so far a sunder, but ye may easily join them together by such
Constructions.

But Chrysostom says in like wise, Dentes inserimus in Carnes Christi: We
thrust our Teethe into y^ Fleashe of Christ. O M. Hardinge, you can not be
ignorante of Chrysostomes extraordinary, Chrysostomus in Encaenijs.
and vehement manner of speech: and therefore ye are the more to blame, thus
of purpose, and witingly to abuse your Reader. For, as Chrysostom says, We
thruste our Teethe into Christ's Fleashe, So he says likewise, Christ is
slain upon the Communion Table, and his Blood is povvred from his side.
Likewise he says unto a sclaunderer of his neighbor, Chrysostom. Ad Roman.
Homil. 21.
Linguam tuam humano Sanguine rubefecisti: Thou haste died thy tongue read in
Man's Blood. So S. Hierome says, Detractores viuis Carnibus Saturantur:
Sclaunderers are filled with live Fleashe. So says S. Cyprian, Cruci
Haeremus: Hierony. in Iobum. Cap. 19. Cyprian. De Coena Domini.
Sanguinem sugimus: and intra ipsa Redemptoris nostri vulnera linguam figimus:
We Cleave to the Cross: and suck the Blood: and we fasten our Tongues
within the wounds of our Redeemer.

These, and other like phrases commonly used in the Anciente Fathers, may not
be racked to the extremity of the words: but rather ought favorably to be
applied to the meaning: which was, by the Material Toothe, and Tongue of the
Body, to express the Spiritual, and inward Eatinge, and suckinge of the
Mind. August. De Doctrine. Christian. Lib. 3. Cap. 16.
So S. Augustine says, Figura ergo est, praecipiens Passioni Domini
communicandum, and suauiter, atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quod Caro
Christi Crucifixa pro nobis, and vulnerata sit: Therefore it is a Figure, or a
Figurative phrase of speech: commaundinge us to be Partakers of Christ's
Passion, and comfortably, and profitably to lay up in our Hearts, that his
Fleashe was Crucified, and wounded for our sakes.

As for your Consecration, Corpus quantum, Non quantum, Non per modum quanti,
Indiuiduum Vagum, etc. which lately were the Substantiallest points of al
your Doctrine, it is sufficient for you now to say, They are no Articles of
your Faith. Such Grace have you, for advantage, to make your Faith more, or
less, at your pleasure. Touching your Dogs, and Mise, whether they Eat the
very Body of Christ, or no, and that Substantially, Uerily, and in Deed, ye
seem still to stay in doubt, as not yet being well assured of this Article of
your Faith. But this is a most certain, and undoubted Article of our Faith,
that no Creature can Eat the Body of Christ, but he, that is a Member of
Christ's Body. S. Augustine says, Hoc est manducare illam escam, Augustine. in
Johan. Tracta. 26.
and illum potum Bibere, in Christo manner, and Christum Manentem in se habere:
This is the Eatinge of that meat, and the Drinkinge of that Drink: for a Man
to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwellinge within him. And therefore we
say, Who so ever will hold, that a Dog, or a Mouse may Eat the very Body
of Christ, and that Really, and in deed, or who so staggereth, or doubts,
whether it may be so, or no, Accursed be he.

You say, your Contentions bitwene your two contrary Armies, the Thomistes,
and the Scotistes, and other Schoolemenne, stand only in certain terms
Metaphysical: As, vtrum Ens, and Vnum differant ratione, an reipsa: The Truth
whereof is very agreeable to the rest of your Doctrine. For, to leave a whole
world of the endless contentions that are among you, Alphonsus, one of your
own Doctors, says, Thomistes. Scotistes.
that one of your Thomistes doubted not to pronounce openly in the behouse of
his Master, Quisquis a B. Thomae sententia discesserit, suspectus de Haeresi
est censendus: Alphons. De Haeresib. Li. 1. Ca. 7.
Who so ever foresaketh the judgment of Thomas of Aquine, must be taken, as
suspected of Heresy. I think, ye use not to place your Heresies in Terms
Metaphysical.

Erasmus, that lived in that age, and understood of the furies of your
Schools, says thus, Erasmus contra Latomum.
Qui Thomam sequuntur, and a Scoto, and a Gersone dissentiunt, eos pene habent
pro Haereticis: They that follow Thomas, and dissente from Duns, and Gerson,
account them in a manner as good as Heretics.

Petrus a Soto, and Catharinus, were both Learned men: both of your side:
both sworn to the Pope: both present at your late Chapter at Tridente. Yet
thus doothe the one of them greet the other: Petrus a Soto Contra Catharinum.
Tu permanes in sensu damnato per Synodum: Thou remainest still in a sense
condemned by the Council. Catharinus condemns Cardinal Caietan for two
hundred sundry errors, and sum of them he calls wicked, and
Antichristian. These Terms must needs be very Metaphysical, M. Hardinge, that
can yield you such Heretical, and Antichristian errors.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 1.
They were best therefore to go, and set peace at home rather among them
selves. Of a truth, Unity, and Concord doothe best becomme Religion: Yet is
not Unity the sure and certain mark, whereby to know the Church of God. For
there was the greatest Unity, that might be, amongst them, that woorshipped
the Golden Calfe, and among them, which with one voice jointly cried against
our Saueour Jesus Christ, Crucify him. Neither, because the Corinthians were
unquieted with private dissensions: or because Paul did square with Peter, or
Barnabas with Paul: or because the Christians upon the very beginning of the
Gospel, were at mutual discord, touching some one matter, may we therefore
think, there was no Church of God amongst them. And, as for those persons,
whom they upon spite call Zuinglians, and Lutherans, in very deed they of
both sides be Christians, good Friends, and Brethren. They vary not bitwixte
them selves upon the Principles, and Fundations of our Religion, nor as
touching God, or Christ, or the Holy Ghost, or the means of Justification,
or of everlasting life, but upon one only question, which is neither
weighty, nor great: neither mistruste we, or make doubt at al, but they will
shortly be agreed. And if there be any of them, which have other opinion,
than is meet, we doubt not, but ere it be long, they will put aparte al
affections, and names of parties, and that God will reuele the truth unto them:
so that by better consideringe, and searchinge out of the matter, as once it
came to pass in the Council of Chalcedon, al causes, and seeds of dissension
shall be thoroughly plucte up by the root, and be buried, and quite foregotten
for ever. Which God grant.

M. Hardinge.
These Defenders be like in conditions to such honest women, as commonly we
call Scoldes. Because unity pleases you not, as being that through lack
whereof your new Church is of al good men detested, and of the meanest very
much suspected, ye say it is not a sure and a certain mark, whereby to know
the Church of God. Yeas, Masters, among other notes and marks of the true
Church, Unity is one. Not every Unity, but Unity in the Holy Ghost, which
gives life to that one Body the Church, whereof every faithful is a member,
and Christ the Head, and pouring Charity abroad in our Hearts, so linketh al
right believers together in the bond of peace, as they al say one thing,
think one thing, sauer one thing. The Unity, that ^s the note and mark of
the true Church, whereof we speak, is that, for which the Church is called
one* and being gathered and knitte together, professes Unity of Faith, of
good will and mutual love together, and of Sacraments. The Unity of them who
worshipped the Golden Calfe, and with one consent against our Savior cried,
Crucifige, was far distant from the Unity, which is a note of the Church,
and is the work of the Holy Ghost. Such is the Unity of the Devils, who
conspire against Christ and al his with one consent. Such Unity is oftentimes
in Thieves: such Unity is found in you, and all your sects. For be ye never
so diverse and at variaunce within your selves, yet ye io^ne together in
wicked amity and Unity against the Church of Christ. And therefore S.
Augustine compares you, and all such as ye be, to Samsons foxe^, that were
sundred by the heads, and tied together by the tails.

Neither say we that among them, who vary in small points, and things not
perteininge to the grounds of Faith, 1. Corin. 1. Gal. 2. Act. 15.
there is no Church. For all that certain of the Corinthians in the Primitive
Church were at square, how so ever Paul told Peter that he thought good,
though Barnabas and Paul agreed not about John Mark, yet were they of
Christ's Church: what else? But where ye bring this for excuse of the
Luth^rans and the zwinglians, and other sects spronge out of them, the cause
is not like pardye. For say on what ye list, and lie so long as ye list,
their dissensions can not be dessembled: much less can they be accorded, etc.

Yet lest they, whose fortune is not to see ought thereof written else where,
should mistrust my report, as all do epsy your lyinge: the words of
Nicolaus Gallus your own Doctor of Luthers scoole, here I will rehearse: In
Thesibus and Hypotyposibus, fol. vlt.
Non sunt leaves inter nos concertationes de rebus leuibus, sed de sublimibus
doctrinae Christianae articulis, de lege, and euangelio, de iustificatione, and
bonis operibus, de Sacramentis. etc. The strifes (sateth he) that be amongst
us, be not light, nor of light matters, but of the high Articles of Christian
^octrine, namely of the law and of the Gospel, of justification, and of good
works, of the Sacraments, etc. Here, as ye see, he rekeneth up a great many
of the weightiest points of our Religion, whereof they d^ssent among
themselves. But I doubt, what I may call weighty and great, saying these good
fellows call the controversy, which is betwixt the Lutherans and the
zwinglians, concerning the Body of our Saucour Christ, neither weighty nor
great. But as they make a foul lie therein, so do they also in saying, they
vary not betwixt them selves, but upon one only question. Of the dissension
that is between the Lutherans, and Zwinglians, thus pitifully complains
Nicolaus Amsdorffius in his Book entitled Publica confessio purae Doctrinae,
him self being an earnest Lutheran: The world goes with us worse and worse
daily. All things do prognosticase the utter ruin of the Gospel, and that
in place of the Gospel, we shall have nothing but mere errors, and the same
very notable. (Then after a few words) now Brenttus (says he) and the
Adiaphoristes (they be a special sect of the Lutherans) being at the
Communication or conference at Worms, would not condemn zwinglius and
Osiander, because they were ^rimme men in the tongues, and well seen in
Humanity. And as for us and our side, because we refused to agree unto that
communication unless they were condemned, they dressed us vily with their
scoffs and railinges, thrust us out of the communication, and compelled us to
go away, etc. Item after a few:

There be that say, they condemn zuinglianisme, but the preface of Brentius
to Master James the minister of Goppingen his book, witnesses far
otherwise. For there they go about (a Gods name) to conciliat good father
Luther and Zuinglius, and make them friends one with an other. Quod plane
impossible est. Quis enim vnquam audiuit contradictoria posse redigi in
concordiam? Which is impossible: for who ever heard, that contradictions
may be accorded? (But the Masters of the Apology make no doubt at all, but
they will shortly be aggreed.) Such childishe and impossible things they
stick not to set forth, Unity.
who would be compted the teachers of the world, as though we were but blocks
and Asses. But as for the heresies and errors of Zuinglius and Osiander, with
a quiet conscience we can not embrace. Neither can we subscribe and yield to
their departinge away, and new guegawes, which have divided them selves from
Luther. Thus far Amsdorffius, and much more there to the same purpose, which
here I leave to blot the paper withal. To conclude, thus all men may plainly
see, how the masters of this defense be convinced of foul lyinge by their
own Doctors and scholefelowes, beside the thing it self, that gives
manifest evidence against them. But such stuff in their writings and
Preachinges is not geason. Leauinge others, I report me to M. Iuelles late
sermon made at Paul's Cross on the Sondaie before Ascension day last, in
which (if uniform report made by sundry there present be true) he abused
certain Honorable, and woorshipfull personages, and of common people a great
multitude, with lies worthy rather to be chastised by laws, then to be
confuted with words. But be it as it is written, Apocal. 22.
Qui in sordibus est, sordescat adhuc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It pitieth me, M. Hardinge, to see your trifling^e. If ye thought it so good
skill, for advantage of your cause, to compare us to scoldes, wherefore then did
not you, although not through your whole Book, yet at least in this self
same place, where ye so deeply charge us with scoldinge, refrain better from
such wild speeches, as might seem to prove your self a scolde? For, I
beseech you, call your words a little to remembrance: and consider
indifferently, what weemen they be, that commonly use the like. Thus ye say,
Even so, good Sirs: proudely, wickedly, and fondely ye obiecte: ye show your
Clerkely prowes: ye Brag: ye boaste: Now have you told your scoldinge
tale: Ye join in wicked amity against the Church of Christ: The founders
of your Church: The Apostles of your Gospel: Ye are convinced of foul
lieinge: Al men do epsy your lieinge: lie on so long, as ye list: He
that is filthy, let him be filthy still. These be your words, M. Hardinge,
altogether in one place. If you can find so many the like in all our whole
Apology, condemn us hardly, and call us Scoldes.

Unity we love, and Honor it, as the greatest comfort of Christian hearts.
But if Unity be the only, and undoubted token of the Church of God, woe then
be to you, and to your fellows. For by that token, agreeinge so il amongst
your selves, ye should seem to have no Church.

But, as we have said, Al they, that agree together, are not therefore
evermore of the Church. Luke 23. Psalm. 2.
Herod, and Pilate were made friends, and agreed together. David says, The
Kings and Princes of the earth have met, and agreed together against the
Lord, and against his Christ. S. John says of the friends, Apocalyp. 17.
and favorers of Antichriste, Hi vnum Consilium habent, and vires, ac
potestatem suam tradent Bestiae: hi pugnabunt cum Agno: These shall have al one
Counsel (and one Mind): and shall deliver over their strength, and their power
unto the Beast: and shall fight against the Lamb.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 29.
Expedit and ipsis Daemonibus, obaudire sibi inuicem in Schismate: It is good
even for the Devils them selves, to be obediente one of them unto an other in
their Division. Symmachus, and other like maineteiners of the Heathenishe
Idolatry, Ambros. Lib. 5. Epist. 30.
said, Aequum est, quicquid omnes colunt, vnum putari: It is meet, that, what
so ever al men woorship, be counted One. And thus would they seem to hold
by Unity.

If your Unity, M. Hardinge, be so sound, and so certain, as ye would seem
to make it, why then do you condemn your selves, one an other, of Heresy?
Certainly Heresy imports Division, and no great Unity. The whole show,
and Substance of your Unity stands in this, To geeue ear to your selves,
and to put Christ to silence. But the true, and Christian unity is this, That
the whole Flock of Christ, John. 10.
hear the voice of the only Shephearde, and follow him. The band of Unity,
is simple Verity: Which, M. Hardinge, for as mutche as ye have forsaken, ye
have no great cause to talk mutche of Unity.

As for Sampsons Foxetailes, it seems, ye lackte somewhat, to play withal.
Otherwise they serve you here to no great purpose. For if there be any
dissension amongst us, it is not in any Article of the Faith, but only in
sum particulare point of learning: The like whereof has benne bitweene S.
Augustine, and S. Hierome, and others the Learned, Godly, and Catholic
Fathers of the Church. And thus, contrary to Sampsons Foxes, notwithstanding
one, or other have benne divided in sum certain Conclusion, as it were in
the tails, yet we join thoroughly al together in one Head, in one Gospel, in
one way of Salvation, and in one sum of Religion: and al together with one
Mouth, and one Sprite glorify God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Concerning the disagreemente, that is bitweene the Lutherans, and the
Zuinglians, touching the Beeinge of the Body of Christ in one only place, or
in many, we say, that in respect either of Salvation, or of other Article,
of God the Father, or of the Son, or of the Holy Ghost, or of any other the
Grounds, and Principles of the Christian Faith, it is not weighty. In that
respect we speak it only. Otherwise we say, the error is weighty.
Such errors in sundry the Anciente Fathers have benne dissembled, and paste
in silence. S. Hilarie seems to say, Hilar. De Trinita. Lib. 10 Hominis
habitus est: Origo non Hominis.
that Christ received not Fleashe of the Blessed Virgin: And, that the same
Fleashe of Christ was impassible, and could feel no grief.

Origin says, Quidam putant, Christu^ in Futuro Saeculo iterum pati oportere,
etc. Sum men think, that in the world to comme Christ must suffer in
his Body, or be Crucified again. Naturam non habens ad dole^dum.
Brentius seems to hold, that Christ's Body is infinite, and in all places,
as is the Godhedde: which error, it seems, was defended by sum in S.
Augustines time. And therefore he says, Cauendum est, Origin. ad Roman. Ca.
6. Li. 5. Brentius.
ne ita Diuinitatem astruamus Hominis, vt Veritate^ Corporis auferamus: We must
take heed, we do not so maineteine y^ Divine Nature of Christ being man,
that we take away the Truth of his Body. These errors, notwithstanding
they were great in them selves, yet in respect of other greater errors, have
benne dissembled. Augustine. Epist. 57. Ad Dardan. Jacob. Andreae De Authori^a.
Scripturae, Page 178.
And therefore Iacobus Andreas, al be it he could not be ignorant of this
dissension, being him self a party, yet he says, Qu^d vociferantur,
nostros de summa Euangelij nondum consentire, mendacium est: Whereas they cry
out, that we cannot agree emonge our selves, about the Substance of the
Gospel, it is a very great Untruth.

But you say, The Masters of the Apology tell us, They doubt not, but
these parties will be reconciled. And yet Nicolaus Amsdorfius (with whose words
ye are ashamed to blotte your paper) takes the matter to be impossible. And
here, ye think, ye have driven us near the wall, specially findinge us so far
disagreeinge in Judgment from a Doctoure, as you call him, of our own.

But* M. Hardinge, ye might better have considered, that Amsdorfius, and we
speak of sundry matters, and therefore our saieinges may well stand together.

Amsdorfius says, the Doctrine, and Terms standinge still, as they do, it is
not possible by any manner of Construction, to make the parties agree. But our
trust in God is, that they, that are deceived, shall find their own error,
and alter their Terms, and correct their judgments, and submit them selves
unto the Truth, and so join together al in one.

So S. Augustine says, Augustine in Secunda Disputatione contra Fortunatum.
Recte dicitur, Glacialem niuem calidam esse non posse. Nullo enim pacto, quam
diu nix est, calida esse potest: It is well said, snow frorne, ^r congcled,
can never be hot. For as long, as it is Snow, it is not possible to make it
hot.

So likewise he says of the Heretics named the Manichees: Lutherans
Zuinglians.
Sic delirant Manichaei: sed resipiscant, and non sint Manichaei: Thus fond
are the Manichees: August. Contra Faustum. Lib. 24. Cap. 2.
But let them amend their errors, and no more be Manichees.

What is there so contrary in judgment, as a Jew, and a Christian? Yet God
has promised, that he will turn the hearts of the Fathers (the Jews) unto
their Children: Malach 4.
and the hearts of the Children (the Christians) unto their Fathers. And S.
Paul says, Roman. 11.
Iudaei, si non permanserint in incredulitate, inserentur. Potens enim est Deus
iterum inserere eos: The Jews shall be graffed into the Tree, if they abide not
in Unbelief. For God is able to graffe them in again. What is there so
contrary, as Light, Psalm. 17.
and Darkness? Yet the Prophet says, Illumina tenebras meas: O Lord,
sighten thou my darkness. To conclude, what is so contrary, as the Kingedome
of the Pope, and the Kingedome of Christ? And yet, we trust, it is not
impossible, but the Pope him self may once turn to God, and confess his
errors, and profess the Gospel of Christ, that he now oppresses.

These things considered, M. Hardinge, it was no deadly Sin, to say, we
trust, that these matters of variance bitweene the Lutherans, and the
Zuinglians, will once be accorded: and that al causes, and seeds of dissension
shall be thoroughly pulled up by the roots, and be buried, and quite foregotten
for ever. This change God has already begone to work, not only in sundry
learned men, but also in great Cities, in good Universities, and in whole
Countries. Therefore, we trust, our hope is not in Vain.

As for the Lies, which, it likes you well to say, M. Ievvel made openly at
Poules Cross, I doubt not of your modesty, but ye would have blased them
better, if ye had thought them woorthe your colors. Such general, and so
great exclamations, upon so simple reports, stand not always with greatest
wisdom. He is to rasshe to be a Judge, that pronounces before he know the
cause. What I said there, for as mutche as ye touch nothing in particulare,
it is needelesse to make rehearsal. But well I remember, I might truly have
said, M. Hardinge commonly Misallegeth, misreporteth, misconstrueth,
corrupts, vvreasteth, and Falsifieth the Anciente Councels, and Holy Fathers.
I could have said, M. Hardinge is oftentimes directely contrary to him
self. I could have said, M. Hardinge in one Book has uttered two hundred
five and fifty great Untruths. These, M. Hardinge, your Conscience knows,
had benne no Lies: and therefore not meet to be chastifed by an Laws.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 1. and 2.
But this is the heauiest, and most grievous part of their sclaunders, that
they call us wicked and ungodly men, and say we have thrown away al care of
Religion. Though this ought not to trouble us mutche, whiles they them selves
that thus have charged us, know full well, how spiteful, and untrue their
sclaunder is. Iustine the Martyr is a witness, that al Christians were called
(...), that is Godless, as soon as the Gospel first began to be
published, and the name of Christ to be openly declared. And, when Polycarpus
stood to be judged, the people stirred up the President to slay, and murder al
them, which professed the Gospel, with these words, (...), That is to say,
Rid out of the way these wicked and Godless creatures. And this was, not
because it was true, that the Christians were Godless in deed, but because
they would not worship stones and stocks, which were then honored as God.
The whole world sees plainly yenough already, what we and ours have
endured at these men's hands for Religion, and our only Gods cause. They
have thrown us into Prison, into Water, into Fire, and have embrued them
selves in our blood: not because we were either adulterers, or Robbers, or
Murderers, but only for that we confessed the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
put our confidence in the living God: And for that we complained too justly,
and truly (Lord thou know) that they did break the Law of God for their
own most vain Traditions: And that our adversaries were the very foes to the
Gospel, and enemies to Christ's Cross, so witingly, and willingly, and
obstinately despisinge Gods Commandments.

Wherefore, when these men saw they could not rightly find fault with our
Doctrine, they would needs pike a quarrel, and inueigh and rail against our
manners, surmising, that we do condemn al well doings: that we settte open
the door to al licentiousness and lust, and lead away the people from al
love of virtue. And in very deed, the life of al men, even of the deuoutest,
and most Christian, both is, and evermore has been such, as one may
always find sum lack, even in the very best, and purest conversation. And
such is the inclination of al creatures unto evil, and the readiness of al
men to suspecte, that the things, which neither have been done, nor once
were meant to be done, yet may be easily both heard, and credited to be
true. And like as a small spotte is soon espied in the neatest, and whitest
garmente, even so the least stain of dishonestie is easily found out in the
purest, and sincerest life. Neither take we al them, which have at this day
embraced the Doctrine of the Gospel, to be Angels, and to live clearly without
any more, or wrinkle: nor yet think we these men neither so blind, that if
any thing may be noted in us, they are not able to perceive the same, even
through the least creuie: nor so friendly, that they will construe ought to the
best: nor yet so honest of nature, or courteous, that they will look back
upon them selves, and weigh our lives by their own. If so be we list to
search this matter from the bottom, we know, yt in the very Apostles times
there were Christians, through whom the name of the Lord was blasphemed, and
evil spoken of emonge the Gentiles. Constantius the Emperor bewaileth, as it
is written in Sozomenus, that many waxed worse after they had fallen to the
Religion of Christ. And Cyprian in a lamentable oration sets out ye corrupt
manners of his time: The wholsome Discipline, says he, which the Apostles
leafte unto us, has idleness, and long rest now utterly marred: every one
studied to increase his lively hode: And clean forgeatinge, either what they
had done before, vvhiles they were under the Apostles, or what they ought
continually to do having received the Faith: they earnestly labored to make
great their own wealth with an insatiable desire of coue^ousnesse. There
is no devout Religion, says he, in Priests, no sound Faith in Ministers,
no charity shevved in good works, no form of Godliness in their
conditions: men are beco^me effeminate, and vveemens bevvtie is
countrefeited. And, without recitinge of many more writers, Gregory Nazia^zene
speaks thus of the pitiful state of his own time: We, says he, are in
hatred emonge the Heathen for our own vices sake, we are also becomme now
a vvoonder, not only to Angels, and men, but even to all the ungodly. In this
case was the Church of God, when the Gospel first began to shine, and when
the fury of Tyrannes was not as yet cooled, nor the sword taken of from the
Christians necks. Surely it is no new thing, that men be but men,
although they be called by the name of Christians.

M. Hardinge.
Lo, a grievous, and a heavy case, that the world calls you wicked, and
ungodly men. Twis they be to blame for it. And so be they, that call them
thieves, which come to be promoted to Tiborne. ^^r, God knows, little have
you deserved so to be called, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
All this, with the rest, is only Hicke Scorners eloquence, not worthy of
answer.

Here ends the Third Part.
The Fourth Part.
The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 1.
-BUT will these men, I pray you, think nothing at al of them selves, whiles
they accuse us so maliciously? And having leisure to behold so far of, and
to see, what is done both in Germany, and in England, have they either
foregotten, or can they not see, what is done at Rome? Or will they accuse us,
their own life being such, as no man is hable to make mention thereof but
with shame? Our purpose here is, not to take in hand at this present, to
bring to light, and open to the world those things, which were meet rather
to be hid and buried with the woorkers of them. It beseems neither our
Religion, nor our modesty, nor our shamefastenesse. But yet he, which geeueth
commandment, that he should be called the Vicare of Christ, and the Head
of the Church, who also hears, that such things be done in Rome, who
sees them, who suffers them, (for we will go no further) may easily
consider with him self, what manner of things they be. Let him in Gods Name
call to mind, and let him remember, that they be of his own Canonistes, which
have taught the people, that Fornication bitweene single folk is no sin: (as
though they had fette that Doctrine from Mitio in Terence) whose words be: It
is no sin (believe me) for a young man to haunte harlottes. Let him remember,
they be of his own, which have decreed, that a Priest ought not to be put
out of his cure for Fornication. Let him remember also, how Cardinal Campegius,
Albertus Pighius, and others many more of his own have taught, that the
Priest, which keeps a Concubine, does live more holily, and chastely, then
he, which has a wife in Matrimony. I trust, he has not yet forgotten,
that there be many thousands of common harlottes in Rome: and that he him self
does geather yearly of the same harlottes about thirty thousand Ducates,
by the way of an annual pension. Neither can he foregeate, that he him self
does maintain openly brothel houses, and by a most filthy lucre does
filthily and lewdly serve his own lust. Were al things then pure, and holy
in Rome, when Iohane a Woman, rather of perfect age, then of perfect life, was
Pope there, and bare her self as the Head of the Church: And after that, for
two whole years, in that holy See she had plaide the naughty pack, at last
going in Procession about the City, in the sight of al her Cardinals, and
Bishops fell in travail openly in the streets?

M. Hardinge.
First who sees not By the answer it vvil appear, that this Lie is plain
Truth.
what a notorius lie they make in the preface and entry to the matter? Say
they not, they take not upon them, at this time to bring to light and to the
show of the world those doings, which ought rather together with the
Auctours of them to be buried? And that so to do, their Religion, their
shamefastnes, their blusshinge does not bear it? What is a lie, if this be
not? Do they not in deed, that they deny in word? Yea, say they not that
thing, which they affirm they say not?

The B. of Sarisburie.
I doubt not, good Reader, but perusinge these few folowinge, thou shalt
plainly see, that the Authors of this Apology spoke not al, that they might
well have spoken. But, if thou happen to read Dantes, Petrarcha, Boccase,
Mantuan, Valla, and others like, thou will certainly say, that even now,
being thus challenged, and called forth, and required to speak, yet we have
rather geeuen an inklinge hereof, then opened the particulare secrets of the
matter. For thereof S. Bernard ad Clerum in Synodo Rhemen. Po^em loco. Fran.
Petrar. Epist. 20.
Bernarde says thus, Quae in occulto fiunt ab Episcopis, turpe est vel
dicere: It is shame to utter the things, that Bishops do in their
secrets. And therefore he says further, even as did the writer of the
Apology, Melius itaque arbitror super hoc dissimulate: Touching such
matters, I think it better to dissemble. Franciscus Petrarcha calls Rome the
VVhoore of Babylon, the Mother of al Idolatry, and Fornication: Fran. Petrar.
Cantilena 92. Onde jugita ogni vergogno. Baptij. Mantuanus.
and says, that al shame, and reverence is quite departed thence. Baptista
Mantuanus says:

Viuere qui Sancte cupitis, discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
Al ye, that would live godly, be packinge from Rome. For there al things else
are lawful: but to be good, it is not lawful. And again, as it is alleged
once before,

Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis Ara Cynaedis
Seruit, honorandae Diuum Ganymedibus Aedes.
Hereby, M. Hardinge, ye may easily see, that we of purpose dissembled, and
covered your shame, and spoke mutche less, and far otherwise of you, then we
might have spoken.

Erasmus, writing of S. Augustines dealinge against the Manichees, says thus,
Obscoena Mysteria Manichaeorum protraxit in lucem. Nam haec prodidisse, erat
vicisse: Erasmus in vita Augustini.
He opened, and published the filthy Mysteries of the Manichees. For the very
openinge thereof was sufficient to overthrow them. But happy are they, that
live in such sort, that no man may well reuele their life without
blusshinge.

Here, M. Hardinge, ye charge us pleintiefully with Fables, and Sclaunders,
and heaps of Lies, great, foul, lewd, and shameful, in one company, al
together. Wherein it was no great Maisterie for you to be so liberal: for
that hereof ye want no stoare.

But if we shall be hable clearly, and plainly to anouche, and justify each
thing, that we have spoken, then we doubt not, but ye will take al these
Lies home again, and bestow them freely amongst your fellows.

M. Hardinge.
They be the Popes Canonistes (say they) that have taught the people, Crimes
laid to the Popes charge by the Defenders.
that simple fornication is no sin. A grievous offense, and worthy to be
punished. And verily if any Pope ever knew, that his learned men in the Canon
law have taught the people such heathenish, and deuilishe Doctrine,
Untruth. For the Canonistes them selves confess, that the Council may judge,
and depose the Pope.
though no man in Earth be his judge, yet he may be thought un worthy the
room of so great charge. But if the Pope never knew such Doctrine preached
by the Canonistes, and if at no time there have been any such, then is he
clear, and ye are proved slaunderers, and false backebyters. We deny it
utterly. How prove ye it? Mary Sir, say ye, look in the margent of our
Apology, and there shall ye find one John de Magistris, noted for an offender
in that behalf. Well, if it were so, he was but one man. Ye speak of
Canonistes, which word signifies a number. And how prove ye that he the
said John de Magistris (for now I will spare you, and will not say they)
taught the people that simple fornication was no sin? etc.

Now we tell you, Ioannes de Magistris blamed by the Defenders, for Martinus de
Magistris
that we cannot find, where ever Johannes de Magistris wrote so impiously, as
ye report. Is it not Martinus de Magistris, that ye mean? It is a great
rashenesse, if ye have not read it your selves, to beliue such This Peltinge
writer is Alpho^sus de Castro, one of M. Hardinges greatiest Doctoures.
pelting writers, that be of your sects, as ye do, by whom ye seem to be
most shamefully and most dangerously deceived. etc. What will be thought and
said of you, if we show plainly, that ye have forged a foul lie, and a
most false slander upon Martinus de Magistris? For so will we call him, until
ye prove it of Johannes.

This Martinus de Magistris was no Canoniste, A foul slanderous lie made by
the Defenders.
as ye say, but a Doctor of divinity, well learned for his time and order of
study, as a schooleman. In a treatise, that he made, De temperantia and de
luxuria, he disputes after such manner, as the scholastical doctors
commonly use. Wherefore he that says that he taught the people, sought by
untruth, how to make the matter more detestable. He that teaches ai^ Schools,
is a Teacher of Teachers.
For disputinge in Schools, and teachinge the people, be far asunder. Says
this doctor Martin after the guise of Schools, Quaeritur vtrum simplex
fornicatio sit Peccatum mortale, that to say, It is a question, whether simple
fornication be mortal Sin. Note by the way, that by M. Hardinges secret
conclusion, Fornication is not a Mortal, but a Venial sin.
This Defender knew, what he did, when he left out the word mortal. For
being disposed to lie, he thought best, to lie for a vantage. The manner of
the Schole Doctors.
Now this is to be understood, how the manner of the scholastical Doctors
is, first to propounde a question: Next to argue, obiecte, and reason
against the Truth of the question: Then to auouche and prove the Truth:
After that to soil the objections brought against the Truth: Lastly to
bring conclusions for confirmation of the Truth. Then in prosecutinge his
question, arguitur quod non, I reason against it, says he, and argue it is
not so. And there after the School manner, he makes an argument against the
Truth. Which argument who so ever takes for his purpose, and allows it,
admits that the Doctor goes against and disproueth. After this he comes
to prove the Truth. Martinus de Magistris cleared of the crime by the
Defenders objected.
And there it follows. In oppositum. simplex fornicatio excludit, etc. To the
contrary (says he) Simple fornication excludes from the Kingdom of God,
Ergo, it is mortal sin. Then he says further. It is to be noted, that the
Ergo, by likelihoode the opinion of others was otherwise.
opinion of Thomas is, that simple fornication undoubtedly is mortal sin.
Who so ever reads further in Martinus, he shall find, after he has well
disputed pro and con, as they term it in Schools, that is to say, for, and
against the Truth, that he puts six conclusions, of which the fourth
begins thus, ideo, etc. Therefore Simple fornication is mortal sin,
because it is forbidden by Gods Law, etc. And in the end of the sixthe, he
says: Hereof the falsehed of their opinion is made evident, who say that
simple fornication is not mortal sin. Which opinion is condemned in the
articles of them of Paris, errore. CLXXXVI. Then he says further. Guido the
Carmelite says in a Chapter contra Errores Graecorum, that the Error of the
Greeks, saieing simple fornication between a single man and a single woman not
to be mortal sin, openly contains Heresy against the Holy Scripture, and
that he proves by four reasons, etc.

By this, and mutche more there expressed, it is sufficiently proved, that
Martinus de Magistris in his scholastical disputations in the said treatise,
For trial of this Conclusion, see the answer.
says not that simple fornication is no sin: mutche less ca^ it be
reasonably, or with any color of honesty said, that so he taught the
people. And therefore it is falsely and slanderously imputed unto him.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here ye say, Simple Fornication.
We lie: we backebite: we sclaunder, etc. For answer whereunto, first we
say, It is no new divise, to make light and simple accoumpt of your Simple
Fornication. Epiphan. Lib. 3. Haeresi. 56.
For Aetius y^ old Heretic used thus to say, Dormire cum muliere extra
Coniungium, non magis est peccatum, quam aurem scalpere: To have the company
of a Wooman out of Marriage, is no more a sin, then it is for a man to clawe
his care. Clemens Stromat. Lib. 3.
Likewise the Heretic Prodicus said, Licet palam, and aperte Fornicari: It
is lavvful to commit open Fornication. Likewise not long sithence wrote
Laurentius Valla, in earneste, or in game, I cannot tell: but thus he wrote: and
he wrote it in Rome, Laurent. Valla, De Voluptate, Lib. 1. Cap. 38. Richar. de
Sancto Victore, Par. 2. Fol. 73.
being him self one of the Canons there: Omnino nihil interest, vtrum cum
Marito coeat Mulier, an cum Amatore: Undoubtedly there is no difference,
whether a Wooman keep company with her Husband, or with her Lover. Richardus
de Sancto Victore says, Paulus praeuidebat, multos fore, qui Fornicationis
malum non adeo damnabile putarent: S. Paul foresawe, there should be many,
that would think, the il of Fornication not to be so damnable a matter. To like
purpose Socrates writes of the corrupt judgment of sundry of his time:
Socrat. li. 5. ca. 22
Scortationem indifferentem esse putant: De Festis vero diebus, perinde atque
pro animabus suis dimicant, inuertentes Mandata Dei, etc. They take
Fornication, or vvhooredome to be a thing indifferente, (that is to say,
neither good, nor il, but leafte at liberty): But they fight for the keepinge
of their Holydaies, as for their souls. From these Fathers, as it appears,
issued out the Pope, and his Roman Cleregie: who have learned so readily to
swalowe a Camel, and so nicely, and solemnly to strain a gnatte.

But, ye will say, all this hitherto pertains nothing unto the Canonistes,
specially in the plural number.

Let us therefore see the practice of the Church of Rome: which is the Life,
and soul of all the Canonistes. Did. 34. Is qui.
Thus therefore it is noted in the Decrees, Qui non habet Vxorem, Parisijs, an.
1505.
loco illius Concubinam debet habere: He that has not a Wife, in steed of her
must have a Concubine. Ye will say, there is error in the printe. Be it so.
Yet thus is it extant in many Copies, and it is well agreeable to your common
practice. Council. Toletan. 1. Cap. 17.
For y^ best, y^ you can make of the same place, is this: Is qui non habet
Vxorem, and pro Vxore Concubinam habet, a Communione non repellatur: He that
has no Wife, and in steed of a Wife has a Concubine, let him not be
removed from the Communion.

Likewise it is noted in the Gloss upon the Constitutions of Otho Bonus:
Constit. Othonis Boni de Concubinis Clericor. remoue^dis. Licet ad profagandu^.
In Glossa. In eade^ Glossa. Extra. De Immunit a. Ecclesia. Petr. Rauennas.
Videtur quod Crimen Meretricij Ecclesia sub dissimulatione transire debeat: It
seems, that the Church ought to pass over the Crime of vvhooredome under
dissimulation ( and not to see it). In which Gloss, ye shall find these
words, Si non cast, tamen caute: If ye do it not chastely, yet do it
charily. Likewise says Petrus Rauennas, one of your notable Canonistes, upon
y^ Decretalles: Quamuis tactus, and oscula sint praeludia incontinentiae in
Laicis, secus tamen est in Clericis. Nam Clericus praesumitur ista facere pro
charitate, and bono zelo: Notwithstanding, handeling, and kissing in Lay
Persons be the occasions, or beginninges of incontinente behaueoure, yet in
Priests it is far otherwise. For a Priest is presumed to do these things of
charity, and of good Zele.

Likewise it is noted in your Gloss, 11 quae. 3. Absit. In Glossa.
Si Clericus amplectitur Mulierem, (Laicus) interpretabitur, quod causa
benedicendi eam hoc faciat: If a Priest embrace a Wooman, a Lay man must
judge of it thus, that he does it to thintente to bless her. Where also ye
shall find this special note set out in the margin for the purpose,
Clericus amplectens Mulierem praesumitur been agere: Ibidem, In Margin.
A Priest embracinge a VVooman is presumed to do well.

These be your Canonistes: Simple Fornication.
these be your Scholemaisters: these be your Doctoures, M. Hardinge: thus they
write, not only in the Singular, but also in the Dual, and Plural number.
They would never so lightly have judged hereof, if they had thought, your
Simple Fornication had benne Sin.

S. Augustine. in En. chiridio ad Lauren. ca. 80.
Augustine says, Clamor Sodomorum, and Gomorrhaeorum multiplicatus est: Quia
non solum iam apud eos non punicbantur illa flagitia, verum etiam public,
velut lege, frequentabantur: The Cry of Sodom, and Gomorrha is multiplied:
For that such vices then, not only were not punished, but also were openly
used, as it had benne by the aid, and Authority of the Law.

Sommewhat it must needs be, Council. Basil. Session. 20. Erasmus in Enchirid.
mili. christiani, Ca. 14.
that in your Late Council of Basile, enforced the Bishops there to Decree,
that Fornication should be Sin. Erasmus, a man of Singular Learning, and
Judgment says, He means sum of the best of the Roman Cleregie.
Iacobus de Valentia in Psalm. 118. Antoninus in Sum. par. 4. titu. 12. ca. 2..
3. Alexander Halensis, par. 3. quae. 35. Mem. 5. Ambrosius. 1. Timoth. 4.
Augusti. in quae. in Exodus quae. 20.
Bona pars eorum, quos vulgus integros, and incorruptos appellat, Simplicem
Fornicationem, and moderatu^ voluptatis vsum, vt leave commissum, neutiquam
refugiunt: * A great many of them, whom the common sort takes for good, and
godly Men, not a white abhor Simple Fornication, and a sober use of
pleasure, reckeninge it to be but a little petite fault. So says Iacobus De
Valentia, Tam Iudaei, quam Saraceni, and mali Christiani, vt detestabilem vitam
suam excusent, and defendant, asserunt, Fornicationem Simplicem esse licitam:
As well Jews, and Saracenes, as also il Christian Men, to the intent to
excuse, and defend their wicked life, say, that Simple Fornication may be
Lavvefully used.

So says Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence, Confutatur error dicentium,
Simplicem Fornicationem non esse peccatum: Hereby is reproved the error of
them, that say, Simple Fornication is no Sin. Alexander of Hales, by way of
disputation doubtethe not to allege the words of S. Ambrose, to this
purpose: Etiamsi aliquis lubricum carnis patiatur, sine dubio vapulabit: sed
non peribit: If a man suffer the Frailty of the Fleashe, without doubt he
shall be pounished: but perish he shall not: And likewise these of S. Augustine,
Illa Fornicatio, quam faciunt, qui Vxores non habent, cum foeminis, quae viros
non habent, an prohibita inueniri possit, ignoro: That kind of Fornication,
which Single Men commit with Single Womenne, whether it be forbidden, or
no, I cannot tell.

Thus have you, M. Hardinge, not only what your Canonistes, but also what your
Schole Doctoures have taught, and thought of Simple Fornication.

But there is noted in the Margin of the Apology, Johannes de Magistris, in
steed of Martinus. M. Har. page 46. ae Read the B. of Winchester unto M.
Fecknam. Page 121.
And hereof have ye made your self a pleasant Conqueste. We read not these
Books our selves: we believe such peltinge writers of our sects: we are
shamefully, and daungerousely deceived. How be it, M. Hardinge, I require but
your Indifferent Judgment: Speak uprightly. Wherefore is it more dradely sin
for us, to name Johannes, in steed of Martinus, then it was for you in this
self same Book, vint. con. cantur. li. 3. de Euchar
to name Captain Iosue, in steed of y^ Prophet Osee. Or, for one of your
Brethren, to allege Hosius, for Athanasius? Or, for D. Sreuin Gardener, instead of Theophylactus, to allege Theophilus? Cicero allegeth Ajax in steed of
Hector: M. Har. page 93. Chrysostom ad Romanos. 1. Chrysostom ad Gala. 4.
Agamemnon, in steed of Ulysses: Eupolis, instead of Aristophanes. Aristotle
allegeth Calypso, in steed of Circe. Your Gratian allegeth Aniceus, for
Anicetus: Ambrosius, for Augustinus: and by your own Confession, Calixtus, for
Anacletus. S. Chrysostom names Abacuk, for Sophonias: and Agar, in steed of
Sara. S. Mark allegeth Abiathar, for Abimelech. S. Matthew names Hieremias,
Hieronym. in Marcum, ca 2. Matthae 27. De Rescriptis, Significante. Abb.
for Zacharias.

It had benne no great prejudice unto your cause, to have dissembled so small a
matter, specially findinge your self so often guilty in the same. Your own
Doctors say, Error in Nomine non habet vitiare, modo constet de Corpore:
Error in name marreth not the matter, so the Body, or party be known.

But this same Martinus, Simple Fornication.
ye say, never denied Fornication to be deadly Sin: but by express words
affirms the contrary. For trial hereof, it may please you to give some
credit to Alphonsus de Castro your own Doctoure. Alphonsus Contrae Haeres.
Li. 5. Coltus.
His words be these, Graeci, vt Guido illis impingit, dicunt, Simplicem
Fornicationem non esse peccatum. Martinus de Magistris in suo libro, De
Temperantia, quaestione secunda de Luxuria, dicit, se fateri, Fornicationem
Simplicem esse Peccatum Mortale. Tamen dicit insuper, quod oppositum credere,
non sit Haereticum: quia, vt dicit, Testimonia Scripturae Sacrae non sunt
expressa: The Greeks, as Guido charge them, say, that Simple Fornication is
no Sin. Martinus de Magistris in his Book, Of Temperance, and in the second
question, disputinge of Lechery, grants in deed, that Simple Fornication
is deadly Sin. And yet he says, It is no Heresy to believe the contrary:
for that, as he says, the Testimonies of the Scriptures ( touching this
matter) are not plain. Here, M. Hardinge, ye have your own Doctors mind.
Martinus says, It is no Heresy, to believe, that Simple Fornication is no
Sin: And this he says even in the very same Book that he has written, De
Temperantia. So daungerously, M. Hardinge, and so shamefully are we deceived,
in alleginge your Peltinge Doctors.

And therefore Alphonsus concludes thus, Sed cum pace illius dixerim, ego
credo, Martinum, alioqui virum Doctum, in hac part errasse: But, to speak
with his favor, I believe, that Martinus de Magistris in this behalf was
mutche deceived.

M. Hardinge.
After this foul lie follows an Untruth. For this he vvil sone be found a
Truth.
other. Let him remember (say these Defenders) that they be his men that have
decreed, that a priest for fornication ought not to be removed from his cure.
To this we may say, that although he be not deprived of his cure, yet he may
be punished other wise. But let us see, how they would prove that they say.
Who bestovved these quotations in the Margin, I cannot tell. But the lav^es
are plain: as it shall appear.
By their note in their margent they send us for proof to the canon law. 3.
quaest. 7. Lata. Extra de bigamis. Quia circa. As touching the chapter Lata, in
the decrees we find none such And, in Causa. 3. quast. 7. there is nothing
to this purpose. The paragraphe Quia circa. Extra. is understood of them, who
being in the state of bigamie, are not to be promoted to holy orders, and not
of one who is already made priest, that he be not for Fornication removed. But,
to understand, what was done to a priest, that had committed fornication, by
order of law. This was in old times Now it is quite foregotten.
in case any Bishop, or priest, or deacon, after degree of deaconship taken,
had benne convict of fornication, or aducutrie, he was deposed, and castout of
the Church, and enioined to do penance among the lartie. Which thing S.
Syluester at length mercifully changed, enioininge An hypocritical folly. For
he may redeem all this whole ten yers fast, by pa^einge of a penny Read
the Answer.
ten years penance after a prescript form, which to our new cleregie
would seem very hard, and strait.

Yea further the law of the Church in this case so little bears with the
sinful life of Clerks, that, Untruth manifest, and a Canon of M. Hardinges
own making.
if any Bishop in his Dioces had consented and borne with the fornication of
Priests, or Deacons, or with the crime of incest, for money, or prayer, or had
not by Authority of his Bishoply Office duly punished such faults
committed: the same should be suspended from his Office. And this much we
have showed touching the remouinge of a Priest, not only from his benefice,
but also from his office, for cause of fornication: wherein these men most
falsely have slaundered the Church, as now to any man it may Fall clearly, God
vvote. See the Answer. Dis. 82. Presbyter.
appear.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, ye show your self to be mutche unskillful in your own
Canons. The simpleste Proctour in your Courts could soon have told you,
that ye are over far deceived. For thus it is written by express words in
your own Gloss upon the Decrees: Dicunt, neminem hodie propter Fornicationem
esse deponendum, nisi in ea perdurat: They say, that for Fornication, noman
ought this day to be deposed, Not deposed for Fornication.
unless he continewe in the same. And, lest ye should in any wise mistrust,
or doubt your Gloss, it is also thus noted of purpose in fair great letters
in the Margin, Fornicationis causa hodie nemo est deponendus: Now a days
noman may be deposed for Fornication. Were there nothing else to be said, yet
this thing only were sufficient.

But Panormitane also your greateste Canoniste like wise says, Extra. de
sanguinita. and affinita. Non debet. Abb. Did. 81 Maximianus Clos.
Ad varietate^ temporu^ debent mutari statuta humana: Ideo hodie ex Simplici
Fornicatione Clericus non deponitur: The Laws of Men ought to be altered
according to the change of times: And therefore now a days for Simple
Fornication no Priest is deposed from his benefice. Likewise ye have it noted
upon your Decrees, Communiter dicitur, quod pro Simplici Fornicatione Clericus
deponi non debet: Quia pauci sine illo vitio inueniuntur: It is commonly said,
that for Simple Fornication no Priest ought to be deprived: For that fevve
Priests are found without that fault.

Again Panormitane says to like effect, Extra. De Cohabita. clericor. and
Mulier. Si autem. Abb.
Clericus Concubinarius in officijs vitandus non est, nisi sit notorius: A
Priest, that keeps a Concubine, unless he be notorious, may not be refused
in his Service.

Sundry other such like Authorities your pooreste Proctoure could have
brought you.

How be it, you say, S. Syluester in such cases enioineth ten years
penance. This was true in deed, M. Hardinge. But it was true in Old forne
years, about twelve hundred years ago. Now Syluester is paste quite out of
mind, and his Law with him. Your own folk now can say, Nunc aliud tempus,
alij pro tempore mores.

Martinus Poenitentiarius says, Martinus Poeniten. in Dictionario.
Ecclesia multos huiusmodi Canones exufflauit: quia onerosi sunt: The Church
has blown away many such Canons, for that they be too burthenous. Look
better on your Books, M. Hardinge. Your own Law says, Fornicationis causa
nemo hodie deponendus est: Quia corpora hodie sunt fragiliora: Di. 82.
Prebyter. In Glossa.
Noman now a days ought to be deprived for Fornication: and that, because our
bodies are frailer, then they were woonte to be. And therefore, touching that
cruel ten years Fast, appointed by Syluesters Constitution, the Gloss there
says thus, Potest ieiunare per alium: vel, potest dare numum pro Ieiunio: He
may Paste by sum other man: or else, He may geeue a good Penny, and so
redeem his whole ten years Fast. But there is graciousely added a special
prouiso In the behalf of him, that shall receive this Penny: Sed debet iste
Donarius esse talis, quod non euincatur ab illo, cui donatur. Alias non
contingeret liberatio: But it must be such a Penny, that it be never euicted
again by Law from him, that received it. Otherwise he should not be
discharged of his penance.

In like manner says Pope Pelagius, Defectus nostri temporis, quibus corpora
ipsa hominum defecerunt, Dis. 34. Fraternitatis.
districtionis illius non patitur manner censuram: The weakness of our time,
by mean whereof the very bodies of men are decayed, doothe not suffer the
rigor of that Law to continewe.

Otho Bonus in his Constitution Legantine says, De Concubinis Clericor.
remouendis. Licet ad profugandum.
Remoueant ipsas intra Mensem: vel ipsas, vel alias de coetero nullatenus
detenturi: Let Priests put away their Concubines within a Months iespite:
afterward to hold neither them, nor any others in any wise. Whereupon the
Gloss, with great conscience, and full discretely, says thus, Detenturi,
scilicet, per mensem. Alioqui diceremus, quod propter quancunque momentaneam
possessionis detentionem sequentem, hanc grauem poenam incurreret. Quod nimis
esset rigorosum, attenta fragilitate nostri temporis: They may not afterward
hold ( neither the same Concubines, nor any other). Which words you must
thus understand: That by the space of a whole Mooneth together he may not
hold them. Not deposed for Fornication.
Otherwise we should say, that a Priest should run into this grievous
pounishemente for any short holdinge of his Concubine in possession folowinge
afterward. Which thing in deed were marvelous rigorous, specially
consideringe the frailty of our time.

Again the same Otho says, In eodem Titulo.
Ordinamus, vt, si contra hoc praesumpserint venire, ab officio, and beneficio
sint suspensi: We ordain, that, if any Priest do contrary hereunto (
living incontinently, contrary to this Constitution) that then he be
suspended, as well from his Benefice, as from his Office. Hereunto your Gloss
addethe, Rigorosa quoque esset haec poena, nisi esset pro Adulterio, vel
incestu: Etiamsi Episcopus esset huiusmodi labens: And this pounishemente also
were over rigorous, unless it were for Aduoutrie, or Inceste: ( For he may
not so be pounished for Fornication) Yea although the party so fallinge were a
Bishop. And again in the same Gloss, Propter solam Simplicem Fornicationem, de
benignitate Canonica, non debet Clericus deponi, vel priuari: Licet secus forte
de Canonis rigore: By the Courtesy of the Canons, only for Simple
Fornication, a Priest may not be deposed from his Office, or depruied from his
Benefice: Al be it, perhaps by the rigor, or extremity of the Canons, it
would be otherwise. Extra De purgatione canonica. Accepimus: In Glossa.
The very true cause hereof is more plainly expressed in your own Gloss upon
the Decretalles: Quia pauci sine vitio carnis inueniuntur: For without the vice
of the fleashe there are but few ( Priests) to be found.

All this notwithstanding, ye say, If the Bishop wink, and dissemble, and
bear with the wickedness of the Priest in this behalf, that then he him
self ought to be pounished by Suspension from his Office. This, M. Hardinge,
is a Canon of your own making: for other Authority ye allege none. But how
may it seem likely, that ye so cruelly pounishe your Bishops, for
favorable dealinge herein, seeinge your High, and alonely Bishop, and the
Bishop of al Bishops, is so well content, upon agreemente for money, to
license both Bishops, and Priests to keep Concubines?

If ye mistruste the truth hereof, Extra De Iudicijs. Ca. 4.. De Adulterijs.
bisides your Common practice, as you know, your own Pope Gregory him self
will soon tell you, De Adulterio, and alijs Minoribus Criminibus, Episcopus
potest cum Clericis post poenitentiam dispensare: Touching Aduoutrie, and
other small Faults, the Bishop after Penance done, may dispense with a
Priest. Where also it is to be noted, that Aduoutrie in your Divinity is
reckened emonge the petite Sins. Likewise again it is to be noted in your
Gloss, Extra. De Bigamis. Quia Circa: In Glossa. Authen. De Trien. and Semiss.
Colla. 3. Extra. De Bigamis: Quia circa. In Glossa.
Cum presbyteris habentibus plures Concubinas, Episcopus potest Dispensare, vt
suum officium exequantur: With Priests having sundry Concubines, the Bishop
may dispense, that they may nevertheless do their Office. Wherein ye seem
sommewhat to ouerreache the Emperors Courteste touching the same: For thus he
writes, Vnam Concubinam qui habet, non plures, cast viuit: He that keeps
one Concubine only, and no more, lives chastely. And in the said former
Gloss, ye shall find an other special note of your own, well worthy to be
written in the Popes privy Galerie in letters of Gold: Nota, quod plures
concubinas habens non incurrit irregularitatem: Mark well, that he, that
keeps sundry Concubines, is not thereby made irregulare. And again, Nota
Mirabile: In eade^ Glossa.
quod cum eo, qui peccat, dispensatur: and cum eo, qui no^ peccat, non
dispensatur: Mark well: Here is a marvelous strange reckeninge: The Bishop
dispenses with him that offends ( having sundry Concubines): but with him,
that offends not ( having married two wives) he dispenses not. And further
he says, Plus habet hic Luxuria, In eadem. Gloss.
quam Castitas: Here Lechery has more privilege, then Chastity.

Again in your Decrees it is written thus, Did. 81. Quidam Clerici. In Gloss.
Quaecunque Clericis taliter coniunctae sunt, auferantur ab Episcopo, and
Venundentur: What so ever weemen have such Company with Priests, let them
be removed by the Bishop, and sold, and made slaves. Unto this Law being in
it self over rigorous, Not deposed ^or Fornication.
the Gloss adds this favorable Construction: Venundentur: verum est, si
contrahunt cum illis, tanquam cum vxoribus. Alias non concedo, posse vendi
propter simplicem Fornicationem: Let them be sold, and made slaves. This is
true, if the Priests marry with them, as with their vviues. Otherwise I
grant not, that for Simple Fornication they may be sold.

Likewise again it is noted in your Gloss, Did. 23. His igitur. In Glossa.
Nota, Frequentationem tantum Viduarum, and virginum prohiberi: Mark well, that
it is not y^ coming to widows, or Maids, but the often hauntinge unto them,
that is forebidden. Otho in his Legantines says thus, Qui detinet public
Concubinas, etc. The priest, that Openly keeps Concubines, Constitu.
Ochonis, De Concubini, Clericor. remouendis: Licet ad profugandum.
let him be deposed: Hereupon your Gloss says thus, Tu dic. Public, quando
Multitudini se patere non expauet. Secus ergo, si secret intra domum propriam,
vel altenam detineat hanc Concubinam. Nam tunc poenam huius Constitutionis non
incurret. Domus enim rem secretam, non autem publicam denotat. Dic ergo,
public, id est, Communiter, and coram multis. Non ergo sufficit, quod semel,
vel bis talis public videatur: He that Openly keeps Concubines, etc.
Understand thou by this word, Openly if he be not afraid, though he appear
unto the people. It is otherwise, If he keep his Concubine secretly, whether
it be in an other man's house, or in his own. For so he comes not within the
danger of this Law. For a house betokens, not ^n Open m^ter, but a Secret.
Thus therefore expound thou this Constitution: If he keep his Concubine
Openly, that is to say, If he keep her Commonly, and in the sight of many.
Therefore, if such a Concubine^ wise, or thrice be seen Openly, it is not
sufficient. In the same ^lose of yours, ye have these words, that I have
alleged before, Si non Cast, tamen Caute.

And, whereas you say, If a Bishop show favor herein, he him self shall be
suspended, Your own Doctoure Abbate Panormitane would have told you the
contrary: De Cohabitae. Cleruorum. and Mulier. ^^autem, Abb.
Episcopus non tenetur deponere Clericum Concubinarium: The Bishop is not
bound to deprive a Priest, that keeps a Concubine.

To make short, ye have also of great providence, divised a special Praemunire,
to embolden your Priests in Fornication, and to warrante them free from al
danger of any your Laws, 2. Quae. 7. Laici.
made in that behalf. For thus you say, Si Laicus, instigante Diabolo,
accuset Clericum incontinentiae, statim repellitur. Laici in accusatione
Episcopi audiendi non sunt: If a Laieman, by the instigation of the Devil,
accuse a Priest of incontinent life, straight way he is thruste back, and
put to silence. The Late sort may not be heard in the accusation of a
Bishop. And again, Laicus non potest Clericum de Fornicatione accusare: Did.
81. Maximianus. In Glossa.
A Laieman may not accuse a Priest of Fornication. This i^ that extremity,
and unmerciful rigor, M. Hardinge, that ye show your Priests in these
cases. No Laieman may accuse them: No Bishop may deprive them: No Law may
touch them.

M. Hardinge.
The third lie is, that Cardinal Campegius, Albertus Pighius, and certain
others have taught, that a Priest lives more Holily and more Chastely, that
keeps a Concubine, then he that has taken a wife in Matrimony. Why do ye
not tell us, where they have taught so? Will ye that we believe your bare
word? How can we, having taken you tardy in so many and so manifestlye^?
Aristotel once asked* what a common liar gained by his lyeinge, This Answer
mutche touches M Hardinge him self.
that (quoth he) when he tells truth, no man will believe him. Wisdom
would syrs* ye took good heed, that ye prove not such gayners. Now we
require you to bring forth proof of that ye charge these learned men
withal. We are sure ye cannot.

The words of Pighius be these: But put case (says he) they, which have
vowed chastity, all do not that they may and ought to do, Fornication
better then Marriage.
to atteine the grace of continency: and therefore they be not only tempted,
but also overcome with temptation for the more part. What then? Shall it be a
less evil for them to marie? For to say it is better, thou may not,
which the Apostle imputes to damnation, if they break their first Faith.
For these (I say) shall it be less evil, and less damnable to marie, then
to be overcome with lusts?

Therefore where ye impute unto him that he makes the kepinge of a Concubine
to be a more Holy and a more chaste life in a Priest, then taking of a wife
in Matrimony, it is a foul lie, and a false slander. Neither is there in
that Doctrine any filthiness at al, which Philip Melanchthon, whom here ye
follow, charge him withal.

Touching that point of doctrine it self, S. Paul confirms it, to whom
the Marriage of those that be bound to vow of continency, seemed so wicked
and heinous a Sin, that he pronounces the will to marie to be damnable. Now
your conjunctions with your yokefellowes (we mean only so many of you as have
vowed Chastity) Untruth. For S. Augustine says, Qui dicunt, talium. Nuptias
non esse Nuptias. sed potius Adulieria, mihi non videntur satis acute, ac
diligenter considerare, quid dicant. De Bono Viduita. Cap. 10.
are not in deed VVedlockes, but Incestuous Aduoutries. And right so we find
them named by Cyprian, Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierome, Photius, and other
Holy and learned Fathers.

But perhaps ye say, both are Aduoutries, whether a vowed person Marie, or
commit Fornication. Let it be so. O Sage confiderations.
Yet is not that sin more grievous which a man commits of set and
determined purpose, then that which he falls into by human frailty? And
that evil which contineweth, is it not much worse, then that which has
intermission ( and no end?)

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Apology says, that Campegius, Pighius, and others more of your side,
have told us, that a Priest, keepinge a Concubine, lives more Holily, and
more Chastely, then a Priest, that has a wife, and lives in Matrimony. Here
ye cry out, as your woonte is, Sclaunders, Lies, foul lies, and I know not
what For thus only they say, say you, That Fornication in this case is less
il, then Matris money. How be it, M. Hardinge, laieinge al Cauilles, and
shifts aside, the less il, in use of speech is commonly called the greatter
good. And in this sense it is written, Eccle 40. Eccle. 42. 2. Petri. 2.
Better it is to Die, then to want. And again, Better is the iniquity of a
Man, then a woman dooinge well. So Jonas says, Death unto me is better then
Life. So S. Peter says, Better had it benne for them not to have known the
way of righteousness, then knowinge the same, to be turned back from the
Holy Commandment, that is given unto them. These, and other like phrases are
often used in the Holy Scriptures, not for that Death, or Iniquity, or
Ignorance of Gods Justice, be good in deed, but for that in comparison of
other worse things, they seem to importe sum less il.

Fornication, ye say, is not better then Marriage: But Marriage is vvoorse then
Fornication. Thus it seems you good, to shadow your matters by shifte of
words, from vvoorse to better, and from better to vvoorse. And yet in all
plain men's judgments, If Marriage be vvoorse then Fornication, then is
Fornication better then Marriage.

But to let you understand, Hulderichus Episcop. Augustanus. The same
Epistle is found in Anciente Record under the name of Volusianus Episcopus
Carthaginensis.
we have dealte simply, and plainly herein, Hulderichus the Bishop of Augusta
in Germany, writing unto Pope Nicolas against the restrainte of Priests
Marriage, above seven hundred years paste, uses like manner of speech, as we
have used. Thus he says, Huius imperij, ne dicam, confilij, tam fatuam,
tamque turpem addunt suggestionem, vt dicant, Honestius est, Pluribus occulte
implicari, quam aperte in hominum vultu, and conscientia cum vna ligari. Quod
profecto non dicerent, si ex illo, and in illo essent, qui dicit, Vae vobis
Pharisaeis, qui omnia facitis propter homines: Unto this commandment, I will
not say, unto this Counsel, they set so foolish and so shameful a
suggestion, that they say, Fornication better then Marriage.
It is an An Honester thing.
Honester thing for a Priest to be entangled with many Concubines, in
Secret, and privily, then Openly, and in the light, and knowledge of the
world, to be joined in Marriage with one Wife. Which thing Verit they
would not utter, if they were either of him, or in him, that says, Woe be
unto you, ye Phariseis, that do al things to please men.

In like sort the Council of Worms wrote sommetime against Pope
Hildebrande, for that he had divised great rigor, and tyranny, to sunder
Priests from their Wives: Council. VVormaetien. Ex Auentino.
Scorta pudicis Coniugibus: Stupra, incestus, adulteria casto Connubio
praefert: He pleaceth strumpettes before honest Wives: and Fornication,
Inceste, Aduoutesie before chaste Marriage. Hosius in Petricouen. Confess. Cap.
56.
Notwithstanding, your Doctoure Hosius says, Turpis Philippo videtur haec
oration: Catholicis autem honestissima: These words unto Philip Melancthon
seem shameful: but unto the Catholics they seem most Honest.

What need we many words in so clear a case? The whole practice of your
Church, M. Hardinge, professes the same. If a Priest marie a Wife, ye
Suspende him: ye Excommunicate him: ye Deprive him: ye Disquiet, and trouble
the whole Church. But if he keep a Concubine, one, two, or more, ye are then
contented, and ready, not only to dissemble it, but also with favor to
excuse it. For so ye say, as it is alleged before, Clericus Concubinarius in
officijs vitandus non est, Extra. De Cohabita. Clerico and Mutier. Ca. final.
Abb.
nisi sit notorius: A Priest, that keeps a Concubine, unless he be very
notorious, may not be eschewed in his Service. Again ye shall find this
lesson specially noted in your Rubrike, Did. 34. Is. qui.
as it is said before, Qui non habet Vxorem, loco illius Concubinam debet
habere: He that has not a Wife, in steed of her ought to have a Concubine. Ye
will say, There is an Error in your print: which thing may easily be
granted, specially the whole Book being otherwise so full of errors. But
would God your errors in Life, and Doctrine were no greatter. How be it, it
follows immediately in the same Decree, Is qui non habet Vxorem, and pro Vxore
Concubinam habet, a Communione non repellatur: Who so has no Wife, and in
steed of a Wife has a Concubine, let him not be removed from the Communion.
In these words, I trow, ye will say, there is no error.

Upon the Legantine Constitutions of Otho Bonus, ye may find these words
noted in the Gloss, Consti Othonis. De Concubinis Clericor. remouen. Licet ad
Profugandum. Augusti. De Moribus Manichaeorum Li. 2. Ca. 18.
Nunquid compelli potest Clericus concubinam abiurare? Videtur, quod non.
Resolutio, Si Clericus duxit Vxorem de facto, eo casu iuramentum exigitur:
Whether may a Priest be forced to fore swear his Concubine? It seems, he
may not. The Resolution hereof is this: If a Priest have in deed Married a
Wife, in this case he is forced to foresake her by an Oath. Therefore we may
say to you, as S. Augustine said sommetime to the Manichees, Non Concubitum,
sed. vt long ante ab Apostolo dictum est, vere Nuptias prohibetis: Ye
forebidde not Copulation: but, as it was long ago forespoken by the Apostle,
in deed ye forebidde very Marriage.

Now, for as mutche, as ye say, ye are no Angels, and your infirmities ought
to be considered, it shall not be amiss, shortly to see, what your own
friends have thought of these infirmities. And here, to pass over other
Authorities, your own Doctor the Bishop of Bitonto, being present at your
Late Chapter at Tridente, of your whole Single Life, which ye call Chastity,
pronounces thus: Quibus turpitudinum monstris, Council. Triden. Session. 1.
qua sordium colluuie, qua peste non sunt corrupti, non foedati in Ecclesia
Sancta Dei, and Populus, and Sacerdos? A Sanctuario Dei incipite, patres, si
vllus iam pudor, si vlla pudicitia, etc. Dicu^t in Cord impio, and ore impuro,
No^ est Deus: With what Monsters of filthiness, with what villainy, with what
Pestilence are they not corrupted, and defiled in the Church of God, both the
People, and the Priest? My Lords, begin even with the Sanctuary of God: if
there be any shame, if there be any honest Life. They say with wicked haste,
and filthy mouth, There is no God.

An other says, Hermannus Riddus, De vita and hones. Cleri. Paralip.
Vrspergen. in Clemen. 5.
Propter multitudinem luxuriae, alia vitia quasi non peccata reputantur: For
the multitude of Lechery ( that is in Priests) other faults are taken for no
sin.

An other says, Defecit iam omnis Disciplina, and Religio in Cardinalibus: Et
tres radices vitiorum, Superbia, Auaritia, Luxuria validissime dominantur: In
the Cardinals now al Discipline, and Religion is decayed: And three roots
of sins, Pride, Covetousness, and Lechery do most mightily prevail. S.
Bernarde says, Fingunt, Bernar. in Cantic. Sermon. 66.
se amore Castitatis ista dicere: cum ea magis causa turpitudinis fouendae, and
multiplicandae adinuenerint: They beat us in hand, that they speak these
things for love of Chastity: Whereas in deed they have divised the same, to
the end to nourrishe, and to increase their fill thinesse. This, M. Hardinge,
is your infirmity, which, in your judgment, of Courtesy, and Charity, we
ought to bear withal.

The places of S. Cyprian, The 2. part, the 8. Chapter, the ^ Division. Did.
27. Quida^.
S. Basile, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and others, that may seem
mutche to make with you in this case, and to condemn this kind of Marriage,
are weighed, and answered before in a place more conuen^ente. Verily, S.
Augustine says, ^rauiter peccant, qui tales diuidunt: They sin grievously,
that divide them, that be so ma^ried.

M. Hardinge.
Where ye say, there be many thousands of common harlottes in Rome, we
think there be many there in deed. Whether there be many thousands, we
doubt. What number soever there is, they be too many. Those Courteghianes the
Church of Rome doothe Not nourrishe, but tolerate. A proper excuse and a soar
pounishemente of open VVhooredome.
tolerate, not nourrishe, trustinge and lookinge, that by sermons,
exhortations, and other convenient means, they may be called back to
repentance, and to the way of salvation.

That the Pope gathers about a thirty thousand Ducates yearly of these
Courteghianes by way of an annual pension, which these Defenders affirm,
Untruth. For it is most true, as it shall appear.
it is utterly false. Cornelius Agrippa, who favored not the Sea of Rome, and
was imbrued with Heresies, that sprange up in his time, was the first Author
of this slander. If they pay the common taxes, which be levied to the Pope,
who only has civil Dominion over that City, they Untruth manifest. For
unless they pay, they shall not occupy.
pay not for that they may be suffered to continewe that sinful trade of
life, but so as the whole City paieth by polles, for that there they have
their abode and habitation.

First it is common to al great Cities in those hot countries, not to
bannishe from among them that filthy generation of harlottes, not by way of
sufferinge, as a thing commendable in it self, but for the auoidinge of a
greatter mischief. As The Pope may dispense as well as God.
God suffered the hard necked Jews to hate their enemies, and pinche them
with vsuries. Likewise Moises permitted a libell of divorce, not that these
things were honest, but to the intent by that means yet they might the rather
love their Brethrene, and lend them money freely, and abstain from
murderinge their wives. Even so men now adays so little apply their endeavor
to restrain the pronesse which is in their fleashe to all riot and carnal
concupiscence, that if some way were not (as the least concerning outward
and civil punishment) This is a ioily Catholic Diui^^ie.
wincked at, whereby the Fleashely men might obtain some part of their
unruly desire: it were more then likely, that in this great decaie of virtue
in general, the furious rage of that vice would leave neither wedlock
undefiled, nor Virginity vnassaul^ed, nor a worse enterprise, which Nature
abhors, unattempted. VVoulde God experience had not taught many Countries
this to be too true an observation.

S. Augustine hereof says. S. Augustine rote these Books* de Ordine, before
he was Baptized.
Quid sordidius, etc. What can be said more unclean, more void of
comeliness, more full of turpitude, then harlottes, baudes, and such other
like pestilences? Take harlottes from among men, Stevves in Rome.
ye shall disturb al things with lecherous lusts. Put the same in the steed
of matrones, ye shall dishonest (all things) with spotte and sha^^. And why is
the Bishop of Rome to be blamed for that they be in Rome, more then the French
King, the King of Spain, or any other Prince, for sufferinge them in their
dominions?

It remains, we seek whether they have also the lowest and vilest place in
that City, or no: lest perhaps, although they be a A vile Untruth They are
not necessary.
necessary evil, yet being promoted above their degree, they make an evil
show in the body, where they rest. Their place may be considered two ways,
in respect of the temporal, or of the Ecclesiastical order or law. For
temporal order thus they stand: Not to have free liberty of dwellinge in the
most haunted streets, and Palaices, where them list, but Untruth. For the
Cardinals them selves say, Habitant insignes Aedes.
only to be in such corners, and bylanes, and small outhouses, as are most
fit shoppes for the vile merchandise of such occupiers. Again they can not
without a very great forfeit ride in Untruth For the Cardinals say: Mula
vehuntur.
Coches, or Chariots, as Matrones there do, but are constrained either to
keep their homely homes, or to walk a foot in the streets. And then also by
order they must be Untruth. For the Cardinals say, Incedunt vt Matronae.
in such apparel, that as Jew, by their red cappes, so they by their short
vailes (a note of dishonestie) be known to al, and be subject to all shrewdnes
of the boys of the streets, who use commonly to mock and revile them.

And here I can not but mislike with that malice which appears to be in the
makers of this Apology. For This is one of the Cardinalle virtues of Rome, to
take toll of Baudrie.
it is a virtue in the Prince to set great burdens and paimentes upon so
filthy a profession, to the end he may fear women from it, and make them the
sooner weary of it, etc. In good soothe masters ye are too young to control
the City of Rome in her doings.

Besides all this, if in that sinful state they continewe to their end
without repentance, Untruth. Sea the Answer.
it is not lauful for them to make any testamente or last will for bestowinge
of their goods, but as condemned and infamous persons, they must leave al to
be confiscated and disposed at the Princes pleasure. But on the other side, if
they turn and repent, there are houses called Monasteries of the Conuertites,
and special provision and discipline for them, where they are taught how to
be wail their unchaste life so sinnefully past over.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching the number of your Courteghianes of Rome, whether they be twenty
thousand, or more, or less, we will not strive. They be leased out in see
farm: The Popes rentes are always certain. For Fornication is fineable in
Rome, and a good ^aleable kind of sin. But this, you say, is an other Lie,
as false, and as sclounderous, as the rest. For, ye say, they pay no yearly
pension for their sufferance in that trade of Life: but only the common
taxes, which are likewise raised upon other Citizens. Whether it be so, or no,
M. Hardinge, it is sufficient for you, so to say. Otherwise, he that raises
such fines upon baudrie, might well be thought to be the baude.

How be it, your own Doctors herein will soon condemn you. For thus it is
written by them in your own Gloss: Videtur, Constitu. Othonis. De Concubinis
Clericor. remouendis.
quod crimen Meretricij Ecclesia sub dissimulatione transire debeat. Nam and
Mareschallus Papae de facto exigit tributu^ a Meretricibus: It seems, that
the Church ought to dissemble the fault of whooredome. For the Popes Marshal
in deed receives a tribute, or pension of VVhoores.

Whereas ye say, Cornelius Agrippa was the first Author of this sclaunder, it
is untrue. For your own Gloss last before alleged, avouches it by the
Authority of Johannes Andreas, Johan. Andreas mortuus est an. 1348.
a notable Canoniste, that lived welneare two hundred years, before Agrippa
was borne. And Nicolaus de Clauengijs, that lived in the time of y^ Emperor
Sigismunde, in his Book entitled, De Corrupto Ecclesiae statu, Nicolaus De
Clauengijs: In Paralipomen. Vrspergen. Ann. 1417.
has one special Chapter, De Exactionibus pro concubinis tolerandis, Of
Exactions for the sufferinge of Concubines.

But all this ye wipe away easily with one word. For ye say, The
Courteghianes in Rome pay these impositions, not as a portion of their
unthrifty gaistes, but only as a pounishemente for their wicked life. For it
is not laweful there to commit sin freely, without paiemente. And thus is the
matter well defended.

So it is noted upon your Decrees, Quod dicitur, Sacerdos non potest percipere
mercedem prostibuli, 14. quae. 5. Quod vero. In Glossa. Et Dis. 90 Oblationes,
in Glossa.
potest dici, quod non debet recipi Oblatio Meretricis: licet Eleemosyna possit
inde fieri: Whereas it is said, The Priest may not receive the reward, or
Oblation of the Stevves, we may say, that the Oblation of an Harlo^ may not
be received: notwithstanding we may make an almouse of the same: That is to
say, A Harlottes money may be taken by y^ way of Almouse, but not by the
way of Oblation. Thus are we taught, and it behooves us to believe, that the
Pope may live, not by the Oblations of the Courteghianes, but by their
Almouse.

Now for as mutche as M. Hardinge would so feign have this matter to pass by
the name of a pounishemente of these il weemenne, I beseech thee, good Reader,
to consider, how greeuousely, and with what extremity, and rigor of Law
they have divised, Constitu. prouin. Edmundi Cantuar. Archiepiscopi.
to have them pounished. In a Prouincial Council holden at Oxforde it is
written thus, Concubinae Sacerdotum moneantur ab Archidiacono, etc. Let
Priests Concubines be warned by the Archedeacon etc. If they vvil not amend,
then let them be forebidden to Kiss the Pax, and to take Holy Bread in the
Church. With such extremity, and cruelty they keep the people from
dooinge il.

It was neither for your profession, M. Hardinge, nor for your gravity, to
become a Proctoure for the Stevves. Although it might well becomme Leontium, an
Heathen Courteghiane of lewd conditions, that wai to bestow her wit, and
Eloquence against Theophrastus, in the defense of that filthy state, yet may
not the same likewise becomme a Christian man, and a professoure of Divinity.

Ye call your Courteghianes a Necessary Evil: but by what Authority of the
Scriptures, I cannot tell. That the whole trade, and life of them is il, we take
it, as your grant: But that they be Necessary in any Christian Common
wealth, I reckon it very hard for you to prove. Ye allege the heat of the
Country: as if that weere a sufficient warrante for your Stews. And yet, I
trow, the town of Louaine, and the Country of Brabante, where ye now
inhabit, is not so hot. The heates of Ievvrie are thought far to pass all the heates of Italy. Yet God says unto the Jews, Deutero. 23.
Non erit vlla Meretrix de filiabus Israel: nec Scortator de filijs Israel:
There shall be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel: Nor Whoorekeeper of the
Sons of Israel. And even now, where so ever the Gospel of Christ is openly,
and freely received, notwithstanding the heat of the Country, your Stews,
and Bordelles flee away, as the night clouds before the Son. But after that
your Priests were once forbidden laweful Marriage, then was it needeful, that
your Necessary il should comme in place. How be it, Roman. 3.
S. Paul says, Let us not do il, that good may follow. For just is the
damnation of them, that so say.

But S. Augustine stands full of your side: S. Augustine has written in the
behoufe of the Stews: S. Augustine says, Take Harlottes away from emonge
men, Augustine. De Ordine, Li. 2.
and ye fill all the Country with ribaudrie, and villainy. In deed the very
name of S. Augustine is great, and Reverend. But what if S. Augustine, when he
wrote these words, were not S. Augustine? What if he wrote that Book, De
Ordine, being as yet a very young man, and but a Nouice in the Faith: not yet
well instructed: not yet Baytized in the name of Christ: him self as yet
keepinge a Concubine, and living in whooredome? Shall such a one, so young,
and so youthful, go for a Saint? Or shall his bare name, and unseasoned
fantasies stand you in steed, to prove your Stews?

Verily, the same S. Augustine, being afterward fully instructed, and
Christened, says thus, Augustine De Ciuitate. Li. 14. Cap. 18.
Istam in vsu scortatorum terrena Ciuitas licitam fecit turpitudinem: The
worldly City ( not y^ Church of God) has made this filthiness of harlottes
to be laweful. And Ludouicus Viues, writing upon y^ same, says, Satis aperte
Augustinus ^estatur, Ludo. Viues in Librum De Ciuitate. Lib. 14. Cap. 18.
lure Civilly veteri Romano multa esse permissa, quae sint contra^ia Legibus
Diuinis. Hoc isti volunt, qui, dum Gentilitatem coniungere, and coaptare
Christianismo laborant, corrupto vtroque, and alterius impatiente, nec
Gentilitatem, nec Christianismum retinent: S. Augustine plainly witnesses,
that by the old Civil Roman ( and Heathen) Law, many things were
suffered, which were contrary to the Laws of God. This thing will not these
men allow, who while they study ( as you, M. Hardinge, do) to join
Heathennesse, and Christianity both together, both being corrupted, and
the one not standinge with the other, keep now neither Heathennesse, nor
Christianity.

Therefore we may mutche better exchange these words of Augustine, spoken
in his youth, before he had well learned to speak: and ma^e mutche better say
thus, Permit Lupanaria: and implebis omnia libidinibus: Suffer, and allow
the Stews: and ye shall fill all the Country with Ribaudrie, and Villainy. And
in this sense S. Bernarde says* Bernard. in Cantic. Sermo. 66.
Toll de Ecclesia honorabile Coniugium, and thorum immaculatum: Nonne reples
eam Concubina^ijs, incestuosis, seminifluis, mollibus, masculoru^
Concubitoribus, and omni denique genere immundorum? Take once from the Church
honorable (...), and the Bed undefiled: and doeste thou not fill the same
Church full of brothelles, keepinge Concubines, etc. and with all so^tes of
filthy persons?

Further ye say, And wherefore is the Bishop of Rome more to be blamed for
mainteinance of his Stews, then the French King, or the King of Spain?
This is but a simple reason for a Doctor of Divinity. It is an old saieinge:
Nil iuuat exemplum, quod litem lite resoluit.

Christ bade not his Apostles, to be leadde by the example of worldly Princes.
If it be il in them, it is mutche worse in him, that would be called the
Vicare of Christ, the Head of the Church, and the Holy one of Israel.

An other part of their paunishemente is, as you tell us, that they may not
ride sumptuousely in Coches, or Charettes, or dwell in the open fair streets,
and in the sight of the City: but are forced to go a foot, and to hide them
selves in corners, and in out houses, and bylanes: and that, by your
description, in such simple, and poor, and beggarly sort, as if they were
the vileste, and ougleste of all the people, and had not a good clowte to cover
their bodies. Certainly, M. Hardinge, your Courteghianes, if they understood
hereof, would think them selves little beholden to such a Proctoure.

Doctoure Peter Martyr, of whom I cannot speak without great reverence,
having good cause to know the state of Rome, as few men better, hereof
wrteth thus: Petrus Martyr. in Li. Iudicu^^ Cap. 16.
None, O Deus bone, quomodo Romae coercentur Meretrices? Habent ornatissimas
domos: vehuntur per publicum habitu principum: Sedent in equis gradarijs:
habent secum Torquatos, and Laruatos Comites: interdum etiam Cardinales,
praesertim noctu: and ancillarum sumptuosissimum gregem: Now a days, O good
God, how are the Courteghianes pounished in Rome? They dwell in the fairest
houses: They are carried with honor through the City, as if they were
Ladies: They are mounted on amblinge palfraies: They are attended with chains
of gold, and persons disguised, and sometimes Cardinals, and specially in
the night season: and have a sumptuous sort of Maids to wait upon them.

If ye shall happen to doubt M. Martyrs report in this behalf, Concilium
Delectorum Cardinalium. Council. tom. 3. Page 823.
yet I trust ye will give sum credit to your own Friends, the Cardinals
of the Church of Rome. Their words hereof be these: In hac etiam Vrbe
Meretrices, vt Matronae, incedunt per Vrbem, seu Mula vehuntur: quas
affectantur de media die Nobiles, familiares Cardinalium, Clericque. Nulla in
vrbe vidimus hanc corruptionem, praeterquam in hac omnium exemplari. Habitant
etiam insignes aedes. In this City of Rome the Courteghianes pass through
the streets, or ride on their Mules, like honest Matrones, or Ladies: and in
the midst of the day, Noble men, the Cardinals dear friends, and
Priests attend upon them. We never saw such corruption, but only in this
City, which is the example, and pattern of al others. Moreover they dwell in
fair and notable houses. Anno. 1538.
This Information was presented unto Pope Paul the third by certain of his
graueste Cardinals, appointed thereto by special Commission.

Now, good Christian Reader, I beseech thee, consider the Conformity of
these tales. M. Hardinge says, The Courteghianes of Rome go only a foot:
These Cardinals say, They ride on Mules. M. Hardinge says, They have a
special apparel of dishonestie, to be known by: These Cardinals say, They
go, or ride, as honest Matrones, or great Ladies, or Noble wemenne. M.
Hardinge says, They be despised, and reviled of the people: These Cardinals
say, They have Priests, Noble men, and the Cardinals friends to attend
upon them. M. Hardinge says, They dwell only in out houses, and back lanes*
These Cardinals say, Habitant insignes Aedes: They dwell in fair, and
notable Houses. So many Untruths it is no hard matter for M. Hardinge to utter
in so short a tale. Now, being so fine Dames, and so richely attired, it
were great sclaunder to say, They serve only for V^rlettes, or common
rascalles. If the report be true, upon Twelueth day at night, in the year of
our Lord, 1564. there were seen Seventeen Coches of Courteghianes arriving
together even into the Popes own Palaice. Anno. 1564.
If any man shall think this report incredible, yet Luitprandus, Luitprandus,
Li. 6. Cap. 6.
of y^ like hereof, says thus, Lateranense Palatium, Sanctorum quondam
hospitium, nunc est Prostibulum Meretricum: The Popes Palaice at Laterane,
sommetime the harbor of Holy Saints, is now becomme a stewe of whoores.

An other part of their pounishemente, ye say, is this: That as condemned,
and infamous persons, at their end they can make no Testamente, nor take
order with that they have. If this were true, it were a good token, that the
Pope is Covetous to have their goods, more then desirous to save their Souls.
How be it, y^ best Learned, and most notable Canonistes, that ye have, affirm
the contrari^. For prouse whereof read Cynus Pistoriensis in L. Cum te. C. De
Condictione ob turpem causam: Cynus Pistorien. Baldus. Bartholus. De Immunita.
Ecclesiar. Ca. 14. Abb.
Read Baldus L. 1. C. in eodem capite: Read Bartholus in L. Idem. ff. eodem
Ca. Abbas Panormitane, after long disputation had touching this matter, thus
says his Judgment in the end: Conclude ergo ex omnibus premissis, quod
Meretrix turpiter non recipit dona, vel promissionem: and quod potest de illis
ad libitum disponere: Of al these premises conclude you thus, That a Harlot
may receive rewards, or promises, without infamy, or shame (of the Law):
and that of the same she may dispose at her pleasure. Therefore, M. Hardinge,
this tale would have benne better studied. For this pounishemente, that ye
have here imagined, by the Judgment of the Learned, is no pounishemente.

In good soothe Sirs, ye say further, Ye are to young to Controlle the City
of Rome in her dooinges. Yet, in y^ rebuking of open vice, noman ought to be
thought too young. But of what age then are you, M. Hardinge, that are hable
thus to defend the City of Rome in open Whooredome? Primasius ad Roman. Cap.
2. Ephesians. 5.
Primasius says, Nemo periculosius peccat, quam qui peccata defendit: Noman
sins with more danger, then he that stands in defense of Sin. S. Paul
says, Let noman deceive you with vain words. For because hereof the anger
of God comes upon the Children of infidelity. Be not therefore partakers
with them.

And whereas you say, This policy is thought necessary for the eschewinge of
a greatter il, Extra. De Celebra. Miss. De homine.
your Law tells you, Abijcienda sunt falsa remedia, quae Veris, and
manifestis periculis sunt grauiora: We must abandon vain remedies, that are
more grievous, then the true, and manifest dangers.

S. Augustine says, Non vult Deus tale lucrum compensari tali damno. God will
not have such a gain to be recompensed with such a loss. S. Paul says,
as we have alleged before: Roman. 3. Tertullian. De Anima. Anthen. De
L^nonibus.
They say, Let us do il, that good may follow. But he adds withal,
Therefore just is their Damnation. Tertullian says, Lupanaria execrabilia
sunt coram Deo: stevves are accursed before God. And therefore, to conclude,
the Emperor Justinian streitely commands, that Harlottes be bannished out
of al Towns.

But here, good Christian Reader, this one thing I beseech the uprightly, and
indifferently to consider: what thing will not these men defend, that can
thus boldly defend confessed filthiness? Or, when will they refourme the
Church of God, that in so long time cannot yet refourme their open Stews?

These Harlottes, ye say, sommetimes repent them, and amend their lives.
God of his mercy grant, that you, M. Hardinge, may once do the like:
Hierem. 3. Matthae. 2^*
Lest the words of the Prophet fall upon you, Frons Meretricis facta est
tibi. God grant, that Harlottes, and Sinners go not before you in the
Kingedome of God.

M. Hardinge.
That ye tell of a Woman named Ioane, bearinge the world in hand, she was
Pope of Rome, it is a fond and avaine fable. Were ye so wise, as ye be
malicious, ye would never have brought your credit in hazard by reportinge
such vanity. This I accoumpte for one of your accustomed lies. By this men
may judge, what little stoare of true things ye have to obiecte against us.
Who lists to see a Learned discourse written hereof, him may is please to
read the annotations of Onuphrius is a man yet living, hired of purpose to
face out this matter.
Onuphrius Pa^uinius upon Platina, de vitis pontificum, In Vita Johan. 8.
printed in Venis. And he shall easily believe the whole matter to be fabulous.

After Anastasius, they that in their writings recite an exacterewe and order
of Popes, as Ademarus, and Annonius of Paris, Regino, Hermannus
Schafnaburgensis. Otho Frisingensis, Abbas Vrspergensis, Leo Bishop of Hostia,
Iohanes of Cremona, and Godfridus Vrterbiensis, of which some wrote three
hundred, some four hundred years paste, al these make no mention at al of
this Woman Pope Ioane. Again there be in bibliotheca Palatina, at Rome, six
or seven tables of the Popes names written in sundry books, before the time of
Innocentius the fourth. Mary in the margent of Pandulphus this fable is put in
between Leo the fouthe, and Benedicte the third, written in a hand far
different from the old characters of that Ancient Book, added by some man of
later time. Which makes the matter to be the more suspected, and taken for a
fable.

Though men had at that time ben so far bewitched, and distract of their
five wits, Semiramis being a vvooman was of long time taken for a man. Yet
men's eyes were not bewitched.
as they could not have known a woman from a man, (which no wise man I wene
believes), yet God has suffered others as very monsters to sit in that See,
as ever was Pope Iohane.
it is not to be thought, that God him self, who appointed and ordained the
Seat of Peter, whereof he would the whole Church to be directed, would
depart so far from his merciful providence, toward the Church, as to suffer
the same to be polluted by a woman, which is not of capacity for holy orders.

Untruth. For there were others before him, that vvrote the same.
The first Author of this fable was one Martinus Polonus, a Monk of the order
of Cisterce: Who wrote long after the time that Pope Iohane is feigned to have
lived in. Whose manner of writing if we consider, we shall find it vain,
and nothing like to be true. It begins thus, Johannes Anglicus natione,
Maguntinus, sedit annos duos, mensem vnum, dies quatuor, etc. John an English
man by nation, of Maguntia, say (in the Roman See) two years, one month,
and four days, alias, five months and three days. What a foolish speech
is this, an English man Maguntine, or of Maguntia? It follows in the fable, as
the said Martine tells. This (as it is said) was a Woman, Dame Iohane the
Pope.
and in the young age of a girl, she was brought to Athenes by one that was
her Lover in a man's apparel, and there profited so mutche in diverse sciences,
as none was found to be compared with her. To Athenes was she brought, says
the fable. And why? For learning. Very well. Whereas at that time Untruths,
two together
neither any Athenes stood, * neither was there any place of lerning there any
longer: but all the country of Attica became Barbarous, and utterly void of
learning, as we understand by the writers of that time. The author
reports, that from thence she came to Rome, and there professed learning
openly, and had great Doctors to her Scholars, and for opinion of learning
and good life, by one consent of al was made Pope. Which is soon confuted
as false: Untruths, 2. Read the Answer.
for there was no learning at those days openly professed at Rome, as the
Stories declare.

It follows in the fable. Being in the Popedom she is begotten with child
of her Servant. And not knowinge the time of her delyueraunce, as she went
from S. Peter's to Laterane, streined with pains between Colosseo and S.
Clementes Church, she brought forth, and died, and was (as they say) there
buried. Here is to be marked, how the This Diuiser dwelled in Rome, and lived
above five hundred years ago.
deviser of this fable bewrays himself, and thinks the matter hard to be
believed. And therefore in the beginning says, she was a Woman ( vt
asseritur) as folks say: and now he says, she was buried, vt dicitur, as it
is said. So he does not affirm it to be true, but refers al to heresaie.
By which testimony lies commonly be soothed.

And as it is false, that ever there was any such Pope, so is it not true,
that ye note in the margent of your book touching the image, which ye say
is to be seen yet in Rome, resemblinge that woman Pope lieinge in travail. The
image, which ye mean, I have seen my self at Rome, graven in a stone, after
the manner of a tomb stone, pitched upright not far from the Colosseo. It
resembles no such thing ye speak of.

Neither is it of any more truth, which some have ignorantly written of the
Popes refraininge to go that way, when he goes thereby in solemn
processions: nor that which I have read in some of your Untruth. For they
lived 500. years before us: and were the best vvriters of that time.
Schoolefelowes peuishe books of the stool of easemente, that is at Laterane
made of fair porphyry stone, which they have reported to be kept there for
an unseemly use at the creation of the Popes, for proof of their Humanity.
Thus, we trust, we have brought your great matter of Pope Ioane to naught.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, in your Judgment, is an other of our foul shameful accustomed Lies.
And that ye prove by the Authority of one Onuphrius, one of the Popes late
pages, specially hired, and procured, to healpe out this matter. Of the Truth,
and certainetie hereof, we shall consider further in the end. Now let us
examine this New Coniectural Doctor with his gheasses. Not Registered.


First, he says, Dame Iohane is not registered in the Calendare emonge the
Popes: Ergo, it is but a vain Fable, that ever Dame Iohane was Pope in Rome.
This Conjecture, M. Hardinge, is very simple. For I doubt not, but ye may well
remember, that Bishops names, as well in Rome, as otherwheres, have upon
sundry occasions benne oftentimes quite stricken out of the Calendare.

So was Chrysostomes name upon displeasure, quite stricken out of the Table of
the Bishops of Constantinople, In Vita Chryso. Chrysostom. Epist. 3. ad Cyriacum.
as if he had never benne Bishop there.

And Chrysostom him self, writing unto Cyriacus in his own defense, says
thus, Siquidem hoc feci, expungatur nomen meum ex albo Episcoporum: and non
scribatur in Libro Orthodoxae Fidei: If I have thus done, let my name be rased
out of the Bishops Calendare: and let it not be registered in the Book of the
Catholic Faith.

And afterward his name being so defaced, and rased out, was restoared again
by Theodotus at the vehemente request, Nicepho. Li. 14. Cap. 26. Gelesius ad
Episcopos Dardaniae.
and instaunce of the people. So Acacius, y^ Bishop of Constantinople, rased
out y^ name of Pope Foelix of Rome: So Innocentius, the Bishop of Rome, rased
out the name of Arsacius the Bishop of Constantinople. And this is it, that S.
Augustine means, writing to the people of Hippo, Nicephor. Li. 13. Cap. 34.
Quid obest homini, quod ex illa Tabula non vult eum recitari humana
Ignorantia, si de Libro viuorum non eum delet iniqua Conscientia? What hurt is
that unto a man, Augu. Epist. 137.
that the Ignorante people will not suffer his name to be readde out of that
Table, if wicked conscience blotte him not out of the Book of Life?

So writes Johannes de Parisijs of Pope Cyriacus: Johan. De Parisijs* De
Potesta. Regia, and Papali.
Cyriacus Papa renuntiauit officio, vt cum Vrsula, and Virginibus palmam
Martyrij susciperet. Sed iste Cyriacus in Catalogo Paparum non annumeratur:
quia credebant, ipsum non propter deuotionem, sed propter oblectamentum
virginum dimisisse Episcopatum: Pope Cyriacus gave over his Bishoprike, that
with Vrsula, and other Maids he might receive the Crown of Martyrdom. But
this Cyriacus is not reckened in the Calendare of the Popes: for that it was
believed, he had given over his Bishoprike, not of devotion, but for sum
fantasy toward the maids.

But, to comme near the purpose, and to the force of your gheasses, therefore
was Pope Iohanes name leafte out of the Calendare of the Bishops of Rome, not
for that there never was any such Pope there: but only for shame, lest it
should appear in record, and afterward be reported for ever, that a
vvooman, and such a vvooman, had benne Bishop of Rome: or, that the Bishop of
Rome had benne with Child.

So says Marianus Scotus, Marian. Scotus.
Huius Iohannae nomen Authors Pontificij non ponunt, propter turpitudinem rei,
and muliebrem sexum: The Chroniclers, that write of the Popes, leave out the
name of Pope Iohane, both for the shame of the matter, and also for the Wooman
kind. Martinus Polonus.
So says Martinus, Iohanna non ponitur in Catalogo Sanctorum Pontificum, tam
propter Muliebrem sexum, quam propter deformitatem facti: Pope Iohane is not
reckened in the Calendare of the Holy Popes, as well for that she was a Wooman,
Sabellicus Ennead. 9. Lib. 1. Page 469.
as also for the shame of the matter. So says Sabellicus, Nullus Defunctae
honor habitus. Fama tenet, ob tam foedae rei memoriam: There was no honor
bestowed at her burial: Johan. de Parisijs, De Potesta. Regia, and Papali.
The report is, for the remembrance of her filthy act. So says Johannes de
Parisijs: So says Fasciculus temporum. Therefore this first reason is but a
very blind Conjecture, and bears no force.

An other of your gheasses is this: Knovvinge a vvooma^ from a Man.
Men had benne bewitched, and distracted of their wits, Fasciculus
temporum.
if they could not have known a Woman from a Man. This reason, M. Hardinge,
bears as great weight, and Substance, as the former. For your own
Amphilochius, M. Hardinges Amphilochius.
that wrote the Life of Thomas Becket, could have told you, that Euphrosyna,
that holy Maid, dwelte six and thirty years in Monks apparel emonge Monks,
and was never otherwise taken, but for a Monk.

Likewise Vincentius, Vincentius. Li. 9 Cap. 47.
and Petrus de Natalibus, and others your Writers, and Recorders of Fables,
could have told you, that Tecla sommetime addressed her self in Man's
apparel, Petr. De Natalib. Lib. 8. Ca. 110 Rauisius Textor in Officina:
Mulieres Virilem habitu^ mentitae. Simeon Metaph. In Eugenia.
and, had she not benne forebidden by S. Paul, would have followed him in
company, as a Man. Rauisius Textor writes the like of one Marina, that
dissemblinge, what she was, lived many years in an Abbie as a Monk. The like
he writes of Lasthenia, Axiothea, and others, that being Weemen, came into
the School in Man's apparel, to hear Plato. The like writes your own
Fabulare Simeon Metaphrastes of Eugenia. And, if ye lack other Authorities of
trust, and credit, One of your own Companions of Louaine avouches the same
of Melania, and Papula. And yet, I think, Copus Dialo. 2. Page 236.
he was not bewitched, as you say, nor thoroughly berefte of his wits.

The quarrel, that ye pike to the Name, and Surname, is nothing else, but a
childishe cauil. For she was not called Iohane English, by the name of the
Country, Anglicus.
for that she was an English Wooman, borne in England, as you full fondely
imagine, but only by the Surname of her Father. So are there many known this
day by the names of Scot, Irishe, French, VVelshe, VVestfalinge, Norman,
Gascoingne, Brabante, Holande: and yet not borne in any of al these Countries,
but only in England. So Matthias Parisiensis, as it is supposed,
notwithstanding his name, was borne in Bohemia.

Therefore, whereas ye would have the words vainly, and without sense, to
be readde, and pointed thus, Johannes Anglicus natione, Mogu^tinus, etc. John
an English man by nation, of Moguntia, etc. ye play, and toie, and trifle
unseemly, and mock your Reader. For the words are clear, and plain, and
lie thus: Johannes Anglicus, Natione Moguntinus, etc. John English, (so
Surnamed) borne at Men's.

Further ye say, Gods Sufferance.
God would never have so foresaken Peter's Chair, as to suffer it to be
polluted by a Wooman, which is not of capacity for Holy orders. This gheasse,
M. Hardinge, presumes over far of Gods Providence. And therefore Antoninus
the Archbishop of Florence, when he had opened this w^ole Story of Pope
Iohane, being astonned with the strangeness, and admiration of the matter,
Antonin. Par. 2. Ti. 16. Ca. 1. 7.
could not refrain him self from crieinge out, O altitudo Sapientiae, and
Scientiae Dei. Quam incredibilia sunt iudicia eius: O the Deapthe of the
Wisdom, and knowledge of God. How incredible be his judgments? In like
manner the Prophet Esaie cries out, Esai. 1.
Quomodo facta est Meretrix Ciuitas fidelis? How is that Faithful City
becomme an Ha^^ot?

And why might not Pope Iohane, being a Wooman, have as good right, and
interest unto the Sea of Rome, In Epistola Othonis Imper. ad Johan. pp. Platyn.
in Johan. 13.
as afterward had Pope John 13. who, being Pope, had wicked company with two
of his own Sisters: or others, whom for their horrible vices, and
wickedness, Platyna calls Monstra, and Portenta, Monsters against kind,
and ilshapen creatures? Luitprandus says, as it is before reported,
Lateranense Palatium nunc est prostibulum Meretricum: The Popes Palaice of
Laterane in Rome, Luitprand. Li. 6. Cap. 6.
is now becomme a Stevve of vvhoores.

All this notwithstanding, says Antoninus, Nulli ex hoc Salutis praeiudicium
fuit. Antonin. par. 2. Ti. 16. ca. 1.. 7.
Quia nec Ecclesia tunc fuit sine Capite, quod est Christus, vnde percipit
influxum Gratiae: Noman had binderance of Salvation by mean hereof. For (
although the Pope were a Wooman, yet) the Church was not without a Head. For
that Head is Christ: From whom she receives influence of Grace. Yea,
although Antichriste geate him self into the Sea of Rome, yet shall the Church
of God nevertheless continewe still: Although in horrible confusion, and under
great persecution.

Further ye say, To Athenes was she brought, says the Fable. And why? For
Learning. Very well. Whereas at that time, neither any Athenes stood, nor was
there any place of Learning there any longer: but all the Country of Attica
became Barbarous, as we understand by the writers of that time.

The City of Athenes was then overthrown, Athenes.
ye say, and Learning there utterly decayed. And therefore all this is but a
Fable. And good reason it is, that we believe you, for that your Onuphrius
has so told you. But for your credites sake, M. Hardinge, lest al men
epsy your Vanity, tell us, by whom was that Noble, and so Populous, and mighty
City of Athenes thus laid waste? By what King? By what Captain? By what
foraine nation? At what time? How long ago? Having not one poor Author to
allege* how could ye pretend the names of so many without blusshinge?

The City of Athenes had then continewed welneare twelve hundred years: And
for knowledge in Philosophy, and renown of Learning, was called the Eye, and
University of al Graecia. Lumen. and (...) Ruffinus in Apologia pro Origin:
Apud Hierony. To^. 4. Georgius Patriar. in vita Iohannis.
Origin writes of him self, y^ he was sommetime a Student in Athenes.
Chrysostom being eighteen years old, for Learninges sake, was sent to
Athenes. S. Basile, and his Brother Gregory, afterward the Bishop of Nyssa,
were Students at Athenes together thirteen years. Your own Amphilochius,
whoes Authority ye may not in any wise deny, says thus of S. Basile,
Apprehendit Matrem Literarum Athenas: He came to Athenes, which is the Mother
of Learning. Boethius of Rome planted him self in Athenes for Learninges
sake, about the year our Lord 520.

In the year of our Lord 680. the Bishop of Athenes was present at the
Council holden at Constantinople, Ruffin. ^i 2. ca. 9. M. Hardinges
Amphilo^^ius. Theod. vi^. (...) r. in Epist. ad (...).
called Synodus Sexta. After that, in the year of our Lord 742. at the second
Council of Nice a great number of y^ Bishops of Graecia were present in
their persons al together. Within few years after which time, followed
Pope Iohane, in the year of our Lord 853.

Hitherto the whole Country, and Church of Graecia continewed in safety: and
the Emperors of Christendom made their continual aboade in those parts. And
have you, It appears in the Subscriptio^s of the 2. Nicene Conc. Anno. 742*
M. Hardinge, so suddenly thrown down al together, both Church,
Country, Town, and Castle, only to keep Pope Iohane from her Study?

Ye say, The whole Country of Attica was then becomme Barbarous. This tale is
your own, and hangs only upon your own credit. Yet Platyna, Sabellicus,
and others more, that wrote this Story, and knew, what they wrote, were not so
Barbarous. But Barbarous is he, M. Harding, that will believe your simple word
without warrante.

At that time, ye say, the City of Athenes was not standinge. But Paulus
Aemylius says, Paulus Aemylius Lib. 6.
that long after that time, in the Reign of Philip the French King, Ann.
Domi. 1220.
Gottofredus one of the House of Tricasses, was appointed, and made Dux
Athenarum, and Princeps Achaiae. The Duke of Athenes, and the Prince of Achaia.
If there had benne then no Athenes standinge at that time, as you tell us, how
then could Gottofredus have benne made Duke of Athenes? If ye say, as ye may
do mutche by your Conjectures, that, notwithstanding the City of Athenes
were rased, and made waste, yet the dignity, or name of honor remained still,
yet will the same Aemylius once again reprove your Error. For, writing
afterward of certain Pirates, that had invaded the Country of Graecia, he
says thus, Paulus Aemylius Lib. 8.
In terram Atticam delati, Athenarum Ducem Brennae Nobilitatis virum
occiderunt, Vrbemque ceperunt: Inuadinge the Country of Attica, they took,
An. Domini. 1288
and slevve the Duke of Athenes, one of the house of Brennus, and took the
City.

These things happened, as it is easy to reckon, welneare four hundred, and
fifty years after the time of Pope Iohane. Now therefore, I beseech you, M.
Hardinge, consider indifferently with your self: If there had benne no City
of Athenes then standinge, how could these Pirates then invade, and take the
City of Athenes? Shall we say, They levied an army, and disquieted the
Country, and troubled them selves, and came so far to catch a shadow?

Thus hitherto it appears not, but if Dame Iohane would have gonne to
Athenes, there was room sufficient to receive her.

After that she came to Rome, and there professed Learning openly. This, No
University in Rome
you say, is soon confuted as false. For there was no Learning at those
days professed at Rome, as the Stories do declare. This is very soon
confuted, M. Hardinge: and specially by him, y^ recketh so little, what he say.
Leave this Hypocrisy: dissemble no more: It is not manly: Dame Iohane the Pope.
Tell us in good soothe, what Writers, what Stories declare these things? your
credit fails over mutche: your word is no sufficient warrante.

Ye say, There was no Learning in those days professed in Rome. And why so?
Will ye now say of Rome, as ye earste said of Athenes? Will ye say, There was
no City of Rome then standinge? Will ye say, Learning there was then utterly
decayed, and the whole Country becomme Barbarous? If there were no study, or
place of Learning then in Rome, where then was there any study in all
Christendom? For the Universities of Parise, Orleance, Tolouse, Salerne,
Padua, Bononia, Praga, Salamanca were erected long afterward. And therefore
ye seem to say, that all the whole world then was Barbarous.

But that ye may the better see your oversight, S. Hierome, writtinge of
Victorinus, and Donatus, Hierony. in Appendice Annalium Eusebij.
says thus: Victorinus the Rhetorician, and Donatus the Grammarian, my
Schoolemaisters, are accoumpted notable in Rome. And again he says,
Victorinus natione Apher, Romae sub Constantio principe Rhetoricam docuit:
Hierony. in Catalogo Scriptor. Illustrium.
Victorinus borne in Aphrica, taught Rhetorique in Rome in the time of the
Emperor Constantius.

Erasmus, writtinge the Life of S. Hierome, says thus, Romam missus est,
velut ad primariam eo saeculo tum Religionis, Erasmus in Vita Hieronym.
tum Eruditionis Magistram, Liberalibus studijs erudie^dus: quod ipse declarat
enarrans 11. Caput Ezechielis: Hierome was sent to Rome, as to the Principal
Schoolemaistresse in those days, both of Religion, and also of Learning: as he
him self declares, expounding y^ eleventh Chapter of Ezechiel. August.
Confess. Lib. 5. Cap. 8.
S. Augustine says, Egisti mecum, O Deus, vt mihi persuaderetur, Romam
pergere, and potius ibi docere, quod docebam Carthagine: O God, thou mouedst my
mind to go to Rome, and there rather, to profess openly the same Learning,
that I had professed at Carthage. And further he says, Audiebam quietiusst
udere ibi adolescentes, and ordinatiore Disciplinae correctione sedari: I heard
say, that young men there went more quietly to their books, and were
keapte in orderly obedience to their studies.

And in the Tripartite work joined unto the Council of Laterane, ye may
find the story hereof recorded thus: In Opere Tripar. Li. 2. Ca. 10.
Primo Athenis Romam translatum est studium Philosophicum: Deinde Roma Parisios
tempore Caroli, vt dicunt Historiae^ First the study of Philosophy was
translated from Athenes to Rome: and afterward, as the Stories say, in the
time of the Emperor Charles, it was translated from Rome to Parise.

What shall I more say? The Pope him self in his own Decretalles says, Rome
is an University. Extra. De Priuilegijs, Li. 4. Cum de diuersis. In Sexto.
These be his words, Curia Romana habet Studium Generale, and eius priuilegia:
The Court of Rome has an Universal Study, and the Privileges of the same.
And again Pope Clemens says, In Studijs Romanae Curiae, Parisijs, Oxonij,
Bononiae, Salamancae debent esse Professores Linguarum, Hebraicae, Clemen Lib.
5. De Magistris.
Chaldaicae, Arabicae: In the Universities of Rome, of Parise, of Oxforde, of
Bononie, and of Salamanca, there must be Professors of the Hebrewe, Chaldee,
and Arabike tongues.

To be short, Theodoricus Niemus, sommetime the Popes Secretary, and
therefore having good cause, to know the truth hereof, and, for ought that I
know, no cause to dissemble, of this whole matter writes thus: Et nunc est
Titulus, Cardinalis praedictae Scholae. Theodoric. Niemus. Citatur ab Illyrico
in Testia bus Veritatis.
Et olim in ea legebantur Septem Arts Liberales, and praecipue Rhetorica: and
etia^ in ea legit quandoque Beatus Augustinus: and Johannes, vocatus de Anglia.
Et fuit Mulier de Maguntia nata, quae studuit Athenis sub virili habitu: and in
tantum profecit in Artibus, vt tandem veniens Romam, per biennium in eadem
Schola Arts Liberales legerit: and adeo sufficiens fuit, vt etiam Maiores, and
Nobiliores vrbis eius Lectiones frequenter audiuerint. Dame Iohane the Pope.
Et postea in Papam eligitur, etc. Even now a Cardinal bears the Title of
the said School, or University of Rome. And in old times the Seven Liberal
Sciences, and specially Rhetorique were readde in the same. There also sometime
readde. S. Augustine: and one, that was called John of England. This John was
a Woman, borne at Men's ( in Germany), and had studied at Athenes in the
apparel of a man: and had so profited in the Arts, that at last coming to
Rome, two years together she professed the Liberal Sciences in the same
School. And her gift in teachinge was such, that the Elders, and Nobles of
the City resorted often to hear her read. Afterward she was chosen Pope,
etc.

Thus many ways, M. Hardinge, have we found an University, or Schole in
Rome: and no cause to the contrary, but Dame Iohane, being so well learned, as
it is said, might well be a Reader there.

But ye say, The Popes time of travail.
why keapte she not her self in? Her Midwife might better answer this
question. But what if she were suddenly prevented before her time, as many
be? Or what if God would have such a matter so openly known, to y^
everlasting Detestation, either of the Person, or of the Place? Certainly,
Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence, being astonished with the horror hereof,
as it is said before, Antomin. Par. 2. Titulo 16. Cap. 1.. 7.
cries out, O the deapthe of the wisdom, and Knowledge of God. O how
unsearchable be his Judgments?

The Author hereof, Vt asseritur.
say you, durst not to auouche the matter for an undoubted Truth: but only
says, Vt asseritur, as it is said: and so refers all the whole to
hearesaie. Notwithstanding, M. Hardinge, many there be, that write this
Story, as a certain Truth, without doubtinge, or credit of hearesaie. And
Platyna, al be it he would not seem to auouche over mutche, for the honor of
the Sea of Rome, yet thus he says, Platyna in Johan 8.
Quod fere omnes affirmant: Which thing in a manner al men do affirm. And
Rauisius Textor says, Scitum est ex Chronicis, and a Maioribus Scriptum: It
is known by the chronicles, In Officina.
and written by our Elders. It is known, says one: It is affirmed in a
manner by all men, says an other: But for the space of eight hundred years,
and more, there was no Writer, I trow, so impudente, that would condemn it
for a Fable, as you do, and utterly deny it to be true.

Touching the Marble Image representinge a woman in child bearinge, The
Marble Image.
and the Popes sudden breakinge of his way, in his solemn procession, let
each man weighe them, as him lists. But, where ye compare that Image to one
of the great ragge stoanes at Stonage, or Long Compton, as if it were utterly
unwrought, and without shape, ye seem wilfully to auouche, as your manner is,
a great Untruth. Theodoricus Niemus.
Verily, Theodoricus Niemus, the Popes Secretary, says, Et adhuc vetus
Statua Marmorea illic posita figurative monstrat (hoc factum). Vnde Summi
Pontifices, dum ad Lateranum de Basilica Principis Apostolorum, and contra
vadunt, illud iter rectum non faciunt. Imo per alias vias per indirectum
transeunt, illud aliquantulum prolongando: Even unto this day an old Marble
Image there erected, under a Figure shows this matter. Therefore yt Popes,
when they pass from S. Peter's Church to Laterane, or backewarde, they take
not their journey straight forth: but pass indirectly by other streets,
making their way some what the longer. This therefore is not an old Wives
dream, as you say, but the Judgment of sundry the wiseste, and best
learned in Rome, who might best know the matter.

As for the Chair of Porphyrie stoane, which otherwheres ye call the Chair of
ease, The holovv Chair.
it is too vile to be answered. Sabellicus says, Spectatur adhuc in
Pontificia domo Marmorea Sella, Sabellicus Enneadis. 9. Li. 1.
circa medium inanis: qua Nouus Pontifex continuo ab eius Creatione residet: Vt
sedentis genitalia ab vltimo Diacono attrectentur.

But, let Truth be Falsehedde: and let Stories be Fables. Yet, M. Hardinge, it
may please you to remember, Dame Iohane the Pope.
that the same Fable was raised first in Rome, and from thence only, and from
no place else, was published abroad into the world. But let the Popes own
Secretaries, and all the people there be deceived: and, to shadow the shame of
that See, let Rome it self be the Mother of lies. Let noman know the certain
Truth of matters, but only Onuphrius, the Popes Paraste, and M. Hardinge. Yet
neither would so many Chronicles have recorded, nor would the whole world so
universally have believed these things of the Pope, more then of any other
Bishop, had there not benne woonderful corruption of manners, and dissolution
of Life, and open horror, and filthiness in that only See above al others.

How be it, good Christian Reader, that thou maiste well, and clearly
understand, that our dealinge herein is plain, and simple, and that we have
not imagined these mates, or any parcel thereof of our selves, may it please
thee to read Platyna in Iohanne 8. Testimonies for the proof of Pope Iohane.
Sabellicus, Enneadis 9. li. 1. Leonicus Chalcondyla a Greek writer, Li. 6.
Marianus Scotus, that lived about the year of our Lord 1028. Sigibertus
Gemblacensis, that lived about the year of our Lord, 1100. Mar^^us Polonus,
the Popes Penitentiarie, whom M. Hardinge so mutche defaceth: that lived about
the year of our Lord, 1320. Rauisius Textor in Officina, Ca. Foeminae habitum
virilem mentitae: Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence, par. 2. ti. 16.
Volaterranus: Nauclerus: Carrion: Constantinus Phrygio: Christianus Massaeus:
Matthaeus Palmerius Florentinus: Supplementum Chronicorum: Chronica
Chronicarum: Fasciculus temporum, and others more. Of these sum lived four
hundred, sum five hundred years ago: and have ever benne coumpted worthy
of sum Authority: notwithstanding, for your Dame Iohanes sake, you, M.
Hardinge, begin now to clippe their credit. How be it, what so ever they
were, certain it is, They were no Lutheranes.

Notwithstanding, sum of your own Fellows of Louaine could have taught
you, to have dealte herein more discretely: and not so precisely, and
peremptorily to have denied the whole Story: specially being sent to you
from your friends in Rome, and confirmed by so many. And therefore one of your
Louaniens would seem handesomely to excuse, and shifte the matter by
possibility of Nature. For thus he says in effect, What if the Pope were
Hermaphrodi as, an Herkinalson, Hermaphroditus.
that is to say, a man, and a woman? both in one? Or if this healpe will not
serve, he seems further to say, What if the Pope, being first a man, were
afterward changed into a woman? And thus, for want of better Divinity, he
forces Ouides Metamorphoses to serve the turn. If ye would have taken this
man's advise, out of doubt with such a pretty, What if, ye might soon have
put us out of countenance. Copus Dialogo 1. Page 47.
His words be these, Neque ego hic quicquam dico de Hermaphroditis, and
(...), de quibus veterum libri pleni sunt. Et ne a nostri tempo^^s memoria
longius abeam, non ignoro, monumentis literarum esse traditum, Mulierem quandam
nomine Acmyliam, Antonio Spensae Ciui Ebulano nuptam, post duodecimu^ a nuptijs
annum in virum transijsse. Legi etiam alteram Mulierem, vbi puerum peperisset,
in marem fuisse mutatam: I will here say nothing of such persons, as be
called Hermaphroditi, and are both Man, and Woman, al in one: whereof in old
Writers we find mutche mention. But not to go further, then to the
remembrance of our own time, I know it is written, that a certain woman
named Aemylia, married unto one Antonius Spensa a Citizen of Ebulum, ten
years after she had benne married, was turned into a man. I have likewise
readde of an other woman, that, when she had benne brought abedde, afterward
became a Man. These notable Stories he allegeth, to answer the matter of Pope
Iohane. Thus he thinks it a great deal the safer way, to make the Pope an
Herkinalson, or by Miracle to turn him from a man into a woman, then simply,
and plainly to confess, that ever Dame Iohane was Pope in Rome.

If you had taken this same way, then all this story had benne a Fable: and a
woman had benne a man: and we had utterly benne confounded.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 1.
But what need we rehearse Concubines, and Bawdes? For that is now an
ordinary, and a gaineful sin in Rome. For Harlottes sit there now a
days, Genes. 38.
not as they did in times paste, without the City walls, and with their
faces hid and covered: but they dwell in Palaices and Fair Houses: they stray
about in Court, and market, and that with bare and open face: as who would
say, they may not only lawfully do it, but ought also to be praised for so
dooinge. What should we say any more of this? Their vicious and abominable
life is now thoroughly known to the whole world. Bernarde writes roundely
and truly of the Bishop of Romes house, yea and of the Bishop of Rome him
self. Thy Palaice, says he, takes in good men, but it makes none:
naughty persons thrive there, and the good decaie. And, who so ever he were,
which wrote the Tripartite work, annexed to the Council of Larerane, he
says thus, So excessive at this day is the riote, as well in the Prelares and
Bishops, as also in the Clerks and Priests, that it is horrible to be
told. But these things be not only grown in ure, and so by custom and
continuance of time well allowed, as all the rest of their dooinges in manner
be, but they are now waxen old, and rotten ripe. For who has not heard,
what a heinous act Peter Aloisius, Pope Paul the thirdes Son committed
against Cosmus Cherius the Bishop of Fanum: what John Casa, Archbishop of
Beneuentum, the Popes Legate at Venice, wrote in the commendation of a most
abominable filthiness: and how he set forth with most lothesome words,
and wicked eloquence, the matter, which ought not once to proceed out of any
bodies mouth? To whose ears has it not comme, that Alphonsus Diazius a
Spaniarde, being pourposely sent from Rome into Germany, so shamefully and
Diuelishely murdered his own Brother John Diazius, a most Innocente, and a
most Godly man, only because he had embraced the Eospel of Jesus Christ, and
would not return again to Rome?

But it may chance, to this they will say: These things may sometime happen
in the best governed Common Wealths, yea and against the Magistrates wills:
and bisides, there be good Laws made to pounishe such. I grant, it be so:
But by what good Laws (I would know) have these great mischieues benne
pounished amongst them? Petrus Aloisius, after he had done that notorious
Act, that I spoke of, was always chearished in his Fathers bosom Pope Paul
the third, and made his very dearlinge. Diazius, after he had murdered his
own Brother, Petrus Aloisius the Popes Son.
was delivered by the Popes means, to the end he might not be pounished by good
Laws. John Casa the Archbishop of Beneuentum is yet alive, yea and lives at
Rome, even in the eye and sight of the most holy Father.

M. Hardinge.
Courtisanes went abroad, so as the Matrones do: some rode on Mules, some
dwelled in goodly houses. Which particulare disorders, Untruths great and
notorious.
as there they continewed not many years, * so in these days they have benne
reformed. Wherein ye follow the Father of your Haeresies, and schoolemaister
of your malice the Devil, Apocal. 12.
who in Scripture is called Accusator Fratrum nostrorum, the accuser of our
Brethren.

But sirs, how leap ye from Rome to Placentia, from the Cleregy to a Temporal
Duke, whom ye call the Popes Son, though he was not his Son being Pope,
but by lawful Matrimony before holy Orders taken? For such a one was Peter
Aloisius of whom ye speak. Be it, that he was an evil man. What makes that
against the Church? Johan. Casa.
what for Defense of your new Gospel? If Johannes Casa being yet a young
spring all, before he came to be a Clerk, and long before he was either
Bishop or Legate, O, a fair Boonegrace, to bevvtifie open and known
wickedness.
made certain amorous Sonettes in Italian rhyme, foloweinge the Italian poet
Petrarcha, to which kind of exercise the good wits of Italy in youth are
much given, and without naminge any person, flatteringly smoothed that
heinous fact, rather then praised, wherein nevertheless he did evil, we
confess, and for the same oversight of his youth, was notwithstanding his
other excellent qualities kept back from the dignity of Cardinalship duringe
his life: all this being granted and considered, what hinders it the
estimation of Christ's Church? And what furthereth it your false Doctrine,
your Schisms, and your Heresies? Touching the Death of John Diazius the
Spaniarde, ye tell Untruth. For we tell no Lie. Read the Answer.
many lies at once.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We leapte not so lightly to Placentia, M. Hardinge, but rather reaste at
Verona, and say the Truth. For Pope Paulus, that should have pounished his
wicked Son, and have burnte him to death for his abominable outrage, removed
not to Placentia, Johan. Sleidan. Li. 19.
but remained still in Rome. Johannes Sleidanus says, that the young
Gentleman, the Bishop of Fanum, upon whom Petrus Aloisius the Popes Son had
showed that horrible villainy, shortly after died for shame, and heaviness.
Yet, he says, it is thought of sum, that Petrus Aloisius, after his wicked
act committed, gave him poison, and so killed him, least he should make
complainte thereof unto the Emperor. He adds further, Paulus nihil o secius
impense amabat Filium: and ad ipsius amplificationem omne studium conuertit. Et
cum de eius flagitijs nonnunquam audiret, fertur non admodum aegre tulisse: and
hoc solum consueuisse dicere, Haec illum vitia non se commonstratore didicisse:
Pope Paul nevertheless favored his Son above measure: and bestowed al his
care, to increase him in Honor. And, whereas he heard sometime of his
shamful acts, the report is, that he was not mutche offended therewith: but
used only thus to say, Well, yevv is he never learned these vices by my
example. So cruel, and terrible is the Pope in repressinge of Sin.

But God of his Justice would not suffer such abomination to escape
vnpounished. Certain of the Nobles of his own City, not long after, arose
against him, and slew him in his own Palaice, and hunge out his vile
Carkesse in shameful sort, by a chain over the walls, and afterward threw
it over into the mote. The people of al sorts ran gladly to the sight: and
stabbe him in on every side with their Daggers: and trodde him filthily under
their feet.

Ye say, the particulare disorders of your Courteghianes in these days at
the last have benne Reformed. And yet by very credible report, even within
these two years, which was in the year of our Lord 1565. Johannes Diazius.
by a persite view taken, there were found in Rome to the number of eight and
twenty thousand weemen of that sort. If this be the Reformation of the
Church of Rome, what was it then, before it was thus Reformed?

As for that most horrible Book of Johannes Casa, so vile, and so lothesome,
that no Heathen ears could abide to hear it, O how favorably, and how
frendely it is excused? He was then, ye say, but a young man: but a springal:
no Bishop: no Clerk: He named no person: It was but a kind of exercise: an
ouersighte: an Amorous Sonette: The good wits of Italy be much given to it:
He praised not that fault, but only smoothed it. O M. Hardinge, what
abomination is there under Heaven, but ye can divise ways, how to smoothe it?

But he was pounished, ye say, full soar for his oversight. For he could
never be made Cardinal, duringe his Life. Yea, good M. Hardinge: And all this
must we believe, because you speak it. The Pope made him the Archbishop of
Beneuentum, and Legate a Latere, and thereby one of his Secret Council, in
part of this cruel pounishmente. But, though he upon that, or sum other
occasion, were keapte back from being Cardinal, yet were there others made
Cardinals, in all respects as had, Andre. Alciatus in Epist. praefixa
Historiae Pauli Iouij.
as he. Read Andreas Alciatus, that notable Ciuilian: And ye shall find, what
a minion was made Bishop of Comum, when Paulus Iouius was put biside. Read
Paulus Iouius in the Life of Clemens. 7. and learn, what pretty folks then
were made Cardinals, and for what causes. As for your own Onuphrius, he
speaks Parables, and casts colors, and would seem to mean more hereof,
Paulus Iouius. Onuphrius in Iulio. 3.
then he durst to utter.

The Emperor Tiberius sommetime placed Nouellius Tricongius in most high and
Honorable room, and made him Proconsul, in part of recompense of his good
service, Sueton. Tranquil. in Tiberio. Tricongium vno Spiritu.
for that he was able to drink three pottles of Wine together with one
breathe. This was not the woorthiest cause of promotinge such Magistrates to
such a room: yet was there more honor, and honesty in this cause of
prefermente, then has benne thought to be in the preferringe of sundry
Cardinals.

Touching the murtheringe of Johannes Diazius by his own Brother Alphonsus,
wherein, ye say, we have told you so many lies at once, we refer
ourselves to the Story thereof truly written by Johannes Sleidanus: Johan.
Sleidan Lib. 17.
the effect whereof in short is this: One Johannes Diazius a Spaniarde, and a
Doctor of Sorbona in Parise, after that God had given him grace to understand
y^ Truth of the Gospel, An. 1546.
departed from thence, and came into Germany, and reasted at Nuburge in the
Dominion of Otho Henricus County Palatine. His Brother Alphonsus Diazius,
being then in Rome, and understanding hereof, immediately took Horses, and
with all speed came into Germany, mindinge to withdraw his Brother from his
purpose. And findinge him constante, and steadfaste, and not likely any ways
to be removed, in the end he fained him self, by the weight of his reasons,
to be persuaded to the same Religion: and desired him to return with him into
Italy, for that he should do more good there, then he could in Germany. But
seeinge him for sundry causes firmly bente to stay there, he took his
leave, and departed thence, and exhorted him to continewe constante in the
Truth, and came to Augusta, six Dutche miles from Nuburge. The next day, as
having foregotten some special matter, he had to say to his Brother, he
returned back again from thence to Nuburge, and by the way bought a
Carpenters axe, and entringe into the Town upon the. 27. of March, he came to
his Brothers lodginge at the break of the day, and him self watchinge
beneath, sent up his seruante with the Axe to do the deed. The seruante,
after he had called forth Johannes Diazius, and had delivered him a letter
from his Brother Alphonsus, and saw him turned toward the light to read
the same, came suddenly behind him, and struck him in the head with his
Axe, and leauinge it stickinge in the wound, came away together with
Alphonsus his Master. This is the very true story hereof, M. Hardinge, and in all these words there is no lie. Touching your Courteghianes, ye say, the
Pope of late has made a general Reformation. For now they are both removed
from their fair Palaices, wherein they dwelte, and also put from their Mules:
As if the fault had benne only in their Mules, or Houses, and not rather in
their whole trede of life. Certainly, the same weemen continewe still, even in
the City of Rome, and that unto the number of eight and twenty thousand, as
it is said before. Such is the Reformation of the Church of Rome.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 1. and. 2.
They have killed infinite numbers of our Brethrene, only because they
believed truly, and sincerely in Jesus Christ. But of that great and foul
number of Harlottes, Fornicatours, Adulterers, what one have they at any time
(I say not, put to death) but either Excommunicate, or once attached? Why?
Volupteousnesse, Adultery, Ribaudrie, Whoredom, Murtheringe of kin,
Ineeste, and others more abominable parts, are not these cou^pted Sin at
Rome? Or, if they be Sin ought Christ's vicar, Peter's Successor, the most
holy Father, so lightly, and stiely to bear them, as though they were no
Sin, and that in the City of Rome, and in that Principal Tower of al
Holiness? O holy Scribes and Phariseis, which never knew this kind of
Holiness. O what a Holiness, what a Catholic Faith is this? Peter did not
thus teach at Rome: Paul did not so live at Rome: they did not practice
brothelrie, as these do openly: they made not a yearly reuenewe and profit
of Harlottes: they suffered no common Adulterours, and wicked Murderers to go
vnpounished. They did not receive them into their familiarity, into their
Council, into their householde, nor yet into the company of Christen men.
These men ought not therefore so unreasonably to triumph against our
living. It had benne more wisdom for them, either first, to have proved
good their own life before the world, or at the least, to have cloked it a
little more cunningly. For we do use still the Old and Ancient Laws, and
(as much as men may do, in the manners used at these days, al things being
so wholly corrupt) we diligently, and earnestly put in execution the
Ecclesiastical Discipline: we have not common Brothel houses of Strumpettes,
nor yet flocks of Concubines, nor Heardes of Harlotte haunters: neither do
we prefer Adultery before Matrimony: neither do we exercise beastly
sensuality: neither do we geather ordinary rentes and stipendes of Stews:
nor do we suffer Inceste, and abominable naughtiness, nor yet such
Aloisians, Casians, and Diazians to escape unpunished. For if these things
would have pleased us, we needed not to have departed from these men's
fellowship, amongst whom such enormities be in their chief pride and price.
Neither needed we for leauinge them, to run into the hatred of men, and
into most wilful dangers.

Paul the Fourth, not many months sithence, had at Rome in prison
certain Augustine Freers, many Bishops, and a great nu^bre of other devout
men, for Religions sake. He racked them, and tormented them: to make them
confess, he leafte no means unassayed. But in the end how many Brothels,
how many Whoremongers, how many Adulterers, how many Incestuous persons
could he find of al those?

M. Hardinge.
This ye deny as impudently, as ye affirmed the other matter of Diazius
falsely. Wherefore what pounishement is due to slaunderers, that ought this
Defender to have for this false slander. Then comes me your Secretary, and
praises him self, and all you his holy companions, besides all wit and
modesty. And says much in commendation of your Ministershippes goodness,
for that ye keep and use still the Old and Ancient Laws, forsoothe, and
discipline of the Church.

For Shame, A brave, and a lusty kind of Eloquence.
for Conscience, for regard of the world, for fear of Gods wrath, for
auoidinge everlasting fire, return to the Catholic Church, from whence ye
are broken out like the faite Bulls Basan, put away your most unlawful
yokefellowes. Leave your selves to be abominable, before with such spiteful
railinge ye reprehende our Fornication, Open Stews, and Inceste, are M.
Hardinges Infirmities.
Infirmity.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 3.
Our God be thanked, although we be not the men, we ought, and profess to
be, yet whosoever we be, compare us with these men, and even our own life
and Innocence will soon prove untrue, and condemn their maliceouse surmises.
For we exhort the people to al virtue and well dooinge, not only by Books and
preachinges, but also by our examples and behaueour. We also teach that the
Gospel is not a boastinge, or bragginge of knowledge, but that it is the Law
of life, and that a Christian man (as Tertullian says) ought not to speak
honorably, but ought to live honorably: nor that they be the hearers of the
Law, but the dooers of the Law, which are justified before God.

M. Hardinge.
Nay, nay, Syrs, for that thing ye crake so much of, be not to hasty to
thank your God. What peculiare God ye mean, we know not. That phrase your
secretary much uses, as though ye had an other God beside him that is God of
all. Compare your selves with whom ye list, your own life and innocence is so
well known, as by reprouinge your vices and horrible sins, no man lightly
shall seem a slaunderer. In deed if your continual aduoutrie and Incest were
laufull Matrimony, if your filthy yoke fellows were your true wedded wives,
if your robbinge, and throwinge down of Churches were almose, and buildinge of
places for prayer to the increase of Gods Honor, if ignorant rashenesse were
godly discretion, if your word of the Lord, where Gods word, if your
pretensed Gospel, were Christ's true Gospel, if your biblebable and railing
were wholesome Preachinge, if y^ Sprite of Satan, that is in you, the same also
being a lyinge Sprite in your mouths, could be meek, humble, Is this the
modestic the sprite of God*
obedient, and would tell Truth, finally if evil were good, if darkness
were light, if sower were sweet, Our God. our Lord.
if the fruits of your so naughty a tree were good: we would also soothe you,
and uphold your immoderate crakes. We say plainly of you at one word,
which we will to be a watch word for all Christen people to beware of you,
your Doctrine is Heresy, your Life is iniquity, your endeavor tends to the
subversion of Souls.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is no great Crake, M. Hardinge, to geeue God thanks. But what discourteous
dealinge is this of your part? Sir Defender, and his Fellows must comme to
you, and learn to speak. Notwithstanding for ought, that may appear, ye
are not yet very well advised, how to speak your self. Now, because we
say, we thank our God, our Secretary has made him self a Several God.
How be it, you may say, Our Lord, and think him not Catholic, that will
say otherwise: and yet make you not your selves thereby any Several Lord. God
give you Grace, ye be not severed from the Lord. But wherefore it should be
more lawful for you, to say, Our Lord, then for us, to say, Our God, I
think it a high point of cunninge for you to open.

Thus ye would have us sommetimes to say, Our Lord: sometimes, The Lord:
sommetimes neither. It were a skilful Cook, that knew your diete. How be it,
Psalm. 46.
The Prophet David says, Psalm. 64.
Deus noster refugium, Psalm. 113.
and Vrtius: Psalm. 63.
Our God, our Refuge, Psalm.
and our Strength? Psalm. 67.
Singe Psalms unto Our God: 1. Corinthians. 1. and 14.
Our God is the God of Salvation: Philip. 1.
Our God is in Heaven: 1. Corinthians. 6.
My God, o My God, I wake early unto thee: Thou art My God: I trust in thee:
My lotes are in thy hands. S. Paul says, I thank My God always: I geeue
thanks unto My God. Thus was it lawful then for the Apostles, and Propehtes to
speak without rebuke: neither was there any M. Hardinge then so discourteous,
to say, They made them selves a peculiar God.

S. Paul says, We are justified in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, and
in the Sprite of Our God. S. Augustine says, Contra istos Mirabiliarios
cautum me fecit Deus Meus, Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 13. August. De Ci^i. Li.
Cap. 29. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 96.
dicens, In Nouissimis diebus surgent Falsi Prophetae: My God has willed me to
beware of these Mungers of Miracles, tellinge me, that in the last days there
shall rise up False Prophets. Again he says, Deus Meus vbique praesens est:
Vbique totus: nusquam inclusus: My God is euerywhere present: euerywhere
whole: nowhere enclosed, or shut up. Chrysostom says, Christo meo
testificabantur and Venti, and Mare: Both the Winds, and the Sea bare
witness to my Christ.

S. Hierome says, Hierony. Aduersus error. Johan. Hierosoly mitan. Cyprian.
De Bono Poenitentiae. Sedulius, In. 2. Corinthians. 6.
Ego non Patrem, non Matrem, non Germanum aduersus Christum meum audiam: I will
not hear neither Father, nor Mother, nor Brother against my Christ. S.
Cyprian says, Hic est Deus noster, id est, non omnium, sed Credentium, and
Fidelium Deus: This is Our God, that is to say, not the God of al, but the God
of the Believers, and of the Faitheful. Sedulius says, Deus Natura omnium
est: Voluntate vero paucorum: God by Nature, is the God of al: but by will, he
is the God of Few. But what shall we need many Doctors, the case being so
clear? You your self, M. Hardinge, in this self same Book, either of
purpose upon sum better advise, or unawares, have written the same. Consider
well your own words: M. Hard. Fol. 124. b. Galat. 2.
Thus ye say, There is no iniquity in Our Lord God. Yet, I trow, by these
words, ye make not to your self a peculiare God.

S. Paul says, I live in the Faith of the Son of God, which has loved
me, and has geeuen him self for my sake. Which words S. Chrysostom,
writing upon the Genesis, Chrysostom. in Genesim. Homi. 34.
expounds thus: Qui dilexit me, etc. Vt proprium vsurpas commune beneficium.
Profecto, inquit: Nam licet pro omni hominum genere Sacrificium oblatum sit,
tamen propter amorem in eum, id, quod factum est omnibus, proprium mihi facio.
Ita and Prophetis mos est, and facere, and dicere, Deus, Deus Meus: quamuis
totius Orbis sit Deus. Sed peculiare hoc est amori, vt ex communibus propria
faciat. Qui dilexit me. Quid dicis? An te dilexit solum? Omnem, inquit, hominum
Naturam dilexit. Sed ego illi Gratias debeo, quasi me Solum dilexisset, and
tradidisset semetipsum pro me Solo. S. Paul says, Christ has loved me. O
Paul, The benefit, that is common to al, thou use as peculiare to thee
self. Yea verily, says S. Paul: For all be it that Sacrifice were offered
for all Mankind, yet for the love, that I bear toward him, the thing that
was done to al, I accoumpte as proper, and several to me self Alone. Thus
the manner of the Prophets is to do, and to say, O God, my God:
notwithstanding be is the God of all the World. But this is the special, and
alonely office of Love, of things common to make things peculiare. Thou
saiste, Christ has Loved me. What saistet thou? Has Christ loved thee
Only, and ^oman else? No, says Paul, He has loved al Mankind. But I owe
him thanks, as if he had loved me Alone, and had given him self Only for me.

Hencefoorthe, M. Hardinge, it may please you to geeue us leave to speak, as
the Prophets, the Apostles, the Holy Fathers, and Doctors have spoken before
us.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 1.
Bisides al these matters, wherewith they charge us, they are wont also to add
this one thing, which they enlarge with all kind of spite: that is, that we
be men of trouble, that we pluck the Sword, and Scepter out of Kings
hands: that we arm the people: that we overthrow judgment places, destroy
the Laws, make hauoke of possessions, seek to make the people Princes, turn
al things vpside down: and, to be short, that we would have nothing in
good frame in a Common Wealth. Good Lord, how often have they set on fiere
Princes hearts, with these words, to the end they might quench the light
of the Gospel in the very first appearinge of it, and that men might begin
to hate y^ same, ere ever they were able to know it, and to the end that
every Magistrate might think, he saw his deadly enemy, as often as he saw
any of us. Surely it should excedingly grieve us, to be so maliciously accused
of most heinous Treasone, unless we knew, that Christ him self, the
Apostles, and a number of good Christian men, were in time paste blamed, and
reviled in like sort. For although Christ taught, they should geeue unto
Caesar, that which was Cesars, yet was he charged with sedition, and was
accused to divise some Conspiracy, and to seek ways to geate the Kingedome.
And thereupon they cried out with open mouth against him in the place of
Judgment: If thou let this man escape, then thou art not Cesars friend.

And though the Apostles did likewise evermore, and steadfastly teach, that
Magistrates ought to be obeyed, y^ every soul ought to be subject to the
Higher Powers, not only for fear of wrath, and punishemente, but even for
conscience sake, yet bare they the name to disquiet the people, and to stir
up the multitude to rebelle. After this sort did Haman specially bring y^
Nation of the Jews into the hatred of King Assuerus, because, said he, they
were a rebellious and stubborn People, The Boures in Germany.
and despised the ordinances, and commandments of Princes. 3. Reg. 18.
Wicked King Achab said to Elie the Prophet of God, It is thou, that
troublest Israel. Amasias, the Priest at Bethel, Amos. 7.
laid a conspiracy to the Prophet Amos charge, before King Jeroboam,
saieinge, See, Amos has made a conspiracy against thee, in the midst of
the House of Israel. To be brief, Tertul. in Apologetico.
Tertullian says, This was the general accusation of al Christians, whiles he
lived, that they were Traitors, that they were Rebels, and the enemies of
Mankind. Wherefore, if now adays the Truth be likewise evil spoken of, and
being the same Truth, it was then, if it be now like despitefully used, as it
was in times paste, though it be a grievous and unkind dealinge, yet can it not
seem unto us a new, or an unwonted matter.

M. Hardinge.
How far ye have attempted ( I mean the sects of your Brotherhed) in
sundry Countries, to wreaste the Swoorde out of Princes hands, to transpose
their Scepters at your pleasure, and to alter states and signories, though we
hold our peace, Untruth, notorious, and manifest to all the world.
the world Judges, the Bloudde of so many thousands slain speaks,
England repents, Scotland mourns, Germany roareth, France bewaileth,
Sauoie weepeth, all Christendom lamenteth. These Boures for the greatest part
were enemies unto Luther.
Were the hundred thousand Boures of Germany consumed by the Swoorde of the
Nobility there for their obedience? The Duke of Saxony, and Lantgraue of
Hesse, were they overthrown in field and taken captive, for standinge in
Defense of their Sovereign? Were so great multitudes of people destroyed at
Munster for their loyalty? Your Sacramentarie Suitzers of Berna, who robbed
the quiet Old Duke of Sauoye of his Towns, and Countries, from the farther
side of the lake of Geneua unto the Alps, did they this for mainetenance of
his right, and to set him at rest with little? What meante ye, when ye laid
your Heads together, being at Geneua in Queen Mary's days, the Faithful
All this great multitude of England, and Scotland, stood only in two
persons. We know no more.
Brothers of England, and Scotland, and devised a most Seditious and
Traitorous Book against the monstrous regiment of Women?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, for want of matter, ye thought it good policy, to furnishe
your tale with stoare of words: The World judges: Blood speaks:
England repents: Scotland mourns: Germany roareth: France bewaileth:
Sauoie weepeth: Christendom lamenteth. If ye had not well studied your Copia
Verborum, ye could never have benne halte so copious, nor have benne hable, so
many ways to utter nothing. Ye might happily have said, Your Cardinals
cry, and your Pope roareth, and your Friends stand aluffe, and tear their
hear, and say, as it is written in the Apocalypse, Apocalyp. 18.
Vae, vae Babylon, Ciuitas illa Magna: Alas, alas Babylon, that Great City.

God be thanked, The Kingedomes, and Princehoodes of the world stand now in
as safe, and in as quiet, and florishinge state, as ever before. Therefore this
Tragical Rhetorique might better have served you sum other where.

The Boures of Germany, of whom ye speak, for the greattest part, were
Adversaries unto Doctor Luther, and understood no part of the Gospel: but
conspired together, as they said, only against the cruelty, and tyranny of
their Lords: as they had done two and twenty years before in the same
Country, in the Conspiracy, Liga Sotularia. An. 1503.
called Liga Sotularia, fifteens years before Doctor Luther began to
Preach: The parteners of which Conspiracy had for their watch word the
name of Our Lady: and in the honor of her, Regiment of vveemen.
were bound to say five Aue Mary's every day. D. Luther began to Preach,
An. 1518.
Certainly, touching these Later Rebels, it is known, that Luther sharply
and vehemently wrote against them. And they them selves being demanded
thereof, Johan. Sleidan. Lib. 4. and 5.
utterly denied both partetakinge, and also the knowledge of the Gospel.

The Princes of Germany raised not their Powers, as ye say, against the
Emperor Charles the fifthe: Paralipomen. Vrspergen. Anno, 1525.
but being wrongefully, and contrary to the Law of Arms invaded by him,
they were forced, being free Princes, by the Law of Nature, to draw their
swoorde in their own Defense.

The Rebels at Mounster were not Gospellers, Nicola. Gerbellius Phortzensis.
as ye seem to mean, but frantique Anabaptists, and Heretics, as ye be:
and therefore enemies unto the Gospel.

The Lords of Berna never were Subjects to the Duke of Sauoie. That they
took certain of his Castles in their Confines, then did it rightly, and by
the Law of Arms, being forced thereto by daiely invasions, and robberies,
and not hable otherwise to live in reaste. But in deed the said poor Duke
was thoroughly spoiled of his whole Dominion: of the one half, by his Brother in
Law the Emperor Charles. 5. of the other half, by his Neuevve Francise the
French King, by the counsel of Pope Clemens. 7. after their great enterviewe
at Marsiles. And thereof was divised a pretty Pasquil, declaringe the miserable
case of the poor Duke, Diuiserunt sibi vestimenta mea: and super vestem meam
miserunt sortem: They have divided my apparel amongst them selves: and they
have cast lotes for my Coat.

The Heads of England, and Scotland, that, as ye say, were laid together
at Geneua, touching the gouernemente of Weemen, being well accoumpted, were
nothing so many, as ye would seem to imagine. For if there had benne but one
less, for ought, that I have heard, there had benne but one at al. Such
hoate Amplifications it likes you to make of so small a number. We will defend
noman in his error. Let every man bear his own guilte. M. Calvin, M.
Martyr, M. Musculus, M. Bullinger, and others, whom you call the Faithful
Brothers of England, misliked that enterprise, and wrote against it.

We know, that God has determined this matter long sithence: For thus he
says, Numer. 27.
Si Homo moriatur absque Filio, ad Filiam eius transibit Haereditas: If a Man
die without a Son, his enheritance shall pass unto his Daughter. And S.
Augustine says, August. De Ciuita Li. 3. Ca. 21.
Lata est Romae Lex illa Voconia, Ne quis Haeredem Foeminam faceret, nec Vnicam
Filiam. Qua Lege quid iniquis dici, aut cogitari possit, ignoro: There was a
Law made in Rome, called Lex Voconia, That noman should conueie his
Enheritaunce unto a woman, no not unto his only Daughter. Then which Law
I know not, what may be more wickedly thought, or spoken.

But, God be thanked, that of his Mercy, has now raised up unto us a Woman
of such Wisdom, Learning, Clemency, Gravity, Judgment, Government, and
other Noble, and Princely Virtues, as have not benne seen in many men. God
increase her daily with his Holy Sprite, and make her and old Mother in
Israel. Amen.

Of your sturdy blastes, and Secret breathinges, M. Hardinge, I will say
nothing. Ye may yet remember, which of your company it was, y^ in the time
of that Noble Prince of Blessed Memory King Edward the.6. said in open
Parlamente, Woe be to that Kingedome, the Prince whereof is a Child. And
afterward, seeinge y^ Queens Majesty, that now is, placed in her estate,
boldly, and openly confessed a great euersighte, and mutche folly in your
former dooinges, for that in the late time of your unruly gouernmente ye had
hewn down the boughs, and leafte the Stock standinge still. Gods Secret
Providence, M. Hardinge, breathed against you, and confounded your dooinges.
Power only ye lacked: but good will ye lacked none.

M. Hardinge.
For answer to all this, ye join your selves with Christ and his Apostles,
as though ye were gilty herein no more, then they. Presumptuously said. But
the matter is not so answered. And yet ye run at large in that common
place, and very vainly, or rather Luciferlike, compare your selves with the
Apostles. But Sirs, stay here, run no farther. Ye are soon stopped. The
case is not like pardie. These be but your words. In the Apostles was the
Truth in deed, so was it in the Holy Prophets, and those first Blessed men
of the Church. The Truth ye boaste and crake so much of, is not that
Truth. Talk less like Rhetoricians, and prove us that ye have Truth, like
honest men. And then talk on: But that can ye never do, so long as ye
remain out of the Church, and ennemies to the Church. O vain bravery.
But what spend I words in vain? Your hearts be hardened, your Eyes be
blinded, your Ears be stopped.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is profounde stuff, M. Hardinge, for a Doctor of Divinity. To answer
you with your own vain words, in deed ye spend your words in vain.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 2.
Forty years ago, and upward, it was an easy thing for them to divise
against us these accursed speeches, and other too, soarer then these: when in
the midst of the darkness of that age, first began to spring, and to
geeue shine sum one glimmeringe beam of Truth, unknown at that time, and
unheard of: when also Martine Luther, and Hulderike Zvvinglius, being most
excellent men, even sent of God, to geeue light to the whole world,
first came unto the knowledge, and preachinge of the Gospel: when as yet the
thing was but new, and the success thereof uncertain: and when men's minds
stood doubtful and amassed, and their ears open to al sclaunderous tales: and
when there could be imagined against us no fact so detestable, but the
people then would soon believe it, for the novelty and strangeness of the
matter. For so did Symmachus, so did Celsus, so did Iulianus, so did Porphyrius
the old foes to the Gospel, attempt in times past to accuse al Christians of
Sedition and Treason, before that either Prince, or people were able to know,
who those Christians were, what they professed, what they believed, or what was
their meaning.

M. Hardinge.
As ye run forth your race, and with lieinge amplification boaste and
brag of the Truth of your Doctrine, and of the Innocence of your demeanor,
ye fall into a great inconvenience and ouersighte. Was the light
extinguished in all Israel, till that lewd Friere came, and Zwinglius
Untruth, malicious, and sclaunderous. For Zainglius was a Godly Preacher, and
no Rutter.
the swarte Rutter? Shall we now change the old song of Micheas the Prophet.
Out of Sion shall come the Law, Miche. 4.
and the word of our Lord from Jerusalem, and singe a new Song, Out of This
Blasphemy touches Gods Providence. For why not a, well from Wittenberg,
as from Rome?
Wittenberg is come the Gospel, and the word of the Lord from Zurich, and
Geneua? If Luther and Zwinglius first came to the knowledge and preachinge of
the Gospel, Wittenberg. Church Invisible.
what meante Christ to break his promise, who said, I will be with you al
days til the end of the world?

Again how forgate ye the old proverb, a lier it behooves to be mindeful?
Remember ye not how this is Untruth fond, and childishe.
contrary to al your own Doctrine? For say ye not other where is, that God had
always his number of the elect, and his invisible Church? Therefore this
must ye recante and call back again, or else shall ye pull all the rabble of
sundry your own sects upon your shoulders, whose filthy railinges, This is M.
Hardinges sobriety
and vile vpbraidinges poor souls ye shall never be able to abide.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is not woorthe the while, to answer him, that says nothing. Sion, from
whence ye say, the Law of God issued first, was in those days, as mutche
disdeigned of you Fathers, Origin. Contr^ Celsum. Lib. 1.
as is this day of your Geneua, or Wittenberg. Origin says of Celsus the
Heathen, Christianum Dogma affirmat a Barbaris cepisse ortum, hoc est, a
Iudaeis: He says, that the Christian Faith took her first beginning from
Barbarous people, Cicero. De Prouin. Consul.
that is to say, from the Jews. Cicero says, Iudaei, and Syri, Gentes
natae seruituti: The Jews, and Syrians, Nations borne to Bondage.

And Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Contra Gentes.
speaking of Iulianus the Renegate, says thus, Galilaeos nos, pro Christianis,
in Edictis suis appellauit: In his proclamatio^s, in the steed of Christians,
he called us scornefully Galileans: Notinge thereby the vileness of the place,
from whence the Gospel of Christ first proceeded. But Nazianzene says, Honora
paruam Bethleem, Nazianzen. De Natali Christi. (...).
quae te induxit in Paradisum: ( Despise not, but rather) Honor that little
Bethleem, that has leadde thee into Paradise.

The sound of this simple, Barbarous, despised people was heard throughout
the whole world. God causes his Light to shine out of the Dark: His Holy
Sprite breaths, where he thinks good: He has no regard of Persons, or
choice of places, Psalm. 18.
3. Actor.
but, as S. Peter said unto Cornelius, In every Nation, who so ever fears
him, Johan. 10
and woorketh righteousness, is accepted before him. God chooses the weak
things of the world, to confound the strong. Gods Holy Name be blessed,
that of so little, and so simple a despised Mustard seed, Matthew. 13.
has now raised up so great a tree: and triumphs the Gospel of Christ his
Sonnne in every place throughout the world. 1. Cor. 1.


What meant Christ, say you, to break his promise? Nay, what meante you,
M. Hardinge, so shamefully to break Christ's Commandment, and yet to charge
him with his Promise? God is true in all his promises, and shall prevail, when
he is so lewdely judged. There is no fault in God, or his Christ: The fault
is in you, that have made of the House of God, a Cave of Thieves. Christ never
made any such special Promise unto the Pope, that what so ever it should
please him to say, or do, he should never err, or do amiss. Ye presume
over mutche of Gods Promises. Nay, though Antichriste should be Pope, yet
should Christ's promises be true still.

It is true, that God has always a Church Invisible, and a number of Elect,
known only to him self alone. Neither is this our only saieing. S. Paul
also says the same: 2. Tim. 2.
Firmum stat Fundamentum Dei, habens hoc sigillum, Nouit Dominus, qui sint sui:
This Fundation stands sound, and firm, heuinge this Seal, The Lord
knovveth, vvhoo be his own. Elias thought, all the Godly in Israel had benne
slain: and not one leafte alive. But God said unto him, I have soued unto me
self seven thousand men, 1. Reg. 19.
that never bowed their knee before Baal. Romans 11.


God knew them: but Elias knew them not. To the judgment of man, they were
invisible. Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 45.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Secundum occultam Dei Praedestinationem,
plurimae sunt foris Oues: plurimi Lupi intus. Nouit enim, ac signatos habet,
qui nec eum, nec se norunt: According to Gods Secret Predestination, there
be many Sheep without the Church: and many woolues within the Church. For he
knows them, and has them marked, that know neither them selves, nor God
neither.

Thus the number of Gods Elect, yea before the coming of Christ, in the
time of darkness, was evermore certain: yet afterward the knowledge of the
Gospel, by the Mouths of the Apostles, was abundantly carried abroad into the
ends of all the world.

Both these parts, M. Harding, may stand well together: and are nothing
contrary to our Doctrine. Be the number of the Faithful more, or less, yet
the Truth of God is one for ever.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 1.
But now, sithence our very enemies do see, and cannot deny, but we ever in all our words, and writings have diligently put the people in mind of their
deutie, to obeie their Princes, and Magistrates, yea though they be wicked,
(For this does very trial and experience sufficiently teach, and al men's
eyes, who so ever, and where so ever they be, do well see, and witness for us)
it was a foul part of them to charge us with these things: and, saying they
could find no new and late faults, therefore to seek to procure us envy
only with stale and outworne lies. We geeue our Lord God thanks, whose only
cause this is, there has yet at no time been any such example in all the
Realms, Dominions, and Commonweals, which have received the Gospel. For we
have overthrown no Kingdom: We have decayed no man's Power, or right: We
have disordered no Common Wealth. There continue in their own accustomed
state, and Aunciente Dignity, the Kings of our country of England, y^ Kings
of Denmark, the Kings of Suecia, the Dukes of Saxony, the Counties Palatine,
the Marquesses of Brandeburgh, the Lantsgraues of Hessia, the Common Wealths
of the Heluetians, and Rhetians, and y^ Free Cities, as Argentine, Basile,
Franckford, Vlme, Augusta, and Norenberg, do al, I say, abide in the same
Authority, and estate, wherein they have benne heretofore: or rather in a
mutche better, for that by means of the Gospel they have their people more
obediente unto them. Let them go, I pray you, into those places, where at
this present, through Gods goodness, and Mercy, the Gospel is taught.
Where is there more Majesty? Where is there less Arrogancy and Tyranny?
Where is the Prince more honored? Where be the people less unruly? Where
has there at any time either the Common Wealth, or the Church benne in more
quiet? Perhaps, ye will say, from the first beginning of this Doctrine, the
Common sort euerywhere began to rage, and to rise throughout Germany. Allow
it were so: yet Martine Luther, the publisher, and setter forewarde of this
Doctrine, did write marvelous vehemently and sharply against them, and
reclaimed them home to peace, and obedience.

M. Hardinge.
Your impudency of lieinge has no measure nor end. But we will say little
here, having said yenough already in reproufe of your falsehed. Civil
Magistrate.
We leave you to the wide world, who sees, and almost feels your lies.

But I marvel not a little, that in this place specially, where ye speak of the
good order, that your Gospel breeds, ye be not ashamed to make mention of
Martin Luther. Good God how mutche could we, if we were so disposed, allege
out of his seditious and Heretical books by him Untruth malicious, and
sclaunderous. Read the Answer.
written against the Power of lawful magistrates? In libro de Saeculari
potestate.
At this time let one place suffice for all Luthers words be these. Inter
Christianos nullus neque potest, neque debet esse magistratus, sed etc. Among
Christen men none can nor ought to be a magistrate, but each one is to other
equally subject: After the Apostles saieinge, Luther admits no civil
Magistrate.
Thinkinge al others better then your selves, etc. Again, Be ye humble al one
to an other. VVhereto Christ accords when he says, When thou art called
to the marriage feast, go, and sit down lowest of al. Among Christen men,
none is superior save one, and only Christ. And what superiority or
magistrate can be there, where al be equal, and have right, power, riches, and
honor al alike? Furthermore, none coueteth to be over other, but al will be
under one another. Where such men be, though one would, yet can he not make
a magistrare to bear rule over others, sith that nature suffers not to have
superiors, where no man will, nor may be a superior. And where such kind of
men is, there be they not Christen men, after the true sort of Christen men.
This far Martin Luther.

He persuaded them to peace, when there was scarsly any left, that could
bear a clubbe. First he Nothing else, but mere Untruth. For Luther called
him the preacher of Satan.
stirred up his Disciple, Thomas Munzer in Thuringia, who was the rebels
preacher. After that he excused him of seditious preachinge to the Duke of
Saxony Prince Electour, trusting, if Munzer were let alone, the matter should
well go forewarde.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To dissemble the rest of your Untruths, and your immoderate and uncivil
bitterness, M. Hardinge, procedinge from the unquiet, and unsavory humors of
your heart: where ye say, Doctor Luther admits no Civil Magistrate, and
note the same so specially in your margin, I marvel mutche, that your paper
blusshed not in your behalf. Read his Books throughout, and consider the
quiet government, both of the Common Wealths, and also of the Churches of
Germany: and ye shall find, that noman ever, neither by word, nor by example
more auaunced the Authority of the Civil Magistrate. To leave al other his
notable Sentences to this purpose, against the Rebels, of whom ye speak,
being then in the field against their Lords, he wrote thus: God
commands al men universally to obeie the Magistrate with fear, Johan.
Sleidanus Lib. 5.
and reverence, etc. Again, Ye take the Sword, and withstand the Magistrate,
whom God has appointed. Is not this rashly to abuse the Name of God?

But he says, Emonge Christians neither may be, nor ought to be any
Magistrate. O M. Hardinge, nothing could have found fault herewith, but
only intemperate, and mere malice. For Luther speaks not these words of
the outward Civil Government, but only of our Inward Band, and Obedience
toward God. And in this respect, there is no King, or Prince in deed, nor
may be any. In this sense S. Paul says, There is no levve, there is no
Gentile: There is no Lord, Galat. 3.
there is no Servant: There is no Man, there is no VVooman: Coloss. 3.
For all you are one in Christ Jesu. S. Paul denies not, but Jew, Gentile,
Lord, Servant, Man, and VVooman, remain still in their several states, and
kinds, as they were before. But in Christ Jesus, he says, there is no
regard of any such difference. In Civil Gouernmente a King is a King, and
so has God commanded him to be known. But after that we be once comme to
the reverence, and obedience of Gods will, there God only is the King: and
the King, be he never so mighty, is but a Subject. So says S. Ambrose to the
Emperor Valenti^^ian, Noli te extollere, An bros. Lib. 5. Epist. 33.
Imperator: Sed, si vis diutius Imperare, esto Deo subditus. Scriptum est,
Civil Magistrate.
Quae Dei, Deo: quae Caesaris. Caesari: O my Lord, auance not your self: But
if ye will remain long in Empiere, be subject unto God. It is written, Geeue
to God, that belongs to God: Geeue to Caesar, that belongs to Caesar.

So says the Emperor Valentinian the Elder of him self, Sozom. li. 6. ca.
7.
Ego sum in sort plebis: I am ( in this respect) as one of the people. To
like purpose Julius Caesar, being an Heathen Prince, said sommetime of him
self at Rome in the Council house, Dion Lib. 43. (...) Sozom. li. 5. ca. 16
Equidem ad alia omnia, quae pro vobis gerenda sunt, and Consul sum, and
Dictator: quod autem ad iniuriam cuiquam faciendum attinet, sum priuatus:
Touching al other affairs, that ought to be taken in hand for your sake, I
am both your Consul, and your Dictator: But as touching any wrong to be
done to any man, I am as a private man, without office. So said the Heathen
Renegate Iulianus the Emperor, Principes, vbi ad limen Delubri venerint,
perinde sunt, atque Priuati: When the Princes, and Magistrates once comme
within the entry of the Temple, they are none other, but as Private Men. And
this is all that traitorous, and horrible Judgment, that, as it pleases you to
say, Luther had of the Civil Magistrate.

Where ye say, he sturred up his Disciple Thomas Munzer in Thuringia, to be
the preacher to the Rebels, it is no strange matter, to see your tongue to run
riot. Luther him self writing thereof unto the Rebels, says thus, Satanas
sub Euangelij praetextu, Johan. Sleidanus Lib. 5.
multos hoc tempore seditiosos, and plane sanguinarios Doctores excitauit:
Satan under the pretense of the Gospel, has sturred up in these days many
seditious, and Bloody Doctors: Meaning thereby Munzer, and other like his
companions.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 2.
But, whereas it is woonte sommetime to be objected by persons wantinge skill,
touching the Heluetians change of state, and killing of Leopoldus the Duke of
Austria, and restoringe by force their Country to liberty, all that was
done, as appears plainly by all Stories, for two hundred and threescore
years paste, or above, in the time of Pope Boniface the Eight, when the
Authority of the Bishop of Rome was in greatest iolitie, about two hundred
years before Huldericus Zuinglius, either began to teach the Gospel, or yet
was borne. And ever sithence that time, they have had al things still and
quite, not only from foreine Enemies, but also from al civil dissension. And
if it were a sin in the Heluetians, to deliver their own Country from
foreine government, specially when they were so proudely and tyrannously
oppressed, yet to burden us with other men's faults, or them with the
faults of their Forefathers, it is against al right and reason.

M. Hardinge.
Now your sprite is not content with that ye have railed already against
the Pope, and Holy Church, but it moves you again to rave and cry out. But
whether with more malice or reason, let us indifferently consider.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 1.
But O immortal God, and will the Bishop of Rome accuse us of Treasone? Will he
teach the People to obeie and follow their Magistrates? Or has he any
regard at al of the Majesty of a Prince? Why doothe he then, as none of the
old Bishops of Rome ever did, Augustine. Steuchus.
suffer him self to be called of his flatterers, Lord of Lords, as though
he would have al Kings and Princes, who, and what so ever they be, to be
his underlings? Why doothe he vaunte him self to be King of Kings,
Antonius de Rosellis.
and to have Kingely Roialtie over his Subjects? Why compels he al
Emperors, and Princes to swear to him fealty, and true obedience? Why does
he boaste, that the Emperors Majesty is a thousandfolde inferioure to him:
De Mayor and Obedien. Solitae. De Mayor. and obedien. Vnam Sancta^. in sexto.
and that for this reason specially, because God has made two lights in
Heaven: and because Heaven and Earth were created, not in two Beginninges, but
in one? Why has he, and his fellows (like Anabaptists and Libertines, to
the end they might run on more licenceously and carelessy) shaken of the
yoke, and exempted them selves from being under al Civil Power? Why has he
his Legates (asmutche to say, as most subtle spies) lieinge in wait in all
Kings Courts, Councelles, and Privy chambers? Why doothe he, when he list,
set the Christian Princes one against an other, and at his own pleasure
trouble the whole world with debate and discord? Why does he Excommunicate,
and command to be taken as a Heathen and a Pagan, any Christian Prince, that
renounceth his Authority? and why promises he his Indulgences and his Pardons
largely to any, that will (what way so ever it be) kill any of his enemies?
Doothe he maintain Empires, and Kingedomes? Or doothe he once desire, that
common quiet should be provided for? You must pardonne us, good Reader,
though we seem to utter these things more bitterly and bitingly, then it
becomes Divines to do. For both the shamefulnesse of the matter, and also
the desire of rule in the Bishop of Rome is so exceeding, and outrageous,
that it could not well be uttered with other words, or more mildely. Clemens.
5. In Council. Viennen. Leo papa. 3.
For he is not ashamed to say in open assembly, that al Jurisdiction of al
Kings depends of him self. And to feed his Ambition, and greediness of
rule, he has pulled in pieces the Empiere of Rome, and vexed and rent whole
Christendom asunder: Falsely and traitorously also did he release the
Romans, the Italians, and him self too, of the oath, whereby they, and he
were streitly bound to be true to the Emperor of Graecia, and stirred up the
same Emperoures Subjects to forsake him: and calling Carolus Magnus out of
France into Italy, made him Emperor: such a thing, Zacharias pp.
as never was seen before. He put Chilpericus the French King, being no
evil Prince, biside his Realm, only because he fansied him not, and
wrongefully placed Pipine in his room. Again, after he had cast out King
Philip, if he could have brought it so to pass, he had determined and
appointed the Kingedome of France to Albertus the King of Romans. He utterly
destroyed the state of the most florishinge City, and Common Weal of
Florence, his own native Country, Clemens. ^.
and brought it out of a free, and peaceable state, to be governed at the
pleasure of one man: Idem Clemens.
he brought to pass by his procurement, that whole Sauoye on the one side was
miserably spoiled by the Emperor Charles the fifthe, and on the other side by
the French King, so that the poor unfortunate Duke had scante one City
leafte him, to hide his head in.

M. Hardinge.
It is a great eye sore to the Ministres of Antichriste, to see the Vicare of
Christ above Lords and Kings of this world: to see Princes and Emperors
promise and swear obedience unto him. But they that are the faithful
subjects of the Church of God, think it no absurdity, that the Shepherd be
set^, not only above the Lambs and Ewes of the Church, but also above the
VVethers and Rams them selves. It is a very great folly for them to find
fault with the superiority of the Bishop of Rome, who can never prove, that
he is not the Vicare of Christ. Matthew. 16.
If he were not his Vicare, yet being a Bishop he is above any temporal Prince
So is every Simple Priest.
concerning his Priestly office. But since Christ said to Peter, Upon this
rock I will build my Church, and hell gates shall not prevail against it, A
little vvitte had benne better, then all this so great a do.
Bark until your bellies break, ye that be the helhovvndes of Luthers and
Zuinglius litour, or rather of Satan's your and their chief master, shall not
prevail against the Apostolic see of Peter. It has withstanded al Devils
and Heretics a thousand five hundred years: and think ye that your selves
be stronger then Arius? It greeueth you, that the Pope is higher then the
Emperor, not for any love ye bear to the Emperor, nor for hatred that ye
have to the Popes person, whom ye know not: but your quarrel is against
Christ, whose person the Pope bears. Or tell us, I pray you, does he call
him self any Princes or Emperors vicegerent, and not rather the So he calls
him self: But when did Christ ever call him so?
Vicare of Christ alone? Whom impugn ye then but Christ in his Vicare?
Luke. 10.
Have ye not readen, qui vos spernit, me spernit: he that despises you,
despises me? Ye thought the Pope had no better text for his primacie and
supreme authority, the^ two lights, which God made in Heaven. But if malice
had not blinded you, in the very same chapter of Innoce^tius the third, (from
whence like a spider ye sucked that ye thought was worste) ye might have seen
an other reason goinge before, Distin. 96. Duo. sunt.
where he said, Pontifex in Spiritualibus antecellit, quae tant^ sunt
temporalibus digniora, quant^ anima praefertur corpori. The Bishop (said
Innocentius) in spiritual matters passes (the Emperor): which spiritual
things are so mutche above the temporal, by how mutche the soul is preferred
before the body. How like ye that reason? Within a little after Innocentius
brings forth an other proof. Where it was said to Jeremy the Prophet*
who came As if Hieremie had benne a Pope.
of the Priests race, Hierem. 1.
and was a Priest him self, A very profounde Reason. Read the Answer.
behold I have set thee over nations and Kingdoms, to the intent thou may
pull up and scater, and build, and plant.

Then after that Innocentius had By Natural Reason. O Natural Folly.
by natural reason and holy Scripture proved the highest Bishops superiority
above Princes, he comes in the third place not now to prove, but to make
his former saieinge already proved more plain, by alludinge to that is written
in the beginning of Genesis. Where Moses declares how God made two lights
in the Firmamente of the Heaven, a greater, and a lesser.

But this cannot sound in the ears of our new preachers. They would not
have the guide of heavenly things above the guide of earthly cares. They love
the Earth, the fleash, the world too well, to be of that mind, and therefore
do ask, why the Popes of Rome like Anabaptists and Libertines have shaken of
the yoke, and exempted them selves from al civil power. What yoke mean ye?
The yoke of infidels and Paynimes?

The B. of Sarisburie.
We are not the Ministers of Antichriste, M. Hardinge, but the witnesses of
the Truth of Christ. He is Antichriste, as S. Paul shows you, that sits
in the Temple of God, and auanceth him self above all that is called God. And,
to speak more particularely of the matter, by S. Gregory's Judgment, he is
Antichriste, Pope above Kings and Emperors.
or the Forerenner of Antichriste, that calls him self, The Universal
Bishop: And vaunteth him self, as the King of Pride: And has an Army of
Priests prepared for him: And sets him self, as Lucifer, above al his
Brethren. Of him Cardinal Franciscus Zarabella says thus, Papa facit,
quicquid libet, Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 30.
etiam illicita: and est plusquam Deus: The Pope doothe, what him lists, yea
though it be unlawful: and is more then a God. This is Antichriste, M.
Hardinge, Grego. Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
by the Judgment of the wise, and godly: and the supporters of him, who so
ever, Francis. Zarabel.
and where so ever they be, are the Ministers of Antichriste.

It is great Arrogancy, to auance a Bishop above a King: Notwithstanding in
sum good meaning it may be true. So a Judge, in knowledge of the Law: so a
Doctoure of Physique, in his profession: so a Pilote, in knowledge of the Sea,
and guidinge of a ship: so a Captain, in Martial affairs is above any
King: And it behooves a King, be he never so wise, or Mighty, in every of
these several faculties, to be guided by them. And thus is the King
inferioure, not only to a Bishop, as you say, but also to every Inferior
Priest.

So S. Chrysostom says of Christ's Apostles: Chrysostom. in Psalm. 44
Omnem Terrarum Orbem peruaserunt, and omnibus principibus fuerunt magis
proprie Principes, Regibus potentiores: The Apostles roaued over the whole
world, and were more Princelike in deed, then the Princes them selves, and
more puissante, and mighty, then the Kings.

So said the Emperor Valentinian unto the people of Millaine, Theodoretus,
Lib. 4. Cap. 5. (...).
Eum collocate in Pontificali Solio, cui nos quoque Moderatores Imperij, nostra
Capita submittamus: Place ye such a man in the Bishops Chair, unto whom
we our selves, that goueine the Empiere, may stoop our Head.

For the Prince is bound to the Obedience of Gods Word, no less, then if
he were a private Subject. And if he refuse to hear, and to reverence the
same, as the declaration of Gods Holy Will, he is accursed. But what is this,
M. Hardinge, to your purpose? Would you therefore that the King should
swear his Obedience unto the Bishop?

In this respect, by your own Learning, any Simple Priest may well be above
the Pope. So says your own Doctoure Panormitane, Papa tenetur Confiteri: and
in eo actu Sacerdos est Mayor illo: The Pope is bound to Confess him self:
And in that act of Confession, Extra. De Poeniten. and remiss. Omnis vtriusque
Abbas.
the Priest is above him. And again, Papa non potest cogere Sacerdotem, vt
reuelet Confessionem: quia in illo actu Sacerdos est Mayor, quam Papa: The Pope
cannot compel a Priest, to open that has benne said unto him in Confession.
For in that Act, the Priest is greater then the Pope. Yet, I trow, ye
would not therefore, the Pope should swear Obedience to a Priest.

This therefore, M. Hardinge, it is, that greeueth us, to see the poor Stool
of Humility, whereon S. Peter sat, blown up now into a Mount of Pride: and
the Pope to require Homage, and Fealty of Kings, and Emperors, as of his
Subjects. It greeueth us to see you, and others your fellows, in respect of
the Pope, so mutche, not only to abase, but also vilely to abuse the Majesty
of them, unto whom Christ, and his Apostles were always obediente. Remember,
what one of yours has written, and published to the world in this behalf.
Stanislaus Orichonius says thus, Stanislaus Orichonius in Chimera, Fol. 97.
Tantum Sacerdos praestat Regi, quantum homo praestat bestiae: Quantum Deus
praestat Sacerdoti, tantum Sacerdos praestat Regi. Qui Regem anteponit
Sacerdoti, is anteponit Creaturam Creatori: A Priest is so mutche above a
King, as a Man is above a Beast: As mutche as God is better then the Priest,
so mutche is the Priest better, then a King. He that sets the King before
a Priest, sets the Creature before the Creatoure.

It greeueth us, Pope above Kings and Emperors.
to see S. Gregory's words, by S. Gregory's Successors, so proudely broken.
For thus he wrote, welneare a thousand years sithence, unto the Emperor
Mauritius, against John the Bishop of Constantinople, claiminge then the same
Universal Authority, that is now usurped by the Pope: Gregor. Li. 4. Epist.
32.
Ille coercendes est, qui Sanctae Universally Ecclesiae iniuriam facit: qui
cord tumet: qui gaudere de Nomine Singularitatis appetit: qui Honori quoque
Imperij vestri se per priuatum vocabulum superponit: Your Majesty must
repress him, that do the this wrong unto the Holy Universal Church: that
swells in heart: that desires to enioie a Name of Singularity: that also,
by a private Title, ( calling him self the Universal Bishop) places him
self over and above the Honor of your Empiere.

Touching the knowledge of Gods word, and cases of Religion, certain it
is, the King is inferior to a Bishop. But if the Bishop be negligente, and
do not his office: or, if he be wilful, and do it not rightly: or, if he be
ignorante, and cannot do it: Then is the Bishop under the Prince, Subject to
his check, and by him may be pounished. So writes the Emperor Constantinus
unto the people of Nicomedia: Theodoretus, Lib. 1. Cap. 19.
Si quis Episcoporu^ in consulte tumultuatus sit, Ministri Dei, hoc est, mea
executione, illius audacia coercebitur: If any Bishop unadvisedly work
trouble, his boldness shall be repressed by the Order of Gods Minister, that
is to say, Roma. 13.
by my execution. Therefore S. Paul says, Let every soul be Subject to the
Higher Powers. Whereunto S. Chrysostom adds these words: Etiamsi Apostolus
sis, Chrysostom. ad Roman. Homil. 23.
etiamsi Euangelista, etiamsi Propheta, sieve quisquis tandem fueris. Neque enim
Pietatem subuertit ista subiectio: Although thou be an Apostle, although thou
be an Euangeliste, although thou be a Prophet, or what one so ever thou be
(yet be thou Subject to the Higher Powers). For Godliness is not hindered by
such subjection.

Your quarrel, ye say, is against Christ: For his person the Pope bears.
Have ye not readen, He that despises you, despises me? Tell us, I pray you,
say you, doothe the Pope call him self any Princes or Emperors Vicegerent,
and not rather the Vicare of Christ alone?

It forces not greatly, by what title the Pope list to claim. He cannot
lightly want Authority, while he may pen his own Commission. I trows, we
may say of him, as Cicero said sommetime of one in Rome, Asinius Senator
Voluntarius, Lectus ipse ase: Asinius is a very vvillinge Senator, him self
appointed and chosen by him self. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Verily, Antichriste shall sit in the Temple of God, even in the place of
Christ, and bear him self as Christ's Vicare.

How be it, Let the Pope do the duty of a Bishop: Let him Exhort: Let him
Preach: Let him dispense Gods Mysteries: Let him fulfill his Office: Let him
do the part of an Euangeliste: And we will love him, and reverence him,
although not, as Christ's Vicare General, yet at least, as a Bishop. Otherwise
we must say unto him, as S. Gregory said sommetime to Cyriacus the Bishop
of Constantinople, Gregor. Lib. 6. Epist. 28.
Omnes Magnos esse, and Honorabiles cupio, quorum tamen Honor Honori
Omnipotentis Dei non detrahat. Nam quisquis se contra Deum Honorari appetit,
mihi Honorabilis non est: I wish that al men should be great, and
honorable: so that their honor be not prejudicial to the honor of Almighty
God. For who so ever shall desire him self to be honored against God, shall
not be honorable unto me.

One high and worthy Reason we alleged out of your Pope Innocentius the
third: The Son is higher, and greater, then the Moon: Ergo, the Pope is
higher, De Mayor. and Obedien. Solita. Carrion. in Inno^en. 3.
and greater, then the Emperor. This Pope Innocentius is he, that said,
Either he would lose his Miter, or else he would pull the Emperor Philips
Emperial Crown from his Head.

Malice. ye say, Pope above Kings and Emperors.
blinded us: otherwise we might have seen other his more substantial, and
better Reasons. So were it needeful, M. Hardinge: for certainly this Reason is
very simple. But the best of his Reasons, ye can find, is this:

The Soul is above the Body,
Ergo, The Pope is above the Emperor.
And how like ye this Reason? say you. Uerily, as a Reason without sense, or
Reason: such as be many of your making. By the like Reason you may say,

The Cook is always about the Fire:
The Fire is the highest of al Elements:
Ergo, of al Sciences the Cooks occupation is the highest.
By the same Reason ye may prove, that the highest Emperor is Subjects, not
only to the Pope, but also to every simple Priest. Yea further, of the same
Reason there must needs follow a great inconvenience: That the Pope him
self, for as mutche as he Ministers Sacraments, Teaches, Exhorts, and
occupies him self in Spiritual affairs least of al others, is therefore the
lowest, and baseste of al his cleregie.

Now, M. Hardinge, I beseech you, consider the weight, and drifte of your
own Reason.

The Popes Charge is Spiritual, say you.

Ergo, the Emperor is bound to sv veare obedience to the Pope. By what
Reason may this Reason be proved? Uerily by the same good Reason ye may say,
Every Priests Charge is Spiritual:

Ergo, the king is bound to swear obedience to every Priest. Yet by such
proper Reasons the Pope has auanced him self above all the states, and Princes
of the World.

But your Holy Father Innocentius, lest he should seem to want Scriptures,
for proof hereof allegeth also the words of God, spoken unto the Prophet
Hieremie: Hierem. 1.
Behold I have set thee over Nations, and Kingedomes, to the intent, that
thou maiste pulle up, and scatter, and build, and plant. Ergo, says he, the
Emperor is Subject unto the Pope. These proufes, ye say, Our Defenders
could not find. Further, ye say, in your sober manner, When will you forsake
the Schole of Lieing? Truly if there be any such Schole, M. Hardinge, you
may claim of good right to be the Master. We are as far from lieinge, as
you are from saieing the Truth.

But what make these words of Hieremie for the Bishop of Rome? Will ye say,
that the Prophet Hieremie was the Pope? Or, that the King then was sworn to
be subject, and loial unto him? What King, or Prince did Hieremie subdue?
What People or Country ever did he overthrow? One of your own Doctors
says, Heruaeus de Potesta. Papa, ca. 13
Hieremias nullum Regem deposuit. Sed intelligitur positus supra Centes, and
Regna, quasi habens Authoritatem super ea in annuntiando, and praedicando Vera.
No^ de destructione Regum Mundi, sed de destructione Vitiorum, and plantatione
Fidei, and morum. 1. Cor. 3.
Vt illud Pauli, Dei aedificatio estis: Dei Agricultura estis: Hieremie deposed
no King. But we understand, that he was placed over Nations, and Kingedomes,
as having Authority over the same, in openinge, and preachinge of the Truth.
He speaks non of the ouerthrowinge of the Kingedomes of the World, but of the
ouerthrowinge of vices, and of the planting of Faith, and manners. In this
sense S. Paul says to the Corinthians, Ye are Gods buildinge: Ye are Gods
tillage.

The very Gloss it self says, Vt euellas Regnum Satanae: vt plants bona: vt
aedifices Ecclesiam: I have placed thee, to root up ( not the Kingedomes of
the world, nor the states of Commonweals, but) the Kingedome of Satan: to
plant good things: to build up the Church. His whole Commission was limited
with these words, Posui Verbum meum in Ore tuo: Hierem. 1.
I have put my Word in thy Mouth.

Such Authority had Elias over King Achab. And therefore he said unto him,
Pope above Kings and Emperors.
It is not I, that trouble Israel, but thou, and thy Fathers house. Such
Authority had John the Baptiste over King Herod: and therefore he said unto
him, It is not lawful for thee, to have thy Brothers Wife.

If it be true, 3. Reg. 18.
that ye would seem to say, that the Popes Superiority standet only in
things Spiritual, wherefore then doothe Pope Nicolas say, Christus Beato
Petro Terreni simul, Did. 22. Mediolanensis.
and Coelestis Imperij Iura commisit? Christ bath given to Blessed Peter, the
Right as well of the worldly, as also of the Heavenly Empiere. Wherefore then
did Pope Adrian thus write unto the Emperor Fredericus: Romae nostra Seeds
est: Auentinus in Adrian. 4. Anno. 1154.
Imperatoris est A quis in Arduenna, quae est Sylua Galliae. Imperator quod
habet, totum habet a nobis. Sicut Zacharias transtulit Imperium a Graecis ad
Teutonicos, ita nos possumus illud transfer ab Alema^nis ad Graecos. Ecce in
potestare nostra est, vt demus illud, cui volumus. propterea constituti sumus a
Deo super Gentes, and Regna, vt destruamus, and euellamus, and aedificemus, and
plantemus: My Seat is in the City of Rome: The Emperors Seat is at Acon in
Ardenne, which is a Foreste in France. What so ever the Emperor has, he
has it of us. As Pope Zacharias translated the Empiere from Graecia into
Germany, so may we again translate the same from y^ Germans to the
Greeks. Behold, it is in our power, to bestow the Empiere upon who we list.
Therefore are we appointed by God over Nations, and Kingdoms, to pulle down,
to root up, to build, and to plant again. This Authority, I trow,
reaches sommewhat further, then only to causes Spiritual. One of your own
Doctors says, Heruaeus de Potesta. Papae. ca. 12
Magis esset acceptum Deo, quod per Solum po^tificem Mundus in Omnibus
regeretur: It were more acceptable unto God, that the world in All Matters (
both Spiritual, and Temporal) were governed only by the Pope.

That Innocentius adds, of the Son and the Moon, ye say, is not a
Reason, but a Similitude. This thing may easily be granted. For in deed it
is a Similitude utterly void of either VVitte, or Reason. But who taught the
Pope, so childishly to play with Similitudes, thereby to auance him self, and
to abase the Empiere of the world? Who told him, that the Pope is the Son,
and the Emperor the Moon? Or, that the Emperor is so far inferioure to the
Pope, as y^ Moon is inferior to the Son? Isidorus, that lived six hundred
years before Pope Innocentius, In Glossa in Gene. Cap. 1. Heruaeus de Potesta
Papae. ca. 13.
says quite contrary, Per Solemn intelligitur Regnum, and per Lunam
intelligitur Sacerdotium: By the Son we understand the Kingdom: and by
the Moon we understand the Priesthood: Whereby he gives us to consider,
contrary to the Judgment of your good Father Pope Innocentius, that, as the
Moon is inferioure to the Son, so is the Pope inferioure to the Emperor.

M. Hardinge.
But when Constantine was Baptized, he gave place to Untruth, fond, and
peeuishe. For Syluester was dead long before Co^stantinus was Christened.
S. Syluester then Bishop of Rome, and to al other Successors of S. Peter. O
how that irketh your haries, that so great an Emperor, and the first that
openly professed Christianity, should by the same Holy Ghost, who called him
to the Faith of Christ, be made to Untruth too vain for a Child. Why
should M. Har. be so vain? There is not one true word in all this talc.
depart from the City, which ruled the world, and to yield his own
Palaice partly a Church to our Savior Christ, partly a dwellinge house for
the Bishops of Rome? Ask of Constantine, why he submitted his neck to S.
Syluester. We have cause to think, that Constantius the heretic, son of
Constantine, was not very glad of his Fathers dooinge. And yet God suffered him
not to return and dwell at Rome but to leave that City free to the Rulers of
the Church.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Constantine, ye say, gave over the City of Rome, and all the VVeaste part
of the Empiere to the Pope, and to his Successors for ever. And this thing
erye say, The Donation of Constantine.
yrketh our hearts full soar. Yea verily, M. Hardinge, it irketh us mutche in
your behalf, to see you, a man of wisdom, and Learning, to warrante such
folies without blusshinge. This whole Donation of Constantine, whereupon ye
build the Popes whole Kingdom, has not show sufficient to mock a child.
The effect, and sense thereof is this, that Constantinus the Emperor, the
third day after he was Christened, in the honor of S. Peter, willingly
leafte all the Weaste part of the Empiere, and departed to Byzantium, which is
now called Constantinople. to dwell in the East: and y^ he gave the whole
Emperial, and Civil Dominion, not only of the City of Rome, but also of
Italy, France, Spain, Arragone, Portugal, England, Germany, Scotland,
Irelande, Pole, Denmark, Sueden, and Hungary, to the Pope. This doubtelesse,
being true, had been a toily liberal, Heruaeus de Potesta. Papae, ca. 19.
and a Princely gift. And one of your friends says, Volunt aliqui, quod
ratione huius Doni, Summus Pontifex Imperator est: and quod potest instituere,
and destituere Reges, sicut Imperator: Sum say, that by mean of this gift,
the Pope is an Emperor, and may set up, and pulle down Kings, as an
Emperor.

But Pius Secundus, being him self afterward Bishop of Rome, says, Dicta
Palea, Constantinus, falsa est: The said Decree (named Constantinus,
containing Constantine the Emperors Donation, Pius in Dialog. Fol. 21.
or Chartar) is utterly false. So says Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence,
Valla, Volaterrane, Hieronymus Cathalanus, Otho Frisingensis, and others more.
Of this Fable we shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

Constantius the Heretic, son unto Constantinus, as you say, mutche
misliked his Fathers dooinge. Nai, M. Hardinge, if Constantius were alive, he
would rather find fault in your discretion, that report such Folies of his
Fathers dooinges. Where ye say, God suffered him not to return, and to dwell
in Rome, it palleth the deepthe of your Divinity, to search up the causes,
and secrets of Gods sufferance. Although Constantius, being encumbred with
dangerous wars, and great affairs, were forced to stay in other Countries,
and could not have leisure to return to Rome, yet he still continued the Lord
of Rome, as also did a great number of other Emperors, that followed after
him. Therefore Pope Bonifacius thus wrote unto the Emperor Honorius: Did.
97. Ecclesia.
Roma est Vrbs vestrae mansuetudinis: Rome is your Majesty's City. Likewise
Pope Agatho writes unto the Emperor Constantinus: In sexta Synodo Constan.
Act. 4. In eadem Synodo Action 1.
Haec est Vrbs Seruilis Maiestatis vestrae: This is your Majesty's bond
City: And Constantinus the Emperor him self says, Dono Archiepiscopo
Antiquae nostrae Romae: To Donus the Arche bishop of our City of Old Rome.

But what need more words? The case is so clear, ^ that no man of learning
can call it in question.

Briefly, touching this fond Fable of Constantines Donation, Cardinal
Cusanus says thus, Nicol. Cusanus de Donatione Constantini.
Donationem diligenter expendens, reperi in ipsamet Scriptura manifesta
argumenta Confictionis, and Falsitatis: Diligently weighinge this Donation of
Constantine, I have found in the very penninge thereof manifest arguments of
for ginge and falshedde. These, M. Hardinge, be the Records, and Presidentes
of most certain, and most ancient memory, that ye would have publisshed unto
the world. By such Monumentes your Pope claims the right, and possession of
the Empiere. And your friends marvel, that ye can defend such falshedde,
and forgerie, so well known, and so manifest, for very shame.

M. Hardinge.
The Being of the Popes Legates and Ambassadors in Princes Courts, is a thing
nolesse convenient, then it is meet for him, that has cure of many flocks of
Sheep, to set his servants, as watchmen in every part, where sutcheflockes do
feed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In what steed these Legates stand the Church of God, Legates. Pardo^nes.
it may appear by these few uttered thereof by Camotensis: Citatur ab
Agrippa de vanita. Scientiar. Nicol. Machiauel. in Historia.
Legati Papae ita debacchantur in Prouincijs, acsi, ad flagellandum Ecclesiam,
Satan egressus esset a facie Domini: The Popes Legates do so rage in all
Countries, as if Satan were gonne out before the face of god, to scourge the
Church. And Machiauel says, There have benne few wars, or Commotions
enflamed these many late years, but by the mean, and whisperinge of these
Legates. What other Doctrine they teach, or what other good they do, it were
hard to say. And therefore the Fathers in the Council of Aphrica refused
utterly, to have any such Legates sent amongst them: For thus they write
unto the Pope, Council. Aphrica. Cap. 105.
Vt aliqui, tanquam a tuae Sanctitatis latere, mittantur, nulla inuenimus
Patrum Synodo constitutu^: That any Legates should be sent unto us, as from
your holiness side, we find it not appointed by any Council of our Fathers.
Again they say, Executores Clericos Vestros quibusque Pontentibus nolite
mittere: ne fumosum se^culi typhu^ in Ecclesiam Christi videamur inducere: Send
not your Clerks (or Cardinals) to put matters in execution, to any Noble man,
or Mighty Prince: Lest we seem to bring the smoky pride of the world into
the Church of Christ.

M. Hardinge.
Untruth. For they depend of the deceitfulness of man: and not of the power
of God.
His indulgences and pardons depend upon the power of bindinge and loosinge,
which Christ gave to Peter and his successors. Matthew. 16.
Ye must demand of Christ, Untruth. For Christ never gave the Pope power
to deal Pardonnes.
why he gave that Power, and not be angry with his vicare for vsinge the same.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O M. Hardinge, what should you mean with all these Uanities? Are ye so fully
bente, to grant no kind of error, neither in your Purgatories, nor in your
Pardons, nor in your Stews? God give you Humility of heart: lest ye be an
unfit vessel to receive Gods Pardonne.

M. Hardinge.
Ye find fault with Leo the third for making an Emperor in the West. I
dare say it greueth you. Untruth, joined with open folly. For this was the
only way to strengthen the Saracenes.
For if there had benne none in the West, the Turk might have been our
Emperor er this, and to his Barbarous and wicked tyranny might have subdued
this part of the world, specially Germany, as he has subdued Greece, Asia,
Egypt, Syria, and all the East Church. Against which mischefe the Vicare of
Christ by his masters merciful warninge with the Princes of the West made
provision* and at the length planted the Empire in this order, we see it now
in.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This policy, practiced by the Pope, loosed the whole power of Christendom.
For as the Empiere before, being united, and joined in one, was strong, and
mighty, so being afterward divided into two, and the East part being
sundred for the Weaste, it became lame, and weak, and not hable to healpe it
self. By mean whereof a gate was opened, to receive the Turk into al these
Christian Dominions, which now he holds, without resistance: who otherwise,
the Empiere being one, and whole in it self, as it was before, could never
have grown to such Power. All this was wrought by the Practice, and Policy
of the Pope.

Notwithstanding, the Pope him self by this bargain lost nothing. Thereof
Marsilius Patauinus writes thus: Marsilius Pataninus.
Pipinus, Son unto Charles the French King, after he had conquered
Aristulphus the King of Lumbardie, took Rauenna, and all the five Cities of
Romandiola, together with the Emperors Lieutenantes Territory called
Exarchatus, and gave all the same to the Pope. Pope Steuin findinge him self
well contented with these benefits, and seeinge the weakness of the Greek
Emperor, procured, that the Empiere should be translated from the Greeks
unto the French, having utterly forgotten the benefits, The very true cause
of the ^^uision of the Empiere. Platyna in Leone. 3.
that he had received of the Emperor: to the intent, that the Greeks being
utterly oppressed, and the French little caringe for these things, he alone
might rule in Italy at his pleasure.

Touching Pope Leo the third, whose Providence, and Policy ye so mutche
commend, the true report of the Story is this: The said Leo being by
violence deprived of his Bishoprike in Rome, fled for aid to Charles the
French King, and by him was restoared. In consideration of which benefit,
he proclaimed Charles the Emperor of the VVeaste. Sithence which time, the
Empiere of Christendom has benne divided, and weakened: the Pope enriched:
and the Saracenes, and Turks above al measure increased.

M. Hardinge.
If the Pope Zacharias deposed Childerike (for so I find him more commonly
named) the King of France, only upon his own pleasure or displeasure, as ye
say, and placed Pipine for him, can ye tell that story, and not see what a
strength of authority is in that See, which is able with a word to place
and displace the mightiest King in Europe? With a word I say, For I am
sure ye can show us of no Army, that he sent to execute that his will. Is
that the power of a man, trow ye, to appointe Kingedomes? Can the Devil him
self at his pleasure set up and depose Kings? No surely. Untruth. For S.
Gregory says, Antichristus ipsas summas huius Saeculi potestates obtinebit.
And much less can any member of his do the same. Remember ye what Christ
said, when the Jews objected, that he did cast out Devils in the name of the
Prince of Devils? A nevve Sin against the Holy Ghost.
Beware ye Sin not against the Holy Ghost, who confess that the Pope has
pulled down and set up Kings. Which thing undoubtedly he could not do
profitably and peaceably, but by the great Power of God. And yet did that line
of Pipine and Charles the great, which the Pope did set up, Untruth, easy to
be seen. Read the Answer.
florishe above any other stock, that ye can name sense the inclination of the
Roman Empire. Which in that transposed state of great a Kingedome, makes
no obscure argument of Heavenly approbation and Divine providence.

Neither did the Pope Zacharias depose Childerike, because he fansied him not,
as ye slander, but only consented to loose his Subjects from bond of oath
made to him, at the general and most earnest request and suit of all the
Nobility, and Communaltie of the whole Realm of France, findinge him very
unprofitable, and unmeet for the Kingedome, as one, who being of no wit,
and therefore commonly named Stupidus, as much to say, a dolte, was
altogether besides like a Sardanapalus, given wholly to belly chere, and to
filthy love of Women. Therefore in your own words ye confess a A Divine
Power in the Pope.
Divine power in the Pope, as by whom Cod directs the wills of faithful
Princes on the Earth. The more such examples ye bring, the worse ye make
your cause. I would ^yer you to ease me of the labor of prouinge such a
notable fact.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Pope Zacharias deposed Childericus, as you call him, or, as sum other call
him, Chilpericus, the French King. Therefore ye say, we must needs
acknowledge a Divine Power in the Pope: saying him hable, by his word, to
place, and displace the mightiest King in Europe. For can the Devil, say you,
at his pleasure set up, and depose Kings?

Verily, John. 12. 14. 16.
M. Harding, Christ him self calls the Devil the Prince of this world: and
therefore woe may imagine, he may do somewhat in y^ world. And y^ Devil, if
ye wi^beleeue his word, when he had set Christ on high upon a Mount, and
showed him all the Kingedomes of the world, Depofinge of King
he said unto him, Al these things will I give thee, Matthae. 4.
if thou will fall down, and woorship me. This is that power, that S. John
says, Apocalyp. 17.
should be given to Antichriste: Reges terrae vires, and potestatem suam
tradent Bestiac: etc. vt consentiant, dentque Regnum suum Bestiae, donec
compleantur Verba Dei: The Kings of the Barthe shall give their strength, and
power unto the Beast, etc. that they may agree together, and give their
Kingedome unto the Beast, until the Words of God be fulfilled. In eodem Cap.
Again he says, Mulier ea, quam vidisti, est vrbs illa Magna, quae habet
Regnum super Reges terrae: The Woman, that thou saw, is that Great City,
that has a Kingedome over the Kings of the World. And again he says,
Apocalyp. 13.
Data est illi Potestas in omne^ Tribum, and Gentem: and adorabunt eam
(Bestiam) omnes incolae terrae, quorum nomina non sunt scripta in Libro Vitae
Agni: Power is given unto that Beast over every Tribe, and Language, and
Nation: and all the dwellers of the Earth shall woorship the same Beast, (which
is Antichriste) whose names be not written in the Lambs Book of Life.

S. Augustine says, Augustine. in Psalm. 9.
Quia Antichristus ad tantum culmen inanis gloriae venturus creditur, tanta ei
licebit facere, and in omnes homines, and in Sanctos Dei, vt nonnulli infirmi
arbitrentur, Deum res humanas negligere: For that we believe, that Antichriste
shall comme unto such a higth of vain Glory, it shall be lawful for him to do
such things, both toward al men ( Princes, and others) and also
toward the Saints of God, that many weak men shall think, God has
foresaken the care of the world.

Again he says, August. in eundem. Psalm.
Ita traditur de Antichristo, quod omnes Reges superaturus sit, and solus
Regnum obtenturus: Thus it is written of Antichriste, that he shall conquer al
Kings, and obtain the Kingedome him self alone.

So says S. Gregory, Gregor. in Job. Ca. 41. Lib. 33. Ca. 22.
Antichristus veniens ipsas etiam summas huius Saeculi Potestates obtinebit:
Antichriste, when he shall comme, shall conquer the highest Estates, and Powers
of this world.

And all this shall comme to pass, as Chrysostom says, by the Dissolution of
the Empiere, whereof we have spoken before. These be his words, Donec Imprij
illius timor fuerit, Chrysostom. In. 2. Thessaloni. 2. Homil. 4.
nemo Antichristo statim subdetur. Quando vero istud Imperium destructum
fuerit, vacantem Imperij Principatum inuadet, and tentabit ad se rapere and
hominum, and Dei Imperium: As long as the Empiere shall be had in awe, noman
shall streightwaie submit him self to Antichriste: But after that the Empiere
shall be dissolved, Antichriste shall invade the state of the Empiere standinge
void: and shall labor to pulle unto him self the Empiere both of Man, and
God.

This, Clemen. Lib. 2. De Appellationib. Pastoralis. Distin. 22. Omnes
I trow, it is, that the Pope proclaims him self the Heir Apparente of al
Kingedomes: This it is, that Pope Nicolas says, Christus Beato Petro,
Aeternae vitae Clauigero, Terreni simul, and Coelestis imperij iura commisit:
Christ has committed unto Blessed Peter, the Keiebearer of Everlasting life,
the right both of the worldly, and also of the Heavenly Empiere: This is it,
that sum are so bold to say, In Sexto. Li. 3. Ti. 16. De Statu Regularium.
Antonius de Rosellis. Auentinus in Adriano. 4.
Papa totius Mundi obtinet Principatum: The Pope has the Princehoode of all the
whole World: And that sum others have said, Papa est Rex Regum, and Dominus
Dominantium: The Pope is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: And that Pope
Adrian says of him self, as it is alleged before, Imperator, quod habet,
totum habet a nobis. Ecce in potestate nostra est, vt demus Imperium, cui
volumus: What so ever the Emperor has, he has it of us. It is in our power
to bestow the Empiere upon whom we list. This, M. Hardinge, is that Divine
Power, that, as you say, is given to the Pope. But as S. John, S. Augustine,
S. Chrysostom, and S. Gregory say, the self same Divine Power is given
also to Antichriste. And therefore it is well noted in your own Gloss, Papa
stupor Mundi: Clemen. in Pro^mi. In Glossa.
The Pope is the vvoondermente of the World: that is to say, the Pope makes
all the world Fools.

But if it seem so great a matter, for a Pope to depose a King, I doubt not,
but ye may well remember, that Emperors sommetimes have deposed Popes. The
Emperor Constantius (an Arian, Platyna in Liberio.
I grant, but yet an Emperor) deposed Pope Liberius: and afterward,
restoringe Liberius, deposed Pope Foelix. The Emperor Otho the first deposed
Pope John. 13. The Emperor Justinian deposed two Popes in order: 2. Tomo.
Conciliorum, In vita Syluerij, and Vigilij.
first Pope Syluerius, and afterward Pope Vigilius. And all this did they
without leuieinge of army, without raisinge of power, without disquiet, or
trouble of the people. And a Doctoure of your own, seeminge fully to determine
the matter by a Book case, says thus, Imperator, requisitus a Cardinalibus,
Heruaeus De potest. Papae. ca. 13.
debet procedere contra Papam: The Emperor, being required by the
Cardinals, is bound to proceed (to deprivation) against the Pope. An other
says thus, Si quando Imperialis Legatus mitteretur a Principe, vt Romanus
Pontifex proficisceretur Constantinopolim ad Imperatorem, Appendix Eutropij, in
Syluerio.
omni neglecta occasion, ibat, etiamsi pro certo sciret, se iturum in exilium:
If at any time the Emperors Embassadoure had benne sent from his Prince, to
will the Pope to comme to Constantinople to the Emperor, al occasions set
aparte, he went straight way, notwithstanding he certainly knew, he
should be bannished. Vrspergensis says, Henricus Rex Italiam ingressus,
Vrspergen. Anno. 1045.
tres Papas indigne constitutos synodaliter deposuit: Henry the Emperor,
coming into Italy, deposed three Popes unlawfully made, by order of Synod.

Now, M. Hardinge, if you, with your Rhetorical furniture, may cry out, O
what a Divine Power had the Pope, that thus could depose a King: why may
not we likewise say, O what a Divine Power had the Emperor, that thus could
depose so many Popes?

But, that ye may the better see this woonderful Divinity, and Heavenly
power, wherewith ye would so feign enfeaffe the Pope, a witness of your own
says thus, Heruaeus De Potest. Papae, Ca. 13.
Quod dicitur, Papam deposuisse Regem Francoru^, and loco eius instituisse
Pipinum, Glosa ordinaria exponit, Deposuit, id est, deponentibus consensit. Non
enim legitur, quod Papa Zacharias Regem Franciae deposuerit: Where as it is
said, that the Pope deposed the French King, and placed Pipinus in his
room, The Ordinary Gloss expounds it thus: He deposed him, that is to say,
He consented to them, that did depose him. For we read not, that Pope
Zachary in deed ever deposed the French King.

The truth of the Story is this, For as mutche as Chilpericus the King
seemed void of Princely gravity, and had given him self over to pleasure,
and wantonness, and Pipinus his Lord Marshal, a man full of Wisdom, and
actiuttie, had the Gouernmente, and burden of all the Realm, the Nobles of
France having agreed amongst them selves, to depose the one, and to set up
the other, sent unto Pope Zachary, as unto a wise man, to have his answer
to this question, Whether were meeter to be King, Paulus Aemylius, Lib. 2.
Gaguinus.
He that carried only the name, and did nothing: Or he, that bare the burden
of the whole. The Pope was soon persuaded, to give sentence with Pipinus the
Lord Marshal, against the King. Whereupon the King was shorn into an
Abbie, and made a Moncke: Pipinus auanced unto the state, gave the Pope the
Exarchate, or Princehoode of Rauenna, in part of recompense of his good will.

Whether the king having niene years ruled his Realm, were afterward
deprived by right, or by wrong, I will not reason. Fasciculus Temporum says,
The kingedome was removed from the right Heirs.

The Line of King Pipine endured, and flourished a long while: And that, ye
say, was no obscure argument of Heavenly Approbation, and Divine Providence.
By such Approbation, and Providence, the Turk may claim. For he has both
longer continued, and mutche more floorished, and increased his estate, then
ever did the house of Pipine. Plutarch. in Catone Vticen.
But Cato was woonte to say, Multum est caliginis in rebus Diuinis: There is
great darkness in Gods matters.

Yet lest any man of ignorance happen herein to be deceived, this was the very
true descente, and floorishinge Fortune of King Pipines race:

The First thereof was Charles the Great: Benuenutus Imolensis in Augustali.
In his time, says Benuenutus Imolensis, Laceratum est Imperium: The state of
the Empiere was torn in sunder.

The Second was Ludouicus Pius: Against him his own Son Lotharius arose,
Paulus Aemylius, Lib. 3.
and caused him to be shorn as a Moncke, and to be thruste into an Abb^e, and
his own Mother the Empress to be made a Nonne.

The Thirds was Lotharius: He oppressed his own Brethren by violence: and
afterward was deposed, and made a Monk.

The Fourth was Ludouicus. 2: He was unfortunate in all his dooinges: and was
shamefully conquered by his Brother.

The Fifthe was Ludouicus 3: Paul. Aemylius in Chronice.
Whom, for his doughty deeds, they commonly call Ludouicus Nihili: which is
as mutche to say, as Jews Nobody.

The Sixth was Carolus 2. named Caluus: as Benuenutus says, Vir lepore
timidior: A man more fearful, and more cowardely, then a hare. He was shortly
slain with poison.

The Seuenthe was Carolus 3: as Benuenutus says, Vir deficiens and animo, and
Corpore: A man wantinge both strength of Body, and wisdom of Mind: that is
to say, both a Cowarde, and a Fool.

The Eighth was Arnulphus: Benuenutus Imolen. in Augustali.
He was eaten up with Life.

The Nienthe was Ludouicus 3. by the report of Benuenutus, a man of no better
Fortune then his Father. In him that house had an end. This is that Noble
Pipines race, Nihilo foelicior Patre. In eo defecit Imperium in Gente Carolorum.
M. Hardinge, that could not so stand, and floorishe, as you say, without
special Heavenly Approbation, and Divine Providence.

M. Hardinge.
Concerning that ye say of King Philip surnamed Le Bell, if we may believe
Paulus AEmylius the best writer of the French Chronicles, the cause was such
between Pope Bonifacius, and that King, that if he did not only excommunicate
him, but also offered gift of his Kingedome to Albert the Emperor, as Platina
your Author herein writes: he may seem therein to have done Not altogether
so evil. A proper qualification.
not altogether so evil, as ye pretend. For, as both AEmilius and Platine
do witness, the cause of their fallinge out was, that whereas the Pope being
first sued unto by Cassanus a Christian Prince, and a great Conqueror in the
East, to join with him for the recovery of the Holy land, sent the Bishop
of Apamea to the French King for his necessary aid in that so common a
quarrel of al Christendom: he being offended, either that the suit was not
first made to him, either for that the said Bishop had done his Ambassade
with she we of more Authority, then the King thought it became him. or upon
some other private grudge, did not only utterly refuse to send any healpe
toward the voyage, but also contemptuously, beside common order, and cruelly,
committed the Popes Legate to Prison, and there kept him, until such time,
as through the Popes interdict, the King was compelled to set him at liberty.
Now of geuinge away his Kingedome, this chief French Historiographer makes
no mention. And if the Pope so did, why may he not seem to have done it A
ioily way, to fraie a King.
rather to fear him, and to reclaim his mind from disobedience? Verily
Platina writing it, declares, how before the Pope proceeded to that
extremity, the French King did what in him lay, By this Divinity, if any
Kingedome refuse to be subject, and thral to the Sea of Rome, the Pope may
give the same away at his pleasure.
to withdraw the people of France from the obedience of the Church and See
Apostolic.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, ye stammer in your tale, and know not well, what to say.
If the Pope gave away the Kingedome of France from the Prince, he did it, ye
say, to the intent to fear him. A pretty divise, Philippus. Bonifacius. 8.
to fraie a King, to pulle the Crown Emperial from his head.

First, this Pope Bonifacius is he, of whom it was said, Intrauit, vt Vulpes:
Regnauit, vt Lupus: Mortuus est, vt Canis: He entered into the Popedom as a
Fox: He reigned as a Woulfe: he died ( in prison) as a Dog. In Solemn
Procession he went attired with the Crown Emperial, Paralip. Vrspergen.
and Robe of Majesty, as an Emperor, and commanded the Naked svverde to be
borne before him. In the Story of his Life joined with his own Book, In vita
Bonifacij 8. In Sexto: Idem in Platyna.
named, Sextus Bonifacij. 8. it is written thus: Moritur hoc modo Bonifacius,
qui Imperatoribus, Regibus, Principibus, Nationibus, Populis terrorem potius,
quam Religionem inijcere conabatur: Thus died Pope Bonifacius, a man, that
sought more to strike terroure into Emperors, Kings, Princes, People, and
Nations, then true Religion.

This Bonifacius, Sabel. Aenead. 9. Lib. 7.
says Sabellicus, sent to the French King for money, as he pretended,
toward the recovery of Jerusalem. The Bishop of Apamea, being his Legate
in that behalf, uttered certain great words in the presence of the King,
and threatened him, unless he would grant it.

The King, not quietly bearinge such presumptuous boldness, commanded the
Apostolic Legate unto ward. This injury so inflamed the Popes choler, that
immediately he sent the Archbishop of Narbon to the King, to require him to
set his Legate at liberty: otherwise to tell him, that for his wickedness, the
right of his Kingedome was fallen to the Church of Rome. Thus Sabellicus, in
favor of the Pope, thought it good somewhat to shadow the matter.

But others thereof have written thus: Martinus Polonus.
Bonifacius 8. mandat Regi, se esse Dominum in Spiritualibus, and temporalibus
in vniuerso Mundo: Vtque Rex recognoscat Regnum Franciae a se. Contrarium enim
sentire, and tenere, Haereticum esse: Bonifacius 8. sent unto the French
King, and told him, that he was Lord both in Spiritual, and also in
Temporal matters throughout the world: and therefore, yt the King should
hold his Kingedome at his hand. For otherwise to think, and hold, he said,
it was Heresy: This is it, that in the name of the Pope is noted in your
Gloss: Did. 81. Si qui. In Glossa.
Quicunque praeceptis nostris non obedierit, peccatum Idololatriae, and
Paganitatis incurrit: Who so ever obeieth not our commandments, falls into
the Sin of Idolatry, Abbas Vrspergen.
and Infidelity. Hereof Vrspergensis writes thus, Habes, Roma, quod sitisti:
decanta Canticum: quia per malitiam, non per Religionem orbem vicisti: O Rome,
thou haste now, that thou haste so long thirsted after. Now singe menly. For
by thy malice, not by Religion, thou haste conquered the world.

The King, being moved herewith, commanded that none of his Cleregie should
comme to the Popes Council: Paulus Aemyl. Platyna. Sabellicus. Nauclerus.
He openly burnte the Popes writes: He commanded the Popes Legate to depart
out of his Realm: He forebade that any money should be made thence to the
Pope: He gave out Proclamations, that none of his Subjects should go to
Rome: And in the Synod at Parise he charged the Pope with Pride, Ambition,
Murder, Simonie, and Heresy.

Thus mutche of the dealinge of the Crown of France unto a stranger: that is
to say, of the Faith, and Reverence, that the Pope bears to Kings, and
Princes. Here followed sommewhat of the spoilinge of the Duke of Sauoie, and of
the alteringe of the state of Florence: which things I thought it best to
pass over, as not worthy of any Answer.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 4.
We are accloied with Examples in this behalf, and it should be very tedious,
to recke^ up all the notorious practices of the Bishops of Rome. But of which
side were they, I beseech you, that poisoned Henry the Emperor, Poison in
the Sacrament.
even in the receiuinge of the Sacrament? Which poisoned Victor the Pope,
even in the receiuinge of the Chalice? Which poisoned our King John, King of
England, in a Drinkinge Cup? Who so ever at least they were, and of what
sect so ever, I am sure, they were neither Lutherans, nor Zvvinglians.

M. Hardinge.
The Finds of Hell were not yet let loose, that begat Lutherans, Zwinglians,
and Caluinistes. And hereof we understand the youth of your Church, which
having divided it self from the old and Catholic Church, is no other but
the malignante Church, and Synagoge of Satan.

To answer your demaundes. Who so ever they were, that poisoned these great
personages, (if they were poisoned at all) good men were they not, neither the
doers, nor the counsailours. Henry of Luxenburg it was, who was poisoned by
report. Whom your Latin Book printed among the Huguenots calls Henry
the seventh, M. Doctor Haddon in his answer to Osorius, accompteth him the
fourth, in both your English translations (that I have seen) he is called
only Henry. As he laid siege to the City of Florence, and had now brought
the Citizens to despair of their safety: when manly courage might not serve,
they betook them to cowardly malice. First they poisoned (as it is said) the
mind of a friar Dominican with Gold, that afterward he should aduentere to
poison the Emperors body with Venime. Paulus Aemilius says, that he died of a
sickness, which he fell into at Bonconue^to, Lib. 8. In scholij^ in Platina^.
as he iournied from Pisa thither. Onuphrius, writing of his Death, says that
he died at Bonconuento a town in the territory of Siena, and makes no mention
of his Poisoning. Cornelius Cornepolita writing this story, seems to give
little credit unto it. For he adds an hear say, Vt aiunt, In Chronographia.
as they say, as though it were a matter avouched by no certainetie, but by
Hearesaie. Nauclerus reports, that the order of those religius men is said
to have a testimonial in writing, witnessinge the foresaid Friere to have
benne Innocent, and that the whole was but a fained tale.

Victor the third Pope is mentioned by Martinus Polonus, to have benne
poisoned by the malicious procurement of the Emperor Henry the third,
because he stood in defense of Gregory the seventh, whom the Emperor so much
hated and persecuted. Vincentius holds contrary opinion, that he died of a
dysentery* as Platina recites.

Touching King John of England, they that write that he was poisoned in a
drinkinge cup by Monks, them selves make no better then a fable of it: and
who so ever write it, refer them selves to hearesaie, and to the popular
fame. The Author of your Acts and Monumentes reports, that many opinions are
among the Chronicle writers of his Death. As ye proceed in your malicious
railinge against the Pope, ye spitte out your poison, demau^dinge certain
question, short, in Words* but full stuffed with false and cankered
slanders.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Poisoninge of that Noble Emperor Henry of Lucenburg, in the Sacrament,
whereby it appears, how far forth the States of the world ought to
trust you, ye would have us to pass lightly over, as a Fable. Of your
Onuphrius, and Cornelius, and other like Parasites, we make no reckeninge. The
truth of the story is reported by many. Paralipom. Vrsperg. Ann. 1313. Bapt.
Egnatius. Auentinus. Carrion. Supplementum Chron.
Vrspergensis says, Quidam Religiosus porrexit Imperatori intoxicatam
Eucharistiam etc. A certain Religious man ministered unto the Emperor the
Sacrament poisoned. The Emperor having received it, and returninge again
unto his place, thought that a piece of cold Ise was paste alonge through his
body.

Baptista Egnatius says, it was wrought by the policy of Robertus King of
Sicilia, moved thereto, as Auentinus says, by Pope Clemente. 5. The same ye
shall find recorded in Carrion, Textor in Officina: Veneno extincti.
in Supplemento Chronicorum, in Rauisius Textor, and sundry others.

The like record there is found of poisoninge of Victor. 3. in the Chalice.
For the more credit whereof it may please you to read Martinus Polonus the
Popes Penitentiarie, Volaterranus, Matthaeus Palmerius, the Supply of
Chronicles, Fasciculus Temporum, Textor, and others.

Touching the death of King John, whether he were poisoned by a Monk, or
no, I will not strive: referringe me self therein to the credit of our
Chronicles: the common report whereof, together with the general opinion of
the people, is this, that he was destroyed with poison. But what so ever were
the cause of his death, Matthias Parisien. An. 1211.
Matthias Parisiensis says thus, Papa Innocentius sententionaliter definiuit
etc. Pope Innocentius determined by sentence, that King John should be deposed
from his estate. And he enioined the execution thereof to the French King,
for Remission of his Sins, promisinge him also faithfully, that, if he so
did, he, and his Successors should enioie the Kingedome of England for ever.
So mutche is England bound to reverence, and obeie the Pope.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 2.
What is he at this day, which allows the mightiest Kings and Monarchs of
the world to kiss his blessed Feet?

M. Hardinge.
It is he (say we) that humbly for his own person refuses such honor,
that calls, and thinks him self, Seruum Seruorum Dei, the servant of the
servants of God. But when he sees the great powers and Princes of the world
humble them selves to Christ, Lord of all Lords, and King of all Kings, in
the person of him, whose Vicare on Earth he is, and chief deputy in those
things, that be to God ward: not unmindful what he is of him self, for the
rooms sake that he bears, and for his honor whose vicegerent he is, the
rather also for A proper Schole of Humility.
example of Humility and Obedience, so to be taken and learned of others of
inferior degree: he suffers that honor to be done, which is more then a
mere man can require. Neither is this the pride of Popes at these days only,
as ye object, but the example of such humility in Princes we can prove to be
ancient.

The great King Charlemaigne, who afterward was create Emperor, could not
be withholden by the Pope Adrian the first, Platina in vita Adriani.
but at the first meetinge he would kiss his feet. Many other Emperors and
Kings have of old time done likewise. And lest the Soueraintie of such
Honor exhibited unto him should in his own conceit lift him higher then
for the degree of human condition, Phy forshame. cannot the pope learn
Humility, but by a draughte?
to that purpose serves the stool of natural easement at his creation,
whereof your surmise is Untruth. For it is not sur mised by us, but recorded
by your own vvriters. Sabellicus says, Vt sedentis genitalia ab vltimo
Diacono attrectentur.
very vile, to temper the highness of that vocation with the base
consideration of human infirmities and necessities.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What thing is there, either so vile, or so horrible, but by such proper
excuses may soon be smoothed? Chrysostom says, Haec, etsi minima esse
videantur, tamen magnorum sunt causae malorum. Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil.
74.
Nam and Civitates, and Ecclesias saepe numero euerterunt. Propterea nec a
lachrymis abstinere possum, cum primos istos consessus and salutationes audiam,
ac in mentem veniat, quot, quanta hinc mala in Ecclesia Die orta sint: These
things, notwithstanding they seem small, yet are they the causes of great
evils. For oftentimes have they overthrown both Cities, and Churches.
Therefore I cannot abstain from weepinge, when I hear of these Superiorities,
and Salutations: and consider, how many, and how great evils have grown
thereof in the Church of God. Hieronym. in Epist ad Galathas Cap. 4.
S. Hierome, mutche mislikinge the state of his time, says thus, Episcopi,
velut in aliqua sublimi specula constituti, vix dignantur videre mortales, and
alloqui conserous suos: The Bishops, as if they were placed in sum high
Castle, scarce^y vouchesaue to look upon poor mortal men, and to speak
unto their fellow servants.

Touching the Bishop of Rome, Kiss the Popes foot.
it is not for naught, that S. Gregory says, Rex Superbiae in foribus est:
The King of Pride is even at hand. In the Popes own Book of the Ceremonies
of Rome, Gregor. Lib 4. Epist. 38.
it is written thus, Electus Imperator cum suis omnibus, seruato ordine, per
gradus ascendit suggestum. Et vt primum videt Pontificem, detecto capite,
Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Sectio. 5. Ca. 3. Deuote osculatur.
illum, genu terram contingens, veneratur: and iterum, cum appropinquat ad
gradus Sedis, genuflectit: demum, vbi ad Pontificis pedes peruenit, illos in
reuerentiam Saluatoris Deuote osculatur: The Emperor Elect goeinge in arraie
with all his train, passes up the stairs into the Scaffolde. And as soon, as
he seethe the Pope, he woorshippeth him with bare head, touching the ground
with his knee: Again, when he comes to the foot of the Popes throne, he
kneeleth down. Last of al, when he comes unto the Popes Feet, he kisseth
them deuoutely in the reverence of our saueour. This is ordered, as a special
Ceremony, and appointed unto the Emperor, as part of his duty.

Likewise it is written of the Empress, as concerning her duty: Imperatrix
Coronata, Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Sectio. 5. Ca. 6. Ceremoniarium. Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
mox osculatur Pedem Pontificis: The Empress being Crowned immediately
kisseth the Popes foot.

Again of the Pope him self it is written thus: Papa nemini omnino mortalium
reuerentiam facit, assurgendo manifest, aut Caput inclinando, seu detegendo:
The Pope him self geeueth no manner of reverence to any man alive, either
openly by standinge up, or by bowinge down, or by vncoueringe his Head.

But the Pope, say you, humbly, for his own person, refuses such
honor, and hereby teaches Kings, and Emperors, and al their Subjects to
be humble. A strange case, to teach Humility in the Schole of Pride. Such
Humility taught Julius Caesar, Diocletian, and Maximinus. Julius Caesar
raughte out his foot for Pompeius Poenus to kiss, that folks might see his
Golden Slipper set with stoanes. Seneca. Pomponius Laetus in Diocletiano.
Pomponius Laetus says, Diocletianus edicto sanxit etc. Diocletian commanded
by Proclamation, that al men should fall down, and kiss his Feet:
whereunto also be added a certain reverence, adourninge his shoes with Gold,
Alexander ab Alexandro. 2. Thessalon. 2.
and Diamondes. Maximinus also afterward did the like.

Such Humility shall Antichriste teach, auancinge him self above all that is
woorshipped, or called God.

Such Humility y^ Devil took upon him to teach, when he said to Christ,
I will give thee al these things, Matthae. 4.
if thou will fall down, and woorship me.

Thus may the Pope call him self Lord of Lords: King of Kings: and set
his foot on Emperors necks: and yet nevertheless, if he can frame a new
title, and say, He is Seruus Seruorum Dei, The Seruante of Gods Servants,
it is no Pride: it is but Humility.

Antoninus says, Antoninus in Summa, Par. 3. ti. 22. Ca. 5.. 4.
Non minor honor debetur Papae, quam Angelis. Vnde Papa recipit a Fidelibus
Adorationes, Prostrationes, and Oscula pedum: quod non permisit Angelus a
Iohanne Euangelista sibi fieri: There is no less honor dew unto the Pope,
then unto the Angels of God. Therefore the Pope suffers the Faitheful to
VVoorship him, to fall down before him, and to kiss his Feet: which things
the Angel of God would not suffer S. John the Euangeliste to do unto him.

This, M. Hardinge, is no maliceous Railinge, as ye call it, nor Spite, nor
Poison, nor Untruth stuffed with false, and cankered sclaunders. By the
report of your own Doctors, and by your own Confession, it is the Truth.

The Porphyrie Stool of easemente serves, ye say, to put the Pope in mind
of his Humanity, that is to say, that he may remember him self, in the
mids of al his glory, to be a man. No, no, M. Hardinge, your own Authors,
and stories can tell you, that stool serves, to put the Pope in remembrance of
his Virilitie: that the world may know, he is no woman.

But let your imagination stand for true. Yet may we think, your Popes are
so forgeatful, or so dulheaded, or so blockishe, that they have need to be
taught by so vile examples, to know them selves? Certainly this is a Mystical
kind of Stool of Easemente. We cannot lightly lack Mysteries at his hands,
if so homely a place be so full of Mysteries. King Alexander the Great
understood him self to be a Man Mortal, Plutarch. in Alexandr^.
for that he was sommetimes of natural necessity forced to sleep. But
Christ's Vicare: Peter's Successoure: The Doctoure of al Doctoures: The Father
of al Fathers: The Master, and Teacher of all the world, were it not for a
stool of casemente, would quite forgeate his own Humanity, and could never
remember him self to be a Man.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 3.
What is he, that commands the Emperor to go by him at his horse bridle,
and the French King to hold his stirope?

M. Hardinge.
What he is. Untruths two togeather^ Read the Answer.
we know not, * nor you neither, Sir Defender. This we know, that in these
words most impudently you belie the Pope. For never was there Pope that
commanded either French King, or Emperor to do the service you speak of.
Part of that I have readen perteininge hereunto, I will here recite.

The woorthiest and greatest Prince that ever was in Earth, Constantine the
Great, to witness openly the reverence which he bare in his heart to Christ
our Savior, and to S. Peter, whose Successoure the Pope is, as likewise
Christ's Vicar in Earth, disdained not to honor S Syluester Pope in his time,
with doing All this is a great untruth, and a shameless Fable.
the office of a footeman to him, and with leadinge his Horse by the Bridle.
Wherein he seems, as first of all Emperors he professed the Faith of
Christ openly, so first of all Princes to have given to the posterity an
example of Humility. That no man doubt of it, this much I find recorded by
an old Father of the Greek Church, Matthaeus Hierom^nac hus, as uttered by
Constantine him self: (...). This is Greek even for a Pope.
(...). Which ^n English is this much. Submittinge our self to the office
of a foot man, and holdinge his Horse by the Bridle, we lead him forth out
of his sacred Palais, in the woorship and reverence of S. Peter.

That since both Emperoures, and French Kings of Humility and devotion,
and to witness their humble obedience to Christ in his Vicar, have done the
like service, yea though the Pope showed him self never so unwilling thereto:
we find it reported in sundry good records. Untruth most manifest. For it
is thus Ordered in the Popes own Pontifical, and in his own Book of
Ceremonies.
But that he ever commanded any such service to be done unto him, ye can
never she we it by any indifferente and credible witness. Paulus Aemylius an
Italian of Verona, in the second Book of his Chronicles, which both
diligently and eloquently he wrote of France, describes how honorably Pipine
that worthy King of France received Steven the Pope, that succeeded
Zacharias, when he came into his Realm. He both killed his feet, and went
by him at his Horse bridell.

The like honor of holdinge the Stirope would Charles the fifthe the late
great Emperor have down at B^non^a to Pope Clement the seventh, had not the
Pope with mutche adoo put him from it.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This thing Sir Defender knows: notwithstanding you, M. Hardinge, dissemble
it cunningely, and will not be known, that ye know it. Neither does Sir
Defender, as you say, by these words impudently belie the Pope. For trial
hereof he refers you to the Popes own Book of Holy Ceremonies: wherein in
it is particularely appointed, The Popes Bridle.
and laid out in order, to avoid confusion, what each estate ought, The Popes
Stirope.
and is bound to do.

Thus therefore it is appointed, Cum Papa per scalam ascendit etc. When the
Pope takes his stairs to mount on Horseback, Ceremoniarium. Lib. 1. Cap. 8.
the greattest Prince, that is present, whether he be King, or Emperor,
holds his Stirope: and afterward leads his Horse a little way forewarde by
the Bridle. But if there were two Kings in presence, the more Honorable of
them should hold the Bridle of the Rightside: and the other of the least. If
there happen no King to be present, then let the woorthiest persons lead
his Horse. Etiamsi Imperator, aut quiuts maximus Princeps adesset, Sellam ipsam
cum Pontifice in humeris aliquantulum portare debet: Ceremoniar. Li. 1 sectio.
5. Ca. 4. Dum Imperator haec vtilitatis Officia vult exhebere etc. Tandem cum
aliquibus bonis verbis recipie^do, permittit etc. Ceremoniarium. Lib. 1. Cap. 8.
But if the Pope would not ride, but he borne on men's shoulders in a Chair,
then must four of the woorthiest Princes, yea the Emperor him self, or any
other mighty Monarche, if he be present, bear the Chair, Pope and al, a
little way forewarde upon their shoulders. Again, Imperator, traditis Pomo,
and Sceptro etc. The Emperor deliueringe over his Goulden Apple, and his
Scepter to one of his men, comes unto the Popes Horse, and in honor of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whole person in Earth the Pope hears, he holds
the Stirope, until the^ Pope be mounted: and afterward he takes the Bridle,
and leads forth his Horse. While the Emperor doothe these profitable
offices, the Pope ought modestly a little to refuse the same: and yet
afterward, with certain good, and gentle words, taking that honor as
done to Christ, and not unto him self, he holds him self contented.

Further it is appointed thus, Caudam pluuialis portabit Nobilior Laicus, qui
erit in Curia, etiamsi esset Imperator, aut Rex: The most Noble Lay man, that
shall be in the Court, shall bear up the train of the Popes Cope, yea though
it be an Emperor, or a King. Again, Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Sectio. 3.
Let the most Noble Laic man, whether he be King, or Emperor, bring water
to wasshe the Popes hands. And while the Pope wassheth, let all the Bishops,
and Lay men kneel down.

Again, Pontifice sedente etc. Ceremoniar. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Etiamsi Rex aut
Imperator sit.
While the Pope is yet sittinge at the Table, the Noblest man within the
Court, be he Emperor, be he King, shall be brought to the Popes Credence, to
give him Water.

Again, Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Sectio. 3.
Primum ferculum portabit Nobilior Princeps, sieve Imperator sit, sieve Rex: The
first disshe the Noblest Prince shall carry, whether he be Emperor, or
King. Again, Ceremonia. Li. 1. Sectio. 13. ca. 2.
Rex in collatione portabit primum potum: When the Pope is at Breakefaste, the
King shall bear his first Cup. And again, Pocula portentur etc. Let the
Popes Cups be borne by the Noble men, or Orators being present: and let
the Clerk of the Ceremonies begin with the woorthiest estate: yea though he
be King, or Emperor.

Now, I trust, M. Hardinge, of your courteste, ye will confess, that Sir
Defender, in these words, has not so impudently belied the Pope. The Popes
own Book of Ordinances, and Ceremonies, that directs al orders, says thus:

The Emperor shall hold the Popes Stirope:
Let the Emperor lead the Popes Horse:
The Emperor must bear the Popes Chair on his shoulder:
The Emperor shall bear up the Popes train:
Let the Emperor bring the Basin and Evver to the Pope:
The Emperor shall give the Pope water:
The Emperor shall carry the Popes First disshe:
The Emperor shall carry the Popes first Cup.
For excuse hereof, perhaps ye will say, These were the Abuses of Old times:
But now al such disorders are well reformed. Therefore it may please you to
remember, that the self same Ceremonies, touching Kings and Emperors
duties, have benne lately renewed, and confirmed, and published abroad into
the world, word by word as they were before, without any manner
alteration, even in the Popes own Pontifical, and that even now newly printed
at Venice, in the year of Our Lord a thousand five hundred three scoare and
one, whereby it may appear, ye are ashamed of nothing, be it never so
shameful.

What truth therefore, M. Hardinge, is in your word? Or, with what
countenance could ye so boldly say, That the Pope ever commanded any such
Service to be done unto him by the Emperor, ye can never show it by any
indifferent and credible witness? I doubt not, but the Popes own witness is
unto you of sufficient credit: and in his own case it must needs to him
self seem indifferente. Hereby it plainly appears, that in all Offices, and
Services, the Pope uses the Emperor as his man. Therefore Auentinus
reports these two verses, written sometime of the Emperor Lotharius the
second,

Rex venit ad fores, Auentinus in Fredericho. 1.
iurans per Vrbis honores:
Post homo fit Papac, sumit quo dante Coronam:
The King, or Emperor comes to the gates, and swears by the honor of
the City: And afterward becomes the Popes Man, at whose hands he
receives the Crown.

That Pipinus so mutche abased him self to Pope Steuin, it is no marvel. The
Proverb is common, One hand clavveth an other. The Pope was auanced by
Pipine: and Pipine was likewise auanced by the Pope. But hereof we have spoken
before.

Where ye say, The Emperor Constantine the Great was footeman to the Pope,
I am mutche ashamed of your vanity, that being a man of wisdom, and
learning, ye should thus seek to mock y^ world with Childishe Fables.

Ye allege Matthaeus Hieromonachus, to prove a Fable by a Fable. If ye would
das^e your Readers eyes, for that ye allege his words in Greek, understand
you, that his peeuishe Greek was taken out of your peeuishe Latin. And yet is
the same Greek so fond, and so full of folly, that ye were ashamed truly to
turn it into English. For thus it stands, (...): That is, In the woorship
and fear of my Lord Blessed Peter. Ye durst not, to make the Emperor
Constantine so rude, to say, that Peter was his Lord: and therefore ye
thought it better, to corrupt, and alter your Authors words. Yet such
vain Fables, and Trifles must ye bring in, to put us, as ye say, quite out
of doubt.

But hereof we shall say more hereafter.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 4.
Who hurled under his table Frauncise Dandalus, the Duke of Venice, King of
Creta and Cypres, fast bound with chains, to feed of bones among his
Dogs?

M. Hardinge.
Were not this Defender passed all shame, he would not make so many and so
shameless lies. Malice has so far blinded him, that he seems not to see,
what becomes a man. Though he fear not to be accounted a lier, yet he
should be loathe to be accounted an dishonest man, yea and specially a fool. In
this One little Marginal note, M. Hardinge has uttered four Untruths
altogether. Read the Answer.
Let truth and honesty go, for in deed there is little in these fellows:
what foolishness is it, a man to bring all his doctrine, and all his
saieinges, touching things that he would so fame be believed, Sabellicus
Decadis. 2. li. 1. 1220. Historiae rerum Ven^taru^ lib. 4.
into so great and certain discredit, by such open and manifest lies? The
truth hereof is this, as I find it witnessed in Sabellicus, and in the
chiefest Chronicles the Venettars have, written by a Noble ma of Venis, named
Petrus Iustinianus. The City of Venus being interdicted of the Pope, Frau^cys
Dandalus was sent by the Duke and Lords of the Counceil there, to sue for
Absolution. At that time was he neither King of Creta, Franciscus Dandalus.
nor of Cypres, nor Duke of Venis, as it pleases this liinge Defender to write
of him, and that in the Defense of their English Church written to all the
world. Johannes Superantius then was Duke, and this Frauncys Dandalus was
Untruth. For he was then a Senator of very great Honor: And at the next
Election was chosen Duke.
but a Private man for that time, as others there were. This Ambassador
Frauncys Dandalus findinge the Pope at his first coming not well inclined to
grant his petition as he wished, the The offense stood only in healpinge
their Neighbor, being a bannished man, into his Country.
quality of the offense deserving the same: to move him to clemency and
pity, advised with him self to play this Pagent. He caused an iron chain to
be tied about his neck. Therewith he came to the Pope as he s^te at dinner,
put him self to crepe on all four, and like a Dog laid him down under the
Table, so long until the Popes displeasure being assuaged, he obtained
Pardone for his Country. Whereof, they say, he had afterward the surname of
Dog given him, as Iustinianus writes. Who desires to see the whole Story,
he shall find it well written by the said Petrus Iustinianus, Historiae rerum
Venetarum libro quarto. Now let us see, Sir Defender, how many lies ye make
in one sentence. That Frauncys Dandalus was by the Pope hurled under his Table,
this is one lie. That he was then Duke of Venis, King of Creta and Cipres,
there be two lies, beside the Notable lie, you seem to be very ignorant of the
state of Venis, in that you make the Duke an Ambassador, who being once
created Duke, goes not out of the City. Yet the right, and state of both
these Kingedomes is in his hand.
Neither is ever any of their state King of Candy and Cipres. For their state
admits none to be a King among them: how be it at the time of Frauncys
Dandalus Candy rebelled, and Cipres was not yet come to be under the
government of the Venetians, as you might have learned in the eloquent
History that Petrus Bembus wrote of Venis his Country. That he was fast
bound with Chains, there be three Lies. For he was not fast bound, Al these
matters be full solemnly proved, and are worthy to be publisshed by
Proclamation.
only he had cast a chain about his own neck, which he might have taken
of at his pleasure. That he was so thrown under the Table to gnawe boanes
among the Popes Dogs, Al these matters be full solemnly proved, and are
worthy to be publisshed by Proclamation.
there be four lies. And that the Pope had Dogs feedinge of boanes under his
Table, * Al these matters be full solemnly proved, and are worthy to be
publisshed by Proclamation.
I doubt not but it is other lie. Whether these five lies be not enough for
one little sentence of three lines, I report me to whosoever of your own
fellows lies for the best game. I think verily this Defender if he be not
very shameless, wishes he had a thicker bearde to hide his slike chekes from
blusshinge. Such false causes must be defended by lyinge proctours. If they
belied stories only, and taught not also false Doctrine in the chief points
of our Faith, their lying were less hurtful.

The B. of Sarisburie.
So many lies, M. Hardinge, and, as ye say, so far paste shame, and such
hot Tragedies, and the cause no greatter? What stir would ye have keapte,
if it had benne matter worthy the hearing? what if the Authoure of the
Apology had benne ouerseene in the report of one year, or two, or in sum
other like Circumstance, the Substance of the Story nevertheless still
reserved? If ye had remembered sum of your own often ouersightes, ye could
not for shame have benne so terrible against others. For it appears well, by all that ye have hitherto sent us over, your insighte in matters is not so
deep, but ye may often, and foully be deceived. You your self, M. Hardinge,
both in this self same place, and in this self same story, and in the
report of one poor note, have committed four, foul, and gross errors,
with one breathe, altogether. You your self, I say, M. Hardinge: I speak of
none other, but of your self. If ye think, the beams of your knowledge shine
so clear, that it can never be ouercaste with cloud of error, then, I
beseech you, consider well your Note specially marked in your Margin. Folio.
186. a.
Thus ye direct us to the Author of your Story: Sabellicus Decadis 2. li. 1.
1220. In this one little short note, I say, ye have sent us four errors.
For first, Decades.
every child knows, that Sabellicus never wrote Decades, but only Enneades.
And therefore, if I were not better acquainted with your Learning, I might
seem to have just cause to say, either ye never saw Sabellicus Books, or
else ye never readde them. I will not here keep an Audite, as you do, nor
say, as you say, Second Decade.
This is one lie. Further ye say, it is written in the Second Decade: But
Sabellicus the Authoure him self says. Franciscus Dandalus. First Book.
It is written in the nienth Enneade. I will not say, as you say, There be
two Lies. Again you say, It is in the First Book: But Sabellicus him
self says, It is in the Seuenthe Book. Yet will not I follow you, nor say,
There be three Lies. For a surplussage, and more likelihoode of your tale, Anno
Do. 1220.
ye note also the year of our Lord 1220. with as good discretion, as the
rest. For at that time, neither Pope Clemens, nor Francise Dandalus was yet
borne. For this thing happened, as it most plainly appears by all stories,
about the year of our Lord 1310. All this notwithstanding, I will not hunte
so greedily for advantages, nor say, as you say, There is the Foruthe Lie.
Neither will I say, as you say, not withstandinge sum man perhaps might
happen to say it, M. Hardinge the Defender hereof, is either an Unhonest man,
or paste shame, or a Lier, or a fool.

These words of yours, M. Hardinge, are neither mannerly, nor manly:
notwithstanding they seem well to content your pleasante humor. S. Hierome
says, Hierony. Aduersus error. Johan. Hierosolymit.
Non aeque inimici audiunt, and amici. Qui inimicus est, etiam in scirpo nodum
quaerit: An Enemy, and a Friend hear not both of one sort. An Enemy will
(cauil, and quarrel, and) seek a knotte in a russhe. The Substance of Gods
Religion stands not in the reportinge of a story. S. Hierome says of
such Captious quarrellers: Audiant a me, non periclitari Ecclesiarum statum,
si ego celeritate dictandi verba aliqua dimiserim: Hierony. De optimo genere
interpretandi
Let them understand, that al be it I in haste of penninge have let escape a
word, or two, yet that shall not hazard the state of the Church of God.

But Francise Dandalus, ye say, was not at that time Duke of Venice: He him
self tied the chain about his own neck: Not Duke.
He came of his own accord upon al four, as if he had benne a Dog, and
lay down willingly under the Popes Table: He lay not there to gnawe boanes:
He found no Dog there to lie with him. Therefore, ye say, this Defender is
an Unhonest man, paste al shame, a Lier, and a fool. Such Cholerique
Conclusions, M. Hardinge, may well beseem a Doctoure of your Divinity.

How be it, the faireste color, ye can lay upon the matter, is this, That
the Embassadoure of that Noble Common Weal of Venice, lay as a Dog, in a
chain, underneath the Popes Table, as you say, and that, willingly, and
with al his heart, by such Submission to appease the Popes ^ighe
indignation, and to recover his favor toward his Country. It seems, he
was either a very Arrogante man, or a marvelous angry Pope, that would by
none other Submission be reconciled.

But Dandalus at that time was not Duke. Neither was it so hard a matter to
know that, M. Hardinge: nor was it so great an Heresy to call him Duke, for
that shortly after he was made Duke. August. De Consensu Evangelist. Lib. 2.
Cap. 17.
S. Augustine says, Dicimus, Apostolum Paulum in Tharso Ciliciae natum. At
ille tunc iam non erat Apostolus. Ita cum audimus, Discipulos Christi inuitatos
ad nuptias, non iam Discipulos, sed qui futuri erant Discipuli, intelligere
debemus: We say, that Paul the Apostle was borne at Tharsus in Cilicia. And
yet Paul at that time, when he was borne, was no Apostle. Even so, Johan. 2.
when we hear, that Christ's Disciples were bidden to the Marriage Feast at
Cana in Galilee, we must understand, that they were not then his Disciples,
but became afterward his Disciples.

So S. Hierome calls Pamphilus a Martyr: and yet at that time, whereof he
meante, Hierony. De Errorib Origenis.
Pamphilus in deed was no Martyr. Therefore he says, Concedamus, vt Pamphili
sit, sed nondum Martyris. Ante enim scripsit, quam Martyrium perpeteretur: Let
us grant, it was Pamphilus Book: but that Pamphilus as yet was no Martyr.
For he wrote his Book first, and was Martyr afterward. Likewise again he
says, Hierony in Ezechielem. Lib. 9. Cap. 30.
Nos pro, No, Alexandriam posuimus per Anticipationem, quae Graece (...)
appellatur: We in steed of the City, No, have translated it, the City
Alexandria, Franciscus Dandalus.
by a Figure called Anticipation: For that the City, which before was
called, No, was afterward called Alexandria.

So S. Augustine says, Genes. 35. Augu. in quaest. super Genesim, Quaest. 117.
It is written in the Book of Genesis: Hi sunt Filij Israel, qui nati sunt ei
in Mesoporamia: cum Benjamin long postea natus sit, cum iam transissent
Bethel, and appropinquarent Bethleem: These be the Children of Israel, that
were borne to him in Mesopotamia: And yet Benjamin ( that there is reckened for
one of his Children) was borne (not in Mesopotamia, but) long afterward, when
they were now paste Bethel, and drew? toward Bethleem, that is in Iewrie. Yet
bath there benne no man hitherto so discourteous, that ever would use your
eloquence, M. Hardinge, and call either Moses, or S. Augustine, or S. Hierome,
Fools, or Liers.

If ye would but indifferently have weighed the matter, ye might well have
thought, we called Dandalus Duke of Venice, for that he was soon afterward
chosen Duke of Venice.

So we may say, Doctoure Hardinge freely, and fully professed the Gospel,
and preached vehemently against the Pope. Nevertheless, when he thus
preached, he was not yet known by the name of a Doctoure.

Let us grant, there was sum error in the report of this story. Yet
must every man be condemned for a Fool, and a Lier, that may be taken in
like Error? If so, then will M. Hardinge trouble his Godfathers, and cause
them to give him a new name.

S. Chrysostom says, Matthew. 2. Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 2. Clemens
Stromat. 1.
There were twelve Magi, or VVisemenne, that came to Christ: And yet ye hold
commonly, they were but three. Clemens Alexandrinus says, Christ preached
but one year: yet others say, he preached three years: others say, he
preached four. Sum say, Christ was three and thirty years old, sum
say, he was four and thirty, when he suffered. Yet Tertullian says,
Tertul. Contra Iud. cos. Irenaeus Lib. 2.
he was Only thirty years old: Irenaeus says, He was more then forty.
Christ says, My Father is hable to give me twelve Legions of Angels: S.
Hilarie, in the report thereof, a great deal auanceth the number, Cap. 34.
and 40. Matthew. 26. Hilarious in Psalm. 54.
and reckeneth duodecim Millia Legionum, twelve Thousand Legions. Your own
Blessed Donation of Constantine, which, ye say, so mutche irketh us,
commands the Patriarch of Constantinople to be subject, and obediente to
the Bishop of Rome: And yet at that time, when, by your imagination, this Fable
was divised, Donatio Constantini.
there was neither Patriarch, nor Church in Constantinople, nor any City as
yet builte, and known by that name. Your Follow Dorman allegeth full solemnly
the seventh Book of Theodoretus: Dorman, Fol. 22.
And yet Theodoretus him self never wrote but only ^iue. And so be leapte
two whole Books beyond his Authoure. Dorman, Fol. 24.
And again he tells us a proper tale, of the terrible Examples of two
kings, Ozias, and Oza: And yet both he, and his Fellows might soon have
learned, that Oza was only a poor Leuite, and no King.

You your self, M. Hardinge, Fol. 308. b.
M. Hardinge, in this self same Book say, that the Council of Nice was
keapte in the time of Pope Syluester: And yet Athanasius, that then was
present at the same Council, Athanasi. in Apolog. M. Hardinge, Fol. 309. a.
says, Syluester at that time was not alive: but that the Council was
summoned by the Emperor, and holden in the time of Pope Julius. Again you
say, that at the very same time while the Council was holden at Nice, Pope
Syluester held likewise a Council in Rome: And so, by the Judgment of
Athanasius, ye say, that Pope Syluester held a Council after he was dead.

And must al these, and other your like tales, M. Hardinge, pass under the
name of Lies, and Folies?

This Gentleman, ye say, was not so fast bound as we imagine: but fell down
meekely, and Willingly of himself. willingly.
No doubt, M. Hardinge, who so knows an Italian courage, will soon believe
that Francise Dandalus, a Gentleman of such Nobility, and the Embassadoure
of so Noble a Common Wealth, was soon, and easily, and willingly woonne, to
comme creeping with a iron chain on his neck, and to wallow under the Popes
Table, as a Dog, to his own immortal shame, and to the Everlasting
dishonor of his Country. Verily he would never have yielded him self to
such Villainy, had it not benne to avoid sum other greatter villainy. For,
I beseech you, whether is it more cruelty, for you to run upon a poor man
with sword drawn, and to strike him through, and so to kille him: or else to
force him to lay cruel hands upon his own body, and to kille him self? S.
Chrysostom says, A poor man oftentimes is content to woounde, or feaster
his own fleashe, to the end, to move the rich man to sum pity: Alij
Capiti suo clauos acutos infigunt: alij per ipsum gelu nudo Corpore mendicantes
petunt: Chrysostom. in 1. Corin. Homil. 21.
Alij hisce etiam grauiora ferentes, miserabile de se praebent spectaculum. At
dices, Nos illorum Capita non configimus. Vtinam vero tu configeres. Non enim
tam grauis fuisset calamitas. Nam qui alium interimit, long leuius peccat,
quam is qui iubet aliquem seipsum interficere: Sum there be, that stick
nails in their own heads: Sum other go begginge with naked bodies in the
cold froste: Sum others suffer other things of greatter cruelty, and show
them selves miserable to behold. But thou will say, we stick not these nails
in their heads. Would God, thou stickedst them in. For then their misery
were not so grievous. For he, that with his own hand kills an other,
commits a great deal less fault, then he that forces a man to kill him
self.

So, say we, it was far greatter grief unto that Noble Gentleman, so vilely
to dishonor, and abase him self, then if he had benne driven thereto through
the force and violence of his enemy. In this sort was the Emperor Henry
the fourth well content, Vrspergen, Sabellicus Ennead. 9. Lib. 3.
willingly to wait upon Pope Hildebrande at Canusium, and three days
together to stand batcheaded, and barefoote in the hard froste at his gate,
and as one says, to be a gastinge stock both to men, and Angels, before he
might have license to comme near. So was the Emperor Frederichus Aenobarbus
contented, willingely to lay his neck under the Popes foot: as we shall
declare more hereafter. Beno Cardinalis
So was the poor Gentlevvoman content, to cast a halter about her own
Sons neck, and so to present him before Pope Hildebrand, whom he had
offended, by such humble Subjection to crave his pardon. In respect wereof
the Pope pardoned him his life: but commanded his foot to be stricken of: of
which woounde the poor young Gentleman soon after died.

Ye say, It is a lie, that Francise Dandalus, so Noble a Gentleman was driven
to gnawe boanes. Gnavve boanes.
I think it well, M. Hardinge: and therefore we will rather say, He lay there
together up the crummes, that fell from his Lords Table.

But under y^ Popes table, No Dogs under the Popes Table.
ye say, there were no Dogs. And this, ye say, is an other lie.
Notwithstanding, this Negative were very hard for you to prove. How be it,
hereat I will not greatly strive. And yet had it benne a more seemly sight, in
my judgment, to see a Dog lieinge there, then a man, and specially a Noble
Gentleman, the Embassadoure of so Noble a City.

To conclude, this was the same Pope Clemens the fifthe, that thus pronounced
of him self, and proclaimed the same unto the whole world by a Law: Nos
superioritatem habemus ad Imperium: Nos, vacant Imperio, Imperatori
succedimus: We have the Soueraintie over the Empiere: Clem. Lib. 2. De
Senten. and re iudica. Cap. 2.
The Empiere being void, we are heirs apparente to the Emperor. The
Venetians had given aid, to restoare one Friscus a bannished man unto the
Dukedom of Ferrara. Therefore Pope Clemens interdited them, and all that they
had, and further signified his pleasure unto all the world, that whither so
ever they, or any of them came, it should be lawful for any man, not only to
take their bodies, and to selle them for slaves, and to spoil their goods,
but also to kille them, whether it were by right, or by wrong. For so
Sabellicus writes, Sabellicus Ennead. 9. Lib. 7.
Vt eos fas esset vnicuique, iure, and iniuria interficere. This was the cause
of all this great a do. And this high indignation has never benne slaked, had
not so Noble a personage abased him self, to be tied by the neck in a chain,
and to creep under the Popes Table, upon al four, like a Dog.

Last of al, where it likes you, in the end to refreashe your wits with
this Defenders thin cheeks, and blusshinge: verily, M. Hardinge, he
blussheth in deed, and is mutche ashamed in your behalf, to see your folies.
God give you Grace, that you may blusshe at your misusing of Gods people:
less ye have that face, that the Prophet says, is paste blusshing. I trust,
this Defender shall never blusshe to say, Romans 1. Hierony. Aduersus Pelagianos,
Lib. 1.
either with S. Paul, Non pudet me Euangelij Christi: Est enim virtus Dei ad
Salutem: I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: For it is the Power of God
unto Salvation: Or with S. Hierome, Non me pudet nescire, quod nescio: I am not
ashamed, in that thing, that I know not, to grant mine ignorance.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 5.
Who set the Emperial Crown upon the Emeroure Henry the si^thes head, not
with his hand, but with his foot: and with the same foot again cast the
same Crown of, saieinge withal, He had Power to make Emperors, and to
unmake them again at his pleasure*

M. Hardinge.
We deny, that Celestinus, whom you note in your books margent, or any other
Pope did this. Untruth. For the stories be plain. Read the Answer.
It is a varne fable devised rather of malice, then wit. Ye should have done
well to show us, with which foo^e the Pope did set on the Crown upon Henr^es
head, the rigit, or the left, standinge, sittinge, leninge, or lieinge,
barefooted, and vsinge the healpe of his great toe* or shodde: whether he had
some iymme iamme made for him to take it up, hold it, and put it on handsomely,
or conveyed it on by a vice, or how it was done.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What nimblenesse, or cunninge the Pope has in his feet, more then other
men, I have not heard. What other sleightes he has now, or has had in
times paste to work such feats, it behooves his Magister Ceremoniarum to
consider. The story is recorded by Ranulphus, Rogerus Cestrensis, and Rogerus
Houedenus, that lived at the same time.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 6.
Who put in arms Henry the Son against the Emperor his Father Henry the
Fourth, and wrought so, that the Father was taken prisoner of his own Son,
and being shorn, and shamefully handeled, was thruste into a Monastery,
where with hunger, and sorrow he pined away to death.

M. Hardinge.
Untruth, easily reproved by good Records.
It was not the Pope, that armed Henry the second against Henry the fourth,
who by th^^^ compte of some is Henry the third. ^^ories declare other causes
of their fallinge out, and the more part of the writers impute it to the
judgment of God, for punishment of his great wickedness. After that he was
overcome with all his power by the Saxons, Henricus Impera. 4. Henricus Impera.
5.
in seuentin days he durst not to appear abroad. In the mean time his
son took upon him forthwith the administration of the Empiere, went into
Italy with an army* would not surrender the state which he liked well, his
father being therewith offended he took prisoner, Manifest Untruth. See the
Answer.
without any motion of the Pope, Untruth. For this was not the cause. But the
Pope vvoulde have given the same him self.
with whom he was also at variance, and committed him to straight custody.

Concerning Gregory the seventh Pope, who before was called Hildebrandus,
whom that Emperor with endless malice persecuted, because he would Untruth.
For then he was at no variance with y^ Pope.
not ratify his Simoniacal making of Bishops, and giving of Ecclesiastical
benefices, and defended the Church against his wicked attemptes: biside sundry
writers of Histories in that time, as Lambertus Schafnaburgensis, Leo
Hostie^sis, and afterward, Otho Frisingensis, who so mutche commend him for
sundry excellent virtues: no man has so largely and so diligently set forth
his worthiness, as This Ancient Doctor is yet alive, and vvriteth vvoorthily
for his hiere.
Onuphr^us Panuinius, who has written of him five Books.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We may easily believe you, M. Hardinge, that the Pope armed not Henry the
Second, as you say, against his Father Henry the Fourth. It had benne a
marvelous Monster in Nature, that the Fourth should go before the Second: or
that the Neuevve should be borne before his Grandfather. But that the Pope
raised up Henry the Fifth against Henry the Fourth, that is to say, the
Son against the Father, that ye might have easily found in your own
Records.

Gregorius Heimbur^ (...) thus, Gregor. Heimburgen.
Paschalis Papa Principes contra Henricum 4. concitauit: imo (...) ^roprium
Filium: quem etiam contra Patrem fecit per multos Episcopos Rhem^^ ^ege^
Coronari, and vocari Henricum Quintum. Pope Paschalis raised up the Princes of
Germany against Henry the Fourth: nai rather he raised up his own Son:
who^ also he caused by many Bishops adioining to the Rhiene, to be crowned
Emperor against his own Father, and to be called Henry the Fifthe.

The case being clear, this one Authority may stand in steed of many.
Hereof Henry the Father pitieously complains in his Letters written to the
French King. Carrion An. 1103.
Carrion says, Hunc Henricum Filium solicitarunt Episcopi, vt aduersus Patrem
insurgeret, eumque Imperio pelleret: The Bishops entised this young
Gentilman, Henry the Son, that he should rise against his Father, and put
him from the Empiere. Vrspergen. Anno. 1105.
But these Bishops, as Vrspergensis says, were Responsales Paschalis Papae,
Pope Paschalis Agentes, or dooers in those Countries. And Henry the Son him
self, when he stood in the field, never pretended any other color against
his Father, but only the obedience of the Sea of Rome.

And, lest any man should doubt of the Truth hereof, the Pope, not long
before, had likewise raised up Rodolphus the Duke of Sueuia against the same
Emperor Henry the Fourth: Vrspergen. eod. loco, Page 257.
and, the better to encourrage his Ambitious head, and to train him to his
purpose, had sent him a Crown with this Poisee:

Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho.
Whereby he meante, Carrion.
that, as Christ had given the state, and right of the Empiere unto the Pope,
so would the Pope now bestow the same upon Rodolphus. Likewise he had written
to the Princes of Germany, as Carrion says, Vt Imperatorem alium designarent:
That they should proceed to the Election of an other Emperor. Thus the Pope
thought it but a play, to place, and displace the States of the world, at his
pleasure. Of this Emperors Virtues I will say nothing. As he is despraised by
sum, Auentinus.
so by others he is mutche commended: Auentinus says, In Pauperes, Monachos,
Sacerdotes munificentissimum, etc. His very enemies confess, that he was most
Liberal unto poor folks, Monks, and Priests: that he was Constant in
adversity: Faithful to his Prisoners: Gentle to his foes: Devout toward
God: wise and Politic in Civil, and Martial affairs: of a Princely
Majesty of counenance: wherein he excelled al others, and was most worthy
of the Empiere.

Vrspergensis says, He was Noble, doughty, and Venterous: and was seen three
score and two sundry times in fought field: Vrspergen. Page 239.
wherein he passed both Marcellus, and Julius Caesar, and al other Kings, and
Emperors, that had benne before him.

The greatteste cause of falling out bitweene him and the Pope was this: Carrion
Order was taken before, and had still benne keapte from the beginning, that
the Election of the Pope should be ratified by the Emperor, otherwise not to
stand. And Platyna says, Platyna in Seuero Papa.
The Pope Elected without the Emperors letters pate^tes was no Pope. An
other Aunciente order was this, that the Emperor might bestow all the
Bishoprikes, and Abbles of the Empiere, when so ever they should happen to be
void. These Ancient Orders Pope Hildebrand presumed to break. For neither
would he suffer his own Election to be ratified by y^ Emperor: nor y^
Emperor to bestow y^ Bishoprikes, or Abbeys within his dominions. In these
attemptes y^ Emperor withstoode him, claiminge unto him self the same right
of enheritance, that al other Emperors his Predecessors had lawfully, and
peaceably enioied before him. Therefore the Pope Excommunicated him: interdited
his Land: Vrspergen. Page 264.
and called him Archepirate, Archeheretique, and Apostata: Therefore he deposed
him: raised up the Duke of Sueuia, and all the world against him: and armed
the Son against the Father: and wilfully disquieted the whole State of al
Christendom. Auentinus.
Auentinus says, Multi tum priuatim, tum pub lice, etc. Many there were, that
both privately, and openly cursed Pope Hildebrande: and said, that with his
hatred, and ambition he troubled the world: and that under the color of
Christ, he wrought the seats of Antichriste.

The Emperor took a long journey into Italy to submit him self unto the
Pope: Vrspergen. Page 235. Sabellicus Enneadis. 9. Lib. 3. Carrion. Helmoldus.
and being at Canusium, as it is said before, in the deapthe of winter, and
In the hard froste, he waited patiently three days together with bare head,
and bare foot before the Popes gates, to win his favor. In the end Pope
Hildebrande being sick, and findinge him self in case not to live, sent
unto the Emperor, and besoughte him Pardonne for all his Injuries. After that,
the Popes, that succeeded, nevertheless continewed this quarrel still. And thus
by the Popes entisemente, The Son raised a power, and deposed his Father: The
Bishops discobed him of his weed of State: and pulled the Crown Emperial
from his head. The Ancient Reverend Prince, having now continewed in his
Empiere fifty whole years, bare al these things quietly, and said unto
them, Videat Deus, and iudicet: Let God see, and Judge your doings. At the
last, being least naked, and out of al, he turned him self to the Bishop of
Spira, and said unto him: Now I beseech you, for Gods sake, give me a
prebeude in your Church. For I am hable to read, Matthew. Palmer.
and can do sum good in the quiere. But he was keapte still in close prison
at Leodium, until he died. And being dead, he was keapte five whole years
together above ground, at the Popes Commandment, and might not be buried:
Such courtesy found that worthy Emperor at the Popes hand, only for
claiminge of his right.

Pope Hildebrande is commended by many for sundry virtues. But no man, say
you, has more set forth his worthiness, then Onuphrius, a man yet alive,
and one of al men, that would be right loathe in any point to displease the
Pope. Perhaps he thought to win sum credit, by aduenturinge his wits in
a desperate cause: as did he, Synesius. Plato.
that bestowed so mutche eloquence in the praise of Baldenesse: or he, that
praised the Fever quartane: or Erasmus, that of late years wrote so mutche in
the praise of Folly.

The Heretic Ebion sommetime praised Judas above all the Apostles: Pope
Hildebrande.
And Libanius the Sophiste bestowed great praises upon Iulianus the Renegate.
Socrat. Lib. 3. Cap. 22.
Certainly sundry Old VVriters, of whom sum knew Pope Hildebrande, and
lived with him, Beno Cardinalis
have not geeuen him such worthy praises. Beno Cardinalis says,
Hildebrande, being as yet but a Cardinal, beatte Pope Alexander with his fist,
and keapte him prisoner: Poisoned six Popes: Was a Coniurer, and raised up
Devils: and threw the Sacrament into the Fiere.

Auentinus, Auentinus.
making his entry to speak of Pope Hildebrande, says thus, Scripturus sum
Reipublicae Christianae, Occidentalisque Ecclesiae, Romanique Imperij Bella,
Caedes, Homicidia, Parricidia, Simultates, Odia, Stupra, Furta, Peculatus,
Sacrilegia, Dissidia, Seditiones plusquam Ciuiles, etc. Now must I speak of
VVarres, Slaughters, Murders, killing of Fathers, Strives, Hatreads,
Fornications, Robberies, Spoilinges of Common treasure, Spoilinges of Churches,
Debates, and Seditions more then civil, which have happened in the Christian
Common Weal, in the Weaste Church, and in the Empiere of Rome.

The Bishops at the Council of Brixia in Germany, Vrspergen.
touching Pope Hildebrande, pronounce thus: Nos eundem Hildebrandum
procacissimu^, etc. The same most Filthy and shameless Pope Hildebrande, a
mainteiner of Churchrobbinges, and housburninges, a defender of Murders, and
Periuries, calling in question the Catholic, and the Apostolic Faith of
the Body and Blood of Christ, an Old Disciple of Berengarius the Heretic,
a Manifest Coniurer, laden with the Sprite of Satan, and therefore out of the
true Faith, we Judge worthy to be deposed. What so ever points of dis^ant
Onuphrius, your Scholefelowe, has lately learned to play, this, M. Hardinge,
is that Holiness, and Worthiness, that sundry Old VVriters have judged to
be in Pope Hildebrande.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 1.
Who, so ilfauouredly, and monstrously put the Emperor Frederikes neck under
his feet, and, as though that were not sufficient, added further this text
out of the Psalms: Thou shall go upon the Adder, and cockatrice, and shall
tread the Lion and Dragon under thy feet? Such an Example of scorninge and
contemninge y^ Majesty of a Prince, as never before y^ time was heard tell
of in any remembrance: except, I ween, either of Tamerlanes the King of
Scythia, a wild and a Barbarous Creature, or else of Sapor King of the
Persians. Al these notwithstanding were Popes, al Peter's Successors, al most
Holy Fathers: whose several words we must take to be as good, as several
Gosples.

M. Hardinge.
Ye ask who put the Emperor Frederikes neck under his feet, etc. Verily,
who it was, I know not: neither your selves, I believe.

But what if ye bring good authority for it? So far as any man does evil,
be he Pope, be he Bishop, Emperor, or King, or what so ever he be, we defend
him not. Popes them selves be men, and do not at As though for the most part
they lived like Angels.
al times behave them selves like Angels. But what is that to your purpose? Our
matter is quaestio iuris, non facti, In praescriptio. Co^tra Haeret.
once more I must tell it you. And if that were a fault in the Pope, we
acknoweledge it to be as Tertullian says, Vitium conuersationis, non
predicationis: The fault of conversation, not of doctrine What fault can ye
find in the Popes preachinge? He never preaches.
preached.

Al these (though ye scoff never so much) were Popes, Treadinge on the
Emperors neck.
al were Peter's successors, and no withstandinge any thing that ye can say
against them to the contrary, without making a lie, Untruth shameless, as it
shall appear.
al were holy Fathers. But their several words we be not bound to esteem
for so good as several Gospels. Never the less their public decrees we
acknowledge and reverence, and think they ought to be obeyed.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The whole story hereof is thus reported by Carrion: Carrion
Vsus est Frederichus deiectione, and summa humilitate, etc. The Emperor
Frederike used al manner submissio, and Humility. For he came to Venice, and
at the gates of the Church, fallinge down grouelinge before the Pope, he
suffered him self to be trodden on by the Pope with his Feet. In the mean
while the Pope caused Proclamation to be made by these words of the Prophet
David, spoken of Christ, Thou shall walk upon the venomous Aspe, and the
Basiliske: Thou shall tread down the Lion and Dragon: And so at the last he
Absolved him. Non tibi, sed Petro. Et mihi, and Petro.
The Emperor in the mean while said, he showed that humility, not unto
Pope Alexander, but unto Peter. Thereunto the Pope answered, Et mihi, and
Petro: Both to me, and to Peter too: placinge him self before Peter.

Thus Carrion declares the whole story with sum particulare Circumstances:
but whether of favor, or hatred, I will not Judge. Neither may it well be
thought, the Pope used the Emperor thus of any great favor. But I think,
that the Noble City of Venice, that caused this whole Tragedy to be set
forth in Imagerie in S. Marks Church there, for the Everlasting
remembrance of the fact, was not so carried away either with love of the one
side, or with hatred of the other, that they would so openly have recorded a
known Untruth.

Thus Sapores sommetime, Aurelius Victor. Pomponius Letus.
the proud King of Persia, when he had conquered Valerianus the Roman
Emperor, and taken him prisoner, used him afterward most villanously, as
his footestocke: and made him lie down grouelinge upon the ground, that he
might set his foot on his neck, when so ever it should please him to mount
on horsbacke.

So Sesostris the great King of Egypt, yokte Kings, Budaeus de Ass.
Matthias a Michouia, De Sarmatia, Cap. 12.
and Princes together in Chains, and forced them by violence, to draw his
Wagon. So the Emperor Henry the Third, upon the day of his Coronation,
caused Four Kings of Vindelicia, being then his prisoners, to carry Pannes,
and Cauldrons to his kitchen.

But ye say, So far, as a man does evil, be he Pope, be he Bishop, ye defend
him not. The Popes themselves, ye say, be men: and do not always behave
themselves, as Angels. Yet notwithstanding, immediately after ye say further,
Al these were Popes, and Peter's Successors, and Holy Fathers. This being
true, it is no hard matter, for any Pope to be Holy. Platyna. Textor in
Officina. Platyna. Platyna in Syluestro 3. Constantien. Concilium.
Pope John 12. was slain in Aduouterie: Pope Benedictus 9. lived without
either Law, or Reason, and defiled Peter's Chair, with all kind of shame. Sine
Lege, and Ratione vixit, and Petri Sedem omnibus probris foedauit. And in the
end he took mon^e yenoughe, and sold the Popedom. Platyna says, Popes
then were elected, not for their Learning, and Holiness, but in respect of
Money, and friendship. The Bishops in the Council of Constance pronounce thus
of Pope John. 23. A te^pore iuuentutis suae fuit homo malae indolis,
inuerecu^dus, impudicus, etc. Et adhuc dicitur, tenetur, creditur, and
reputatur pro tali, and vt talis: From the time of his youth he has evermore
benne a man of il disposition, unshamefast, unchaste, unhonest, etc. And
stilhitherto he is named, holden, believed, taken, and reputed for such a
one, The Pope is ever Holy.
and as such a one. Sum of them have lived filthily with their own
daughters, and sum worse, and in more beastly disorder. Platyna calls them
Monstra, and Portenta, Monsters, and ougle, and horrible, and il shapen
Creatures. Yet, say you, al these were Peter's Successors, and Holy Fathers.
And so must they needs be coumpted, although they had benne a great deal
worse. Dame Iohane, I trow, ye will have foreprised out of this number. For
notwithstanding she were a Holy Mother, yet ye may not well call her the
Holy Father.

In deed, De Mayor. and Obedien. Vnam. Sanctam. In Glossa.
thus ye have it prouidentely noted upon your Decre talles: Est quaedam
Spiritualitas secundum statum, quando est in statu Sanctissimo, and
Spiritualissimo: and in hoc statu est Solus Summus Pontifex: There is a
certain Spiritual Holiness according to the state most Holy, and most
Spiritual: and in this state is only the Highest Bishop, that is, the Pope.
And a Special Statute of praemunire in the Popes behalf is written thus: Papa
de Homicidio, Did 40. Non no: In Glossa.
vel Adulterio, accusari non potest. Vnde Sacrilegij instar esset, disputare de
facto suo. Nam facta Papae excusantur, vt Homicidia Samsonis, Furta Hebraeoru^,
Adulteria Jacob: The Pope may never be accused, neither of Aduouterie, nor of
Murder. Therefore it were as badde, as Churcherobbinge, to reason, or move
matter of any his dooinges. For what so ever he do, it is excused, as are the
Murders committed by Samson: the Robberies in Egypt by the Jews: and y^
Aduouteries of Jacob. And again, Did. 40. Non no:
In Papa si defint bona acquisita per meritum, sufficient quae a loci
praedecessore praestantut. In the Pope if there want good deeds gotten by his
own inerites. yet the good deeds done by S. Peter, that was his Predecessoure
in that place, are sufficient.

But S. Hierome says far otherwise: Diff. 40. Non est facile.
Non Sanctorum Filij sunt, qui tenent loca Sanctorum, Sed qui exercent opera
eorum: They are not always the children of Holy men, that fit in the
places of Holy men: but they, that do the works of Holy men.

Therefore I may say to you, M. Harding, as S. Augustine says to Emeritus y^
Heretic: Noli Frater, Augustine. Epist. 164. ad Emeritu^.
noli obsecro: no^ te decet, eisi alique^ forte deceat: si tame^ quicqua^
deceat malos: Emeritum certe non decet defendere Optatum: Do not, my Brother,
do not, I pray you. It be comes you not: Although happily it may becomme
sum other man: If any thing may becomme the wicked: Yet verily it becomes
not Emeritus, to defend Optatus ( in open wickenesse).

S. Hierome says, Hieron. in Epist. ad Philemonein.
Si quis hominem, qui Sanctus non est, Sanctum esse crediderit, and Dei eum
iunxerit socierari, Christum violat, cuius Corporis omnes membra sumus. Qui
dicit, inquit, Iustum Iniustum, and Iniustum Iustum, abominabilis est vterque
apud Deum. Et rursus, qui dicit, Sanctum non esse Sanctum: and rursus, non
Sanctum esse Sanctum, Proverb. 17.
est abominabilis apud Deum: Who so believes, that man to be Holy, that is not
Holy, and ioineth the same man to the fellowship of God, does villainy to
Christ. For all we are members of his Body. It is written, Both he that
calls a Just man Wicked, and he that calls a Wicked man Just, are both
abominable before God. Likewise who so says, a Holy man is not Holy: or, An
Unholy man is Holy, is abominable before God.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 2. and 3.
If we be counted Traitors, which do honor our Princes, which give them al
obedience, as mutche as is due to them by Gods word, and do pray for them:
what kind of men then be these, which have not only done all the things
before said, but also allow the same for specially well done? Do they then
either this way instruct the people, as we do, to reverence their
Magistrate? or can they with honesty appeach us as seditious persons,
breakers of the common quiet, and despisers of Princes Majesty?

Truly we neither put of the yoke of obedience from us, neither do we
disorder Realms: nor do we set up, or pulle down Kings: nor do we
translate gouernementes: nor geeue we our Kings poison to drink: nor yet
hold forth to them our feet to kiss: nor opprobriously triumph over the^:
nor leap into their necks with our feet.

This rather is our Profession, this is our Doctrine, that every soul, Chryso.
in 13. ca. ad Romanos.
of what calling so ever it be, be it Monk, be it Preacher, be it
Prophet, be it Apostle, ought to be Subject to Kings and Magistrates: yea,
and that the Bishop of Rome him self, unless he will seem greater then the
Evangelists, then the Prophets, or the Apostles, ought both to acknoweledge,
and to call the Emperor, his Lord, and Master: Gregor. saepe in Epist.
as the Old Bishops of Rome, who lived in times of more grace, ever did. Our
common teachinge also is, that we ought so to obeie Princes, as men sent of
God: and, that who so withstandeth them, withstandeth Gods ordinance. This is
our Doctrine: and this is well to be seen both in our Books, and Preachinges,
and also in the manners and modeste behaueour of our people.

M. Hardinge.
The Doctrine of obedience apperteineth specially to subjects. The Bishop of
Rome sittinge by due succession in the chair of Peter, Untruth Manifest, as
it shall appear.
in spiritual causes can have no Superior. In temporal matters it may be,
that in one age he has acknowledged the Emperor, as the Lord of that
province, where he lived. Untruth enclosed: For they were subject likewise
afterward.
as before Constantine all the Popes did live in subjection: and in an other age
he may be Lord thereof him self. Likewise S. Gregory might call Mauritius
his Lord, either of courtesy, or of custom: and yet our Holy Father Pius the
fourth shall not be bound to do the like, in O Grave Consideration.
consideration that the custom has long sense ben discontinewed. Neither did
S. Gregory by that title of honor preiudicate unto him self in any spiritual
jurisdiction. For that name notwithstanding, he governed the Untruth euidente
unto a child.
whole Church, and complained that Maximus was made Bishop of Salonae a City
in Illyrico, without his Authority, not regarding that Mauritius the Emperor
was thought to have willed it so to be done. Lib. 4. Epistol. 34.
And therefore he writes to Constantia the Empress, that for as mutche as
neither he, nor his depute was made privy to it, that the thing had benne
done, which never was done before by any of the Princes, that were the
Emperors Predecessors.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What need you to speak so precisely, and so nicely of your Causes Spiritual,
M. Harding? Ye know, that your Pope has claimed, and yet claims his
Souerainetie, not only in Spiritual Causes, but also in Temporal: as it shall
appear. He will say, ye are an il Proctoure, and do him wrong, and go
about to abridge his right, that will so lightly exclude that thing, that he
so greedily will have included.

You say, The Pope can have no Superioure in Spiritual Causes. And yet by the
Judgment of sundry your Doctors, even in Causes Spiritual, the Council is
Superioure to the Pope, Council. Constant. Council. Basilien. Did. 19.
Anastasius. In Glossa.
and may summone him: and Judge him: and geeue Sentence against him: and
depose him: As hereafter it shall be declared more at large. Thus is it noted of
purpose upon your own Decrees: Cum agitur de Fide, tunc Synodus Mayor est
quam Papa: When the case is moved in a matter of Faith, (that is to say, in a
cause Spiritual) then is the Council greater then y^ Pope. And your own
Panormitane says, The Pope inferioure to the Prince.
as it is alleged before, Papa tenetur confiteri: and in illo actu Sacerdos est
Mayor illo: The Pope is bound to make his Confession: and in so dooinge, the
Priest is above the Pope. Again he says, Papa non potest cogere Sacerdotem,
Extra De ^oeniten. and Remiss. Omnis vtriusque. Abb.
vt reuelet Co^fessionem: quia in illo actu Sacerdos est Mayor, quam Papa.
Children know, that Faith, and Confession are Spiritual Causes, and not
Temporal. Ye see therefore, M. Hardinge, by the Judgment of your own
Doctoures, that the Pope may have a Superioure, even in Spiritual causes.

Now let us weighe the great force of your Reason. Thus you say:

The Pope sits in Peter's Chair: Ergo, in Spiritual Causes he can have no
Superioure.

Who taught you thus to piece your Arguments? What Child, what Sophister
would so reason? Who ever gave such Power, and Virtue to Peter's Chair?

In Temporal matters, ye say, it may be, that in one age the Pope has
acknowledged the Emperor, as Lord of that Province, where he lived.
Graceously considered. It was the Popes Courtesy, and Humility, no doubt:
but not his duty. Now be it, Aaron the High Bishop in Israel was contented
to submit him self to Moses, and of duty to call him Lord.

Tertullian says thus, Exodus 32. Tertullian. ad Scapulam.
Colimus Imperatorem, vt hominem a Deo secundum, and Solo Deo Minorem. Sic enim
Imperator Omnibus Mayor est, dum Solo vero Deo Minor est: We honor the
Emperors Majesty, as a man next unto God. For so is the Emperor greater
then Al men, while he is leasse then only the True God.

Origin says, Petrus, Origin. ad Roman. Ca. 13. li. 9.
and Johannes nihil habebant, quod Caesari redderent. Dixit enim Petrus, Aurum,
and Argenium non habeo. Qui hoc non habet, nec Caesari habet quod reddat, nec
vnde Sublimioribus Potestatibus subiaceat. Qui vero habet Pecunia^, aut
Possessiones, aut aliquid in hoc saeculo, audiat, Omnis anima Potestatibus
Sublimioribus subiaceat: Peter, Actor. 3.
and John had nothing to give unto the Emperor. For Peter said, Gold, and
Silver I have none: which who so has not, has nothing to geeue to Caesar,
not wherein he should be subject to the Higher Powers. But who so ever has,
either Money, or Lands, or any thing in this world, let him hear what S.
Paul says, Let every soul submit it self to the Higher Powers.

And for proof of the practice hereof, 2. q. 7. Nos si.
Pope Leo thus submits him self humbly unto Jews the Emperor: Nos, si
incomperenter aliquid egimus, and in Subditis iustae Legis tramitem non
conseruauimus, vestro admissorum nostroru^ cuncta volumus emendare iudicio. If
we have done any thing disorderly, and over our Subjects have not keapte
the dew trade, and course of Law, by your Majesty's Judgment we vvil
redress al our faults.

So likewise, long before Pope Leo, Pope Gregory wrote unto the Emperor
Mauritius: Gregor. Lib. 3. Epis. 61. ad Mau^ ritium Impera.
Ecce per me Seruum vltimum suum, and vestrum, respondebit Christus: Sacerdotes
meos manui tuae commisi, etc. Ego quidem vestrae iussioni subiectus, Legem
vestra^ per diuersas terrarum parts tra^smitti feci: Behold, thus will Christ
answer you by me, being both his, and your most humble Seruante: I have
committed my Priests unto thy hand. As for my part, I, being subject unto
your Majesty's Commandment, have caused your Order to be proclaimed through
diverse parts of the world. Gregor. Lib. 3. Epist 64.
Again he says, Christus dominari Imperatorem, non solum Militibus, sed
etiam Sacerdotibus concessit: Christ has given power unto the Emperor, to
bear rule, not only over soldiers, but also over Priests.

Again he says, Grego. ad Maurittum Impera.
Et Imperatori obedientiam praebui: and pro Deo, quod sensi, minime tacni: I
have showed my duty toward my Lord the Emperor: and touching God, I
have not conceled, what I thought. And this is it, that S. Paul says, ^et
every soul be subject to the Higher Powers. Upon which words S.
Chrysostom says, The Pope inferioure to the Emperor.
Etiamsi sis Apostolus, etiamsi Euangelista, etiamsi Propheta, five quisquis
ta^dem fueris. Neque enim Pietatem subuertit ista Subiectio: Though thou be an
Apostle, though thou be an Evangelist, though thou be a Prophet, or what one
so ever else thou be, Chrysostom. ad Roman. Homil. 23.
yet be thou subject to the Heigher Powers. For this Subjection is no
hinderance to Godliness.

But afterward the Popes began to look alofte, and both to say them
selves, and also to cause others their parasites to say, Johan. Mayor. 4.
Sent. q. 2. did. 20. Sex. Lib. 3. Ti. 16 in Glossa.
Romanus pontifex supra Reges in Temporalibus: The Bishop of Rome is above
Kings, even in things Temporal. Again, Papa totius orbis obtinet potestatem:
The Pope has the power of all the world. Again, Solus Papa est verus Dominus
Temporalium: Only the Pope is the very true Lord of Temporal things. Johan.
De Parisijs, de potestate Papae.
And again, Omnis potestes secularis immediate data est Papae: Al manner
Temporal Power is given immediately to the Pope.

Ye say, Heruaeus de potesta. Pap. ca. 19.
Pope Gregory might call the Emperor Mauritius, his Lord, (not of deutie,
but) either of Custom, or of Courtesy. Yet, (say you further) our holy
Father Pope Pius the Fourth shall not now be bound to do the like. Here, I
beseech you, M. Hardinge, What strange kind of Spiritual Power has Pope Pius
now g^tte^, that was not before in Pope Gregory? what Learning? what Virtue?
what Worthiness? what Holiness? What good reason ca^ ye allege, wherefore
Christ, and his Apostles, and al other Holy Fathers, and Martyrs should be
Subiect^ to the Prince, and only your late Popes, and Cardinales should
stand so free?

Ye say, This Custom has long sithence benne discontinewed: And in one age
the Pope may acknowledge the Emperor, as the Lord of the Land, where he
dwells: and in an other age he may be Lord thereof him self. That is to
say, In one age the Pope may be subject to the Emperor: and in an other
age the Emperor may be subject to the Pope. This is your whole, and only
reason. Thus, we see, your obedience toward your Prince goes not by Gods
Word, but only by Ages. Therefore we may say to you, as S. Hilarie
sommetime said to y^ Arian Heretics, Fides temporum est, Hilarious ad
Constantium Impera. Psalm. 116.
non Euangeliorum: Your Faith passes by Ages, and not by Gospels. And yet it
is written, Veritas Domini manet in Aeternum: The Truth of our Lord endures (
not for one age, or other, but) for Ever. It were a high point of Learning
for an Astronomer skilfully to Prognosticate, between y^ Emperor and the
Pope, whether of them should be Dominus Anni. How be it, here may I well and
justly answer you with these words of S. Bernarde: Omnis anima potestatibus
sublimioribus subdita sit. Bernar. Epist. 42. ad Archiepisco. Senonens.
Si omnis, and vestra. Quis vos excepit ab vniuersitate? Si quis tentat
Excipere, conatur Decipere. Noli illorum acquiescere consilijs: qui cum sint
Christiani, Christi tamen vel sequi facta, vel obsequi dictis probro ducunt.
Ipsi sunt, qui vobis dicere solent, Seruate vestrae Sedis honorem, etc. Estis
vos vestro Praedecessore impotentior? Si non crescit per vos, non decrescat per
vos Hae illi. At Christus aliter iussit, and gessit. Reddite, inquit, quae sunt
Caesaris, Caesari: and que sunt Dei, Deo: Let every soul be subject to y^
Higher Powers. If every soul, then is your soul subject, as well as others.
For ( notwithstanding your Dignity) yet who has excepted you from this
generality? He that would except you from the Obedience of the Prince,
seeks to deceive you. Give no ear to their Counselles. For,
notwithstanding they be Christians, yet they think it a shame, either to
follow Christ's deeds, or to obeie Christ's Words. They use to say unto you,
o sir, maintain the honor of your See, etc. Are not you so good, as your
Predecessoure? If your See be not auaunced by you, yet let it not be abased by
you. Thus say they. But Christ has both taught, and wrought far otherwise.
For he says, Geeue to Caesar, that belongs to Caesar: and geeue to God,
that belongs to God.

Likewise he says again unto Pope Eugenius, The Pope Limited to a part.
A te tamen Mosiste, vel potius Mors ista non coepit? vtinam in te desinat.
Vides omnem Ecclesiasticum zelum feruere sola pro Dignitate tuenda? Bernar. De
Consideratione, li. 4.
Honori totum datur: Sanctitati nihil, vel parum. Si, causa requirente, paulo
submissius agere, ac socialius te habere teniaueris, Absit, inquiunt: Non
decet: Tempori non congruit: Maiestati non conuenit: Quam geras personam
attendito: But ye will say, this Manner, or rather, this Death, began not of
you: Would God it might end in you. Do ye not see, that al your
Ecclesiastical zele, and care stands only in mainteinance of Honor? Upon
Honor al together is bestowed: upon Holiness, either nothing, or very
little. If, upon occasion, ye would sommewhat submit your self, and deal
familiarely, O, do not so, say they: It is not meet: It is not agreeable to
the time: It is not convenient for your Majesty: Consider well, what state ye
bear. Such good Lessons ye have, where with to nourture, and to train the
Pope. And if he happen of him self to be a fool, by such schoolinge ye are
hable to make him mad.

But Gregory, Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 34. Artic. 4. Diu. 25.
ye say, being Pope, governed the whole Church of God. For he complains,
that Maximus was made Bishop of Salonae in Illyrico without his allowance. This
Authority is answered in my Former Reply. But how holds this Argument, M.
Hardinge? Gregory complains, that Maximus was made Bishop of Salonae in
Illyrico without his allowance: Ergo, Gregory ruled the whole Church?

What Schole will allow you such Conclusions? It is known, that in the
Nicene Council the charge of the whole Church was committed to three Principal
Patriarchs, whereof the Patriarch of Rome was the First: the Second of
Alexandria: the Third of Antioche. And each of these three was limited
severally to his own peculiare portion. Nilus De Primatu Roma. Pon.
Nilus a Greek Writer says, Cum aliae Regiones assignatae sint Romano, aliae
Alexandrino, aliae Constantinopolitano, non magis hi sub illo sunt, quam ille
sub hisce: For as mutche as certain Countries are limited to the Bishop of
Rome: certain to the Bishop of Alexandria: and certain to the Bishop of
Constantinople, they are now no more under him, then he under them.

As for the Churches of Illyricum, they were specially appointed to the Bishop
of Rome, as it appears by the Epistle of Pope Damasus, written to the
Bishops of Illyricum: Sozomen. Lib. 6. Cap 23.
Par est omnes, qui sunt in Orb Romano, Magistros consentire: It is meet,
that all the Teachers, that be within the Roman Province, agree together. So
says Athanasius, Athanas ad Solitariam vitam agentes.
Roma est Metropolis Romanae Ditionis: Rome is the Mother Church ( not of the
whole world, but) of the Province of Rome. Nicephorus says, Iustinianus
decreuit, vt Iustiniana Prima haberet locum Sedis Apostolicae Romae: vtque
esset Caput sibi ipsi cum plena potestate: Nicephor. Lib. 17. Cap. 28.
Iustinianus the Emperor appointed, that the City called Iustiniatia Prima
should have the place of the Apostolic See of Rome: and that with full power
it should be Head unto it self. Neither durst your forged, and countrefeite
Anacletus, to claim the Jurisdiction of all the whole world, but only a
portion of the same. For thus he says, Anaclet. Epist. 3. Did. 93. Iuxta
Sanctorum.
Omnes Episcopi, qui huius Apostolicae Sedis ordinationi subiacent: Al
Bishops ( not through the world, but) that are Subject to the ordination of
this Apostolic See of Rome. So likewise S. Gregory in his complainte unto
the Empress, touching this same Maximus, ye Bishop of Salonae, speaks not
of all the Bishops, that were throughout the whole Church of God, but only
of such Bishops, as were limited unto his particulare charge. For thus he
makes his complainte, Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 34.
Si Episcopi mei me despiciant etc. If mine own Bishops ( lieinge within
mine own peculiare Jurisdiction) shall despice me.

Therefore your Divinity wanted Logique, M. Hardinge, when ye framed your
Argument in this sort, Gregory complained of Maximus etc. Ergo, Gregory
governed the whole Church.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 1. and. 2.
But where they say, we have gonne away from the Unity of the Catholic
Church, this is not only a matter of malice, but bisides, though it be most
untrue, yet has it sum show and appearance of truth. For the common
people, and ignorante multitude geeue not credit only to things true, and of
certainetie, but even to such things also, if any chance, which may seem
to have but a resemblaunce of truth. Therefore we see, that subtle, and crafty
persons, when they had no truth on their side, have ever contended, and
hotely argued with things likely to be true, to the intent they, which were not
able to epsy the very ground of the matter, might be carried away at least
with sum pretense and probability, or likelihoode of the Truth. In times
paste, whereas the first Christians, our Forefathers, in making their
Prayers to God, did turn them selves toward the East, there were that
said, they woorshipped the Son, Tertull. in Apologetico.
and reckened the same as their God. Again, where our Forefathers said, that
as touching Immortal and Everlasting Life, they lived by none other means,
but by the Fleashe, and Blood of that Lamb without spotte, y^ is to say, of
our Saueour Jesus Christ, the envious Creatures, and Enemies of Christ's
Cross, whose only care was to bring Christian Religion into sclaunder by all
manner of ways, made the people believe, that they were wicked persons, that
they sacrificed men's Fleashe, Ibidem.
and drunk men's Blood. Also where our Forefathers said, that, before God,
there is neither Man, nor Woman, and that for atteininge to the true
Righteousness, there is no distinction at al of persons: and, whereas they
called one an other indifferently by the name of Sisters, and Brothers, there
wanted not men, which forged false tales upon the same, saieinge that the
Christians made no difference among them selves, either of age, or of kind:
but like brute beasts without regard, had to do one with an other. Ibidem.
And, whereas, to pray, and to hear the Gospel, they met often together in
secret, and byplaces, because Rebels sometime were woonte to do y^ like,
therefore Rumors were every were spreadde abroad, that they made privy
confederacies, and took counsel together, either to kill the Magistrates, or
to subuerte the Common Wealth. And, whereas in Celebratinge the Holy Mysteries
after Christ's Institution, they took Bread and Wine, they were therefore
thought of many, Augustine. Contra Faust. Lib. 27. Cap. 13.
to woorship, not Christ, but Bacchus, and Ceres: for somuche as those vain
Gods were woorshipped of the Heathen in like sort, after a profane
Superstition, with Bread and Wine. These things were believed of many, not
because they were true in deed (for what could be more untrue?) but because
they were like to be true, and through a certain shadow of truth might the
more easily deceive the simple. On this fashon likewise do these men
sclaunder us as Heretics, and say that we have leafte the Church and
Fellowship of Christ: not because they think it is true, for they do not
mutche force of that, but because to ignoraunte folk, it might perhaps sum
way appear true.

We have in deed put our selves aparte, not as Heretics are woonte, from
the Church of Christ, but as al good men ought to do, from the infection
of naughty persons, and Hypocrites. Nevertheless in this point they
triumph maruciloully, that they be the Church, that their Church is
Christ's Spouse, the Pillar of Truth, the Ark of Noah: and, that without it
there is no hope of Salvation. Contrariewise, they say, that we be
Renegates: that we have torn Christ's seat: that we are plucked quite of
from the Body of Christ, and have foresaken the Catholic Faith. And, when
they leave nothing unspoken, that may never so falsely and malitious^y be
said against us, yet this one thing are they never hable truly to say,
that we have swarued, either from the Word of God, or from the Apostles of
Christ, or from the Primitive Church. Surely we have ever judged the
Primitive Church of Christ's time, of the Apostles, and of the Holy Fathers,
to be the Catholic Church: neither make we doubt to name it, Noah's Ark,
Christ's Spouse, the Pillar and vpholder of al Truth: nor yet to fix therein
the whole mean of our Salvation. It is doubtless an odious matter, for one to
leave the fellowship whereunto he has benne accustomed, and specially of those
men, who, though, they be not, yet at least seem to be, and be called
Christians. And, to say truly, we do not despise the Church of these men
(how so ever it be ordered by them now a days) partly for the names sake it
self, and partly for that the Gospel of Jesus Christ has once benne therein
truly, and purely set ^oorthe. Neither had we departed therefrom, but of very
necessity, and mutche against our wills.

M. Hardinge.
We grant, that in old time slanders were made upon the Faithefull. But no
like slander is made by us upon you in the matter, whereof ye speak. For let
us grant, that ye have in deed put your selves aparte, and are gone from the
contagion of naughty persons and Hypocrites. This is the very thing, we lay
to your charge. For though we were such, as for a great number ye shall never
be able to prove, yet by Christ's own sentence ye must do that, The same
Scribes, and Phariseis commanded the people to refuse Christ's company:
Johan. 9. and 12. And was the people bound to follow them?
which they that sit in the chair of Moses bid you do, although they be
Hypocrites, as the Scribes and Phariseis were, of whom Christ spoke etc. But
it shall be inoughe for you to do, as the Successors of Peter bid you to do,
and so to follow their saieinges, and not their dooinges.

The Primitive Church is continewed with our time, by the Successors of S.
Peter. for whose Faith never to fail Christ prayed, and whom Untruth. For
Christ never gave Peter any such special Privilege.
only he made Shepeherde to feed all his Flock of Sheep and Lambs. Christ
A strange kind of Divinity: such as Peter, and Paul^ never knevve.
now requires of you, not to obeie Peter and Paul, but to obeie him, who
sits in their chair. Where ye say, it is an odious matter to forsake us,
and yet have foresaken us: where ye confess that ye despise not the Church,
we be of, and yet grant that ye have departed from it: how stands this
together? Remember ye what ye say? Know ye what ye do? Who will regard
your word, which with one breathe say, and vnsaie? If it be odious, why do
ye it? If ye despise not the Church, why depart ye from it?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Christ says, Departing from the Pope.
The Scribes, and Phariseis sit in Moses Chair: Do that they say, but do
not, that they do. Ergo, say you, We may not depart away from the Pope.
How so ever it fare with your Conclusion, M. Hardinge, verily in your premises
ye compare the Pope, and his Cardinals with the Scribes, and Phariseis. And
yet the Scribes, and Phariseis sat in the Chair, and taught the Law: Your
Pope, and Cardinals sit still, and teach nothing. Notwithstanding, let us
well allow of this Comparison. Matthew. 23.
Ye may remember, that Christ also says, Woe be unto you, ye Scribes, and
Phariseis, that shut up the Kingedome of Heaven before men: and neither do
you enter in your selves: nor will you suffer other, that feign would enter.
Woe be unto you, ye blind Guides: Woe be unto you, that have taken away the
keie of Knowledge. Likewise he says of them unto his Disciples: Beware of
the leaven of the Scribes, and Phariseis: Let them go: Matthew. 16. Matthew. 15.
Blind they are, and the Leaders of the blind.

To sit in Moses Chair, was, truly, and rightly to instruct the people,
and to open unto them the Law of Moses. August. De Sermon Domi. in Monte,
Lib. 2.
S. Augustine says, Hoc ipsum, quod bona dicebant, and ea, quae dicebant,
vtiliter audiebantur, and fiebant, non erat ipsorum. Cathedram enim, inquit,
Mosi sedent: That they spoke good things unto the people, and that the
things, that they said, were profitable to the hearers, and dooers of the
same, it was not of them selves. For Christ says, They sit upon Moses
Chair. Again he says, Sedendo super Cathedram Mosis, legem Dei docent.
Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 46.
Ergo per illos Deus docet. Sua vero illi si velint docere, nolite audire:
nolite facere. Certe enim tales sua quaerunt, non quae Jesus Christi: Sittinge
upon Moses Chair, they teach the Law of God: Therefore it is God, that
teaches by the mean of them. But if they will teach you things of their
own, then hear them not: then do it not. For certainly such men seek
their own: and not the things, that perteine to Christ Jesus. Ye see
therefore, M. Hardinge, we are bound to hear the Pope, and his Cardinals,
and other like Scribes, and Phariseis, not absolutely, or without exception,
what so ever they list to say: but only so long, as they teach the Law
of God. Further then that, S. Augustine says, We may neither hear them,
nor follow their Counsel.

Hereunto ye thought it good, to add more force, as a supply, to aid your
wantes. Christ said unto Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith shall
never fail. Ergo, say you, The Pope can never err. This way of reasoninge,
I trow, ye Learned of Peter de Palude a worthy Doctoure of your side. For so
he reasons: Ego rogaui pro te, Petrus De Palude, de Potestate pp. Articul. 4.
Petre, vt Fides tua non deficiat. Ex quo habetur, quod Romana Ecclesia in Fide
errare non potest: nec de eius Fide dubitare licet: Sed in omnibus est
sequenda: Peter, I have Prayed for thee, that thy Faith may not fail. By
these words we are taught, that the Church of Rome cannot err in Faith.
Neither is it lawful to doubt of the Faith of that Church: but in all causes
we are bound to follow it. Augu. De quaest. Noui Testamen. quae. 75.
But S. Augustine says, Nunquid pro Petro rogabat: pro Iohanne, and Iacobo
non rogabat? Vt coeteros raceam: To leave the rest, did Christ Pray for
Peter? and did he not Pray for John, and James? Again he says, August. De
Verbis Domini in Euange. secund. Lucam. Sermo. 36.
Hac nocte postulauit Satanas vexare vos, ficut triticum: and egorogaui Patrem
pro vobis, ne deficiat Fides Vestra: This night has Satan begged to threashe
you, as if it were wheat: but I have Prayed to my Father ( not for Peter
only, but) for you, that your Faith may not fail. So says Origin, Nunquid
audebimus dicere, quod aduersus vnum Petrum non praeualiturae sint portae
Inferorum: aduersus coeteros autem Apostolos, Origin. in Matthew. Tract. 1.
ac Praefectos Ecclesiae sint praeualiturae? An Petro Soli dantur a Christo
Claues Regni Coelorum? Nec alius Beatorum quisquam eas accepturus est? Omnia,
quaeque prius dicta sunt, quaeque sequuntur, Velut ad Petrum dicta, sunt omnium
Communia: May we dare to say, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail
Only against Peter: but shall prevail against the other Apostles, and Rulers
of the Church? Were the Keys of the Kingedome of Heaven given only to Peter?
And shall no Holy man else receive the same? Nay, all the things, both that were
said before, and also that follow after, as spoken to Peter, are Common, and
belong unto al. Therefore, as ye say of the Church of Rome, so may we say
likewise of the Church of Jerusalem, where S. James was: and of the Church
of Ephesus, where S. John was, and of other the like Apostolic Churches,
notwithstanding they be now in the possession of the Turk, and have received
the Religion of Mahomete, yet, because Christ has once prayed for them, The
Faith of them shall never fail.

Further ye tell us, It shall be yenough for you, to do, as the Successoures of
Peter bid you to do. Christ now requires not of you to obeie Peter, and
Paul: but to obeie him, that sits in their Chair. If this way be as sure,
as it is short, then is there no doubt, but al is well. Though we believe
neither Peter, nor Paul, nor what so ever is written in Gods Word, yet,
say you, If we follow the Pope, we cannot err. For thus mutche, M.
Harding, ye are hable to warrante us by your Gospel, y^ Christ requires not
us now, to be obedient to Peter, and Paul, but only to the Popes Holiness,
y^ keeps Residence in their Chair. This is your Divinity: these are your
words. If ye ever recante the same, ye mar the flower of your Market. We
need not now to say, Thus says the Lord: it shall be sufficient for us,
Galat. 1.
to say, Thus says the Pope. Yet S. Paul so far aduentureth the Truth, and
certainetie of his Doctrine, that he doubts not to say, If an Angel from
Heaven preach unto you any other Gospel, then we have Preached, accursed be
he. Chrysostom. in 1. Caput ad Galat.
Upon which words S. Chrysostom has noted thus: Non dixit, Si Contraria
annuntiauerint, aut totu^ Euangelium subuerterint: verum, Si paulum
Euangelizauerint praeter Euangelium, quod accepistis, etiamsi quiduis
labefactauerint, Anathema sint: S. Paul says not, If they Preach Contrary
to the Gospel, or overthrow the whole Gospel: but, If they Preach any little
thing bisides the Gospel, that ye have received: if they overthrow any
thing, what so ever it be, accursed be they. Did. 36. Ca. final.
Therefore S. Hierome says, Ea doceat Episcopus, quae a Deo didicerit, non ex
proprio Cord etc. Let the Bishop teach those things, that he has learned of
God: and not of his own heart, or fancy.

Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in 2. Timoth. Homi. 2.
Plus aliquid dicam: Ne Paulo quidem obedire oporret, si quid dixerit proprium,
si quid humanum: sed Apostolo Christum in se loquentem circumferenti: I will
tell you a greatter matter: We may not obeie, no not S. Paul him self, if
he speak any thing of his own, or if he speak only as a man: But we must
believe the Apostle of Christ, carrieinge Christ about speakinge within him.

And therefore Panormitane says, De Electio. and Elec. potesta. Significasti.
Abb.
In concernentibus Fidem, etiam dictum vnius priuati esset praeferendum dicto
Papae: si ille moueretur melioribus rationibus Noui, and Veteris Testamenti,
quam Papa: In matters concerning Faith, the saieinge of one Private man were
to be heard before the saieinge of the Pope: if the same Private man were
moved with better reasones of the New, and Old Testamente, then the Pope.
But, that we should no longer obeie Peter, and Paul, but geeue ear only to
him, that is cropen into their Chair, it is such Divinity, as neither
Peter, nor Paul ever taught us.

Last of al, as upon sum good aduauantage, ye begin to Triumph. Remember
ye, say ye, what ye say? know ye, what ye do? who will regard your
word, which with one breathe say, and vnsaie? If it be odious to leave our
fellowship, why do ye it? If ye despise not the Church, why depart ye from
it? To Say, and Vnsaie, it is your property, M. Harding: it is not ours. Ye
have Said, and Vnsaide, and yet, were it not for shame, it is thought ye
would be content to Say again. We despise not the Church: it is the House
of God: But we mislike your defacinge, and disorderinge of the Church. Christ
reproved the Priests, and Phariseis, for that they had turned the Temple of
God into a cave of Thieves: Matthew. 21.
And yet nevertheless he despised it not: but said it was his Fathers house.
To leave the wicked fellowship of them, that bear a name, and show of
Godliness, it seems odious before men: 2. John.
but before God it is not odious. S. John says, Who so ever is such a one,
bid him not, God speed. For who so says, God speed unto him, is
partetaker of his il. 1. Corinthians. 5. Apocalyp. 18.
S. Paul says, I warn you, that you receive no meat with any such. And
God him self says, Comme out from her, o my people, lest ye be partetakers
of her sins, and lest ye receive of her Plagues.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 3.
But I put case, an Idol be set up in the Church of God, and the same
Desolation, which Christ prophesied to comme, stood openly in the Holy
Place? What if sum Thief, or Pirate invade, and possess Noah's Ark? These
folks, as often as they tell us of the Church, mean thereby them selves
alone, and attribute al these titles to their own selves, boastinge, as they
did in times paste, which cried, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the
Lord: or, as the Phariseis, and Scribes did, which craked, they were Abraham's
Children. Thus with a gaie, and ioly show deceive they the simple, and seek
to choke us with the bare name of the Church. Mutche like as if a Thief, when
he has gotten into an other man's house, and by violence either has thruste
out, or slain the owner, should afterward assign the same house to him
self, castinge forth of possession the right Enheritour: Or, if
Antichriste, when he had once entered into the Temple of God, should afterward
say, This house is mine own, and Christ has nothing to do withal. For
these men now, after they have leafte nothing remaininge in the Church of
God, that has any likeness of his Church, yet will they seem the Patrones,
and the valiaunte maineteiners of the Church: Very like as Gracchus amongst
the Romans stood in Defense of the Treasury, notwithstanding with his
prodigality, and fond expenses, he had utterly wasted the whole stock of the
Treasury. And yet was there never any thing so wicked, or so far out of
reason, but lightely it might be covered, and Defended by the name of the
Church. For the Waspes also make honycombes, as well as Bees: and wicked men
have companies like to the Church of God. Yet for all that, They be not
straight way the people of God, which are called the people of God: neither
be they al Israelites, as many as are comme of Israel the Father. August. in
Sermon. Contra Arianos, to. 6.
The Arians, notwithstanding they were Heretics, yet bragged they, that they
alone were the Catholics, Augustinus in Ep. 48 ad Vince^. Epiphani. lib. 1.
Haere. 30.
calling all the rest, now Ambrosians, now Athanasians, now Iohannites. And
Nestorius, as says Theodorete, for all that he was an Heretic, yet covered he
him self (...), that is to wite, Sozomen. lib. 6. cap. 38.
with a certain cloak, and color of the true and Right Faith. Ebion, though
he agreed in opinion with the Samaritanes, yet, as says Epiphanius, he would
needs be called a Christian. The Mahometistes at this day, for all that al
Histories make plain mention, and themselves also cannot deny, but they took
their fist beginning of Agar the bond woman, yet for the very name, and
stocks sake, choose they rather to be called Saracenes, as though they came of
Sara the free woman, and Abraham's true and lavvful wife. So likewise the
false Prophets of al ages, which stood up against the Prophets of God, and
resisted Esaias, Jeremy, Christ, and the Apostles, at no time craked of any
thing so mutche, as they did of the name of the Church. And for none other
cause did they so fearcely vex them, and call them Renegates, and Apostatas,
then for that they forsook their fellowship, and keapte not thordinaunces of
the Elders. Wherefore, if we would follow the judgments of those men only,
who then governed the Church, and would respect nothing else, neither God,
nor his word, it must needs be confessed, that the Apostles were rightly,
and by just Law condemned of them to death, because they fell from the
Bishops and Priests, that is, you must think, from the Catholic Church:
and because they made new alterations in Religion, contrary to the Bishops,
and Priests wills, yea, and for all their spurninge so earnestly against it.

M. Hardinge.
What a foolish putcase, and what a fond what if is that, to say, What if a
pirate invade the Ark of Noah? As though S. Paul had not warned us, that
Antichriste shall sit, and shevve him self in the place of Christ.
As though God sat not at the stern, and had the bel^e in his own hand.

Ergo Antichriste shall sit in the Popes chair. 2 Thessalonians. 2
Antichriste can not sit in the temple of God, But what if Christ's Vicare him
self be Antichriste?
until the vicare of Christ, who keeps possession, be thrown out, and then
will Christ come with his Angels to destroy the wicked man with the breath of
his mouth. Ye that are the berbingers of Antichriste, are not yet able to cast
out the lieutenant of Christ. Math. 24.
Ye heave at the vnderministers. Your master will accompleshe al iniquity, and
he shall be the desolation that Christ spoke of. We understand, what ye shoot
at. But ye are ashamed to utter plainly your blasphemy. Untruth, Malicious
and sclaunderous.
Ye would say (as it may seem) if ye durst, that Christ is the desolation,
and that Antichrist is the true God. Ergo ye belie us, although not greatly.
In effect I do not greatly belie you.

Neither if the Apostles might go from the Bishops of Moses law, therefore
may ye depart from the vicare of Christ. For the law of Moses is changed,
and the priesthod of Aaron is transferred: But the law and priesthood of Jesus
Christ tarieth for ever, as David said, Thou art priest for ever, according to
the order of Melchisedech. Ye hault too manifestly.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Antichriste, ye say, cannot sit in the Temple of God, until the Vicare of
Christ, who keeps possession, be thrown out. So the old Trojans sometime
said, Their City could never miscarrie, while their Palladium remained
amongst them. But who told you these strange news, To sit in the place of
Christ.
M. Harding? Who made the Pope Christ's Vicare general throughout the whole
Church? 2 Thessalonians 2.
Or who bade him keep possession in steed of Christ? Must we needs
think, that the whole state of Christ's Church, hangs only of the Pope? Or
that, if the Pope were not the Pope, the Church of Christ were not the
Church? Or, must your simple word now be taken for a Prophecy, that
Antichriste shall never enter into Gods Temple, before the Pope be thrown
out? This Fable would have benne better furnished with more credit.

Verily whereas we say, we put case, an Idol be set up in the Church of
God: Or, what if sum Thief or Pirate invade and possess Noah's Ark, neither
is this, what if, so fond as you would seem to make it: nor this, Put case,
so impossible. For S. Paul says, Antichriste shall sit in the Church of
God, and show him self above all that is worshipped, or called God: that is to
say, Being a Thief, and a Pirate, he shall enter perforce into Noah's Ark.

Now, M. Hardinge, If Antichriste may sit in the place of God, mutche more
may he sit in the place of Peter. I will not say, the Pope is Antichriste.
God will reuele him in his time: Apocalyp. 13.
and he shall be known. S. John says, This is the wisdom: who so has
understanding, let him reckon the number of the Beast. Upon which words,
Irenaeus, li. 5. cap. vltimo.
Irenaeus welneare fifteen hundred years ago, says thus: The name of
Antichriste, expressed by that number shall be, Latinus: And he adds further,
Hoc valde verisimile est. Quoniam verissimum Regnum hoc habet vocabulum.

S. Gregor. lib. 4. Epist 38 Sacerdotum paratus est exercitus. Irenae lib. 5.
Cap. penulti. Ioachimus Abbas.
Gregory says, He is Antichriste, that shall claim to be called the Universal
Bishop: and shall have a Guard of Priests to attend upon him. Again, Irenaeus
says, Antichristus, cum sit Seruus, tamen adorari vult, vt Deus. Antichriste,
notwithstanding he be but a slave, yet, he will be woorshipped, as if he were
God. Ioachimus Abbas says, Antichristus iampridem natus est Romae, and altius
extolletur in Sede Apostolica: Antichriste is long sithence borne in Rome, and
yet shall be higher anaunced in the Apostolic See.

Thus is he described, that shall sit in the place of Christ, and shall
maineteine possession against Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
But, Christ shall comme with his holy Angels, and shall destroy him with the
breath of his mouth.

That ye allege of the Priesthood of Melchisedech, serves you here to small
purpose. We know, that, not the Pope, but Christ alone is a Priest for
ever, Augustine in lib. 83. quaesti. quae. 61.
according to the Order of Melchisedech. S. Augustine says: Ipse est
Sacerdos noster in aeternum, secundum Ordinem Melchisedech, qui semetipsum
obtulit holocaustum pro peccatis nostris: and eius Sacrificii Similitudinem
celebrandam in suae Passionis Memoriam commendauit: Christ is our Priest for
ever after the Order of Melchisedech, which has offered up him self a
Sacrifice for our sins: and has delivered unto us a Similitude, or
Likeness of that Sacrifice, to be done in remembrance of his Passion.

Likewise again he says, In eadem quaestione.
Holocausti eius Imaginem ad Memoriam Passionis suae in Ecclesia celebrandam
dedit, vt esset Sacerdos in aeternum: non secundum Ordinem Aaron, sed secundum
ordinem Melchisedech: Christ has given an Image, or Resemblaunce of that
Sacrifice, to be keapte in the Church in Remembrance of his Passion, that he
might be a Priest for ever: not after the Order of Aaron, but after the Order
of Melchisedech.

How be it, Articul. 17. Division. 15.
touching this whole matter, I have answered more at large in my Former Reply.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 4.
Wherefore, like as it is written, that Hercules in old time was forced, in
striving with Antaeus that huge Giant, to lift him quite up from the Earth,
that was his Mother, ere he could conquert him: even so must our Adversaries
be heaued from their Mother, that is, from this vain color, and shadow of
the Church, wherewith they so disguise, and defend them selves: otherwise
they can not be brought to yield unto the Word of God. And therefore says
Jeremy the Prophet, Make not such great boaste, that the Temple of the
Lord is with you. This is but a vain confidence: these are but lies. The
Angel also says in the Apocalypse: They say, they be Jews: but they be the
Synagog of Satan. And Christ said to the Phariseis, when they vaunted them
selves of the kindred, John. 8.
and blood of Abraham: Ye are of your father the Devil: For you resemble not
your Father Abraham: As mutche to say, as, Ye are not the men ye would so
feign be called: ye beguile the people with vain titles: and abuse the name of
the Church, to the overthrowing of the Church.

M. Hardinge.
Heave at us, whiles ye will, and whiles ye may, ye shall never remove us. In
which stedfastnes we trust to stand by Gods grace to the last breath. Heave
at us with all the forces of your cunning, of your malice, of your flattery, of
your policies, and with what so ever ingens ye have: ye shall never be able to
overthrow the house of our consciences builded upon the sure rock. Math. 7.
Let the gourders of rain come down from you and al other Heretics, let the
floudes of worldly rages thrust, let the winds of Satan's temptations blow
their worste, this house shall not be overthrown.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O M. Romans 11.
Hardinge, S. Paul says unto you, Noli altum Sapere, sed time: Presume not of
your self: but stand in awe. Such words would rather have becommed them,
Hierem. 44
that said sommetime unto the Prophet Hieremie, Verbum, quod locutus es nobis
in Nomine Domini, non audiemus: Sed faciendo faciemus omne verbum, quod
egredietur de ore nostro: We will never hear the word, that thou speak
unto us in the name of the Lord. Luke. 19. (...).
But we will surely do, what so ever thing shall pass out of our own mouths.
Thus it is written of them, that said, The Lord shall not bear rule over, nor
master us. With like mildness of spirit the wilful Philosopher said, Non
persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris: Ye shall not make me believe it, no though I
do believe it.

As Constancy in good things is a virtue, so frowardness, and wilfulness is
a vice. Vow not thus your own destruction. He that is fallen, may rise
again. The Lord is hable to raise you up: and to make you a vessel of his
glory. Ye know not, to what good purpose God has appointed you. Speak not
over mutche of the strength of your Mount. You know, upon how light
occasions it has benne moved. Follow rather S. Paul's counsel, and with fear,
and tremblinge work your own Salvation. Philip. 2. Hieremi. 10. Luke. 11.
The way, ye walk in, is not your own: Your heart is in the hand of God.
Suffer Gods Truth to prevail: And understand, that the kingedome of God is
come unto you.

The Apology, Cap. 10. Division. 1.
So that these men's part had been, I have prayed for thee, Peter etc.
first to have clearly, and truly proved, that the Romish Church is the
true and right instructed Church of God: and that the same, as they do order
it at this day, doothe agree with the Primitive Church of Christ, of the
Apostles, and of the Holy Fathers, which we doubt not, but was in deed the
True Catholic Church.

M. Hardinge.
Ye would us to prove, that the Roman Church is the true Church of God. Ye
grant, that once it was the true Church of God. And the Gospel shows, that
Christ prayed for it in S. Peter, who made his successors there. Luke. 22.
This is a very vain hope. For Christ prayed for the other Apostles no less,
then for Peter.
What follows hereof, but that it must needs abide as true, as ever it was,
except Christ's prayer were not heard? S. Paul likewise wttnesseth, that the
Roman Faith is preached in the universal world, Romans 1. Li. 4. Epi. 8.
giving a manifest prophecy, that the Roman Faith and the Catholic Faith
should be alone. S. Cyprian calls the agreing with the Bishop of Rome and
communicating with him, Catholicae Ecclesiae vnitatem, etc. The allowing and
firm holding of the unity of the Catholic Church. And writing to
Antonianus in the same book, he accompteth it for one thing, to Communicate
with Cornelius the B. of Rome, and to Communicate with the Catholic Church.
For you it is vain to say, that it has erred, Untruth. For where did the
Holy Ghost ever make such promise?
when the holy ghost has signified, that it can not err.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I will not say, Where were your wits, M. Hardinge, when ye wrote these
things? But well may I say, where was your Logique? As for Divinity, it
appears by your reckening, ye make no great accoumpte of it. Christ, say
you, prayed for Peter: Ergo, the Roman Faith can never fail. Few children
would willingly make such Arguments. Ye presume very mutche of the
Simplicity, and Ignorance of your Reader. For think you, that Christ
prayed only for Peter, and for no body else? Or think you, that Christ's
prayers took place in none other of all the Apostles, but only in Peter? Awake
for shame: and shake of these dreams. Christ him self says, O Father, I
pray nor only for these, John. 17.
but also for them, that by their word shall believe in me. And S. Augustine
thus reports the same prayer, as it is alleged before: Ego rogaui Paitem pro
vobis, Augustine. De verbis Do. in Euangelio Secun. Lucam. Sermon 36. Augusti in
quae. Nou Testam. quae. 75. Origin. in Mat. tracta 1. Roman. 1.
ne deficiat Fides vestra: I have prayed unto my Father, (not for Peter only,
but) for you, that your Faith may not fail. Again he says, Nunquid pro
Petro rogabat: Pro Iohanne, and Iacobo non rogabat? Did Christ pray for
Peter: And did he not pray for John, and James? Certainly Origin says, as
likewise I have before alleged, Omnia, quaeque prius dicta sunt, quaeque
sequuntur, velut ad Petrum dicta, sunt omnium Communia: All the things, that
either paste before, or follow after, as spoken unto Peter, are common unto all the Apostles.

But S. Paul says unto the Romans, Your Faith is spoken of throughout
the world. And S. Cyprian says, The agreeing with the Bishop of Rome was the
Unity of the Catholic Church. And yet it may please you, to be remembered
by the way, that the same S. Cyprian reproved Cornelius, and Stephanus, both
Bishops of Rome: and told them, they were both deceived: and therefore
would not agree unto them. Nevertheless, hereof ye conclude thus, Ergo the
Holy Ghost has signified, that the Church of Rome cannot err. It pitieth
me, M. Harding, in your behalf, to see, into how streite, and miserable
holes ye are feign to creep. For, what if the Faith, and the Constancy of
the Romans in old times, for the Nobility of that Empiere and City, were
then published throughout the whole world? Yet where did the Holy Ghost ever
tell you, that therefore the Church of Rome should never err? By what Word?
By what Promise? By what Revelation? Ye say, The Faith of the Romans was
heard of throughoute the whole World. So was the Great capitol there: So was
the beauty of their Princely buildinges. Which, notwithstanding are now made
smoothe, and even with the ground. Esai. 2.
So likewise is it written of Jerusalem, De Sion exibit Lex, and Verbum Domini
de Jerusalem: The Law shall comme forth from Sion, and the Word of God from
Jerusalem. So in the City of Antioche the Faithful were first called
Christians: Chrysostom. ad Popul. Antio. Homi. 3. Nazian. epist. 74. Nazian. ad
Heronem.
And therefore Chrysostom calls the same City Caput totius orbis, The Head
of the whole world. Thus was Eusebius Samosatensis called Regula Fidei, The
Rule, and Standerde of the Faith: Thus was Athanasius called Orbis oculus: and
Fundamentu^ Fidei: The Eye of the world, and the Fundation of the Faith. Would
ye hereof conclude, M. Harding, that therefore the Faith of these Churches can
never fail? Ye know, that all this notwithstanding, the Churches as well of
Jerusalem, and Antioche, as also of Asia, Syria, Graecia, and of all the East,
are now subject to the Turk, and scarcely a few leafte there, that dare to
profess the name of Christ.

What a fond Paradise is this, to say, because ye had once the Faith of
Christ, therefore now ye can never err? Such a fantastical Paradise had
they built unto them selves, Hierem. 7. Math. 3.
that cried out in old times, even as you do now, The Temple of God: The
Temple of God: We are the Children of Abraham. But who so ever well
co^sidereth the story of the time, shall soon find, y^ then they cried most,
The Temple of God, when they had most shamefully abused, and defaced the
Temple of God: and, that then they claimed most to be called the Children of
Abraham, when they had forsaken both the Faith, and life of Abraham, and, as
Christ says unto them, Johan. 8.
were becomme the Children of the Devil.

Such a fantasy had they, that said, Non peribit Lex a Sacerdote: Nec
consilium a Sapiente: Hierem. 18.
Nec Verbum a Propheta: The Law shall not depart from the Priest: Nor Counsel
from the Wise: Nor the Word from the Prophet. But God says unto them,
Obstupescent Sacerdotes, and Prophetae terrebuntur. Lex peribit a Sacerdote,
and Consilium a Senioribus. Nox vobis erit pro Visione: and tenebrae pro
Diuinatione: Your Priests shall be amassed: and your Prophets shall be at their
wits end. The Law shall perish from the Priest: Hieremi. 18. Ezechiel. 7.
Miche. 6. Galat. 3. 2. Pet. 2. Esai. 1.
and Counsel shall want in the Elders. Ye shall have Night in steed of a
Vision: and Darkness in steed of Prophecy.

S. Paul says unto the Galathians, Ye began well: who has thus bewitched
you, that ye should not obeie the Truth? S. Peter says, As there were
False Prophets amongst the people in old time, even so among you there
shall be False Prophets, bringing in Sects of Perdition. Of such a change
the Prophet Esaie co^plaineth, Quomodo facta est Meretrix Ciuitas Fidelis?
How is this Faithful City now become an Harlot? Deceive not thus your
self, M. Harding, with vain hope. Harken rather to the voice of our Lord.
Put nothing to his Word: take nothing from the same: turn neither to the
Right hand, nor to the Leafte. So shall ye be sure, ye shall not err.

The Apology, Cap. 10. Division, 2.
For our parts, if we could have judged, Ignorance, Error, Superstition,
Idolatry, men's Inventions, and the same commonly disagreeing with the Holy
Scriptures, either to please God, or to be sufficient for thobteining of
Everlasting Salvation: or if we could ascertaine our selves, that the Word of
God was written but for a time only, and afterward again ought to be
abrogated, and put away: or else, that the Saienges and Commandments of God
ought to be subject to man's will, Gods word mutable.
that, whatsoever God says, and commaundethe, except the Bishop of Rome will,
and Command the same, it must be taken as void, and unspoken: If we could
have brought our selves to believe these things, we grant, there had benne no
cause at al, why we should have leafte these men's Company.

M. Hardinge.
God forbid, that either ye, or any Christen man should judge, that ignorance,
error, superstition, idolatry, men's inventions contrary to the Scriptures,
either pleased God, or to be sufficient to salvation. Because ye lay this to
the catholic Church, Untruth enclosed, knovve^, and willful: Read the
answer.
we can say no less of you, but that ye be false liers, and diuelishe
slaunderers. And Thus partly M. Hardinges Doctors say: partly M. Hardinge
him self: As it shall appear.
who teaches, that Gods word was written, but for a time only? That his
commandments be subject to man's will? That Gods saienges and precepts be
void, except the Bishop of Rome ratify them? Here would I say unto you at
least, fie for shame, but that I think, I should prevail no more, then if I
said to an impudent and common Harlot, Ierem. 3.
fie for shame. Who may not plainly see, the Scripture verified on you,
Frons mulieris Meretricis facta est vobis? Ye have gotten to you the impudent
face of an Harlot.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, it has pleased you, to bestow large liueries, of your
False Liers: Diuelishe Sclaunderers: Impudent Faces: Common Harlots: with Fies,
and shames, etc. Wherein no man may justly grudge you, to be so liberal of
your own. First, that by your Doctrine Ignorance highly pleases God, and is
sufficient to Salvation, bisides the general practice of your whole Church,
ye may soon call to mind, that one of your dearest friends, in most
honorable Audience, not long sithence, openly published the same, in the name,
and behoufe of al his Brethren, as a Secret Mystery, and the very bottom of
your Divinity: Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. You know, M. Harding,
that a great many both worthy, and honorable, are hable to witness, that
this is, neither false Lie, nor Diuelishe Sclaunder. Concerning Superstition,
and Idolatry, what need we many words? The thing it self is too well hable
to prove it self. Who so but looks into your Churches, may easily, not
only see it with his eyes, but also feel it with his fingers. That Gods
Holy Word, by your Learning, is mutable, and serves only for a time, your
own Doctoure Cardinalis Cusanus would soon have taught you:
Notwithstanding, it may scarcely seem lawful for you, being so learned a
man, in the Substance of your own Doctrine, Cardinal. Cusanus, De Authoritate
Eccle. and Concilij Supra, and Co^tra Scripturam.
to plead Ignorance. Cardinal Cusanus words be these: Scripturae adaptatae
sunt ad tempus, and vary intelliguntur: Ita vt vno tempore secundum currentem
vniuersalem ritum exponantur: mutato ritu, iterum Sententia mutetur: The
Scriptures are applied unto the time, and may have sundry understandings: So
that at one time they may be expounded (one way) according to the universal
current order (of the church): and that, the same order being broken, the
meaning of the Scriptures may be changed. Look better on your books, M.
Hardinge: and ye shall see, that herein is neither Lie, nor Sclaunder. That the
Holy Scriptures of God, by your Divinity, be not Authentical, farther then
they be ratified by the Pope, ye might have learned of your Syluester Prierias,
Syluester Prieria^, contra Lutherum.
Master of the Popes Palaice. Thus he writes: A Doctrina Romanae Ecclesiae,
and Romani Pontificis, Sacra Scriptura robur trahit, and authoritatem. The Holy
Scripture takes strength, and Authority of the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, and of the Bishop of Rome. Again he says, Indulgentiae Authoritate
Scripturae non innotuere nobis: Sed Authoritate Romanae Ecclesiae, Romanorumque
Pontificum; quae Mayor est: Pardonnes are not known to us by the Authority of
the Scriptures, but by the Authority of the Roman Church, and of the
Bishops of Rome, which is greater, then the Authority of the Scriptures.

If ye say, these be Lies, and Sclaunders, ye offer great wrong to your own
Doctors. Nevertheless, if ye shall happen to cry out in the impatience of
your Choler, Fie for shame: Impudente Faces: Common Harlottes: remember, what
you your self have written immediately before, touching the same. These be
your own words. Recante them ye may: But deny them ye may not. Thus you
say: M. H. fol 192 b.
Christ now requires of you, not to obeie Peter, and Paul, (that is to
say, the Word of God) But to obe^e him, who sits in their Chair. We
forge not these words, M. Hardinge: They are your own. Folks will think,
ye have no Modeste Matrones face, if ye speak willingly against your self.

Now, ye see, M. Hardinge, who teaches you, That Gods Word was Written
only for a time: And that Gods Commandments are no further Authentical,
but as they be ratified by the Pope: Therefore henceforth ye may spare these
Lies, and Sclaunders: and cry out, Fie, and Shame, when sum occasion shall be
offered. Cardin. Cusan. De Authorita. Eccle. and Council. Supra and Contra
Scripturam.
In deed Cardinal Cusanus says: Veritas adhaeret Cathedrae. Quare Membra
Cathedrae Vnita, and Pontifici Coniuncta, efficient Ecclesiam: The Truth
cleaves fast to the Popes Chair. Therefore the Members united unto that
Chair, and joined unto the Pope, make the Church.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 1.
As touching that we have now done, to depart from that Church, whoes
errors were proved, and made manifest to the world, which Church also had
already evidently departed from Gods Word, and yet not to depart so mutche
from it self, as from the errors thereof, and not to do this disorderly, or
wickedly, but quietly, and soberly, we have done nothing herein against the
doctrine, either of Christ, or of his Apostles. For neither is the Church of
God such, as it may not be dusked with sum spot, or asks not sometime
reparation. Else, what need there so many Assemblies, and Councelles, without
the which, In Council. Lateranens. sub Iulio. 2.
as says Egidius, the Christian Faith is not hable to stand? For look,
says he, how often Councelles are discontinued, so often is the Church
destitute of Christ.

M. Hardinge.
That the Church is points of our Faith necessary to salvation erreth, we
deny it: and Untruth. Ye make your own vvarrante. For Christ never made
such promise to the Church of Rome.
upon warrant of Christ's promise, we tell it you al assuredly, ye shall never be
able to prove it.

Councels are kept, and Bishops be made by the same providence of God,
which provides partly by that means, and partly by other, that the Roman
Faith, Chair, and Rock, shall stand for ever. Ad quos (says S. Cyprian,
speaking of them of Rome) perfidia non potest habere accessum: Untruth,
grounded upon gross ignorance. For M. Hard. fovvly mistaketh S. Cyprians
whole meaning.
to the which unfaithfulness can not have access. He says not only, shall
not have access, but, can not have access.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It seems, M. Hardinge, ye have benne brought up under sum poor unskillful
Surgian. For ve apply one salve to every soar. What soever be alleged
against you, it is sufficient for you to answer. The church of Rome erreth
not, has not erred, can not err. And to this purpose ye have brought us in
certain words of S. Cyprian, far bisides the Authors meaning. Whereby it
appears, that sommetimes ye allege Authorities of the Fathers, not
considering, neither to what end they spoke, nor what they meante.

For, where as S. Cyprian says, Unto the Romans unfaithfulness can have no
access, he speaks not of the Unfaithfulness of Faith, or Doctrine, as you
by error have imagined, but only of the Unfaithfulness of report. The
cause of writing that Epistle, in short, was this: Certain lewd fellows,
refusinge to stand to the judgment of the Bishops of their own Country
of Aphrica, The Church of Rome can not err.
appealed further, and fled to Rome, with many untrue, and forged tales, to
win sum credit of their cause. Hereunto S. Cyprian says, The Romans be
godly, and wise men: they will soon be hable, to epsy their falsehedde. For
vnfaitheful reports, and lewd tales can have no access unto them. If ye had
considered, either the occasion of the writting, or the whole drifte of the
letter, Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
or the very bare words, as they lie, ye might easily have, seen, that this
only was S. Cyprians meaning.

His words be these, Post ista adhuc insuper Pseudoepiscopo sibi ab
Haereticis constituto, nauigare audent, and ad Petri Cathedram, vnde vnitas
Sacerdotalis exorta est, a Schismaticis, and Profanis literas far: nec
cogitare, eos esse Romanos, quorum Fides, Apostolo praedicante, laudata est: ad
quos Perfidia habere non possit accessum: After this, having a False Bishop
appointed unto them by Heretics, they dare to take shipping, and unto Peter's
Chair, and unto that Principal Church, from whence the Priestely unity grew
first, to carry letters from Schismatiques, and lewd men: Neither consider
they, that the Romans are that people, whose Faith is praised by S. Paul the
Apostle: unto whom Unfaithfulness ( of reports, and tales) can have no
access.

If ye doubt of this Exposition, read these words, touching the same,
goeinge before in the same Epistle: In eadem Epist.
Roman cum Mendaciorum suorum merce nauigarunt. Quasi Veritas post eos nauigare
non posset: quae Mendaces linguas rei certa probatione conuinceret. They sail
to Rome with the Merchandise of their Lies: as though the Truethe could not
sail after them, that by proof of the certainty, might controlle their
lieing tongues. This is that Unfaithfulness, that S. Cyprian speaks of: and
not the Vnfaithefulnesse of Faith, and Doctrine.

Now, touching this Appealinge, and fleeing to Rome, lest ye should
think, by occasion of these words, that S. Cyprian allows it, or thinks
well of it: ye shall find in the same Epistle, y^ he utterly misliketh it, and
conde^neth it. For thus he says, Cyprian in eade^ Epist.
Acquum est pariter, and iustu^, vt vniuscuiusque causa illic audiatur, vbi
crimen admissum est: It is meet and right, that every man's cause be pleaded
in that Country, where the fault was committed, etc. Again, Oportet eos,
quibus praesumus, non circumcursare: It is not meet, that they, over whom we
have Jurisdiction, should run about the World: He means to Rome.

And again, Nisi paucis desperatis, and perditis Minor videtur esse Authoritas
Episcoporum in Aphrica constitutorum, etc. Unless a few desperate, and wicked
men think, the Authority of the Bishops of Aphrica is less, then the
Authority of the Bishops of Rome. By these words S. Cyprian makes the
Bishop of Rome equal in Authority with him self, and other Bishops.
Wherefore I must conclude with other words of S. Cyprian in the same
Epistle: Haec est, Frater, vera dementia, non cogitare, quod Mendacia non diu
fallant: Nocte^ tam diu esse, quoad illucescat Dies: O my Brother, this in
deed is very madness, not to think, that Lies cannot long deceive: The
Night lasts no longer, but until the Day begin to spring.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 1. and. 2.
Or, if there be no perile, that harm may come to the Church, what need is
there, to retain to no purpose the names of Bishops? For so it is now
commonly used among them. For if there be no Sheep, that may straie, why be
they called Shepeheardes? If there be no City, that may be betrayed, why
be they called VVarchemenne? If there be nothing, that may run to ruin,
why be they called Pillars? Anon after the first Creation of the World, the
Church of God began to spread abroad, and the same was instructed with the
Heavenly Word, which God him self pronounced with his own Mouth. It was
also furnished with Divine Ceremonies. If was taught by the Sprite of God, by
the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and continued so even til the time, that
Christ showed him self to us in the flesh. This notwithstanding, how often,
O good God, in the mean while, and how horribly was the same Church
darkened, and decayed?

Where was that Church then, when al fleashe upon Earth had defiled his own
way? Where was it, when amongst the number of the Whole World, there were
only eight persons (and neither they al chaste, and good neither) whom Gods
will was should be saved alive from that Universal destruction, and Mortality?
when Elie the Prophet so lame^tabldy and bitterly made his moan, 3. Reg. 13.
that only him self was leafte of all the Whole World, which did truly and
dewly worship God? Esai. 1.
and when Esaie said, The Silver of Gods people (that is, of the Church)
was become Dross: and that the same City which aforetime had been
faithful, was now become an Harlot: and that in the same there was no part
sound throughout the whole body, from the head to the foot? Or else, when
Christ him self said, that the House of God was made, by the Phariseis and
Priests, Math. 21.
a Den of thieves? Of a truth, the Church, even as a cornefilde, except it
be eared, manured, tilled, and trimmed, will instead of Wheat, bring forth
Thistles, Darnel, and Nettels. For this cause did God send ever among, both
Prophets, and Apostles, and last of al his own Son, who might bring home
the people into the right way, and repair anewe the tottering Church after
she had erred.

M. Hardinge.
These and the like places have been already alleged, of old time, against the
Catholics, by the Donatistes, as S. Augustine shows: and of late years by
your scholemaister John Calvin of Geneua. We need not to study for new
answers to the argument made out of these and such other places, mutche
fitter for this purpose, then these are, sith that the same is so well answered
by S. Augustine. Oftentimes (says he) Gods word rebukes the wicked sorts
of the Church so, De Vnitate Eccle. ca. 12.
as though al were such, and none at al remained good. For thereby we are
warned, them in their certain number to be called al, as mutche to sale, all the children of hell. But Sirs, what if the Church at the beginning of the
world, and at the general drowning, was of small number? And what if the
Synagog were sometime quite extinguished? Must it therefore follow, that the
church also after that God has given to Christ his Son the ends of the
world to be his possession, Psalm. 3.
may now be brought to a few, and to fail altogether? Where was the
Church (say ye) when of all the world there were but eight persons, and they
only saved alive from the universal destruction? Forsooth they were in Noah's Ark. And now have we But the same Arc is not the Church of Rome.
our Noah's Ark also, in which who so ever abides not, the same is drowned.

Neither were the Prophets and Apostles sent, nor Christ came him self to
repair a new the Church, which had in faith wholly erred: but both they
were sent, and he came, that it should not wholly err.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is true, The Church in fevve.
that ye say, In the Holy Scriptures this word, Al, is often used in steed
of, Many. And thus, ye say, it fared with the Synagog of the Jews: for that
then the Faithful were sommetimes brought unto a small number: sommetimes were
utterly decayed, and consumed to naught. And in this sense, ye say, Elias
complained, 3. Regum. 19.
that the Prophets of God were al slain, and he only le^te alive.

But now, ye say, the Church may not be brought to a fevve. For God has
given to Christ his Son the ends of the world to be his possession. Yet
Christ him self, that best knew the reach, and limits of his possession,
says thus, When the Son of Man shall comme, Luke. 21. Ambrosi. in Lucam.
lib. 10. Apocalyp. 12.
think you, he shall find Faith in the world? Whereupon S. Ambrose says,
Tunc Fides rara: Vt ipse, quasi addubitans, Dominus ista dixerit: Then shall
Faith be geason: So that our Lord spoke these words, as doubting thereof,
whether there should be any Faithful leaft, or no. And S. John in his
Reuelatio^s says, Mulier fugit in solitudinem, vbi habet locum paratum a Deo:
The wooman ( whereby is meante, not the Synagog of the Jews, but the Church
of Christ) flees into the wilderness: where she has a place provided of
God. By which words is meante, that in time of Ignorance, and Persecution,
the Church is without Countenance, 2. Thessal. 2.
and unknown. S. Paul says, Before the Day of the Lord, there shall be a
departing from the Faith of Christ. By these it appears, that the decaie of
the Church shall be universal: and that the remanentes shall not be many.
Vincentius Lirinensis.
Therefore Vincentius Lirinensis puts the case on this wise: Quid si nouella
aliqua contagio iam non portiuncula^ tantum, sed totam pariter Ecclesiam
commaculare conetur? Tunc item prouidebit, vt Antiquitati inhaereat: What if
sum new corruption go about to invade, not only sum portion of the
Church, but also the whole universal Church altogether? Then must a
Christian man settle him self to cleave to Antiquity: That is to say, to
follow the Primitive Church of the Apostles, and Ancient Fathers. This case
would he never have moved, unless he had thought, the Whole universal Church
might happen by sum error to be corrupted. Surely S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom. in 1. ad Corinth. Homil. 36.
speakinge of the state of the Church, that he saw in his time, says thus:
Videtur Ecclesia hodie mulieri, quae mansuetudine veteri exciderit, similis:
quaeque Symbola tantum foelicitatis illius quaedam referat: Arcas, and Scrinia
rerum pretiosissimarum adhuc retinens, Thesauro destituta. Huic mulieri
Ecclesia hodie videtur similis: The Church this day is like unto a woman,
that has quite lost al her old modesty: and that bears only certain
badges, and tokens of her former felicity: and that, being utterly berefte of
the treasures, keeps only the Cases, and Boxes of the precious things, she
had before. To such a woman the church this day may be likened. Hieronym.
in vita Malchi.
Likewise S. Hierome, speaking of that he saw by experience in his time,
says thus: Ecclesia, postquam ad Christianos principes peruenit, potentia
quidem, and diuitijs mayor, sed virtutibus minor facta est: The church, after
that she is comme to Christian Princes, in deed is greatter in wealth, and
richesse: But in virtue, and holiness she is less, then she was before.
Therefore says Chrysostom, Haec dico, Chrysostom. Ad Populum Antioch. Homil.
4.
ne quis miretur Ecclesiam propter multitudinem: sed vt ipsam probatam reddere
studeamus: Thus mutche I tell you, not that we should auaunce the Church
because of the Multitude, and increase of people: But that we should endeavor
to adourne her with virtue.

Now, Bernard. in Conuersione Pauli, Sermo. 1.
where ye say, the Church now can never be brought to few, S. Bernarde
says thus unto God, by way of moan: Coniurasse videtur contra te
vniuersitas populi Christiani, a minimo vsque ad maximum: A planta pedis vsque
ad verticem non est sanitas vlla. Egressa est iniquitas a Senioribus Iudicibus
Vicarijs tuis, qui videntur regere populum tuum: O Lord, the Universal
Company of Christian people seems to have conspired against thee, from the
lowest unto the highest. From the sole of the foot, unto the croune of the
head, there is no whole place. Iniquity and wickedness is gonne forth from
thy Elder Judges, Ci^a^ur ab Holco^o in Sapier^. Lectio. 23.
that be thy Vicares, that are thought to rule thy people. Again he says,
Intestinalis, and insanabilis est plaga Ecclesiae: the wound of the Church is
inward, and paste recover. Likewise Baptista Mantuane complains unto Pope
Leo:

Sancte Pater succurre Leo, Baptis. Mantuanus, Fastor. 4.
Respublica Christi
Labitur: aegrotatque Fides iam proxima morti.
Healpe, Holy Father Leo: Christ's Common Wealth ( that is, the Church) is
falling down: the Faith is sick, and like to die.

So likewise says he, Fortalitium Fidei, lib. 5.
that wrote the Forte of Faith, Et si in hoc Daemonum bello cadant Religiosi
Principes, and Milites, and Praelati Ecclesiastici, and Subditi, tamen semper
manent aliqui, in quibus saluatur Veritas Fidei, and Iustificatio bonae
Conscientiae. Et si non nisi duo homines remanerent in mundo, in eis saluaretur
Ecclesia, quae est Vnitas Fidelium: In this battle of Diuelles,
notwithstanding the Godly Princes, the Soldiers, the Ecclesiastical Prelates,
and Subjects be overthrown, yet evermore sum remain, in whom the Truethe
of Faith, and the Righteousness of a good Conscience is preserved. And
although there remained but two men in the World, yet in the same two the
Church of God should be saved: Which Church is the Unity of the
Faitheful. The Church of God is often compared to the Moon, August. Epist. 48.
which sometimes is full, and round, and bright, and glorious: sommetimes is
wholly shadowed and drowned in darkness: and yet notwithstanding is not
consumed, but in Substance remains still. S. Augustine says, Aliquando in
Solo Abel Ecclesia erat: et expugnatus est a fratre malo, and perdito Caim.
August. in Psalm. 128.
Aliquando in Solo Enoch Ecclesia erat: and translatus est ab iniquis:
Sommetime the Church was in only Abel: and he was destroyed by his brother
wicked Caim. Sommetime the Church was only in ^noch: and he was translated
from the wicked. Your own Panormitane says: Extra de Electione.
Significas^i. Abb.
Possibile est, quod Vera Fides Christi remaneret in Vno Solo: Atque ita verum
est dicete, quod Fides non deficit in Ecclesia. Hoc patuit post Passionem
Christi. Nam Fides remansit tantum in Beata Virgin. Quia omnes alij
scandalizati sunt. Tamen Christus ante Passionem orauerat pro Petro, vt non
deficeret Fides sua. Ergo, Ecclesia non dicitur deficere, nec etiam errare, si
remanet Vera Fides in Vno Solo, It is possible, the true Faith of Christ
may remain in one alone: And so it is true to say, that Faith fails not
in the Church. This thing appeared after Christ's Passion. For then the
Faith remained only in the Blessed Virgin. For all the rest (both the
Apostles, and others) were offended. Yet had Christ prayed for Peter before
his Passion, that his Faith should not fail. Therefore we may not say,
the Church fails, or erreth, if the Faith remain but in one alone.

Again, August. in Psalm. 88.
S. Augustine says, Non tamen propter hos remanebit Christus sine
Haereditate. Nouit Dominus, qui sint sui, etc. Yet shall not Christ, because of
the wicked, remain without his Enheritance. The Lord knovveth who be his own.

The Apology, Cap. 13. Division. 1.
But lest sum man should say, that the foresaid things happened only in
the time of the Law, of Shadows, and of Infancy, when the Truth lay hid
under Figures, and Ceremonies, when nothing as yet was brought to perfection,
when the Law was not graven in men's hearts, but in stone; (And yet were that
but a foolish distinction) for even at those days there was the very same
God, that is now, the same Spirit, the same Christ, the same Faith, the same
Doctrine, The Church of Rome may err.
the same Hope, the same Enheritaunce, the same Covenant, and the same
Efficacy and Virtue of Gods Word: Eusebius also says, All the Faithful, even
from Adam until Christ, were in deed very Christians, though they were not so
termed): But, as I said, lest men should thus say still, Paul the Apostle
found the like faults, and falls even then in the prime, and chief of the
Gospel, in the greattest perfection, and in the light: so that he was compelled
to write in this sort to the Galathians, whom he had well before instructed: I
fear me (quod he) lest I have labored amongst you to small purpose, and
lest ye have heard the Gospel in vain. O my little Children, of whom I
travail anevve, til Christ be fashoned again in you: And as for the Church
of the Corinthia^s, how fowlely it was defiled, it is nothing needeful to
rehearse. Now tell me, might the Churches of the Galathians, and Corinthians go
amiss, and the Church of Rome alone may it not fail nor go amiss?

M. Hardinge.
We answer, that in parts of the church, faults may be found, and
sundry men that seem to be of the Church, and be in the Church in deed,
may fall and perish: all this we grant. we speak not of the whole Universal
church but only of the Church of Rome.
But that the whole, catholic, and universal Church, whose faith we
profess, may err, fall, and fail: that we deny utterly, which had been this
Defenders part to prove, else he talks to no purpose. And where S. Paul
rebukes all the Galathians in general, as though al had forsaken their faith,
he does it after the wont of the Prophets, both in that and other epistles,
for the greater parts sake, reprehending al, though some deserve praise. As
for the Corinthians, though many among them were faulty, yet who considers
how be begins his epistle to them, shall find that he But the same Church
this day is subject to the Religion of Mahomete, and is no Church.
acknowleged a Church among them. For thus he writes: Paul by vocation by
Apostle, etc. to the church of God which is at Corinth. etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
That in any particulare Church faults may be found, that, ye say, ye will
confess. But that the whole Catholic Universal Church may err and fail,
that, you say, ye deny utterly.

Notwithstanding it is certain, that the Churches of Corinthe, and Galatia,
and sundry others, are now, not in any Particulare portion, but thoroughly
departed from the Faith: and are now wholly subject to the Turk.

This therefore must needs be your meaning, that al be it al other Particulare
Churches throughout the world happen to err, yet the Church of Rome, that is
to say, the Pope and his Cardinals, can never err. This Lesson, I trow,
Pet. de Palude, De potestate Curatorum, Ar. 6.
ye learned of Petrus de Palude: For neither Christ, nor any of his Apostles
ever taught it you. This worthy Doctor says thus: Tota Ecclesia Petri non
potest a Fide deficere. Omnes autem Ecclesiae Apostoloru^ omniu^ possunt
deficere a Fide totaliter, indigentes ab Ecclesia Petri confirmari: The whole
Church of Peter, cannot wholly fail from the Faith. But all the other Churches
of all the Apostles may fail wholly from the Faith, having need to be
confirmed by the Church of Peter. M. Hard. fo. 16. b
And to this end, you your self call the Roman Faith, the Catholic Faith:
making no manner difference between either other. Did. 21. Omnes.
And therefore Pope Nicolas thus auaunceth, and thundreth out his own
Authority: Non quaelibet Terrena Sententia, sed illud Verbum, quo constructum
est Coelum, and Terra, per quod denique omnia condita sunt Elementa, Romanam
fundauit Ecclesiam: Not any worldly Sectence, but the self same Word, where
by Heaven, and Earth was made, and whereby all the Elements were created, was
it, that founded the Church of Rome. By which words he means, that the
Roman Faith shall stand as fast, as the Fundations of Heaven, and Earth.
Even so Peter assured his promise unto Christ: Although, Matthae. 26.
said he, al others deny thee, yet I alone will not deny thee. No, though I
should presently die with thee, yet I only will never deny thee.
Nevertheless, when it came to trial, the same Peter denied him first.

Now, that the Churches of Rome, which you call the Catholic Church, may
err, and be foresaken of God, it is evident by the plain words of S. Paul.
For thus he writes even unto the Church of Rome: Roman. 11.
Quod si aliqui ex ramis fracti sunt etc. If any of the boughs be broken of,
and thou, being a wild Olive tree art graffed into the natural Olive, and
made Partaker of the root, and of the fatness thereof, boaste not thee self
against the boughs. If thou boaste, ( remember) thou bear not the Root:
but the root bears thee. Thou will say, The boughs are broken of, that I
might be graffed in. Well, they are broken of for their Infidelity: but thou
stand fast by Faith. Be not high minded: but stand in awe. Seeinge God
has not spared the Natural boughs, lest happily he spare not thee. See
therefore the goodness, and the sharpness of God: His sharpness toward
them, that are fallen away: but his goodness toward thee, if thou
continewe, Alioqui and tu excideris.
and remain in goodness. Otherwise thou ( being the Church of Rome) shalt
likewise be smitten of. Hereby it is plain, that the Church of Rome may
fail, and fall from God, no less, then other like Churches. For otherwise this
advertisement of S. Paul had benne in vain.

Therefore Hormisda, Hormisda pp, ad Episcopos Hispaniae.
being him self Bishop of Rome, writes thus, Dilectissimi Fratres, continuas
preces ad Dominum fundamus, and iugi deprecatione poscamus, vt and
institutione, and opere illi, cuius esse membra cupimu^s, adhaereamus. nec
vnquam ab illa via, quae Christus est, deuio tramite declinemus: ne ab eo
just, quem impie reliquerimus, deseramur: My dearly beloved Brethren, let us
Pray unto God, that both by profession, and by order of life, we may cleave
to him, whose Members we desire to be: and that by any crooked path we never
turn from that way, which is Christ: lest we ( being the Church of
Rome) be justly forsaken of him, whom wickedly we have forsaken. Thus
would not the Pope him self have written in the behoufe of the Church of
Rome, if he had thought, the same Church could never have erred. Chrysostom.
De varijs locis in Matthew. Homi. 20.
To be short, Chrysostom says, Ecclesia, quocunque modo egerit contra
voluntatem Christi, abijci digna est. Non autem abijcitur propter
longanimitatem Christi, nisi sola causa Transgressionis: The Church, by what
way so ever she do against the will of Christ, is worthy to be given over.
Yet through the patience of Christ, she is never given over, but only for
breakinge his commandments.

The Apology, Cap. 13. Division. 2.
Surely Christ prophesied long before of his Church, that the time should
comme, when Desolation should stand in the Holy Place. 2. Thessal. Daniel. 8.
And S. Paul says, that Antichriste should once set up his own Tabernacle,
and stately Seat in the Temple of God: and that the time should be, when
men should not away with Wholesome Doctrine, but be turned back unto
fables, and lies, and that within the very Church. 1. Petri. 2. Daniel. 8.
Peter likewise tells, how there should be teachers of lies in the Church
of Christ: Daniel the Prophet speakinge of the later times of Antichriste,
Truth, says he, in that season shall be thrown under foot, and trodden upon
in the world. And Christ says, Abomination of Desolation
The calamity and confusion of things shall be so exceeding great, Matthew. 24.
that even the chosen, if it were possible, shall be brought into error: and
that these things shall comme to pass, not amongst the Gentiles, and Turks,
but even in the Holy Place, in the Temple of God, in the Church, and in the
Company and Fellowship of those, which profess the name of Christ.

M. Hardinge.
The Prophecy of Daniel concerning the Abomination of Desolation, whereof
Christ spoke in the Gospel, we think with the Untruth. For the best
learned Divines have thought otherwise: As it shall appear.
best learned Divines, that it is to be referred, not to the end of the
world, Daniel. 9. Matthew. 24.
nor to the driuinge away of the Faith by Antichriste, as ye imagine, but to
the consummation and final endinge of the Synagog.

Touching that ye say of Antichriste, it makes nothing against the
Catholics, against whose Faith he prevails not. Mary, many good men
think, that he has already begone to set up his Tabernacle, and stately
seat in the hearts of many, which ought to be the Temple of God, by his
foreronners Martine Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and you their scholars, with
the rest of that wicked rabble. Where ye add, and that within the Church, it
is Untruth For S. Paul says plainly, He shall sit in the Temple of God. 2.
Thessal. 2.
more then ye found in S. Paul. But we understand your good will, though we
find you without ever a good reason. And ye we grant, 1. ^oan. 2.
ye came out from us, as S. John says, but ye were not of us. For if ye had
benne of us, ye would have tarried with us. So may the saieinge of S. Peter
be referred to you, and likewise that of Daniel, which ye allege, though the
words be not in Daniel. For your schoolemaisters and you are a limme of
Antichriste and ye labor what ye can, to overthrow and tread under foot the
true Faith of the Church, and the Catholic Religion.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What needed you, 2. Thessalon. 2. Nicol. Lyra. Hieronym. ad Algasiam.
Hippolytus man.
M. Hardinge, to talk so mutche in the favor of Antichriste? Or, why should
you be grieved, to hear him called the Abomination of Desolation? S. Paul
calls Antichriste, the Man of Sin: Sum say, He shall be wholly possessed of
the Devil: Your own Hippolytus says, He shall be the Devil him self. Yet
have few men found them selves grieved with such saieinges.

I know, the Words of Christ, and of Daniel, by diverse Expositions, have
been diversely applied. Yet may ye not well thus condemn al their Judgments,
that have applied the same to Antichriste. Origin one of the most Ancient
Fathers of y^ Church, entreatinge of Antichriste, contrary to your
Exposition, says thus: Origin. in Matthae. Tracta. 29. Chrysostom in Opere
Imperfecto, Homil. 49.
Ipse est Abominatio Desolationis: Antichriste is y^ Abomination of Desolation.

S. Chrysostom says, Hic Antichristus dicitur Abominatio Desolationis: quia
multorum Christianorum animas facturus est desolatas a Deo: This Antichriste is
called the Abomination of Desolation: for that he shall cause the Souls of many
Christianes to be desolate, and foresaken of God. Gregorius Nazianzenus says,
Antichristus veniet in Desolatione Mundi. Gregor. Nazian. Significatio in
Ezechielem. (...).
Est enim Abominatio Desolationis: Antichriste shall comme in the Desolation of
the world: For he is the Abomination of Desolation. S. Hierome says,
Abominatio Desolationis intelligi potest omne dogma peruersum: By the
Abomination of Desolation we may understand any manner Perverse Doctrine:
Whereof, no doubt, in Antichriste shall want no stoare. And again, speakinge
namely of the Man of wickedness, the Adversary of Christ, which is
Antichriste, that lifts up him self above al, Hieronym. in Matthew. Cap. 24.
Eodem loco. Ambrasi in Lucam, Lib. 10. Ca. 21.
that is called God, He says, Abominatio Desolationum erit in Templo, vsque
ad Consummationem temporis: The Abomination of Desolation shall stand in the
Church, until the Consummation, or end of time.

S. Ambrose says, Abominatio Desolationis execrabilis Aduentus Antichristi
est: The Abomination of Desolation is the cursed coming of Antichriste. S.
Hilarie expounding these self same words of Christ, When ye shall see ye
Abomination of Desolation standinge in the Holy place, says thus, De
Antichristi temporibus haec loquutus est: Hilari. in Matthae. Canon. 25.
Theodoret. in Daniel. Ca. 12. Eusebius Emissen.
Christ spoke these words of the time of Antichriste. Likewise says
Theodoretus, writing upon y^ Prophet Daniel, Abominationem Desolationis ipsum
vocat Antichristum. And bisides others, the most Ancient, and most Catholic
Fathers, likewise says Eusebius Emissenus in a special Homily to this
purpose. Now, M. Hardinge, whereas ye so certainly assure your self, y^ these
words of christ may in no wise be taken of y^ confusion, and horroure, y^
shall be at y^ end of y^ world, bisides al these Learned and Godly Fathers, I
beseech you, consider the whole drifte, Matthae. 24.
and circumstance of the place, and the words, that Christ spoke immediately
before. The Apostles demanded him this question: What is the token of thy
Coming (to Judgment) and of y^ end of the world? To this question Christ
answeareth in this wise: Take heed, yt noman deceive you. Many shall comme in
my name, and shall say, I am Christ: and shall deceive many. Ye shall hear of
wars, and talks of wars: But be not ye troubled: Al these things must
happen: yet this is not the end, etc. Many Pass Prophets shall rise, and shall
deceive many. Iniquity shall increase: Charity shall wax cold. Who so
continues unto the end, he shall be saved. And this Gospel of the Kingedome
shall be Preached in all the world, for a witness unto al Nations, and then shall
come the end. The next words, that follow, are these, Therefore when ye
shall see the Abomination of Desolation, yt was spoken of by Daniel, etc. Thus
may ye see, M. Harding, by the very course, and te^oure of Christ's answer,
yt, if the Judgment, be the Judgment: if the End, be the End: if the
World, be y^ World, then must these words needs have relation to the
End of the world: what so ever any of your best Learned Divines, of whom ye
have hitherto named none, have taught, or said to y^ contrary. Antichriste
standinge in the Church of God.
Whereas we say, Antichriste shall stand even within the Church, y^, ye
say, we find not in S. Paul. Notwithstanding, our good will, ye say, ye
understand: although ye find in us never a good Reason. As for the goodness
of our Reasons, we will not strive. But whether S. Paul say, y^ Antichriste
shall stand in y^ Church, or no, let us be judged by S. Paul. His words be
plain Adeo, 2. Thessalon. 2.
vt in Templo Dei sedeat, tanquam Deus: So that he will sit in the Church of
God, as if he were God. If the Church of God, be the Church, then does S.
Paul say, Antichriste shall sit within the Church. In like sense Christ
says, Antichriste shall sit in the Holy place: Matthae. 24. August. De
Ciuita. Dei. Li. 20, Cap. 19. In eodem Cap.
By which words many of the best learned Fathers have expounded, the
Church. S. Augustine says, Non enim Templum alicuius Idoli, aut Daemonis,
Templum Dei Apostolus diceret: For the Temple of an Idol, or of a Devil, the
Apostle would never call the Temple of God. And he adds further, Quidam putant
rectius Latin dici, sicut in Graeco est, no^, in Templo Dei, sed, in Templum
Dei sedeat: Tanquam ipse sit Templum Dei, quod est Ecclesia. Sicut dicimus,
Sedet in amicum, id est, velut amicus: Sum men think, we should better
read it in Latin, 2. Thessalon. 2. (...).
as it is in the Greek, not, He sits in the Temple of God, but, he sits
For, or As the Temple of God: As if he him self were the Temple of God,
which is the Church. As we say, He sits for a Friend, yt is, He sits
as a Friend. Here S. Augustine says, Antichriste shall not only sit in y^
Church, but also shall show him self in outward appearance, Herueus De
Potestate Pap. Ca. 23.
as if he him self were the Church it self. Now, M. Hardinge, who this
should be, I report me to your own Doctoures, of whom one has written thus,
Papa quodammodo virtualiter est tota Ecclesia: The Pope in a manner by way of
virtue, or Power, Hieronym. in Ca. 24. Matthaei, Chrysostom. in Opere
imperfecto, Homil. 49.
is the whole Universal Church. S. Hierome says, Antichristus stabit in loco
Sancto, id est, in Ecclesia, and se ostendet, vt Deum: Antichriste shall stand
in the Holy place, that is to say, in the Church: and shall show him self,
as if he were God. S. Chrysostom says, Incident in Abominationem
Desolationis, quae stat in Sanctis Ecclesiae locis: They shall fall into the
Abomination of Desolation, that stands in the Holy places of the Church.

S. Hilarie says, Hilarious contra Auxentium.
Vnum moneo: Cauete Antichristum. Male enim vos parietu^ chapter coepit:
Abomination of Desolation 2. Thessal 2.
male Ecclesiam Dei in tectis, aedificijsque veneramini. Anne ambiguum est, in
ijs Antichristum esse sessurum? One thing I read you: Beware of Antichriste.
For it is not well, that ye should be thus in love with walls: It is not well,
that ye should honor the Church in houses, and buildinges. Is there any
doubt, but Antichriste shall sit in the same? S. Paul says, Mysterium
iniquitatis operatur: (Satan) woorketh the Mystery of iniquity: That is to
say, he opens not him self, but what so ever he doothe, he doothe it in
couerte. Upon which words Anselmus says, Anselmus.
Iniquitas eorum est Mystica, id est, Pietatis nomine pallia^a: The iniquity
of them is Mystical, that is to say, It is cloked, and coered with y^ name of
Godliness.

Therefore S. Chrysostom in opere Imperfe. Homil. 49.
Chrysostom says, Christiani, qui sunt in Christianitate, volentes accipere
firmitatem Fidei verae, ad nullam rem fugiant, nisi ad Scripturas, etc. The
Christianes, that be in Christendom, willinge to have the steadfastness of the
true Faith, let them flee to none other thing, but only to the Scriptures.
Otherwise, if they look to any thing else, they shall be offended, and perish,
not knowinge which is the true Church: And so shall they fall into the
Abomination of Desolation, that stands in the Holy places of the Church.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 1. and. 2.
Albeit these same warninges alone may suffice a wiseman, to take heed, he
do not suffer him self rashely to be deceived with the name of the Church,
and not to stay, to make further inquisition thereof by Gods Word, yet
biside all this, many Fathers also, many learned, and Godly men, have often
and carefully complained, how al these things have chanced in their life
time. For even in the midst of that thick miste of darkness, God would yet
there should be sum, who, though they gave not a clear, and brighte light,
yet should kendle, were it but sum spark, which men, being in the
darkness, might epsy.

Hilarious, when things as yet were almost incorrupt, and in good case too,
Contra Auxentium.
Ye are il deceived, says he, with the love of wales: ye do il vvoorship
the Church, in that ye vvoorship it in houses and buildinges: ye do il
bring in the name of peace under roofes. Is there any doubt, but Antichriste
vvil have his Seat under the same? I rather reckon Hills, vvoodes, Pooles,
Marshes, Prisons, and Quauemires, to be places of more safety: for in these
the Prophets either abidinge of their accord, or forced thither by violence,
did Prophecy by the Spirit of God.

Gregory, as one, which perceived, and foresawe in his mind the wrack of al
things, wrote thus of Johan Bishop of Constantinople, the first of al others,
that commanded him self to be called by this new name, the Universal Bishop
of whole Christ's Church: Gregor. Lib. 4. Ad Mauritium.
If the Church, says he, shall depend upon one manne, it vvil soon fall
down to the ground. Who is he that sees not how this is comme to pass
long sithence? For long agone has the Bishop of Rome willed to have the
whole Church depend upon him self alone. Wherefore it is no marvel, though
it be clean fallen down long agone.

M. Hardinge.
Ye make a foul lie, Sir defender, upon S. Gregory. The Words you recite,
be your own, not his. Is it not enough to lie your self, as you do very
often, but that you father lies also upon the Doctoursi Thanks be to God, that
so ye bewraie the weakness of your cause. Untruth. For he vvriteth it often.
Read the Answer.
Neither in any Epistle to John Bishop of Constantinople, as you say in your
Apology, nor in any to Mauritius the Emperor, as you have noted in the
margent, writes Gregory, Untruth, more pee^^she, then the former.
that if the Church shall depend upon one man, y^ whole shall fall to ground.
I see well, you would feign Gregory had so written. And if he had, yet your
argument had benne naught. For you take not the right minor, which should have
benne this, The Church does depend upon one man, if you would make your reason
good, and after the rules of Logike. For where your minor speaks only of the
Popes will, thereof your conclusion follows not. Dispose your propositions in
the form of a Syllogism, and you shall epsy your own feeble reason. And if
you make that your minor, then grant you that, which you deny.

The words whereof you gather this pretensed saieinge of Gregory, Epist.
lib. 4. ad Maurit. Epist. 32.
as I suppose, be these: If any man has caught unto himself that name (of
Universal Bishop) in that Church (of Constantinople) then the whole Church,
(which God forbid) fell from his state, when he that is called Universal,
fell. Gregory understands by the name, Universal Bishop, as him self
declares in many places. A manifest untruth without vvitte.
such a one, as is a Bishop altogether and only, so as there be no other
Bishop besides him. Now if it were granted, that the Bishop of Constantinople
were this one and only Universal Bishop, this inconvenience would follow, that
with the fall of that Universal Bishop, the Universal Church also fell. For
where the Church is, there be Bishops: and where be Bishops, there is the
Church: and a Untruth. For Christ never gave out any such Commission.
Bishop Universal, by Gregory, is as much as all Bishops. That this being
granted, the whole Church is fallen from the Faith, thus he proves. For
(says he) the Bishops of Constant inople have fallen into the goulfe of
great and detestable Heresies: as Nestorius, who thinkinge Christ to be two
persons, and beleuinge that God could not be made man, ran to a Iewishe
Infidelity: and as Macedonius, who denied the holy Ghost to be God. Wherefore
if the B. of Constantinople be the Universal Bishop, according to the sense
aforesaid, then at the fall of him from the Faith, as when those two before
named fell, the Church also falls, as then by this reason, when they were
Bishops, it fell. Thus reasons S. Gregory in that Epistle to Mauritius. But
because to Gregory it seems very far from reason, and incredible, that the
Church should fall from the Faith, and fail: therefore he enucigheth
against John the Bishop of Constantinople for chalenginge that name of
Universal Bishop, and concludes that the Untruth, fond, and willful. For S.
Gregory speaks these words no more of the B. of Constantinople, then of
the B. of Rome.
Bishop of that See in any wise can not so be.

But if the word, Vn^uersall, signify a soueraintie of charge, and
Supremacy of Government over the whole Church, Here M. Hard. recanteth his
error. For before he said. These words belong only to the Pope.
which Christ committed to Peter, and in Peter to his Successors the
Bishops of Rome, John. 21.
when he said, Feed my Sheep: in this sense it is not impious nor erroneus,
nor contrary to the mind of S. Gregory, to call the Successor of Peter,
Christ's vicare in Earth, the Universal Bishop, This same was it, that
Gregory reproved: For thus he vvriteth, Cuncta Christi Membra tibi conaris
Vniuersalis appellatione supponere: Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
that is to say, the highest of al, and having power over all other
Bishops, and Bishop of the Universal Church. And, as Christ gave to S.
Peter and his successors, for the benefit of his Church, a Supreme
authority and power* so for the same Churches sake, John. 14.
for whose love he delivered him self to death, Luke. 22.
by petition made to his Father, he obtained for him and his successors the
Privilege of this supreme and most excellent grace, that their Faith should
never fail. In consideration of which singular Privilege, obtained by Christ
and Untruth, utterly void of shame.
granted to the sea Apostolic, and to none other, Gregory rebukes John the
Bishop of Constantinople so much, as one that presumptuously usurped that new
name of universal Bishop against the statutes of the Gospel, and against the
Decrees of the Canons.

To conclude, if either Gregory, or any other man should sa^e, that the
Church depends upon one man: he might seem to say truth, meaning
rightly, and that not alone, nor without good Authority. Contra Luciferian.
For such a saieinge we find uttered by S. Jerome. The safety of the Church
(says he) depends upon the dignity of the highest Priesie, who if he have
not authority peerlesse and above all other, there will be so many Schisms in
the Church, as there be Priests. Which peerlesse authority above all other,
as S. Hierome in that place does attribute to to the Bishop of every Dioces
directly, John. 21.
so consequently to Peter's Successor, to whom it was said, Feed my Sheep.
For by what reason in each Dioces it behooves one Priest to be highes^ouer
other Priests, The Universal Church falls.
by the same and in like proportion nolesse it behooves, that in the whole
Church one Bishop be highest over other Bishops. I mean, for auoidinge
Schisms.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If ye had better looked on your Books, M. Hardinge, ye would not have benne
so hasty in dealinge Lies. We falsify not that good Fathers Words: but
report them truly, as we find them. For thus he writes in sundry places,
of John the Bishop of Constantinople, that first auanced him self above al
his Brethren, and required to be called the Universal Bishop of all the world:
Vniuersa Ecclesia a statu suo corruit, Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 32
quando is, qui appellatur Vniuersalis, cadit: The whole Universal Church
falls from her state, when he falls, that is called the Universal Bishop.
This is no Lie, M. Hardinge: Confer the places: and ye shall find the
words, as we report them. It stands not, neither with your profession,
nor with your modesty, so discourteously to use your tongue. We neither Lie our
selves, nor father Lies upon the Doctoures. God be thanked, his cause is
such, as may well be maineteined without Lies.

But, to put you further out of doubt, the sense of these words ye may
find often uttered by S. Gregory, in other places. Unto Anastasius, the
Bishop of Antioche, Gregor. Lib. 6. Episto. 24.
he writes thus: Vt de honoris vestri iniuria taceam, si vnus Episcopus
vocatur Vniuersalis, vniuersa Ecclesia corruit, si Vnus Vniuersus cadit: To
dissemble the injury done to your Honor, if one Bishop be called Universal,
then if that One Universal Bishop fall, the whole Universal Church goes to
ground.

Again he says in the same Epistle, Gregor. in eade^ Epistola.
Vos eandem causam Nullam dicere non debetis. Quia, si hanc aequanimiter
portamus, Vniuersae Ecclesiae Fidem corrumpimus: Ye may not say, This is a
matter of no importance. For, if we patiently bear these things, we destroy
the Faith of the Universal Church.

Again he says, Gregor. Lib. 4. Epistol. 39.
In isto Scelesto vocabulo consentire, nihil aliud est, quam Fidem perdere: To
consent unto this wicked Name, is nothing else, but to lose the Faith.

Again, Gregor. Li. 4. Epist. 52. and. 55.
Flens dico: Gemens denuntio: Quia cum Sacerdotalis Ordo intus cecidit, foris
diu stare non poterit: I speak it with tears: I tell it with sighe of Heart:
For, seeinge the Order of Priesthood is fallen within, it cannot now stand
long without

Again, Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 36.
Diabolus ita valide in quibusdam Ecclesiae necessarijs Membris dentes figit,
vt nulli sit dubium, quin, nisi vnanimiter, fauente Domino, cunctorum prouida
Pastorum turba concurrat, omne, quod absit, citius ouile dilaniet: The Devil so
strongely fasteneth his Teeth in the necessary Members of the Church, that,
unless by Gods Grace, the provident company of al Bishops join
together, there is no doubt, but he will soon destroy the whole flock:
which God forbid. And again he compares the Pride of this name with the
Pride of Antichriste: and says, that the one shall work the Confusion of the
Church, Gregor. Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
no less, then the other. Thus he says, Nunquid no^, cum se Antichristus
veniens Deum dixerit, Deus.
friuolum vald^ erit? Sed ramen nimis perniciosum. Si quantitatem vocis
attendimus, Duae sunt Syllabae: si pondus iniquitatis, Vniuersa pernicies: When
Antichriste shall comme, and call him self God, shall it not be a very trifle?
Yet shall it be marvelous hurteful ( to the Church). If ye weigh the quantity
of the word, it stands in two Syllables: If ye consider the weight of the
wickedness, it is an Universal destruction. These are no Lies, as it likes
you to call them, M. Harding: They are very plain words: it is the
undoubted meaning of S. Gregory. And therefore he calls this claim of
Universal Power, a Superstitio^^s, a Profane, an Ungodly, and a Wicked title:
a name of Hypocrisy: and a name of Blasphemy.

To avoid these Authorities, being so pregna^t, and so clear, ye are feign
to tansie sundry pretty shifts, such as, neither John, nor Gregory was ever
hable to understand.

First ye say, One Only Bishop.
This John the Bishop of Constantinople meante by this title, utterly to
disgrade al Bishops, and Patriarchs, what so ever: and to make him self the
Only Bishop of all the world. It is a childish labor, to seek a knotte in a
russhe, and to imagine doubts, where the case is clear. It is certain, that
the Bishop of Constantinople meante none other Universal Authority, then that
now is claimed by the Pope. Therefore it is thus noted in the Book, called
Chronicon Eusebij, Chronicon Eusebij, Anno. 607.
Institntum fuit, vt Romana Ecclesia Caput esset Ecclesiarum omnium: cum prius
Constantinopolitana id vsurpare tentasset: Order was taken, that the Church of
Rome should be the Head of al Churches: whereas before, the Church of
Constantinople had attempted to Usurp the same. Which thing is also noted by
Matthias Palmerius of Florence, and that without any manner difference, or
change of words. Matthias Palmerius.
Sabellicus says, Bonifaciusz. egit ab initio administrationis suae cum
Phoca, Sabellicus Ennead. 8. lib. 6.
vt Romana Ecclesia esset omniu^ aliarum Caput. Estque id aegre, nec sine multa
contentione Apostolicae Sedi datum. Graeci id ad se decus trahentes, ibi
Christianae Pietatis Arcem esse oportere aiebant, vbi and Imperij: Bonifacius
the third, at the first enitre into his office, was an earneste suitor unto
the Emperor Phocas, that the Church of Rome might be the Head of al other
Churches. Which thing hardely, and with great labor was granted to the
Apostolic See of Rome. The Grecians drawinge the same honor unto them
selves, said, It was necessary, the Head of Christian Religion should be
there, where as was the Head of the Empiere: which was at Constantinople.

Likewise writes Vrspergensis: Vrspergensis in Phoca.
At the request and suite of Pope Boniface, Phocas the Emperor appointed the Sea of the Apostolic Church of Rome, to be the Head of al Churches. For
before that time, the Church of Constantinople wrote her self the First, or
Chief of al others.

By these it may appear, M. Hardinge, it was great folly for you, thus to
ca^^^l at the name. For the Power, and Jurisdiction, then claimed by the Bishop
of Constantinople, and afterward usurped by the Bishops of Rome* was al one.
Therefore S. Gregory says to John the Bishop of Constantinople, Gregor. Lib.
4. Epist. 38.
Tu quid Christo, Vniuersalis Ecclesiae Capiti, in Extremi Iudicij dicturus es
examine, qui Cuncta cius membra tibimet conaris Vniuersalis appellatione
supponere? What answer will thou make, at the trial of the Last Judgment,
unto Christ the Head of the Universal Church, which thus by the name of
Universal Bishop, seekeste to make al his Members subject unto thee? Even the
self same Universal power claims now the Bishop of Rome: and seeks to
make al other Bishops through the world, and the whole Universal Church of
Christ, thral and subject unto him.

The Bishops of Constantinople fell sommetimes into Heresies, and were
deceived. But Christ has prayed for Peter, that his Faith should not faise.
Ergo, say you, The Bishop of Rome can never possibly be deceived. O, M.
Hardinge, let shame once force you to refrain these Vanities. I doubt not,
but hereafter in place convenient I shall be hable to show, that there have
benne me Heretics placed in S. Peter's Chair, eue^ in the Sea of Rome, then
you are hable to find in any one See within Europe.

Verily, S. Gregory's reason, touching the danger, and Confusion of the
Church, weighs no more against the Bishop of Constantinople, then against
the Bishop of Rome. For thus he says, If he, that is called the Universal
Bishop, happen to err, then needs must y^ whole Universal Church fall
together with him into Error, And therefore if ye had perused the Council of
Basile, ye should have found this self same reason alleged there, not
against the Bishop of Constantinople, but against the Pride, Council. Basilien.
in Epist. Synodal.
and Arrogancy of the Bishop of Rome. The words be these: Alioqui, errante
Pontifice, sicut saepe contigit, and contingere potest, to^a erraret Ecclesia:
The Pope him self disclaimeth, etc.
Otherwise, when so ever the Pope erreth, as he has often erred, and may err
again, the whole Church should err with him. Thus wrote the Bishops, and,
by your own Judgment, Catholic Bishops, in the Council of Basile: yet had
they not forgotten the Prayer, that Christ made for S. Peter.

And therefore Franciscus Zarabella, a notable Canoniste, and Cardinal of the
Church of Rome, seeinge the great enormities, that grew hereof, says thus:
Papae faciunt quicquid libet, Francis. Zarabella: C^^atur ab Illyrico, De
Sectis.
etiam illicita: and sunt plusquam Deus. Ex hoc infiniti sequuti sunt errores.
Quia papa occupauit omnia iura inferiorum Ecclesiarum: ita vt inferiores
Praelati fint pro nihilo. Et, nisi Deus succurrat statui Ecclesiae, Vniuersalis
Ecclesia periclitatur: The Popes do now, what so ever they list to do, yea
although it be vnlawfultand are becomme more then God. Hereof have followed
infinite Erroures. For the Pope has invaded, and entered upon all the right of
the Inferioure Churches: so that the inferior Bishops may go for naught.
And unless God healpe the state of the Church, the Universal Church is in
danger. Thus hitherto, M. Harding, ye have found no lie.

Now, where ye would seem to say, Gregory so reproved the Bishop of
Constantinople, that nevertheless he claimed y^ same Title, and Universal
Authority to him self: may it therefore please you herein to stand to y^
Judgment of S. Gregory him self, of who^, I reckon, ye do not doubt, but
he understood his own meaning. Doubtelesse, if ye had so diligentely
considered S. Gregory, as ye bear us in hand, ye should have found, that,
touching any his own right herein, he Disclaimeth this Title, and refuses it
utterly. For so he writes to y^ Emperor Mauritius: Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 32.
In eadem Epist.
Nunquid ego in hac re, pijssime Domine, propriam causam defend? O my most
Graceouse Lord, do I herein quarrel for mine own right? Again he says, Non
mea Causa, sed Dei est No^ ego solus, sed tota turbatur Ecclesia: Quia piae
Leges, quia venerandae Synodi, quia ipsa Domini nostri lesu mandata, Superbi,
atque pompatici cuiusdam Sermonis inuentione tuibantur: It is Gods cause: It
is not mine. Not I only am troubled therewith, but also the whole Church. For
the Godly Laws, the Reverend Synodes, and the very Commandments of our
Lord Jesus are broken by the invention of a certain proud, In eadem.
and pompouse Name. Again, Nullus Romanorum Pontificum hoc Singularitatis
Nome^ assumpsit: Nullus Decessorum meorum hoc tam profano vocabulo vti
consensit: Nos hunc honorem nolumus oblatum recipere: Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 36.
None of all the Bishops of Rome ever took upon him this name of
Singularity: None of my Predecessors ever consented to use this Ungodly
style: we our selves will not receive this honor, though it were offered.

Thus it appears by the Judgment of S. Gregory, that this Universal
Authority is utterly unlawful, not only in other Bishops, but also even in
the Bishop of Rome.

Touching the place of S. Hierome, I see, ye are content to give over, and to
recante your former error. For in your First Book, ye say, these words
are Notable above others: and therefore might not be dissembled. And where S.
Hierome says, M. Hard. Fol. 80.
The safety of the Church hangs of the Dignity of the High Priest
(meaning thereby every several Bishop within his own Limits) ye thought it
good, thus to lard the same, by a proper pare^thesis, with certain other
special stuff, of your own provision: He means the Pope, Peter's Successor:
as if this High Priest, of whom S. Hierome writes, could be none other, but
the Bishop of Rome. Now upon sum better advise, and by way of Retractation,
ye say thus, This peerless Authority above al other, S. Hierome does
attribute to the Bishop of every Diocese: which in deed was the very meaning
of S. Hierome. Certainly, if S. Hierome, by these words, meante Only the
Bishop of Rome, as ye told us before, then he meant not the Particulare Bishop
of every Diocese, as ye tell us now. Therefore ye must needs confess, that
either now, or before, ye have sought means to beguile your Reader. As for
the Pope, Peter's Successor, he meante no more of him, then of any other Bishop.
If it shall likewise hereafter please you, to call in other your like
ouersightes, ye shall publishe more truth, and encumber your Reader with less
Error.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 3.
Bernarde the Abbate, above four hundred years paste, writes thus: Nothing
is now sincere, and pure amongst the Cleregie: wherefore it rests, that
the Man of Sin should be reveled. The same Bernarde in his Treaty of the
Conversion of S. Paul, It seems now, says he, that Persecution has
ceased: no, no, persecution seems but now to begin, and that even from
the^, which have chief preeminence in the Church. Thy friends and neighbors,
O God, have drawn near, and stood up against thee: from the sole of the foor
to the crown of the head, there is no part whole. Iniquity is proceeded from
the Elders, the ludges and Deputees, which pretend to rule thy people. We
cannot say now, Look how the people is, so is the Priest. For the people
is not so il, as is the Priest. Alas, alas, O Lord God, the self same
persons be the chief in persecu^ing thee, which seem to love the Highest
place, and bear most rule in thy Church. The same Bernarde again upon the
Canticles writes thus: Al they are thy friends: yet are they al thy foes: Al
thy kinnesfolke: yet are they al thy adversaries. Being Christ's servants,
they serve Antichriste. Behold in my rest, my bitterness is most bitter.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 1.
Roger Bacon also, In Likello de idiomate linguarum.
a man of great fame, after he had in a vehemente Oration touched to the
quick the woeful state of his own time, These so many errors, says he,
require and look for Antichriste. Gerson complains, that in his days all the
Substance, and efficacy of Sacred Divinity was brought unto a glorious
contention, and oftentatio^ of wits, and very Sophistry. The poor men,
called pauperes a Lugduno, men, as touching the manner of their life, not to
be misliked, were woonte boldly to affirm, that the Romish church (from
whence alone al Counsel, and Order was then sought) was the very same Halot of
Babylon, and rovvte of Devils, whereof is Prophesied so plainly in the
Apocalypse.

M. Hardinge.
Now comes me he in with a new band, which consists of tagge and ragge,
and a weak company, God knows, they be to show their faces against the
Catholic Church, which (as the Holy Ghost speaks by Solomon) is terrible
like an army of men set in bataile raie.

First friar Bacon the Coniurer, and negromanser, as commonly they say o him,
he is set in the forewarde, a man of great fame forsoothe.

Then comes in the good plain father Gerson, a writer in our Graundfathers
time: he complains, that Friars and students gave them selves too mutche to
the unprofitable subtilitie of Scholastical questions. What makes this
against the faith of the Church?

After these, this Defender places in an out winge the fall brethern of
Lions, commonly called Waldensis, or Pauperes de Lugduno, notorius Heretics
condemned of the Church. These being detestable Heretics condemned of the
Church, we recke not what they say, no more then what Luther says, what
Zuinglius, what Calvin, what these Defenders them selves say, what
Antichriste, what Satan says. For the enemies of Gods truth may not be
admitted to give witness against the Truth.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Of these last Authorities, which ye call tagge, and ragge, we never made
any great accoumpte. Notwithstanding both Johannes Gerson, and Rogerus Bacon
were notable, and famous in their times, and in all respects comparable then
with the best. Plain Father Gerson (for by such words ye thought if best
to quail his credit, being otherwise coumpted a subtle disputer, and a
profounde Schole Doctoure) was Chauncellar of the University of Parise: and
for his wisdom, and Learning, was thought worthy to be the Directoure of all the Bishops in the Council of Constance.

Rogerus Bacon, as it appears by his Book, De Idiomate Linguarum, was hable
to judge of the Latin, Greek, and Hebrevve tongues: and difides diverse other
Books, writes also sundry Epistles unto Pope Clemente: wherein he mutche
complains of the ruin, and Confusion of the Church. Certainly the weakest
of these both, has more weight, and Substance, then either your Amphilochius,
or your Abdias, or your Hippolytus, or your Leontius, or your Anacletus, or
your Pope Clemens, whom ye so often call the Apostles felovve.

How be it, there is no man so simple, but may bear witness to the Truth.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius, Arnobius, Eusebius, S. Augustine, and other
Holy Fathers thought it no prejudice to their cause, to allege the witness of
the Frantique Sibylles: S. Paul allegeth the Authorities of the Heathen
Poets, Aratus, Menander, Epimenides, that never knew God: Christ thought it
no scorn, to receive witness at Infantes mouths: No, he refused not the
Devils, when they bare witness with him, and said, We know, that thou art
Christ the Son of the Living God. Pauperes a Lugduno found fault with the
Pride of the Pope: Aeneas Syluius in Historia Boemica.
with the lewd life of the Cleregie: with Purgatory: with Holy Water: with
Pardonnes: and with other your like deceiuinges of the people.

They translated the Bible: and prayed in their natural known mother tongue.
These were their Erroures: Therefore were they called detestable Heretics:
therefore were they condemned by your Church of Rome. But Gods Name be
blessed for ever. Sithence that time the Popes painted Power has still abated:
and these poor detestable condemned Heretics have still increased.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division, 2.
I know well yenough the Authority of these foresaid persons will be but
lightly regarded amongst these men* How then if I call forth those for
witnesses, who^ they the^ selves have used to honor? What if I say, that
Adrian the Bishop of Rome did frankly confess, that al these mischieues braste
out first from the high Throne of the Pope?

M. Hardinge.
Here have we a man of straw set up, Rome the root of il.
whom this defender names Adrian Bishop of Rome. He gives him a waze of
straw in his hand, that a far of seems to be a sore weapon, taken out of
the armorie of Platina, A great solic. For Platyna was dead threescoare
years before Adrian. 6 was Pope.
as is pretended. But when ye come near and behold what fellow this is, and
confer with Platina, touching his weapon, ye see it to be a fained thing.
For there is no such saieinge by Platina attributed to any of the Untruth
vain, and unadvised. For Platyna vvriteth not one word of Adriane the sixthe.
six Adrians Bishops of Rome, whose lives he writes. And mo there were not.
Therefore where you say, What if I say, that Adrian, etc. I answer thereto,
that if you so say, you say a false lie.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching this pretty fancy of a man of Cloutes, and a vvaze of straw, I
see well, M. Hardinge, ye thought it good policy, to clowte up the matter, and
to satisfy your Reader with a stravven answer. The straw was in your
eyes, M. Hardinge, and not in the man. Ye stood too far aluffe: your eyes
daseled: and therefore ye knew not, what ye saw. If ye had drawn near, ye
should soon have found your own error. It was no man of straw, but Pope
Adrian the sixthe, and last, that we spoke of: Unless ye think the Popes
Holiness to be a man of straw. For thus he pronounced at Norinberg in
Germany in the great assembly of y^ Empiere, by the mouth of Cheregatus his
Legate a Latere. A Sacerdotibus iniquitatem populi dimanare: multis nunc annis,
grauiter, multisque modis peccatum esse Romae: Johan. Sleidanus Lib. 4. Ann.
1523.
and inde a Pontificio Culmine malum hoc, atque luem ad inferiores omnes
Ecclesiarum Praefectos defluxisse: Thus Pope Adrian bade his Legate say, That
the iniquity of the people grew from the Priests: And that now, for the
space of many years, there have benne great, and grievous offenses committed
in Rome: And that all this plague, and mischief has flowed unto all the
Inferioure Rulers of the Church, even from the High Throne of the Popes
Holiness. This same story is also extante, Fasciculus reru^ Sciendarum.
printed at Colaine in a Book called Fasciculus rerum Sciendarum.

Thus therefore once again we say, M. Hardinge, that Pope Adrian. 6. frankly
confessed, that al these mischiefs proceeded first even from the Throne, or
Seat of the Popes Holiness: and, saieinge the same, notwithstanding your
uncivil speech, we say no lie.

And, lest ye should think, this Legate Cheregatus either of
foregeatefulnesse, or of malice, did his errante otherwise, then he had in
Commission, the like words have sithe^ce be^ne uttered in your own late
chapter at Tridente by Cornelius the Bishop of Bito^to. These be his words:
Effecerunt tandem, vt Pietas in Fucum, Cornel. Bitontinus in Council. Tridenti.
and Hypocrisim, etc. They have brought to pass, that Godliness is turned
into Hypocrisy: and that the Sauoure of Life is turned into the Sauoure of
Death. Would God they were not gonne wholly with general consent, from
Religion, to Superstition: from Faith, to Infidelity: from Christ, to
Antichriste: from God, to Epicure: saieing with wicked heart, and filthy
mouth, There is no God. Neither has there benne this great while any
Pastoure, or Pope, that regarded these things. For they al ( both Pope, and
others) sought their own: and not so mutche as one of them ( neither Pope,
nor Cardinal) sought for the things, that perteine to Jesus Christ.

Therefore, M. Hardinge, ye may hencefoorthe spare your Unsavory, and bitter
speeches: For in these reports there is no lie.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 3.
Pighius acknowlegeth herein to be a fault, that many Abuses are brought in,
Errors in the Mass.
even into the very Mass, which Mass otherwise he would have se^^e to be a
most reverend matter. Gerson says, that through the number of most fond
Ceremonies, all the Virtue of the Holy Ghost, which ought to have full
operation in us, and al true godliness is utterly quenched, and dead. Whole
Graecia, and Asia complain, how the Bishops of Rome with the martes of
their Purgatories and Pardons, have both tormented men's Consciences, and
piked their purses.

M. Hardinge.
In deed pighius in his sixth controversy, speaking of private masses,
denies not but certain abuses be crept into that most Holy and most helthful
thing, for so he speaks. And adding further, we snow (says he) to what man,
and to what men it pertains the same to correct. And let each man
acknowledge his own measure, and understand his duty. As who should say,
it is not mere for every man to take upon him to amend any thing that is
amiss about the Mass. For he means not that the Mass it self is erroneus,
as full well there he declares: but that men be faulty in abusinge that most
Holy Sacrifice. For many come to the Altar, unworthily. Many be present at
it, that ought not to come within the Church doors. Some Priests be of so
lewd lives, and of so vnreuerent behavior at it, as it were better they
abstained Albeit, I think, he meante rather such abuses, as the learned
Fathers of the prouincial Council of Coulen would to be amended: to wit,
certain peculiar offices of Masses devised by men of late years besides the
ordinance of the Ancient forefathers.

As for the other great troop ye bring with you out of Greece and Asia,
first, we require you to make them agree with your selves, and with the
Catholic Church about the procession of the Holy Ghost, and then we shall
answer both you, and them concerning your grievous matter of Purgatory and
Pardons. It is not our manner to take the saieinges of Heretics for good and
sufficient Authority.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In deed, M. Hardinge, here ye hew over high. Ye take upon you to make us
understand Pigghius meaning: and yet by your own Confession it appears,
ye never knew your self, what he meante. Ye say, He found fault with the
unworthiness, either of the Priests, or of the people, ye know not,
whether: or with some what else, noted in the late Chapter of Colaine, ye know
not, what. Yet what so ever it shall please you to imagine, ye think, you have
wrong, if we believe you not immediately upon your word. But Pigghius him
self, whoes tale ye would so fame tell, says not, as you would make him
say, Abuses have creapte into the Priest, or People, But plainly, and simply
he says, Erroures have creapte into the Mass.

How be it, These Erroures, ye say, what so ever they be, no man may
redress, but only the Pope. Extra, de Translatione Episcopi, Qua^to. In
Gloss. Extra, de Concess. Praebendae. Proposuit: In Glossa.
And good cause, why. For your Doctoures say, Papa ex nihilo potest facere
aliquid: the Pope of nothing can make sum thing: And, what so ever he do,
noman may say unto him, Domine, cur ita facis? Sir, why do you so? And the
very heart, and root of al your Divinity of Louaine is this, Christ has
prayed for Peter: Ergo, the Pope can never err. But if ye mean plainly, and,
if there be no dissimulation, nor Hypocrisy in your words, tell me, I befeche
you, even as you desire to be believed, Of all the Errors ye Phigghius meante,
for the space of these forty years, what one Error has the Pope
redressed? Their is no plainness in this dealinge, M. Harding. Your mind is
not to seek redress, be the fault never so evident: but still to continewe
your selves in credit, and the world i^ error.

All the Christians of Graecia, Graecia, and Asia.
and Asia, ye say, be Heretics: and therefore ye recke not, what they say.
No doubt: for they say, the Pope is not the Head of the Church. Did. 22.
Omnes.
Which thing who so ever denies, says Pope Nicolas, must needs be holden
as an Heretic. Thomas Aquinas for that good affection, and reverence, he bare
toward the Pope, says thus, Dicere, Papam non habere Vniuersalis Ecclesiae
Primatum, est error similis errori dicentium, Spiritum Sanctum a Filio non
procedere: To say, that the Pope has not the Primacie of the Universal
Church, it is an Error like unto the Error of them, that ( maintain
Heresy touching the Holy Trinity, and) say, The Holy Ghost proceeds not
from the Son of God. Of your readiness herein Ludouicus Viues writes thus,
Augustinum Vetustas sua tuetur. Qui si reuiuisceret cum Paulo, certe ille
contemptui esset Rhetorculus, Lodouicus Viuet in Li 13. De ^iuitate Dei, Ca. 24
aut Grammaticulus: Paulus vero vel insanire, vel Haereticus videretur: S.
Augustine is safe now because of his age. But if he, and Paul were alive
again, he should be shaken of as a bad Rhetorician, or a poor Grammarian.
But S. Paul should be taken, either for a mad man, or for an Heretic.

Now judge you, M. Hardinge, what Church of yours is this, where as S. Paul,
the Apostle of Christ, if he were now alive, should go for an Heretic.
Vesputius, as I remember, after he had travailed far, and had seen y^ Manners,
and Religions of many Countries, says thus, Graeci implicati sunt multis
Erroribus: The Greeks are entangled with many Errors: But he adds withal:
Faxit Deus, ne and Latinis multae irrepserint Stultitiae. God grount, there be
not many folies entered also into the Church of Rome.

Surely, the Christian men, that be this day in Graecia, and Asia, utterly
abhor the Pope, Paulus Aemylius, Pantaleon.
with all the deformities of his Church. The Greek Emperor Michael
Palaeologus, for that he had submitted him self to the Pope, in the late
Council of Florence, was therefore afterward abhorred, and hated of his people,
while he lived: and being dead, was forebidden Christian Burial. Isidorus the
Archbishop of Kiouia in Russia, for that, being returned from the said
Council, he began for unities sake, Matthias a Michouia, in Nouo Orb.
to move the people to the like submission, was therefore deposed from his
Bishoprike, and put to death.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 1.
As touching the Tyranny of the Bishops of Rome, and their Barbarous
Persianlike Pride, to leave out others, whom perchance they reckon for
enemies, because they freely, and liberally find fault with their vices, the
same men, which have leadde their life at Rome in the Holy City, in the
face of the most Holy Father, who also were hable to see al their secrets,
and at no time departed from the Catholic Faith, as for example. Laurentius
Valla, Marsilius Patauinus, Frauncis Petrarke, Hierome Sauanorola, Abbat
Ioakim, Baptiste of Mantua, and before al these, Bernarde the Abbate, have many
a time and mutche complained of it, geuinge the world also sommetime to
understand, that the Bishop of Rome him self (by your leave) is very
Antichriste. Whether they spoke it truly, or falsely, let that go: sure I am,
they spoke it plainly. Neither can any man allege, that those Authors were
Luthers, or Zuinglius Scholars: for they lived not only certain years, but
also certain ages ere ever Luther, or Zuinglius names were heard of.

M. Hardinge.
If this Defender were compared to a mad dog, some perhaps would think it
rude, and an unmannerly comparison. Let the man be as he is, who so ever he be:
verily the manner and fashion of both is like, how so ever I be content, his
person be honored with the due regard of a man. For as the mad dog runs
up and down, here and there, and now byteth one thing, and then an other,
snappeth at man and beast, and rests not in one place: So this Defender, to
deface the Church, shows him self to have a very unquiet head. Now he
ronneth at the Bishop of Rome, then at the whole cleregie. Now he barketh at
errors in Doctrine, and shows none, then he snappereth at manners, and
backebiteth men's lives. Now he brings forth Scriptures, and them he
stretches and racketh, but they reach not home. Then comes be to the
Doctoures, and makes them of his side whether they will, or no. From Doctoures
he runs to Coniurers, to riminge Poets, and to Heretics themselves. I
think they had rather run to the Turks, then the Catholic Faith should
be received. And here leauinge that he took in hand to prove, that the
Church erreth in necessary Doctrine, he flingeth at the tyranny and pride of
the Bishops of Rome, and brings in for witness against them, white and
black, good and bad. So he hurt them, he cares not how, by what means, ne
by what persons.

First to geate credit, he utters a manifest lie, saieinge of them al,
they leadde their life at Rome in the Holy City under the nose of the most
holy Father, and might see al his secrets, and never foresooke the Catholic
Faith. His witnesses be these: Laurence Valla, Marsilius of Padua, Francis
Petrarch, Hierome Sauonarol^, Ioachim Abbot, Baptiste of Mantua, and S.
Bernarde, whom of spite he calls Bernarde the Abbot. Now let us see how
many lies here be made at once. Whereas of al these Untruth. For Mantuane
dwelled in Rome: Petrarcha was made Poe^te in Rome: Sauanorola was often in
Rome, etc.
never a one leadde his life at Rome, but Laurence Valla, who was a Canon of
Laterane, and this Defender says that al did: there is one lie. That al these
might see the Popes secrets, there be two lies. That none of these foresooke
the Catholic faith, Untruth. Otherwise shevve, wherein they foresooke the
Faith.
there be three lies. As for Laurence Valla, he was not in every point very
sound, as it appears in his Book of Free will, and in his annotations upon
the new Testamente. In althinges he handled, he showed him self new fangled,
rather then groundedly learned, as well in grammar and logike, as in divinity.

But Mars. lius of Padua, to please the Emperouve Ludouicus Bauarus, who lived
above two hundred years paste, through malice conceived against Pope John
the xxij of whom the said Ludouicus was for just causes excommunicate, went
so far in schism. Untruth. Otherwise shevve, in what Article he was an
Heretic.
as at length he fell into Heresy.

And Abbot Ioachim, whiles he reproved Peter Lombarde, This is Vncerra^ne.
Read Luther touching the same.
uttered Heresy contrary to the Catholic faith, touching the Trinity: and
therefore his book was condemned by the Church, though his person was not
condemned, because he submitted him self, and his writings to the judgment
of the Holy Roman Church, as we find in the Decretals. That al these have
greatly and often complained of the Bishops of Rome their tyranny and
pride, Untruth. For this vvil soon appear.
there be four lies. Extra, de summa^nit. and fide Cathol, Cap. 2.
That they declared the Pope him self to be very Antichriste, Untruth. For by
most express words they call him Antichriste.
there be five lies. And whereas, to make this shameless lie, you ask leave, so
we ask leave of you to tell it you, and to challenge you of a lie, and
saieplainely unto you, that speaking of them al, you belie them, and that you
shall never be able to prove that you say of them.

Francis Petrarch the Italian Poe^te, and Baptiste of Mantua the Latin Poet,
speak like Poets, each of them once in their works against the evil
manners of the Court of Rome. But what proof makes all this, that the Roman
Church, that is to say, the Weast Church, which only remains, and ever
has remained whole and sound of Faith, erreth in Doctrine? Or what argument
can you gather out of al these, I will not say against the life, but against
the office, Authority, and dignity of the Bishop of Rome? The argument, you
can make hereupon is this: Poets reprehende the vices of the Court of Rome:
Ergo, the Pope is Antichriste. Or, ergo the Catholic Church erreth, and is to
be foresaken. What force is in this reason, every reasonable man, be he never
so mean of wit, may soon judge:

The B. of Sarisburie.
Your Comparison of Mad Dogs, M. Hardinge, becomes well the rest of your
Courteous eloquence. Antichriste.
Who so shall mark, how vainly you snappe at, what so ever ye can imagine, is
in your way: now at our Logique: now at our Rhetorique: now at our Greek:
now at our Latin: now at our Lamenesse: now at our lean Cheeks: now at
our thin Beardes: now at our Superintendenteshippes: now at our
Ministershippes: now at our Maistershippes: now at our Mashippes, (for this
is the sobriety, and gravity of your speech): and further how greedily, and
egrely ye fasten your teeth, and feed your self with Wind, and are still
snappinge, and catch nothing: although in regard of manhood he spare to call
you a Mad Dog, as it likes you to call others, yet he may well think you
scarcely to be a sober man.

Christ found fault, sommetime with the Bishops: Sommetime with the
Priests: Sommetime with the Scribes: Sommetimes with the Phariseis: Sommetime
with the People: Sommetime with their Religion: Sommetime with their
Traditions: Sommetime with their Ignorance: Sommetime with their Prayers:
Sommetime with their Fastinges: sommetime with their Life: Sommetime with
their Hypocrisy: Sommetime with their Cruelty: And thus in your fantasy,
he ran hither, and thither, up, and down. Yet, I trow, ye will not touch
him with your Comparisons, nor say therefore, as ye say to us, he had a very
unquiet Head.

Who so has eyes to see, and considers the miserable Abuses of the Church
of Rome, touching either Life, or Religion, cannot lightly want just matter
to reprove. Ye remember, what Church it is, whereof S. Bernarde says,
Bernardus in Conuersione Pauli, Sermo. 1.
A planta pedis, vsque ad verticem Capitis non est Sanitas vlla: Non est iam
dicere, vt Populus, sic Sacerdos. Quia nec sic Populus, vt Sacerdos: There is
not one whole place from the sole of the foot, to the top of the Head. We
may not now say, As is the People, so is the Priest: For the People is
nothing so il, as is the Priest.

Ye say, these witnesses dwelt not in Rome: and here in a small matter, ye have
noted a great lie. How be it, Bernarde the Abbate, that dwelte furtheste of,
was twice in Rome: Gulielm. Abb. in Vita Bernard. Raphael Volaterran.
and was Chief of Council with Pope Innocentius in his greateste affairs
Franciscus Petrarcha was made Poet in the Capitol, and keapte Laura his
Concubine in the eye of the Pope, and had his most aboade in Rome. Laurentius
Valla was Cauon of the Cathedral Church in Laterane, and leadde his Life, and
died in Rome. Briefly, S. Bernarde only excepted, all the rest were Italians,
and dwelte never far from Rome: and as it may appear by the plainness of
their speech, understood sum part of the deepeste Secrets of the Church
of Rome.

Marsilius Patauinus, ye say, was an Heretic: But what one Heresy he
defended, or before what Judge he was convicted, or where he was either
abtured, Marsilius Patauinus.
or pounisshed for the same, neither you, nor any of al your Fellows have
hitherto told us. Therefore we must think, He was an Heretic without
Heresy: Ioachimus Abb. Extra. De Summa Trinitate, and Fide Catholica,
Da^namus. Apocal. 17.
as sum men be Doctoures without Divinity.

Ioachimus Abbas found fault with the Bishop of Rome: And therefore he must
needs be an Heretic. As for that he is charged in the Popes Decretalles with
error, touching the Trinity, it is a great Untruth: as ye may clearly
perceive by a Book, that Martin Luther has pourposely written in his Defense.

But, Vergil. Septemque vna sibi muro circundabit Arces. Iren. li. 5. Cavlt.
to comme near the matter, and to speak of the thing, that most misliketh
you, S. John says, Antichriste shall fit in a City builte upon seven
Hills: (and so is the City of Rome). Irenaeus says, The number of
Antichrists Name shall be expressed by this word, Latinus. Sibylla says, The
greateste terroure, and fury of his Empiere, Sibylla, Oratione 8. (...).
Hieronymus ad Algasiam. Gregor. Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
and the greateste woe, that he shall work, shall be by the banks of Tyber.
Which circumstances seem plainly to painte out the City of Rome.

S. Hierome says, Antichristus fedebit in Templo Dei: vel Hierosolymi, vt
quidam putant: vel in Ecclesia, vt verius arbitramur: Antichriste shall fit in
the Temple of God: either at Jerusalem, as sum think: or else in the Church
( of God) it self: which we take to be the truer meaning. S. Gregory
says, Ego fidenter dico, quo'd quisquis se Vniuersalem Sacerdotem vocat, vel
vocari defiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit: I speak it boldly:
Who so ever calls him self the Universal Priest, or desires so to be
called, ( as does the Pope) in the Pride of his heart he is the forerenner of
Antichriste.

And when John, then Bishop of Constantinople, had first entered his claim
unto this title, Gregor. Lib. 4. Epist. 34.
S. Gregory made answer unto the same, Ex hac eius Superbia, quid aliud,
nisi propinqua iam esse Antichristi tempora designantur? By this Pride of his,
what thing else is signified, but that the time of Antichriste is even at hand?

Again he says upon occasion of the same, Rex soperbiae prope est: and, quod
dici nefas est, Sacerdotum est praeparatus exercitus: The King of Pride ( that
is Antichriste) is coming to us: and an Army of Priests is prepared: which
thing is wicked to be spoken. Hieronym. ad Algasiam.
S. Hierome says, Antichristus omnem Religionem suae subijciet Potestati:
Antichriste shall cause al Religion to be subject to his Power.

I will not here take upon me to discrie, either the Person, or y^ dwelling
Place of Antichriste. Who so has eyes to see, let him see. These Circumstances
agree not unto many. S. 2. Thessal. 2.
Paul says, Antichriste woorketh the Mystery, or secret practice of
Iuiquitie. Whereupon the Gloss says, Mystica est Impietas Antichristi, id est,
Pieratis nomine palliata: The wickedness of Antichriste is Mystical: that is
to say, (It is not plain, and open, or easy to be espied of every body, but)
cloked under the name of Godliness.

And, for as mutche as M. Hardinge thinks, we misallege these Writers, and
violently force them to our side, whether they will, or no, S. Bernarde says
thus, Bernardus Epist. 125. Page 1316.
Bestia illa de Apocalypsi, cui datum lest os loquens Blasphemias, and bellum
gerere cum Sanctis, Petri Cathedram occupat, tanquam Leo paratus ad praedam:
That Beast, that is spoken of in the Book of Revelations, unto which Beast
is given a mouth to speak Blashemies, and to keep war against the
Saints of God, is now gotten into Peter's Chair, as a Lion prepared to his
pray, Ioachimus Abbas said above three hundred years sithence, Ioachimus
Abbas.
Antichristus iam pridem natus est Romae: and altius se extollet in Sede
Apostolica: Antichriste is already borne in Rome: and shall auaunce him self
higher in the Apostolic See.

Arnulphus, In Concilio Remensi, Inter Opera Bernardi.
in the Council of Remes, says thus, Quid hunc, Reuere^di Patres, in sublimi
Solio residentem, vest purpurea, and aurea radiantem, quid hunc, inquam, esse
censeris? Nimirum, si charitate destituitur, solaque scientia inflatur, and
extollitur, Antichristus est in Templo Dersedens, and sese oftendens, tanquam
sit Deus: What think you, Reverend Fathers, of this man ( be means the Pope)
sittinge on high in his Throne, glitteringe in purple, and clothe of Gold?
What think you him to be? Verily, if he be void of Charity, and be blown
up, and auaunced only with knowledge, then is he Antichrist, sitting in the
Temple of God, and showing out him self, as if he were God.

The Bishops in the Council at Reinspurg say thus, Auentinus.
Hildebrandus Papa, sub specie Religionis, iecit Fundamenta Antichristi: Pope
Hildebrande, under a color of holiness ( by forebiddinge Priests marriage)
has said the Fundation for Antichriste. Dantes in Cantione. 32.
Dantes an Italian Poet by express words calls Rome the Whore of
Babylon. Fanciscus Petrarcha likewise says, Rome the Whore of Babylon: The
Mother of al Idolatry, Francis. Petrarcha, Epist. 20.
and Fornication: the Sanctuary of Heresy: and the Schole of Error. I know,
these words will seem odious unto many. Therefore I will stay, and spare the
rest. The Pope him self, for that he saw, to whoes Person, and credit these
things belonged, therefore in his Late Council of Laterane gave strait
Commandment to al Preachers, Council. Lateran. sub Iulio and Leone. Session.
11.
that noman should dare once to speak of the Coming of Antichriste.

The Apology, Cap. 17. Division. 1.
And what marvel if the Church were then carried away with errors in that
time, specially when neither the Bishop of Rome, who then only ruled the
roste, nor almost any other, either did his duty, or once understood,
what was his duty? For it is hard to be believed, whiles they were idle and
fast asleep, that the Devil also all that while either fell asleep, or else
continually lay idle. For how they were occupied in the mean time, and with
what faithfulness they took care of Gods House, though we hold our peace,
yet, I pray you, let them hear Bernarde their own friend. The Bishops
(says he) who now have the charge of Gods church, are not Teachers, but
Deceivers: They are not Feeders, but Beguilers: They are not Prelates, but
Pilates. These words spoke Bernarde of that Bishop, who named him self the
higheste Bishop of al, and of the other Bishops likewise, which then had
the place of gouernemente. Bernarde was no Lutherane: Bernarde was no Heretic:
he had not forsaken the Catholic Church: yet nevertheless he did not let
to call the Bishops, that then were, Deceivers, Beguilers, and Pilates. Now,
when the people was openly deceived: and Christian men's eyes were craftily
bleared: and Pilate sat in Judgment place, and condemned Christ, and
Christ's Members to Sword, and Fiere, O good Lord, in what case was Christ's
Church then? But yet tell me, of so many, and so gross errors, what one
error have these men at any time reformed? Or what fault have they once
acknowledged, and confessed?

M. Hardinge.
Why Sirs, are ye so well learned, and so holy of life your selves, that ye
take upon you to judge the Bishop of Rome, Christ's chief officer in earth,
and al other men, before the time of your Apostates, and Renegate Frters, to
have been both impious for not doing their duty, and ignorant for not knowinge
what was their duty? Was al Virtue so far bannished, al necessary
knowledge and Christian learning so clean put out, that we must now
begin to learn how to believe, and how to live a Christian life of such
light preachers, The Sprite of Modesty.
Wicked vowbreakers, lewd Lecherous Lurdens, and detestable blasphemers, as
your deuilishe rabble is?

S. Bernardes words to Eugenius be these: Age indagemus adhuc diligentius,
quis sis, etc. Well go too. Lib. 2. De consideratione.
Let us somewhat more diligently examine, what manner a man thou art, what
person thou bear for the present time in the Church of God. Who art thou?
The great Preieste, the highest Bishop. Thou art the chief of al Bishops,
thou art the heir of the Apostles: for primacie thou art Abel, for
Government Noe, for Patriarkship Abraham. for holy order Melchiscdech, for
dignity Aaron, for Authority Moses. for judgment Samuel, for power Peter,
The Pope is Christ.
for thy anointinge Christ. Thou art he^to whom the Keys were delivered, to
whom the Sheep were committed. There be also other porters of Heaven, and
Pastors of flocks. But thou so mutche far passinge al other, as thou haste
inherited both names mutche more indifferent. They have their flocks
assigned unto them. each man one. Al are committed to thee, the one whole flock
to one. Neither art thou only the Pastor of all the Sheep, but also the
only Pastor of all the Pastors.

Wherefore according to thine own Canons, The state of the Church of Rome.
other are called into part of care, thou into falnes of power. The Authority
of others is restrained to certain prescripte bounds: thine is extended even
upon those, who have received power over others. Can not thou, if there be
cause why, close up heaven gates against a Bishop, deprive him of his
Bishoprike, and give him up to the Devil?

Now hear an other reason which confirms that prerogative to thee, as well
as the other. The Disciples rowed, Johan, 12.
and our Lord appeared unto them on the shore, and that in his Body now
again restored unto life, which was more confortable unto them. Peter knowing
that it was our Lord, leapte into the sea, S. Peter leapeth for the Popedom.
and so came unto him, and the rest came by bote. What means this? Forsooth
it was a sign of the singular Popedom of Peter, by which he took into his
Gouernemente, not one only one Ship, as the other did, each man his own,
but the whole world.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Apostates, Renegates, Lecherous Lurdaines, Detestable, Diuelishe rabble? O M.
Hardinge, the Vessel, that held this liquoure, was not clean. We condemn
not your Cleregie, either for life, or for Learning: but only report therein
the judgment of others, your special friends. And therefore, if any thing
mislike you herein, the fault is in them, and not in us. S. Bernarde says,
Your Bishops in his time were not Doctoures, but Deceivers: Not Feeders, but
Defrauders: Not Prelates, but Pilates. Judge you now, in what case the Church
of God stood then, when the Bishops, that were the Guides, and Leaders of
the people, might be compared to Pilate, that gave Sentence in judgment
against Christ.

Johannes Vitalis a Cardinal of Rome, and therefore in no wise of your part to
be refused, Johan. Vitalis de praelatis and Sacerdot. Hiere. 5.
says thus, De Sacerdotibus modernis dicit Hieremias: Stupor, and mirabilia
facta sunt in terra. Prophetae praedicabant mendacium: and Sacerdotes
applaudebant manibus: Et populus meus dilexit talia: Concerning the Priests,
that now be, Hieremie says, Honor, and woonders are wrought upon the Earth.
The Prophets have preached Lies: the Priests have clapte their hands at it
for joy, and liked it well: and my people has loved such things.

Albertus Magnus says, Albertus in Iohanne^, Ca. 10. EE.
Illi, qui modo' praesunt in Ecclesijs, plurimum sunt Fures, and Latrones: plus
Exactores, quam Pastores: plus Spoliatores, quam Tutores: plus Mactatores, quam
Custodes: plus Peruersores, quam Doctores: plus Seductores, quam Ductores. Isti
sunt Nuntij Antichristi, Subuersores Ouiu^ Christi: They that now govern the
Church, for the most part, be Thieves, and Murderers: more Catches, then
Feeders: more Spoilers, then Defenders: more Killers, then Keepers: more
Deceivers, then Doctoures: more Beguilers, then Cuiders, These be the
vauntcurrers of Antichriste, the Subuerters of the Sheep of Christ.

William Holcote says, Guliel. Holcote in Li. Sapientiae Lectio. 182.
Sacerdotes moderni sunt similes Sacerdotibus Baal: sunt Angeli Apostatici:
sunt similes Sacerdotibus Dagon: sunt Sacerdotes Priapi: sunt Angeli Abyssi:
The Priests of this time are like the Priests of Baal: They are the Renegate
Angels: They are like the Priests of Dagon: They are the Priests of Priapus:
They are the Angels of Hell. Bernard. in Concilio Remensi.
S. Bernarde says, Dicimini Pastores, cum sitis Raptores. Fratres, Jesus
hodie elegit sibi multos Diabolos Episcopos. Non sunt Pastores, sed Traditores:
Ye are called Bishops, but ye are Rauenners. O my Brethren, Jesus at this
time has chosen unto him many Devils to be Bishops: they are not Feeders:
they are Traitors. Johan. Sarisburien. in Polycratico. Li. 6. Ca. 24.
Johannes Sarisburiensis said boldly unto Pope Adrian the fourth, Ideo mea
opinione Papae frequentius moriu^tur, ne totam corrumpant Ecclesiam: Therefore
in my judgment the Popes die the oftener, lest ( if they should continue
long) they should infecte the whole Church.

Again S. Bernard in Cantica, Sermo. 66.
Bernarde says, Pudeat Successores Apostolorum Lucem non esse Mundi, sed
Modij: Mundi autem tenebras. Dicamus eis, Vos estis tenebrae Mundi: Let it
shame the Successors of the Apostles not to be ye Light of the World, but
the Light of the Busshel: and rather the Darkness of the World. Let us
therefore say unto them, ye are the Darkness of the World.

Through these spectacles we may behold the state of the Church of Rome.
For Christ says, Matthae. 6.
If the Light it self, that is in thee, be made Darkness, how great then
will the Darkness it self be? How can the City be keapte in safety, if the
Watcheman be blind, and see nothing? If the Blind lead the Blind, both
fall into the pit. Matthae. 15. Matthae. 13. Hilari. in Matthae. Canon. 8.
Christ says, Dormientibus illis, creuerunt Zizania: While the Husbandemenne
were asleep, then the Cokle, and Darnel grew. S. Hilarie says, Ecclesiae,
intra quas Verbum non vigilat, naufragae sunt: The Churches, wherein Gods
Word watches not, suffer shipwreck, and are drowned.

But Bernarde, ye say, stoutely maineteineth the Popes Supremacy. I grant
you. Neither did we ever allege him, to prove the contrary. He defends also
other great, and gross errors, as living in a time of deepest Darkness.
But the Reason, Bernar. De Consideratione ad Eugeni. Lib. 2. Johan. 21.
he uses, seem very weak, specially to win so great a matter. For thus he
says, Peter leapte into the water, and came to Christ: The rest of the
Disciples came by bote:

Ergo, The Pope has the Jurisdiction of all the world.

Such other pretty Reasons, made in the Popes behalf, ye may find many.
Peter Crab, Council. to. 1. Pagin. 10. Matthae. 17. Johan. 21. Luc. 5. Mark. 14.
Luc. 22. Johan. 1. Matthae. 26.
that lately compiled the Books of Councelles, reasons thus: Peter paid the
tribute money for Christ, and him self:
Christ said unto Peter, Follow thou me:
Again he said, Lanche forth into the deep:
Again, Peter art thou asleep? Could thou not watch with me one hour?
And again, From hencefoorthe thy name shall be Peter:
And, Peter drew his Sword, and cut of Malchus Ear:
Ergo, says he, The Pope has Universal Authority over the whole Church of
God.

Notwithstanding, how so ever these Reasons hold, Bernarde says, The Popes
are the Heads of the Church. True it is. But again the same Bernard says,
The same Heads are the Ministers of Antichriste, Deceivers, Defrauders,
Rauenners, Traitors, the Darkness of the World, VVoulfes, Pilates, and
Devils. And this was sufficient for our purpose. Gregor. Homil. 17. in illa
verba, Messis quidem multa.
S. Gregory says, Considerate, quid de Gregibus agatur, quando Lupi sunt
Pastores: When the VVoulfe is becomme the Sheephearde, consider then, what may
becomme of the Flock.

As for that S. Bernarde says, The Pope is Abel: The Pope is Noe: The Pope is
Abraham: The Pope is Melchisedek: The Pope is Aaron: The Pope is Moses: The
Pope is Christ.
The Pope is Samuel: The Pope is Peter: The Pope is Christ, I doubt not, but
your own Conscience will answer, it is too mutche. Yet is that a great deal
more likely, that others have said, as I have alleged before, The Pope is
Antichriste. For both Heaven, and Earth knows, he is not Christ.

The Apology, Cap. 18. Division. 1.
But, forsomutche as these men auouche the Universal possession of the
Catholic Church to be their own, and call us Heretics, because we agree
not in judgment with them, let us know, I beseech you, what proper mark,
and badge has that Church of theirs, whereby it may be known, to be the
Church of God. Yewis it is not so hard a matter to find out Gods Church,
if a man will seek it earnestly, and diligently. For the Church of God is
set upon a high, and glisteringe place, in the top of an Hille, and builte
upon the Fundation of the Apostles, and Prophets: There, Augustine. De Vnitate
Eccle. Catholicae.
says Augustine, let us seek the Church: there let us try our matters.
And, as he says again in an other place, The Church must be shevved out of
the Holy, and Canonical Scriptures: and that, which can not be shevved out of
them, is not the Church. Yet for all this, I wot not how, whether it be for
fear, or for conscience, or despair of victory, these men alwaie abhor,
and flee the Word of God, even as the Thief flees the Gallows. And no
wonder truly. For, like as men say, the Cantharus by and by perishes, and
dies, as soon as it is laid in baulme, notwithstanding Baulme be otherwise
a most sweet smellinge ointemente: even so these men well see, their own
matte is damped, and destroyed in the Word of God, as if it were in poison.
Therefore the Holy Scriptures, which our Saueour Jesus Christ did not only
use for Authority in all his speech, but did also at last seal up the same
with his own Blood, these men to the intent they might with less
business drive the people from the same, as from a thing dangerous, and
deadly, have used to call them a Bare Letter, Albertus Pighius in Controuer. De
Ecclesia.
Uncertain, Unprofitable, Dou^be, Killinge, and Dead: which seems to us al
one, as if they should say, The Scriptures are to no purpose, or, as good as
none at al. Hereunto they add also a Similitude not very agreeable, how the
Scriptures be like to a Nose of Wax, or a Shipmans Hose: how they may be
fashioned, and plied al manner of ways, and serve al men's turns.

M. Hardinge.
Where ye say, the Church is builded upon the Fundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, and showed by the Holy Canonical Scriptures: we confess the same
with S. Augustine. When ye add, the Church, which can not be showed out of
the Scriptures, to be no Church, we say, that though Untruth. For S.
Augustine in the same places, and elsvvhere, oftentimes says the same.
S. Augustine have no such words in the Chapters, which ye allege in the
Margent, yet were it never so much granted, that he had those words in that
place, they should make nothing for your purpose. S. Augustine in that Book
disputes against the Donatistes, who would restrain the Catholic Church to
the only Country of Aphrike, denieinge other Christen men to be members
thereof. S. Augustine refutinge their Heresy, declares the Son of God to be
Head, and all the true Faithful to be the Body of the Church: and that it is
not sufficient to hold with the Head alone, or with the Body alone: but we
must hold with both together, if we will be saved.

The Donatistes did grant the Head Jesus Christ, and denied his Body the
Church. For this cause says S. Augusiine, Ipsum Caput de quo consentimus,
oste^dat nobis Corpus suum, de quo dissentimus: Let the Head, upon whom we
agree, show unto us his Body, whereupon we disagree. The Head is Christ, who
spoke first by his Prophets, afterward by him self, and last of all by his
Apostles. In his igitur omnibus quaerenda est Ecclesia. In all these (says
he) the Church must be sought. Where the Church is to be sought,


If thou mark, good Reader, that, which I have here rehearsed out of S
Augustine, it is to be seen, that he binds not the proof of the Church
simply to the Holy Scriptures, Untruth. For S Augustines words are general.
but only in a case, when he has to do with an Heretic, who will not admit
the authority of the Church. Therefore Here M. Hardinge secretly confesses,
that his Church of Rome cannot be shevved by the Scriptures.
a true Church may be found, which is not showed in the Scriptures, so the
contrary thereof be not showed in the Scriptures. Church known by Gods
word.
Now if these Defenders will have that to be no Church, which can not be
showed out of Scriptures, they shall understand, that as therein they play
the Donatistes, so we must needs folow's. Augustine in bringinge Scripture
against them, not as the Untruth. For S. Chrysostom says, Nunc nullo modo
cognoscitur, quae sit vera Ecclesia, nisi Tantummodo per Scripturas.
only proof in deed (which they falsely say) but as a very good and chief
kind of proof, most profitable in all cases, and necessary at such time, as
the adversary will admit none other proof, etc.

Wherefore it remains, that it is the Synagog of Antichriste, and Lucifer.
Who as he fell out of Heaven like a lightninge, so he makes a blase and show
of a Church in the Earth for a time. But as we can tell when it was not
borne, so shall it not be long, but that through Gods power it will vanishe
away dispersed, and be scattered by the lightsome Majesty of Christ's true
Church, which from S. Peter's time to this day florisheth in her Head the
Bishop of Rome, and in her members throughout the world. In the Unity of the
B. of Rome.
which abide in the Unity of the same Bishop.

We esteem and understand the Scriptures to be the sense and the word. If
they can pretend the bare word, they think themselves good enough to make a
sense of their own. Which bare word, as they misuse it, Pighius perhaps
compares to a nose of wax. But the Scriptures he never meante to dishonor
with that similitude. If it were lawful for us to use Scripture after our own
interpretation, as they do, we should not lack sufficient matter in the Holy
Books to overthrow by our own applieinge all their false opinions and
Heresies. Untruth manif^ st, and shameless. For M. Hard, knovveth, that in
the greattest cases, that lie in question, he can allege neither Scripture, nor
Doctoure.
But we are bound to that religious awe, and reverence of them, that except
we have an Author to auouche the sense, whereof we take hold, we dare bring
forth nothing. And yet read our Books who will, he shall lack neither
Scriptures in them, nor witnesses of our interpretation in any controversy of
this age. Let it be agreed, that for decision of controversies, such sense of
the Scriptures be taken for Scripture, which the Holy Ghost has taught the
Church, and then let the world judge, who flies the word of God, as the
Thief does the Gallows.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Contrary to that, we have here alleged of S. Augustine, ye say, A true
Church may be found, which is not showed in the Scriptures: Whereby it
appears, ye are loathe, your Church should comme to the trial of this
Standerde. But, for as mutche as this quarrel grows of S. Augustine, let S.
Augustine him self be the Judge. And, to allege a few words in steed of
many, thus he says, Vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, Augustine. De Vnitate Eccle.
Ca. 16.
Diuinarum Scripturarum Canonicis Libris ostendant. Ecclesiam Christi, sicut
ipsum Caput Christum, in Scripturis Sanctis Canonicis debemus agnoscere:
Whether they have the Church, or no, let them show by the Canonical Books
of the Holy Scriptures. We must know the Church of Christ, even as we
likewise know Christ, which is the Head of the Church, in the Holy
Canonical Scriptures. Again he says, August. Contra Cresconium Cram. Lib. 1.
Ca. 33.
Ecclesiam sine vlla ambiguitate Sancta Scriptura demonstrat: The Holy
Scripture shows the Church without any doubtefulnesse.

Again, Quaestio est, vhi sit Ecclesia. Quid ergo facturi sumus? Vtrum in
verbis nostris eam quaesituri, an in Verbis Capitis sui, Domini nostri Jesus
Christi? Futo, quod in illius potius Verbis eam quaerere debemus, August De
Vnita Ecclesi. Ca. 2.
qui Veritas est, and optime nouit Corpus suum: The question, or doubt is,
where the Church should be. What then shall we do? Whether shall we seek the
Church in our own words, or in the Words of her Head, which is our
Lord Jesus Christ? In my Judgment we ought rather to seek the Church in
his Words: for that he is the Truth, and best knows his own Body.

Again, August. Eodem Li. Ca. 3.
Non audiamus, Haec dico, Haec dicis: Sed audiamus, Haec dicit Dominus. lbi
quaeramus Ecclesiam: Ibi discutiamus causam nostram: Let us not hear these
words, This say I, This saiste thou: But these words set us hear, Thus
says the Lord: there let us seek the Church: there let us discuss our
cause. And again, In eode^ capite.
Nolo Humanis Documentis, sed Diuinis Oraculis Sanctam Ecclesiam demonstrari: I
will not have the Holy Church to be showed by Man's Judgment, but by Gods
Word.

Likewise says S. Unity of the Church in one Pope.
Chrysostom, Nunc nullo modo cognoscitur, quae sit vera Ecclesia Christi, nisi
Tantummodo per Scripturas: Now can noman know, which is the true Church of
Christ, but Only by the Scriptures. Again he says, in like form of
words, Volens ergo quis cognoscere, quae sit Vera Ecclesia Christi, vnde
cognoscat in tanta confusione similitudinis, Chrysostom. in opere Imperfe. Homil
49. In Eadem Hom.
nifi Tantummodo' per Scripturas? If a man be desirous to know, which is the
true Church of Christ, how can he know it in such a confusion of likeness,
but Only by the Scriptures? These words be so evident and so plain, that
noman with modesty may well deny them.

And, whereas you say, All this notwithstanding, A true Church may be
found, which is not showed in the Scriptures. S. Ambrose says, Ambrosi,
Hexameron. li. 4. ca. 8.
Ecclesia fulget, non suo, sed Christi Lumine: The Church shines ( or is
known) not by her own Light, but by the Light of Christ, which is, by the
Word of God.

And chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Johan Homil. 58.
Qui Sacra non vtitur Scriptura, sed ascendit aliunde, id est, non concessa
via, hic Fur est, and Latro: Who so uses not the Scripture, but geateth up an
other way, that is, by a way, that is not lawful, he is a Thief, and a
Murtheier.

Again he says, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 46.
Jerusalem hic semper Ecclesiam intellige, quae dicitur Ciuitas Pacis: cuius
Fundamenta posita sunt super Montes Scripturarum: Here by Jerusalem evermore
understand thou the Church, which is called the City of Peace: The
Fundations whereof are said upon the Mountains of the Scriptures.

Ye magnify your Church of Rome, and say, It shieth on high upon the
Mount. Yet S. Bernarde says to the Pope, and his Cleregie, as it is alleged
before, Vos estis Tenebrae Mundi: Ye are the Darkness of the World.
Therefore ye may not well vaunte your selves so mutche of the brightness of
your Beams. As for that, ye call our Church the Synagoge of Lucifer, and
Antichriste, we may well suffer it to blow ever, as the vain unsavory smoke
of sum impatiente Cholerique humor. Our cause is not the worse, M.
Hardinge, in the Judgment of the wise, for that you have learned so readily
to speak il.

But what Louanian vanity is this, to say, The Members of the Church of
Christ abide in the Unity of the Pope? What Scripture, or Doctoure, or Father
ever told you of such Unity? S. Paul says, We are alone not in the Pope,
but) in Christ Jesus. And what so great Unity, can you say, there is, or
has benne in your Popes? Platyna in Stephano.
Platyna says, Post Stephanum semper haec consuetudo seruata est, vt acta
Priorum Pontificum sequentes ant infringereat, aut omnino' tollerent: It has
benne an ordinary custom emonge the Popes ever sithence the time of Pope
Steuin, that the Popes, that followed afterworde, would evermore either break,
or abolishe the Acts of the Popes, Erasmus in Annotationib. in 1. Corin. 7.
that had benne before them. Erasmus says, Johannes. 22. and Nicolaus totis
Decretis inter se pugna^t, idque in his, quae videntur ad Fidei negotium
pertinere: Pope John. 22. and Pope Nicolas in their whole Decrees are
contrary the one against the other: yea, and that in matters, that seem to
belong to cases of the Faith.

To be short, the Popes have foully corrupted the Scriptures: they have
corrupted the Decrees, and Canons of Councelles: they have benne Sorcerers,
Idolaters, Scribes, and Phariseis: They have benne Arian Heretics: Nestorian
Heretics: Monothelite Heretics: Montaniste Heretics: they have maintained
damnable Heresies against y^ Godhed of Christ: against y^ Person of Christ:
against y^ VVil of Christ: and against the Immortality of the Soul: they
have hen contrary to themselves, one directly, and expressly against an
other: Yet must the Pope bear up the whole Church of God, even as Atlas
bears vy the Heavens? and unless all the world abide in him, is there no
Unity in the Church?

Thus says Hosius, Hosius in Petricouien. Confess. Ca. 27.
Vnum praeesse toti Ecclesiae, vsque ade o est necessarium, vt absque hoc
Ecclesia Vna esse non possit: It is so necessary a thing, that one have the
gouernmente of the whole, that otherwise the Church of God cannot be One.

Likewise it is noted in the Popes own Gloses upon his Decretalles, Constat
Ecclesiam ideo esse vnam, quia in Universally Ecclesia vnum est caput Supremum,
scilicet, Papa: It is plain, that the Church is one, for that in the
Universal Church there is one Supreme Head, that is, the Pope. An other of
your Doctors doubts not to step yet a little farther, Clemen. 5. Ad
nostrum. In Glossa. Johan. De Parisijs, De Potestate Regia, and Papali, Ca 3.
and thus to expound the words of Christ, Fiet Vnu^ Ouile, and Vnus Pastor:
Quod quidem de christo intelligi non potest: Sed de aliquo alio Ministro, qui
praesit loco eius: There shall be one Fold, and one Shepehearde. These words
we may not understand of Christ, but of sum other Minister, that rules
in his room. By which Doctors Catholic Judgment we find, that the
Unity of the Church hangs not of Christ, but of the Pope.

But these be over vain, and gross vanities. For though the Pope, were no
Pope, yea, though Antichriste were the Pope, yet is Christ hable to hold his
Church in perfect Unity. ^phesi. 4.
S. Paul says, Christus est Caput, ex quo totum Corpus coagmentatur, and
connectitur: Christ is the Head, of whom the whole Body (of the Church) is
framed fast, and joined together. Therefore S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom.
ad Colossen. Homi. 7. Citatur in Cathena in 1. Cap. Iohannis.
Ex hoc capite Corpus habet, and vt sit, and vt been sir. Quid relicto Capite
Membris adhaeres? Of this Head (that is Christ) the Body has both to be,
and also well to be. What cleauest thou to the Members, and leauest the Head?

This is the Unity of the Church, that the whole Flock may hear the voice
of that One Shepehearde, and follow him. And that one Shepehearde is Christ
the Son of God, and not the Pope. Therefore S. Augustine says, Per hanc
Potestatem, quam solum sibi Christus retinuit, stat Vnitas Ecclesiae, de qua
dictum est, Vna est Columba mea: By this Power, which Christ (he says not,
has given over the Pope, but) has reserved only to him self, stands the
Unity of the Church: of which Unity it is said, My Dooue is One.

Ye say, there appears in your Books sufficient abundance of Scriptures,
touching any controversy of this age, and that according to the very sense,
and meaning of the same, together with the consent, and Judgment of the
Holy Fathers. But as for us, ye say, we build only upon the bare words,
and make a meaning of our own.

In deed it is no great Maisterie for you, to arm your self with sum show
of Scriptures. Matthae. 4. In Con. Chalcedon. Action. 2. Athanas. contra
Arianos Oratione. 1. Tertullian. De Baptismo.
The Devil was not altogether void of such furniture, when he came to
tempte Christ. S. Cyril says, Omnes Haeretici de Scriptura diuinitus
inspirata sui colligunt erroris occasiones: Al Herotiques out of the Heavenly
inspired Scriptures geather occasion of their error. Athanasius says,
Haeretici Scriptutarum Verbis pro esca vtuntur: Heretics use the words of
the Scriptures for a bait.

Tertullian says, Fidem ex his impugnat, ex quibus constat: An Heretic
assausteth the Faith by the same words of God, that breed the Faith.

But for as mutche as ye say, ye bear such awe, and reverence unto the
Word of God, and in the interpretation thereof follow only the sense of the
Holy Ghost, and the Judgment of the Doctors and Fathers of the Church, for
sum trial of your truth herein, let us see, how discretely, and reverently
ye have used the same.

In your late Council holden at Laterane in Rome, one Simon Begnius, the Bishop
of Modrusia, Council. Lateran. Session. 6. Page 601.
says thus unto Pope Leo, Ecce venit Leo de Tribu Judah, Radix David etc. Te
Leo Beatissime Saluatorem expectauimus etc. Behold, the Lion is comme of the
Tribe of Judah, the Root of Deuind etc. O most Blessed Leo, we have looked
for thee, to be our Saueour. In your late Chapter at Tridente Cornelius the
Bishop of Bitonto said thus, Council. Trident. Cornelius Bitont inus.
Papa Lux venit in Mundum: and dilexerunt homines tenebras magis, quam Lucem.
Omnis, qui male agit, odit lucem, and non venit ad Lucem: Abusinge of the
scriptures.
The Pope being the Light is comme into the World: and men have loved the
Darkness more then the Light. Every man, that doothe evil, hates ( the Pope
that is) the Light, and comes not to the Light.

Pope Adrian says, Council. to. 2. Decreta collecta per Adrianum, Page 613.
Papa non iudicabitur a quoquam: Quia Scriptum est, Non est Discipulus supra
Magistrum: No man shall Judge the Pope: for it is written, the Scholar is not
above his Master.

The Pope suffered the Ambassadors of Sicilia to lie prostrate on the ground,
Paulus Aemylius, Lib. 7.
and thus to cry unto him, as if it had benne unto Christ, Qui tollis Peccata
Mundi, miserere nostri: Qui tollis Peccata mundi, dona nobis Pacem: O thou (
Holy Father) that take away the Sins of the World, have mercy upon us:
thou, that take away the Sins of the World, give us Peace.

Pope Sixtus says, Who so accuses the Pope, can never be forgeuen. And his
reason is this, Council. tomo. 1. In purgatione Sixti.
Quia qui peccat in Spiritum Sanctum, non remittetur ei, neque in hac vita,
neque in futura: He, that sins against the Holy Ghost, shall never be
foregeuen, neither in this World, nor in the World to comme. And by these
words of the Scriptures, so well applied, he concludes, that noman may
accuse the Pope. And, to leave a heap of other examples (for they are
infinite), you your self, M. Hardinge, have often used the Scriptures in like
sort.

Thus ye say, M. Hard. fo. 99. a
The Son of Man came not to destroy ( the Souls of men) but to save:
Ergo, The substance of Bread in the Sacrament is not annihilate, or consumed
to nothing.

And this, ye say, was the Sense, and meaning of the Holy Ghost: this is
the Judgment of all the Doctors, and Holy Fathers. Such religious awe, and
reverence ye bear toward the Word of God. Yet says your Doctoure
Hosius, Hosius Contra Brentium. Li. 4. Fol. 178. a.
The Scripture, as it is alleged by us, is the Word of the Devil: but as it
is alleged, and handled by you, so only it is the Word of God. If ye had
not utterly wypte al shame from your faces, ye would neither make such
mockeries of Gods Holy Word, nor so lewdely abuse the people of God.

The Apology, Cap. 19. and 20. Division. 1.
Woteth not the Bishop of Rome, that these things are spoken by his own
Minions? or understands he not, he has such Cha^pions to fight for him?
Let him harken then how Holily, and ho^ Godly one Hosius writes of this
matter, a Bishop in Polonia, as he testifies of him self: a man doubtless
well spoken, and not unlearned, and a very sharp, and a sto^^te mainteinour of
that side. Thou will marvel, I suppose, how any good man could either
conceive so wickedly, or write so despitefully of those words, which, he
knew, proceeded from Gods mouth, and specially in such sort, as he
would not have it seem his own private opinion alone, but the common opinion
of all that band. He dissembleth, I grant you in deed, and hides, what he
is, and sets forth the matter so, as though it were not he, Hosius de
Expresso Verbo Dei.
and his side, but the zvvenkfeldian Heretics, that so did speak. We,
says he, vvil bid away with the same Scriptures, whereof we see
brought, not only diverse, but also contrary interpretations: and we vvil
hear God speak, rather then we vvil resort to the naked Elements, or bare
words of the Scriptures, and appointe our Salvation to reaste in them. It
behooves not a man to be expert in the Law, and Scripture, but to be taught
of God. It is but lost labor, that a man bestows in the Scriptures. For
the Scripture is a Creature, and a certain bare Letter. This is Hosius
saieinge, uttered altogether with the same Sprite, and the same mind,
wherewith in times paste the Heretics Montanus and Marcion were moved, who,
as it is written of them, used to say, when with contempt they rejected the
Holy Scriptures, that them selves knew many more, and better things, then
either Christ, or the Apostles ever knew.

What then shall I say here, O ye principal Posts of Religion, O ye
Archegouernours of Christ's Church: is this that your reverence, which ye
give to Gods Word? The Holy Scriptures, which S. Paul says, came by
the inspiration of God, which God did commend by so many Miracles, wherein
are the most perfect printes of Christ's own steps, which all the Holy
Fathers, Apostles, and Angels, which Christ him self the Son of God, as
often as was needeful, did allege for testimony and proof, will ye, as though
they were vilwoorthy for you to hear, did them Auaunt? That is, will ye enioine
God to keep silence, who speaks to you most clearly by his own mouth in
the Scriptures?

Or, that Word, whereby alone, as Paul says, we are reconciled to God,
and which, the Prophet David says, is Holy, and Pure, and shall last for
ever, will ye call that but a bare, and dead Letter? Or will ye say, that al our
labor is lost, which is bestowed in that thing, which Christ has
commanded us diligently to search, and to have evermore before our eyes? And
will ye say, that Christ, and the Apostles meante with suttletie to deceive
the people, when they exhorted them to read the Holy Scriptures, that thereby
they might flow in all wisdom, and knowledge? No marvel at al, though these
men despise us, and al our dooinges, seeinge they set so little by God him
self, and his infallible saieinges. Yet was it but want of wit in them, to
the intent they might hurt us, to do so extreme injury to the Word of
God.

But Hosius will here make exclamation, and say, that we do him wrong, and
that these be not his own words, but the words of the Heretic
zvvenkfeldius. But how then, if zvvenkfeldius make exclamation on the other
side, and say that the same very words be not his, but Hosius own words?
For tell me, where has zvvenkfeldius ever written them? Or if he have written
them, and Hosius have judged the same to be wicked, why has not Hosius spoken
so mutche as one word, to confute them? How so ever the matter go, although
Hosius peradventure will not allow of those words, yet he does not disallow
the meaning of the words.

For welueare in all Controversies, and namely touching the use of the Holy
Communion under Both Kinds, although the words of Christ be plain, and
evident, yet does Hosius disdeinefully reiecte them, as no better, then Cold,
and Dead Elements: and commands us to geeue Faith to certain New
Lessons, appointed by his Church, and to, I wot not what, Revelations of the
Holy Ghost. And Pighius says, Me^ne ought not to believe, no not the most
clear, and manifest words of the Scriptures, unless the same be allowed
for good by the Interpretation, and Authority of the Church: whereby he
means the Church of Rome.

M. Hardinge.
How ignorantly, wickedly, and stubbornely the Author of this Apology
burdeneth the reverent Father in God, and Honorable prelate Cardinal Hosius
with that he never said, it is not unknown to al men, who have readen that
Book, which he wrote, De Expresso verbo Dei, of the express Word of God.
Here I ask so much pardon, as to detecte an heretical touch or two, before
I make direct answer to the foul slaunderinge of Hosius.

First I note, with what fidelity these new Holy brethren do their things.
It may be thought that the Secretary of this new Clergy at his penninge of
the Apology, saw not Hosius Book of the express word of God. But as they
have benne conversant in S. Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, and the Ancient
Fathers, so use they Hosius at this time: that is to say, they read neither
the Old Fathers with any diligence, neither the writers of our time: But by
snappes and pieces either them selves write out here and there a line or two,
or use that, which some of their own sect has taken out of them. So that
for most part they never know the true meaning of the place, which they
allege. But vsinge patched note books, and bringinge in scattered
Authorities, they be deceived themselves, and deceive others. And he that took
the note, knew well they were not the words of Hosius, and did but only put
the name of Hosius unto them, because they were taken out of his Book. The
writer of this Apology, not knowinge, or not remembringe so much, when he
found in the note book the name of Hosius with such words, he did rashely
put them in printe, to his own great shame, and discredit. If this excuse be
not true, we must needs lay marvelous malice to the said writer, who
wittingly and of set purpose did impute the words to Hosius, which he
reported by way of mislikinge of them, and shewinge whose Heresy they
contained.

Now let the Defenders chose, whether they will have their Secretary condemned
of ignorance, or of malice. How so ever it be, mark yet the third point,
which hereof we will gather. The Apology was skant Printed and published, but
that gross error was out of hand espied, and word thereof brought to the
Author, I mean him, that penned it. But what did he? Did he confess, that he
was deceived? Did he cry Hosius mercy? No, no. That is not the woonte of
Heretics. They will go forewarde with the matter once begone, what so ever
come of it. What did he then? When it should be set forth in English, and
word came to him thereof, he made an excuse, I warraunt you meet for an
Heretic, whose property it is Proficere in peius, as S. Paul says, to
proceed to worse and worse, to take his degree backewarde, and of a great
fault to make a far greatter. For whereas before (as Charitiemoueth me to
think) he had made an error, supposinge Hosius to have said that, which he
had not, after ward by stubborn mainteininge of it, he shows what spirit
he is of. And when he might reasonably have excused his ignorance, chose
rather spitefully to discover his malice: As it shall manifestly appear by the
circumstance of the thing. He lays to Hosius charge, and in his person to
all our charges, that we do not esteem the Holy Scriptures. He proves it by
certain words alleged out of a treatise made by Hosius De Expresso verbo
Dei. The words are here put in the Apology, as the reader may see. The true
argument of Hosius book is no other then to show, that all Heretics have
alleged the words of God, as they be written: But none of them all have
taken the right understanding of Gods words, as they do in deed
signify. For that only the Catholic Church atteineth unto, because only it
has the Holy Ghost. All Heretics have brought for their opinions the written
Word of God so long, until at the last (says Hosius) there were found,
who by the words of the Scriptures took upon them to take away al Authority
from Scriptures. Natum est (says he) nouum quoddam Prophetarum genus, qui non
sunt veriti Scripturarum auctoritate Scripturis auctoritatem omnem detrahere.
En quo perduxit rem tandem Saranas? A certain new kind of Prophets is
risen, who stick not by the Authority of Scriptures to take away al
authority from Scriptures. See whither at the length the Devil has brought
the matter.

Now afterward expoundinge this matter more at large, he declares the
Captain of that Heresy to have benne Zwenkfeldius. He shows that by a
Text of Scripture, where David says, I will hear, what our Lord speaks
in me: Zwenkfeldius went about to will men to hear what God tells every man
by inspiration, rather then to give attendance to the written word of God.
And whiles Hosius reports, what Zwenkfeldius said for the maintenance of his
fond Heresy, among other his words these are, which be brought in this
Apology against Hosius, and against the Catholics: whereas it is neither
Hosius, nor any Catholic that speaks them, but only Zwenkfeldius him self.

Hitherto we have showed that the words alleged in the Apology under the
name of Hosius, make neither against him, nor against us, as not being his
words, nor ours, but only the words of Zwenkfeldius. Well, what credit
may we give to this man in expoundinge the Word of God, (whose true
meaning he may falsisie at his pleasure, because we can not bring forth
God him self to declare his words) seeinge he dares to burden Hosius with
these words, which Hosius him self being yet alive can declare to have
another meaning, as the Book it self doothe witness to all that list to
read the same. This was a great fault, to impure so horrible an Heresy to
Hosius unjustly. This was a great ignorance, to charge him with that Heresy,
which he refuteth and impugneth. They are great crimes, and yet such, as
might ri^e of misreporte and ignorance. But when he was told of them, he
should of reason have corrected them. He should have repented with Peter, and
not despaired with Cain and Judas.

But what did he, when he understood he had erred? He adds a Gloss far
more malicious then the former error was. For, graun^inge that Hosius sets
out the matter so, as though neither he, nor any of his side, but the Heretics
Zwenkfeldians spoke so, this not withstandinge he burtheneth both him and the
Catholics with it, saieinge, that he dissembleth, and hides what he is. Sir,
was this the way to amend your fault, to grant that Hosius spoke against
the Zwenkfeldians, and yet to bear men in hand, he favored them? If he had
favored their Heresy, what needed he to refell it? But how say you, that
Hosius dissembleth and hides what he is since that even here in two places in
most plain words, you lay the Zwenkfeldian Heresy to his charge? Read
your own Book. Before the allegation of Zwenkfeldius Heresy, say you not
thus? We, says he, will bid away, etc. And after the allegation, have you
not these words, This is Hosius saieinge? How stands all this together?
You have forgotten the Proverb, that bids a lier to be mindful. I can not
tell how to name this kind of your dealinge, lieinge, or detraction,
slaunderinge, or malicious speakinge. But Sir, if Hosius have spoken evil, why
give you not witness against him of evil? If he have spoken well, even by
your own confession in reputinge the Zwenkfeldians for Heretics, why find
you fault with him for his good words, such I say, as your self confess
to be good? You reprove him, who speaks not against Zwenkfeldius: and again
you grant he speaks against him: and yet because you had once reproved him,
you will contine we in it without reason, learning, or wit. But it must
needs so be: for without pertinacie no man is either a perfect Heretic, or a
perfect slaunderer.

If yet you stand in Defense of it, all the world will account you for a
desperate person. For no man that ever saw Hosius works, can think that he
was gilty of that you burden him with. But some man might think you were
deceived, and mistook Hosius. But since you grant, you do not now mistake
him, and yet charge him with auouchinge that, which he holds for Heresy: he
that understands thus much of you, may assure him self, that you are
disposed to belie and slander Hosius, though it cost you the damnation of
your Soul. For shame man, repent, and revoke that, for which your own
conscience stinteth not to bark at you.

But Hosius (say they) peradventure will not allow the words of
Zuenkfeldius: The mistakinge of Hosius.
yet he doothe not disallowe the meaning of the words. Well and clerkely
reasoned. As though words were allowed or disallowed for any other so
principal a cause, as for their meaning. And therefore he that disalloweth
words, has much more disallowed the meaning of them. Yet, (say they) of
the Holy Communion under Both Kinds he rejects the plain words of
Christ, as Dead and cold Elements. Verily a man might think this Book
was set forth by some ennemie of our new English Clergy, it is so mutche
to their defacinge, had not themselves at diverse times acknowleged it for a
whelpe of their own littour. A man for his life can not find one leaf in it
without many Lies.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I cannot greatly blame you, M. Hardinge, though ye show your self hot,
and vehement in defense of Hosius. For of him you, and sum of your Fellows
may say, as Carneades said sommetime of Chrysippus, Nisi Chrysippus fuisset,
ego non essem: If Chrysippus had not benne, then had I never benne. For had not
Hosius benne good unto you, and spared you part of his furniture, such as it
was, your Divinity had benne full bare.

Ye say, we read neither the Old Writers, nor the New, but are utterly
ignorante, and void of al learning: and, in respect of the Beams of your
knowledge, know nothing. It were a very ambitious, and a childishe vanity, to
make vauntes of Learning. For as motche as ye seem desirous of the same of
great Readinge, ye shall have the whole praise, and glory of it, M. Hardinge,
without contention. We will rather say with S. Paul, We know nothing, but
only Jesus Christ Crucified upon his Cross. Yet notwithstanding we are
neither so ignorant, nor so idle, but that we are hable, and have leisure to
read, as well the Old Doctors, and the Fathers of the Church, as also your
light uncivil Pamflettes, and blotted Papers: which, God wot, in all
respects are very New. And for either of them, we are mutche ashamed in your
behalf: For the Old Doctors, and Fathers, to see them of your part, either
of wilfulness, or of forgeatefulnesse, or of ignorance, so fowly misused: of
your own Papers, and Novelties, to see them with untruth, and other
discourteous speech so fully freighted.

But, touching Hosius, ye condemn us utterly, either of ignorance, or of
malice. For the words, wherein we find such fault, were uttered by him,
as you say, not as any part of his own Judgment, but only, as in the
person of the Heretic Zuenkfeldius. Therefore, ye say, we charge him
wrongefully with the allowinge of that thing, which he expressly, and
plainly reproves.

First of al, the Author of the Apology protests, that, if there were any
oversight herein, it proceeded only of error, and not of malice: as it may
well appear, in yt he was not deceived alone. For if he were deceived in
mistakinge these words, diverse others, the best Learned of this age, have
benne deceived therein as well, as he. Nicolaus Gallus.
Nicolaus Gallus hereof writes thus, Hosius Cardinalis Legatus Sanctissimi,
and praesidens Concili^ Tridentini, in suo Libro de Expresso Verbo Dei, ait,
Nos vero Dei de Coelo sententiam potius expectabimus etc. Non oportet Legis,
aut Scripturae esse peritum, sed a Deo doctum. Vanus est labor, qui Scripturis
impenditur. Scriptura enim Creatura est, and egenum quoddam Elementum: Cardinal
Hosius, Legate unto the most Holy Father, and President of the Council of
Trident, in his Book, De Expresso Verbo Dei, says thus: We will rather wait
for Gods will from Heaven, etc. It behooves not a man to be skilful in the
Law of God, or in the Scriptures, but to be taught of God. It is but lost
labor that is spente in the Scriptures. For the Scripture is a Creature, and
a poor kind of out ward Elemente. Thus Nicolaus Gallus burdeneth your own
Catholic Friend Hosius with these words, and not the Heretic Zuenkfeldius.

Likewise says Flacius Illyricus, The mistakinge of Hosius.
speakinge of the same words of Hosius, Vnum locum ex plurimis proferam, in
quo Hosius alterius cuiusdam sententiam de hac re citans, Flacius Illyricus in
Norma Concilij.
comprobat: Nos Dei de Coelo Sententiam potius expectabimus etc. vanus est
labor, qui Scripturis impenditur: One place I will allege out of many, where
Hosius bringinge in the saieinge of one certain man ( meaning Zuenkfeldius)
allows well of the same. These words, says Illyricus, Hosius utters in
the name, and person of Zuenkfeldius: Yet nevertheless he allows them, as
his own.

To like purpose writes Iacobus Andreae: who, after he had reported all the
foresaid words, Jacob. Andreae, De Authorita. Sacrae Scripturae.
in the end concludes thus: Hactenus Hosius: Quae verba sieve Hosius suo, sieve
aliorum nomine recitet, certe hanc else Asoti, and Hosij de Sacra Scriptura
sententiam, non est obscurum: Thus far Hosius: which words, how so ever
Hosius report them, either in his own name, or in the name of sum other,
without al doubt, this is the Judgment, that both Asotus, and Hosius have
of the Holy Scripture.

So likewise says that most Grave and Learned Father Johannes Brentius:
Interea vociferantur, Johan. B^^ in Pra^^ in lac^^ (...) dreae contra Hosium.
Sacram Scripturam else Dubiam, Ambigua^, Praeceptorem Mutum, Litera^
Occidentem, Literam Mortuam: adeoque, fi Reuerendis illis Patribus libuerit,
Aesopi Fabulas: In the mean while they cry out, y^ the Holy Scriptures are
Blind, and Doubteful: a Dou^be Scholemaister: a killinge Write: a dead
Letter: yea, and, if it shall like these Reverend Fathers, no better, then
Esopes Fables. Perhaps ye will say of these Learned Men, as ye say of some
others, They used only their patched Notebookes, and scattered Authorities, by
snappes, and pieces, here, and there a line, or two: and understood not, what
they wrote. Notwithstanding, what so ever it shall please you to say, as
therein your grace is very great, yet you see by these few, and must needs
confess, if the Authoure of the Apology, thouchinge this place of Hosius,
were happily ouerseene by error, yet he had to many of the best Learned of
this age, to keep him company in his error. Verily, they say not, as you
say, Thus says Zuenkfeldius: They say, as we say, Thus says Hosius: It
Hosius were hable to blind so many, we must think, he was a skilful Writer.

The fairest color, ye can lay hereon, is this: How so ever these words be
uttered by Hosius, Jacob. Andreae.
yet was this no part of his meaning. Yet Iacobus Andreae says, Hanc else
Asoti, and Hosij sententiam, non est obscurum: Without doubt this is the very
meaning of Alotus, Flaci. Illyricus: Alterius cuiusdam sententiam de hac re
citans. comprobat.
and Hosius. And Illyricus says, Hosius alleginge ye saieinge of one certain
man (whereby he means the Heretic Zuenkfeldius) allows well of the same.

But, for as mutche as ye say, This Gloss is more maliceous, then the Former
Error: and that therein we spitefully discover our Malice, without Reason,
without Learning, without VVitte: and require us to repent for shame, as if
it were a Sin, not against Hosius, but against the Holy Ghost, I beseech
you therefore indifferently to consider, with what reverence, and modesty, not
only Hosius, but also sundry others your Friends of that side, have used to
speak, and write of the Word of God.

Ludouicus a Canon of ye Church of Laterane in Rome, in an Oration openly
pronounced in your late Chapter at Tridente, Ludouicus, Citatur ab Illyrico in
Norma Concilij.
says thus: Ecclesia est Viuum pectus Christi: Scriptura autem est quasi
Mortuum Atramentum: The Church is the Lively Breaste of Christ: But the
Scripture is, as it were, Dead Ink. Likewise said the Bishop of Poiters in
the same your Chapter: Scriptura est res manimis, and muta, Johan. Sleidanus
Lib. 23.
sicut etiam sunt reliquae Leges Politicae: The Scripture is a Dead, and
Doumbe thing, as are al other Politic Laws. Albertus Pigghius says, Si
dixeris, haec referri oportere ad Iudicium Scripturarum, Albert. Pigghius
Controuer. 3. De Ecclesia.
Communis re sensus ignarum esse comprobas. Sunt enim Scripturae Muti Iudices:
If thou say, These matters must be put over to the Judgment of the
Scriptures, thou she west thee self to be void of common reason. For the
Scriptures are doumbe Judges, and cannot speak. Eckius calls the Scriptures,
The mistakinge of Hosius.
Euangelium Nigrum, and Theologiam Atramentariam: The Black Gospel, and Inken
Divinity. Again Pigghius says, Ecclesia habet illam potestatem, Martinus
Kemnitius in Examine Con. Tridentini, Page 32. Martin. Kemnitius, in eodem
Examine, Page 240.
vt possit Scriptis quibusdam impertiri Canonicam Authoritatem, quam nec ex se,
nec ex suis Authoribus habent: The Church has power to geeue Canonical
Authority unto certain Writings, which otherwise they have not, neither of
them selves, nor of their Authors. There may be certain Books allowed for
Scripture, says he, yt have no credit, nor Authority of them selves.
Therefore the meaning hereof must needs be this: The Church (of Rome) has
Authority to make Scriptures. Again he says, Sunt Scripturae, vt, non minus
vere, quam festiue dixit quidam, velut Nasus Cereus, qui se horsum, illorsum,
and in quancunque volueris partem, Pigghius Hierar. Li. 3. Cap. 3. Fol. 103.
trahi, retrahi, fingique facile permittit: As one man both truly, and merrily
said, the Scripture is like a Nose of Wax, that easily suffers it self to
be drawn backewarde, and forewarde, and to be molded, and falshioned, this
way, and that way, and how so ever ye list.

Thus, M. Harding, ye teach the people to reverence, and weighe the Word
of God. Ye call it Dead Ink: a Liuelesse matter: a doumbe Judge, that cannot
speak: a Black Gospel: Inken Divinity: a Nose of wax: and a thing utterly
void of Authority of it self. Examine these places: weigh these words.
They are no Lies: They are no Sclaunders. Judge uprightly: remove affection: ye
shall find, that Hosius, and Zuenkfeldius, touching the Authority, and
Credit of Gods Word, accord in one. For proof whereof, when objection
was made, that King David, being, not a Bishop, but only a Temporal Prince,
had written Psalms, that is to say, the very kete of the Scriptures, Hosius
made answer, Hosius Lib. 2. Contra Brentium.
Quid ni scriberet? Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim: VVrote David
Psalms? And why should he not write them? Horace says, We write Ballades
every body, learned, and unlearned: tagge, and ragge. So irreverently, and like
an Heathen, he scorneth, and scoffeth at the scriptures of God, and likeneth
the Heavenly Ditties of the Holy Ghost, to a Vile, Heathenishe, Wanton
ballade. This in Zuenkfeldius had benne great Blasphemy: Ye allow it in
Hosius, as a virtue.

S. Luke. 7.
Luke says, Pharisaei, and Iurisperiti spreuerunt consilium Dei in
semetipsis: The Phariseis, and Learned in the Law despised ye Council of God
in them selves. Irenaeus says, Irenae. Li. 3. ca. 2.
Haeretici accusant Scripturas, quasi no^ recte habeant, necsint ex
Authoritate, etc. Heretics find fault with the Scriptures, as if they were
not well written, and as if they were not of sufficient Authority, etc. And
thus they do, to the end, to cause the people to loathe, and doubt the Word
of Life, and so to becomme captive to their own Traditions. Cardinal. Cusan.
De Authorita. Ecclesiae, and Concilij Supra, and Co^tra Scripturam.
Therefore Cardinal Cusanus says thus, Haec est omnium sane intelligentium
sententia: qui Scripturarum Authoritatem, and intellectum in Ecclesiae
approbatione fundant: and non e conuerso, Ecclesiae Fundamentum in Scripturarum
Authoritate locant, etc. Dico, nulla else Christi praecepta, nisi quae per
Ecclesiam pro talibus accepta sunt: This is the Judgment of al them, that
mean well: which found the Authority, and understanding of the Scriptures
in the allowance of the Church: But contrary wise lay not ye Fundation of
the Church in the Authority of the Scriptures. Thus I say, There are no
Commandments of Christ, but only such, as by ye Church are allowed for
Christ's Commandments. Albert. Pigghius Hierar. Lib. 1. Ca. 2.
So says your highest Doctoure Albertus Pigghius, A postoli quaedam
conscripserunt, non vt Scripta illa praeessent Fidei, and Religioni nostrae,
sed potius vt subessent: The Apostles wrote certain things, not that their
Writings should be above our Faith, Johan. Maria Verractus. Editus. An.
1561. Hosius, De Expresso Verbo Dei Pa. 97.
and Religion, but rather, that they should be under. Johannes Maria Verractus
says, Determinatio Ecclesiae appellatur Euangelium: The Determination of the
Church is called the Gospel.

Therefore Hosius by his Episcopal Authority pronounces Sentence Definitive
in this wise: Quod Ecclesia docet, Expressum Dei Verbum est: quod contra
Sensum, The mistakinge of Hosius.
and Consensum Ecclesiae docetur, Expressum Diaboli Verbum est: What so ever
the Church teaches (by the Church he means the Pope, and his Cardinals,
and the Church of Rome, etc.) that is the Express Word of God: what so
ever is taught against the Meaning, and Consent of the Church, that is the
Express Word of the Devil.

This was sommetime an ordinary practice of sundry Old Heretics, to
scorn, and to disdeigne the Scripures of God: and to ground them selves upon
other Conclusions, and imaginations of their own. So the Heretic
Carpocrates said, Epiphani. Lib. 1. Haere. 27. Tertullian. De Praescription.
He knew more, then either Christ him self, or his Apostles.

Tertullian says, Discipuli Montani dicunt, Paracletum plura in Montano
dixisse, quam Christum in Euangelio protulisse: nec tantum plura, sed etiam
meliora atque maiora: The Disciples of Montanus the Heretic said, that the
Holy Ghost uttered more things in Montanus their Master, then ever Christ
uttered in the Gospel: and not only moethinges, but also greatter, and better
things. And again they said, Paulus ex part sciebat, and ex part
prophetabat. Nondum enim venerat, quod perfectum est: Paul knew in part,
Augustine. ad Quoduulideum.
and prophesied in part. For the perfection (that was afterward in Montanus)
was not yet comme. Therefore it is not universally true, M. Hardinge, that you
say, Al Heretics have alleged the Scriptures. For sum Heretics, in whoes
steps ye seem to tread, have made light of, and disdeigned the Scriptures,
as well, as you. But, as sum Heretics have alleged the Scriptures, as you
do, without sense: even so al Heretics are evermore reproved by the
Scriptures, as you be. And that is the cause, that you, and your Fellows, for
the most part, so fearfully shun the Scriptures. For he that does evil,
flees the Light.

Therefore, wereas ye call us forth, and bid us humbly to cry you mercy,
first bid Hosius your Scholemaister to recante his Errors: will him to
speak more reverently of Gods Word: for it is Holy: Let him confess, and
repent his Blasphemy in comparing the Scriptures of God with Heathenishe
Ballades. Recante you the Errors, that Pigghius, Cusanus, Eckius, and others
your Doctoures, and Fellows have set abroad: And the Authoure of the Apology
shall do, what so ever shall behoue him.

Remember also, how unjust, and untrue reports you your self, and your
Fellows have witingly, and willingly published, and blased in writing, not
sparinge any man, whom it pleased you to touch with sclaunder. You your self
in this self same Book have written thus: M. Har. Fol. 141. b.
The Learned Gospellers of the Sea Towns in Saxony teach, that there is no
Hell at al.

An other of your Company there, thus most unjustly sclaundereth that godly
Father Doctoure Peter Martyr: Copus Dialo. 3. Page 331.
Petrus Martyr negat, Christum else nostrum Deprecatorem: Peter Martyr denies,
that Christ is our Intercessoure. Likewise again, with one general sclaunder,
he misreporteth all the Professors of the Gospel what so ever: Copus Dialo. 6.
Page 878.
Omnes Euangelici Pseudomartyres negant Christum venisse in Carne: All the
Gospellers (whom he thought it better, to call the False witnesses of the
Gospel) deny that Christ ever came in the Fleashe. I will press you no
further with Examples of your immoderate sclaunders. As your discourteous tongue
has no bridle, so your waste words have no end.

Al these, and other like reports, your conscience knows, are most untrue.
Yet have ye not doubted, thus to hasarde your whole credit, and vainly with
the same to feed the world. Suffer me therefore, M. Hardinge, to answer you
with your own words: For shame man, repent, and revoke that, for which
your own Conscience stinteth not to bark against your self.

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division. 1.
And yet, as though this were too little, they also burn the Holy Scriptures,
as in times paste wicked King Aza, or as Antiochus, or Maximinus did, and are
woonte to name them Heretics Books. Eusebius. Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
And out of doubt, as it seems, they would do, as Herod in old time did in
Ievvrie, that he might with more surety keep still his usurped Dominion. Who
being an Idumean borne, and a stranger to the stock, and kindred of the
Jews, and yet couetinge mutche to be taken for a Jew, to the end he might
establishe to him, and his Posterity the Kingdom of that Country, which he
had gotten of Augustus Caesar, he commanded all the Gen^alogies, and Petigrees
to be burnt, and made out of the way, so that there should remain no record,
whereby it might be known to them that came after, that he was an Alien in
blood: whereas even from Abraham's time these monume^tes had benne safely
keapte amongst the Jews, and laid up in their treasury: because in them
it might easily, and most assuredly be found, of what lineage every one did
descend. So (in good faith) do these men, when they would have al their
own dooinges in estimation, as though they had benne delivered to us even from
the Apostles, or from Christ him self: to the end there might be found no
where any thing hable to convince such their dreams, and lies, either they
burn the Holy Scriptures, or else they craftily conueigh them from the people.

M. Hardinge.
Pardon me, I pray thee, Reader, if I use words some what vehemente, the
cause so requiringe. This Defender cries out, O ye pillours of Religion. But
how mutche more justly cry we again to him O thou captain lier, O most
worthy, not the reward of a whetstone, but the judgment of abackebiter, of
a slaunderer, a cursed speaker, of a mocker, of the accuser of the brethren, of
a Blasphemer: Is this the regard thou haste, All this is M. Hardinges
sobriety: It is no railinge.
I say not to God, or to Christen men, but to thine own estimation, and
common honesty of a man? Canste thou persuade thy self to great credit by
lieinge? To seem sober by railinge? Honest by villainy? Charitable by
slaunderinge? Upright by deceit? Just by impiety? Why say thou of us in
general, that is to say, of the Catholic Church, that we despise, hate,
cast away, and burn the Holy Scriptures? Had we not loved and kept the
Scriptures, how could thou and thy fellows have comme by them? Had ye not
them of us? From the Apostles time to this day we have kept them Untruth.
For the Old Latin text has infinite corruptions.
unspotted and undefiled: and ye within these fifty years have by your vulgar
translations Untruth. Otherwise let M. Hirdinge shevve one point of
Corruption.
corrupted them, that lamentable it is to consider. And when we burned the same
corrupt translations or any part thereof, or any of your Heretical treatises,
we burned not the Scriptures, But he is a foolish man, that burns down
both the Trees and Caterpillars al together.
no more then one does the apple tree, that burns the caterpillars.

The Scriptures we honor, and keep most reverently and diligently. Therefore
your comparinge of us with the wicked Kings Aza, Antiochus, Maximinus, and
Herod, is false and slanderous. For how say you, Sir Captain of liers, You
had it in your Libraries. But the poor people had it not.
had we not the Scripture in every Monastery, Cathedral Church, college, in
every private library of any that was learned?

The like thing was objected to S. Augustine and the Catholics in his time by
the Donatistes, being then Heretics, as ye are now. To whom he answeareth,
as we will answer you: Certe ille ignibus tradidisse credatur, qui eis lectis
non consentire conuincitur. (...) Let him be thought to have cast they Holy
Scriptures into the fire, who, when they are read, is convict not to consent
unto them. We read in the Holy Scriptures, that Christ said, This is my
Body. Who believes it, Burninge of the Scriptures
ye, Untruth. For we deny it not.
that deny it, or we, who are content to die for the defense of that his real
body in the blessed Sacrament? S. James says, a man is justified by works,
and not by faith only. Who believes thus, they, which say that only faith
justifies, or they which say, that works be required also to justify at
ion? Joan. 6.
Christ says, A worthy Argument, and full vvisely applied. Read the
Answer,
Qui ma^ducat hunc panem, viuet in Aeternum: he that eats this bread, shall
live for ever. Who believes this, they that say both kinds be necessary to
lay men by commandment of Christ, or they, who say, that one kind is
sufficient to salvation concerning the eatinge of the Sacrament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye may soon be Pardoned, M. Hardinge, for speakinge il: for as mutche as,
for ought, that may appear by your speech, ye have not yet learned to
speak well. Whether ye have burnte the Scriptures of God, or no, both Heaven,
and Earth, and Sea, and Land may bear witness. For a poor excuse, ye
say, ye have burnte our Errors, and Heretical Translations, and not the
Scriptures: as the Housbandeman uses to burn Caterpillars. How be it, he may
be thought an unwise Housbandeman, that burns up his Caterpillars, and Trees
too, both together: and, to wreake him self of the one, is content to
destroy the other. If al Books conteininge Error should be burnte, then
should your Louanian Nouelles go to wrack. For yewis, M. Hardinge,
contention, and vain glory set a part, ye know right well, they are full of
Errors. Moreover ye know, there be Errors in S. Augustine: There be Errors
in Orige^, in Tertullia^, in S. Ambrose, in S. Hierome. There be Errors in
every of ye Aunciente Fathers: in ye Greeks: in the Latins: in one, and
other. There be Errors in your Schole Doctoures: There be Errors in your
Canonistes: Briefly, your Holy Fathers Decrees, and Decretalles are not void
of Errors. Yet is there no Book worthy to be burnte, in respect of Error,
but only the Book of the Scriptures?

If there were such Errors in the Vulgar Translations, ye should have
discried them, although not al, yet for your credites sake, one at the least.
Ye should have removed the Error, and have restoared the Scriptures, to the
use, and comfort of the people. But this is it, that troubles you so soar:
that the Scriptures are published in the Common known tongues, and that the
simple people of al sorts (whom otherwise ye call Dogs, and Swine, and
filthy brute Beasts void of reason) may understand them. This, M. Hardinge,
is that great, and horrible Errrour: This is the Error of al Errors.
Therefore Irenaeus says, as it is alleged before, Irenae. Li. 1. Ca. 2.
Haeretici, cum ex Scripturis arguuntur, in accusationem vertuntur
Scripturarum: Heretics, when they be reproved by the Scriptures, then begin
they to find fault with the Scriptures. Ambros. in Luca^ Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
And therefore S. Ambrose says, Herodes conscius ignobilitatis suae,
Scripturas incendit: ne qua Posteris suis, vel de praescripto Veteri quaestio
moueretur: existima^s, quod si Indicia de publico sustulisset, nullis alijs
Testimonijs clarere posset, quin de Patriarcharum, and Proselytoru^ Veterum
genere emanaret: King Herod, for that he well understood the baseness of his
House, therefore he burnte the Scriptures: least that, by mean of such
Ancient Records, sum doubt might afterward be moved against his
posterity. For he thought, if he had once removed such Monumentes, it could
never be proved by any manner other witness, but that he came by descente from
the stock of the Patriarchs, and Old Proselytes: Whereas in deed he was
amere altene, and a stranger to the House of Israel, and a very tyrannous
Usurper of the Crown, as being lineally descended, not from Jacob, but from
Esau.

But ye say, You have keapte, and preserved the Scriptures, in your Libraries,
in veleme, and, I trow, in letters of gold. Even in like sort, and with like
truth ye might say, that you have keapte the Son, and the Moon: and, had
it not benne for your keepinge, they had benne lost. It was God, M. Hardinge,
that of his Mercy preserved his Holy Word: eue^ as he preserved Daniel in
the Cave of Lions: Jonas in the Whales belly: Keepinge of the Scriptures
The three Children in the mids of the flaming Fire. Ye keep the Scriptures
as the Dog keeps the haie: which neither eats it him self: nor
suffers the poor hungry cattle, that feign would eat it: Ye keep the^
in ward, in duste, and moulde: as the Jews, before the time of King Josias,
keapte the Book of Deuteronomie closely in the corners, 2. Regum. 22.
or amongst the treasures of ye Temple: so, the noman knew, where to find
it. Had it not benne for Gods special providence, notwithstanding your
keepinge, they might have perished.

S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom in Epis. ad Hebraeos, Homil. 8.
Nunc neque an sint Scripturae quidam sciunt: Spiritus tamen ita dispe^sauit,
vt custodiantur: Now a days there are sum, that cannot tell, whether there be
any Scriptures, or no. Yet has the Sprite of God so provided, that they are
still preserved.

Thus the Jews made their vauntes, that they were the keepers of the Law,
and that the Christians had al of them. S. Augustine says, Iudaei dicu^t, non
Nostra nos Lege vti, August. In quaestionibus ex Veteri Testament. quaest 44.
Paulus Phagius in Deuter. Ca. 17
sed Sua: The Jews say, That we have no Law of our own, but only
theires. Likewise eue^ at this day the Jews keep, and use the Law of God
with all reverence: They never lay any other Book upon the Bible: They wasshe
their hands, before they touch it: They will not sit upon the benche, where
the Bible lies: As often, as they either open it, or shut it, they use to
kiss it: when ye Pope goes through Rome to his Palace of Laterane, the Jews
meet him upon the way, and offer him the Bible, and desire him reverently to
embrace it, as though the Pope could have no Bible, but only of them. Al
these things notwithstanding, the Pope answeareth them of course, even as we
may answer you: Sanctam Legem, viri Hebraei, and laudamus, and veneramur:
obseruantia^ vero vestram, Ceremoniar. Li. 1. Cap 8.
and vanam interpretationem damnamus, and improbamus: Ye men of the Jews
Profession, we praise, and honor the Holy Law: But your Tradition, and
vain Interpretation we utterly condemn, and reprove.

For Chrysostom says, Chryso. in Matt. Homil. 33.
Nihil nunc apud Iudaeos remansit, nisi Sola Scriptura Librorum, omni Legis
obseruantia pereunte: There remains now nothing emonge the Jews, but
only the writing contained in Books: for all the observation of the Law is
paste from them. Chrysosto. in Cenesim, Homil. 8. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 117.
Again he says, Literae quidem Legis apud illos sunt: Sensus autem est apud
nos: The Letters of the Law are with the Jews: But the Sense, and Meaning
is with us. Likewise he says unto the Jews, Vos complicatis membranas
animaltum mortuorum: Nos possidemus Spiritum viuificautem: You turn the leaves
of the Scriptures, made of the skins of dead Cattle: but we have the Sprite,
that geeueth Life. August de Fide rerum inuisibil. Cap. 6. August. Contra
Fausiu^ Mantchae. Lib. 16. Cap. 21.
So says S. Augustine: Iudaei in Libris suffragatores nostri sunt: in
Cordibus hosts nostri: The Jews healpe us, and aid us with their Books:
But they are our enemies in their hearts. Again he says, Magnum aliquid
actum est in vsum nostrum de Infidelirate Iudaeorum: vt ijdem ipsi, qui haec
propter se non haberent in Cordibus, ea propter nos haberent in Codicibus:
Sum great good thing is wrought to our use by the infidelity of the Jews:
that they, that, to do them selves good, had not these things in their
hearts, yet for our sakes, to do us good, should have same things in their
Books.

Speak not therefore so mutche, M. Hardinge, of your safe keepinge of ye
Scriptures For the Jews have keapte, and until this day do keep them as
safely, as you. Yae keapte the Scriptures, as the Augures of Rome sommetime
keapte the Sibylles Books: that is to say, ye keapte them to your selves, in
close prisonne, and in secrecy: that the people should know nothing, but in all cases should be forced to seek to you. Thus ye keapte the Light in
Darkness: and, as S. Paul says, Roman 1. Chryso in Matt. Homil. 35.
ye keapte the Truth of God in Wickedness.

S. Chrysostom says, Quando vides Scripturas Prophetarum, and Euangelij, and
Apostolorum traditas esse in manus Falsorum Sacerdotum, number intelligis, quod
Verbum veritatis traditum est Principibus iniquis, and Scribis? When thou
seeste the Scriptures of the Prophets, of the Gospel, and of the Apostles to
be delivered into the hands of False Priests, This is my Body.
dooste thou not understand, that the Word of Truth is delivered unto the
wicked Princes, and unto the Scribes? To be short, I may answer you with the
words of Chrysostom, Arcas, and Scrinia rerum pretiosissimarum adhuc
seruatis, Chrysostom. in 1. Corin. Homi. 37.
The sauro destituti: Ye keep still the Cheastes, and boxes of most precious
things: but the Iewelles, and Treasures be clean gonne. Therefore, your safe
keeping of the Scriptures notwithstanding, we may say to you, as S.
Augustine sommetime said to the Heretic Petilian: Judas Christum Carnalem
tradidit: Tu Spiritualem: furens Euangelium sanctum flammis sacrilegis
tradidisti: Augusti. Contra Literas Petilia. Lib. 2. Cap. 7.
Judas betraiede Christ Carnal: thou haste betrayed Christ Spiritual: for
thou in thy rage haste delivered the Holy Gospel unto wicked fires.

Ye reply, You rather have burnte the Gospel: for that you deny the words
of the Gospel. For example ye allege these words of Christ, This is my Body:
which words, ye say, of our part are denied. God be thanked, as we have
not burnte, so have we not denied any word, or parcel of the Gospel.
Touching these words by you alleged, we embrace them, and reverence them,
and believe them, even as the Words of Christ. But we embrace them, not as
you have fondely rackte, and wreasted them, and fowly abused them, by your
vain Constructions: but as Christ meante them, and as the Aunciente
Catholic Fathers in the Old times have expounded them. Chrysostom. in Johan.
Homi. 14.
S. Chrysostom says, Sacrae Scripturae Verba non vult Deus, vt Simpliciter,
sed multa cum prude^tia intelligantur: God will not, that we should understand
the words of the Holy Scripture simply and plainly, as they lie, but with
great wisdom, Chrysosto. in Johan. Homil. 39.
and discretion. Again he says, Diligenter inuigilandum est: vel potius
Diuina Gratia opus est, ne nudis verbis insistamus. Ita Haeretici in Errorem
incidunt: We must take great heed: or rather we have need of the Grace of
God, that we reaste not upon the bare Words of the Scriptures. For by that
means Heretics fall into Error. August. ad Consentiu^. li. 1. ca. 10.
Hierony. ad Galat. Cap. 1.
S Augustine says, Omne Figurate, aut factum, aut dictum, hoc enuntiat, quod
Significat: Every thing that is either done, or spoken in a Figure, shows
forth the same thing, that it Signifies. S. Hierome says: Ne puremus in
Verbis Scripturarum esse Euangelium, sed in Sensu: Let us not think that the
Gospel stands in the Words of the Scripture, but in the Meaning.

Again he says, Hieron. in Matt. Cap. 16.
Cum Seniores putentur in Ecclesijs, and Principes Sacerdotum, Simplicem
sequentes Literam, occidunt Filium Dei: Whereas they be taken for the Elders of
the Church, and the Chief of the Priests, folowinge the Plain Letter, ( as
it is written, and not regardinge the meaning) they kille the Son of God.

Let us see therefore, in what sense the Holy Catholic Fathers have in Old
times expounded these Words of Christ.

First, Tertullian says thus, Christus acceptum Panem, and distributum
Discipulis, Corpus suum illum fecit, Tertullian. Contra Marcionem. Lib. 4.
Augusti. Contra Adiman. Cap. 12.
Hoc est Corpus meum, hoc est, Figura Corporis mei: Christ taking the Bread,
and dividing it to his Disciples, made it his Body, saieing: This is my Body,
that is to say, This is a Figure of my Body. S. Augustine says, Non dubitauit
Dominus dicere, Hoc est Corpus meum, cum daret Signum Corporis sui: Our Lord
doubted not to say, This is my Body, when he gave a Token of his Body. I leave
infinite other Authorities to like purpose. By these few we may easily
perceive, in what sense the Holy Fathers in Old time understood these Words
of Christ, This is my Body. Yet were they never therefore condemned of.
Heresy, nor thought to deny any parcel of the Scriptures. S. Augustine says,
August. in quaessionib. in Leuit. quaest. 57.
Solet res, quae Significat, eius rei nomine, quam Significat. nu^cupari: Hinc
est, quod dictum est, Petra erat Christus. Non enim dicit, Petra Significat
Christum: Sed, tanquam hoc esset, quood vtique per Substantiam non erat, sed
per Significatione^: The thing that Signifies, is Commonly called by the name
of that thing, that it Signifies. Therefore is it, that S. Paul says, The
Rock was Christ. For he says not, The Rock signified Christ ( but, This
is my Body.
The Rock is Christ) As if the Rock had benne Christ in deed: whereas,
touching the Substance, it was not so: but so it was by Signification.

In this sort is the Bread Christ's Body: not verily, and in deed: but, as
S. Augustine says, after a certain phrase, or manner of speech. And so is
it noted even in your own Gloss, De Cons. Did. 2. Hoc est. In Gloss.
Vocatur Corpus Christi, id est, Significat Corpus Christi: The Bread is
called the Body of Christ: that is to say, The Bread Signifies the Body of
Christ. Thus we deny not Christ's Words, M. Hardinge: But we deny the
fond, and fantastical senses, that you have imagined of Christ's Words.
Therefore where you allege these words, as spoken by S. Augustine, He is a
burner of the Scriptures, that consents not unto the Scriptures, Ye might
have remembered, Augu. Epist 162.
that the same S. Augustine likewise says, Ille credatur Testamentum
tradidisse flammis, qui contra Voluntatem litigat Testatoris: He is to be
thought, to have delivered the Testamente to the fire, that quarrelleth ( as
you do) against the will, and meaning of him, that made the Testamente. S.
Gregory says, Facile in verbis agnoscimus aliud esse, quod intimant, aliud,
quod sonant: Tanto' autem quisque notitiae illius Extraneus redditur. Gregorius
in Job. Lib. 4. Ca. 1.
qua^to' in Sola eius Superficie ligatur: In words we do well perceive, that
there is one thing, that they Signify, and an other thing, that they sound.
And the more a man binds him self to the ovvtvvarde sight, and shevve of the
Letter, the further of is he from the understanding of the same.

The objection of difference, that ye make bitweene S. James, and S. Paul, (S.
Augustine says) is made by the^ y^ understand, neither S. James, Augu. in
Lib. 83. quaestionu^ q. 76. Part. 1. Ca. 10. Diui. 1.
nor S. Paul, The whole force thereof is answered before. It is easy to see,
that S. Paul speaks of one Kind of Works, and S. James of an other: and
again, S. Paul of one kind of Justification, and S. James of an other.
Therefore this difference is soon avoided. Certainly we deny neither S.
Paul, nor S. James: nor think, the one of them to be contrary to the other.

Touching the Words of Christ, that ye have alleged out of S. John, it
appears, ye were in sum baste, Johan. 6.
and therefore were feign to take, that came first to hand. For I will not
say, M. Hardinge, what Doctoure, or Father, but, what drifte, or discretion of
Common sense ever taught you to reason thus? Christ says, He that Eats of
this Bread shall live for ever: Ergo, The people must receive the Communion
under One kind. Remnitius in Examine Conci. Triden. Page 598.
Freere Eckius your Fellow reasons with like discretion to like purpose:

Give us, says he, our daily Bread:

Ergo, We may restrain the people from the Cup.

Perhaps ye will say, The name of Bread belongs to Eatinge only, and not to
Drinkinge. This may be granted well without prejudice. Notwithstanding, S.
Cyprian doubted not to say, Cyprian. De Coena Domini. In eodem Sermon.
Manducauerunt, and Biberunt de eodem Pane: They did both Eat, and Drink of
one Bread. And again he says, Manducamus and Bibimus eius Sanguinem: We
Eat and Drink his Blood.

How be it, in deed these words of Christ in the sixthe of S. John, belong
only to the Spiritual Eatinge, and drinkinge of Christ's Body, and Blood,
(that is wrought, not by the Mouth, but only by Faith) and nothing to the
outward Ministration of the Sacrament. Nicolaus Lyra, in Psalm. 110.
Your own Doctoure Nicolas Lyra says, Haec verba nihil direct pertinent ad
Sacramentalem, vel Corporalem Manducationem. Nam hoc verbum dictum fuit,
antequam Sacramentum Eucharistiae esset institutum. Ex illa igitur Litera de
Sacramentali Communione non potest fieri Argumentum efficax: These Words of
Christ in the sixth Chapter of S. John, directely perteine nothing to the
Sacramental, or Corporal Eatinge. For these words were spoken long before
the Sacrament was ordained. Therefore of this place there can be made no good
sufficient Argument, touching the Sacramental Communion. You say, your
proof, taken of these words is sufficient, Communion under one kind.
and therewith ye deceive the Ignorant. Lyra says, It is not sufficient. Now
let your indifferente Reader Judge, whether of you two is deceived.

And, whereas ye would seem to say, Christ gave no Commandment of Both
kinds, to be received of the people, Even so, and with like truethe ye might
also say, Christ gave no Commandment, no not of one kind at al to be
received of the people. For there was no man present, but only the Apostles,
at the Institution, as well of the one kind, as of the other. Therefore, that
the people may claim any one part of the Sacrament, they have it not of any
right, but only of your mere, and free liberality. For otherwise of dewtie,
by your iudgeme^te, they should have nothing.

Notwithstanding Christ says, Bibite ex hoc omnes: Drink ye ( not only
the Apostles, but) Drink ye al of this, Which words Paschasius expounds
thus: Paschasius.
Bibite ex hoc omnes, Hoc est, tam Ministri, quam reliqui Credentes: Drink ye
al of this: that is to say, as well the Ministers, as the rest of the
Faithful. Glossa. Citatura Cassandro, de vtraque Specie.
An other says thus, Bibite ex hoc Omnes: Omnes, scilicet, sine personarum
acceptione: Drink ye al of this: Al, that is to say, without difference, or
choice of persons.

But hereof we have spoken more at large in other places.

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division. 2. and. 3.
Very rightely, and aptely does Chrysostom write against these men.
Heretics, says he, shut up the gates against the Truethe: for they know
full well, if the gate were open, the Church should be none of theires.

Theophylacte also: Gods Word, says he, is the Candel, whereby the
Thief is espied.

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division, 4.
And Tertullian says, The Holy Scripture manifestly finds out the fraud,
and theafte of Heretics. For why do they hide, why do they keep under the
Gospel, which Christ would have preached alowde from the house top? Why
whealme they that light under a Busshel, which ought to stand on the
Candelsticke?

M. Hardinge.
The Scripture says, There shall be men standing in their own conceit,
unchaste, loving pleasure more then God. 2. Tim. 3.
Who are unchaste? they that exhort al men to This Chastity in the more
part is open filthiness. They forebidde Marriage, and suffer Concubines, for
the better mean to serve God. Math. 23.
Chastity, and them selves abstain from wedlock for the better mean to
serve God: or ye, that bid men, which have vowed chastity, to break
their vows?

The B. of Sarisburie.
I leave your Chastity to the judgment of the World. Yet you may
remember, there were sum in old times, whom Christ likened to Painted
graves: outwardely in appearance fair, and glorious: but inwardly full of
stinking boanes. It appears by the whole course, and order of your lives,
that Single Life, Hierony. in Daniel. Cap. 11.
and Chastity are sundry things. S. Hierome says thus, Super
Concupiscentiam foeminarum non intelliget: De Antichristo facilior
interpretatio est: quood ideo simulet Castitatem, vt plurimos decipiat: He shall
have no skill, touching the desiere of weemen: Countrefeite Chastity.
The better exposition hereof, is to apply these words to Antichriste: For
that he shall Countrefeite Chastity, to the end to deceive many.

S. Augustine says of the Heretics called the Manichees: Augustine. De
Moribus Ecclesiae Cathol. li. 1. cap. 1. Ambro. De Noe and Arca, ca. 14.
Vitae Castae, and memorabilis continentiae imaginem praeferunt: They bear a
countenance of continent life, and notable Chastity. S. Ambrose says, Multi
sunt Haereticorum, qui praetendere volunt Corporis continentiam? There be many
Heretics, that will countrefeite, and pretend Chastity of body ( that by the
witness thereof they may win Credit to their Doctrine.) Therefore, M.
Hardinge, when you thus vaunte your selves of this Color of Chastity, ye
make boaste of that thing, that other Heretics, and Antichriste him self
shall have, as well as you.

S. Paul, where he foretells us of the Disciples of Antichriste, amongst
other marks, whereby they may be known, says thus: Prohibentes nubere: 1.
Tim. 4. Hierony. in Hieremi. cap. 7. lib. 2.
whereby he meante, that Antichriste should give out a great shine of Chaste
life, and forbid Marriage. Of such S. Hierome says, Iactant pudicitiam
suam impudenti facie: They make bragges of their Chastity with whoorishe
Countenance.

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division. 5. and 6.
Why trust they more to the blindness of the unskillful multitude, and to
ignorance, then to the goodness of their cause?

Think they their sleightes are not already perceived, and that they can walk
now unspied, as though they had Gyges ring to go invisible by, upon their
finger? No, no.

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division. 7.
Al men see now well, and well again, what good stuff is in that cheste of
the Bishop of Romes bosom. This thing alone of it self may be an argument
sufficient, that they work not uprightly, and truly.

M. Hardinge.
You are mutche troubled with the cheste of the Popes bosom, wherein be is
thought to have al laws. At this you scoff four or five times in your
Apology, medlinge with a matter, that you understand not. For it is a Lawiers
phrase. Who presupposes the Prince of every common weal to know the law of
the same, no less then if it were written in his breaste. And therefore when
he makes a new law, he repealeth the former law, whereunto the latter is
contrary.

The B. of Sarisburie.
For as mutche as this matter of the Popes breaste is so deep, and full of
darkness, specially being as you say, a Lavviers phrase, that no man may
safely enter into it, but only you, that never were student in any Law,
let us therefore see, what your own Canonistes, and Lavviers them selves
have meante hereby.

First of al, Baldus.
Baldus of Perusium says, Papa est Doctor vtriusque Iuris, Authoritate, non
Scientia: The Pope is Doctor of both Laws (as well Civil, as Canon) by
Authority, but not by knowledge. Here we find, how so ever the Pope be
stoared of Learning, yet at the least he is a Doctoure by Authority.

Further your Gloss says, 9. quae. 3. Neque. ab Augusto. Dis. 19. Si
Romanorum. In Gloss.
Etsi totus mundus sententiaret in aliquo negotio contra Papam, tamen videtur,
quo'd standum fit sententiae Papae. Iura enim omnia in Scrinio pectoris sui
habere videtur. Quod ergo Papa approbat, vel reprobat, and nos approbate, vel
reprobare debemus. Quisquis ergo non obedit Statutis Romanae Ecclesiae,
Haereticus est censendus. The Cheaste of the Popes bosom.
Et Sacrilegij instar esset, disputare de facto Papae: Although all the world
would judge in any matter against the Pope, yet it seems, we ought to
stand to the judgment of the Pope. For he seems to have al Laws in the
Cheaste of his bosom: Did. 40. Si Papa, (...) glossa.
Therefore, what so ever the Pope either allows, or disalloweth, we are
bound likewise to allow, or disallowe the same. And who so ever is not
obedient to the Laws of the Church of Rome, must be deemed an Heretic. And
it were as great sin as Churcherobbinge, to reason of any of the Popes
dooinges.

Further, Extra De tra^sta. Episcopi. Qua^to In Glossa. Felin. De Rescriptis.
Ad Audientiam. 2. ver.
your Lavviers say thus, Papa dicitur habere Coeleste arbitrium: Vnde in his,
quae vult, est ei pro Ratione Voluntas. Nec est, qui dicat illi, Domine, cur
ita facis? Quia sicut ex Sola Voluntate potest per Papam Lex creari, ita per
Solam Voluntatem potest cum ea dispensari: The Pope is said to have a heavenly
judgment: Therefore in such things, as he wills, his Will stands in
steed of Reason. Neither may any man say unto him, O sir, Why do you
thus? Like as a Law may be made by the Only VVil of the Pope: so may the
same Law be dispensed withal only by the vvil of the Pope.

This, M. Hardinge, is the exposition of your Lavviers phrase. These are the
treasures, that we are taught to seek in the Closet of the Popes breaste.
Thus may we set aparte Scriptures, Doctoures, Councelles, and what so ever is
biside: The Popes breaste may serve for all.

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division. 8.
Worthily ought that matter seem suspicious, which flees trial, and is
afraid of the light. For he that does evil, as Christ says, seeks
darkness, and hates the light. A conscience, that knovveth it self clear,
comes willingly into open shevve, that the works which proceed of God
may be seen. Neither be they so very blind, but they see this well yenough,
that their Kingdom streightwaie is at a point, if the Scriptures once have
the upper hand: and that, like as men say, the Idolles of Diuelles in times
paste, of whom men in doubtful matters were then woonte to receive answeares,
were suddenly stricken doumbe at the sight of Christ, when he was borne, and
came into the world: even so they see, that now al their subtle practices will
soon fall down hedlonge, even upon the sight of the Gospel. For Antichriste is
not overthrown, but with the brightness of Christ's coming.

The Apology, Cap. 22. Division. 1.
As for us, we run not for succor to the Fire, as these men's guise is,
but we run to the Scriptures: neither do we reason with the Sword, but
with the Word of God: and therewith, as says Tertullian, do we feed our
Faith: by it do we stir up our hope, and strengthen our Confidence.

M. Hardinge.
Ye fly not to the Fire, as we do, say ye, but unto the Scriptures. Neither
do ye reason with us with the sword, but with the Word of God. Ah good
word of God, thou seruest to many purposes. And is it in deed the word of
God Sirs, that keeps so many reverend Fathers in prison these many years?
Heretics to death.
It is the word of God, that has deprived so many men, some of their
liuinges, All this now is extreme Cruelty. Not long sithence it had benne
taken for great Mercy.
some of their countries, whose life ye can not blame? Is it the word of
God, that by cruelty of imprisonmente of late years gave most certain
occasion of death to those holy, learned, and worshipful men, who for their
singular virtue being well known, need not here to be named? Is it the word
of God, that made so mutche adoo in your late parliament for establishinge of
your bloody law, whereby ye would have power to put men to death Untruth.
For it is either Idolatry, or open folly: and no part of the Faith of
Christendom.
for the Faith of Christendom? The Turks and Saracenes have always suffered
them to live in their dominions, but our Gospellers by their word of God are
taught to kill them. Blessed be God, who has given to our noble and most
clement Queen Elizabeth a better spirit to understand his word in this
point. What Sprite then had you M. Harding and your Fellows that burnt so
many?
then these Gospellers have yet attained unto.

If any of you do say, that the new Superintendentes do not keep the old
Bishops and leanred Clergy in prison, but the Law of the Realm: I answer,
first, that the Law is a crabbe of your own stock: next that neither the
Bishops before time burnt Heretics, but the Law of the Realm, the law of
the Prince, the law of al Christendom. Neither was the same made by Papists
of late years, as ye would your deceived disciples to believe, but of old
time thought This matter thus uttered in generality, is a great Untruth.
necessary by Princes to be enacted, for the better maintenance of quiet in
their dominions.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is no new practice, ye say, to kille Heretics. I grant you. Neither
is it a new practice, to condemn godly men by the name of Heretics. Your
Fathers sommetime cried out against Christ the Son of God, We have a Law:
Johan. 19.
and by the Law he ought to die. And Christ him self said sommetime to
Jerusalem the City of blood, Luke. 13.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and stoanest them to
death, that he sent unto thee. But S. Augustine says, Nullis bonis in
Catholica hoc placet, Augustine. Contra Crescon. Gram. li. 3. ca. 50
si vsque ad Mortem in quenquam, licet Haereticum, saeuiatur: It seems good
unto no good man in the Catholic Church, that cruelty unto death be showed
unto any man, no though he be an Heretic.

Notwithstanding, it agrees well with your Religion, M. Hardinge, though your
mouths now be mousled, yet to rampe, and gape still after blood. Fulfill ye the
measure of your Fathers. Let it not grieve you, to hear, what Solomon says,
Math. 23. Proverb. 12.
Viscera impiorum crudelia: The very bowelles of the wicked are full of
cruelty. When your Fables, and folies be espied, then ye flee to Sword, and
Fire. Which beeinge once wreasted from you, your whole Religion must needs
comme to ground. S. Hierome says of other your peers, Pugnant
Epicherematis ex carnificum officinis: They fight with Arguments taken from
the Bouchers shoppes.

Ye have wreakte your anger long yenough upon innocente blood. Begin once
to know the hand of God. It is hard for you, to kike still against the
prick. We may truly say unto you with S. Cyprian, Sacerdos Dei Euangelium
tenens, and Christi Praecepta custodiens, Cyprian ad Cornel.
Occidi potest, Vinci non potest. The Priest of God, holding the Gospel, and
keeping the Commoundementes of Christ, may well be killed: But conquered he
cannot be. Tertull. ad Scapulam. Tertul. in Apologetico. 3. Esdr. 3. Prouer.
21. Hacron. in Esai. lib. 5. cap. 14. Augustine. Confessi. li. 12. ca. 14.
We may say with Tertullian, Crudelitas vestra, Gloria nostra est: Plures
efficimur, quoties metimur a vobis: Your Cruelty is our Glory. When ye
comme to reckon us ye find us more, and more. Truethe above al things vvil
prevail. There is no Counsel against the Lord.

As for our parts, we were never yet guilty to one drop of your blood.
We seek no aid at Fire, or Sword. We will rather say with S. Hierome,
Vtiuam filios Haereucorum, and omnium qui decepti sunt, interficiamus Sagittis
Spiritualibus, id est, Testimonijs Scripturarum. Would God we may rather
kille the Children of Heretics, and of al them, that be deceived, with
Spiritual Arrows, that is to say, with the Testimonies of the Scriptures: And
with S. Augustine, O fi occidas eos de gladio bis acuto, If an Angel from
Heaven, etc.
and non sint Hosts tui: Sic enim amo eos occidi sibi, vt vitrani tibi: Would
God thou would kille them, O Lord, with the two edged sword, ( that is,
with thy Holy Word) That they may no longer be thine Enemies. For so I
wisshe them to be killed unto them selves, that they may live unto thee.

And again, Vindicet nos Deus de vobis, vt ipsum errorem vestrum in vobis
occidat, and nobiscum de Veritate gaudeatis: Augustine. Epist. 166.
God so revenge out cause against you, that he may kille your error in
you, that ye may rejoice together with us of the Truethe.

The Apology, Cap. 22. Division. 2.
For we know, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is the power of God unto
Salvation, and that therein consists Eternal Life. And, as Paul warns us,
we do not hear, no not an Angel of God, though he came from Heaven, if he go
about to pull us from any part of this Doctrine.

M. Hardinge.
Boaste no more of the Gospel. We (I mean the catholic Church) had it, we
keapte it, and understood it, before ye were borne, and before your heresy
was heard of.

But a Devil coming from hell (for who is author of division but Satan?) has
carried you away into an other Gospel: whereas in deed there is but one true
Gospel. And here let any indifferent man consider, how uprightly you allege
S. Paul. You write, that Paul warns you not to give ear to an Angel
coming from heaven, Galat. 1.
if he go about to draw you from any part of this Doctrine. Of which this
Doctrine mean you? Of this, which you have declared in this Apology? And did
S. Paul ever read your late Chapter of Trente.
Did S. Paul ever read your A pologie? How then pronounced he of it that
sentence? We mean (say you) by this Doctrine, the Doctrine of the Gospel.
If you mean so, we say the same. But we tell you, that S. Paul spoke not of
every Gospel generally, but of a certain Gospel qualified. For he says, Si
quis vobis euangelizauerit praerer id quod accepistis, anathema sit: If any man
preach a Gospel unto you besides that ye have received, be he accursed. Hear
you the Gospel S. Paul speaks of? It is not every Gospel. It is a Gospel
preached and received. If ye preach that Gospel, which ye received, we join
hands with you. But if ye preach a Gospel which ye have received of no
Apostle, nor Apostoiique preacher, and which was not heard of in the earth,
when Luther ran out of his Cloister, and forsook his Religion: then be ye
assured, that ye are the men, who are holden for accursed of S. Paul.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, ye would feign escape away with a Childishe Cauil. Paul,
ye say, speaks of a Gospel qualified: whereby ye mean a Gospel delivered,
and received: As if ye would say, The Gospel of Christ, unless it be
delivered by you, is no Gospel. But S. Paul meante not the Doctrine delivered
from hand to hand, or from Pope to Pope: But the Doctrine delivered, and
received in the Scriptures. And in this sense he says of him self: Quod
accept a Domino, Hoc and tradidi vobis. The thing, that I have received of the
Lord, the same have I delivered unto you. In like sort he calls him self
an Apostle, not of men, 1. Cor. 11. Galat. 1.
nor by men, but by Jesus Christ. How be it, what need many words? The
case is clear. S. Augustine says plainly, Paulus ait, Si Angelus de Coelo
vobis annuntiauerit, August. Contra literas Petilia. lib. 3. cap. 6.
praeterquam quod in Scripturis legalibus, and Euangelicis accepistis, Anathema
sit: If an Angel from Heaven preach unto you any other thing, then ye have
received (not by Tradition, or by delivery from your Elders, but) in the
Scriptures of the Law, and of the Gospel, accursed be he. These words be
plain, M. Hardinge, and quite disgrace al your Gloses.

Hereto Chrysostom adds further, Non dixit Paulus, Si contraria
annuntiauerint, Chrysostom. In Epi. ad Galat. cap. 1.
aut totum Euangelium subuerterint, Cou^celles.
verum, Si vel paulum Euangelizauerint, praeter Euangelium, quod accepistis,
etiamsi quiduis labefactauerint, Anathema sint. S. Paul says not, If they
teach the contrary, or, if they overthrow the whole Gospel: But he says,
if they preach any little small thing, besides the Gospel, that ye have
received, or, if they loose, or shake down any thing, whatsoever it be,
accursed be they. These words, M. Hardinge, touch you very near. Ye have
altered the whole form of the Church of God. Therefore repent your selves,
lest ye remain still within the danger of the Curse.

S. Augustine says, August. De bono viduitatis. ca. 1. Roma. 12.
Sancta Scriptura nostae Doctrinae Regulam figit, Ne audeamus plus sapere, quam
oporteat sapere: The Holy Scripture has laid a rule unto our Doctrine, that
we dare not to understand more, then is meet for us to understand.

The Apology, Cap. 22. Division. 3.
For, where these men bid the Holy Scriptures away, as doumbe, and
frutelesse, and procure us to comme to God him self rather, who speaks in
the Church, and in their Councelles, that is to say, to believe their
fancies, and opinions: this way of finding out the Truth is very uncertain,
and exceeding dangerous, and in manner a fantastical and mad way, and by no
means allowed of the Holy Fathers.

M. Hardinge.
Where they say, we pass but little on the Scriptures, as dumb and
unprofitable, therein they Untruth. For these be your own Fellows
words. Read the Answer.
slander us, as in other things. We do not so. But we say, that as every
act of Parliament must be executed by a lawful Judge, so the holy Scriptures
have their execution by lauful Judges, who are the bishops and fathers, and
well in other places, as specially when they be laufully assembled in general
councelles. Now say these men, that way is very uncertain, dangerous, in
manner mad, and not allowed of the fathers. Who ever heard men thought to have
their right wits, talk after so loose a sort? Did the fathers Gregorius
Nazia^zenus says, He never savve good comme of any Council.
disprove the order of coming together in general councelles? Or thought they
the same to be a way for men to be the sooner deceived? If so many may be
deceived with most diligent study and mature judgment conferring together,
how mutche sooner may one or two alone leadde by private fancy and self will,
be carried away into error? At the Nicene council came together. 318 bishops:
At the first of Constantinople. 150. at the Ephesme counsel. 200. At that of
Chalcedo^ 630 Al these four councelles sundry ancient fathers, namely S.
Gregory, esteemed as the four Gospels. Yea but says he, I have the word of
God. But what if 300. far holier, and better learned men say, he has it
not? Let the reader be judge, says he. A meet judge, in such a cause. The
Scholars may read, but judge of their masters they may not by Christ's
doctrine, Math. 10.
who said, Non est discipulus supra magistrum, the scholar is not above his
master. Why not, for all that, say you, if the Holy Ghost inspire him? Sir,
is it not to be thought, God does assist his Church represented in such
solemn assemblies of three hundred or more fathers governors of Christen
people, rather then one man?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Whether ye call the Scriptures of God a Dumb thing, Cap. 19. Diui. 1.
Ludouicus in Con. Triden. Episcop. Pictauien. in Con. Triden. Albert. Pigghi.
Controuer. 3. Eckius.
or no, I report me to that, is said before. One of you calls it Mortuum
Atramentum, Dead Ink: An other says, Scriptura est res inanimis, and muta:
The Scripture is a dead and a dumb thing: An other calls the Scriptures,
Nigrum Euangelium, The black Gospel. Now if the Scriptures be Dead, and
Doumbe, and can not speak, then must it needs follow, they are unprofitable.
Neither do we despise the Authority of Councelles. Good Councelles be grave,
and reverend. But thus we say, Councelles are often against Councelles: And,
if we make rekening of number, the Arian Heretics have had more Councelles,
then the Christians. S. Hierome says, The people cannot Judge.
Spiritus Sancti Doctrina est, quae Canonicis literis prodita est: Contra quam
si quid statuant Concilia, nefas duco: That is the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost,
that is set abroad in the Canonical Scriptures: Hierom. in epist. ad Galath.
Chrysostom. In. 2 ad Timoth. Hom. 2.
Against which Doctrine if Councelles determine any thing, I think it
wicked.

S. Chrysostom says further in more earneste sort: Plus aliquid dicam: Ne
Paulo quidem obedire oportet, si quid dixerit proprium, si quid humanum: I will
say more: We ought not to believe, no not Paul him self, if he speak any
thing of his own, or if he speak only as a man.

And to increase the uncertainty hereof, the whole weighte, and judgment of
Councelles hangs now evermore upon the Pope: as it may appear by these
words of the Conclusion of the late Chapter at Trident: Saluasemper in
omnibus Sedis Apostolicae Authoritate: Council. Triden. Session. 6. Platyna in
Stephano.
The Authority of the Apostolic See in all things evermore reserved. But
Platyna says, as it is alleged before, Acta priorum Pontificum sequentes
Pontifices semper aut infringunt, aut omnino' tollunt: The Popes, that follow,
do evermore either break, or wholly abrogate the Decrees of the Popes, that
were before.

Whether the Scripture be well alleged, or otherwise, thereof, ye say, the
people may not Judge. For Christ says, The Scholar is not above his
Master. Certainly, M. Hardinge, the simplest of all the people,
notwithstanding, by your restrainte, he may not judge of the Scriptures, yet
he may easily judge of you, either that ye understand not, or that ye
unadvisedly abuse the Scriptures. Whether it be the Word of God, or no, the
people, ye say, may not Judge: And that ye prove even by the Scriptures, God
knows, full handsomely, and full discretely applied: For the Scholar (ye say)
is not above his Master. Thus we may learn by the Logique of Louaine, that
Populus is Latin for a Scholar: and that Scripture is Latin for a Master.
And thus by your vain premises without sense ye proceed vainly, and
conclude nothing.

O, M. Hardinge, have some regard to that ye write. The simpleste may soon
epsy your dooinges. Ye can no longer thus mock the world with shows of
words. Christ spoke not these words of the understanding of the
Scriptures: but of persequution for the Scriptures. For thus the words lie
together: When they shall persecute you in one City, flee into an other, etc.
The Scholar is not above his Master: Nor the Servant above his Lord. If they
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, Matthae. 10.
how mutche more will they so call his household servants?

Alas, where learned you to frame such Arguments, The Apostles, being the
Scholars, can no more escape persecution, then could Christ, that was the
Master: Ergo, The people cannot understand, what they read in the
Scriptures? Here is neither Antecedente, nor Consequente, nor Sequel in
Reason. For the honor of y^ University, have better regard unto your Logique.

Ye bewraie the weakness of your cause, when ye so sclenderly abuse the
Scriptures.

The Apology, Cap. 22. Division. 4.
Chrysostom says, There be many oftentimes, which boaste them selves of
the Holy Ghost: but truly, who so speak of their own head, do falsely
boast that they have the sprite of God. For like as, says he, Christ denied,
he spoke of him self, when he spoke out of the Law, and Prophets, even so
now, if any tiauerint, Cou^celles.
aut totum Euangelium subuerterint, verum, Si vel paulum Euangelizauerint,
praeter Euangelium, quod accepistis, etiamsi quiduis labefactauerint, Anathema
sint. S. Paul says not, If they teach the contrary, or, if they overthrow
the whole Gospel: But he says, if they preach any little small thing,
besides the Gospel, that ye have received, or, if they loose, or shake down
any thing, whatsoever it be, accursed be they. These words, M. Hardinge,
touch you very near. Ye have altered the whole form of the Church of God.
Therefore repent your selves, lest ye remain still within the aunger of the
Curse.

S. August. De bono viduit atis. ca. 1. Roma. 12.
Augustine says, Sancta Scriptura nostae Doctrinae Regulam figit, Ne audeamus
plus sapere, quam opor^eat sapere: The Holy Scripture has laid a rule unto
our Doctrine, that we dare not to understand more, then is meet for us to
understand.

The Apology, Cap. 22. Division. 3.
For, where these men bid the Holy Scriptures away, as doumbeand frutelesse,
and procure us to comme to God him self rather, who speaks in the Church,
and in their Councelles, that is to say, to believe their fancies, and
opinions: this way of finding out the Truth is very uncertain, and exceeding
dangerous, and in manner a fantastical and mad way, and by no means allowed
of the Holy Fathers.

M. Hardinge.
Where they say, we pass but little on the Scriptures, as dumb and
unprofitable, therein they Untruth. For these be your own Fellows
words. Read the Answer.
slander us, as in other things. We do not so. But we say, that as every
act of Parliament must be executed by a lawful Judge, so the holy Scriptures
have their execution by lauful Judges, who are the bishops and fathers, as
well in other places, as specially when they be laufully assembled in general
councelles. Now say these men, that way is very uncertain, dangerous, in
manner mad, and not allowed of the fathers. Who ever heard men thought to have
their right wits, talk after so loose a sort? Did the fathers Gregorius
Nazia^zenus says, He never savve good comme of any Council.
disprove the order of coming together in general councelles? Or thought they
the same to be a way for men to be the sooner deceived? If so many may be
deceived with most diligent study and mature judgment conferring together,
how mutche sooner may one or two alone ^eadde by private fancy and self will,
be carried away into error? At the Nicene council came together. 318 bishops:
At the first of Constantinople. 150. at the Ephesine counsel. 200. At that of
Chalcedo^ 630 Al these four councelles sundry ancient fathers, namely S.
Gregory, esteemed as the four Gospels. Yea but says he, I have the word of
God. But what if 300. far holier, and better learned men say, he has it
not? Let the reader be judge. says be. A meet judge, in such a cause. The
Scholars may read, but judge of their masters they may not by Christ's
doctrine, Math. 10.
who said, Non est discipulus supra magistrum, the scholar is not above his
master. Why not, for all that, say you, if the Holy Ghost inspire him? Sir,
is it not to be thought, God does assist his Church represented in such
solemn assemblies of three hundred or more fathers governors of Christen
people, rather then one man?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Whether ye call the Scriptures of God a Dumb thing, Cap. 19. Diui. 1.
Ludouicus in Con. Triden. Episcop. Pictauien. in Con. Triden. Albert. Pigghi.
Controuer. 3. Eckius.
or no, I report me to that, is said before. One of you calls it Mortuum
Atramentum, Dead Ink: An other says, Scriptura est res inanimis, and muta:
The Scripture is a dead and a dumb thing: An other calls the Scriptures,
Nigrum Euangelium, The black Gospel. Now if the Scriptures be Dead, and
Doumbe, and can not speak, then must it needs follow, they are unprofitable.
Neither do we despise the Authority of Councelles. Good Councelles be grave,
and reverend. But thus we say, Councelles are often against Councelles: And,
if we make rekening of number, the Arian Heretics have had more Councelles,
then the Christians. S. Hierome says, The people cannot Judge.
Spiritus Sancti Doctrina est, quae Canonicis literis prodita est: Contra quam
si quid statuant Concilia, nefas duco: That is the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost,
that is set abroad in the Canonical Scriptures: Hierom. in epist. ad Galath.
Against which Doctrine if Councelles determine any thing, I think it
wicked.

S. Chrysostom. In. 2. ad Timoth. Hom. 2.
Chrysostom says further in more earneste sort: Plus aliquid dicam: Ne
Paulo quidem obedire oportet, si quid dixerit proprium, si quid humanum: I will
say more: We ought not to believe, no not Paul him self, if he speak any
thing of his own, or if he speak only as a man.

And to increase the uncertainty hereof, the whole weighte, and judgment of
Councelles hangs now evermore upon the Pope: as it may appear by these
words of the Conclusion of the late Chapter at Trident: Council. Triden.
Session. 6. Platyna in Stephano.
Salua semper in omnibus Sedis Apostolicae Authoritate: The Authority of the
Apostolic See in all things evermore reserved. But Platyna says, as it is
alleged before, Acta priorum Pontificum sequentes Pontifices semper aut
infringunt, aut omnino tollunt: The Popes, that follow, do evermore either
break, or wholly abrogate the Decrees of the Popes, that were before.

Whether the Scripture be well alleged, or otherwise, thereof, ye say, the
people may not Judge. For Christ says, The Scholar is not above his
Master. Certainly, M. Hardinge, the simplest of all the people,
notwithstanding, by your restrainte, he may not judge of the Scriptures, yet
he may easily judge of you, either that ye understand not, or that ye
vnaduifedly abuse the Scriptures. Whether it be the Word of God, or no, the
people, ye say, may not Judge: And that ye prove even by the Scriptures, God
knows, full handsomely, and full discretely applied: For the Scholar (ye say)
is not above his Master. Thus we may learn by the Logique of Louaine, that
Populus is Latin for a Scholar: and that Scripture is Latin for a Master.
And thus by your vain premises without sense ye proceed vainly, and
conclude nothing.

O, M. Hardinge, have some regard to that ye write. The simpleste may soon
epsy your dooinges. Ye can no longer thus mock the world with shows of
words. Christ spoke not these words of the understanding of the
Scriptures: but of persequution for the Scriptures. For thus the words lie
together: When they shall persecute you in one City, flee into an other, etc.
The Scholar is not above his Master: Nor the Servant above his Lord. If they
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how mutche more will they so
call his household seruountes? Matthae. 10.


Alas, where learned you to frame such Arguments, The Apostles, being the
Scholars, can no more escape persecution, then could Christ, that was the
Master: Ergo, The people cannot understand, what they read in the
Scriptures? Here is neither Antecedente, nor Consequente, nor Sequel in
Reason. For the honor of yV University, have better regard unto your Logique.

Ye bewraie the weakness of your cause, when ye so sclenderly abuse the
Scriptures.

The Apology, Cap. 22. Division. 4.
Chrysostom says, There be many oftentimes, which boaste them selves of
the Holy Ghost: but truly, who so speak of their own head, do falsely
boast that they have the sprite of God. For like as, says he, Christ denied,
he spoke of him self, when he spoke out of the Law, and Prophets, even so
now, if any thing be pressed upon us in the name of the Holy Ghost, save the
Gospel, we ought not to believe it. For as Christ is the fulfillinge of the
Law and Prophets, so is the Holy Ghost the fulfillinge of the Gospel. Thus
far goes Chrysostom.

M. Hardinge.
They allege out of Chrysostom, that who so ever speak of their own, do
untruly attribute to them selves the Spirit of God. But they remember not,
how they, who are gathered together in the name of Christ, Math. 18.
do not speak of their own, because Christ, who is the truth, has
promised to be in the midst of them. Now if they tell us, that the Fathers at
Trent were not gathered together in the name of Christ, how mutche more truly
may we reply to them, that the temporal men assembled together at Auspurg,
at Marpurg, at Worms, at Smalcald, at Baden, at Westminster, or any where
else, came not together in the name of Christ? I require but a man of common
sense to sit Judge in this cause. They can not possibly bring any thing out
of the Scriptures, or ancient Fathers, for maintenance of this their great
case.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye build over boldly, M. Hardinge, on Christ's promises. God is true, what
so ever he promise: But oftentimes men are false. Christ has promised to be
present, Psalm. 2. Actor 4. Michaeas. 3.
where so ever two, or three be geathered together in his name: But it
appears by the words of the Prophet David, that Councelles oftentimes
meet together against God, and against his Christ. The Prophet Michaeas
says, Sic dicit Dominus de Prophetis, qui errare faciunt populum meum:
Abominantur iudicium, and omne rectum peruertunt: Super Dominum requiescebant,
dicentes: Nunquid non est Dominus in medio nostri? Thus says our Lord of the
Prophets, that deceive my people: They abborre Judgment: they overthrow all that is right. And yet they reaste them se^lues upon our Lord, saienge, Is
not our Lord in the midst amongst us?

This is your defense, M. Hardinge. Whether the Word of God be with you, or
against you, yet ye say, ye have still the Sprite of God: and our Lord him
self is in the midst amongst you. Chrysostom. De Sancto and Adorando
Spiritu. August. in Ioha^. tractae 46.
But this boldness, by Chrysostomes Judgment, is presumptuous, and
dangerous. And therefore his counsel is, that if any thing be pressed upon us
by the name of the Holy Ghost, sauinge only the Gospel of Christ, we
should not believe it. In like sense S. Augustine says, Sua illi si docere
veliut, nolite audire: nolite facere: If they bring any Decree or Fantasy of
their own, hear it not: Do it not.

Thus the Old Frenetique, and Fanatical Heretics, when they found them
selves convinced by the evident testimonies of Gods Word, they appealed to
the Spirit of God: which, they said, even as you say, evermore assisted
them, August. Contra ^austum Manichae li. 3^. ca. 18.
and could not fail them. Hereof S. Augustine writes thus: Videris ergo, id
vos agere, vt omnis de medio Scripturarum authoritas auferatur: and suus cuique
animus author sit, quid in quaque Scriptura probet, quid improbet: id est, vt
non Authorirati Scripturarum subijciatur ad Fidem, sed sibi Scripturas ipse
subijciat: Non vt ideo illi placeat aliquid, quia hoc in sublimi Authoritate
scriptum legitur: sed ideo recte scriptum videatur, quia hoc illi placuit: Ye
see therefore, this is your drifte, that al Authority of the Scriptures be
removed: that each man may be leadde by his own fantasy, what he list,
either to allow in the Holy Scriptures, or to disallowe: that is to say, that
he submit not him self, touching his Faith, to the Authority of the
Scriptures: but that he make the Scriptures subject unto him: Not that he will
allow any thing, because it is written in that high Authority of the
Scriptures: but that he will think it well written, because he allows it. By
mean hereof it comes to pass, that S. Hilarie writes, Qui, quae scripta
sunt, negas, quid superest, nisi vt, Hilari. De Trinitate, li. 9.
quae non scripta sunt, probes? For as much as thou deniest the things that
be written, what remains there, but that thou must allow the things, that
be not written?

Concerning the Authority, and Credit of Councelles, we shall have cause to
say more hereafter. But where ye require, but a man of common sense, to sit
as Judge in this cause, it appears, that either ye remember not, or else ye
weighe not, that ye immediately said before. For in this self same Chapter ye
say, The people may not judge of their Bishops: and that, as ye tell us, by
Christ's own Doctrine: For the Scholar is not above his Master. Yet now
suddenly, as having foregotten your own words, ye call forth the
Scholare, yea, and as it may be thought, one of the meanest of al your
Schole, as a man only endewed with common sense, to sit in Judgment over
his Master.

Notwithstanding, Actor. 10. Johan. 3. Extra. De Electi. and Electi potastat.
Significasti. Abb.
God is no accepter of persons. Gods Holy Sprite is not bound to
Councelles, or Companies: but breaths freely, where it lists. And
therefore, as your own Doctor Panormitane says, in Cases of Religion the
Judgment of one Simple plain man ought sommetimes to be received before the
Judgment of the Pope.

Here ends the Fourth Part.
The Fifthe Part.
The Apology, Cap. 1. Division, 1.
But here, Old. Nevve.
I look, they will say, though they have not the Scriptures, yet it may
chance, they have the Ancient Doctors, and the Holy Fathers with them. For
this is a high brag they have ever made, how that al Antiquity, and a
Continual Consent of al ages does make on their side: and that al our cases be
but New, and yester days work, and until these few late years were never
heard of. Questionless, there can nothing be more spitefully spoken against
the Religion of God, then to accuse it of Novelty, as a matter lately found
out. For as there can be no change in God him self, so ought there to be no
change in his Religion.

Yet nevertheless, we wot not by what means, but we have ever seen it come
so to pass, from the first beginning, that as often as God did geeue but
sum light, and did open his Truth unto men, though the Truth were not
only of greatest Antiquity, but also from Everlasting, yet of wicked men,
and of the Adversaries it was called Newfangled, and of late divised. That
vngraceous, and bloudthirsty Haman, when he sought to procure the king
Assuerus displeasure against the Jews, Esther. 3.
this was his accusation to him: Thou have here (says he) a kind of people,
that uses certain nevve Laws of their own, but stifnecked, and rebellious
against al thy Laws. When Paul also began first to preach, Actor. 17.
and expound the Gospel at Athenes, he was called a tidinges bringer of Nevve
Gods: as mutche to say, as of a Nevve Religion. For (said the Athenians)
may we not know of thee, what Nevve Doctrine this is? Celsus likewise, when
he of set purpose wrote against Christ, to the end he might more
scornefully scoff out the Gospel by the name of Novelty, What, Origin.
Contra Celsum.
says he, has God after so many ages now at last, and so late bethought
him self? Eusebius also writes, that the Christian Religion from the
beginning, for very spite, was called (...), that is to say, Nevve, and
Strange. After like sort, these men condemn al our matters, as Strange, and
Nevve: but they will have their own, whatsoever they are, to be praised, as
things of long continuance.

M. Hardinge.
They had said sum what, if they had proved, that the doctrine A vain
distinction. For neither do we call our Doctrine Nevve.
of Christ had benne called now by them, who were the professors, and
folowers of it. But now reportinge that the Gentiles, who knew not God, as A
man, as the Athenians, as Celsus the Ethnike, and such the like, called the
right and true Religion of God, new: they say nothing to any purpose. But let
them show, that before the coming of Christ, any such Religion was
allowed, that was new: Or that since Christ's incarnation, among Christian
men what so ever Religion was not shunned and rejected as heretical, which
was new. Here are they domme. And yet for show of learning in a matter not
necessary, they bring forth their store, and declare that the doctrine and
Religion of truth was new to them, which knew not God nor Christ the son
of God, which no man denies.

Thus al men of any judgment may see, how fondly they reason. We We tell
you, ye have lost the right names of things: and call that Nevve, that in deed
is Old.
tell them that al nevve doctrine now in the Church of Christ is naught: and
they prove, that infidels have in the time of Moses law, and at the first
preachinge of the Gospel, impugned Gods everlasting truth with the odious
term and reproach of newnes. New doctrine was good to us at our first
conversion from infidelity. But since that we received the true faith from S.
Gregory the Bishop of Rome, Untruth. For the True Faith of Christ had benne
planted, and still continued in this Realm four hundred years; before the
coming of this Augustine.
who converted the Realm of England to the faith by S Augustine his legate,
and others sent for that godly purpose: worthily we shun and abhor al new
Gospels, new faithes, new doctrines, new religions.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Truth of God neither is furthered by the face of Antiquity: nor hindered
by the opinion of Novelty. For oftentimes the thing, that in deed is Nevve,
is commended as Old: and the thing, that in deed is Old, is condemned as
Nevve. If Nevvnesse in Religion in all respects, and every way were il,
Christ would not have resembled his Doctrine to Nevve Wine: Math. 9. Ioh. 13.
Luke. 22. Arnobius contra Gentes, li. 2.
nor would he have said to his Disciples, I give you a Nevve Commandment:
Neither would he have called the Cup of Thankesgeuinge, The Nevve
Testamente, in his Blood. Arnobius says, Religionis Authoritas non est
tempore aestimanda, sed numine: nec quo die, sed quid colere coeperis, intueri
conuenit. Quod Verum est, Serum non est: The Authority of Religion must be
weighed by God, and not by time: It behooves us to consider, not upon what
day, but what thing we began to worship. The thing that is true, is never
too late.

S. Augu. in quaest. Noui and Veteris Testamenti, quaest. 114. Augustine. De
Ciuita. li. 10. ca. 32.
Augustine says, Quod Anterius est, inquiunt Ethnici, falsum esse non potest.
Quasi Antiquitas, and Vetus Consuetudo praeiudicet Veritati: The Heathens say,
The Religion, that was first, can not be false: As though Antiquity, and Old
Custom could prevail against the Truethe. Again he says, Nec dici debet,
quare Modo'? and quare Sero? Quoniam mittentis Consilium non est humano ingenio
penetrabile: Neither may we say, Why comes it now? Why comes it so late?
For the Counsel of God that sent it, is unsearchable to the wisdom of man.
Ye say, They were Infidelles only, that charged the Religion of Christ with
Novelty. And further ye say, We tell them, that al New Doctrine now in the
Church of Christ is naught. Hereto, M. Hardinge, we soon agree. And
therefore well tell you, that your Nevve Fantasies, which ye have painted with
the Color of Auncientie, and therewith have deceived the world, are vain,
and naught. As for us, we have planted no Nevve Religion, but only have
renewed the Old, that was undoubtedly founded, and used by the Apostles of
Christ, and other Holy Fathers in the Primitive Church: and of this long
late time, by mean of the multitude of your Traditions, and Vanities, has
benne drowned.

Therefore we may say with S. Bernardus De vita Solitaria.
Bernarde, Nouitatem dico, propter linguas hominum impiorum: qui, cum
manifestum Lumen obnubilare non queunt, de Solo Nouitatis nomine cauillantur,
etc. Sed haec Nouitas non est Nouella vanitas. Res enim est Antiquae
Religionis: Perfect fundatae in christo Pietatis: Antiqua Haereditas Ecclesiae
Dei: I call it Novelty, because of the tongues of wicked men: who being not
hable to shadow the manifest light of the Truth, find cauillations upon the
Only name of Novelty. But this Novelty is no Nevve Vanity ( as is this late
vpstarte Religion of Rome). For it is a matter of Old Religion: of perfect
Godliness founded in Christ: The Ancient Enheritance of the Church of God.
Tertullian. De Virginibus velandi
The Old Learned Father Tertullian says, Viderint ergo, quibus Nouum est,
quod sibi est Vetus: Haereses non tam Nouitas, quam Veritas reuincit. Augustine
of England.
Quodcunque contra Veritatem sapit, hoc est Haeresis, etiam vetus Consuetudo:
Let them therefore take heed, which coumpte that thing New, that in it self
is Old. Herefie is reproved, not so well by Novelty, as by Verity. What so
ever thing sauereth against the Truth, the same is an Heresy: Yea, although
it be a Custom never so old. Ignatius ad Philadelphien.
Ignatius says, Antiquitas mea Jesus Christus est: My Antiquity is Christ
Jesus. For otherwise the Religion of Christ at that time was coumpted Nevve,
and in respect of the Ancient Religion of the Heathens, Universally, and of al
men was condemned.

That Augustine, the Monker of Rome, brought first the Faith into this
Land, it is utterly Untrue. For, as I have said before, it appears plainly
by sundry the Ancient Fathers, origin, Tertullian, chrysostom, Hilarie,
Theodoretus, Eusebius, and others, that the Faith of Christ had benne
universally received, and perfitely rooted in this Realm many hundred years,
before this Augustine the Monk was borne. Indeed he brought in great heaps
of strange Novelties, and superstitions, as Candels, Candelstickes, Banners,
and Holy Water, and other like shows: Whereof the Church of God had no great
need. And yet have the same sithence benne increased by other New Diuises,
and Vanities, above measure.

But, for as mutche as certain of M. Hardinges Beaupecres of Louaine have
lately found them selves talk, and keapte great Mootes in the behoufe of
their Augustine, the Italian Monk, whom they call the Apostle of England, and
will needs have to be received and honored, as a Saint, I have thought it
therefore good, briefly, and by the way, to note a few words touching the
same.

It seems, they be mutche offended, that so virtuous a Man, and so Holy a
Saint should be charged with Pride, and Cruelty. With Pride, in so
disdeignefully despisinge his Brethren, the Bishops of this Ilelande of
Britain: With Cruelty, in procuringe the Death both of many thousands of
Christian people, and also specially of the Innocente, and Unarmed Monks of
Bangor: and all this, for that they refused to receive him as their
Metropolitan, and to agree with him in certain small points of the Roman
Religion. How be it, his Pride is well blased by Beda, writing pourposely of
the same, in that he sat still in his Throne, Beda: Septem Britannor. Epis. and
plures Viri Doctissimi.
and disdeigned to rise up, and to give any token of Reverence unto the Seven
Bishops, and other Learned, and grave men of the Britannes, making their
appearance at his Council. And therefore they said, they would not hearken to
his demaundes, nor take him for their Archbishop, as having otherwise of
old an Archbishop of their own, to whom they ought their obedience.
Their words, as they are reported by Beda, were these: Si modo' nobis
assurgere noluit, Beda. lib. 2. ca. 2.
quanto' magis, si ei subdi coeperimus, iam nos pro nihilo conteinner? If even
now be disdeigne to rise up unto us, how mutche more will he despise us, and
regard us as nothing, when we shall once be under his Jurisdiction?

But, to excuse this Augustine of shameful Cruelty, lest he should seem to
be accessorie to the Murdering of so many, and so by their own Laws to be
Irregulare, as a man of blood, they say, He neither enkendled the War
against the Britains, nor was present at the fight: but was dead long
before. Which thing also they think, may be proved by the express words
of Beda. For thus he says. Beda eodem loco
Quamuis ipso Augustino iam multo ante tempore ad Coelestia Regna sublato:
Notwithstanding Augustine him self, long before the time of this War, were
taken up into the kingdom of Heaven. For the truth, and certainty hereof, it
may please thee, good Christian Reader, to understand, that these last
words of Beda, concerning the Death of Augustine, are manifestely forged,
and have benne violently thruste into the text, by a guileful Parenthesis, by
them, that sithence have benne ashamed of his Cruelty, Augustine of England.
and were never written by the Authoure, as by euidente proufes it shall
plainly appear.

But first of al, in an Old chronicle, written in French above two hundred
years paste, Thomas Graie. Augustine the inflamer of the War.
by Thomas Graie, ye shall find it recorded thus: Augustine, being thus
refused of the Bishops, and others the Learned of the Britains, made such
complainte thereof to Ethelberte the king of kente, that forth with he levied
his Power, and Marched against them, and slew them in most Cruel wise,
having ( as he says) no more regard of mercy, then a Woulfe has upon a
Sheep. Hereby it appears, that this Augustine was the inflamer of the War,
and so the causer of the slaughter.

And whereas, by the words of Beda, as they be now commonly extant in the
Latin, we are told, this Augustine was dead, long before the War began,
it appears plainly by the true Beda in deed, The true story of Beda,
Translated by King Alfrede. Augustine alive in the time of the War.
translated above seven hundred years ago into the old English, or Saxon
tongue, by Alfredus, or Aluredus then King of this land, that the same
Augustine was yet alive, after the same War was ended, and that he afterward
Consecrated two Bishops, Mellitus, and Iustus: Mellitus, to be Bishop of
London: and Iustus, to be Bishop of Rochester. Which things thus declared, it
follows orderly in the story, Then (these Wars being ended, and these
Bishops Consecrated) afterward died the beloved Father Augustine. After the
War he died, he says: and not Before, as they have sithence altered it in
the Latin. I trwo, M. Harding, ye are not so mutch amazed with the admiration
of your Augustine, that ye will say, he had power to Consecrate Bishops, and
to use his Archiepiscopal Authority, being dead.

As for these words, that we find reported by the Parenthesis, in the
Latin, as written by Beda, (Quamuis Augustino iam multo ante tempore ad
coelestia Regna sublato) For as mutche as they are quite contrary to the very
course, and order of the story, and specially for that they are not once
touched in the Aunciente Saxon Translation, sundry Copies whereof at this
present are extante, and to be seen, of such Reverend Antiquity, as may
not justly be called in question, therefore we have good cause to judge, that
the said words have benne sithence forced, and shifted in, by sum good
skille, and policy, lest Augustine, so holy a man, should be found guilty
of so great a Cruelty. An. Dom.


596 August. comes into England. 597 598 599 600 601 August, receives his
Palle. 602 603 604 August. consecrateth Mellitus, and Iustus. 605 Gregory
dies. The war against the Britains: The Saxon Chronicle of Peterburrough.
606 607 608 August. dies: Flores Historiar.
Verily, The Abstracte of Chronicles written.
in the Old English Chronicle it is recorded, not only that this Augustine,
the Italian Monk, by his complainte caused the King of Kente to arm his
people against the true, and Faithful Christians of this Country, then being
in Wales: or, that he was alive at the time of ye battle, but also, that he
was him self present in person goeinge toward the same. The words be
these: Augustine came again, and told king Ethelberte, that the Britains
would not obeie him. Wherefore the King was wroth, and sent to Elfrede the
king of Northumberland to comme to healpe him, to distress the Britains of
Wales. And (Augustine) the Archbishop of Canturburie met with them at
Leicester. Augustine alive, and in company with the kings marchinge
toward the filde.
The King of Leicester at that time was called Brocuale. He being afraid of
the two Kings, fled out of the Land, and came never again. And the two
kings seized al his lands, and departed them bitweene them selves. And
afterward they went to wards Wales. The Britains heard of them, and sent
men to them in their shirtes, and harefoote, to ask mercy. But they were so
cruel, that they had of them no pity, etc. Hereby it appears. that this
Augustine, not only enkendled this cruel War, but also was alive, and
present in the Army.

Therefore, M. Hardinge, it shall henceforth be good, both for you, and for
your Fellows, not to adventure so rasshely in judgment, before ye know.

Thus mutche briefly, as anweare unto them, that so feign would have their
Augustine acquitted of Pride, and Cruelty.

The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 2.
Wherein they do mutche like to the Coniurers, and Sorcerers now a days,
which woorkinge with Devils, use to say, they have their Books, and al
their Holy, and hid Mysteries from Athanasius, Cyprian, Moses, Abel, Adam, and
from the Archangel Raphael: to the end, that their conninge being thought to
comme from such Patrones and Founders, might be judged the more high and
Holy. After the same manner these men, because they would have their own
Religion, which they themselves, and that not long sithence, have brought
forth into the world, to be the more easily, and rather accepted of foolish
persons, or of such, as cast little, whereabout they or others do go,
they are woonte to say, they had it from Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, from
the Apostles, and from Christ him self. Full well know they, that nothing is
more in the peoples favor, or better likes the common sort, then these
names.

M. Hardinge.
Nay Sirs, your selves may with more reason be likened to Enchaunters,
Necromancers, and Witches. For as they say, that they have their Books, and
their mysteries from those Doctors, and first Fathers, and from Raphael the
Archangel, but cannot show the delivery thereof by any succession from hand to
hand, as for example, who received the same from Raphael, from Adam, from
Abel, etc. and who kept them from time to time: so ye say also, that ye have
your Gospel, and every part of your Doctrine from the Apostles, from Christ,
from the Prophets, from the Patriarchs, from heaven, from Gods own bosom,
Jacob. 1^
who is Father of lights. But ye cannot shows us your lauful succession, by
whom, and by whose preachinge, as by hands, it came down alonge from Christ
and his Apostles unto you. It lay in the Scriptures, and in the Books of the
Holy Fathers.
Where lay your sacramentary Doctrine hidden bitwene the time of your
Prophet Zuinglius, and your Patriarch Berengarius? How, and by what delivery
from hand to hand continewed the same those five hundred years? She we us
your succession. Where be your Bishops, where be your Churches?

The Doctrine, which the Catholics of our Country hold, and profess,
Untruths impudente. Read the Answer.
as well touching the blessed sacrament, as al other points of our faith,
they have received it of their Bishops, and they of their Predecessors, by
order until they reach to S. Augustine: S. Augustine received it of S.
Gregory: * he of others before him: * and they al one of an other by continual
aescente unto S. Peter: who received it of Christ: Christ of God his Father. *
And this Doctrine we find taught and plainly set forth in the books that
Untruth. For all this is but a shevve of empty names, and nothing in them.
S. Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Basile, Cyprian, Dionyse, and the
other holy Fathers have leafte to the Posterity. And so they be witnesses of
the truth of the Doctrine which our Bishops have taught us.

Preach ye, and cry ye out never so mutche, make so many Laws in your
Parlamentes, as ye list, imbrue your swords in the Blood of the Catholic
Christians, as ye cry for it in your pulpites, yet shall that rock, whereon we
stay, be too hard for you. Neither shall ye ever be able to overthrow the
Catholic Church builded thereupon. For certain we are, that neither al your
power, nor Hell gates shall prevail against it. Matthew. 16.


The B. of Sarisburie.
Marcus Varro was woonte to say, Vtile est Ciuitatibus, vt se viri fortes,
etiamsi falsum fit, Pretense of Antiquity.
Dijs genitos esse credant: It is very behoueful for Cities, and Commonweals,
that men of Valiante courage believe the^ selves to be ye Children of ye
Gods, yea although in deed it be untrue. Augusti. De Ciuitate, Li. 3. ca. ^.
Unto which words S. Augustine adds these: Haec Sententia, cernis, quam
latum locum aperiat falsitati Ye see, how large a scope this saieing does
open to the Mainteinance of Falsehedde. Many vain men, to auance the
Nobility of their blood, have fette their petite degrees, sum from
Achilles, sum from Aeneas, sum from Hercules, and sum from the Ark of Noah. The Heretic Dioscorus, to geate sum credit to his Doctrine, would
seem to bring the descente thereof from all the Ancient Fathers of the
Church. For thus he said in the open Council, Council. Chalced. Actio. 1. Pa.
767.
Ego testimonia habeo Sanctorum Patrum, Athanasij, Gregorij, Cyrilli, in multis
locis. Ego cum Patribus eijcior: Ego defendo Patrum Dogmata: Non tra^sgredior
in aliquo: Et horum Testimonia, non simpliciter, neque transitory, sed in
Libris habeo: I have the witness of the Holy Fathers, Athanasius, Gregorius,
cyrillus, in many places. I am thrown forth with the Fathers: I defend the
Fathers Doctrine: I swerve not from the^ in any point: I have their witness,
not barely, nor by the way, but in their Books.

So said the Heretic Eutyches, Ego legi Scripta Beati Cyrilli, and Sanctorum
Patrum, Council. Chalced. Actio. 1. Pa. 793. Council. Chalced. Actio. 4. Pa. 877.
and Sancti Athanasij: I have readde the Books of Cyrillus, of the Holy
Fathers, and of Athanasius. So said the Heretic carosus, Ego secundum
expositionem trecentorum december and octo Patrum, sic Credo: sic Baptizatus sum:
Thus do I believe, and thus was I Baptized, according to ye Exposition of the
three hundred, and eighteen Fathers in the Council of Nice. Thus y^ Arian
Heretics alleged the Authority of y^ Ancient Father Origin: thus the
Pelagian Heretics alleged the Authority of S. Augustine. As, upon occasion,
it has benne said before.

Even with such truth, M. Hardinge, are you woonte to blase the Arms of
your Religion. There is no toie so vain, or so fabulous, but ye are hable by
your conninge to bring it lineally, either from Christ him self, or from his
Apostles, or from one, or other of the Ancient Fathers. The Bishop of Sidon in
y^ Late diete of the Empiere holden at Augusta, Anno. 1548.
avouched openly that ye had your whole Canon from the Apostles of Christ,
word by word, even as it is peeuishely written in your Mass Books. Andreas
Barbatius proves the Antiquity of y^ Cardinals of Rome, 1. Regum 2.
Polydorus De Inuentorib. Li. 4 Cap. 9.
by these words written in the first Book of the Kings, Domini sunt
Cardines Terrae: Et posuit super eos Orbem: The Corners of the Earth be the
Lords: and upon them he has set the world, Abbate Panormitane says,
Cardinalatus est de Iure Diuino: Quia Papa per Sacerdotes Leuiticos intelligit
Cardinales: The Cardinalship stands by the Law of God: Extra, Qui Filij sint
Legitimi. per Venerabile^. Abb.
For the Pope by the Leuitical Priests understands his Cardinals. Mutche
hereof is alleged before.
Hosius seems to say, that Monks have their beginning even from the
Apostles, meaning thereby, as one of your Companions there doothe, in favor,
I trow, of Religion, that Christ him self was the Abbat. For thus he says,
Hosius in Confessione Petricouien. Cap. 88. Copus, Dialo. 2. Page 194.
Christus Dux, and exemplar vitae Monasticae: Christ was the Captain, and
samplar of Monks life. And yet the same man afterward, as having forgotten
his former dream, utterly displaceth Christ, and gives the whole honor
hereof unto Elias, and Elizaeus: These be his words, Elias, and Elizaeus
Duces instituti Benedictini: Elias, and Elizaeus were y^ Captains of S.
Benettes order, y^ is to say, they were Black Monks? By like wisdom ye
would seem to fetch your Holy Water from S. Augustine. This was sommetime a
ioily good way to win credit, specially whiles, what so ever ye said, y^
people was ready to give you care. So y^ old Arcades said in commendation of
their Antiquity, y^ they were a day, or two elder then the Moon. Saturnus
(...).
being in Italy, for y^ he was a stranger, and no man knew, from whence he
came, therefore was called Filius Caeli, and was thought to come from Heaven,
Romulus, and Alexander, for that they were borne in bastardie, and never knew
their own Fathers, therefore to magnify the nobility of their blood,
would be called the Children of the Gods: the one of Mars, y^ other of
Iuppitter.

With such Truth, Pretense of Antiquity.
and Fidelity, M. Hardinge, your woonte is, to painte out all the parts, and
members of your Doctrine. For, be it never so vain, or childishe, or lately
divised, yet ye bear us in hand, that your Predecessors received the same,
as you say, of their Bishops: and they of others their Predecessors by
order, until they reach to your Augustine the Monk of Rome, whom ye have full
woorthily made a Saint: your Augustine ye say received the same of Gregory:
Gregory of others before him: and they al, one of an other by continual
ascente unto S. Peter: and Peter of Christ: and Christ of God his Father.

No Heralde could lightly have said more in the matter. I trow ye would
prove by this Ascente, and Descente, that God the Father made Holy Water, and
said Mass.

In deed, as well herein, as also in your empty names of Augustine, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Basile, Cyprian, Dionyse, etc. as I told you once
before, ye bring us only a vain show of painted boxes, and nothing in
them. For in all these Holy Fathers, where find you either your Private Mass:
or your half communion: or your Accidents without Subject: or the rest of
your like Vanities, wherewith ye have so long time deceived the world? Leave
your dissimulation: set aparte your Confectures, and blind gheasses: and for
your credites sake, once show us these things in the Ancient Holy Fathers:
and show them plainly, and in deed: that we may think there is sum
weight in your word.

But your own Gloss speakinge of the Ministration of the Holy Communion,
which now in your Churches in a manner is wholly abolisshed, says thus: Hoc
Antiquum est. De Conse. Did 2. per acta. In Gloss. Doc. Tonstallus, De
Eucharistia. Lib. 1 Page 45. Anno. 1215. Erasm. 1. Corin. 7
Nam hodie videtur esse relictum: This was the Old order. For, as it seems,
now it is leafte. Doctoure Tonstal says, It was no Heresy to deny your
Transubstantiation, before your late Council of Laterane. Erasmus, whoes
judgment, I think, ye will not refuse, says thus, In Synaxi
Transubstantiatione^e ser o definiuit Ecclesia: In the Holy Ministration, it
was long, ere the Church determined the Article of Transubstantiation. All this notwithstanding, M. Hardinge, ye blusshe not to say, that both these,
and al other your fantasies, have benne conueighed unto you by most certain
Succession, from hand to hand: from your English Augustine: from Gregory:
from the Fathers: from the Apostles: from Christ: and from the bosom of God
him self.

The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 3.
But how if the things, which these men are so desirous to have seem
New, be found of greatest Antiquity? Contrariwise, how if all the things
well nighe, which they so greatly set out with the name of Antiquity, having
benne well and thoroughly examined, be at length found to be but New, and
divised of very late? Soothely to say, no man, that has a true, and right
consideration, would think the Jews Laws, and Ceremonies to be New in
deed, for all Hammans accusation. For they were graven in very Aunciente Cables
of greatest Antiquity. And, although many did take Christ to have swarued
from Abraham, and the Old Fathers, and to have brought in a certain New
Religion in his own name, yet aunsweared he them directly: If ye believed
Moses, ye vvoulde believe me also. For my Doctrine is not so Nevve, as you make
it. For Moses, an Authoure of greatest Antiquity, and one, to whom ye give al
honor, has spoken of me. S. Paul likewise, Though y^ Gospel of Jesus
Christ be of many counted to be but New, yet has it (says he) a testimony
most old, both of the Law, and of the Prophets. As for our doctrine, which we
may more rightly call Christ's Catholic Doctrine, it is so far of from
New, that God, who is above al most Ancient, and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, has leafte the same unto us in the Gospel, in the Prophets,
and Apostles works, being monumentes of greatest age. So that noman can now
think our Doctrine to be New, unless the same think, either the Prophets
Faith, or the Gospel, or else Christ him self to be New.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 1. and 2.
And as for their Religion, if it be of so long continuance, as they would
have men wene it is, why do they not prove it so by the examples of the
Primitive Chruche, and by the Fathers, and Councels of Old times? Why lies so
Ancient a cause thus long in the duste, destitute of an Advocate? Fire, and
sword they have had always ready at hand: but as for the Old Councels, and
Fathers, al Mum, not a word. They did surely against al reason, to begin
first with these so bloody, and extreme means, if they could have found
other more easy, and gentle ways.

And if they trust so fully to Antiquity, and use no dissimulation, why did
John Clemente a Country manne of ours, but few years paste, in the presence
of certain honest men, and of good credit, tear and cast into the fire
certain leaves of Theodorete the most Ancient Father, and a Greek Bishop,
wherein he plainly and evidently taught, that the Nature of Bread in the
Communion is not changed, or abolished, or brought to nothing? And this did
he of purpose, because he thought there was no other copy thereof to be
found.

M. Hardinge.
Touching the matter you have devised upon M. Clemente, he does not only
deny it in word, that ever he burnte or otherwise destroyed any leaf of
Theodoritus, but also declares by the whole order of his life, and by special
regard and love he bears to the tongue, which that learned Bishop wrote in,
that he has ever ben, and yet is far from the will to burn or destroy any
scrappe, syllable, or letter of Greek, mutche more certain leaves of the
learned Father Theodoritus, where any such thing was written, as you imagine.
Nay, Well ye have the truth? In very deed he says, and by such way, as a
godly and grave man may auouche a troth, protests, that he never had
hitherto any part of that book, neither in Greek, or in Latin in written
hand.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This report was made in the presence, and hearing of M. Peter Martyr, and
sundry other learned men, of whom certain are yet alive. The reporter was
both a Learned man, and a grave Father, and not long sithence a Bishop in
England: who said, he was present, and saw the thing done with his eyes.
More to say hereof, I am not hable.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 3.
Why says Albertus Pigghius, that the Ancient Father S. Augustine had a wrong
Opinion of Original Sin? Dis. 27. Quidam Augusti. De Bono Viduita. Cap. 10.
And that he erred, and lied, and used False Logique, as touching the case of
Matrimony concluded after a Vow made: which Matrimony S. Augustine
affirms to be perfect in deed, and that it may not be undone again.

M. Hardinge.
M. Hardinge refuses S. Augustines Authority.
We never took our selves bound to any private opinion of what so ever
Doctoure. For all our faith is Catholic, that is to say, Universal, such as
not one Doctor alone This Untruth is over cold, and vain For M. Hardinge
well knovveth, the substance of his Doctrine stands not by the Doctoures.
but the Universal number of Doctoures have taught, and Christen people have
received. If in a secret point of learning S. Augustine or S. Cyprian teach
singulerly, we follow them not. Mutche less do we bind our selves to
maintain, what so ever Albertus Pighius has written. Our Doctrine of Original
sin is to be readen in the fifth session of the late Tridentine council. Sub
Paulo. 3.
If Pighius dissent from that, he dissenteth from us. But if he stand only
upon some point not yet determined by the Church, his opinion may be
tolerated until the Church define that question. When you note the point,
(for there are many points in that Doctrine) then we will show you further our
mind therein.

The marriage, which is made after a simple Vow of chastity, stands in his
force, by reason that there is more in marriage, then was in the bare Vow.
Promise made unto God without Delivery A folly of al folies.
For in the simple vow there is nothing but a promise made to God, without
any deliverance of that thing, which was promised. But in marriage the man and
woman by present acceptance of each others bond, do make the matter to
extend beyond the nature of a promise. Therefore if likewise the vow made to
God were not a simple promise, but also a deliueringe of the thing promised:
then cannot the marriage folowinge make void the vow, which was not only
promised, but also performed. A Vow made before the Bishop, or Abbate, is of
more force then a Vow made before God alone.
The performance is, when he that voweth, does profess him self in the hands
of his Superior by taking the habit of some Religion, or by receiuinge holy
orders of the Bishop. For in that solemn act he delivers up al his own
right and power, so that now be is not master of him self to give his Body to
any person in marriage, or otherwise. You should know by the Law of nature,
if you would consider it, that if I promise a horse to one man, and afterward
promise the same, and deliver him to an other: that the second man is true
Lord of that horse, although I have done injury to him, to whom I made the
first promise. For the promise with the delivery, is more vaileable to
transfer my right in the horse, then my promise alone. Even so it is a great
sin to break a simple Vow of chastity made to God.

The B. of Sarisburie.
How lightly your Captain General, Albertus Pigghius, weighs the Authority
of S. Augustine, it may appear by his words. For thus he writes, Quod non
solum incerta, Albert. Pigghi. in 1. Controuer. De peccato Originis.
sed etiam falsa sit Augustini Sententia, ita mihi demo^strari posse videtur:
Thus me thinks, I am hable to prove, that S. Augustines Judgment herein is
not only uncertain, but also False. And again afterward in the Conclusion,
Quod Augustini Sententia non solum incerta, sed etiam certo' Falsa sit, satis
mihi demonstratum videtur: That S. Augustines Judgment is, not only
uncertain, but also certainly False, Alber. Pigghius in eadem Controuersia.
me thinks I have sufficiently proved. And again, Non multum me mouet
Augustini Sententia: Mihi non placet Augustini ea de re Definitio, and
Sente^tia: S. Augustines Judgment does not greatly move me: I like not S.
Augustines Determination and Judgment, touching this matter. And again, Ego
omnium, non solum Aduersariorum, sed etiam Catholicorum receptas in Scholis
redarguo Sententias: I do reprove the Judgments, Ruard. Tapper. Liriensis,
Episcopus Lusitanus.
not only of our Adversaries, but also of the Catholics allowed in the
Schools. For these causes Ruardus Tapper of Louaine, and Liriensis of
Portugale have namely written against Pigghius. Vow Simple and Solemn.
And for as mutche, as ye are desirous to have the point noted, wherein
Pigghius so mutche misliketh S. Augustines judgment, Petrus a Soto your own
Doctoure notes it thus, Pigghius de hoc male audit, Petrus a Soto, De Natura,
and Gratia.
quasi Peccata in nobis Originalia omnin o inficietur: Pigghius is il reported
of, as a man, that utterly denies Original Sin. Thus your Doctoures weigh S.
Augustines Authority, lighter, or heavier, as they list.

The matter of Marriage after a Vow is blown away with a seely Distinction
of a Vow Simple, and a Vow Double, which ye commonly call a Solemn Vow:
and all the same is substantially, and clearly proved by the promise, and
delivery of a Horse. Surely, M. Hardinge, a very simple Creature, and
sommewhat inferioure to a Horse, would hardely be tied to such Distinctions.
For the better cleeringe hereof, that ye call a Simple Vow, y^ is made before
God alone: that Double, or Solemn, that is made in the presence of the Bishop,
or Abbate. Now, it is plainly confessed by your own Doctors, that your
Simple Vow, be it never so Simple, yet binds you as streitely before God,
as the Double.

For Pope Coelestinus says, Extra, Qui Clerici and voue^tes. Rursus.
Votum Simplex apud Deum non minus ligat, quam solenne: The Simple Vow before
God binds no less, then the Solemn. And touching the Promise, and
Delivery of your Horse, Johannes Scotus says, Alia ratio est, Scotus in 4.
Senten. Did. 38. qu. 1.
quod Vouens Solenniter mittit in possessionem illum, cui Vouet Solenniter:
Vouens autem Private, non: sed quasi promittit. Sed haec ratio valet minus,
quam secunda. Quia omnia, quae intrinseca sunt Voto, vt Votum respicit actum
voluntatis, per quem obligat se vouendo, and transfert Dominium suum in
alterum, omnia, inquam, ista sunt aequalia hinc inde. Igitur non magis datio
hic, quam ibi: nec promissio ibi, quam hic: An other reason, that they use, is
this: That he, that makes a Solemn Vow, puts him, to whom he so voweth,
in possession. But so doothe not he, that makes a Simple Vow: but only
gives his promise. This Reason is worse, and weaker, then the Second. For all things, that be of the Substance of the Vow, ( as a Vow concerns the
Act of the Mind, whereby the Mind binds it self by Vowinge, and
transposeth the ownership of it self unto an other) al these things, I say,
are of like weight, and equal of either side. Therefore there is no more
perfourma^ce of promise in the solemn Vow, then in the Simple: nor more
promise in the Simple Vow, then in the Solemn. Thus you see, M. Hardinge,
with great travail, and mutche a do, ye have found a difference without
difference. Caietan. in Thom. Secund. Secundae quast. 88. Arti. 7.
Cardinal Caietan says, Eiusdem speciei est Transgressio Voti Solennis, and
simplicis: Et differunt solum secundum magis grave, and minus grave: The
breakinge of a Vow Simple, and a Vow Solemn, is of one kind, or Nature:
And the difference is only in more grievous, and less grievous. Therefore
Thomas of Aquine him self, the first Father, as it appears, of this
Distinction, says thus: Thomas in Secund. Secundae, quaest. 88. Art. 11.
August. De Bono viduitatis Ca. 10.
Videtur, quod Ecclesia possit dispensare in Voto Continentiae Solemnizato per
susceptionem Sacri Ordinis: It seems, that the Church may dispense with a
Vow of Chastity Solemnized by the receiuinge of Holy Orders.

And this is it, that S. Augustine says, Qui dicunt, talium Nuptias, non esse
Nuptias, sed potius Adulteria, mihi non videntur satis acute, ac diligenter
considerare, quid dicant: They that say, the Marriage of such Men, or
Weemen (as have Vowed Chastity) is no Marriage at al, but rather Aduouterie,
seem unto me not to consider discreetely, or advisedly, what they say. Thus
therefore, M. Hardinge, notwithstanding your Simple, or Double Vow, S.
Augustine says unto you, ye speak Unadvisedly, and Indiscreetly, and
understand not, what you say. But of this whole matter, we have entreated
before more at large.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 4.
Also, when they did of late put in Printe the Ancient Father Origens work
upon the Gospel of S. John, Liber hodie extat and circumfertur mutilus.
why least they quite out the whole sixthe Chaptre, wherein it is likely, yea
rather of very suertie, that the said Origene had written many things
concerning the Sacrament of the Holy Communion, contrary to these men's
minds, and would rather put forth that Book mangled, then full and perfect:
for fear it should reprove them and their parteners of their error. Call ye
this trustinge to Antiquity, when ye rent in pieces, keep back, maime, and
burn the Ancient Fathers?

M. Hardinge.
A wise man affirms no more then he knows: a good man no more then stands
with Charity: a learned man, in matters of weight, no more then he can auouche
by evident Hereby M. Hardinge saketh mutche the credit of his own Learning.
reasons, sure proufes, or sufficient Auctorities. This Defender charginge the
Catholics with manglinge of Origin upon S. John's Gospel, as though of
purpose they had left out the sixth Chaptre, which he imagines to contain
their Sacramentary doctrine contrary to the Catholic Faith: for as much as he
is uncertain hereof, and thereby notes a great untruth in the setters
forth of that work, neither by any means is able to prove the same: he
shows himself a fool, aslaunderer, and an unlearned man. We are like I
perceive, to hear of the faults they know by us, sith that they burden us
with that, that they know not, and for the same can pretend but a slender
conjecture. But Sir defender, why complain you not of the leauinge out of
other Chapters, and parts of that work, as well as of the sixth Chapter? In
prolog. 39. Hom. Origenis i^ Lucam.
For whereas Origin wrote upon John nine and thirty tomes, as S. Hierome
witnesses: the Latin translation Printed in Venis has but. 32 lackinge the
seven last tomes. Neither be all they whole and perfect, but many of them
maimed and mangled.

What manner a Doctrine of the Blessed Sacrament he has uttered upon the
sixthe Chapter of John, and how Catholic he was in that point, it appears
by diverse his other works, that you have no cause to belie him in that you
never saw. For the truth of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, his testimonies
be evident. Hom. 13. In Exodus
For credites sake, here will I recite a couple. In one place he says thus:
Ye know which have benne woonte to be present at the Divine Mysteries, how
that when ye take the Body of our Lord, ye keep it with all warenesse and
reverence, that no whit thereof fall down, that nothing of the consecrated
gift miscary. For ye believe your selves to be gilty, and right well do ye so
believe, if by negligence ought fall down. In an other place, writing upon
the Centurions words spoken to Christ, Hom. 5. in diuerso^ Euangelij locos.
Matthew. 8. When (says he) thou take that Holy meat, and that incorrupt
deintie, when thou enioiest that Breadde and Cup of Life, thou Eatest and
Drinkest the Body, and Bloudde of our Lord, then our Lord enters under they
roof.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We lay not in the manglinge of this Anciente Father, as matter of sufficient
evidence, but only as a great conjecture of your Corruption, referringe the
Judgment thereof unto the Reader. Certainly, M. Hardinge, we have good
cause many ways, to doubt your dealinge: but in nothing more, then in the
handlinge of the Fathers. Council. Aphrican. Cap. 105.
Ye remember, how wickedly Pope Zosimus, the better to color his Ambition,
long sithence corrupted the Nicene Council. Neither can ye forgeate, what
trifles, and fabulous Vanities ye have lately sent us abroad under the old
smooky names of Abdias, Leontius, Amphilochius, Hippolytus, and Clemens, whom
ye so solemnly call the Apostles Felovve. In these uncleanly conueiances, to
any wise man there can appear no simple meaning. Notwithstanding ye thought
it good policy, to deceive the world by any shifte, or shadow of Anciente
Fathers.

What Origin thought of the Words of Christ in the sixth Chapter of S. John,
Origin. in Leuiticum, Hom. 7.
it is easy to conjecture, by that he has written otherwheres. Upon the
Leuiticus he writes thus, Est and in Euangelio Litera, quae occidit: Si enim
secundum Literam sequaris illud, quod dictum est, Nisi Comederitis Carnem Filij
Hominis etc, ea Litera occidit: Even in the Gospel there is a Letter, that
kills: For where as Christ says, Unless ye eat the Fleashe of the Son
of Man etc, if ye take the same according to the Letter, that Letter kills.
This was Origens judgment of the Sacrament: and the same in those days was
counted Catholic.

Ye reply: Origin. in Exodum, Homi. 13.
Origin says, When ye take the Body of our Lord, ye keep it with all
wariness, and reverence, that no part thereof fall down. And again, When
thou take that Holy meat, Origin. in Diuersos Euangelij locos, Homi. 5.
then our Lord enters under thy roof. Both these places in my Former Reply
are fully answered. But what Catholic Doctrine, M. Hardinge, can ye pike out
of these words? What Transubstantiation? What Real Presence? What Accidents
without Subject? Ye will say, Origin calls the Sacrament Christ's Body. So
doothe Christ him self: so doothe Paul: so do all the Anciente Fathers:
because it is the sacrament of Christ's Body. Your own Gloss says, De
Consecra. Did. 2. Hoc est.
as it has benne often alleged, Vocatur Corpus Christi, id est, Significat
Corpus Christi: It is called the Body of Christ, that is to say, it
Signifies the Body of Christ. But the people, ye say, received it warily,
and with reverence. So do they now, even in those Churches, that you most
mislike withal.

He says further, When thou receiuest that Holy Meat, then our Lord enters
under thy roof. And what great matter think you to win hereby? Even in the
same place Origin says, Intrat etiam nunc Dominus sub rectum credentium
duplici Figura, vel more: Even now the Lord enters under the roufe of the
Faitheful after two manners, or sorts. For, when the Holy, and Godly
Bishops enter into your House, even then through them our Lord enters. Will
ye conclude hereof, that the Bishop is Transubstantiate into Christ? Or that
Christ is Really, and Substantially dwellinge in him? This is an Allegory, M.
Hardinge, or a Mystical kind of Speech, wherein, as you know, that Learned
Father was mutche delited. The Roof, that he means, is not Material, but
Spiritual: that is to say, not the Body of Man, but the Soul: Like as also
the Coming, or Entringe of Christ into the same is not Bodily, but only
Spiritual.

So S. Augustine says, Augustine. Quaestionum Euangeli. Li. 2. Ca. 33. August.
De Tempore, Sermo. 74.
Praedicant Christum, and cum annuntiando venire faciunt in exhausta fame
viscera Filij esurientis: They Preach Christ, and by Preachinge, cause him to
comme into the Bowelles of the hungry child, wasted with Famine. Likewise
again he says of the Centurion, Tecto non recipiebat Christum: Cord
recipiebat: quanto humilior, tanto capacior, tanto plenior: He received not
Christ into his house: he received him into his Heart: The more humble, the
more room had he to receive him, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 41.
and the fuller he was. So says Chrysostom, Qui vocant David cum Cythara,
intus Christum per ipsum vocant: They that call in David with his Harp, by
mean of him call in Christ. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 46.
Again he says, Christus aut suscipitur, aut occiditur apud nos. Si enim
credimus verbis eius, suscipimus eum, and generamus in nobis: Christ either is
received, or slain within us. For if we believe his Word, we receive him,
and begeate him within us. Hieronym. ad Paulam De obitu Blesillae.
In such sort S. Hierome writes unto Paula, Ad talem clemens ingreditur
Jesus, and dicit, Quid ploras? Non est mortua puella: sed dormit: Into such a
one Jesus enters mild, and gracious, and says, Why weepest thou? Thy
damesel is not Dead: but lies asleep.

This manner of speech, as I said before, is Spiritual, or Mystical: and may
not be taken according to the outward sound of the Letter. Images painted in
churches.
So says S. Hierome, Secundum Mysticos intellectus, quotidie Jesus ingreditur
in Templum Patris: According to the Mystical understanding, Hieronym. in
Matthew. li. 3. ca. 21. Origin. in Matthew. Tracta. 35.
Christ enters daily into the Temple of his Father. In this sense Origin
says, Christ enters into our House. Which phrase, writing upon S.
Mathevve, he expresses in plainer manner: Tradunt, and eijciunt ab anima sua
Saluatorem, and Verbum Veritatis, quod erat in eis: They betraie, and throw
forth our Saueour from out of their Soulet (as do al Apostates, and
Renegates, that deny the known Truth of God) and they betraie the Word of
Truth, that was within them.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 1. and 2.
It is a world to see, how welfauouredly, and how towardly, touching Religion,
these men agree with the Fathers, of whom they use to vaunte, they be their
own good.

The Old Council Eliberine made a Decree, that nothing, that is honored of
the people, should be painted in the Churches.

M. Hardinge.
The words of that prouincial Council be these: It is thought good, that
paintinges be not in the Chruche: Eliber. Council. Ca. 36.
that what is woorshipped or Adored, it be not painted on Walls. This express
prohition of paintinge, and that naught be painted in Church Walls, that is
woorshipped or Adored, may seem both to presuppose a former use of such
paintinges, and also to allow the other sort of images. Whether it do or
no, It forces not greatly.
it forces not greatly. The seventh general Council assembled at Nice against
the Imagebreakers, has not only allowed the Devout use of Images.
Devout use of Images commonly used in the Churches of Christen people: but
also condemned al those that throw them down, and maineteine y^ contrary
opinion. Now we are taught that a provincial Council ought to give place to a
General.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The paintinge of Images in Church walls was forebidden in the Council holden
at Eliberis, or Granado in Spain: Ergo, say you, such Images were used
before that Council. All this may well be granted without prejudice. But ye
see plainly, they were forebidden in that Council. One says, Ex malis
moribus bonae Leges ortae sunt: Of il manners came good Laws. Men used, ye
say, before y^ time to painte Images in Church walls. But this use was
naught. And therefore the Council Decreed against it: and that, as it may be
geathered by the words, for fear of Idolatry.

But you say, the Second General Nicene Council allowed well the devout use
of Images. And a General Council ought to take place before a Prouincial: For
that in a General Council there are many Bishops: in a Prouincial, there are
but few. Thus, I see, ye weigh your Religion, not by Truth, but by Company.
How be it, this Rule is very loose, and may soon deceive you.

Good Christian Reader, let no man beguile thee by the color of Councelles.
Read this Second Nicene Council throughout, if you be hable. Thou will say,
there was never any Assembly of Christian Bishops so vain, so peeuishe, so
wicked, so blasphemous, so unworthy in all respects to be called a Council.
The blessed Bishops there agreed together with one consent, that Images in
Churches are not only to be allowed, but also deuoutely, and reverently to be
honored, and that with the same Honor, that is dew to God him self. One of
them says, Venerandas Imagines recipio, and Adoro, and id perpetuo docebo: I
receive, and woorship the Reverend Images: Council. Nicenum 2. Action. 2.
and this will I teach, while I live. An other says, Sacras Imagines perfect
Adoro: qui vero secus consitentur, eos anathematizo: I do perfitely Adoure the
Holy Images: Adouring of Images.
and I accurse al them, that hold the contrary.

An other says, Council. Nicenum 2. Actio. 4.
Non sant duae Adorationes, sed vna, Ipsius Imaginis, and primi Exemplaris,
cuius est Imago: There be not two kinds of Adoration, but one, dew as well to
the Image, as to the Pattern of the Image. This Holy Council, ye say, decreed
against Imagebreakers. But the Counsel of God decrees against Image
vvoorshippers, and Imagemakers.

S. Augustine says, August. De Consensu Euangel. Lib. 1. Cap. 10.
Sic omnino errare meruerunt, qui Christum, and Apostolos eius, non in Sanctis
Codicibus, sed in Pictis Parietibus quaesierunt. Nec mirum si a Pingentibus
Fingentes decepti sunt: So were they worthy to be deceived, that sought,
Christ, and his Apostles, not in the Books of Holy Scripture, but in Painted
Walls. Neither may we marvel, if Painers by Painters were deceived.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 3.
The Old Father Epiphanius says, Epiphan. in Epistol. ad Johan. Episcop.
Hierosolymitan.
It is an horrible wickedness, and a Sin not to be suffered, for any man, to
set up any Picture in the Church of the Christians, yea, though it were the
Picture of Christ him self. Yet these men store al their Temples, and each
corner of them with painted, and carved Images, as though without them,
Religion were nothing woorthe.

M. Hardinge.
To that ye pretend to allege out of Epiphanius, we say, first, that although
he were of the mind you make him to be of, Epiphanius but one man.
and said, as you report of him, yet is he but one man, whose singular
opinion is not to be preferred before the Untruth. For the Anciente Fathers
make no mention of Images.
Judgment of al other so many excellent Fathers, and the determination of the
whole Church. Untruth For we report him truly, as shall appear.
Now in deed you misreporte Epiphanius. For he says not so, as your write.
He calls not the having of the Image of Christ, of any Saint in the
Church an horrible wickedness, or a sin not to be suffered: he has no
such words.

Secondly, what if we say, this place makes nothing at al against the use
of Images, and that Untruth For his words be plain, Imaginem, quasi
Christi, aut Sancti cuiusdam.
he speaks never a word against the Image of Christ, or his Saints in
the Church, but only against one particular Image, which he found hanginge
at a Church door in a village of Palestine called Anablatha? And seeing he A
childishe, and a vain shifte. For Epiphanius speaks directly against al
images.
speaks not generally against al Images, but against such as that was,
which there he notes by this special word, Istiusmodi Vela, vailes of this
sort: he gives us to understand that he misliked some quality or
circumstance of that one Image, and not reproved the Untruth. For Images then
were not commonly received in the Church.
common and received custom of the Church in having Images in due order. Now,
what circumstance that was, it depends of so many particularities. which
might happen either on the Images part, as it is most like, or on the peoples
part there inhabitant, and is so little declared by Epiphanius in that place,
that neither we can say any thing determinately thereof, nor ye should bring
such an obscure, and uncertain matter to the disproufe of a verity always
so well in the Church acknowledged and practiced.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O, how many, and how pretty shifts here be divised, if any would healpe, to
serve the purpose? One of the late Louanian Cleregie, for that he saw, these
words were clear, and might not be avoided by any Gloss, therefore be
thought it the wisest way, First to bring the Authority, Copus, Dialog. 5.
Page 692. Copus, Page 698.
and credit hereof in question, 2.
that Epiphanius never wrote any such Epistle: Next he says, The same
Epistle was never translated by S. Hierome. But, for as mutche as he saw, that
his folly herein was open, and easy to be controlled, Thirdely he says, that
the Image, Epiphanius rent the Image etc.
that Epiphanius rent in sunder, 3.
was not the Image, either of Christ, or of any Christian Saint, but the
Heathen Image of Iuppiter, or Hercules, 4.
or somma other Idol, he knows not what. Fourthly he says, The said Holy
Father Epiphanius was an Heretic, Copus, Page 702.
one of those, that were called Anthropomorphitae, Copus, Page 703.
whose error was, That God in his Divinity had the whole shape, and
proportion of a Man. How be it, this folly far passes all the rest. For it
behooved those Heretics most of al others, for defense of their error, to
maineteine Images. And yet it seems a very uncivil part, to condemn so
Reverend, and so Godly a Father of so gross an Heresy, without prouse: and
specially such a Father, as has so learnedly written against al Heresies.
Fifthly he says, Copus. Page 703.
even as M. Hardinge here says, 5.
Epiphanius was but a man, and one man, and his Judgment singular, and
therefore the less to be esteemed. Last of al, Copus, Page 706. 707.
he says, 6.
The same Holy Father Epiphanius was a Jew: and being a Christian, and a
Reverend Father, and a Christian Bishop, yet notwithstanding maineteined the
Religion of the Jews, and therefore rent in sunder the Image of Christ,
Simeon Metaphrastes.
in despite of Christ. And for proof hereof, he allegeth Simeon Metaphrastes,
a Doctoure as wise as him self.

M. Hardinge, for that he imagined, these shifts were very unsavory, and
would hardly serve, therefore has divised to conueigh him self out sum
other way. First he says, We falsiste this Holy Father, and allege his
words otherwise, then they be. Secondely he says, It was not the Image of
Christ, that Epiphanius found painted in the Vele, but sum other pretty
thing, he knows not what. Lastely he says, Epiphaniusr reproves not
generally al such Veles, so painted, but only that one Vele, that he found.

For trial hereof, Epiphanius ad Johan. Hierosolymitan. Apud Hierony. Tom. 2.
I refer me self to ye Original. The words thereof be these: Inueni ibi
velum pendens in foribus eiusdem Ecclesiae tinctum, atque depictum, and habens
Imaginem, quasi Christi, aut Sa^cti cuiusdam. Non enim satis memini, cuius
Imago fuerit. Cum ergo hoc vidissem in Ecclesia Christi, contra Authoritatem
Scripturarum, Hominis pendere Imaginem, scidi illud: and magis dedi consilium
Custodibus eiusdem loci, vt pauperem mortuum eo obuoluerent, and efferrent etc.
Quaeso, vt iubeas Presbyteros eiudem loci praecipere, in Ecclesia Christi
istiusmodi Vela, quae contra Religionem nostram veniunt, non appendi: Decet
enim honestatem tuam hanc magis habere sollicitudinem, vt crupulositatem
tollat, quae indigna est Ecclesia Christi, and populis, qui tibi crediti sunt:
I found there a Vele hanginge at the entry of the Church, stained, and
painted, and having the Image, as it were, of Christ, or of sum Saint.
For, whose Picture it was in deed, I do not remember. Therefore, when I saw
the Image of a man to hang in the Church of Christ, contrary to the
commandment of the Scriptures, I tare it in sunder: and gave counsel to the
Wardens of that Church, that they should wind, and bury sum poor body in
it etc. I beseech you, charge the Priests of that place, that they command,
that such Veles, as be contrary to our Religion, be no more hanged up in the
Church of Christ. It behooves your reverence to have care hereof, that this
Superstition, unmeet for the Church of Christ, and unmeet for the people to
thee committed, be removed. Now, judge you, M. Hardinge, wherein we have
falsified this Learned Fathers words. You say, He speaks not one word
against the Image of Christ, or his Saints. I beseech you then, against
what other Image speaks he? Habens Imaginem, quasi Christi, vel Sancti
cuiusdam.
Epiphanius says plainly, It had the Image, as it were, of Christ, or of
sum Saint: You say, He found fault with that Vele only, and not with
any other. Once again, I beseech you, tell us, what had the Image of
Christ, or of his Saints offended Epiphanius, more then other Images? If the
Image of Christ may not be suffered in the Church of Christ, what Image
then may be suffered? What cause of difference can you imagine, that any other
Veles should be allowed rather, Images in churches.
then this? Your answer is this, We cannot say any thing determinately
thereof. Whereby it appears, ye would feign say somewhat, if ye wiste what.
Yet must we be ouerruled by all and every your determinations, yea, although
you your self confess, ye can determinately determine nothing.

Notwithstanding, the Anciente Fathers of the Church have long sithence
determinately, Lactant. Lib. 2. Ca. 19.
and plainly judged against you. Lactantius says in plain words: Non est
dubium, quin Religio nulla sit, vbicunque Simulachrum est: Out of al doubt,
there is no Religion, where so ever there is an Image. Tertullian says,
Tertullian. De Idololatria.
Idolum tam fieri, quam coli Deus prohibet. Quanto' praecedit, vt fiat, quod
coli possit, tanto prius est, ne fiat, si coli non licet. Facio, ait quidam,
sed non colo: quasi ob aliquam causam colere non audeat, nisi ob quam and
facere non debeat: Scilicet, ob Dei offensam vtrobique. Imo tu colis, qui facis
vt coli possit: God has forebidden an Image, or an Idol, as well to be made,
as to be woorshipped. As far as making goes before woorshippinge, so far is
it before, that the thing be not made, that may not be woorshipped. Sum man
will say, I make it: but I woorship it not: As though he durst not to woorship
it for any other cause, but only for the same cause, for which he ought not
to make it. I mean both ways for Gods displeasure. Nay rather, thou
woorshippest the Image, that geuest the cause, for others to woorship it.
Therefore S. Augustine, speakinge of the Image of God the Father, August. De
Fide and Symbolo. Ca. 7.
says thus, Tale simulachrum Deo fingere, nefarium est: To divise such an
Image for God, it is abominable.

Theodorus the Bishop of Ancyra says, Sanctorum Imagines, and Species ex
Materialibus coloribus formati minime decorum puramus. Citatur in Council.
Nicen. 2. Action. 6.
Manifestum enim est, quod vana sit huiusmodi cogitatio, and Diabolicae
deceptionis inuentum: We think it not conueniente, to Painte the Images of
Saints with Material, or Earthly colors. For it is evident, that this is a
vain Imagination, and the procuremente of the deceitefulnesse of the Devil.

To like yourpose writes Epiphanius, Estote memores, dilecti Filij, ne in
Ecclesias Imagines inferatis, neque in Sanctorum Coemiterijs eas statuatis. Sed
perpetuo circumferte Deum in cordibus vestris. Quin etiam neque in domo communi
tolerentur. Non enim fas est, Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per
occupationem mentis: My dear Children, be ye mindeful, that ye bring no
Images into the Churches, and that ye erecte up none at the burialles of the
Saints. But evermore carry God in your Hearts. Nay, suffer not Images to be,
no not in your private Houses. For it is not lawful, to lead a Christian man
by his eyes, but rather by the study, or exercise of his mind.

For this cause Epiphanius says, The Superstition of Images is unfit for
the Church of Christ.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 4.
The old Fathers Origene, Origin. in Leui. Ca. 16.
and Chrysostom exhort the People to read the Scriptures, Chrysostom. in
Matthae. Homil. 2. Idem in Ioha^. 31.
to buy them Books, to reason at home bitwixte them selves of Divine matters:
VViues with their Husbands, and Parents with their Children: These men
condemn the Scriptures, as dead Elements, and, asmutche as ever they may,
bar the People from them.

M. Hardinge.
Untruth. For the whole hereof is true: and no part false.
Partly it is true, partly false, that you say. Origin exhorts all, to
resort to the Churches in the Holy days, Homil 9. in Leuit. Cap. 16.
and there to hear the words of God: and thereof afterward to think
earnestly, and to meditate on the Law of God, and to exercise their minds in
it day and night, in the way, in their house, in their bed, and when they
rise. This hold we withal, and be desirous, the Ovaine excuse. Many of your
people never hear Sermon in all there lives.
people bear away that the true and Godly Preachers teach them in the
Church, Readinge of the Scriptures
and that they think of it, and put it in daily practice of life. For else to
what serves all our Preachinge?

Chrysostom Hom. 2. in Math. speaks against them, which contemned the
Scriptures, and said, they were no Monks, but had wives and Children, and
care of householde. As though it perteined not to married men to read any part
thereof, but to Monks only.

If in our time the people might be induced to read the Holy Scriptures, with
such minds, for such causes, to such intents and purposes only, as
Chrysostom requires: God forbid, we should by any means stay them
therefrom. M. Hardinges favorable opinion of the people.
But consideringe the manner of our time, and calling to due examination the
curiosity, the temeritie, the irreverence, the contempt of all holy things,
that now all men may epsy in the people: if we think it not good they be
admitted to the readinge of the Scriptures freely and without any limitation,
how so ever you and your fellows judge of us, we doubt not of the account, we
have to make of that our meaning before our Lords dreadful seat of
judgment. Now to conclude, we tell you, that you have misreported both
Chrysostom, and specially Origin. For how so ever they speak of the readinge,
and meditation of the Scriptures, for amendment of life, verily in the places
by you quoted, Manifest untruth. Read the Answer.
they exhort not the people to reason, and dispute of divine matters among
them selves, specially the husbands with their wives, the parents with their
children, as you say they do.

The B. of Sarisburie.
For as mutche as ye say, part hereof is true, and part false, I trust, ye
will geeue us leave freely to use the Truth, until ye shall find your self
better hable to prove the Falshedde. It seems not greatly to mislike you,
that the people have sum little liberty, to read sum such part of the
Scriptures, as you may best spare them, for the orderinge of their lives.
Whereby it appears, that for quietinge of their Consciences in matters of
Religion, and causes of Truth, ye think it best, they read nothing. And
this, ye say, ye are hable to answer before the dreadful seat of Gods
Judgment. Touching the Truth hereof, to say so mutche, as might be said,
it would require great waste of time. S. Augustine says, Si desit, August.
De Ciuita. Li. 11. Ca. 2. Hieronym. ad Demetriad. De Virginita tuenda.
aut ignoretur, qua eundum fit, quid prodest nosse, quo eundum fit? If ye have
not, or know not, what way to go, August. De Tempore, Sermo. 55.
what shall it profit you to know, whither to go? S. Hierome says, Vt maius
est, voluntatem Domini facere, quam nosse, ita prius est nosse, quam facere.
Illud Merito praecedit: Hoc ordine: As it is more, to do the will of our Lord,
then to know it: so the Knowledge of the same goes before the Dooinge. In
goodness, Dooinge goes before: in order, Knowinge. Again S. Augustine
says, Si Scripturas Diuinas aut non legimus ipsi, aut legentes alios non
libenter audimus, ipsa nobis medicamenta conuertuntur in vulnera: and inde
habebimus Iudicium, vnde potuimus habere remedium: If we either read not the
Scriptures our selves, or be not desirous to hear others read them, then are
our Medicines turned into wounds: and then, where we might have had
remedy, we shall have Judgment. Such saieinges are common, and ordinary
in S. Chrysostom. Thus he says, Chrysostom. in Genesim, Hom. 6.
Librum Diuinum accipiat aliquis in manum: conuocatisque proximis, per Diuina
eloquia riget and suam mentem, and conuenientium: vt sic Diabolicas insidias
effugere valeamus: Let one of you take in hand the Holy Book: and let him call
his Neighbors about him: and by the Heavenly words let him water, and
refreashe both their minds, Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 10.
and also his own. Again he says, Poterimus and domi versantes, ante, and
post Conuiuium, acceptis in manus Diuinis Libris, vtilitatem inde capere, and
Spiritualem Cibum animae praebere. Being at home, we may both before, and
after Meat, take the Holy Books in hand, and thereof receive great profit,
Chrysostom. in Genes. Homil. 29.
and Minister spiritual food unto our soul. And again, Etiam domi vacemus
Diuinarum Scripturarum Lectioni: Even when we be at home, let us bestow our
time in readinge the Scriptures.

Origin says, Vtinam omnes faceremus illud, quod Scriptum est, Scrutamini
Scripturas: VVoulde God we would al do, accordingely as it is written,
Search the Scriptures. Origin. in Esatam, Homil. 2.


But ye say, we have misreported both Chrysostom, and Origin. For they
exhort not the people ( as you say) to reason of Divine matters emonge them
selves, specially the Husbands with their VViues, etc. Whether of us both
makes truer report, let us be tried by Chrysostom. Chrysostom. in Johan.
Homil. 2. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homi. 78.
Thus he says, Neque in hoc tantum consessu, sed domi quoque, Vir cum Vxore,
Pater cum Filio, inuicem de his frequenter loquantur: and vltro, citroque suam
and ferant, and inquirant sententiam: Velintque hanc probarissimam inducere
consuetudinem: Hearken not hereto only here in the Church, but also at home,
let the Husband with the Wife, let the Father with the Child, talk together
of these Matters: and, both to, and fro, let them both enquire, and geeue
their Judgments: And, would God they would begin this good Custom.

Here have you, M. Hardinge, the Husband communinge of Divine matters with his
Wife: and the Father with his Child. Therefore so unadvisedly to say, we
have misreported this Holy Father, it was of your part a misreporte.

Likewise S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Episit. ad Coloss. Ca. 3. In illud:
Verbum Dei habitet in vobis. Hieronym. in psalm. 133.
Hic ostenditur, verbum Christi, non suffiele^ter, sed abundanter, etiam Laicos
habere debere: and docere se inuicem, vel monere: Here we are ought, that even
the Lay menue ought to have the Word of God, not only sufficiently, but
also obundantly: and one to instruct, and to warn an other, Again he says,
Solent and Viri, solent and Monachi, solent and Mulierculae hoc inter se habere
certamen, vt plures ediscant Scripturas: Both Married men, and Monks, and
Wives, commonly have this contention emonge themselves, who may learn most
Scriptures.

To conclude, Theodoretus De Corrigen. Graecor. affectib. li. 5.
Theodoretus says thus, Passim videas nostra dogmata non ab ijs solum teneri
etc. Ye may commonly see, that our Doctrine is known, not only of them, that
are the Doctors of the Church, and the Masters of the people, but also even
of the Tailers, and Smithes, and VVeauers, and of al Artificers: Yea, and
further also of VVeemen: and that, not only of them, that be Learned, but also
of Labouringe VVeemen, and Sevvsters, and Servants, and Handemaides. Neither
only the Citizens, De Diuina Trinitate, rerumque omnium Creatione dissertantes.
but also the Countriefolkes do very well understand the same. Ye may find,
yea, even the very Dichers, and Deluers, and Covvheardes, and Gardiners
Disputinge of the Holy Trinity, and of the Creation of al things.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 4. and 5.
The Ancient Fathers, Cypria, Epis. 11. Lib. 1.
Cyprian, Epiphanius, and Hierome say, for one, who perchance has made a
Vow, Epiphan. contra Apostolicos, haeres. 61.
to lead a sole life, and afterward lives vnchastely, and cannot quench the
flames of lust, Hieronym. ad Demetriadem. August. De Bono viduita. Ca. 10.
it is better to marry a Wife, and to live honestly in wedlock. And the Old
Father Augustine judges, the self same Marriage to be good and perfect, and
that it ought not to be broken again. These men, if a man have once bound
him self by a Vow, though afterward he burn, keep queanes, and defile him
self with never so sinful, and desperate a life, yet they suffer not that
person to marry a Wife: or, if he chance to marry, they allow it not for
Marriage. And they commonly teach, It is mutche better, and more Godly to
keep a Concubine, or an Harlotte, then to live in that kind of Marriage.

The Old Father S. Augustine complained of the Multitude of vain Ceremonies,
Augustine. ad Ianuar. Epist. 118.
wherewith he even then saw men's minds and Consciences ouercharged: These
men, as though God regarded nothing else but their Ceremonies, have so out of
measure increased them, that there is now almost none other thing leafte in
their Churches, and places of prayer.

The B. of Sarisburie.
All that M. Hardinge has here to say, In the 2. Darte. 8. Chapter, 1.
Division: and, 2. Part. 17. Chap. 1. Division.
has benne both alleged, and also fully answered before in a place more
conueniente.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 5.
Again, that Old Father S. Augustine denies it to be lawful for a Monk, to
spend his time slouthfully in Idleness, and, under a pretensed, and
countrefeite Holiness, to live al upon others. And who so thus lives, the
Old Father Apollonius likeneth him to a Thief. These men have (I wot not
whether to name them Droues, or Heardes of Monks) who for all that they do
nothing, nor yet once intend to bear any show of Holiness, yet live they
not only upon others, but also riot lauishly of other folks labors.

M. Hardinge.
But S. Augustine calls it vvoorse then Idleness.
We do not maintain, that a Monk should live idly. But we reprove you
for accountinge the Service of God Idleness. Neither is that the thing only
which ye can allege in Defense of that your Brethren have done to
Monasteries in the Countries where your Gospel proceeds. For ye have removed
not only such Monks as were proved idle, but all Monks generally, that
would serve God according to that vow, which they made under the As though
Christ's Rule were lost, or were not sufficient.
approved rule of S. Benedicts, S. Augustine, S. Francis, S. Dominicke, or of
any other. You say, we have Droues and Heardes of Monks, thereby
signifieinge, they are beasts rather then men: Whereas S. Augustine calls
them Seruos Dei, the Servants of God, in that very work, which you allege.

Since that our Monks (I mean all religious men) served the Altar, and were
appointed to Preach, Minister the Sacraments, and bestow their time in Prayer
for their own infirmities, and for the Sins of the people: Untruth, plain
contrary to S. Augustine.
by the doctrine of S. Augustine, De opere Monachor. Cap. ar.
they are not bound to labor, as they, who for so winge spiritual things to
the behofe of others, may reap their temporal things to their own necessary
sustenance.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Monks, ye say, be Gods Servants: and Monks life is the Service of God.
And herein ye use such earnest talk, August. De Opere Monachor. Ca. 12.
as though, if the whole generation of Monks were removed, God should sit
without Service. In deed S. Augustine shewinge us, August. De Sermon Domi. in
Monte.
what good Service the Monks of his time did unto God, Eodem loco. Augustine.
De Opere Monachor. Ca 22.
says thus: Isti non Deo seruiunt, sed suo ventri: These Monks serve not
God: they serve their bellies. Again he says, lactantia ^o est periculosior,
quo sub nomine ^eruitutis Dei decipit: Hypocrisy, or vountinge of Holiness is
the more dangerous, for that it deceives us under the name of Gods Service.
Again he says, Fallit dolosa imagine Sanctitatis: It deceives us by the
deceiteful countenance, or Image of Holinesse^ Again, touching these Monks,
he says, Non apparet, vtrum ex proposito Seruitutis Dei venerint, an vita^
inopem, and laboriosam fugientes, vacui pasci, and vestirl voluerint: We
cannot tell, whether they became Monks for purpose to serve God, or else being
weary of their poor, Monks. Gods Service.
and paineful Life, were rather desirous to be feadde, and clothed dooinge
nothing. And therefore he calls the Almouse, that they geatte, Sumptus
lucrosae egestatis: Augustine. De Opere Mona^hor. Ca. 28.
and Simulatae pretium Sanctitatis: The charges of gaineful poverty: and the
price of feined Holiness. Again he says, Venalem circumferunt Hypocrisim:
They carry their Hypocrisy about to sale.

S. Hilarie speakinge of the same kind of Holy People, Augustine. De Opere
Monachor. Ca. 31.
says thus, Conuiuia sub obtentu Religionis sumptuosa sectantur. Hilari. in
psalmum. 52.
Apothecas suas inutili Religiosoru^ obsequio defendunt: de quibus Scriptum
est, Comedentes domos viduarum. Etia^si Dominum se credant inuocare, tamen
audient, quod est in Euangelio, Scimus quia peccatores Deus non audit: Under
the color of Holiness, they seek for deinty and costely fare: They
maineteine their stoarehouses by the unprofitable service of Religious people:
Matthae. 23.
of whom it is written, They devour up poor Widow houses. Although they
think, they serve God, yet the same answer shall be made them, that is written
in the Gospel, John. 9.
We know that God geeueth no ear to Sinners. Upon these words of the
Gospel, Luke. 19.
Selle al, that thou haste, and geeue it to the poor, and comme, and follow
me, Matthae. 18.
Your very Ordinary Gloss says thus, Been operando: non mendicando: Follow
me in well dooinge: nor in begginge.

We grant, y^ Service of God may not rightly be called Idleness. But what
if S. Bernarde say of your Monks, Bernardus in Cantica Cantl. Hieronym. ad
Eustochium.
Serui Christi, seruiunt Antichristo: They pretend Christ's Service, and serve
Antichriste. For where did God ever require you to do such Service? S.
Hierome says of them, In statu seruili, and abiectionis esse abhorrent.
Laborare recusant prae pigritia: Mendicare erubescunt validi: quia nihil
daretur eis: They are loathe to be abiectes, and in servile state. For Idleness
they will not labor: And to beg they are asbamed. For, being valiant, and
lusty people, noman would give them any thing. Augustine. De Opere Monachor.
Ca 22.
Likewise says S. Augustine, Tanquam Conseruatricem Euangelij praedicant
pigritiem: Augustine. eodem Capite.
They speak mutche of their Idleness, as if it were the Keep, and Castle of
the Gospel. Again he faith, Contingit eis, quod in viduis iunioribus
indisciplinatis cauendum Apostolus dicit: Simul and otiosae esse discunt: non
solum autem o tiosae, sed and curiosae, and verbosae, loquentes quae non
oportet: The same thing happens unto them, that S. Paul speaks of young
Widows living out of order: They learn to be idle: and not only idle, but
also curtous, and full of words, speakinge su^che things, as are not meet.
Thus ye see, M. Hardinge, that this pretense, and color of Gods Service
has oftentimes of the Anciente Fathers benne called Idleness.

Ye say, Monks now Serve the Aultare, and Minister Sacraments: and therefore
are not bound to Bodily labor. This is a fair color to shadow their
Idleness. For who ever hade Monks to Serve the Aultare: or gave them
Authority to Minister Sacraments? What Doctor? What Father? What Anciente
Council? In old times it was not lawful for a Monk to be a Priest. S.
Gregory says, Nemo potest Ecclesiasticis Officijs deseruire, 16. Quaestion.
1. Nemo.
and in Monastica Regula ordinate persistere: No man can serve the
Ecclesiastical Office, and orderly keep the Rule of Monkerie. 16. Quaestion 1.
Monachus.
And S. Hierome says, 16 Quast. 1. Alia causa.
Monachus, non Docentis, sed Plangentis habet officium: A Monks office is, not
to Preach, but to Mourn. Glossa.
Again he says, Alia causa est Monachi, alia Clerici: Clerici Oues pascunt:
Ego Pascor: The state of a Monk is one thing, and the state of a Priest is
an other. Priests Feed the Flock: I (being a Monk) must be fed.
Whereupon the Gloss says, Ego Pascor Sacramentis ipsorum: I am fed with the
Sacraments of the Priests. Whereby it is euidente, that the Monk him self
had no Authority, to Minister Sacraments, no not so mutche as privately to
him self. But, touching Bodily labor, S. Hierome says, Hieronymus ad
Rusticum: Et in vita Hilarionis.
This was holden as a Law emonge the Monks in Aegypte, that who so would not
labor, should not eat.

And S. Augustine says, Monks. Bodily labor.
as it is alleged in his name, Nihil Dei Seruis peius est otiositate. Augustine.
ad Fratres in Eremo. Sermo. 1. Augustine. De Opere Monac^oar. Ca. 23.
Operentur ergo in nomine Domini: Unto the Servants of God there is nothing
worse then Idleness. Let them work therefore in the name of our Lord.

Of such Idle Monks S. Augustine says, Isti manus otiosas, and repositoria
plena habere volunt: These Monks will have Idle hands, and full Cellers. A
learned Father was woonte to say, by the report of Socrates, A Monk, that
labo^reth not with his hands, may be resembled unto a Thief. S. Bernarde
says, Restat, vt sint in laboribus Daemonum, qui in laboribus hominum non
fuerunt: They must needs be in the travails of Devils, Historia Tripartita,
Lib. 8. Ca. 1. Bernardus in Psalm. 72. Augustine. De Opere Monachor. Ca. 28.
that were not in the travails of men.

Of these S. Augustine says, Diabolus tam multos Hypocritas sub habitu
Monachorum vsquequaque dispersit: Such a number of Hypocrites has the Devil
scattered abroad every where, under the color of Monks.

The first Suppressours of Monasteries within this Realm, in our memory,
were two of your dearest friends, Cardinal VVoulsee, and Doctoure Fisher, the
Bishop of Rochester: Theodoretus, Lib. 4. Cap. 11. (...)
either of them well warranted thereto by the Authority of the Pope. Long
before that time, the Godly Learned Bishop Letoius ouerthrewe, and burnte the
Messalians Monasteries, and said they were Dens of Thieves: and, as
Theodoretus reports, chased the VVouues away from the Fold.

Of late years, sundry of the Cardinals of Rome, amongst whom also was
Cardinal Poole, being specially appointed in Commission by Pope Paulus 3. to
view the disorders, and deformities of the Church, returned their answer in
this sort: Council. Tomo. 3. Con. Delectorum Cardinali. Page 822.
Alius abusus corrigendus est in Ordinibus Religiosorum: quod adeo multi
deformati sunt, vt magno sint scandalo Saecularibus, exemplo'que plurimum
noceant. Conuentuales ordines abolendos esse putamus omnes: An other Abuse
there is to be Reformed in the Orders of Monks, and Freers. For many of them
are so vile, that they are a shame unto the Se^^lares: and with their example
do mutche il. As for Conuentual orders, we think it good, they be al
abolished.

This, M. Hardinge, was the Judgment of your own friends. And therefore ye
have the less cause to be offended with the suppressinge of Abbeys. For your
own dear Catholic Fathers partly have suppressed the^ them selves, and
partly have consented unto the same. Council. Tom. 2. Page 1000. Operis
Tripart. Li. 3. Cap. 3.
In the Book called Opus Tripartitum, joined unto the Council of Laterane, it
is written thus: Totus fere Mundus obloquitur, and Scandalizatur de tanta
multitudine Religiosorum Pauperum, qui introierunt in Mundum: VVelneare the
whole world cries against, and is offended for so great a multitude of
begginge Monks, and Freeres, that are entered into the World.

Therefore was this Decree published in the Council of Laterane, Council.
Lateran. Sub Innocen. 3. Ca. 13.
Ne nimia Religiosorum diuersitas graue^ in Ecclesia^ Dei offensionem inducat,
firmiter prohibemus, ne quis de coetero Nouam Religionem inueniat: Lest over
great diversity of Religious folk bring great offense into the Church of
God, we do earnestly forbid, that from hencefoorthe no man divise any New
Religion. Damasus, speakinge of the order of them, Did 68. Chorepiscopi.
that were called Chorepiscopi, says thus, Vnde iste Tertius Ordo
processerit, ignoramus: and quod ratione caret, extirpare necesse est: From
whence this Third Order is comme, we cannot tell. And the thing that wants
reason, must needs be taken up by the roots.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 6.
The Old Council at Rome decreed, Council. Romans ca. 3.
that no man should comme to the Service said by a Priest well known to keep
a Concubine. These men let Concubines to ferme to their Priests, and yet
constreigne men by force, A Priest keepinge a Co^cubine
against their will, to hear their cursed paltry Service.

M. Hardinge.
Untruth. For it is easy to be found.
We find no such Canon in the old Roman Councels. Did 25. Ca. Nullus.
Your allegations noted in the margent be false for the more part, as your
Doctrine is. Yet find we that Nicolaus and Alexander Popes have willed no man
to hear the Mass of that Priest, whom he knows undoubtedly to keep a
Concubin^. Such wise men be the Proctours of filthiness.
But wise men in the Law think only that to be an undoubted knowledge, when
either the judge has by open sentence published such a man to keep a
Concubine, or the fact it self is notorious.

Untruth, notorious, and manifest to the world. The B. of Argentine has a
Florene by the year of every Priest, that keeps a Concubine: and if she
bear a child, he has four.
Whereas you say, we let Concubines out to ferme to our Priests, it is meet
for you to say it, because it is false and slanderous. Untruth. Read the
Answer.
Neither was ever any man, or at this day is driven to hear his Mass, who
keeps a Concubine. For if he will take upon him to prove any Priest to keep a
Concubine, him self non being so infamous, as he may not stand in
judgment, it is certain, he shall be heard. If he cannot prove it, then is
not he out of doubt by order of Law, that this Priest keeps a Concubine,
and therefore he is bound, as other Christian people be, to hear his Mass.
Untruth. For Pope Hildebrande says, Benedictio eoru^ vertitur in
maledictionem. Concit. Roman. sub Nicolao. 1. Council. To. 2. pa. 795. Anno,
880. Zacharias pp. in Epist. ad Bonifa. Dis. 40. Non nos, In Glossa.
Which is no sacrilege as your sacrilegious heart thinks, and blasphemous
tongue utters, but the blessed and holy sacrifice, which Christ made at his
last Supper.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If it had pleased you, better to have perused your Books, ye might soon
have found these self same words in the Council of Rome, holden there under
Pope Nicolas the First: Which, although it be not so old, as may be compared
with y^ Ancient Fathers Councelles, yet it is elder then sum parts, and
branches of your New Religion. To like purpose writes Pope Zachary, Quis
sapiens iudicabit, eos esse Sacerdotes, qui nec a Fornicationibus abstinent?
What wise man will reckon them to be Priests, that abstain not so mutche as
from Fornication? If no wise man can judge them to be Priests, what man then
is he, that will authorize them to Minister Sacraments?

Now of the other side, M. Hardinge, consider you the Common, and ordinary
practice of your Church of Rome. First, touching the Pope him self, your
Gloss says, Facta Papae excusantur, vt Adulterium Jacob: The Popes dooinges (
or Aduouteries) are excused, as the Aduouterie of Jacob. And again, Communiter
dicitur, quo'd pro Simplici Fornicatione quis deponi non debet: cum pauci sine
illo vitio inueniantur: It is commonly said, that a man may not be deposed,
or deprived for Simple Fornication: Did. 81. Maximianus, In Gloss. Did 32.
Nullus.
For as mutche as few ( Priests) be found without that fault.

Again, whereas the words of the Decree are these, Nullus audiat Missam
Presbyte^, quem scit Concubinam indubitanter habere: Let noman hear the Mass
of that ^neste, whom he undoubtedly knows to keep a Concubine, The Close
upon the same says thus, Hic Canon quandoque fuit latae Sententiae: Sed hodie
non est: This Decree in old times stood as a ruled case: but now is it not
so. Ideo licet notoria sit Fornicatio, tamen non est propter eam abstinendum ab
officijs Presbyterorum: And therefore, although the Fornication be notoriously
known, yet may we not therefore refrain from the Service of the Priest.

Hereunto very well agreethe the Gloss upon Othoes Legantines: De Concubinis
Clericor. remouendis. Licet ad profligandum.
Quid ergo si Sacerdos mueniatur coire cum muliere? Respondeo: Adhuc dicitur
occultu^: nec propter hoc debet cum vitare in publico, nisi aliter Conuincatur:
What if a man find the Priest in the m^uoure with a woman? I answer: All that
notwithstanding, the fault is pr^^e. Neither may a man therefore aouid y^
Priests Service, unless he be otherwise co^^cted.

And again, in the same Gloss upon these words, Qui public detinet
Concubinas: it is noted thus, Glossa in cu^dem titulum.
Tu dic Public, quando multitudini se patere non expauet. Secus ergo, si
secret intra domum propriam, vel alienam detineat hanc Concubinam. Nam tunc
poenam huius Constitutionis non incurret. A Priest keepinge a Co^cubine
Dom us enim rem secretam, non au^t publicam denotat: By this word Openly,
understand thou, If he be not afraid, lest the world epsy him. Therefore it
is otherwise, if he keep the same Concubine secretly, whether it be in his
own house, or in sum other man's. For then he is not within the danger of
this Law. For a house betokens a thing to be Secret, and not open.

By this favorable, and gentle Construction, unless the Priest keep his
woman openly in the Marketplace, he is without al danger of Laws, and
Canons: and we may not refrain to hear his Service.

It is no Sacrilege, you say, but the Blessed, and Holy Sacrifice. Hereto I
may answer with the words of S. Augustine: Augusti De Ciuitat. Li. 2. Ca 4.
Quae sunt Sacrilegia, si illa erant Sacra? Aut quae Inquinatio, si illa
Lauatio? What is Sacrilege, if this be a Sacrifice? Or, what is staininge, if
this be wasshinge? Verily your own Pope Hildebrande hereof writes thus: Did.
81. Si qui.
Imperamus vobis, ne eorum Officia, Orationes, and Cu^tus audiatis Quia
Benedictio ^orum vertitur in Maledictionem, and Oration in Peccatum: Testante
Domino per Propheram, Maledicam Benedictionibus vestris. Qui vero huic
Saluberrimo praecepto obedire noluerint, Idololatriae poena^ incurrent: We
command you, that you hear neither their Offices, nor thire Prayers, nor
their Service. For their Blessinge is turned into Cursinge, and their Prayer
into Sin: As the Lord him self witnesses by the Prophet: I will curse your
Blessings, says the Lord. And who so ever will not obeie this wholesome
Commandment, he shall fall into the pain of Idolatry. Judge ye now, M.
Hardinge, whether this be Sacrilege, as we say: or, as you say, a Blessed,
and an Holy Sacrifice.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 7.
The Old Canons of the Apostles command, that Bishop to be removed from his
Office, which will both supply the place of a Civil Magistrate, and also of
an Ecclesiastical person. These men for all that, both do, and will needs
serve both places. Nay rather, the one office, which they ought chiefly to
execute, they once touch not: and yet no body commands them to be displaced.

M. Hardinge.
If we ought to stick at any one certain worldely business, Untruth impudente
above measure. For it was not unseemly for Christ's Apostles to be married.
which may seem unseemly for a Bishop or a Priest, as too base for his
dignity, and too much hinderance to his vocation, undoubtedly marriage is of
that sort. 1. Cor. 7.
Whom may we better credit for this case, then S. Paul? S. Paul speaks
thus, not only of Priests, but also of every private Christian man.
He that is without a wife (says he) is careful for the things that be of our
Lord, how he may please God. But he that is coupled with a wife, is careful
about the things, which are of the world, and is divided.

But with our fieashely Ministers, this business is not fleashely, and worldly
at al, but altogether spiritual, because their spirit is wholly occupied
therein.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Christ thought so little hinderance to be in Marriage toward the Preaching
of the Gospel, Ambro. 2. Cor. 11.
that of his twelve Apostles he chose eleven, that were married. So S. Ambrose
says, as it is alleged before: Apostoli omnes, exceptis Iohanne, and Paulo,
Vxores habuerunt: All the Apostles had Wines, sauinge only S. John, and S.
Paul.

But ye say, With our fleashely Ministers* this business is not fleashely,
but altogether Spiritual: because: their Sprite is wholly occupied therein. It
pitieth me, M. Hardinge, to see you so vainly to be stowe your Spiritual
Cogitations. Matrimony is Gods ordinance. Matrimony chaste, and pure.
God never ordained Man to live in villainy, and filthiness. S. Paul says,
Hebrae. 13.
Matrimony is honorable in all men ( as well in Priests, as in others) and
the bed undefiled. But Aduouterers, and Fornicatours the Lord him self vvil
judge. Roman. 8.
And again, writing unto the Married people of Rome, he says, Vos non estis
in Carne, sed in Spiritu: You are not in the Fleashe, but in the Sprite. They
were Married, and lived in the Laws of Marriage: Yet S. Paul says, They
were not in the Fleashe, but in the Sprite.

S. Augustine says, August. De Bono Coniugali. Ca. 11 Origin. in Epist. ad
Roma. Ca* 12.
Sancta sunt etiam Corpora Coniugatorum, Fidem sibi, and Domino seruantium: The
Bodies of married people, keeping faith both to them selves, did to the Lord,
^^e Clean, and Holy. Origin says, Non solum virgins, aut Contine^tes,
offerunt Copora sua Hostiam Sanctam: Not only Virgins, or others that live in
Single Life ( but also Married folks) offer up their Bodies a Holy Sacrifice.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom ad Hebrae. Hom. 57.
Sanctificationem Paulus vocat Pudicitiam, and Temperantiam Coniugalem: The
honest Chastity, and Temperance, that is bitweene Man, and Wife, S. Paul
calls Holiness. And again, Carent Culpa Nuptiae, nec a Virtute quicquam
prohibent^ Marriage is void of fault: and is no hinderance unto virtue.

Hereof we have spoken before more at large. But touching the Chaste life of
your Spiritual Cleregie, M. Hardinge, as sundry your own friends have
recorded, and as the whole world is well hable to judge, it is nothing else,
but a Spiritual filthiness.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 8.
The Old Council of Gangra commands, that none should make such
difference bitweene an Unmarried Priest, and a Married Priest, as to think
the one more holy, then the other for Single Life's sake. These men put such
a difference bitweene them, that they straight way think al their Holy
Service to be defiled, if it be done by a good, and honest man, that has a
Wife.

M. Hardinge.
It was not for your purpose, Sirs, to use true dealinge, and to allege the
words as they are in that old Council. For they speak of an Untruth,
fond, and peeui^he. For this word, External, is not once named in all that
Counsel.
external Sacrifice, The Council of Gangra never once named the Mass.
which the Church calls the Mass. The same it behooved you to dissemble,
C^^. 4.
lest ye bewraied your cause. The words be these: If any man make a
difference of a Priest, who has benne married, is though when he sacrifices,
a man might not communicate with his oblation, be he accursed. Those fathers
speak evidently of a Priest, who has sometime ben married, that is to say,
before his Priesthode. Untruth so impudente, that I marvel, M. Hardinge can
report it without blussinge. Chrysostom. ad Hebrae. Homil. 17.
For after Priesthode, it was never bearde since the time of Christ, that
any Priest might marie by the Law either of the Greek, or of the Latin
Church. We therefore condemn the marriages of Priests, which be made after
the taking of holy orders, and say, that he is no good and honest man, but
an incestuous Aduouterer, that marieth afterward.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To answer al your trifles, M. Hardinge, it were too long. We refuse not
the names of Oblation, or Sacrifice. We know, that the Holy Ministration is
Commonly so called by the Aunciente Fathers: For that, as Chrysostom says, it
is the Memory, the Remembrance, the Samplare, the Token of that one Sacrifice,
that Christ once offered in his Body upon the Cross. Hoc Sacrificium
exe^plarilliusest. Magis Recordationem Sacrifici^ operamu^.
How be it, the reason hereof, that ye would seem to wreast out of y^ Greek
word, (...), is very simple, and bewraieth in you, either want of skill, or
great corruption. For, being learned in the Greek tongue, ye must needs
know, that (...) signifies not a Sacrifice, Marriage in Priesthood.
but a Ministry, or public Service. Plutarchus says thus, Lictores, quasi
Litores dicebantur, quo'd essent (...) Hereby it appears, Plutarchus in
Romulo. Alexander ab Alexandro. Pachymeres: (...). Roman 13. Actor. 13.
Chrysostom in Acta Homil. 27.
that the Common Hangeman of the City was called (...), and his office (...):
Which, I trow, M. Hardinge, ye would not have to be called a Sacrificer, and
a Sacrifice. Pachymeres, in his Annotations upon Dionysius. says thus: (...),
appellat Diaconos, aut eos, qui nunc Hypodiaconi appellantur: He c^lleth them,
(...), that are called Deacons, or Subdeacons, S. Paul, speaking of Kings,
and Civil Princes, says, (...), aut Ministri Dei sun^ I reckon ye will not
say, that either Deacons, or Subdeacons, or Kings, or Princes had Authority
to Minister the Holy Communion, or, as you say, to offer up the Daily
Sacrifice. Where as S. Luke says, (...), Ministrantibus illis; Chrysostom
demands this question, Quid est Ministrantibus, (...) He answeareth,
Praedicantibus. Whereby it appears, that the Apostles Sacrificinge, was
their preachinge. It had benne over mutche va^itie, to note theis^ things,
had not your vain quarrel given the occasion. Certainly there is no mention
in the said Council of Gangra either of your Mass, or of your External
Sacrifice.

After Priesthood, ye say, it was never heard sithence the time of Christ,
that any Priest might Marry by the Law, either of the Greek, or of the
Latin Church. This warrant were undoubtedly true, if every your word were a
Gospel. But what if your own Gloss, that is to say, the very Ground, and
mother of your Divinity, stand against you, and say, Ye warrante unwisely,
or, if that mislike you, unadvisedly, ye know not what? Verily, upon the Popes
own Decrees ye shall find it noted thus: Did 31. Aliter: In Glossa.
Nicephorus, Li. 10. a. 10. Nicephor. Li. 9. Ca. 17.
Multi ex hac Litera dixerunt^ qu^d Orientales possunt contrahere in Sacris
Ordinibus? Of these words many have geathered, that y^ Priests of the East
Church may marry, being within Holy Orders. Nicephorus says, that
Eupsychius, being a Priest at Cesaria in Cappadocia married a Wife a little
before that he was Martyred. The like he seems to write of Apollinaris the
Elder, that being a Priest, Married a Wife at Laodicea.

In the Council holden at Ancyra there is a Canon written thus, Diaconi,
quicunque ordinantur, Council. Ancyranum. Canon. 9.
si in ipsa Ordinatione protestati sunt, and dixerunt, velle se coniugio
copulari, quia sic manner non possunt, hi, si postmodum vxores duxerint, in
Ministerio maneant, propterea qu^d ^is Episcopus licentiam dederit: Deacons,
that receive orders, if at the time of their admiss^on, they make
protestation, and say, they will be married, for that they cannot otherwise
contine we, if they afterward Marry, let them remain in the Minist^^^: for
that the Bishop has already dispensed with them.

Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Epist 1. ad Tim. Hom. (...).
speaking of the Marriage of Bishops, says thus, Quamuis Nup^ae plurimum
difficultatis in se habeant, ita tamen Assumi possunt, vt perfectiori vit^^
^^pedimento non sint: Notwithstanding Marriage have in it mutche trouble, yet
so it may be Taken, that it shall be no hinderance to perfect life. He says,
Marriage may be Taken, or chosen: Erasmus Contra Bedam. Page 197. Cornel
Agrippa contra Louanien. Artic. 18 Did. 8 4 Ci^n in prae^ertio. In Glo^^a.
Cat^^n in (...).
And he speaks namely of the Marriage of Priests, and Bishops.

Erasmus says, The Priests of the Greek Church this day, notvvithstanding
their Orders, Marry Wives. The like writes Cornelius Agrippa against the
Louanians. Your own Gloss upon y^ Decrees* as I have alleged before, notes
thus, Dicunt qu^d olim Sacerdotes poterant contrahere, ante Siriciu^: They
say, that in old times, before Pope Siricius, it was Laweful for Priests, to
contracte Matrimony.

Likewise Cardinal Cai^tane says, Nec ratione, nec Authoritate probari potest,
qu^d, absolut^ loquendo, Sacerdos peccet, contrahe^do Matrimonium: It cannot be
proved, neither by Reason, nor by Authority, speakinge absolutely, that a
Priest offends God in Ma^^^nge a Wife. So likewise says Anselmus in a
Dialogue bitweene the Master, and the Scholare, touching these matters:
Defideramus certifica^i tua Sotione super Vulgari in toto Orb quaestione,
Anselm. In Dialog. Inquisitione Prima.
quae ab omnibus pene quotidie ventilatur, and adhuc lis indiscussa celatur,
Scilicer, An liceat Presbyteris, post acceptum ordinem Vxores ducere: We are
desirous by your Answer to be certified, about this Common question, that is
now tossed through the world, and as yet lies undiscussed, I mean, whether
a Priest, being within Orders, may Marry a Wife. Hereby it appears,
that in the time of Anselmus, which was above a thousand years after
Christ, this matter lay in question, and was not yet discussed.

If ye knew these things before, M. Hardinge, ye were to blame, to dissemble
them: if ye knew them not, ye were to blame to controlle them. I doubt not,
but it may appear by these few, that sithen^e the time of Christ's
Resurrection, sundry Priests, being within Holy Orders, have married Wives:
and that, not only in the Greek Church, but also in the Church of Rome.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 9.
The Ancient Emperor Justinian commanded, In Nouel. Constit. 123.
that in the Holy Administration, al things should be pronounced with a
clear, loud, and treatable voice, that the people might receive sum fruit
thereby. These men, lest the people should understand them, numble up al
their Service, not only with a drowned, and hollow voice, but also in a
strange, and Barbarous tongue.

M. Hardinge.
Justinian the Emperor wills prayers at the holy oblation, (which these
Defenders here translate administration, as being ashamed of their own
Authore, because they hold Untruth, fond, and peeuishe For Iustinia^
speaks not of any Sacrifice of the Mass*
against the sacrifice of the Mass) to be made not in silence, but with an
audible voice. Not meaning as though prayers made in silence were unfruitful
to the people, as these men would make us believe. And therefore they corrupt
his words, as what thing do they not corrupt, that comes under their
hands? They say Justinian made that Law, Vt fructus ex ea re aliquis ad
populum redire posset, that sum fruit might come thereof to the people, In
novel. Constitut. ^3.
as who should say, Untruth. For S. Augustine says, Quid prodest
loquutionis integritas, quam non sequitur intellectus audientis.
no fruit were like to come, if prayer were made in silence. But what says
Justinian? His words be, Quo maiore exinde deuotione in depromendis Domini
Dei laudibus audientium animi efferantur. To the intent the minds of the hearers
may thereby with the more devotion be lifted up in settinge forth the praises
of our Lord God. He says, that the loud voice helps to more devotion, he
says not, to some fruit, but, with more devotion Untruth, notorious, and
contrary to their own principal position, Ignorance is the Mother of
devotion.
Some fruit is always had even by secret prayer, and more fruit sometime,
then by loud prayer.

Two faults then are committed, or rather two lies made in Justinians words:
one, that for oblation, they turned administration, which falsehede M. Jewel
uses in his printed Sermon, and in his replies to M. D. Cole. Whether he be
also gilty of this? An other fault is, that for more devotion, they put some
fruit. The third lie is, in that they say, we do whisper al our Service, so
is the Latin, albeit this good Lady likes better the term of mumblinge.
Untruth For M Hard. own Councelles express it by these words,
Insusurrare, and Murmurare.
I wene few who have the sense of hearing* will say with them, that the
singinge of Psalms, Hymmes, Epistle, Gospel, Grailes, Offertories, Preface*
and such like Service used in the Catholic Church, is whisperinge, or
numblinge. The fourth lie is, where they say, we do it so, lest the people
should understand us. Untruth, and a gloss contrary both to the text, and
also to the continual practice of the Church of Graecia.
We wish, that all the people understood al our prayers. But we think it not
convenient, in a common profane tongue, to utter high mysteries Therefore we
wish, they would learn the Mystical tongue. A Mystical folly of al folies.
mystical tongue, and gladly do we teach their children the same. S. Dionyse
the Areopagite scholar to S. Paul, teaches Timothe, and in him al us,
Communicare ea quae vim perficiendi habent, cum ijs, qui perficiunt, to
communicate those things, which have power to make men perfect, with them,
who make men perfect: that is to say, to publishe priestly office of
Consecration, (for nothing makes us more perfect) among them only, who are
Priests, and not among others.

Last of all the fifth lie is to say, Prayer in a strange to tongue.
that we pronounce our service, and our mysteries in a barbarous tongue. A
(...) For S. Paul says. The tongue is Barbarous, that is not known.
As though the Latin tongue were barbarous, and not rather every vulgar
tongue. That tongue is most barbarous, which is most used of the vulgar
sort, most private? most unknown in respect of al A solemn Decree
without sense.
When England comes to have a service of their own, a tongue of their
own in Churches, and has a Church of their own beside the whole, then have
they lost their part with the Catholic Church, whereunto God restoare it
again.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O M. Harding, we corrupt not such things, as comme under our hands. The
world seethe, that is your Ordinary, and peculiare practice: It is not ours.
Ye dubbe us both here, and elsewhere, with your lies upon lies. Such is the
Civility, and Courtesy of your speech. Yet hitherto we have not redubbed
you with any one lie. Sobriety, and modesty rather becomes them, that
speak of God.

First, Justinian. Impe. Authen. Constit. 123: We command al Bishops,
and Priests to Minister the Holy Oblation. etc. not under silence, but with a
loud voice, etc. that the hearts of the Hearers may be sturred to more
devotion, etc.
ye say, We have corrupted Justinians words. And yet, ye know, we
alleged only Justinians meaning, and otherwise not one of al his words. Ye
say, Justinian meante not, as though prayers made i^ silence were unfruitful
to the people. For sum Fruit, ye say, there is al ways had even by
secret, and unknown Prayer: But what fruit, or how mutche, or how ye know
it, or can assuere it, ye spare to tell us. Yet S. Augustine says, Quid
prodest locutionis integritas, quam non sequitur intellectus audientis?
Cumloquendi omnino nulla fit causa, si, quod loquimur, non intelligunt, propter
quos, vt intelligant, loquimur: What profit is there in speech, be it never
so perfect, if the understanding of the hearer cannot attain it? For there is
no cause, why we should speak at al, if they understand not, what we
speak, for whoes sake we speak, that they may understand us. Again he
says, Men's mea sine fructu est: Hoc ait, quando id, quod dicitur, non
intelligitur: My mind is without fruit: This the Apostle S. Paul says,
when the thing, that is spoken, it not perceived. And again, Si intellectum
me^ns remoueas, nemo aedificatur audiendo, quod non intelligit: Set aparte the
understanding of the Mind: And noman has fruit, or profit of that thing,
that he perceives not. Likewise again he says, Quid opus est iubilare, and
no^ intelligere iubilatione^: vt Vox nostra sola iubilet, Augu. De Doctrina
Christiana, Lib. 4. Ca. 10.
and Cor non iubilet? Sonus enim Cordis intellectus est: What needs us to
singe, if we understand not, what we singe: to singe with our voice, and not
with our Heart? For Understanding is the sound, or voice of the Heart.

These words, August. De Trinitate. Li. 14. Ca. 16. 1. Cor. 14.
VVhisperinge, and Mumblinge, mislike you mutche. Yet your own friends,
intreatinge hereof, have often used the same words. In your late Council of
Colaine it is written thus, Vt Presbyteri Preces non tantum Ore Murmurent,
August in Genesia ad Literam. Lib. 11. Cap. 8. Aug. in Psalm 59. Council.
Colonien. Cap. 5. Anno. 1536 Regino. 2. Concilio Nannet^^.
sed etiam Cord Persoluant nunquam a manibus eorum Liber Legis, hoc est,
Biblia deponatur: That the Priests not only Mumble up their Prayers, but
also pronouace them from their hearts, Let the Book of the Law, that is to
say, the Bibl^, never be said from their hands. Likewise Regino reports
the words of the Council of Nantes, Ridiculum est, muris, aut parietibus
Infusurrare ea, quae ad populum pertinent: It is a preushe thing, to whisper
those things to the walls, that pertei^e unto the people.

Notwithstanding, whether it be VVhisperinge, or Mumblinge, or by what so ever
name else it shall please you to call it, that good Emperors Commandment, and
meaning was, that ye should so utter al things in the Congregation,
Distinctely, Authen. Constitu 123. Augu. in Psalm. 18.
and Plainly, with loud, and Open Voice, that the people might understand
you, and answer, Amen. Therefore S. Augustine says, Nos, qui in Ecclesia
Diuina eloquia cantare didicimus, simul etiam instare debemus, esse quod
Scriptum est, Beatus populus, qui intelligit iubilationem. Proinde, Charissimi,
quod Consona voce cantauimus, sereno etiam Cord nosse, and tenere debemus:
We, that have learned to singe in the Church the Heavenly words of God,
must also endeavor to be that thing, that is written, Blessed is the people,
that understands, what they singe. Therefore dearly beloved, that we have
song together with iuneable voice, we ought also to know, and see with pure
heart. S. Ambrose, declaringe the Ecclesiastical order of his time, Ambro.
Hexamer. Li. 3. Cap. 5.
says thus, Responsorijs Psalmorum, Cantu Virorum, Mulierum, Virginum,
Paruulorum, consonus vndarum fragor resultat: With the answearinge of Psalms,
and with the Singinge together of Men, Women, Maids, and little Children,
the Church sounds, as if it were the dasshinge of the Sea.

To like purpose Leo says, Leo, De leiunio Septimi Mensis, Sermo. 3.
Totius Ecclesiae vna est Oration, and vna Confessio: The whole Church has one
Prayer, and one Confession.

That ye allege out of Dionysius, is vain, and Childishe, as is the rest of
your talk, and quite contrary to the Authors mind, and therefore not
worthy to be answered. For Dionysius says not, as you have imagined, M.
Harding, that the Priest should talk alone in his Mystical unknown Tongue,
as a ianglinge Cymbal without sense: but rather tells you, that, by his
order, the Priest, and the whole People should singe together. These be his
words, Percipiens ipse, Dionysius, Ca. 3. (...).
and alijs tradens Diuinam Communionem, postremo desinit in Gratiarum actionem,
vna cum tota Ecclesiae multitudine: The Priest both receiuinge him self the
Holy Communion, and also deliueringe the same unto others, last al ends with
thanks geuinge, together with all the whole multitude, or Company of the
Church.

Ye say, We wisshe the people would learn the Mystical Latin tongue: and
gladly do we teach their Children the same. Ye say, The Mystical Latin
tongue. O vain man, and more vain, then vanity it self: Why seek you so
fondely to deceive Gods people? Who ever taught you these kinds of Mysteries?
what Scripture? what Council? what Doctoure? what Father? How know you, that
the Latin tongue, that every Child may so commonly, and so easily
understand, should be so Mystical? It were a great Mystery, to reach the
bottom of your Mysteries. S. Paul calls you, 1. Cor. 4.
not the Hiders, or Couchers, but the Dispensers, and Stevvardes of Gods
Mysteries. Your Mystical policy is, to lead Gods people through Myste, and
Darkness. Ye wisshe, the people would learn the Latin tongue, which you
call Mystical. No doubt, a worthy, and a learned wisshe. Ye might as good
cheap, and as well have wisshed, that all the whole people, of al Country,
would learn to speak Greek, and Hebrevve. But your meaning is, y^ until all the Plovvmenne, and Artificers, and Laborers of the World be hable to
understand, and to speak your Mystical Latin tongue, they may not in any
wise he allowed, to understand any parcel of their Prayers.

Lactantius, Lactan. Lib. 5. Ca. 20.
speakinge of the subtle practices, and policies of the Heathens, says thus,
Hinc Fida Silentia instituta sunt ab hominibus callidis: vt nesciret populus,
quid coleret: Therefore trusty silence, and secrecy was appointed by subtle,
and false faitours: that the people ( still being blind) should never know,
what they worshipped.

This is not the Mystery of the Kingedome of Heaven: Matthew. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Apoc. 17.
It is rather the Mystery of iniquity: The same Mystery, y^ S. John
mentions in his Revelations: In Front eius Nome^ scriptum est, Mysterium:
Babylon Magna, Matter Abominationu^, and Fornicationum Terrae: A Name was
written in her Forehead, a Mystery: Great Babylon, the Mother of the
Abominations, and of the Fornications of the Eathe. Of these Holy Mysteries,
your Latin tongue, as ye have used it, may well, and justly be called
Mystical.

S. Hierome says of your Fathers in Old time, Hieron. in Epist. ad ^phes.
Cap. 5. Hieronymus ad Theodoram.
De Domo Dei Secnam fecere Populorum: Of the House of God they have mode a
stage play of the people. And speakinge of the Valentinian Heretics he
says, Barbaro simplices quosque terrent sono, vt, quod non intelligunt, plus
mirentur: With a Barbarous unknown sound of words the^ fear the simple,
that, what so ever they understand not, they may the more esteem, and have in
reverence.

But the Latin tongue, ye say, is not Barbarous: and therein, as your wont
is, ye have noted a woonderful great Lie in our Apology. Yet unto S. Paul,
that tongue seems Barbarous, that is unknown unto the hearer. Thus he
says, Nisi sciero vim vocis, 1. Cor. 4.
ero illi, qui loquitur, Barbarus: and ille, qui loquitur, mihi Barbarus:
Unless I understand the power, or meaning of the words, I shall be Barbarous
to him, that speaks: and he that speaks (in what tongue so ever he speak)
shall be Barbarous unto me. Artic. 3. Diui. 3. Ludoui. Viues De Traden.
Disciplinis, Lib. 3. Fol. 97.
Hereof I had occasion to say somewhat in my Former Reply. S. Augustine
says, Mallet quisque cum Cane suo versari, quam cum homine ignotae linguae:
Any man would rather dwell with his Dog, then with a man of an unknown
tongue.

To conclude, ye say, When England comes to have a Service of their own,
and a Tongue of their own in Churches, then have they lost their part with
the Catholic Church. Here, M. Hardinge, a little more reason would have
given sum credit to your words. For, as touching the Public Service of
the Church, I beseech you, even in your own time of Barbarous blindness,
what Service had the Church of England, but peculiare, and Special to her
self? Touching the variety of Tongues S. Augustine says, Augusti. Aduer.
Iudeos, Oration. 4.
Astitit Regina a dextris tuis in vestitu deaurato, circundata varietate. Vbi
significatur Linguarum varietas in omnibus Gentibus: quarum tamen vna est
intus, and Simplex Fides: The Queen stood at thy right hand, apparesled in
Cloth of Goulde, adourned with variety. Here by is Signified the Diversity of
Tongues in all Nations: The Faith whereof, that lies within, is one, and
simple. Likewise again he says, Aug. in Psalm. 44.
Vestius Reginae huius quis est? Et pretiosus, and varius est: Sacramenta
Doctrinae in Linguis omnibus varijs. Alia Lingua Aphricana: alia Syra: alia
Graeca: alia Hebraea: alia illa, and illa. Faciunt istae Linguae varietatem
vestis Reginae huius. Quomodo autem omnis varietas vestis in vnitate concordat,
sic and omnes Linguae ad vnam Fidem, In vest varietas sit: scissura non sit.
Ecce varietatem intelleximus de Diuersitate Linguarum: and Vestem intelleximus
propter Vnitatem: What is this Queens apparel? It is precious, and full of
variety: The Mysteries of Doctrine in all sundry Tongues. There is one Tongue
of Aphrica: an other of Syria: an other Greek: an other Hebrewe: an other
this, an other that. These Tongues make up the variety of the Queens apparel.
But as all the variety of colors in the apparel agrees in Unity: even so al
Tongues agree in one Faith. Let there be Variety in the Apparel: But rent,
or cut there may not be. Behold, by the Variety, we understand the
Diversity of Tongues: and by the Apparel, we understand the Unity ( of y^
Church). Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 6.
Again he says, Distant inter se Linguae: Sed Linguarum distantiae non sunt
schismata: Tongues are divided one from an other: But the Division of Tongues
is no Schism, or Division in Religion.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 10.
The old Council at Carthage commanded that nothing should be read in
Christ's Congregation, but the Canonical Scriptures: these men read such
things in their Churches, Council. Cartha. 3.
as them selves know for a Truth to be stark Lies, and fond Fables.

M. Hardinge.
A man were better, I assure thee, good Reader, to make two new Books, then
to correct one so full of lies and falsefied places, Council. Cartha. 3. c. 47.
as this Apology is. Untruth. For, if this Old Counsel be falsified, it was
falsified twelve hundred years ago, in the Council of Hippo.
This old Council of Carthage is newely falsefied by our new Cleregie. The
words of the Council are these. Palcuit, vt praeter scripturas Canonicas nihil
in Ecclesia legatur sub nomine Diuinarum Scripturatum: Scriptures only to be
read in Churches
It has seemed good unto us, that besides the Canonical Scriptures, nothing be
read in the Church under the name of the holy Scriptures. They leauinge out
these four words, sub nomine Diuinarum Scripturarum, Under the name of
Divine Scriptures, would bear men in hand, the Council willed nothing to be
read in the Church, besides the holy Scriptures. Are not these trusty men to
whom ye may commit the charge of your souls for your faith and salvation?

It follows in the same decree, Liceat etiam Legi passiones Martyrum, cum
anniuersarij dies celebrantur: Let it be lawful also for the Martyrdomes of
Martyrs to be read, when their yearly festes are kept. And yet dare they not
only to say, nothing must be read besides the Scriptures, but also to allege
that very place for that special lie, which says the contrary. Look in the
Book thy self good reader, and see how falsely they handle so holy matters.
Untruth. For it is confessed by the best of M. Har. own side.
An other lie is, when they say, we read those things in the Church, which
our selves know to be stark lies, and funde fables. When they cannot them
selves show that we have any such, it is a vain lieing rhetorike to say,
we doubt not of it, or know it our selves for a truth. I wonder not if they
blushe not in belieng us, who have belied so many Scriptures, Councels, and
fathers.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It stands well with your Truth, M. Hardinge, so often to charge us with
Lies, and Falsehedde. I trust it will appear, ye had no great cause, to keep
so great revel upon so poor a Conqueste. In deed these words be not found
in the third Council of Carthage. Yet are they found in the Council of Hippo,
which is the Abbridgemente of the third Council of Carthage, as it appears
by the Title of the same: Concilij Hipponensis Abbreuiationes factae in
concilio carthaginensi Tertio.

The words of the Council of Hippo, and, for so mutche, also of the third
Council of Carthage, Council. Hippo, Cap. 38.
be these: Scripturae Canonicae in Ecclesia legendae quae sunt: and praeter
quas alia non legantur: The Scriptures Canonical, which are to read in the
Church: and besides which nothing else may be read. Here have you, M.
Hardinge, the plain words of the Council of Hippo, abberidged out of the
third Council of Carthage, That nothing may be read in the Church, but
only the Canonical Scriptures. Judge you therefore, how just cause ye had,
so unadvisedly, for I vate not to say, so unlearnedly, to charge the Apology
with Lies, and Falsehedde.

Hereto may we add the like Decree of the Council holden at Laodicea:
Sabbatjs Euangelia cum alijs Scripturis legenda esse censemus: Council. Laodice.
Cap. 16.
We agree that the Gospel, with others Scriptures, be read upon the Saboth
day. If these words seem not sufficient, Council. Laodice. Cap. 59.
it follows further in the same Council, Non oportet Libros, qui sunt extra
Canonem, legere, nisi solos Canonicos Veteris, and Noui Testamenti: We may not
read any Books, that be without the Canon, but only the Canonical Books of
the Old, and Nevve Testamente.

To like effect Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homi 38.
Ideo Christus meusas nummulariorum euertit: Significans quod in Templo Dei no^
debent esse nummi, nisi Spirituales, id est, qui Dei imaginem habent: Therefore
Christ ouerthrewe the Exchangers bakes: Meaning thereby, that there may be
no Come in the Church, but only Spiritual, that is to say, Chryso. in Acta,
Homil. 19.
that bears the Image of God. Again he says, Lectorum officium erat, in
Ecclesia, Sacra Legere ex Scriptis, vel Prophetarum, vel Apostolorum: It was
the Readers office, to pronounce holy things unto the people, out of either
the Apostles, or Prophets.

Erasmus says, Erasin. in Hiero. de Eccle. Scriptarib. Efrem.
Apparet, non nisi Apostolicas Literas olim Legi solitas in Templis, aut certe
Vitorum Apostolicae Authoritatis: It appears, that in old time, nothing was
used to be read in the Churches, but only the Apostles Writings: or at least
the Writings of such others, Scriptures only to be read in Churches
as were of Apostolical Authority. Likewise says Abbas Ansigisus, reportinge
the Ecclesiastical Decrees of the French Kings, Jews, and Charles: In
Templis tantum Canonici Libri, id est, Sacrae Literae legantur: Let there he
read in the Churches only the Canonical Books, Ansigisus, Lib. 1. Cap. 19.
Impressus Parisijs Anna. 1550.
that is to say, the Holy Scriptures.

An other lie, Ye say, is this, when they say, we read those things in the
Church, which our selves know, to be stark lies, and fond Fables. For
trial hereof, we shall not need to travail far. Your own Books, and
Legendes are prouse sufficient.

Erasmus thereof says thus, Erasin. in Annotation. in Hieronym. De
Ecclesiasticus Scrip.
Hodie quorumlibet somnia, imo mulietcularum Deliramenta leguntur inter diuinas
Scripturas: Now a days every fools Dreams, yea very we men's doctinge
fancies are read with the Holy Scriptures.

Likewise says Polydore Vergil: Multorum Diuorum vitas recitant, tametsi
parum ad Fidem Scriptas: Polydor. Vergil. in Oration Dominicam.
They read many Saints Lives, although not written according to Truth.
Ludouicus Viues, writtinge of your Legenda Aurea, which was the Mother of al
your devout Ecclesiastical stories, or Fables, says thus, Nescio, cur Aurea
dici debeat, cum scripta sit ab homine ferrei oris, and plumbei Cordis, and
plenissima sit impudentissimis Mendacijs: I see no cause, why it should be
called the Goulden Legende, seeinge it was written by a man of an iron face,
and a ledden heart, and is freight full of most shameless lies. If ye knew not
these things, M. Hardinge, your friends will think, ye know nothing. Such
Truths ye read, and publishe devoutly, and solemnly in your Churches. Yet
may we neither say, nor think, ye mock the people.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 1.
But if there be any, that think, these above rehearsed Authorities be but
weak and selender, because they were decreed by Emperors, and certain petite
Bishops, and not by so full, and perfect Councelles, taking pleasure rather
in the Authority, and name of the Pope: let such a one know, that Pope
Julius doothe e^idently forebidde, that a Priest in ministering the Communion,
should dippe the Bread in the Cup. These men contrary to Pope Julius
Decree, divide the Bread, and dippe it in the wine.

M. Hardinge.
Ye may be sure, many men think this your homely stuff not only weak and
slender, but also corrupt, venomous, and loathsome. But now by like, ye will
amend your fault. But how? Surely by going from very evil to as bad or worse,
if ye can do worse, then hitherto ye have done. Julius the Pope (say ye) does
evidently forbid, that a Priest in Ministringe the Communion, should dippe
the Bread in the Cup Now verily your former fault of lieing is well amended.
For where before ye best out, cast in, or changed some of those words, which
ye pretend to allege, now ye make every whit new of your own. Where has
Julius these word? I speak not of your false alleging of places in your
Books margent. I forgive you the puttinge of Cum enim nemo, instead of cum
omne. These be small and slipper faulies, which if they were alone might be
wincked at in such slipper mercha^tes, as ye are. But let us hear, what Pope
Julius says. Alios quoque audiuimus intincta^ Eucharistia^ populis pro
compleme^to co^munionis porrigere, We have heard also of others, who give to
the people the Euchariste dipped, or stiped, for making up of the Communion.
It is to be understood, that whereas Christ, gave the blessed Sacrament of
the Aulier to his Apostles, he gave it under both kinds. And when the Priests
in some countries, either for lack of wine at al times ready, either for sum
private fancy, used to dippe or stipe the sacred body of our Lord under form
of Bread in the consecrated blood, Communion under one kind.
and so to give it to the people: Pope Julius finds fault therewith, for
that neither Christ ordained so, nor the Apostles left such order to the
Church. So that Julius means nothing else, but to reprove and reform that
use of dippinge or stiping the one kind in the other in the Administration of
the Communion unto the people. Read the place, who lists, he shall find the
same sense more largely uttered a little after.

But what sense make these Defenders a Gods name? They say, Julius forebiddeth
the Priest, ne dum peragit mysteria, panem immegat in Calicem, that in
ministringe the communion, (so the lady tourneth) he should dippe the Bread
in the Cup. There is no such word in the wholde decree. Julius names
Eucharistiam: they call it Bread. Julius has, A fond Vanity. For if he
forbid the Priest to dippe the Sacrament, and to deliver it, then he
forebiddeth the Priest to dippe the Sacrament.
intinctam porrigere populis, that no Priest give the Sacrament dipped to the
people: they, leaving out, giving it to the people, say he forbad the Priest
to dippe it. They leave out also the chief cause of the whole, which is pro
complemento communionis, for making up of the communion. For he for ebiddeth to
give unto the people only the consecrated host dipped in the Chalice, as
though it were the whole Communion, nolesse then if the Blood were given
aparte. These men (say they) contrary to the decree of Pope Julius, divide the
Bread, and dippe it in the wine. We in the Mass break the host in three
parts, not without These Mystical Significations, be Mystical folies. Read
the Answer.
signification of a Mystery: two we receive aparte: the third we put into the
Chalice, and receive it together with the blood. VVhal have ye to say
against this?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Every part hereof is largely answeard in my Former Reply to M. Hardinge.
True it is, the fault, that Julius here finds in Dippinge, and Ministering
the Sacrament, agrees not fully with the present disorders of the Church of
Rome. Yet notwithstanding, in condemning the one, he must needs condemn the
other. Ye say, we leave out these words, Intinctam porrigunt Eucharistiam
populis: They dippe the Sacrament, and deliver the same unto the people. And
again these words, Pro complemento Communionis: For the accomplishemente of
the Communion. The more matter we have leafte out, the more have we conceled
your faults: and so mutche y^ more are you beholden to us. For what meante
you, M. Harding, to mention any of al these words? What needed you to burden
your self with more Abuses, and so mutche to bewraie your folly?

Julius says, They dipped the Sacrament into the Cup, and delivered it
unto the people: You dippe the Sacrament, as they did: but unto the people ye
geeue nothing. Julius says, They meante by dippinge to make it a full, and a
perfect Communion: Contrariewise, you defraude the people of the Holy Cup,
and deliver them only the Half Communion, And therefore ye are mutche more
blame worthy, then ever were they, whom Julius reproved. For they offended
only of Simplicity: and you of wilfulness.

But touching the matter it self, the fault, that we find with you, and
the fault, that Julius found with others your Predecessors, is al one. You
dippe the Bread into the Cup: and so did they. They brake Christ's
Institution: and so do you. And therefore Julius said unto them, Hoc quam sit
Apostolicae, and Euangelicae Doctrinae co^trarium, and consuetudini
Ecclesiasticae aduersum, non difficile ab ipso Font Veritatis probatur, a quo
ordinata ipsa Sacramentorum Mysteria processerunt: How far contrary this is
to the Apostolical, and Euangelical Doctrine, and to the Custom of the
Church, it is easy to prove by the Fountain of the Truth, by whom the
Mysteries of the Sacraments were ordained, and from whom they first proceeded.

Ye think the matter well discharged, for that ye deliver not the Sacrament so
dipped unto the people, but minister it only unto your self. Here by the
way, it were a matter of skill, to understand, by what Authority, either of
scripture, or of Council, or of Doctoure, it may appear, that it is lawful
for the Priest so to use and receive the Sacrament, Communion under One kind.
and unlawful for the people. If the people may not as safely, and as lawfully
so receive the Sacrament, as may the Priest, wherefore the^ are these
words written in your Mass Books, even in y^ Canon, and Secrets of your
Mass? Haec Sacrosancta Commixtio Corporis, and Sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus
Christi fiat mihi, and omnibus sumentibus salus animae and Corporis, This Holy
minglinge of the Body, and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, be unto me, and
unto al, that receive it, the health of Soul and Body. Verily these words,
Omnibus sumentibus, cannot by any shifte possibly be expounded of One Only
Priest, but must needs be extended unto the people.

Ye would feign tell us of certain special Mysteries, that ye have found out
in y^ Breakinge of the Sacrament, Daniel. 2 Senten. Lib. 4. Did. 12.
if ye wiste, what they were. But ye are in case, as somm^time was
Nabuchodonozor: Ye are not hable well to tell us your own dream. Sammetime ye
say, The Bread is broken: sommetime ye say, The Accidents remain alone by
Miracle, and they are broken: Sommetime ye say, Christ's Immortal, and
Impassible Body it self is Broken: Sommetime ye say, Our eyes be deceived,
and nothing is broken.

Again (ye say) the First piece signifies the Chruche travailing in the
world: Durandus Li. 4. Cap. 53.
The Second signifies the Blessed Saints in Heaven: the Third signifies
the Souls in Purgatory. De Conse. Did. 2. Triforme.
But Pope Sergius, the Father of these fantastes, conueieth his Mysteries an
other way. For the First portion, says he, signifies Christ's Body after
his Resurrection: The Second, christ's Body vvalkinge on Earth: The Third,
Christ's Body in the Grave. These, M. Hardinge, be your Holy Significations,
and Special Mysteries. With such folies, and Mystical vanities ye mock the
world. In Old times the Bread was not broken, to busy men's heads with
Significations, Artic. 11. Diui. 3. Augu. Epist. 59.
but only to be delivered to the people: as in my Former Reply, I have
declared more at large. S. Augustine says, Panis benedicitur, and
Sanctificatur, and ad distribuendum Comminuitur: The Bread is Blessed, and
Sanctified, and broken into pieces, to the end it may be delivered.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 2.
Pope Clement says, It is not lawful for a Bishop to deal with Both
Swerdes: For if thou vvilt have both, says he, thou shalt deceive both thee
self, and those, that obeie the. Now a days the Pope chalengeth to him self
Both Swerdes, and uses both. Wherefore it ought to seem less marvel, if
that have followed, which Clemente says, that is, that he has deceived both
him self, and those, which have geeuen ear unto him.

M. Hardinge.
If these fellows had not sworn to belie all the world for maintenance of
their new Gospel, they would at this time at least have made a true report
of S. Clementes words. S. Clement speaks not of two swords. The palace
truly alleged has thus: These words are partly Clementes, partly S.
Bernardes.
Si mundialibus curis fueris occupatus, and teipsum decipies, and eos qui te
audiunt. If thou be occupied in worldely cares, thou shall both deceive thy
self, and those that listen to thee. The Authoure of this Apology, having
spite at the Church, which is Christ's fold, and at the Pope, the head
Shepherde, enuieing at his authority, forgeth a lie upon S. Clement, making
him to say, Si vtrunque habere vis, if thou will have both swords, thou
shall both deceive thy self, and those that obeie thee. Fond and child ^he.
As though a Bishop may have the Tempord (...), and ^xecute a Temporal office,
without vvo^ldly cates.
Whereas Clemente speaks no word of the two swords, but of worldly cares,
where with what Bishop so ever is entangled, shall (as he says) deceive both
him self, and others that harken to him. For which cause these Defenders
being coupled with yoke fellows in pretensed wedlock, Both Svveerdes in one
hand.
which state wrappeth a man in worldly cares, 1. Cor. 7.
because such a one What cares have they that keep Concubines?
cares for the things of the world, how to please his wife, and is divided,
as S. Paul says: it must needs follow, that having taken the office of
superintendentes, and charge of Souls upon them. Eleven of the Twelve
Apostles, and many Holy Fathers, and Bishops were Married: and yet deceived
not etc.
they have deceived them selves, and daily do deceive so many as hear them,
and follow their false Doctrine.

The B. of Sarisburie.
O what a pleasante grace M. Hardinge has, to talk of Lies? A man would
think, it were sum good part of his study. In this place two sundry
Authorities, the one of Clemens, the other of S. Bernarde, I know not, by what
error, were joined in one, and both alleged, and set forth under the name
only of Clements. I grant, There was herein an oversight: But Lie, or
Falshedde there was none.

The words of Clemens are, Bernard. De Consideration. Li. 2.
as you report them. The words of S. Bernarde, written unto Pope Eugenius,
are these: Planum est, Apostolis interdici Dominatum. I ergo tu, and tibi
vsurpate aude, aut Dominans Apostolatum: aut Apostolus Dominatum. Plane ab
alterurto prohiberis. Si vtrunque similiter habere velis, perdes vtrunque: It
is plain, that unto the Apostles of Christ, Lordeship, or Temporal
Princehoode is forebidden. Go thou thy way therefore ( thus he says to the
Pope) and dare thou to usurp, either the Apostleship, being a Lord: or a
Lordeship, being an Apostle. From one of them undoubtedly thou art
forebidden. If thou vvilt indifferently have both, thou vvilt lose both.

Of such, S. Hieronym. in Sophoniam. Ca. 1.
Hierome writes thus, Militantes Christo, obligant se negotijs Saecularibus,
and eandem imaginem offerunt Deo, and Caesari: Being the Soldiers of Christ,
they bind them selves to worldly affairs, and offer up one Image to God, and
Caesar. In the Canons of the Apostles it is written thus, Canon. Aposto. Canon.
80. Mathae. 10.
Non oportet Episcopum, aut Presbyterum, se Publicis Administrationibus
immittere: sed vacare, and co^modum se praebere vsibus Ecclesiasticis. Nemo
enim potest duobus Dominis seruire: A Bishop, or a Priest may not entangle
him self with worldly Offices: but be at reaste, and show him self meet for
the use of the Church. For noman can serve two Masters. Yet the Pope this
day claims the right of Both Svverdes, De Maiorita. and Obedient. Vnam
Sanctam. Paralipomena Vispergensis.
not only of the Spiritual, but also of the Temporal. And Pope Bonifacius 8.
in the Great Iubilee, and in the open sight of the world, when he had one
day showed him self in his Pontificalibus, apparelled in Procession as a
Bishop, the next day he put upon him the Emperors Roabes of Majesty, and
had the Emperial Crown upon his head, and the Sw^rde naked. and glitteringe
borne before him.

As for Pope Clemens, his Canon is easily shifted by a pretty Prouiso. For thus
says your Gloss touching the same, Extra de Iureiurando, Etsi Christus. In
Glossa.
Cessante causa, cessat effectus. Verbi causa, Prohibetur, ne Presbyteri gerant
tutelas, hac causa, vt melius vacent Diuinis Officiis. Haec causa finalis est.
Vnde, cessante hac causa, cessat effectus. Vnde, si non vacent Diuinis
Officiis, poterunt gerere tutelas: The cause endinge, the Effect ends too.
For example: The Law commands, that a Priest shall not be charged with the
VVardeship of a Child in his nonage. The cause hereof is this, that he may
the better apply his Divine Service. This is the Final Cause. This cause
removed, the Effect geeueth place. Therefore if the Priest follow not his
Divine Service, then he may have y^ Wardeship of a Child. Even so, if the
Pope do not the Office of a Bishop, then may he be a Temporal Prince. But by
these means it comes to pass, even as clemens says, He deceives both
him self, and also them that hear him.

Touching this vain objection of the charge, Part. 5. Cap. 3. Division. 7.
And Part. 2. Cap. 8. Division. 2.
and cares of Marriage, it is fully answered before, in a place more
conueniente.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 3.
Pope Leo says, Upon one day it is lawful to say but one Mass in one
Church: These men say daiely in one Church commonly ten Masses, twenty,
thirty, yea often times more. So that the poor gafer on can scante tell which
way he were best to turn him self. Pope Gelasius says, It is a wicked
deed, and subject to Sacrilege in any man, to divide the Communion, and, when
he has received one Kind, to abstain from the other. These men, contrary
to Gods Word, and contrary to Pope Gelasius, command, that one Kind
only of the Holy Communion be geeuen the people: and by so dooinge, they make
their Priests gilty of Sacrilege.

M. Hardinge.
A solemn fancy. They must needs be wise me^^e, that so vvil think.
There is no small number of men, which are moved to suspecte, that this
Apology was devised by some Catholic man, intendinge to mock this new
Cleregie of England, and to put them quite out of estimation and credit. Here
M. Hard. confesses, that he, and his Fellows can set forth lies.
And to that very end this innumerable company of Lies to them seems of
purpose to be set out. For no man having his five wits would think good,
for mainetenance of his own part, to affirm so many things, the contrary
whereof to his great discredit and shame, In Epist. ad Dioscorum Alexandrinum.
by search is easily found. Untruth manifest. Read the Answer. Articul.
13. Division. 4.
Leo says clean contrary to that is here in his name avouched, that when so
ever a new multitude fills the Church, so as all cannot be present at the
Sacrifice at once, that the Oblation of the Sacrifice be without castinge any
doubt done again.

The B. of Sarisburie.
I beseech thee, Gentle Reader, for shortness sake, and for thy better
satisfaction herein, to consider my answer made hereunto in my Former Reply
to M. Hardinge. Uerily Leo speaks not one word, either of Private Mass, or
of Sole Receiuinge, or of any other like Superstitious, and yeeuishe vanity:
but only of the General Communion of the whole Church. His Counsel therefore
unto Dioscorus is, that if upon occasion of resort, the multitude of
Communicantes were so great, that they could not have convenient coume in the
Church, to receive al together at one Communion, then the Priest, after he
had ministered unto the first Company, and had willed them to depart forth,
and geeue place to others, and saw the Church replenished again with a new
Company of aftercommers, should without fear, or remorse of Conscience
begin the whole Communion again, and so minister unto them, as he had done
unto the foremet. More then this out of Leoes words cannot be geathered.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 1.
But if they will say, that al these things are woorne now out of ure, and
nighe dead, and perteine nothing to these present times, Yet to the end al
folk may understand, what Faith is to be geeuen to these men, and upon
what hope they call together their General Councelles, let us see in few
words, what good heed they take to the self same things, which they the^
selves, these very last years, (and the remembrance thereof is yet new and
freashe) in their own General Council, that they had by order called, have
decreed, and

Again he says, Summus Sacerdos.
speakinge likewise of any one Bishop, Vidisti Summum Sacerdotem Interrogantem,
Ambros. De ijs qui initiantur. Ca. 3.
and Consecrantem: Thou saw the Highest Priest examininge the people, that
was to be Baptized, and Consecratinge the Water.

I leave out sundry other like Authorities of Origin, of Lactantius, of
Athanasius, of Leo, Euagrius Lib. 3. Cap. 32.
of Victor, of Meltiades, and of others. Euagrius calls Euphemius, and
Gregorius the Bishop of Antioche, Summos Sacerdotes, The Higheste Priests.
Ruffinus. Lib. 2. Cap. 23.
Ruffinus calls Athanasius, the Bishop of Alexandria, Pontificem Maximum: The
Greatest, or Higheste Bishop. By these, I trust, it may appear, that the
Title, or Dignity of the Highest Priestehoode, was general, and common to al
Bishops, and not only closed up, and mortesed only in the Pope.

Bisides all this, Augustine. Epis. 162.
ye bring us a Word, ye say, of Greater sound: In Romana Ecclesia semper
viguit Apostolicae Cathedrae Principatus: In the Roman Church the
Princehoode of the Apostolic Chair has always flourished. In deed,
Princehoode, and Apostolic, be ioily large words, and carry great sound.
And feign would ye have, the Bishop of Rome should be a Prince.
Notwithstanding, in the Council of Aphrica it was decreed thus, Did. 99.
Primae Sedis.
Primae Sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum: Let not the Bishop
of the First See be called the Prince of Priests.

But what if the sound of these words weighe no heavier, then the former?
Or, what if this word, Princehoode, be no more peculiare to the Pope, then is
the other of Highest Priesthood? Paulinus, writtinge unto Alypius, not the
Great Bishop of Rome, but the poor Bishop, as I remember, of Tagasta, says
thus, Inter Epistolas Augustine. Epis. 35.
Deus in Ciuibus Ciuitatis suae Principalem te cum Principibus populi sui, Sede
Apostolica collocauit: God has placed thee amongst the Citizens of his
City, in the Apostolic See, being a Principal, or a Chief with ( other
Bishops, that is to say, with) the Princes of his people: Here have you
found the Princehoode of the Sea Apostolic, not only in Rome, but also in
the poor City of Tagasta. Likewise S. Chrysostom says, Chrysotom. De
Orando Deum. Li. 1.
Ad orandum nos assidue prouocat (Paulus) Apostolorum Princeps: Paul the
Prince of the Apostles calls upon us, to be al ways praieinge. So says S.
Gregory, Paulus obtinuit totius Ecclesiae Principatum: Paul obtained the
Princehoode of the whole Church. Gregor. in 1. Regum, Ca. 10. Li. 4. Ca. 4.
So says Leo, Iuuenalis Episcopus, ad obtinendum Palestinae Prouinciae
Principatum, etc. Bishop Iuuenal, that he might obtain the Princehoode of the
Province of Palest^e, etc. Briefly your own singular Doctoure Amphilochius
writes thus. Leo Epis. 62. Amphilochius.
not of the Pope, but of S. Basile the Bishop of Caesarea: Additus est
Principibus Sacerdotum Magnus ipse Princeps Sacerdotum: Basile, being dead,
was laid with other Bishops the Princes of Priests, being him self the
Great Prince of Priests. It was great folly therefore M. Hardinge, these
Titles thus lieinge in Common, to encroche the same only to the Pope.
Notwithstanding, ye say, Thus now til then. Verily, when the Pope him self
shall begin to consider, and to weighe your pleadinge, then will he say, he
had a very unskillful Proctoure.

For answer to the rest, Articul. 4. Diuisi. 30. and 32.
I remit you to my First Reply.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 2.
Which of the Anciente Fathers, or Doctors ever said, that both the
Svverdes are committed unto you?

M. Hardinge.
Let S. Bernarde, Writing to a Pope, answer for the Pope. Untruth. For his
Authority is not sufficient, as it shall appear.
He is a sufficient witness. Where your self do allege him much against
the Pope, you can not by the law justly refuse him, speaking for the Pope.
Both Svverdes.
The spiritual swoorde you deny not, I trow. Of the Temporal swoorde
belonginge also to the Pope, Bernard. De Considera. Lib. 4.
thus says S. Bernarde to Eugenius. He that denies this swoorde to be thine,
seems to me, not to consider sufficiently the word of our Lord, saieinge
thus (to Peter thy Predecessor) Put up thy Svverde: Ergo, The Pope has both
Svverdes: A simple Argument.
Put up thy swoorde into the scaberde. The very same then is also thine to be
drawn forth perhaps at thy beck, though not with thy hand. Else if the same
belonged in no wise unto thee, where as the Apostles said, Behold there be
two swoordes here: Our Lord would not have answered, It is enough, but, It
is too much. So both be the Churches, the spiritual swoorde, and the
material. But this is to be exercised for the Church, and that of the
Church. That by the hand of the Priest, this of the Soldier, but verily at
the beck of the Priest, and commandment of the Emperor. Thus. touching
the Popes both swoordes, you are fully answered by S. Bernarde.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Pope has power to claim Authority without shame. Amongst others his
unadvised, Did. 22. Omnes.
and vain Words, thus he says: Christus Beato Petro, Vitae Aeternae
Clauigero, Terreni simul and Coelestis Imperij iura commisit: Christ has
committed unto Peter, the keiebearer of Everlasting Life, the right both of
the VVorldly, and also of the Heavenly Empiere: That is to say, The Pope is
Emperor both of Heaven, Paralipom. Vrspergensis.
and of Earth. And therefore Pope Bonifacius 8. as it is said before, in the
sight of the world, ware the Crown Emperial on his head, and commanded the
naked svverde to be borne before him: and Proclamation to be made, Ecce duo
Gladij hic: Behold here are the two Swerdes. I mean the same Pope
Bonifacius, of whom it is written, Carrion.
He entered as a Fox: He reigned as a Woulfe: he died as a Dog. Hereof it is
written in concilio Vangionum, Vtrunque, and Imperium, and Pontificatum,
Auentinus.
sicuti Decij, and Falsorum Deorum Cultores factitare co^sueuerunt, vsurpat:
The Pope wrong fully usurps both together, as well the VVorldly Empiere, as
the Bishoprike, as Decius, and the woorshippers of False Gods were woonte to
do.

Yet S. Bernarde says, The Pope has Both Svverdes: But S. Bernardes
Authority in this case is but simple. He lived Eleven hundred years after
Christ's Ascension, in the time of King Henry the First, the King of
England, in the mids of the Popes route, and Tyranny. How be it, touching
his Judgment, and Credit herein, let us rather hear one of your own
Doctors. Herueus therefore says thus, Herueus De Potestate Papae, Cap. 18.
Bernardus ponit, quod Papa habet Gladium Materialem in nutu. Sed istud, cum
hoc, quod non est magnae Authoritatis, magis est co^tra eos, quam pro eis:
Bernarde says, that the Pope has the Material, or Temporal Sword at his
commandment. But this saieinge of Bernardes, bisides that it is of small
force, makes also more against them, Herueus De Potestate Papae, Cap. 18.
then with them. Again he says, Vnum istorum Gladiorum Petrus non teugit,
scilicet, Saecularem, qui suus non erat: The one of these two Svverdes. Peter
never touched: I mean the VVorldly, or Temporal Svverde: For that Sword was
none of his.

Likewise ye may find it written in your own Decrees, under the name of S.
Did. 10. Quoniam idem.
Cyprian, Christus actibus proprijs, and dignitatibus distinctis, Officia
Potestatis vtriusque discreuit: Christ ( has not committed Both these
Svverdes to one man's hand, but) by several Duties, and sundry Dignities,
has severed ye Offices of either Power. Whereupon your own Gloss says thus,
Ergo, est Argumentum, quod Papa non habet vtrunque Gladium: This therefore is a
proof, that the Pope has not Both the svverdes.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 3.
Which of the Anciente Fathers ever said, that you have Authority, and
right to call Councelles?

M. Hardinge.
Who has authority to command the parts of the body, To call Cou^celles.
but the head? Untruth great and manifest. for this was yet never proved.
And that the Pope is head, where it is amply declared, ye heard even now.
Where you ask, which ever said, that the Pope has authority to call
councelles, if you know not so mutche, Untruth. For Socrates says not so.
We tell you, that Socrates the writer of the Ecclesiastical history says so,
not speaking in his own person, but reportinge an old rule of the Church in
these words. Histo. Triparti. li. 4. Cap. 9.
Sed neque Julius interfuit maximae Romae praesul, neque in locum suum aliquem
destinauit, cum vtique regula ecclesiastica iubeat, non oportere praeter
sententiam Romani Pontificis Untruth, standing in false Translation. Read the
answer.
concilia celebrari. But neither Julius the bishop of great Rome was present,
(at the council of Antiochia) neither sent he any man in his place, where as
the ecclesiastical rule commands, that without the advice and will of the
Pope of Rome no councels be kept. And, as Socrates witnesses of the calling
of councels, so does Sozomenus witness of the things done in them. Lib. 3.
ca. 10.
Cum sacerdotali lege constitutum sit, pro irritis haberi debere, quae praeter
sententiam episcopi Romani geruntur. Where as (says he) it has benne
ordained by a law of Bishops, that what things be done (in any council)
besides thaduise and will of the bishop of Rome, they ought to be taken for
none, and void. If you will see more for this authority of calling councels,
read Rescriptum Iulij Papae contra Orientales: Epist. Athanasij and
Aegyptiorum Pontificum ad Foelicem Papam. This matter is also fully answered.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here has M. Hardinge brought in a show of great Authorities without sense.
For answer whereof, it may please thee, Gentle Reader, to consider the
fourth Article of my Former Reply. Articulo. 4. Diui. 26.
Notwithstanding, amongst al these words of Pope Julius, Socrates,
Cassiodorus, and forged Athanasius, there is not one word of power, and
Authority to call Councelles. Only thus mutche they say, (...). Regula
Iuris.
No Decree may pass in Council without the agreemente and consent of the
Bishop of Rome: for that he was one of the Four Principal Patriarchs, and
ought to have his voice there, as well as others. It is a Principle ruled in
Law, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus debet approbari: That touches al, must be
allowed by all.

But, lest you should think, this was the Popes only prerogative, and
belonged to none other bisides him, the same Socrates writes the very like
words as well of the Bishop of Constantinople, as of the Pope. Thus he says,
Et hoc fecerunt, Socra. li. 7. ca. 28. (...).
contemnentes Legem, qua cauetur, ne quis eligatur praeter sententiam Episcopi
Constantinopolitani: Thus did they, not regardinge the Decree, whereby order
was taken, that no Bishop should be chosen without the consent of the Bishop
of Constantinople. Yet may not M. Hardinge conclude hereof, that therefore the
Bishop of Constantinople had Authority to call Councelles.

Aeneas Syluius, that afterward him self was Pope, named Pius the Second
writes thus, His Authoritatibus mirum in modum putant se armatos, qui negant,
Concilia fieri posse sine consensu Papae. Quorum sententia si, vt ipsi volunt,
inuiolata persistat, ruinam secum Ecclesiae trahit: They that say, no Council
may be keapte without the consent of the Pope, think them selves
marueilously fensed by these Authorities. Aeneas Syluius De Council. Basi. lib.
1.
But if their saieinge hold, and take place, as they would have it, it vvil
dravve with it the decaie, and ruin of the Church.

The Four first great Councelles, of Nice, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, of
Constantinople, and the rest, as it shall afterward more largely appear, were
always called by the Emperors, and not by the Pope. As for the Pope, he had
not yet the whole world at his commandment, nor any such Universal
Authority, to call Councelles: but rather was commanded him self, as other
Bishops were, by the Emperors Authority, to comme to Councelles.

Therefore, where you would conclude thus, The Pope was Head of the Church:
The whole world is the Popes Diocese.
Ergo he had Authority to call Councelles: We may rather, and mutche better
turn your tale backewarde, and say thus, The Pope had no Authority to
call Councelles: Ergo, he was not Headde of the Church.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 4.
Which of the Ancient Fathers, or Doctors ever said, The whole world is
but your Diocese?

M. Hardinge.
He that said to Peter, Joan. 22.
feed my Lambs, and, feed my Sheep, God knovveth here is a sheepishe reason.
which Lambs and sheep al Christen men be through the world.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Canonistes, that is to say, the Popes Pages of Honor, have not doubted
to infeaffe their Master with the possession of all the world. One says
thus, Extra, de Appellation. Vt debitus. In Gloss. Extra. De statu Regularium.
periculoso In Gloss. Extra. de Poenis. Foelicis. In Gloss. Extra De Co^cess.
Praebendae, and Ecclesiae non Vaecantis. Quia diuersitatem. Abb. Ceremoniar.
li. 1. Fran. Zarabella.
Dominus Papa est Ordinarius omnium hominum: Our Lord the Pope is the
Ordinary, or Bishop of al men. An other says, Papa totius mundi obtinet
Principatum, The Pope has the Princehoode of all the world. An other says,
Papa est Episcopus totius Orbis: The Pope is the Bishop of the whole world. An
other says, Papa etiam cessante negligentia Praelatorum, potest confer
beneficia totius Oribis: Quia ipse est Ordinarius totius mundi. Though there be
no defaulte, or negligence in any Bishop, yet may the Pope bestow the
benefices of all the world: For that he is the Bishop of all the world.
Therefore when the Chief Deacon inuesteth, or enrobethe the Pope at his
Consecration, he says unto him, Ego inuestio te de Papatu, vt praesis Vrbi,
and Orbi: I do inueste thee with the Popedom, that thou maiste rule both the
City, and the world.

Of this infinite Ambition, and inordinate tyranny many good men have often
complained. Franciscus Zarabella, being him self a Cardinal of Rome, says
thus: Ex hoc infiniti sequuti sunt errores: Quia Papa occupauit omnia iura
inferiorum Ecclesiarum: Et nisi Deus succurrat statui Ecclesiarum, Vniuersa
Ecclesia periclitatur: Hereof have ensued infinite errors: for that the Pope
has invaded the right of al inferior Churches. And unless God healpe the
state of the Churches, the Universal Church is in ieoperdie. Anna in Historia
Graeca: (...). Histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 1. cap. 6.


The learned Lady Anna Daughter unto the Emperor Alexius, and Irene, in her
Story, that she wrote in Greek, emonge many other things to like purpose,
writes thus: Papa est Dominus totius Mundi, quemadmodum Latini quidem putant,
and praedicant: Est enim etiam haec pars quaedam illorum insolentiae. The Pope
is the Lord of all the world, as the Latins think, and speak of him. For
this is a piece of their Ambition.

This has benne the late wanton Claim of the Popes Canonistes. Athana. Ad
solitariam Vitam agentes.
Otherwise the Ancient Learned Fathers have evermore bounded, and limited the
Pope within his own particular Jurisdiction. Ruffinus says, the Fathers in
the Council of Nice, Sozomen. lib. 6. ca. 23. (...). Hieronymus ad Euagrium.
appointed the Pope to ouersee the Churches of his own Suburbs: Vt Romanus
Episcopus Suburbicarum Ecclesiarum sollicitudinem gerat. Athanasius says, Roma
est Metropolis Romanae ditionis: Rome is the Mother Church ( not of all the
universal world, but) of the Roman ( particulare) Jurisdiction. The
Bishops in the Council of Rome write thus to the Bishops of Illyricum, Par
est, omnes qui sunt in Orb Romano, Episcopos conuenire: It is conuemente, that
all the Bishops, that be within the Jurisdiction of Rome, should accord
together. S Hierome speakinge of the usage, and order of the Church of Rome,
says thus, Al receive of the Popes fullness.
Quid mihi profeis Vnius Vrbis Consuetudinem? What allegeste thou me the
Custom of one City? So mutche he abbridgeth the Popes Jurisdiction, that he
extends it, not unto the Listes, and ends of all the world, but restreineth
it only to the limits of one City. Hierony. ad Euagrium. Hieronymus aduersus
Vigilantium.
Likewise again, speakinge of the Bishop of Rome, he says thus, Non solum
Vnius Vrbis, sed etiam totius Orbis errant Episcopi: Then not only the Bishop
of One Town ( which was the Bishop of Rome) but also the Bishops of all the
world are deceived.

Thus therefore writes Gennadius, together with the Council of
Constantinople, unto the Bishop of Rome, Gennadius ad omnes Metropolitanos, and
ad Papam Roman.
Curet Sanctitas tua Vniuersas tuas Custodias, tibique subiectos Episcopos: Let
your Holiness see unto ( not all the whole world, but) al your own charge,
and such Bishops, as he subject unto you.

By these few we see, the Bishop of Romes power was, not Universal or
infinite, over all the Churches, and Kingedomes of the world: but certain, and
limited within his own particulare Jurisdiction.

As for the reasons, ye use for proof hereof, I marvel, ye would ever
trouble the world with so Childishe folies. Christ said unto Peter, Feed my
sheep: Ergo, say you, the whole world is the Popes Diocese. A good Sheep
would have made a better Arguments.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 5.
Which of the holy Ancient Fathers ever said, that al Bishops have received
of your fullness?

M. Hardinge.
Besides others, so has A simple Authority.
S. Bernarde said in his book de consideratione ad Eugenium. Where he
says, that he is called in plenitudinem potestatis, into the fulness of power.

The B. of Sarisburie.
There is no folly so vain, but by some shift may be maintained. In your
Gloss, M. Hardinge, Clemen. li. 5. De Haereti. Ad vestrum, In Gloss. Petrus de
Palude, de Potestate Papae.
it is written thus: Omnes subiecti sunt motioni Papae, and sunt in illo, quasi
Membra de Membro: Al men are subject unto the Popes will, and are in him as
members of a member. An other says, Ecclesia non habet Potestatem aliquam
Iurisdictionis, nisi a Petro: The Church has no Power of Jurisdiction, but
only from Peter. And again, A Petro, post Christum, Spiritualis Gratia, and
Potestas deriuatur: Next after Christ, Spiritual Grace, and Power is derived
from Peter. And therefore an other of your Doctors says: Petrus de Palude,
de Potestate collata Aposto. Durandus, li. 2. De Ministris and Ordinib.
Augusti. de Trinita. li. 15. ca. 26.
Omnes Episcopi descendunt a Papa, quasi Me^bra a Capite: and de eius
Plenitudine omnes accipiunt. Al Bishops are derived from the Pope, as Members
from the Head: and al they receive of his fullness: that is to say, Power of
his Power, and Grace of his Grace. Al these vanities M. Hardinge thinks, may
be well borne out by two bare words of S. Bernarde.

But S. Augustine, many hundred years before Bernarde was borne, wrote thus:
Nos quidem accipere possumus hoc donum pro modulo nostro: Fundere autem illud
super alios non possumus. Sed, vt hoc fiat, Deum super eos, a quo hoc
efficitur, inuocamus: In deed we may receive the gift of God according to
our portion: but to pour the same upon others, we are not able.
Notwithstanding, in their behalf we call upon God, that is the worker hereof,
that he will do it.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 6.
Which of all the Ancient Doctors ever said, that al Power is given to you,
Al power geeuen to the Pope.
as well in Heaven, as in Earth?

M. Hardinge.
Untruth, indiscreet, and impudent. For no Ancient Doctor or Father ever
uttered so fond words.
Al they which speak of the ministerial Power, whereby under Christ the
militant Church by him is governed. But if you mean absolutely, as your
words seem to sound, so no discrete Catholic man ever said or thought.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, by a pretty distinction, of Power Absolute, and Power not Absolute,
Christ, and his Vicare are set together to part tenures. How be it, what
manner of Power it is, Extra, De translatione Episcopi. Qua^to. Hostien. In
Council. Lateran. sub Leone. 10. Sessione. 10.
that the Pope claims, his own Proctours, and Counselors can tell us best.
Cardinal Hostiensis says, Excepto peccato, Papa potest, quicquid Deus ipse
potest: Sin only excepted, the Pope has Power to do, what so ever God him
self can do. Stephanus the Bishop of Patraca, in your late Council at
Laterane in Rome, says thus, In Papa est omnis Potestas supra omnes
Potestates, tam Coeli, quam Terrae: Al Power is in the Pope above all the
Powers, as well of Heaven, as of Earth.

And, Citatur in eode^ Council. Lateran.
to make the matter plain, your own Bernarde him self says, Tibi data est
omnis Potestas: in qua, qui totum dicit, nihil excludit: Al manner of Power is
geeuen to thee: He that says, Al, excepteth nothing.

And, Extra, de Co^stitutionibus, ca. 1.
Abbate Panormitane says, Plenitudo Potestatis superat omnem Legem positiuam:
Et sufficit quod in Papa sit pro Ratione Voluntas: The fullness of Power
passes al Positive Law: and it is sufficient in the Pope, that Will stand
instede of Reason.

This is that Power, that M. Hardinge here has so closely conveyed in, under
the Cloud of his Distinction.

But, Baldus.
Baldus, that by experience saw the practice hereof, says thus: Haec
Plenitudo Potestatis, est Plenitudo Tempestatis: This Fullness of Power, is a
Fullness of Tempeste.

An other of your Doctoures says: Herueus, De Potesta. Papae. ca. 18
Bernardus nullam Potestatem ponit in Papa, quam non ponit in Praelatis
inferioribus: licet in Papa ponat Summam: Bernarde allows no Power unto the
Pope, but he allows the same to other inferioure Bishops: Notwithstanding,
he allows the greatest Power unto the Pope. Bernard. De Consideration. li. 3.
S. Bernarde him self says to like purpose, Sic factuando probatis, vos
habere plenitudinem Potestatis: Sed Iustitiae forte non ita. Thus dooinge, and
dealinge, ye show your self to have the Fullness of Power: but perhaps not
likewise the Fullness of Justice.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 7.
Which of the Ancient Fathers ever said, that neither King, nor Prince, nor
the whole Cleregie, nor all the people together are hable to be Judges over you?

M. Hardinge.
Worthy reasons.
What Sheep shall be judges over their shepherde? For as the Fathers of the
most ancient Council of Sinuessa said, in the cause of This Marcellinus being
Pope, had committed open Idolatry, in making Sacrifice unto Diuelles.
Marcellinus the Pope, Nemo vnquam iudicauit Pontificem: No man ever judged the
Pope, nor any Prelate his high Priest. Quoniam prima seeds non iudicabitur a
quoquam: * because the first See shall not be judged of any body.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In these two points stands the Popes Guard of trust, and the keep, and
Castle of al his Power. First, the Church of Rome, what so ever way she
take, can never err: Next, the Pope, what so ever he do, may never be
called to any reckening. The Pope without Check.
One of your Doctors says thus: Omne factum Sanctissimi Patris interpretari
debemus in bonum. Et fiquidem fuerit furtum, vel aliud ex se malum,
interpretari debemus, Johan, De Parisijs, De Potesta. Regia, and Papali.
quod Diuino instinctu fiat: We must expound every act of the Holy Father
for the best. And if it be theft, or any other thing, that of it self is
evil ( as Aduoutrie, or Fornication) we must think, it is done by the
secret inspiration of God. An other says, Si Papa innumerabiles populos
cateruatim secum ducat mancipio Gehennae, cum ipso plagis mulus in aeternum
vapulaturos, Distinct. 40. Si Papa.
huius culpas arguere praesumat mortalium nullus: If the Pope draw infinite
Companies of people by heaps together with him self into Hell, to be pounished
with him with many stripes for ever, yet let no Mortal man presume to reprove
his faults.

An other says, 9. Questi. 3. Cunctae.
Papa solutus est omni Lege Humana: The Pope is exempted from al Law of Man.
An other says, Sacrilegij instar esset, disputare de facto Papae. Facta Papae
excusantur, vt homicidia Samsonis: vt furta Haebraeorum: vt adulterium Jacob:
Did. 40. Non nos. In Gloss.
It is a sin, as great as Sacrilege, or Church robbinge, to reason of any
of the Popes dooinges. For his Acts are excused, as Samsons Murders: as the
Jews Robberies: and as the Aduouteries of Jacob. Petrus de Palude. de
Potesta. Papae. Arti. 4.
An other says, Nec Totus Clerus, nec totus Mundus potest Papam iudicare, aut
deponere: Neither all the Cleregie, nor all the whole World, may either Judge,
or Depose the Pope. And again, Papa in nullo casu, quamdiu est Papa, Idem
eode^ loco.
propter quodcunque crimen potest deponi, nec a Concilio, nec a rota Ecclesia,
nec a toto Mundo: The Pope, while he is Pope, cannot in any case, for any
offense by him committed, be deposed, neither by the General Council, nor by all
the Church, nor by the whole world.

And all this they are well hable to prove by good substantial Authority of the
Scriptures. In Epistola Nicolai Papae: Inter decreta Adriani Papae. Did. 21.
Inferior. Herueus De Potest. Papae. ca. 20. Council. Tomo. 1. In purgatione
Sixti.
For thus they reason, The Scholare is not above his Master: The Servant is
not above his Lord: And again, The Axe boasts not it self against the
Carpe^ter, that hevveth with it: Ergo, no man may accuse the Pope.

Therefore, an other of your Doctors says: Iudicare de factis Papae, hoc
aliqui dicunt esse, Tangere Montem, and ponere os in Coelu^: To Judge of the
Popes deeds, this, sum men say, is to touch the Holy Mount ( wherein
God gave the Law, and showed him self to Moses) and to set the face against
the Heavens. And the Pope him self says, It is the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, which shall never be forgeuen, neither in this world, nor in the world
to comme.

Thus may the Pope depose Kings, and Princes, and trouble the whole state of
the world, and do what he list, without Controlmente. Yet may no man dare
say unto him, Sir why do ye so? Therefore the Accusers of Pope Symmachus
said in the presence of King Theodoricus, Papa iactat, se vna cum docendi
Potestate, Ennodius.
accepisse licentiam peccandi: The Pope makes his boaste, that together with
the Power of teachinge, he has received free liberty to do il.

Pope Marcellinus, Council. Tomo. 1. In Marcellino.
whose name ye have alleged, out of the Council of Sinuessa, for defense
hereof, was an Apostata, and had foresaken Christ, and being Pope in Rome, had
made Sacrifice unto Devils. All this notwithstanding, ye say, no mortal man
might accuse him. Thus has the Pope a Special Prerogative, and Praemunire, to
forsake Christ, and to commit open Idolatry, and to geeue Honor, and
Sacrifice unto Devils, without Controlmente.

Yet S. Gala. 2. Cyprian. Ad Quirinum.
Paul accused S. Peter, even unto his face, in the presence of many. And S.
Cyprian says, Petrus se non Vindicauit, seu aliquid insolenter assumpsit, vt
diceret, se Primatum tenere, and obtemperari sibi a nouellis, and posteris
oportere. Peter ( being thus checked openly by S. Paul) neither revenged him
self, nor took any thing proudely upon him, as to say, that he had the
Primacie, or that others, that were but Nouices, Nicephor. li. 17. cap. 26.
and aftercommers (as Paul was) ought be obediente unto him. Mena, the Bishop
of Constantinople, judged, and Excommunicated Pope Vigilius. The Bishops of
the East Church Judged, The Emperor receives his power of the Pope.
and Excommunicated, and deposed Pope Julius. One of your Doctoures says, Si
Papa committat crimen Depositione dignum, debet puniri, ac si esset vnus
rusticus: If the Pope commit an offense, where fore he should justly be
deposed, he ought to be pounished, as if he were a Clown of the Country. Your
neighbors of Leodium, Sozomenus, li. 3. cap 11.
in their Epistle against Pope Paschalis, write thus: Remoto Romanae
Ambitionis typho, cur de grauibus, and manifestis, non reprehendantur, and
corrigantur Romani Episcopi? Felinus in Repertorio. Dignitas.
Qui reprehendi and corrigi non vult, pseudo est, sieve Episcopus, sieve
Clericus: Settinge aparte the Pride of Romish Ambition, the Crimes being
great, and manifest, why may not the Bishops of Rome both be reproved,
Council. Tomo. 2. Epist. Leodien. contra Paschalem Pap. (...).
and also corrected? He, that flees rebuke, and correction, is a false man,
whether he be Priest, or Bishop.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 8.
Which of the Ancient Fathers ever said, that Kings, and Emperors, by
Christ's will, and Commandment, receive their Authority at your hands?

M. Hardinge.
What is to be answered hereto, There may you find nothing to prove
nothing.
you may gather of that is alleged before out of S. Bernard, speaking of
both swords.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It is evident by the record, and general consent of al Ancient Writers, that
the Pope has neither possession, nor foot of Lands, nor House to dwell in,
nor the name of Universal Bishop, Nicephor. li. 7. cap 46.
nor Chartar, nor Liberty, nor Jurisdiction, but that he has received, either
of the French kings, or of the Emperors. Yet would he now bear y^ world in
hand, Cario^. in Bonif. 3 Sabellicus in Phoca.
yt the Emperor has nothing, neither Lands, nor Honor, nor Power, nor
Right, nor Swerd, nor Jurisdiction, but only from him. If any man doubt
hereof, bisides other testimonies of Antiquity, let him read that most
vain, and Childishe Donation, that the Pope him self has forged, under the
name of the Emperor Constantine. Ambrosi. In Lucam. li. 9. ca. 20.
S. Ambrose says, Si non vis esse obnoxious Caesari, noli habere, quae sunt
Mundi. Si habes diuitias, obnoxious es Caesari: If thou will not be subject to
the Prince, then possess not the things, that be of the world: If thou have
worldly riches, August. In Iohannem, Citatur in Epist. Leodi^n. contra
Paschale^ Council. Tomo. 2. Citatur ab Illyrico inter Testes veritatis. Pa. 102.
then art thou subject unto the Prince. Likewise S. Augustine, Dices, Quid
mihi, and Regi? Quid tibi ergo, and possessioni? Per Iura Regum possessiones
possidentur: Thou will say, what have I to do with the Prince? What then
haste thou to do with Lands? For possessions are holden (not by the Popes
right, but) by the right of Kings, and Princes.

Charles the French king, Neuewe to Charles the Great, wrote thus unto Pope
Adrian: Imperatores ius distinguendorum negotiorum Episcopis Sanctis iuxta
Diualia Constituta permiserunt: non autem Episcoporum Villici extiterunt:
Emperoures, by their Commissions under their great Seals, have granted unto
Bishops Authority to hear causes: but they them selves were never
Stewardes, or Bailifes unto Bishops. One of your own late Doctors says,
Herueus De Potest. Papae. ca. 18.
Papa habet gladium (Ciuilem) ex Commissione, and permissione Principis: The
Pope has the Temporal Svverde, or Civil Jurisdiction, by the Commission, and
Sufferance of the Prince. Therefore it seems great folly to say, The Prince
has his svverde, or Jurisdiction only by the Commission of the Pope.

Your own Barbarous Gloss says, Extra. De Maiorita. and Obedt. Vnam
Sanctam. In Gloss.
Imperator in temporalibus habet Potestatem a solo Deo. Et imperium fuit,
antequam Apostolatus esset. The Emperor in Temporal things has his
Authority ( not from the Pope, but) from God only. And the Empiere was,
before the Apostles were. Again, Imperator non habet gladium a Papa: The
Emperor receives his power of the Pope.
Sed Imperium est a solo Deo. The Emperor has not his Sword of the Pope:
but the Empiere is only from God. Again, Ex sola electione Principum, dico,
verum esse Imperatorem, antequam confirmetur a Papa: I say, that the Emperor
is a very right, and perfect Emperor, by the only Election of the Princes,
Did. 96. Cum ad Verum. In Gloss. 23. quae. 4. Quaesitum.
yea, before he be confirmed by the Pope.

What shall we need more witnesses? Your very Ceremoniarie of Rome says thus,
Hoc affirmamus, ante Carolum Magnum, neminem Imperij Romani Coronam ex Manu
Romani Pontificis Romae suscepisse: Thus we say, that before the Emperor
Charles the great (that is, for the space of eight hundred years after
Christ) no man ever received the Crown of the Roman Empiere at Rome, Did.
96. Cum ad verum. In Gloss Ceremonia. li. 1. Section. 5. ca. 7. Bernardus De
Considerat. li. 2.
by the Hands of the Bishop of Rome. S. Bernarde hereof thus writes unto the
Pope: Esto, vt alia quacunque ratione hoc tibi vendices: non tamen Apostolico
iure: Nec illud tibi dare, quod non habuit, Petrus potuit: Be it, that ye
claim this right by sum other means, Yet by the Apostles right ye cannot
claim it: Neither could Peter geeue you that right, that he himself never
badde.

The Emperor Ludouicus the fourth says thus: Paralipomena Vrspergen. in
Ludouico. 4.
Mea Potestas non pendet a Papa, sed a Deo immediate. Et vanum est, quod dici
solet, Papam non habere Superiorem: My Power hangs not of the Pope, but
immediately of God alone. And it is but a peeuishe vain tale, that they say,
the Pope has no Superioure. Johannes Mayor says, Johan. Mayor. 4 Senten.
Did. 20, quae. 2.
Bonifacius Octauus multum apparenter definiuit, quod Romanus Pontifex est
supra Reges in Temporalibus: quod tame^ oculatissimi Theologi dicunt esse
falsum: Pope Bonifacius. 8. has concluded with great show of reason, that,
even in Temporal Causes, the Pope is above Kings. But I may tell you, the
VVisest Divines say, Johan. De Parisijs, De Potesta. Regia, and Papali, cap. 5.
it is but a false tale. Johannes de Parisijs says, In Temporalibus, Potestas
Saecularis mayor est Potestare Spirituali, nec, quoadista, est ei subiecta in
aliquo: In Temporal Causes, the Temporal Power is greater then the Spiritual
Power, and, touching the same, is not subject to it in any point. Herueus
says, Si Imperator habet Potestatem suam immediate a Papa, Ergo, Imperator
est Minister Papae: If the Emperor receive his Power immediately from the
Pope, Herueus De Potesta. Papae. ca. 19.
then is the Emperor the Popes Seruante.

Al these Authorities notwithstanding, the Pope him self says, The
Emperor has no right, nor Authority, but only of him. And, touching the
last Objection of Herueus, that ye Emperor should be the Popes Servant, he
thinks, it may be well admitted without any great inconvenience. For thus
says one of his Privy Counsel, Did. 98. Si Imperator. In Glos.
Iste Romanus Imperator, est Procurator, and Defensor Romanae Ecclesiae. This
Roman Emperor is (nothing else, but) the Proctoure, and Steward of the
Church of Rome.

Likewise says Johannes de Parisijs, Dicunt, quod solus Papa est Verus
Dominus Temporalium: Johan. De Pari. De Potest. Regia and Papali. ca. 5.
ita vt possit auferre ab alio, quod alias suum est: and tenet factum eius,
licet peccet. Sed Praelati coeteri, and Principes, non sunt Domini, sed
Tutores, Procuratores, and dispensatores: They say, that only the Pope is the
right Lord of Temporal Possessions: so, that he may put any man from his
own. And although he offend in so dooinge, yet his dooinge takes place. But
other Bishops, and Princes, be not Lords, but Overseers, Bailifes, and
Stewardes.

Therefore Pope Adrian namely thus auanced him self above the Emperor
Fredericus. 1. Imperator per nos imperat: Vnde haber Imperium. nisi a nobis?
Auentinus.
Ecce in Potestate nostra est, vt demus illud, cui volumus: Propterea
constituti sumus a Deo super Gentes, and Regna: vt destruamus, and euellamus,
and aedificemus, and plantemus: By mean of us, the Emperor is Emperor: For,
whence has he his Empiere, but of us? Behold, it is in our hand, to bestow
the Empiere, upon whom we list. And to that end are we placed by God, over
Nations, and Kingdoms: that we should destroy, and pluck up, and build, and
plant. Such proud vauntes the Pope makes of him self, without either
shame of the world, or fear of God.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 9.
Which of the Anciente Learned Fathers, The Pope above the the Emperor.
with so precise, and Mathematical Limitation, ever surueied, and determined
you to be seventy, and seven times greater then the Mightiest Kings?

M. Hardinge.
Some merry fellow, Cleme^s Co^. Aposto. li. 2, Cap. 34. Nazianzen. Ad popul.
Nazianzen. De Maiori. and Obedien. Solitae.
or other, A pleasant Mathematical Divinity
which thought he might be bold to speak Mathematically, so he kept him
self within compass, and without just reprehension. For where as the
spiritual power so far passes the Temporal, as the Soul does excelle the
Body, and the Heavens surmounte the Earth, as S. Clement says, and Gregory
Nazianzene: By this reason, every simple poor parish Priest is seventy, and
seven times greater then the Emperor.
you should not so greatly be offended with the seventy and seven times
greater dignity, and we need not condemn him as an Heretic, which would
be pleasant in his algorisme, especially Ioannes Andreae in the same place
referring the matter to the Astronomers.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Sum Merry felovve, I vvarrante you, ye say. And thus, now in mirthe, now
in sadness, ye have of long time mockte the world, and forced Kings and
Emperors to be your selaues. Johan. Andreae. Clemens.
As for your New Doctors, Jack of Andrew, and Sir Clement, as you
evermore call him, the Apostles felovve, we weighe them none otherwise, then
they be worthy. But, touching Gregory Nazianzene, it is true, that he says,
The Truth, and Might of Gods Word infinitely passes al wordly Power. But
what makes all this for the Pope, that walloweth only in his Temporalties, and
worldly cares, and as well in Preachinge Gods Word, and Ministering the
Sacraments, as also in other Spiritual exercises, is as far inferioure to
any mean Priest, as the Earth is inferioure to the Heavens?

How be it, that it may appear, what pretty Mirthe ye have made herewith, one
of your own Fellows says thus: Herueus De Potesta. Papae ca 11.
Ecclesiastici debent iudicare per contemptibiles, id est, per Laicos, Secundum
tenorem, and debitum Terreni Iuris: The Ecclesiastical Officers, or Bishops,
ought to judge by them, that be Vile, and Contemptible, that is to say, by the
Lay Magistrates, according to the tenoure, and order of the Temporal Law.
Here in your Mirthe, and pleasance, in comparison of your selves, ye call
Princes, and Temporal Magistrates, Vile, and Contemptible.

Again, Herueus De Potesta Papae. ca. 12.
ye say, Patet, Regnum, sieve Regimen Regale non esse acceptum a Deo. Sed ipsum
solum permisit indignatus. Et magis esset acceptum Deo, quod per solum Papam
Mundus in omnibus regeretur: It is plain, that the state of kingedome, or
kingely government came not from God. For God only suffered it in his anger.
And it were more acceptable unto God, that the whole world were in all things
governed by the Pope alone. It were good, ye should tell us, whether ye speak
this only in Mirthe, and Game, or else in earneste, and good sadness.

Verily, when ye so proudely compare the Pope to the Son, and the Emperor
to the Moon, your meaning is, that, as the Moon has no light, but only
from the son, so the Emperor has no Authority, but only that he
receives from the Pope. Isidorus in Glos. in Genesim. Herueus, De Potesta.
Papae. ca. 13
Notwithstanding, in this comparison, Isidorus your own Doctor says, ye
are sowly ouerseene. For thus he writes, Per Solemn intelligitur Regnum, and
per Lunam intelligitur Sacerdotium: By the Son, is meante Kingely Dignity,
and by the Moon, is meante Priesthood. Now therefore Jack Andrew, your
merry man, by this reckening may cast your coumptes backewarde, and say, The
Emperor is seventy, and seven times greater, then the Pope.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 10.
Which of the Anciente Fathers ever said, Constantines Donation.
that more ample Authority is geeuen to you, then to the residue of the
Patriarchs?

M. Hardinge.
A whole heap of Untruths and forgeries hudl^d together.
The Fathers of the Nicene council, by witness of Julius the first, who then
lived. and those of the Council of Sardica, Athanasius, and the Bishops of
Aegipt, Thebaida, and Lybia, and the Fathers of certain other Councelles.

Above al other most specially the first Christian Emperor Untruths,
without any word or shevve of truth.
Constantine the great. Who being fully instructed of the most godly and
learned Bishops of his time, * what authority the successor of Peter, had by
* commission of our Savior Christ, thought good by his * Emperial
Commandment and decree, to confirm, ratify, and for his own person to
yield unto Untruth. For Syluester was dead long before these matters are
imagined to be done.
blessed Syluester then Pope, and to his successors Bishops of Rome, the
same Authority, and Superiority, not only over Bishops and Patriarchs, but
also Power and Honor, higher and greater, then that of Kings, and Emperors.
The words of This solemn Decree is nothing else, but a solemn folly.
his solemn decree in that behalf made, are these, which as they are found in
sundry other Greek writers, so most plainly in For shame: has the Pope
none other Record to prove his Chartar by, but only one poor, hungry,
forged Grecian, that never savve Rome?
Matthaeus Hieromonachus. (...). Which in our tongue is this mutche to say.
We geeue in decree and commandment to al Lords, and to the Senate of our
Empire, that the Bishop of Rome, and the successor of S. Peter chief of the
Apostles, have Authority and Power in all the world more then that of the
Empire is, and that he be honored and worshepped more then the Emperor, and
that he be Head of the four Patriarchal seats, and that things apperteininge
to the right faith, be of him judged and determined. Justinian the Emperor
likewise made an express decree, that the most holy Pope of the elder Rome
(for these be his very words) be taken, according to the determinations of
the holy councels, to be the First, and principal in Councelles, we confess:
But Lord and Master of al other Patriarchs, that vvoulde be proved.
first and principal of al Bishops. It were not hard to allege mutche more
for proof hereof, of good and sufficient authority: but in a matter not
doubtful this may suffice.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This is a folly of al folies. Yet is there no folly so great, but by words
and countenance it may be maineteined. It shameth, me to bestow words
herein: and so mutche the more, for that you say, the case is so clear, and
out of doubt. I assure you, M. Harding, of al other your innumerable Louanian
vanities, concerning the practice of the Church, and story of time, this one
vanity is y^ vainest.

But lest any man, by Simplicity, or Ignorance should be deceived, not
understanding the Mysteries of this Donation, or Chartar, by the judgment of
your own Doctors, Herueus de Potestate Papae, Cap. 19.
the meaning thereof is this: Volunt aliqui quod ratione huius Doni, Papa est
Imperator, and Dominus Mundi: and quod potest Reges instituere, and Destituere,
sicut Imperator: Sum think, that by force, and virtue of this Donation, the
Pope is the Emperor, and the Lord of the World: And that hereby he has
Power both to set up, and also to put down Kings, as an Emperor.

The Fable hereof is so peeuishe, that the wiseste, and best learned of your
very friends, Platyna, Cardinal Cusanus, Marsilius Patauinus, Laurentius Valla,
Antoninus Florentinus, Otho Frisingensis, Hieronymus Paulus Catalanus,
Volaterranus, Mullinaeus, and others have openly reproved it unto the world,
and have written against it, and are mutche ashamed of your folies.

And, to allege one in steed of many, Cardinal Cusanus hereof has written
thus: Donationem Constantini diligenter expendens, reperi ex ipsamet Scripture.
manifesta argumenta Confictionis and Falsitatis: Constantines Donation.
Advisedly weighinge this Donation, or Grant of constantine, Nicolaus
Cusanus, de Concordantia Catholica, lib. 3 cap. 2. Ni. Cusa. eodem loco.
( whereby the Pope claims al his Temporal power) even in the penninge
thereof, I find manifest tokens of falsehed, and forgerie.

Again he says, Sunt, meo iudicio, illa de Constantino, Apocrypha: Sicut
etiam fortassis quaedam alia longa, and magna scripta Sanctis, Clementi, and
Anacleto Papae ascripta. Ipsae enim Epistolae, applicatae ad tempus illorum
Sanctorum, seipsas produnt: By my judgment these Chartars of Constantine are
forged: as perhaps are also other long, and great Letters, that bear the
name of S. Clemente, and Pope Anacletus. For the Letters them selves, applied
unto the time of these Holy Fathers, betraie them selves.

Again, Did. 98. Constantinus.
the same grant of Constantine, even in Gratian the Popes own Register, is
found only in the Palea, and not in the Original allowed text. And in many
Old Books, that have no Gloss, it is not found. And in the Gloss upon the
same it is noted thus, Palea ista non legitur in Scholis: in qua continetur
Priuilegium, Glosa ^ode^ loco.
quod Constantinus concessit Romanae Ecclesiae: Scilicet, vt Primatum inter
omnes Ecclesias obtineret: This patche is not read in the Schools: wherein is
contained the Privilege, that Constantinus the Emperor granted to the Church
of Rome: that is to say, that the said Church should have the Soueraintie
over al Churches.

And, Pius. 2. in dialog.
to put the matter out of doubt, even Pope Pius him self thereof says thus,
Dicta palea Constantinus, falsa est: The said, that so begins,
Constantinus, is stark false. Felinus de Maioritate and Obedien. Solitae.
Colum. 3.
Whereunto Felinus your canoniste adds these words: Et inuehit contra
miseros Legistas, qui laborant in disputando, an valuerit id, quod nunquam
fuit: And the same Pope Pius rages earnestly against the poor Lavviers, for
that they take such pains to reason, whether that thing may be good, and
auailable in Law, that never was made.

And again, the same Doctoures, In vita Syluestri. Herueus de potesta. Papae.
ca. 19*
that would seem most frendely and favorably to speak of this Donation, by
their own judgment, do quite condemn it. For thus they say, In, Donatione
illa audita est Vox Angelorum in aere dicentium, Hodie Venenum effusum est in
Ecclesiam: At the time of the Confirminge, and passinge of this Donation, there
was a Voice of Angels heard in the air, saieinge, This day Poison is
powered into the Church.

Briefly, to touch sum part of the Contents, and Substance of the same,
the foolish Body, that forged it, was so simple, that he knew not, whether
Constantinople stood in the ^aste from Rome, or in the North: Whether Byzance
were a City, or a Country: Whether the Emperial Diadem were made of Silk,
or of Goulde. He tells a tale of the Patriarch of Constantinople, that he
should be ^oner, and buxom to the Bishop of Rome: and yet at that time, when,
as he imagines, this Grant was made, the City of Constantinople was not
builded, nor and such name as yet known in the world.

And yet is the Marginal Gloss hereupon, as good, and as substantial, as the
Text. Council. Tomo. 1. page 227.
For, where as the Text says, Contradimus Beato Syluestro phrygium nostrum,
id est, mitram: We deliver unto Blessed Syluester our phrygium, that is to
say, our Miter, there shall you find this pretty note in the Margin,

Nota, Phrygium.
quo'd Phrygium factum est ex pennis pauonum: Mark well, that this Phrygium, or
Miter, was made of a Pecockes tail. No doubt, a worthy gift for an
Emperor: and a meet Miter for a Pope. But, as I said before, it ^^ameth me,
in so Childishe a Fable, to stand so long.

As for your Greek Doctor Hieromonachus, he shall be stalled together with
your Clemens, Leontius, Amphilochius, and other like your worthy and Weighty
Doctors. Constantines Donation.
For shame, what should ye bring us this one sely poor Greek witness,
whoes name ye never heard before, to testify of Grauntes and Conueiances
made in Rome? Can your Pope find out neither Council, nor Doctor, nor
Father, nor any other Writer of likely record, to healpe him in so great a
case, but only one poor raskal Grecian, that knew no more of the matter,
then you your selves? It bewraiethe the needinesse of your cause. He that
durst so lewdely to falsify such a Grant, thereby to intrude him self
into the possession of the Empiere, would not blusshe to falsify sum
Beggarly Witness, to auouche the same.

Now, where ye would seem to say, the other Four Patriarchs stood
evermore at the Commandment of the Bishop of Rome: not only the said three
Patriarchs, which never neither yielded, nor knew any such Obedience, but
also the general practice of the world will soon reprove you.

Nilus a Greek Writer says, Nilus De primatu Romani Pontificis. (...).
Vt liquidi^s appareat, Papam non imperare alijs omnibus Episcopis, legatur
Sextus Canon Synodi Nicenae, quo diserte praecipitur, vt alijs Ecclesiis
Alexandrinus, alijs Romanus, alijs Antiochenus praesit: Vt non liceat alteri,
alterius prouinciam inuadere: That it may well and plainly appear, that the
Pope has no Power or Gouernemente over al other Bishops, read the Sixthe
Canon of the Nicene Council. There it is expressly Commanded, that the Bishop
of Alexandria shall have the rule over certain Churches, and the Bishop of Rome
over certain, and the Bishop of Antioche likewise over certain: And that it
shall not be laweful for any one of them, to invade the Jurisdiction of an other.

The Emperor Justinian says, Ecclesia Vrbis Constantinopolitanae Romae
Veteris praerogatiua laetatur: Cod. De Sacrosan. Eccle. Omni innouatione.
Nicephorus, li. 12 cap. 13.
The Church of the City of Constantinople enioieth now the prorogatiue of
Rome the Elder. Nicephorus says, Romano and Constantinopolitano Episcopo ex
aequo paria sunt and dignitatis praemia, and honorum iura: The title of
dignity, and right of honor, geeuen to the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop of
Constantinople are one, and equal.

So likewise it was determined by Decree in the Council of Constantinople:
Definimus Sedi Constantinopolitanae paria Iura, Council. Constant. 2. cap. 36.
(...).
and Priuilegia cum Sede Veteris Romae: We decree, that the Sea of
Constantinople shall have Rightes, and Privileges equal with the Sea of Old
Rome. Therefore, as it is said before, Gennadius, together with the Council
of Constantinople, wrote thus unto the Bishop of Rome: Cures Sanctitas tua
Vniuersas tuas Custodias, tibique Subiectos Episcopos: Gennadius ad omnes
Metropolitanos, and ad Papam Roman. Cypria^ ad Cornelium.
Let your Holiness see unto al your own Cures, and to the Bishops, that be
subject unto you.

S. Cyprian, Cyrillus, Athanasius, and others, writing, either of, or unto the
Bishop of Rome, call him, not their Lord and Master, unto whom of duty they
ought Obedience, but their Brother, and their Felovve Servant. Yea the Pope
him self, in some cases, has rather offered his Obedience unto other
Bishops. Athanasius ad Epi. Aphricanos. Epistola Liberij ad Athanasium.
For thus writes Pope Liberius unto Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria:
Quaeso vt huic confessioni subscribas, vt ego securior efficiar, and tua
mandata inhaesitanter obeam: I beseech thee to subscribe to this Confession,
that I may be out of doubt, and may do your Commandments without
grudginge.

Yet now the Bishop of Rome, to maintain his title by a Write of Right, for
as mutche as the four principal Patriarchs of the world have forsaken him,
appoints out Four of his ordinary Chaplens, and geeueth them the names of
four Patriarchs: The first for Constantinople: the second for Alexandria: the
third for Antioche: the fourth for Jerusalem. And thus, having these four
at Commandment, in his pleasante fau^^e, he rules, and governs the whole
world. In such a solemn bravery, the great Cham of Tartarie at this day,
after he has dined him self, The Pope is God.
sounds out a trumpet, and geeueth all the kings, and Emperors of the world
leave to go to dinner: and in this imagination, and ioilitie, he continues
his claim to the possession of all the world, even by as good right and Title,
as doothe the Pope. And when so ever the Pope him self, in his own person,
openly, and solemnly says his Mass, he commands the Gospel, and Epistle
to be readde in Greek. Whereupon his own Master of Ceremonies says thus:
Ceremonia. li. 3. cap. 7.
Hanc consuetudinem hinc ortam puto, vt appareat Romanam Ecclesiam in se
continere Vtramque Gentem: Hereof, I think, this Custom first proceeded,
that hereby it may appear, that the Church of Rome contains in it Both
Nations. Antoni. in Summa. par. 3. tit. 22. cap. 6.
Artic. 4. Diui. 8.
Artic. 4* Diui. 7.
All this notwithstanding, Antoninus says, Hoc Graeci non credunt. For all
this, the Greeks believe it not.

The objections of Justinian, and of the Council of Sardica, are answered in
my Former Reply to M. Hardinge.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 11.
Which of the Anciente Holy Fathers ever called you Lord, and God?

M. Hardinge.
None that wise is, so speaks absolutely: nevertheless in some certain
sense, S. A vain forgerie.
Clement calls every Bishop. Terrenum quendam Deum, a certain earthly God,
as it is written, These words are spoken of Princes and Magistrates.
I have said, ye are Gods, etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
So that ye make not the Pope an Absolute God, ye think, ye may otherwise
call him God safely, and without prejudice. A proper shifte, to maintain a
vain man in ye possession of his Godhed. Hierony. In Daniel. cap. 3. (...).
Suetonius in Domitiano
Suetonius.
Pompon. Laetus. Athenaeus, li. 7.
Chrysostom. De Spi. Sancto.
August. Contra Faustum li. 13. cap. 17.
Euse. li 2. ca. 13.
In such a pleasant imagination Antiochus sommetime the king of Syria,
entitled him self by the name of God. So the Emperor Domitian used to
assign his Proclamations: Dominus Deus vester Domitianus: Your Lord God
Domitian. So the Emperor Caligula called him self, Deum optimum Maximum, and
Iouem Latialem: The Best, and most mighty God, and the great God Iuppiter of
Italy: So Sapores, the great king of Persia, called him self, Fratrem Solis,
and Lunae: The brother of the Son, and the Moon: So the peeuishe Physician
Menecrates called him self Iuppiter: So Nicostratus called him self Hercules:
So Nicagoras made him self a pair of whinges, and would needs be called the
God Mercurius: So Manichaeus the Heretic called him self the Holy Ghost: So
the Romans in old times erected up an Image in the honor of Simon Magus the
Sorcerer, with this Inscription, or Posee, Simoni Sancto Deo: In the honor of
Simon the Holy God. By this your so handesome Distinction, M. Hardinge, of God
Absolute, and God not Absolute, I see not, but every of these might well, and
safely have maineteined his title without blame.

Certainly, Did. 96. Satis euidenter.
Christopher. Marcel. In Conc. Latera. Sess. 4.
Cardillus pro Council. Trident.
in this arrogante vanity, scarcely any of al these was ever comparable to the
Pope. Pope Nicolas says, Constat Summum Pontificem a Pio Principe Constantino
Deum appellatum. It is well known, that the Pope, of the godly Prince
Constantine, was called God. Likewise the Pope was well content, to suffer one
of his Parasites to say unto him, in the late Council of Laterane, Tu es alter
Deus in terris: Thou art an other God in Earth. Likewise Cardillus the
Spaniard in Defense of the Popes La^e Chapter at Trident, oftentimes calls
the Popes late Chapter at Tridente, oftentimes calls ye Pope Terrenu^ Deum,
An Earthely God: By the same style, and right, whereby Holophernes sometime
said, Judith. 5.
Nobuchodonosor est Deus Terrae: Nabuchodonosor is the God of ye Earth.

Upon the Popes own Clementines, ye shall find the matter thus taken up, and
qualified with great indifferency, and modestle, and thus specially noted in
the Margin: The Pope is neither God, nor Man. Our Lord God the Pope.
Papa nec Deus est, nec Homo. And, to leave other his like blasphemo^^, and
fond styles, Extrauag. Johan. 22. Cum Inter. In Glossa. Impress. Lugduni. An.
1555. Parisijs. (...) n. 1513. 2 Thessalon. 2.
Gregor. in Job. Ca. 34. Li 25. Ca. 14.
Anselmus in. 2. Thessalon. 2.
in an other like Gloss ye shall find it written thus, Credere, Dominum Deum
Nostrum Papam non potuisse statuere, prout statuit, Haereticum censeretur: To
believe, that Our Lord God the Pope might not decree, as he decreed, it were a
matter of Heresy. Here have we found by express, and plain words, even in
the Popes own Authentical, and allowed Book, Our Lord God the Pope.

These things might seem incredible, had not S. Paul foretold us, that the
Man of Sin should sit in the Temple of God, and show him self, as if he
were God. S. Gregory, writing of Antichriste, says thus, Cum sit damnatus
Homo, and nequaquam Spiritus, Deum se esse mentitur: Whereas he is a damned
man, and not a Spirit, by lieinge, he faineth him self to be God. Anselmus
says, Simulabit se Religiosum, vt sub specie decipiat Pietatis: Imo se Deum
esse dicet: and se Adorari faciet: atque regna Coelorum promittet: Antichriste
shall feign him self to be Holy, yt he may deceive men under the Color of
Holiness. Yea, and he shall call him self God: and shall cause him self to be
woorshipped: and shall promise ye Kingdom of Heaven. Eusebius says, Eusebius
de Praeparat. Li. 7. (...).
Hoc est Argumentum, eos odisse Deum, quo'd velint seipsos appellari Deos: This
is a token yt they hate God, for yt they will have them selves called by the
name of God.

Likewise says the Ancient Father Irenaeus, Antichristus existens Apostata,
and Latro, quasi Deus, vult Adorari: and cum sit Seruus, Regem se vult
praeconiari: Antichriste, being a Renegate, and a Thief, yet will be
woorshipped as a God: and being but a slave, yet he will be Proclaimed, and
published, as a King. Therefore, although y^ Pope be not, as you say, an
Absolute God, or an Absolute Christ, yet without any great inconuenie^ce, I
trow, he may well be an Absolute Antichriste.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 12.
Which of the Anciente Holy Fathers ever said, that you are not a mere
Natural man, but a certain Substance made, and grown together, of God and
Man?

M. Hardinge.
Can you bring him before his face, A fainte ercuse.
that shall say so unto him? I warrant you (ma^ster Defender) he shall either
be reproved for his flattering, or proved to understand no more by it, then A
certain Divine Power in the Pope.
a certain divine power above the Natural state of men, A soar pounishemente
for open Blasphemy.
or warned, that he be more circu^specte in his glosinge, when Heretics are
ready to slander the whole Church, because of one Private man's affection.

The B. of Sacrisburie.
He that may call him self, Lord, and God, may easily Claim him self to be
more, In Sexto: De Electione, and Elect. Fundamenta, In Glossa. Clemen. In
Prooe^io. In Glossa.
then a man. In ye Popes own Decretalles, it is noted thus in the Margin,
Papa no^ est Homo: The Pope is not a Man. Your Gloss upon the Popes own
clementines, allegeth these words out of one of your allowed Poets, Papa
stupor Mundi: The Pope is the Wonder of the World. And again, Nec Deus es,
nec Homo: quasi neuter es inter Vtrunque ^hou art neither God, nor Man: In a
manner Thou art neither of both: but rather a mean bitweene both.

By the Authority of this Doctoure, it appears, that the Pope is neither
God, nor Man. Angel, I trow, he is not. What other Creature ye may make of
him, I leave to you further, to consider.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 13.
Which of the Anciente Fathers ever said, that you are the only Headspringe
of al Laws?

M. Hardinge.
VVhsoeuer says it, speaks not without evident reason, consideringe that of
the Principal of every government, all laws belonginge to the same, be
deducted and derived.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here have ye brought us a full simple reason, as God knows. But to have
brought us sum Authority of Doctoure, or Council, it had benne better.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 14.
Which of the Anciente Fathers ever said, that you have Power over
Purgatory?

M. Hardinge.
No doubt, it were a worthy matter. VVisely.
O that ye would first believe a Purgatory, and then should ye understand,
what dispensation of loosing and bindinge is committed to the Vicare of
Christ. Esai. 7.
For, as Esaie says, Except ye believe, ye shall not understand: and the
consequent doctrine must needs be obscure, as long as the principal ground
thereof is wickedly denied.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Of your Purgatory fantasies, we have sufficiently said before. Where ye
wish, we would believe, there is a Purgatory, Verily we believe constantly,
what so ever God has willed us to believe. Roman. 10.
S. Paul says, Faith comes by hearing: Hearing comes by the Word
of God: and thereby only is Faith directed. As for your Folies, and
Mockeries, they are subject to Fancy, and not to Faith. August. de Tempore
Sermon. 145. Feria. 3. Paschat.
August. in quaestiont^. veteris Tes^am quae. 43.
S. Augustine says, Nemo de Christo credat, nisi quod de se credi voluit
Christus: Let no man believe of Christ, but that, that Christ has commanded
him to believe of Christ. Again he says, Constat Fidem stultam non prodesse,
sed potius obesse: It is certain, that Foolish Faith doothe no good, but
rather burteth. Notwithstanding though al your Listes, and gaineful Territories
of Purgatory were fully granted, yet should it be very hard for you to
prove, either by Scripture, or by Doctoure, that the Pope bears any greater
Authority, or swea there, to command in, or out at his pleasure, then any
other simple Priste. Al be it, one of your allowed Doctors says, Augelus
Parisiensis.
Purgatorium est peculium Papae: Purgatory is the peculiare possession of the
Pope.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 15.
Which of the Anciente Fathers ever said, that you are hable to Command the
Angels of God, as ye list your self?

M. Hardinge.
Nor old Father, Untruth manifest, As shall appear.
nor new Doctor. And what so ever he be, that shall so tell you, believe him
not. He speaks not Catholikely: and you must make no scruple in such matters.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, at last, M. Hardinge, for shame, ye are feign to yield. No Doctoure,
ye say, ever thus said, neither Old, nor Nevve. How be it, hereto ye have
laid a very special exception: If any man have so said, say ye, what so ever
he were, he spoke not Catholikely. And yet again ye tell us further, How so
ever it be, we should never be scrupulous in such matters.

But what if the Pope him self, The Popes power over the Angels of God.
the Father of al Fathers, and Doctoure of al Doctors, both New, and Old,
have not blusshed to say the same? May we say, as you say, The Pope him
self was not Catholic? Or, if we so say, will you believe it?

In deed, King Xerxes, the great King of Persia, when he had brought over
his huge Army into Graecia, sent out his letters of defiance unto the great
Mount Athos, Herodotus.
that is in Macedonia, and commanded him to stand still, and not to st^rre a
foot, nor to work any pispleasure, either to him self, or to his Army.
Even by like Authority, and with as good discretion, the Pope has used to
send out his Precepts, and Princely Letters, and to command Angels,
Archangels, and all the Powers of Heaven, to comme, to go, to fetch, to
carry, and to be ready to do his will. Therefore is he the better content, to
hear his friends tell him thus, Tibi data est omnis potestas, In Council.
Lateranen. Sub Leo^ne. 10. Sess. 10. Extra. De Constitutionib. Statuta Canonum.
Felin.
Felinus eodem loco.
supra omues potestates, tam Coeli, quam terrae. Qui totum dicit, nihil
excludit: To thee is geeuen al manner of Power, above al Powers, as well of
Heaven, as of Earth. He that says, Al, excepteth nothing.

Felinus your Doctoure says thus, Nedum Circa Coelestia, Terrestria, and
Infernalia papa gerit Vicariatum Christi, sed etiam super Angelos, Bonos, and
Malos: The Pope has Christ's Lieutenantship, not only over things in Heaven,
over things in Earth, and over things in Hell, but also over the Angels,
both Good, and Badde.

Innocentius the Pope him self says, Vicario Creatoris omnis creatura
Subiecta est: Unto the Creatours Lieutenante every Creature is subject. Your
own Doctoure Antoninus, Autonin. in Sum. par. 3. Titu. 22. Cap. 5. ante.
the Archbishop of Florence, says, Potestas Papae mayor est omni alia
potestate creata, aliquo modo exte^dens se ad Coelestia, Terrestria, and
Infernalia: vt de ea verificari possit, quod dictum est, Omnia Subiecisti sub
pedibus eius: The Popes Power is greater, then any other power, that God ever
made: and after a sort stretches it self unto things i^ Heaven, things in
Earth, and things in Hell: so that, of that Power the words may be
verified, yt are written by the Prophet David, Agrippa de vanitate Scientiarum.
Thou haste made al things subject to his fecte. Camotensis says, Papa
Angelis praecipit, and potestatem habet in Mortuos: The Pope commands the
Angels ( of God), and has power over the Dead. Gregorius Haimburgensis
says, Vt termiuis v^ar suorum Adulatorum, Gregor. Haimburgen. in Appellatione
sigismundi Ducis Austriae.
Veselus.
Agrippa de Vanita. Scientia^.
Papa Angelis habet imperare: To use the words of his Platterers, the Pope
has Power to command the Angels. Therefore, if any man happen to die upon
ye way, as he passes in Pilgremage to Rome, Pope Clemente. 6. commands the
Angels of God, to be at hand, and to carry his soul immediately into
Heaven.

Hereto, and to al other the like, M. Hardinge says, These Popes, these
Doctors, these Fathers, these Pages, these Parasites, herein were not
Catholic.

Notwithstanding, he says further, If the Pope, for his fancy, take
sommewhat upon him, and sommetimes be a little over bold with Gods Angels,
to Command them, and Countremaunde them, at his pleasure, in such cases we
ought not to be over scrupulous.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 16.
Which of the Anciente Fathers ever said, that you are the Lord of Lords,
and King of kings?

M. Hardinge.
He uses the clean contrary Title, calling himself Seruum Seruorum Dei,
the Seruante of the Servants of God. Yet if he, for the largeness of his
jurisdiction, have a number of Lords and Kings within his fold, In a right
good sense.
although he himself does not boast of it, yet in a right good sense, that
Title may be given to him.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Notwithstanding the Pope call him self the King of Kings, The Pope King of
Kings.
and the Lord of Lords: Extra De Maiorit. and Obedientia. Solitae. Did. 98.
Si Imperator. In Glossa. Auentinus in Adriano.
Notwithstanding he say, The Emperor is so far inferior unto him, as the
Moon is inferioure unto the Son: Notwithstanding he say, The Emperor is
but his Bailife, his Stevvarde, and his Man: Notwithstanding he say, He has
power to set up, and to put down Kings, and Emperors at his pleasure, Yet,
says M. Hardinge, all this may be spoken in right good sense: for the Pope
uses a clean contrary Title, and calls him self, Seruum Seruorum Dei, The
Seruante of Gods Servants. Thus he thinks it sufficient, to weighe matters
only by Title, and not by Truth.

How be it, all this is but plaieinge under a Visarde. The Devil seldom theweth
his horns: ^* Corinth. 11.
but rather changes him self into an Angel of Light. Touching this Title, As
the Pope calls him self a Seruante, even so doothe the Emperor likewise
abase him self to the name of a Seruante. If ye doubts hereof, read your own
Gloss upon your Decretalles. In Decretal. Grego. In prooemio. In Glossa. Extra.
de Preben. and Dignitatib. Johan. 22.
Execrabilis. In Glossa.
Herueus de Potest. Papae. Ca. 12.
The words there be these: Etiam Imperator seipsum appellat Seruum: LIkewise
again the same Gloss says, Papa se seruum appellat, and Imperator vocat se
Seruum Vltimum Ecclesiae: The Pope calls him self a Seruante, and the
Emperor calls him self the vilest Seruante of the Church.

All this is nothing else, but a politic kind of dissimulation, and
Hypocris^e. For if these be Servants, I pray you then, who be Lords?

Herueus, one of your own Doctors, hereof says thus, Dicere, quo^d talia
dicum Summi Pontifices ex Humilitate, est omni^ of perniciosum. Et hoc est
ponere os in Coelum. Philosophus dicit, hoc esse peccatum Ironiae, quod
opponitur virtuti. Et addit, tales humiles non esse virtuosos, sed timidos, and
blanditores. Et Augustinus ait, August de Verbis Apostoli.
Cum Humilitatis causa mentiris, si no^ eras peccator antequam mentireris,
mentiendo peccator efficeris: To say, that the Popes speak these words of
Humility, it were very hurteful. And this is, To set the face against the
Heavens. Aristotle says, this is the ^^nne of Dissimulation, or Hypocrisy,
which is contrary unto virtue. And says further, that such humble men
are not virtuous, but fearful, and flatteringe. And S. Augustine says, when
so ever thou speak untruth under the color of Humility, if thou were not
a sinner before, yet by tellinge untruth thou art made a Sinner.

Good Reader, pull of this painted Visarde: and under this vain Title of,
Servant of Servants, thou shall find a Lord of Lords. For proof hereof,
thus ye Pope him self says: Neither Emperor* nor King may judge the Pope.
Epistola Nicolat Papae, Inter Decreta Adriant Papae. Council. tomo. 1* In
purgatione Sixti.
And his reason is this, Non est Seruus supra Dominum: For (the Emperor
being a) Seruante, in not above (the Pope, that is) his Lord. Thus ye see,
he that so humbly calls him self the Seruante of Servants, if ye touch
him, or anger him, will suddenly change him self into the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords. For in these words he plainly, and expressly calls
the Emperor the Seruante, and him self the Lord. And, what so ever he said
to the contrary, verily the Popes Exposition must needs be more Authentical,
then M. Hardinges.

He makes the Emperor to hold his Stitope: He makes the Emperor to lead
his Bridle: He makes the Emperor to kiss his Foot: He makes the Emperor
to lie down grouelinge, Doct. Bonner in Praefa. in Libel. Stephani Gardineri
De Vera Obedientia.
and sets his foot on his neck: And yet still calls him self, The
Seruante of Servants. Few good Servants will be to homely with their Masters.
Doctoure Bonner says thus, Notwithstandinde the Pope be a very Roueninge
Woulfe, dressed in Sheep clothinge, yet he calls him self, The Seruante of
Servants.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 1.
We can also go further with you in like sort. What one, amongst the whole
number of the old Bishops and Fathers, ever taught you either to say
Private Mass, whiles the people stared on, or to lift up the Sacrament over
your head, in which points consists now al your Religion: Or else to mangle
Christ's Sacraments, and to bereue the people of the one part, contrary to
Christ's Institution, and plain express words? But that we may once come
to an end: What one is there of all the Fathers, which has taught you to
distribute Christ's Blood, and the Holy Martyrs Merits, and to selle openly
your Pardons, and all the rooms and lodginges of Purgatory, as a gaineful
kind of merchandise?

M. Hardinge.
Your objections of Private Mass, of liftinge up the blessed Sacrament, of
ministringe the Communion under one Kind, be as common with you, as Life be
with Beggars, and lies with Heretics. For in deed your questions be but
beggarly and heretical. Touching the same. I have said Note, that M.
Hardinge, in his said three Articles of Answer to M. Ievvel, has
publisshed threescoare and nico^ great Untruths.
so much in roy answer to M Iuell your nearest friend his Challenge* as here
to rehearse it again, Article. 1. 7. 2.
it is needelesse. You may seek it there. The Doctrine of pardons I judge
verily you understand not. Here is no opportunity to discuss it. The full
treatise of the same requiringe a long process, may well to an other time be
differred. Fol. 117.
Of Purgatory I have said some deal here before. These be the matters,
wherein you and your ignorant fellow ministers gladly show your vile railinge,
and scoffinge eloquence. Yet concerning the doctrine of pardons And all the
same is less then nothing.
least I say nothing, this much I have thought good to say here.

In the Sacrament as well of Baptism, as of penance, all the bands of sin
are loosed, and the whole everlasting pain due to sin is forgeuen. At
Baptism no temporal pain is enjoined to us, because Christ most freely
bestows the benefit of his death upon us at that our first entry into the
Church. A Doctrine full of sondrie blasphemies.
But if afterward we abuse his mercy, returninge again to filthy sin,
Christ would our second, third, and al other reconciliations from thence
forth, to be with due satisfaction, not of his dreadful anger, (which only
his blood, and the Sacrament of penance, by due contrition and confession in
deed or in vow received, is able to remove) but with satisfaction of such
temporal pain, as his merciful justice required both of all others from the
beginning, and King David alleged for proof of Pardonnes.
namely of King David: ^* Reg. 12.
To whom confessinge his fault Nathan said, Our Lord has put a way thy
Sin, thou shalt not die. Behold the forgiveness of the mortal sin, and
of the everlasting pain due to the same. But yet so is it forgeuen, that
withal it is transferred into a temporal satisfaction. What was that? It
follows in the story, that because David through his aduoutrie and murder
had caused the ennemies of God to blaspheme his holy name, the child borne of
the wife of Vrias should surely die. And so it came to pass. If the death of a
Son be so grievous a punishment to a good Father, that King David was content
to pray, to fast, to lie on the ground, afflicting him self seven days,
only to try whether he might as it were by exchange bie out the death of his
Son, and yet so could not obtain his desire: we may be most certain, that
the very best friends of God, sinning after Baptism (or circuncision, which
in the old law stood in place thereof) must by ordinary course sarisfie with
some temporal affliction that just judgment of our merciful Make and
Redeemer, if farther grace be not found by some other way. This satisfaction
has benne therefore justly called the third and last part of penance.
Which if it be not fulfilled in this life, undoubtedly it shall be straightly
exacted in the world to come in the fire of Purgatory. For that sins may
be in an other world forgeuen to those who die not in the deadly bonds of
them, Untruth avouched upon Christ. See the Answer.
our Savior has given us to understand, Matthew. 22.
saying, That the sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgeuen, neither
in this world nor in the world to come, whereof it appears that sum other
Sins may be forgeuen in the world to come.

Well, this satisfaction may notwithstanding be fulfilled more then one way.
For a man being once by the Sacrament of penance justly reconciled to the
mystical Body of Christ, which is his Church, wherein (as the Prophet says)
a faithful man is made partaker of all that fear God and keep his
commandments: Psalm. 118.
we have in that band of peace such an unity of Spiriie communicated to us
al, that the defect of one may be in spiritual causes A folly passinge al
other folies.
supplied out of the plenty of all others his fellow members, Galat. 6.
according as the Apostle says, A text full vvisely applied to prove
Pardonnes.
Bear ye one an others burdens. And because the Head (which is Christ) is
the chief membre of all, and far more then all the rest, such influence is
from him derived throughout his mystical Body, that even his death may as well
inwardely by charity, as outwardly by another way also be applied to us for
the pardoninge of that temporal satisfaction, which after the Sacrament of
penance is left vnforgeuen. And that is by such authority, as Christ gave to
Peter, saying: Matthew. 16.
To thee I will give the Keys of the Kingedome of Heaven, and what so ever
thou bindest in Earth, it shall be bound also in Heaven, and what so ever thou
O Fond man, Christ says, What so ever thou loosest in Earth, and not in
Purgatory.
loosest in Earth, it shall be loosed also in Heaven. Lo, what so ever Peter
loses in earth, it shall be loosed in the sight of God. If therefore the
Pope, who succedeth Peter, do by just cause loose not only the mortal Sin
by the sacrament of penance, but also the band of Temporal pain, which
remains yet due to to the Sin: it is undoubted, that such pain is loosed
in the sight of God. The cause of loosinge must be, not only the will of the
Pope (who is put in Authority to build, and not to destroy: to dispense, and
not to lauishe) but a reasonable change or recompense substituted in that
behalf, such as apperteineth to the Honor of God; or to the profit of
souls: As mainteininge war and fightinge against infidels for the defense of
Christendom, recovery of the Sepulcher of Christ, succouringe widows,
Orphans, or other poor persons, the buildinge or mainteininge of Holy places,
the visitinge of Prisons and Martyrs toumbes, or any like Devout and Charitable
deeds. Which whiles the faithful Christian does obediently perform
(although otherwise the thing enjoined be not great) he may obtain remission
also of that temporal satisfaction, which was left in penance vnremitted.
This kind of Pardon S. Paul gave to that notorious sinner, 1. Cor. 5.
who at Corinth had his Fathers wife, and was for that fault separated from
the Church of God, to be afflicted temporally in his fleashe. But when the
Corinthians had informed S. Paul of his earnest and true repentance, and had
showed their own favor and good wills toward him: 2. Cor. 2.
the Apostle answeareth, Whom ye forgive ought, I also (forgive) for I also
in that I have forgeuen, if I have forgeuen ought, for your sakes in the person
of Christ, I have forgeuen it. Well, we are assured the Apostle speaks of
forgeuinge such afflictions, as the party was in, by reason he was delivered
out of the defense of holy Church, to that state, where the Devil, In. 1. Cor.
5. Hom. 15.
as S. Chrysostom upon that place notes, Pro solutione Peccatorum, for
payment of his Sins, might vex him: and wherein such persons being put to
their penance, used to remain for a certain space of months or years,
until their penance were done and expired. Now the reconcilinge of the man
not yet having done due satisfaction before his ordinary time, is a pardon.
Which the Apostle says, he does give in the person of Christ, as having
authority of him to do it: and for the Corinthians sakes, as who were able by
their Holy Prayers and common sorrow (whereof the Apostle speaks) to make
recompense for that which lacked on the behalf of his own satisfaction. If
this much do not satisfy any man, And thus M. Hardinge avvaked out of his
dream.
desiringe to be fully resolved herein, let him resort to the Latin works
of the Holy and learned Bishop of Rochester.

The B. of Sarisburie.
These objections, ye say in your pleasante homely comparison, are as common
with us, as Life with Beggars. And yet to my remembrance, neither you^ Private
Mass, nor your Half Communion was ever touched in this whole Apology, more
then once, before this place: the Liftinge up, or Shevvinge of the Sacrament,
not once at al. ye should have weighed your advantages better, M. Hardinge,
before ye thus bestowed your lothesome quarrels.

But thought you in deed, The Popes Pardo^nes.
M. Hardinge, I will not say, as you say, that with so Lovvsy, and Beggarly,
but that with so poor, and simple stuff ye should be hable to mock the
word? Many fond tales both you, and your fellows have sent us over: but a
fonder tale, then this tale is, of your Pardonnes, and Purgatories, ye have
sent us none. I must say to you, as S. Augustine sommetime said to Iulianus
the Pelagian Heretic: Augustine contra Iulianum, Lib. 5. Cap. 1.
Necessitate compellitur Talibus pannis indui dui tam magna etiam Vestra
superbia: Your Pride, be it never so great, even for very poor need and
beggerie, is feign to cover it self with such soary clowtes.

I beseech you, consider, how advisedly, and reverently ye use Gods Holy
Word. 2. Regum. 12. Matthew. 12.
Thus you say, Nathan said unto David, Our Lord has put away thy sin:
thou shall not die: Christ says, The Sin against the Holy Ghost shall not
be foregeuen, neither in this World, nor in the World to comme: Or, as S.
Mark says, Non habe^ remissionem in Aeternum: Marci. 3. Galat. 6. Matthew. 16.
Sed reus erit Aeterni delicti: He has not remission for Ever: but shall be
guilty of Everlasting Sin. S. Paul says, Bear ye one an others burden.
Christ says to Peter, To thee will I geeue the Keys of the Kingedome of
Heaven, etc. S. Paul said of him, ye had lived in shameful inceste with his
Fathers wife, 1. Corinthians. 5.
Let such a one be given over to Satan. These be your Scriptures: hereof ye
full discretely, and learnedly Conclude thus: Ergo, The Pope has a vvarrante
sufficient to grant his Pardonnes, and that, as well to the dead, as to the
quick.

O M. Hardinge, God is not to be mocked: fear his judgments: Abuse not his
Name, or Word in vain. Full well you know, that neither David, nor Nathan, nor
Christ, nor Paul were Pardo^moungers. What should I further say to him, that
with so great a countenance, and so mutche a do, can say nothing? Let S.
Augustine briefly answer al these vanities. Thus he says, Hoc quid est
aliud, nisi dilige^ter pro humana suspicione contendere, Augu. de Ciuit. Lib.
13. Cap. 24.
and Scripturas Sanctas negligenter attendere? What thing else is this, but
stoutely to strive for man's fancy: and negligently to consider Gods Holy
Word?

The Prophet David, upon whom ye would seem to ground these folies,
answeareth you thus, Narrauerunt mihi iniqui fabulationes: Sed non vt lex tua
Domine: The wicked have told me many foolish tales: Psalm. 118.
But, O Lord, nothing as thy Law. S. Augustine, and if he were now alive,
he would say of you, as he said of other your Predecessors, O Vanitas,
vendens Vanitatem, Vanitatem audituris, Vanis, and Credituris: August. in Li.
50. Homili. Hom. 36*
O Vanity, sellinge Vanity, to them that will hear Vanity: and Vain are
they, that will believe it.

Leo says, In hanc insipientiam cadunt, qui cum ad cognoscendam Veritatem
aliquo impediuntur obscuro, Leo ad Flauianum, Epist. 10
non ad Propheticas voces, non ad Apostolicas Literas, nec ad Euangelicas
Authoritates, sed ad semetipsos recurrunt: Into this folly they fall, that, when
they be hindered by some darkness from the knowledge of the Truth, go not
to the Voices of the Prophets, nor to the Writings of the Apostles, nor to
the Authorities of the Gospelles: but only have recourse unto them selves.

Now, somewhat to say particularely of the matter, touching your pardonnes,
your own Doctoure Syluester Prierias, Master of the Popes Palaice, writes
thus: Indulgentiae Authoritate Scripturae non innotuere nobis: Sed Authorirate
Ecclesiae Romanae, Syluester Prierias contra Luthe.
Romanorumque pontificum, quae mayor est: Pardonnes are not known unto us by
the Authority of the Scriptures: but by the Authority of the Church of ^ome,
and of the Popes, which is greater, then the Authority of the Scriptures.

Therefore, M. Hardinge, by this Doctors judgment, it was great folly to
allege so many Scriptures for proof of your Pardonnes. For here ye are taught
in good sadness, that your Pardonnes can never be proved by any Scriptures. It
had benne mutche better for you, to have alleged only the Popes Authority.

For that, The Popes Pardo^nes.
as your Syluester teaches you, far passes all the Authority of the
Scriptures.

Roffensis says, Roffensis contra Lutcherum. Polydor. De Inuentorib. Lib. 8.
Cap. 1.
Ego respondeo, non satis certo constare, a quo primum Indulgentiae tradi
coeperint. Apud Priscos vel nulla, vel certe quam rarissima fiebat mentio de
Purgatorio. Quam diu autem nulla esset cura de Purgatorio, nemo quaesiuit
Indulgentias. Nam ex illo pendet omnis Indulgentiarum aestimatio. Si tollas
Purgatoriu^, quorsum Indulgentijs opus erit? Coeperunt Indulgentiae, postquam
ad Purgatorij Cruciatus aliquandiu trepidatum est. Thus I answer: It cannot
well appear, from whom Pardonnes first began. Emonge the Old Doctors, and
Fathers of the Church, there was either no talk at al, or very little talk of
Purgatory. But as long as Purgatory was not cared for, there was no man that
sought for Pardonnes. For the whole price of Pardonnes hangs of Purgatory.
Take away Purgatory, and what shall we need of Pardonnes? Pardonnes began,
when folk were alitle fraide with the pains of Purgatory.

Johannes Mayor says, Johan. Mayor, in 4. Sent. Disi. 20. quaest. 2.
De Indulgentijs pauca dici possunt per certitudinem, quia Scriptura de illis
express non loquitur. Nam quod ditur Petro, Tibi dabo Claues, etc. certum est,
quo'd opor^er intelligere illam Authoritatem cum sale. Fatuae ergo and
superstitiosae sunt quaedam Indulgentiae viginti millium annorum: of Pardonnes
little may be said of certainetie: for the Scripture expressly says
nothing of them. Touching that Christ says unto Peter, Unto thee will I
geeue the Keys etc. we must understand this Authority with a corn of Salt
( otherwise it may be unsavory). Therefore certain of the Popes Pardonnes,
that promise twenty thousand years, are foolish, and superstitious.

Your Schole Doctoures them selves were woonte sommetime to say, Veselus.
Inuentio indulgentiarum est pia fraus, and dolus non malus, quo populus
officioso errore trahatur ad pietatem: The Diuisinge of Pardonnes is a Godly
guile, and a hurtelesse deceit: to the intent, that by a devout kind of
E^oure the people may be drawn to Godliness.

Alphonsus de Castro says, Alphons. de Castro. Li. 8. Indulgentiae.
Nulla res est, quam minus aperte Sacrae Literae prodiderint: and de qua minus
vetusti Scriptores dixerint. Non est mentio vlla de Indulgentijs: There is
nothing that the Scriptures have less opened, or whereof the Old Learned
Fathers have less written, then Pardonnes. Of Pardonnes ( in ye Scriptures and
Doctoures) there is no mention.

Of the shameless Merchandise, and sales hereof, many Godly men have
complained. 1. Timoth. 6. 2. Petri. 2.
Ye have turned godliness into gain: and, as S. Peter says, Through
covetousness, by fained speech, ye have made Martes, and Markettes of the
people. One of your own friends says thus, Opus Tripart. coniunctum cum
Council. Lateran. Lib. 3. Cap. 8.
In multis Breuibus continentur tot Indulgentiae, vt boni Viri mirentur, vnquam
de Conscientia Papae, vel alicuius boni viri potuisse illa procedere: In many
of their Books there are contained so many days, and years of Pardonne,
that good men marvel, that they could ever comme out, by the Consent
either of the Pope, or of any other god man.

To conclude, August. In Epist. Johan. Tracta. 1.
we will say with S. Augustine, Fratres, Iesum Christum Iustum habemus
Aduocatum apud Patrem. Ipse est propitiatio pro Peccatis nostris: Hoc qui
tenuit, Haeresim non fecit: Hoc qui tenuit, Schisma non fecit. Vnde enim facta
sunt Schismata? Cum dicunt homines, Nos iusti sumus: Nos Sanctificamus
immundos: Nos iustificamus impios: Nos petimus: nos impetramus: My Brethera,
we have Jesus Christ the Righteous our Advocate with the Father. He is the
Propitiation, or Pardonne for our sins. He that held this, never made
Heresy: He that held this, never made Schism. For whereof do Schisms
comme? Hereof they comme: when men say, ( as now the Pope says,) We are
righteous: We do make Holy the unholy: We do justify the wicked: We do
Pray: we do obtain.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 1.
These men are woonte to speak mutche of a certain secret Doctrine of
theirs, and of their manifold and sundry readinges. Let the^ therefore bring
forth sommewhat now, if they can, that it may appear, they have at least
readde, or do know sommewhat. They have often stoutely noised in all corners,
where they went, that all the parts of their Religion be very old, and have
benne approved, not only of the multitude, but also by the consent, and
continual observation of al Nations, and times. Let them therefore once in
their life, she we this their Antiquity: Let them make appear to the eye,
that the things, whereof they make such a do, have taken so long, and large
increase: Let them declare, that al Christian Nations have agreed by consent
to this their Religion.

Nay, nay, they turn their backs, as we have said already, and flee from
their own Decrees, and have cut of, and abolished again within ashorte
space, the same things, which but a few years before, them selves had
established, for evermore, foresooth, to continewe. How should one then trust
them in the Fathers, in the Old Councelles, and in the Words spoken by God?
They have not, good Lord, they have not (I say) those things, which they
boaste, they have: they have not that Antiquity, they have not that
Universality, they have not that Consent, neither of al places, nor of al
times. And, though they have a desire rather to dissemble, yet they themselves
are not ignorant hereof: yea, and sommetime also they let not to confess it
openly. And for this cause they say, that the ordinances of the Old
Councelles, and Fathers be such, as may now and then be altered, and, that
sundry and diverse Decrees serve for sundry, and diverse times of the Church.
Thus lurk they under the name of the Church, and beguile seely creatures
with their vain glosinge. It is to be merueiled, that either men be so
blind, that they can not see this: or, if they see it, that they can be so
patient, so lightly, and so quietly to bear it.

M. Hardinge.
Here is mutche a do, and as some say, great boste, and small roste: many
words, little matter. The sense of these words (if I be not deceived)
resembles M. Jewels chalenging sprite, as like as an E We resembles a sheep.
What we can bring forth, we say not It is good policy for him, that has
nothing to shevve, to hold his peace.
Neither think we it necessary at your request, to show, what we have
read, and what we know. Bosting and bragging shows we leave to you: that you
require, has been sufficiently declared other where is. Al things are not to be
said at al times. Yet two of your loud lies besides other that you make here,
I will be so bold, as to discover. The decrees of the late Tridentine Council
(for that is it that you mean) although they be not yet in all place most
exactely observed, yet be they not repealed, cut of, and abolished again, as
you say.

For trial hereof, consider only the words of Roffensis, Mayor, and
Alphonsus, alleged in the former Division.
And what a foul lie is that other, where you say, that our selves
acknowledge and confess openly that the faith and Doctrine, which we hold,
is not Ancient, and Universal, for times, places, and consent of al? What
else mean we, when we challenge unto us and claim the Catholic Faith? But
this is your accustomed slender Rhetorike, when proufes and arguments of
truth fail you, to use the figure of impudent lieinge, and say, that we our
selves confess it to be true, which you impute unto us. What so ever you
say in this place, we may of right return it ever to you. So we do, and so
take you it, etc. And for ought that I can se yet, as your Synagog had of late
the beginning, so it is like shortly to have an endinge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Of al these words, and others more, so vain, as many, there is not one word
woorthe the answearinge. What affiance M. Hardinge, and his friends have in
their Antiquity, it may appear by the last Division.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 1.
But, whereas they have commanded, that those Decrees should be void, as
things now waxen too old, and that have lost their grace, perhaps they
have provided, in their steed, certain other better things, and more
profitable for the people. For it is a common saieinge with them, that if
Christ him self, or the Apostles were alive again, they could neither
better, nor more Godly govern Gods Church, then it is at this present
governed by the^. They have put sommewhat in their steed in deed: but it is
chafe in steed of wheat, Hierem. 23. Esai. 1.
as Hieremie says: and such things, as, according to Esaies words, God
never required at their hands. They have stopped up, says he, all the veins
of the clear springing water, and have dug up for the people deceiuable,
and puddlelike pits, full of mire, and filth, which neither have, nor are
hable to hold pure water. They have plucked away from the people the Holy
Communion, the Word of God, from whence al comfort should be taken, the
true Worshippinge of God also, and the right use of Sacraments, and Prayer,
and have geeuen us of their own, to play withal in the mean while, Salt,
Water, Oil, Boxes, Spittle, Palms, Bulls, Jubilees, Pardons, Crosses,
Sensinges, and an endelesse rabble of Ceremonies, and (as a man might term
them with Plautus) pretty games, to make sport withal.

M. Hardinge.
Rail and revel whiles ye will, the Church is governed by But the Pope uses
neither of them.
disciline. If Christ himself or his Apostles we alive again, the word,
that is to say, Untruths, without either measure, or regard of shame.
the Doctrine of our belefe, no we preached and received in the Catholic
Church, neither should be altered, nor could be bettered. For it is the same,
he taught him self. And that we doubt not of it, according to his promise, he
has sent the holy Ghost, to inform the Church of al truth. Malach. 3.
Psalm. 118.
Remember you not, who said, I am God, O folly. The Change is in you, and not
in God.
and am not changed? again, that the word of God remains for ever?

This being true, it is evident, that we have the sound and weighty wheat,
which no persecution of tyraunces, and blasies of heretics, no contagion of
evil manners, for these fiften hundred years could either blow from the
floor of our Lords berne, the Church, or corrupt. We have according to the
Apostles counsel, Depositum 1. Tim. 6.
kept that has been committed unto us. We have enjoyed the fountain of the
water of life.

Ye charge us soar, that we have plucked away from the people the holy
communion, the word of God, the true worshippinge of God, the right use of
Sacraments, and prayer. Who so ever takes these five away, wherein chiefly
stands our salvation, the same The Gospel in your mouth.
is Antichrist. Were not that ye have already done so mutche for us, as the
world may take you for impudente liers, we would not quietly bear so
greauous a matter. But now, that ye have tried your selves so false of your
word, we little esteem it: your railinge is no slander. Lastly concerning
prayer, what has been ordained by our holy forefathers Untruth For your
Barbarous unknown Pr^iers, to the time of the Anciente Learned Fathers, were
never known.
of al ages, Christ's government no better, the^ the Popes.
directed with the sprite of God, for the maintenance and increase of it to
Gods honor, all that in few years by the instincte of Satan, to promote his
Kingedome, ye have utterly abolished, and by wicked violence brought the people
from Untruths joined with open Blasphemy.
devotion to a careless idleness, from speaking to God with hearts and
lips, to a spiritual dummesse, from prayers to chapters, from holy thinkinge
to unprofitable harkeninge.

Ye can not abide salt, water, oil, palm, the cross, incense, etc. no
marvel. No more can not the devil, who possesses you, and rides you, and
after his own will drives you from truth, from Christen Religion, and from al
Godliness. Were it so that your sprite could a way with those things, then
were it not agreeing with his sprite. Until ye give place to the spirit of God,
who may drive out of you the spiritie of Satan, we look to hear no better
tidinges of you.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye were sommewhat angry, M. Hardinge, when ye thus besturred your self. It
pitieth me in your behalf. Christ, and his Apostles, ye say, never ruled
the Church in better order, then it is now ruled by the Pope, and his
Cardinals. Even so might they have said, that had turned the House of God
into a Cave of Thieves. One of your friends says, Matthew. 21. Latomus de
Vtraque Specie. Iacobus Andreae aduersus Hosiu^, Page 70.
Apostoloru^ temporibus rudis adhuc erat Ecclesia: In the time of the Apostles,
the Church as yet was rude, and Barbarous, and out of order. And, being
afterward reproved for his blasphemous speech, he answered lewdly in his
pleasance,

Rudis, indigestaqueue moles.
Others of you say, Christus in Coelo praesidet: Papa in Terris residet:
Christ rules in Heaven: the Pope in Earth. An other says, Dis. 19. Sicomnes
Omnes Sanctiones Sedis Apostolicae sic accipiendae sunt, tanquam ipsius Diuina
voce Petri firmatae: All the Laws of the Apostolic see of Rome must so be
taken, as if they were confirmed by the Divine voice of Peter him self.

An other says, Andreas Barbatius Siculus ad Bessarionem: Polydor. Vergil. de
Inuentorib. Lib. 4. Cap. 9. Ceremoniar. Li. 1 Sect. 8. Cap. 6. Hierony. in
Proverb. 7.
Sicut ostium regitur Cardine, ita Ecclesia Romana regitur Consilio
Cardinalium: As the door is ruled by the hook, so is the Church of Rome
ruled by the Counsel of Cardinals.

Therefore the Pope him self says thus unto them, Vos eritis Senatores
vrbis, and Regum similes, very Mundi Cardines, super quos militantis ostium
Ecclesiae voluendum, and regendum est: Ye shall be the Senators of my City,
and like unto Kings, the very books, and stays of the world, upon whom the
very door of y^ Church Militante must be turned, and ruled. Such are they,
whom S. Hierome imagines thus to say, Non est Vir in domo. Non est Christus
Corporaliter in Ecclesia. Surgens enim a mortuis, Ascendit in Coelum: nobisque
Ministerium gubernandae Ecclesiae, suam, videlicet, Domum reliquit: My Husband
is not at home. (That is to say) Christ is not now Corporally in the
Church. For, being risen from the dead, he is Ascended into Heaven: and has
leafte unto us the gouernmente of his Church: that is, the whole orderinge of
his House.

True it is, as you say, Malach. 3. Psalm. 118. Matthew. 15.
God is one, and is not Changed. And his Word endures for ever. But the
Change is in you, and not in God. Gods Word is the Word of Life: your
Word is the Word of Vanity. God the Father has not planted it: Therefore
it shall be plucked up by the roots. God says by the Prophet Malachie: The
lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge: Malach. 2.
and the people shall require the Law at his mouth. For he is the Angel of the
Lord of Hosts. Vos autem recessistis de Via, etc. But you are gonne back
from the Way: you have offended many a one in the Law: you have broken the
Couenante of Leui, says the Lord of Hosts. And therefore have I made you to
be despised.

Ye have changed the most part of the Apostles Doctrine: And of al, that
ever they ordained, ye have in a manner leafte nothing standinge. S. Bernarde
says of your own Church of Rome, Readinge of Chapters.
A planta pedis vsque ad verticem Capitis, non est sanitas vlla: From the sole
of the foot, unto the Crown of the head, there is not one whole place:
Bernard. in Conuersione Pauli.
And yet ye bear us strongely in hand, that Christ, and his Apostles never
ruled the Church in better order, then it is now ruled by the Pope, and his
Cardinals.

All the rest of your empty talk is answered sufficiently before. Yet one
pange of your Eloquence. I may not in any wise leave untouched. Thus ye say,
By the instincte of Satan, ye have brought the people from devotion, to
careless idleness: from speakinge to God with hearts, and lips, to a
spiritual doumbenesse: from Prayers, to Chapters: from Holy thinking, to
unprofitable hearkeninge. If I were not well acquainted with your speech, M.
Hardinge, I could not think, ye would so unadvisedly bestow your words. I
doubt not, but even hereby it shall soon appear, whether of us has wilfully
broken the Apostles Orders, and refused the Godly Examples of the Holy
Primitive Church of God. Ye tell us, that the Readinge of the Scriptures
unto the people, in the Church of God, is a Spiritual doumbenesse, and a
thing unprofitable, as only divised of our selves, and that, as you say, by
the instincte of Satan, and never before, either known, or used by any
Catholic Learned Father.

Yet the Aunciente Father Origin says, Origin. in Joshua Homil. 15.
Iudaicarum Historiarum Libri traditi sunt ab Apostolis, Legendi in Ecclesijs:
The Books of ( the Old Testament, which are called) the stories of the Jews,
were delivered by the Apostles, to be readde in the Churches. Dionylius Eccle.
Hierar. Cap 3. (...).
Dionysius says, Deinde ordine habetur Sacrorum Librorum Lectio: After ward
follow in order the Lessons of the Holy Books. Justinius Martyr says, Die
Solis omnes, qui in oppidis, vel in agris morantur, vnum in locum conueniunt:
Commentariaque Apostolorum, vel Prophetarum Scripta leguntur. Deinde, is, qui
praeest, admone^ omnes, and horratur, vt ea, quae Lecta sunt, bona, imitentur.
Deinde surgimus omnes, and comprecamur: Upon the Sondaie, the Christian people,
that dwell in town, Justinius Martyr Apologia. 2.
or Country, meet together in one place. There the Epistles of the Apostles,
or the prophets Writings are pronounced unto us. Afterward, he that is the
Chief, or Minister, warns, and exhorts all the rest, that they will follow
those good things, that they have heard readden. That done, we rise up al,
and pray together. S Cyprian says, Cyprian Lib. 2. Epist. 5.
Lector personat Verba sublimia: Euangelium Christi legit: A Fratribus
conspicitur: cum gaudio Fraternitatis auditur: The Reader sounds out the
high, and Heavenly Words: he reads out the Gospel of Christ: He is seen
of the Brethren: he is heard with joy of (al) the Brotherhoode.

The Fathers in the Council of Constantinople say thus, Council. Constantinopo.
5. Actio. 1.
Tempore Diptychorum cucurrit omnis multitudo cum magno silentio circum circa
Altar, and audiebant: At the time of Readinge ( of the Chapter) all the
multitude of the people with great silence drew runde about the Anltare, or
Communion Table, and gave ear.

In the Council of Laodicea it is written thus, Council. Laodice. Can. 16.
In Sabbatis Euangelia cum alijs Scripturis legi conuenit: Upon ye Sabbath day
it is convenient, that ye Gospelles, and other Scriptures be readde ( in the
Church unto the people). Leo de Resurrectione Domini, Sermo 2.
Leo says, Solennitati Sacratissimae Lectionis subiungatur exhortatio
Sacerdotis: After the solemn Readinge of the most Holy Lesson, let there
follow the Sermon, or Exhortation of the Priest. S. Chrysostom. in Acta.
Homil. 19.
Chrysostom says, Sta^ Minister, and Communis Minister, and alta voce
clamat. Post illam vocem Lector incipit Prophetiam Esaiae: The Minister, and
Common Minister stands up, and cries out with loud voice ( saieinge, keep
silence, and geeue ear). After that, the Reader begins the Prophecy of
Esaie. S. Ambrose says, Ambros. Lib 5. Epist. 20. Johan. 5.
Non possum ego a me facere quicquam: sicut audio, and iudico. Audistis Lectum:
Ego non accuso vos: Moses vos accusat: Audistis Lectum: (Christ says) I
cannot do any thing of me self: As I hear, so I judge. Ye have heard it
readden: I accuse you not: It is Moses, that accuses you. Ye have heard it
readden.

S. Augustine says, Readinge of Chapters.
Audistis, cum Euangelium legeretur: Modo, cum legeretur, si intenti fuistis
Lectioni, Audistis: Audiuimus in Lectione, quae Lecta est, Fratres
dilectissimi: Aug. in Psalm 3. August. in 50 Homil. Hom. 4* August. de Tempore.
Sermo 2.
Ye heard, when the Gospel was readde: Ye heard ere while, when it was
readde, if ye gave ear to the Readinge: Dearly beloved, we have heard in
the Lesson, that has benne readde.

Hereby, I think, it may appear, that the Readinge of Lessons, and Chapters,
is no New Diusse in the Church of God.

And yet will you tell us, M. Hardinge, that all this is only a Spiritual
doumbenesse, and an unprofitable Hearkeninge, brought in by the instincte of
Satan, to promote his Kingedome? Or, if you dare so to tell us, must we
believe you?

Verily, Isidor. de Eccles. Offic. li. 1. ca. 10.
Isidorus says, Lectio est non parua audientium aedificatio. Vnde oporter, vt
quando Psallitur, Psallatur ab omnibus: quando Oratur, Oretur ab omnibus:
quando Lectio Legitur, facto silentio, aeque audiatur a cunctis: The Lesson (in
the Church) brings great profit to the hearers. Therefore when Singing is,
let al Singe together: when Prayer is, let al Pray together: And, when the
Lesson, or Chapter is readde, let silence be made, and let al hear together.
Tertullian says, Coimus ad Literarum Diuinarum Commemorationem. Tertullian. in
Apologetico.
Fidem Sanctis Vocibus pascimus: Spem erigimus: Fiduciam figimus: We comme
together to the Readinge of the Holy Scriptures: we feed our Faith with
those Heavenly Voices: we raise up our affiance: we fosten our hope. Again
he says, Tertullian. ad Vxorem. Lib. 2.
Vbi fomenta Fidei de Scripturarum Lectione? Where is the feeding of Faith,
that comes by the open pronouncinge, and Readinge of the Scriptures?

Origin says, Origin. in Leuiticum, Homil. 5.
Non fuisset Necessarium, Legi haec in Ecclesia, nisi ex his aedificatio aliqua
audientibus praeberetur: It had not benne Necessary, to have these things
readde in the Church, unless thereof might grow sum profit to the hearers.

Leo says, Leo de Passione Domin. Sermon. 19.
Sacram Dominicae Passionis Historiam Euangelica, vt moris est, narratione
decursam, ita omnium vestrum arbitror inhaesisse pectoribus, vt vnicuique
audientium, ipsa Lectio quaedam facta sit vitio: I think, that the Holy story
of our Lords Passion, which we, as the manner is, have readde unto you, is
so fastened unto al your hearts, that the very hearing it self unto every of
the Hearers is a kind of seeinge. Chrysostom says, The manner was, that
before every such Lesson, or Chapter, the Minister should say unto the
people, with a loud voice, Attendamus: Let us Mark. Chrysostom. in Acta Homil.
19.


S. Augustine says, Epistolae Apostolicae, non tantum illis Scriptae sunt, qui
tempore illo, August. Contra Cresconium. Li. 1 Cap. 9.
quo scribebantur, audiebant, sed etiam nobis. Non enim ob aliud in Ecclesia
recitantur: The Apostles Epistles were not written only to them, that heard
them at the same time, when they were written, but also to us. For to none
other purpose they are readde openly in the Church.

This therefore is no Spiritual Doumbenesse, M. Hardinge: This is no
unprofitable Hearkeninge: This is no Instincte, or Work of Satan. S.
Augustine says, Vide Formicam Dei: Surgit quotidie: Currit ad Ecclesiam Dei:
Orat: Audit Lectionem: Aug. in Psalm. 66.
Hymnum cantat: ruminat, quod audit: Apud se cogitat: recondit intus grana
electa de area: Behold Gods Emote: She rises daily: She renneth to the
Church of God: she Prays: She hears the Lesson, or Chapter: She fingeth
the Psalm: She cheweth, or remembers, that she has heard: She museth
upon it within her self: And within she lays up the Corns chosen from the
floor.

But your Churches, M. Hardinge, are full, not only of Spiritual, but also of
Corporal, and horrible doumbenesse. Of al, that is said, or done there, the
poor Godly People knows nothing. S. Augustine says, Readinge of Chapters.
Si intellectum mentis remoueas, nemo aedificatur, audiendo, quod non
intelligit: If ye remove the understanding of the mind, Augu. de Genesi ad
Literam. Li. 12. Cap. 8.
no man is edified, or takes profit by hearing, that he cannot understand.

Chrysostom says, Perdiderunt audiendi laborem, and tempus. Nam qui non
intelligit, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homil. 131.
quod audit, perdit, quod audit: They have lost both their labor in
hearing, and also the time. For he, that understands not, that he hears,
loses the thing, that he hears. Therefore the Pope him self in his
Pontifical, geeueth this special Charge unto the Reader, In Pontificali.
Stude Lectiones Sacras distinct, and aperte proferre ad Intelligentiam, and
aedificationem Fidelium: Endeavor thee self to pronounce the Holy Lessons (
or Chapters) distinctely, and plainly ( not to a Spiritual doumbenesse, but)
to the understanding, and profit of the Faitheful.

Touching the Prayers, that the simple people makes in a tongue unknown,
Christ says, Matthew. 15.
This people honors me with their lips: But their hearts are far from
me.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 2.
In these things have they set al their Religion, teachinge the people, that
by the same God may be duly pacified, Spirits be driven away, and men's
consciences well quieted.

M. Hardinge.
What shall I say to all this, but that ye lie? I would say, as the manner is,
Saving your worshippes: but that your often and unshamefast lieing has quite
taken away from you al opinion of honesty. Al Christ's Religion which we
profess, consists not in these things, Untruth. For hereby ye profess to
quiet men's consciences. Read the Answer.
neither by these be men's consciences quieted. By certain of these, evil and
impure sprites be driued away in deed. Which here by sundry Aunciente
records and Testimonies I would declare to be most true, were it not well
yenough known by daily experience. But as for you, whereas neither Bread, nor
Water, nor Cross drives you away, it seems ye are worse to be coniured,
then the devil himself. Many of your sect Catholic Princes have found so
stubborn, as they could yet never rid their Countries of them, but by
coniuration of fire.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye say, ye ye never sought to quiet men's Consciences by Oil, Water,
Palms, etc. And therefore ye stand up a tipps toe, and in your familiare
manner, cry out, ye lie. For short trial hereof, one example may suffice,
in steed of many. Augustine Steuchus, Augu. Steuchus in Librum Numeror. Cap.
19.
one of your special, and worthy Doctoures, says thus, Aquas Sale, and
Orationibus Sanctificamus, vt ad earum Aspersum nostra delea^tur delicta: We
halowe Water with Salt, and Prayers, that by the Sprinkelinge thereof our
sins may be foregeeuen. Sins foregeeuen by Holy Water.
Read your own Pontifical: and ye shall find in the halowinge of your Water,
your Ashes, your Palms, your Candels, etc. this clause evermore in the end,
Vt sint nobis ad Salutem Animae, and Corporis: That they may be to us to the
Salvation of Body, and soul.

Whereas in the end ye vaunte your self of your Cruelty, In Pontificali.
and so pleasantly make Sport with the Blood of your Brethern, take it not
for il, if I answer you with the Words of Solomon, Proverb. 11.
Viscera impiorum crudelia: The bowelles of the wicked be always cruel.
Therein, M. Hardinge, stands your greateste puissance. If ye were no better
armed with Fire, and Svverde, then ye be with Scriptures, and Doctoures, no
wise man would greatly fear your force.

As for us, we may answer you now, as S. Cyprian sommetime answered the
Heathens: Nobis ignominia non est, pati a Fratribus, quod passus est Christus:
Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
neque vobis gloria est, facere, quod fecit Judas: It is no shame for us, to
suffer of our Brethren the same violence, that Christ suffered: neither is it
any praise for you, to do the same thing, that Judas did.

Tertullian says unto your Fathers: Tertullian in Apologe^ico.
Crudelitas vestra, gloria nostra est: Semen est Sanguis Christianorum: Your
cruelty is our Glory: The Blood of Christians is the seed of the Gospel. I
pray God, all that innocente Blood, that has benne sheadde in this cause, be
not required at your hands in the day of Wrath, and at the declaration of
the just judgment of God. Roma. 2.


The Apology, Cap. 10. Division. 1.
For these, lo, be the orient colors, and Precious savors of Christian
Religion: these things does God look upon, and accepts the^ thankefully:
these must come in place to be honored, and must put quite away the
Institutions of Christ, and of his Apostles. And, like as in times paste, when
wicked King Jeroboam had taken from the people the right serving of God, and
had brought the^ to woorship ye Golden Calves, lest perchance they might
afterward change their mind, and slip away, geatinge them again to
Jerusalem to the Temple of God there, he exhorted them with a long tale, to
be steadfast, saieinge thus unto them: O Israel, these Calves be thy Gods. In
this sort commanded your God you should woorship him. For it should be
wearisome, and troublous for you, to take upon you a journey so far of, and
yearly to go up to Jerusalem, there to serve and honor your God: Even after
the very same sort, when these men had once made the Law of God of none
effect, through their own Traditions, fearinge that the people should
afterward open their eyes, and fall an other way, and should sommewhence else
seek a surer mean of their Salvation, Jesus, how often have they cried out,
This is the same woorshippinge, that pleases God, and which he straitely
requires of us, and wherewith he will be turned from his wrath: that by these
things is conserved the Unity of the Church: that by these al sins be
cleansed, and consciences quieted: and that, who so departs from these, has
leafte unto him self no hope of Everlasting Salvation. For it were wearisome,
and troublous (say they) for the people to resort to Christ, to the
Apostles, and to the Anciente Fathers, and to observe continually, what their
will and commandment should be. This, ye may see, is to withdraw the people
of God from the Weak Elements of the world, from the leaven of the Scribes
and Phariseis, and from the Traditions of men. It were reason, no doubt,
that Christ's Commandments, and the Apostles were removed, that these their
diuises might comme in place. O just cause, I promise you, why that Anciente,
and so long allowed Doctrine should be now abolished, and a new Form of
Religion be brought into the Church of God.

M. Hardinge.
It should have becomme Scoggin, Patche, Iolle, Harry Pattenson, or VVil
Summer, to have told this tale mutche better, then your Superintendentships.
And if ye would needs have played the part your selves, it had been more
convenient to have done it on the stage, under a vices cote, then in a book
set abroad to the world in defense of al your new English Church. Ye shall
never make any reasonoble man believe your scoffinge tale. We esteem little your
railinge comparison, with your spiteful words, and so mutche deuilishe
villainy.

The Apology, Cap. 10. Division. 2.
And yet, whatsoever it be, these men cry still, that nothing ought to be
changed: that men's minds are well satisfied here withal: that the Church of
Rome, the Church, which cannot err, has decreed these things. For
Syluester Prierias says, that the Romish Church is the Squier, and Rule of
Truth, and that the Holy Scripture has received from thence Authority, and
Credit. The Doctrine, says he, of the Roman Church, is the infallible Rule
of Faith, from the which the Holy Scripture takes her force. And
Indulgences, and Pardonnes (says he) are not made known to us by the
Authority of the Scriptures, but they are known to us by the Authority of
the Roman Church, and of the Bishops of Rome, which is greater, then the
Scriptures. Pigghius also lets not to say, that without the license of the
Roman Church, we ought not to believe the very Plain Scriptures: Mutch like
as if any of those, that cannot speak pure, and clean Latin, and yet can
babble out quickly, and readily a little sum such Law Latin, as serves
the Court, would needs hold, that al others ought also to speak after the
same way, that Mammetrectus, and Catholicon spoke many years ago, and which
themselves do yet use in pleadinge in Court: for so may it be understood
sufficiently, what is said, and men's desires may be satisfied: and that it
is a fondenesse, now in the later end, to trouble the world with a new
kind of speakinge, and to call again the old finenesse and eloquence, that
Cicero, and Caesar used in their days in the Latin tongue. So mutche are
these men beholden to the folly, and darkness of the former times. C.
Plinius.
Many things, as one writes, are had in estimation oftentimes, because they
have benne once dedicate to the Temples of the Heathen Gods: Even so we see
at this day, many things allowed, and highly set by of these men, not
because they judge them so mutche woorthe, but only because they have benne
received into a custom, and after a sort dedicate to the Temple of God.

M. Hardinge.
Ye have never done with the Church of Rome. I cannot blame you. For so long
as that stands, without ye repent and turn, So was Christ taken of the
Phariseies.
ye shall never be taken but for such as ye be, Schismatikes, and Heretics.
But alas poor souls, what think ye to overthrow that Church builded upon
the rock The fundation of the Church of God, is not Peter, but Christ.
Peter, against which hitherto neither tyrauntes, nor Heretics far
passinge you in lerninge, and honesty of common life, The Church above Gods
Word.
could ever prevail? Trow ye to extinguishe that faith of the Roman
Church, Untruth. For generally it^^ contrary to (...) Faith of (...)
which is the same that was the faith of Peter, Luc. 22.
for which Christ prayed, that it should never fail? Ye labor in vain.
Well may Satan win you: the Church which our Lord prayed for, by you shall
he never win. Give over therefore your vain and wicked attemptes. Trust not
in the patches, that falsely ye allege out of Canonistes gloses, scholemen,
riminge poets, Heretics, and who so ever, be they never so bad. Some ignorant
persons may ye deceive, whose sins deserve the same.

What Syluester Prierlat says. I mind not here to discuss. It is easil^^
found in (...) Book, (...) Lutherum.
Neither where he says, that you allege, have you thought good to tell us,
lest. by perusinge the place, we should take you in a lie, as we have almost
in all your other allegations. The like sincerity you use in alleaginge
Pighius. We bind our selves neither to the words of Syluester, nor of
Pighius. If they err, what is that to us? Let them bear their own burden.
If they tell truth, we believe them for truths sake. If otherwise, we leave that
part for you to carpe. If Syluester Prierias said, that for points of
belefe, the Doctrine of the Roman Church is a squire to try their truth
by: the same A comm^^^rie biside (...) Text.
being well understood is right true. Likewise if Pighius say, that the
Roman Church shows unto us, which be the approved and undoubted
scriptures, and which be not: this is so true, as your self (I suppose) will
yield thereunto. As for that the scripture received from the Church of Rome
Authority, credit, and force: A proper Gloss.
if in your meaning you exclude God, that is your lie, not Syluesters
sentence. If relation be made to us, that we ought not give credit unto it,
Vanity of Vanities: For the Scriptures were known, and believed, before
there was any Church in Rome.
unless it had been showed to be holy scripture by the Roman Church, which
is the true Church of Christ: in this sense, be it Syluester, or who else so
ever says it, it is a true saieinge, and agreeable to S. Augustine, Contra
Epist. Fundamenti. ca. 5.
Ego Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commueret Authoritas.
I would not believe the Gospel, except the Authority of the Catholic Church
moved me. And for that you allege out of him, touching indulgences, truth it
is, the full, and whole knowledge of them is not plainly opened unto us, by
express and evident words of Scripture, no more then the mystery of the
blessed Trinity, baptizinge of infantes, and many other truths: but rather by
the doctrine of the Roman Church.

Where you tell us of Pighius, that he lets not to say, that without the
license of the Romish Church (for in that word you please your self well) we
ought not to believe the very plain scriptures: It is no hard matter to find
it, Read the Answer.
we will proclaim you a liar, until you show us, where he spoke so far
beside reason, and lerninge. The holy Church does not will us to stay from
belefe of the scriptures, until we have license: but by all ways and means
inuiteth and stirs us to believe the truth in the scriptures uttered.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The greatest weight hereof upon two of your Doctoures, Syluester Prierias,
and Albertus Pigghius. Whoes credit notwithstanding ye would feign
otherwise save upright, yet here, as it seems, ye are content, for shame to
geeue them over. We bind our selves, ye say, neither to the words of
Syluester, nor of Pigghius. If they err, what is that to us? This short, and
blunte answer, notwithstanding it seem to like well you, yet perhaps
Prierias, and Pigghius it would not like. I see no great cause to the
contrary, but either of them might as well renounce your Authority, and say
of you, We are not bound, neither to M. Hardinges words, nor to his fellows.

For that ye doubt the Truth of our allegations, read Syluester Prierias
Master of the Popes Palace, in his Book entitled, Syluester Prierias, contra
Lutherum.
Contra praesumptuosas Martini Lutheri Conclusiones, de potestate Papae. His
words there amongst others be these: Quicu^que no^ innititur Doctrinae
Romanae Ecclesiae, ac Romani po^lificis, tanquam Regulae Dei infallibili, a qua
etiam sacra Scriptura robur trahit, and Authoritatem, Haereticus est: Who so
ever leans not to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and of the Bishop of
Rome, as unto the infallible Rule of God, of which Doctrine the Holy
Scripture takes force and Authority, he is an Heretic.

Again he says, The Church above Gods Word.
Authoritas Romanae Ecclesiae, Romanique pontificis mayor est, etc. The
Authority of the Roman Church, and of the Bishop of Rome is greater, ( then
the Authority of Gods word).

As for that, is here alleged of Pigghius, it is the very sound, and sense of
the greatest part of his Common place, De Ecclesia. Of whoes judgment
herein, M. Calvin writes thus: Alb. Pigghius in locis Communib. De Ecclesia.
Pighius ait, Nullius Scripturae Authoritate, quantum libet Clarae, nostro
quidem iudicio, and euidentis, aduersus Claram, consonantemque Orthodoxorum
Patrum Se^tentiam, and aduersus communem Ecclesiae Definitionem, aliquid
credere cuiquam licere: Pighius says, that noman may lawfully believe any
thing, by the Authority of any Scripture, be the same, in our judgment,
never so plain, and euidente, against the clear, and agreeable judgment of
the Catholic Fathers, and against the Common determination of the Church:
By which he means only the Church of Rome. Therefore, M. Hardinge, it may
please you now a little to spare your voice, and to stay your Proclamation.

But, for as mutche as ye seem, so little to esteem these two Doctoures,
Prierias, and Pigghius, being otherwise, not long sithence, the chief
Leaders, and Captains of al your bands, ye may therefore join others to
them, to better their credit, and to increase the Company. And, for as
mutche as we speak of the Church of Rome, let us hear the judgment of a
Cardinal of the Church of Rome, notwithstanding otherwise alleged before.

Cardinal Cusanus therefore hereof says thus, Nicol. Cusanus de Authoritate
Ecclesiae, and Co^cilij supra and contra Scriptur.
Haec est omnium sane intelligentium Sententia, qui Scripturarum Authoritatem,
and intellectum in Ecclesiae approbatione fundant: and non e conuerso,
Ecclesiae^ Fundamentum in Scripturarum Authoritate locant: Nulla sunt Christi
praecepta, nisi quae per Ecclesiam pro talibus accepta sunt: Sequuntur igitur
Scripturae Ecclesia^, and non e conuerso: This is the judgment of al them,
that think rightly, that found the Authority, and understanding of the
Scriptures in the allowance of the Church: and not contrariewise, lay the
Fundation of the Church in the Authority of the Scriptures. There be no
Commandments of Christ, but such only, as so be taken, and holden by the
Church. Therefore the Scriptures follow the Church: but contrarievvile the
Church follows not the Scriptures. Johan. Maria Verractus. Editus est, Ann.
1561. Alb. Pigghius Hierar. li. 1. a. 2. Alb Pigghius in controuersijs. De
Ecclesia.
Likewise says Johannes Maria Verractus, Humiliter confitemur, Ecclesiae
Authoritatem esse Supra Euangelium? We do humbly confess, that the Authority
of the Church is above the Authority of the Gospel. Likewise Albertus
Pigghius says, Apostoli quaedam Scripserunt: non vt Scripta illa praeessent
Fidei, and Religioni nostrae, sed potius, vt subessent. Scripturae sunt Muti
Iudices: Scripturae sunt veluti Cereus Na^us: The Apostles have written
certain things: not that their said Writings should rule our Faith, or
Religion: but rather, that they should be under, and be ruled by our Faith. The
Scriptures are doumbe Judges: The Scriptures are like a Nose of wax.

By these, and other like vnreuerente, and godless speeches, they seek to
lead the poor simple deceived people from the Holy Scriptures, and Voice of
God, to the Authority of their Church: by which Church they understand
only the Pope, and his Cardinals.

But ye say, These be the Priests of the House of Leui: The Pope is the
Judge for the time, Deuter. Cap. 17. Heruaeus, De potesta. Papae. ca. 23
in the place, that our Lord has Chosen. Sum others of you sale, Papa est
tota Ecclesia Virtualiter: The Pope is by Power, and virtue the whole Church.
What so ever these shall happen to say, we may not swerve from their
Judgment, neither to y^ Right hand, nor to the Left hand. Whereupon the
Hebrevve Gloss notes thus, Nicol Lyra in Deuter. Cap 17.
Si dixerint tibi, quod Dextra sit Sinistra, aut quod Sinistra sit Dextra,
talis Sententia tenenda est: Although they tell thee, y^ thy Right hand is thy
Left hand: or that thy Left hand is thy Right hand, yet such a Sentence
must be holden as good.

S. Augustine, The Church above Gods word.
ye say, holds hard of your side. He says, Non crederem Euangelio, nisi
me Ecclesiae Catholicae Authoritas commoueret: I would not believe the Gospel,
except the Authority of the Catholic Church moved me. These few poor
words have benne tossed of your part, and wroonge, and pressed to the
vttermoste, Augustine contra Epistolam Fundamen. Cap. 5.
to yield out that, was never in them. For hereby ye would feign prove, that
the Authority of the Church, whereby ye evermore understand your Church of
Rome, and none other, is above the Authority of Gods Word: that is to
say, that the Creature is above the Creatoure, that made Heaven, and Earth.

But what if S. Augustine, as he says, I believe the Gospel because of the
Church, have likewise said, I believe the Church because of the Gospel? Then,
I trow, ye must turn your tale, and say, The Gospel is above the Church.
His words be plain: August. In Psalmum. 57.
Ex ore Veritatis Ecclesiam agnosco participem Veritatis: By the Mouth of
(God, that is) the Truth, I know the Church, that is partetaker of the
Truth. Augustine. De Vnitate Ecclesiae, Ca. 2.
Again he says, Nolo, Humanis Documentis, sed Diuinis Oraculis Ecclesiam
Sanctam demonstrari: Ecclesiam quaerere debemus in Verbis Christi, qui est
Veritas, and optim e nouit Corpus suum: Ecclesiam sine vlla ambiguitate Sancta
Scriptura demonstrat: Augustine. contra Cresconi. Grammat. Li. 1. Ca. 33.
In Scripturis Sanctis Ecclesia manifest cognoscitur: Ecclesiam, sicut ipsum
Caput, in Scripturis Sanctis Canonicis debemus agnoscere: I would, the Church
should be showed, not by the Decrees of Men, Augustine. De Vnita. Ecclesiae,
Ca. 16.
but by the Heavenly Oracles, or Words of God: We must seek the Church
in the Words of Christ, which is the Truth, and best knows his own
Body: The Holy Scripture shows us the Church without doubtinge: In the Holy
Scripture the Church is plainly known: Augustine. eodem loco.
We must know the Church by the Holy Canonical Scriptures, as we know
(Christ, that is) the Head.

Likewise says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 49.
Nullo modo cognoscitur, quae sit Vera Ecclesia, nisi tantummodo per
Scripturas: It is not any ways known, which is the True Church of Christ,
but Only by the Scriptures.

And thus, for as mutche as we know, both Christ by the Church, and the
Church by Christ, the one geeuinge evidence to the other, by this reckeninge,
M. Hardinge, and by your shiftinge of turns, we must sometimes place Christ
above the Church, and sommetimes the Church above Christ.

Now be it, S. Augustines mind was not, to commence an Action bitwene Christ
and his Church, in comparison of their Dignities, or for trial, and keepinge
of their bounds: or, to teach us, that the Truth of God takes Authority of
the Church: but only, to show us, that the Church is a witness to Gods
Truth. And certainly it has great weight of persuasion, to move the
Conscience of any man, to see so many Kingedomes, and Countries to join
together in y^ profession, and obedience of one Truth. And I doubt not, but
even this day, many thousands are the sooner leadde, to humble them selves
unto the Gospel of Christ, for that they see, the whole world, that is to
say, the whole Church of God, is contented so willingly, and so humbly to
embrace the same. David, to testify the Truth, Psalm. 18. Roman. 10. Psalm.
76.
and certainetie of the Gospel, says thus, The sound of the Apostles went
out into all the Barthe, and the Words of them into the ends of all the
World. This is the turninge of the Right hand of God.

Therefore S. Augustine says unto Faustus the Heretic, Augustine. contra
Faustum. Lib. 32.
Cur non potius Euangelicae Authoritati, tam Fundatae, tam stabilitae, tanta
gloria diffamarae, atque ab Apostolorum temporibus, Cap. 19.
vsque ad nostra tempora, per Successiones certissimas commendatae, te non
subdis? Why do thou not rather submit thee self unto the Authority of
the Gospel, being so grounded, so stablished, Preached, and published with so
great glory, commended, and delivered unto us by most certain Successions
from the time of the Arostles, until our time?

Likewise in this same place by you alleged, S. Augustine says, The Church
above Gods vvoor de.
Ego non crederem Euangelio, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae co^moueret
Authoritas. Quibus ergo obtemperaui dicentibus, Credit Euangelio, Cur eis non
obtemperem dicentibus, Noli credere Manichaeo? I would not believe the Gospel,
unless the Authority of the Catholic Church moved me. Augustine. contra
Epist. Fundam. Ca. 5.
Seeinge therefore I have obeyed them, saieinge to me, Believe the Gospel, why
should I not also obeie them saieinge unto me, Believe not Manichee?

Thus the consent of the Church hears witness to the Gospel: without
which witness notwithstanding, the Gospel nevertheless were the Gospel still.
Therefore Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 49.
Si dixerint, in ipsis Veris Ecclesijs Christum apparuisse, nolite eis credere
dicentibus ista deem: Quia non est digna Diuinitatis meae notitia haec: If they
shall tell you, that Christ has appeared, yea even in the very True Churches,
yet believe them not saieinge thus of me: For this is no meet knowledge for my
Godhedde.

To conclude, M. Hardinge, we will say to you, as S. Augustine sommetime said
to the Donatian Heretics, auancinge their only Church in Aphrica, even as
you now auance only your Church of Rome: August De Vnitate Ecclesiae, Ca. 11.
Nos post vocem Pastoris nostri, per ora Prophetarum, per os proprium, per ora
Euangelistarum nobis aperrissime declaratam, voces vestras non admittimus, non
credimus, non accipimus: After the voice of our Shepehearde, uttered most
plainly unto us by the mouths of the Prophets, by his own mouth, and by
the mouths of the Evangelists, if ye bring us your own voices, we allow
them not, we believe them not, we receive them not.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 1.
Our Church, say they, cannot err. They speak that (I think) as the
Lacedaemonians long sithence used to say, that it was not possible to find
any Adulterer in all their Common Health: whereas in deed they were rather al
Adulterers, and had no certainty in their Marriages, but had their wives in
common amongst them al: Or, as the Canonistes at this day, for their bellies
sake, use to say of the Pope, Summa Angelica, in dictione Papa.
that, for so mutch as he is Lord of al Benefices, though he selle for money,
Bishoprikes, Monasteries, Priesthood, Spiritual Promotions, Theodoricus de
Schismate.
and part with nothing freely, yet because he counts al his own, he cannot
commit Simonie, though he would never so feign. But how strongly, and
agreably to reason these things be spoken, we are not as yet hable to
perceive, except perchance these men have plucked of the whinges from the
Truth, as the Romans in old time did proine, Plutarchus.
and pinion their Goddess Victory, after they had once gotten her home, to
the end, that with the same whinges she should never be able, to flee away
from them again.

M. Hardinge.
Toward the end of your Apology, Sir Defender, who so ever you be, that
pieced it together, you do but trifle. Of like your stuff is spence. For
here little say you, that you have not said already. Wherefore I crave Pardon
of the Reader, if according to the slenderness of matters objected, my This
is good plain dealinge. For in deed this Answer is very sclender.
confutation seem also slender. Sir you do now but patche pieces together,
which you have gathered out of your note Books, into the same infar^ed, some
out of the Canonistes, some out of the Scoolemen, and them not of the greatest
estimation, most of al out of Humanity books, wherein you be pretely seen.
And that seems to be your chief profession. As for Divinity, there
appears no great knowledge in you. What ye rehearse of the Lacedaemonians,
it pertains to your own companies, no less, then to them, I mean only
your Apostates, Monks, and Friars, Priests, and Nonnes.

You find great fault in the Canonistes that be at this day, and name in
your Margent Summa Angelica, the Author whereof died many years paste. If he,
Theodoricus, what so ever he was, or any other Canoniste offend you, as for
his bellies sake, speakinge of the Pope, that should set your teeth anedge:
what pertains that to us, who defend the Catholic Faith, not the saieinges
of every Canoniste? You were best, seeinge you make so much adoo with them,
to Article their errors, and either write a railinge Book against them, which
ye With M. Hardinges good instructions.
can easily do, or send one of your best learned superintendentes to Bononia,
there in open scoole with disputations to confute them. And so doubtless ye
shall either convert them, which were a worthy act: or prove your selves
fools, which were great pity.

But to answer your objection, we say, first, that you allege Summa
Angelica falsely. Nothing is found soundinge to that you burden the Pope
withal in the place by you quoted, in dict. Papa. Next, whereas it is written
in Summa Angelica, In curia Romana titulus de Simonia non habet locum, In dict.
Simonia.
you, Sir Defender, either nor knowinge what followed, or of malice abusinge the
place, have reported the same, as if it were precisely said without any
distinction. Whereas in deed the self same Sum uses this distinction,
saieinge, Ver. vtrum actoritas.
Verum est in ijs quae sunt Simoniaca de iure positiuo solum: sed non in ijs
quae sunt Simoniaca de iure diuino. Whereby he means that the Pope is not
under the rules of Simonie concerning A worthy distinction. Hereby the Pope
may selle Bishoprikes, and Benefices without Simonie.
such laws and pains, as he himself, or his predecessors have made in that
behalf. For they have made many things belonginge thereto, as you may well
know your self, who are so pretely seen in the Canon Law, as it may appear
by the often and cunninge allegations which you bring out of the Gloses. But
concerning This kind of Simonie stands only in, sellinge of Orders, and
Sacraments, etc.
that Simonie, which properly is so called, the Pope is nolesse subject
thereto by the true judgment of Summa Angelica, Untruth shameless, as shall
appear.
which you have shamefully belied, then any other man.

You jest at Gods blessed Truth always remaininge in his Holy Church, and
profanely resemble it to a bird proined and pinyoned, that it fly not a
way. As though the Church kept truth with such policy, as the old
Romans are fained, to have kept their Goddess Victory. Well Sir, we tell
you in sadness, we are assured of the Truth, that it is in the Church, and
that it shall never depart from thence. And if ye call this, cuttinge away of
her wings, that it never fly from the Church: we grant they be cut in
such sort, as she shall keep the Church for ever as her own neast. And
will you know who tells us this? Even God him self, saieinge in his
Prophet Esaye to Christ of his Church: Esai. 59.
I will make this covenant with them, says our Lord: My spirit which is
in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, Full discretely, and
well applied: As if these words had benne meante of the Pope, and his
Successors.
shall not depart from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy seed, and from
the mouth of thy seeds seed, says our Lord, from this time forth, for
evermore.

Against this truth, what so ever ye bring in reproufe of Popes lives, whom
not withstandinge most impudently ye belie, what indiscreet saieinges, or
flateries so ever ye burden the Canonistes with, all tourneth to nothing. The
Truth remains unshaken: your spirit of lieinge, scoffinge, and malice
thereby is discyfred.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, ye say, Sir Defender is pretily seen in Humanity: For that, ye
say, seems to be his chief profession. Verily, M. Hardinge, We are well
pleased, to take such, and so mutche learning, as you may spare us. We
contend only for Truth, and not for Learning. What so ever our Learning
be, if it may please God, to use it to his Glory, it shall be sufficient, be
it never so little. How be it, had you not had sum good likinge in your own
Learning, ye would not upon so simple occasions have vpbraided others.

Touching that, The Pope cannot commit Simonie.
sundry of your Doctors have said, the Pope cannot commit Simonie, first it
shall be necessary in that behalf, to consider the state, and practice of the
Church of Rome. S. Bernarde, writing unto Pope Eugenius, says, Limina
Apostolorum Ambitio iam plum terit, Bernardus de Consideratione. Li. 3.
quam Deuotio. Vocibus Ambitionis vestrum toto die resultat Palatium: Ambitio
in Ecclesia per te regnare molitur: The Apostles Entries, or Gates in Rome, are
now more worn with Ambition, then with Devotion. All the day long your
Palaice ringeth with the sound of Ambition. By thy means, Ambition seeks to
reign in the Church of God. Again he says, Bernardus in Conuersione Pauli.
Sermo. 1. De Ciuitate Dei Li. 18. Cap. 22. Viues.
Sacri gradus dati sunt in occasionem turpis Lucri: and quaestu^ aestimant
Pietatem: The Holy Degrees, or Ecclesiastical roumes are geeuen over to
occasion of filthy gain: and the same gain they coumpte Holiness. Ludouicus
Viues says, Romae cum omnia prope vendantur, and emantur, nihil tamen agas
sine Lege, ac Formula, atque euam Sanctissimi iuris: At Rome, not withstandinge
al things be boughte, and sold, yet may ye do nothing there without
Form, and Order, and that of most Holy Religion.

Your own Gloss says, In Sexto De Electione and Elect. potest. Fundamenta.
In Glossa.
Roma est Caput Auaritiae. Ideo omnia ibi venduntur: Rome is the Head of
Covetousness. Therefore al things there are boughte, and sold. Where as also
Johannes Andreae, your great Canoniste, notes this Verse, alludinge to the
name of Rome, Roma manus rodit: quos rodere non valet, odit.

Durandus says, Durandus de modo Celebrandi Council. Ti. 20.
Simonie so reigns in the Church of Rome, as though in deed it were no
Sin. To be short, these two Veries were commonly spreadde of Pope
Alexander, Vendit Alexander Claues, Altaria, Christum.
Vendere iure potest: Emerat ipse prius. Musculus in Johan. Cap. 6.



Pope Alexander makes sale of his Keys, of his Aultares, and of Christ him
self. Well may he less these things: for he him self paid well for them.

Notwithstanding, ye doubt not, but all this, by a pretty soary Distinction,
may soon be excused. For thus ye say: Verum est in ijs, quae sunt Simoniaca
de lure Posiiuo solum: Summa Angeli. in Simonia.
Sed non in ijs, quae sunt Simoniaca de lure Diuino. Whereby, ye say, the
Authoure means, that the Pope is not under the Rules of Simonie, concerning
such Laws, and pains, as he him self, or his Predecessoures have made, and
provided in that behalf. And therefore, as your modeste manner is, ye say,
we have falsely alleged, and shamefully belied Summa Angelica. But why do you
not better open the several parts of your Distinction? Why do ye not better
tea^ he us to understand, what is Simonie by Law Positive: and what is
Simonie by the Law of God? And why do ye not declare each part by plain
Examples? Seeinge you thus to steal away in the dark, we have sum cause
to doubt your dealinge.

How be it, to make the matter plain, your own Gloss says thus, Simoniaca
desui Natura, Extra. De Officio Iudicis Delegati. Ex part N. In Clossa.
sunt quae Nouo, aut Vereri Testamento prohibita sunt: vt, Emere, vel Vendere
Sacramenta, Simoniaca de Iure Positiuo, sunt, quae solum sunt Spiritualia ex
Constitutione Ecclesiae: vt sunt Tituli Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum etc.
These things are Simoniacal of their own Nature, that are forebidden in the
Old, and New Testamente: as to buie, or selle Sacraments. These things are
Simoniacal by Law Positive, which are Spiritual only by the ordinance of
the Church. Such are the Titles of al Ecclesiastical Benefices, and
Dignities: Ac be Bishoprikes. Deanries, Abbeys, Archedeaconries, etc. Thus, M.
Hardinge, if your Pope selle Sacraments, which will yield him but little
money, He may be charged with Simonie. The Pope cannot commit Simonie.
But if he selle Bishoprikes, Deanries, Abbeys, Archedeaconries, Prebendes,
Personages, never so many, yet by the shifte of your pretty Distinction, noman
may charge him. For all these things are Spiritual, only by the Popes own
Positive Law, that is to say, by the Ordinance of the Church. And think
you not, so good a Distinction was well woorthe the findinge out? One of your
own Company, speakinge hereof, says thus: O Petre, Aureum Speculum.
quantam animarum multitudinem cateruatim transmisit, and transmittit ad
Infernum haec Superstitialis, and Damnanda Distinctio? Multis est occasio, and
viam aperit and ruinam Damnationis aeternae: O Peter Peter, how many Souls
has this Superstitious, and Damnable Distinction sent by heaps, and yet
doothe daily send into Hell? It is an occasion unto many, and opens the way
unto the fall of Everlasting Damnation.

To make the matter plain, ff. De Offi. praeroris. L. Barbarius. Colum. 2.
Baldus says, Simonia non cadit in Papam recipientem: Though the Pope take
money, yet no Simonie can touch him. In like sort says his fellow Bartolus,
Papa non dicitur facere Simoniam, conferendo Beneficia, ff. Eod. Titulo. Ead.
L. Bartolus.
and Dignitates, accepta Pecunia: The Pope is not said, to commit Simonie,
although he take Money for the Benefices, and Dignities of the Church.

Theodoricus says, Papa non potest committere Simoniam. Sic tenent Iuristae.
Theodoricus De Schismate inter Urban. and Clement. Lib. 2. Ca. 32.
Quia Simonia excusatur per Authoritatem eius: The Pope cannot commit Simonie.
So hold the Canonistes. For Simonie by his Authority is excused. Felinus
says, Ista Glosa videtur dicere, quod Papa non committit Simoniam in
recipiendo pecuniam pro collatione Beneficiorum: ex quo non ligatur proprijs
Constitutionibus. Tamen Moderni tenent indistincte, quod Papa non inuoluatur
Crimine Simoniae: Felinus de Officio Iudicis delegati. Ex part. N.
Et ita ego teneo: Et sic est seruanda communis opinio. Ergo Papa potest dictam
prohibitionem Simoniae firmatam in Universally Ecclesia, limitare respectu
Apostolicae Sedis. Et si diceres, Requiritur in talibus apparens causa, dico,
hic esse causam apparentem. Nam cessante tali redditu, qui maximus est, attenta
hodierna Tyrannide, Seeds Apostolica contemneretur: This Gloss seems to say,
that the Pope commits not Simonie, receiuinge money for the bestowinge of
Benefices: for as mutche as the Pope is not bound to his own Constitutions.
Yet now adays the Lawiers hold, without any such Distinction, (of Law
Positive, and Law of God) that the Pope cannot in any wise comme within the
danger of Simonie. And so I me self do hold: and so the common opinion
must be holden. A just, and a reasonable cause, wherefore the Pope may selle
Bishoprikes, Deanries, Abbeys etc. Extra De Simonia, Ca. 1. Numero. 6. Fol. 18.
Abb. Archidiacon. in Tract. De Haeresi. ver. Et quia tanta est.
Therefore, notwithstanding the Law yt forebiddeth Simonie, take place in the
whole Universal Church, yet in respect of the Apostolic See of Rome, it
may be restrained. But thou will say, In such cases there ought to be some
apparente cause. I tell the, that there is a cause apparente. For this reuene
we (of Simonie) which is very great, being once cut of, consideringe the
Tyranny, that now is, the Apostolic See would be despised. By this
authority it appears, The Pope is not able to maintain his Estate, and
Countenance, nor to save al things upright, without Simonie.

Panormitane says, Etsi Papa accipiat pecuniam pro collatione alicuius
Praelaturae, aut Beneficij, tamen Dominus Cardinalis ait, Non committitur
Simonia: Notwithstanding the Pope take money for the bestoweinge of a
Bishoprike, or of a Benefice, yet my Lord Cardinal says, there is committed
no Simonie. Archidiaconus Florentinus says, Papa recipiendo pecuniam, non
praesumitur animo vendendi recipere: Sed vt illa pecunia ad vsum suum
conuertatur: cum Papa sit Dominus Rerum Temporalium, per illud dictum Petri,
Dabo tibi Omnia Regna Mundi: The Devils Words alleged under the name of S.
Peter.
The Pope receiving money (for Bishoprikes, or Benefices) is not thought to
take it by way of sale: but only, to turn the same money to his own use.
For the Pope is Lord of al vvorldly goods, as it appears by the words of
Peter ( which woo^ des notwithstanding Peter never spoke: for they were
spoken by Satan) Unto thee will I geeue all the Kingedomes of the World. The
Pope cannot commit Simonie.


Again Felinus says, Quod datur Papae datur Sacrario Petri: nec est proprium
Papae: Sed prodest danti, tanquam facienti opus pijssimum: What so ever is
geeuen to the Pope, Felinus De Offi. Iudicus delega. Ex part. N.
( for Bishoprike, or Benefce, by way of Simonie) it is geeuen to S. Peter's
Treasury. Neither is it the Popes own several goods. But it is available to
the geeuer, as unto one, that doothe a most Godly deed. Such a special
grace has the Pope. Of most Diuelishe Vice, The Pope changes Vice into
Virtue.
he is hable to make most godly Virtue.

Hostiensis says, Papa potest vendere Titulum Ecclesiasticum, vt Episcopatum,
Abbatiam, etc. The Pope may selle any Ecclesiastical Title, or Dignity, as a
Bishoprike, or an Abbie, without danger of Simonie.

But, Extra De Simonia. Ca. 1. Hostien.
what speak we of the Pope? Your Cardinals them selves, by your favorable
Constructions, and godly orders, are likewise Priuileged, to commit Simonie,
safely, and freely, and without blame. Panormitane says, Cardinalis, pro
Palafreno a nobili viro recepto, Extra. De simnia, Eisi questiones
non praesumitur committere Simoniam: A Cardinal, for receiuinge a Palfraie of
a Noble Man, (for a Benefice, or a Bishoprike) is not thought to commit Simonie.

Thus, whereas Christ drove Buiers, and Sellers out of the Church, you by
your proper Distinctions, have received in Buiers, and Sellers, and thruste
out Christ. Hieronymus.
S. Hierome says, Per Nummularios significantur Beneficij Ecclesiastici
venditores: qui Domum Dei faciunt Speluncam Latronum: By the Exchangers are
signified the Sellers of Ecclesiastical Benefices: which make the House of
God, a Den of Thieves. 1. Quaest. 1. Eos qui.
In your own Decrees it is written hus, Tolerabilior est Macedonij Haeresis,
qui asserit, Spiritum Sanctum esse Seruum Patris, and Filij. Nam isti faciunt
Spiritum Sanctum Seruum suum: The Heresy of Macedonius, that said, the Holy
Ghost is Seruante, and sclaue to the Father, and to the Son, is more
tolerable, then is the Heresy of these simonistes. For these men make the
Holy Ghost their own Seruante.

Yet, ye say, ye are well assured, that the Truth is in the Church of Rome,
and shall never depart from thence, notwithstanding any disorder, or fault
whatsoever, there committed. And for proof thereof, ye allege, as ye say,
the Words of God him self in y^ Prophet Esaie. Esaie. 59.
Al be it, in that whole Prophet, there is not one word expressly mentioned
of the Church of Rome. Such a fantasy, as it appears, was sommetimes in
the Heretics, called the Manichees. For thus they said, Augustine. De Natura
Boni, Ca 46.
A Principibus Gentis Tenebrarum Lumen, ne ab ijs aufugeret, tenebatur: The
Princes of the Nation of Darkness held fast y^ Light, least it should
flee from them. For even so doothe the Pope, and his Cardinals hold the
Truth, as the Princes, or Powers of Darkness held the Light. It was hard
dealinge for you, to bind Christ in Recognisance, not to depart from the
Pope: ye should rather have bound the Pope, not to depart from Christ.

S. Hierome says, Hieronym. in Michaeam. Ca. 4.
Prophetae Jerusalem non habent in ore Prophetiam: Et in Domino requiescunt,
and dicunt: Non venient super nos mala. Quorum causa Speculatoriu^ Dei hostili
aratro diuiditur: Et locus, quondam pacis, ruinis plenus fit: and Templum
Domini in vepres, spinasque conuertitur, and est Habitaculum bestiarum: The
Prophets of Jerusalem have never a word of Prophecy in their mouths. Yet
they reaste them selves upon the Lord, and say, There shall no evil comme upon
us. For thene sakes the Watch Tower of the Lord is turned up with the enemies
Pleughe: the place of peace is full of ruin: the Temple of the Lord is turned
into Breeres, and Thorns: and is becomme a stable of wild beasts.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 2.
But what if Jeremy tell them, as is before rehearsed, that these be Lies?
What if the same Prophet say in an other place, that the self same men,
Hieremi. 12.
who ought to be Keepers of the Vineyarde, have brought to naught, and
destroyed the Lords Vineyarde? How if Christ say, that the same persons,
who chiefly ought to have a care over the Temple, Matthae. 21.
have made the Lords Temple a den of Thieves?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here come you in with your whatiffes, which commonly you use, when other
Rhetorike fails you. We tell you plainly without any iffes, that Learnedly
proved.
Jeremy meante of you, and such as you be, and calls your whole new
fangled Doctrine, Verba mendacij, the words of lieinge, earnestly geuinge
warninge, that men give no credit to them. His other rebuke pertains also
to you. When were ever such Thieves in the Church of God, as ye are?

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 1.
If it be so, that the Church of Rome cannot err, it must needs follow,
that the good luck thereof is far greater, then al these men's policy. For
such is their Life, their Doctrine, and their Diligence, that for all them,
the Church may not only err, but also utterly be spoiled, and perish^. No
doubt, if that Church may err, which has departed from Gods Word,
from Christ's Commandments, from the Apostles Ordinances, from the
Primitive Churches Examples, from the Old Fathers, and Councelles Orders, and
from their own Decrees, and which will be bound within the compass of none,
neither Old, nor New, nor their own, nor other folks, nor Man's Law, nor
Gods Law, then it is out of al question, that the Romish Church has not
only had power to err, but also that it has shamefully, and most wickedly
erred in very deed.

M. Hardinge.
A man would have thought, you would have brought some substantial Argument,
whereby to prove, that the Church erreth. Neither make you excuse in that,
you speak of the Roman Church. The Church of Rome is the whole Catholic
Church.
In this account we make no difference between the Roman Church, and the
Church. But all your proufes depend upon your iffes, which being denied,
you have no more to say. No doubt (say you) if that Church may err, which
has departed from Gods Word, from Christ's Commandments, etc. then it
has erred in very deed. But Sir, what if a man deny your supposal, and stay
you in your first if? What have you to prove it? All that you have said
hitherto. We know, and of little force it is. But no doubt, say you, if that
Church may err, which has departed from Gods Word, etc. Yea forsoothe,
if all iffes were true, then if Heaven fell, we should catch Larkes. And if
a bridge were made between Dover and Calys, we might go to Boleine a foot,
as William Somer once told King Henry, if it be true, that I have heard
say.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here in nothing else, but only the Canonization of poor William Summer.
While your Books, M. Hardinge, shall live, al his sage sawes shall never die.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 2.
But say they, ye have benne of our Fellowship, but now ye are becomme
foresakers of your Profession, and have departed from us. It is true: We have
departed from them, and, for so dooinge, we both geeue thanks to Almighty
God, and greatly rejoice on our own behalf. But yet for all this, from the
Primitive Church, from the Apostles, and from Christ we have not departed.
True it is: We were brought up with these men in darkness, and in the
lack of the knowledge of God, as Moses was brought up in the Learning, and in
the bosom of the Egyptians. We have benne of your Company, Tertull. in
Apologetico.
says Tertullian, I confess it: and no marvel at al: For, says he, men
be made, and not borne Christians.

M. Hardinge.
We say, (as ye report) that ye have benne once of our Fellowship, but now
ye are become Apostates and foresakers of your Profession, By this whole
discourse, Christ, and his Apostles may be condemned.
and have wickedly departed from us. By the name of us, we mean not some one
particular company, but Christ's Catholic Church. We say of you, as S.
Ihon said of the like, 1. Joan. ^.
whom he calls Antichrists: Ex nobis exierunt, sed no^ erant ex nobis. Nam
si fuissent ex nobis, permansissent vtique nobiscum: They are departed from out
of us, but they were not of us. For if they had benne of us, they had doubteles
remained still with us.

But what is your answer hereunto? It is desperate, foolish, and lieinge.
First, ye confess the thing, and not only that, but also thank God for it,
and greatly rejoice in it. And therein ye follow the worse sort of Sinners,
Proverb. ^.
of whom Solomon says, Laetantur cum male fecerint, and exultant in rebus
pessimis: They be glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in the worste
things that are. Ye have divided the Church of God, ye have rent our Lords
net, ye have cut his whole wouen cote, which the wicked Soldiers, that
Crucified him, could not find in their hearts to do. Dionysius Alexandrinus,
writing to Nouatus the great Heretic, who did as ye have done, says thus
unto him, as Eusebius recites, Eccles. Hisit. Lib. 6. Ca. 5. in Graecis.
whereby ye may esteem the greatness of your crime: Thou should have
suffered what so ever it were, that the Church of God might not be divided.
And martyrdom suffered for that the Church should not be divided, is no
less glorious, then that which is suffered for not dooinge Idolatry. Yea in
mine opinion it is greater. For there one is martyred for his own only Soul,
and here for the whole Church. Thus it follows, that by your Apostasy, and
by your diuidinge of Gods Church, ye have done more wickedly, A good
excuse of Idolatry.
then if ye committed Idolatry.

But yet for all this, (say they) from the Primitive Church, from the
Apostles, and from Christ we have not departed. What can be said more
foolishly? Why Syrs, Yes verily: Even as the House of God, and the Cave of
Thieves were al One Temple: Matthae. 21.
is not the Primitive Church and this of our time one Church? Does it not
hold together by continual Succession till the worlds end? What, has
Christ more Churches then one? Is the Primitive Church quite done, and now
must there begin a new? Is not Christ, his Apostles, and all true
beleuers, in what time or place so ever they live, his one mystical Body,
whereof he is the Head all other the members? As Christ is one, the Holy
Ghost one, one Faith, one Baptism, one Vocation, one God: so is the Church
one, which began at the first man, and shall endure to the last: whereof
the living part on earth before the coming of Christ into Fleashe, was
sometime brought to small number: after his coming, and after that the
Apostles had Preached and spreadde the Gospel abroad, the number neither was
ever, nor shall be other then great (though sometime accounted, small in respect
of the unbelievers) until the coming again of the Son of Man, Luc. 1^.
at what time he shall skantly find Faith, specially that which woorketh by
Charity, in the Earth. Against which time busely ye make preparation.

For some part of excuse of your forsakinge the Church, ye say, ye were
brought up with us in darkness, and in the lack of knowledge of God, as
Moses was among the Egyptians: For that ye bring out of Tertullian, helps
you nothing at all. I pray you Syrs, what darkness mean ye? Speak ye of
Sin? We excuse not our selves. But when took ye out the beam of your own
eyes, that ye epsy the mote of our eye? It were well ye proved your selves
honest men, before ye required us to be Angels. If ye mean the darkness of
ignorance, as peradventure ye do, and the lack of knowledge of God: Now that
ye are departed from us, and have set chair against chair, ( I see not cause
why to say, Altar against Altar) what more and better knowledge of God have
ye, then we have, and ever have had? Do we not know the Articles of our
belefe? Tell us, which do we lack? This is life Everlasting (says our
Savior in the Gospel) to know thee God alone, and whom thou haste sent
Jesus Christ. Joan. 17. Matthew. 16.
So far as God lightneth our understanding with the Supernatural Here M.
Hardinge lays out his heaps of Learning.
light of his grace, this much we know. For which Peter the Son of Iona was
accounted blessed of Christ, the same we sin full Papists through Gods
grace, also know and confess. The Commandments of God we know: what is
good, what is evil, which be sins, which be Virtues, what is to be
followed, what is to be shunned, so far as is behoofull, we be not ignorant.

What is the darkness then, for which ye would needs be gonne from us? And
what is that worthy knowledge ye have won by your departure? Tell us, that
we may bte the Books, and go to scoole with you. Truly without ye have some
hidden and secret knowledge, which ye have not uttered to the world hitherto,
as we believe ye have not, being such boasters as ye are: we see little cause,
ye should twite us of ignorance, and brag of your own knowledge. This we see
full well, they that run away from us to your side, be they Monks or Friars,
Tinkers or Tapsters, Cobblers or Bodgers, white or black, by and by in your
Synagoges they be great Rabbis. And ye the superintendentes admit them to be
your Ministers and Preachers of the word, and tell them they can do well,
and they believe no less themselves. But the people take them for such, as
they knew them before they took such degree, and many times for their good
behavior, they foregete their Holy Ministry, and Christen them by their
common name, which was not given them at the Font. Yet all this proves not
either our ignorance, or your marvelous and rare knowledge. Neither shall ye
ever be able to prove to any man of learning and judgment, that in any
liberal sciences, or right knowledge of the Scriptures, ye are comparable to
the learned men of the Catholic Church. Though about fifty years paste and
upward for a space, the studies of eloquence and of tongues were intermitted,
yet then and before those times was there no small number of men, who had
profounde knowledge of all good Arts, and specially of the Holy Letters. I
report me to Thomas Walden, who very learnedly confuted the Heresies of your
great Graundfather John VVicklef, to Alcuinus in the great Charles time, to
Beda before that, all three English men, to Anselme and Lanckfrancke Bishops of
England, though strangers borne, to S. Thomas of Aquine, S. Bernarde,
Rupertus, and hundreds more, which here is no place to reckon. Were not they,
by confession of all, great Clerks? do not the best learned of our time, in
obscure matters fetch light of them? To say the Truth, in comparison of
their clear light, your ill sauoringe snoffes may scantly seem to yield a
dark smoke. Many talk of your painted sheath, who, were they learned in deed,
would soon perceive neither that to be very fresh and gaie: for as for your
sword, what rusty and beggarly met all it is, the wiser part of the world
sees. A very Learned, and a worthy Conclusion. But vvoe be to them, that
call Light Darkness, and Darkness Light: Esai. ^.
Therefore ye shall do well, Syrs, to speak no more of the darkness and
ignorance of the Catholic Church, and to boast less of your great cunninge,
and knowledge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Your head was very idle, M. Hardinge, when it could so easily yield us
such idle talk. If ye think it in no case to be lawful, to depart from
them, what so ever they be, that bear the show, and countenance of the
Church, then must ye needs condemn the Apostles, and Prophets, and most
specially Christ him self. But let us consider, from what company we are
departed. So may the causes of our departure the better appear. For the Pope
him self says not nay, but, upon just considerations, any Church may
leave the Church of Rome. Departing from the Church of Rome.
His own words be these, Nulli agere licet, sine discretione Iustitiae,
contra Disciplinam Romanae Ecclesiae: Without discretion of Justice, it is
lawful for no man, to do any thing contrary to the order of the Church of
Rome. By this the Popes own Decree, Did. 12. Non Decit. In Rubric.
with discretion of Justice, it is lawful to do contrary to the Orders of
the Church of Rome.

But, for a short, and general view of that whole Church in this behalf, S.
Bernarde says thus, Bernardus in Synodo Remensi.
Parum est nostris Pastoribus, quod non servant nos, nisi and perdant. Non
parcunt suis, qui non parcunt sibi, Perimentes pariter, and Pereuntes: It is
not sufficient for our Bishops, that they save us not, unless they also do
destroy us: Sparinge not them selves, they spare not their people. They do
both perish them selves, and kille others. In eadem Synod.
Again he says, Non custodiunt hoc tempore Sponsam, sed perdunt: Non
custodiunt Gregem Domini, sed mactant, and deuorant: They keep not this day,
the Spouse of God, that is, his Church, but they destroy her: They keep not
this Flock, but they kille, and devour. He that writes, Paralipomena
Vrspergensis, in the story of the Council of Constance, says thus,
Paralipom. Vrspergen. Pa. 396.
Spiritum extinguebant: Prophetias aspernabantur: Christum in Membris suis
persequebantur: Eratque plane Persequutrix Ecclesia: They oppressed the Sprite
of God: they defied the Voices of the Prophets: they persequuted Christ in
his Members. And in deed the Church was geeuen to work persequution.

Aeneas Siluius, Aeneas Sylui. in Epist. ad Casparem Schlickium. Paralipom.
Vrspergen. in Clemen. 5.
that afterward was Pope Pius. 2. says, Refriguit Charitas, and Fides omnis
interijt: Charity is waxen cold, and al Faith is dead.

In the life of Pope Clemens. 5. it is written thus: Hic fuit Publicus
Fornicator. Ab eo tempore defecit omnis Disciplina, and Religio in
Cardinalibus: and tres Radices vitiorum, Superbia, Auaritia, Luxuria,
validissime domina^tur: This Pope was an open VVhoore master. From that time
forewarde, al kind of Discipline, and Religion decayed in the Cardinals: and
three roots of vices, Pride, Avarice, and Lechery, mightily bare the swaie.

Antonius Marinarius, In Council. Trid. Antonius Marinarius.
at your late Chapter at Tridente, says thus of the Church of Rome, Si
Euangelica Fides nostrae vitae Regula esset, re ipsa Christiani essemus. Nunc
Titulo, and Ceremonijs vocamur Christiani: If the Faith of the Gospel were a
Rule unto our life, then should we be Christians in very deed. As now, by
Titles, and Ceremonies, we bear only the name of Christians.

At the same Chapter, the Bishop of Bitonto said thus, as I have reported
before: Council. Trident. Episcopus Bitontinus.
Quibus turpitudinum Monstris, qua sordium Coll^ute, qua Peste non sunt
foedati, non corrupti in Ecclesia Sancta, and populus, and Sacerdos? A
Sanctuario Dei incipite: si vllus iam pudor, si vlla pudicitia, si vlla
superest been viuendi vel spes, vel ratio: With what Monsters of Filthiness,
with what Vileness, with what Pestilence be they not corrupted, and defiled in
the Holy Church ( of Rome), as well the Priest, as the People? Begin even
with the Sanctuary of God: if there be any Shame, if there be any regard of
Honesty, if there be any Hope, or way to live well.

An other says, Francis. Zephyrus in Apologeticum Tertulliani.
O nos miseros, qui Christiani dicimur. Genres agimus sub nomine Christi:
Miserable are we, that are called Christians. We live as Heathens, under the
name of Christ. An other says, O lugenda Roma, quae nostris Maioribus clara
Patrum Lumina protulisti: nostris temporibus, monstrosas tenebras, Arnulphus,
aut Bernardus in Council. Remen. Petrar. in Rithmis Italicis: Schola di Errori:
e Tempio di Eresia.
futuro saeculo famosas, offadisti: O miserable Rome, which in the time of
our Elders, haste brought forth the lights of worthy Fathers: but in our
days, haste brought forth Monstrous Darkness, shameful, and sclaunderous
to the time to comme. Petrarcha calls Rome, a School of Error, and a
Temple of Heresy.

Brigitta, whose words, and Prophesies ye have in reverence, says in her
Revelations, Christus sumer Benedictionem a Clero Romano, and dabit eam alteri
Genri facienti voluntatem Domini: Departing from the Church of Ro^^
Christ shall take his blessinge from the Cleregie of Rome: and shall give the
same unto a people, that shall do his will.

By these sewe, we may conceive the whole state of the Church of Rome:
which only Church, Herma^^ Riddus.
above al others, M. Hardinge tells us, is so founded in the Truth, that it
can never have power to be deceived.

We have departed therefore, from Shepeheardes, that spoiled the flock: From
Bishops, that destroyed the Church: that oppressed the Sprite of God: that
defied the voice of the Prophets: that persequuted Christ in his members:
that both perished them selves, and killed others: that walowed in monsters of
filthiness: that lived, as Heathens, under the name of Christ: That were
void of Charity: void of Faith: void of Discipline: void of Religion:
that were Christians only in Titles, and Ceremonies: From whom Christ had
vvithdravven his Blessinge: To be short, we have departed from the Temple of
Heresy, and from the School of Error.

This, M. Hardinge, is the beauty, and face of your Roman Cleregie: this is
that blessed Company, that we have foresaken.

Yet, say you, It had benne better, to have died, then to have broken the
Unity of such a Church. For your friends tell you, that without the
Obedience of the Bishop of Rome, De Maiorita and Obedient. Vnam Sanctam.
Subesse Romano Pontifici, est de necessitate Salutis.
there is no Hope of Salvation. Notwithstanding, your own Clemens, whom ye
commonly call the Apostles Felovve, says thus, Schisma efficit, non qui ab
Impijs secessionem facit, sed qui a Pijs: He makes no Schism, or Division in
the Church, that departs from the Wicked: but he, that departs from the
Godly. And therefore he adds further, Laici, cum ijs qui contraria sententiae
Dei dogmata defendunt, nolite societatem habere, neque participes illorum
Impietatis fieri. Ait enim Dominus, Clemens, Apostolicar. Consti^a. Lib. 6.
Cap. 4.
Recedite de medio horum hominum, ne cum eis pereatis: Ye Lay men, have no
Fellowship with them, nor be you Partetakers of their Wickedness, that defend
Doctrines contrary to the doctrine of God. For Our Lord says, Depart from
the mids of this people, lest ye perish together with them.

Pope Pius. Aeneas Syluius ad Rector. and vniuersitate Colonien. Paraliponena
Vrspergens Page 435.
2. says, Resistendum est quibuscunque in faciem, sieve Paulus, sieve Petrus
sit, qui ad Veritatem non ambulat Euangelij: We must withstand any man unto
the face, be it Peter, be it Paul: if he walk not after the Truth of the
Gospel. S. Augustine says, Ne Catholicis quidem Episcopis consentiendum est,
sicubi forte falluntur, and contra Canonicas Scripturas aliquid sentiant: We
may not agree, no not with the Catholic Bishops, if they happen to be
deceived, and think any thing contrary to the Canonical Scriptures.
Augustinus de Vnitate Ecclesi. Ca. 10.


S. Chrysostom says, Ex ipsis Veris Ecclesijs frequenter exeunt seductores.
Propterea nec ipsis omnino credendum est, nisi ca dicant, vel faciant, quae
conuenientia sint Scripturis: Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 49.
Even out of the very True Churches oftentimes there comme deceivers.
Therefore we may not in any wise believe, no not them, ( notwithstanding
they be the True Churches of God) unless they speak, or do such things,
as be agreeable to the Scriptures.

Anselmus, Anselmus in. 2. Thessalon. 2.
a late Writer, expoundinge these words of S. Paul, Tunc Reuelabitur ille
iniquus, says thus, Romanus Pontifex, qui tenet nunc Ecclesias, teneat illas,
donec de medio fiat: id est, donec ab ipsa Romana Ecclesia, quae est Medium,
and Cor Ecclesiarum, fiat iniquitas, ob quam ab ea multae discedant Ecclesiae:
Let the Bishop of Rome, that now holds the Churches, hold them still, until
it be taken away from the mids: yt is to say, until Wickedness be wought
of the Church of Rome, that is the Midst, and heart of Churches: for which
wickedness, many Churches shall depart from her.

S. Ambrose says, Ambros. in Epist ad Theodos. and V^sent.
Nullus pudor est, ad meliora transire: It is no shame, to go to the better.

S. Augustine says unto Faustus the Heretic, Departing from the Church of
Rome.
Ille me quondam de gremio tuo Error excusserat. Expertus fugi. quod experiri
non debui: That Error shook me once out of thy bosom. Being taught by
proof, I have fled that thing, that I should not have proved. August Contra
Faustum. Lib. 15. Cap. 3.


Ambrosius Ansbertus, one of your own Doctoures, says, Per Hieremiam
Prophetam dicitur, Exite de medio eius populus meus, and saluet vnusquisque
animam suam ab ira faroris Domini. Ambros. Ansber. in Apocalyp. Li. 2. Cap. 2.
Nequaqua^ enim in hac vita de medio Ciuitatis reprobae, id est, de medio
malorum quos Babylon illa significat, electorum aliquis valet exire, nisi
detesta^do, quod ab ipsis agitur, and age^do, quod ab ipsis detestatur: The
Prophet Hieremie says, O my people, go forth from the mids of them, and
save every man his own soul from the rage of our Lords fury. For none of
the Elect of God can in this life go forth from the mids of that Wicked
City, that is to say, from the mids of the evil, which that Babylon
signifies, but by defieinge, that they do: and by dooinge, that they defy.

And, whereas ye would so feign daste our eyes, and cover your deformities
with the name of the Church, Cyprian. De Lapsis, Sermo. 5.
S. Cyprian says, Non est Pax, sed Bellum: nec Ecclesiae iungitur, qui ab
Euangelio separatur: It is no Peace, but War: neither is he joined to the
Church, that is divided from the Gospel.

S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. ad populum vntioch. n. Homi. 17.
Mihi Ciuitas, non habens pios ciues, Omni villa vilior est: and quacunque
Spelunca ignobilior: A City, that has not Godly Citizens, is unto me viler,
then any Village: and more loathe some, then any Cave. And this he says of the
City of Antioche, which, by express words, he more esteems, then the
City of Rome.

We grant, we have departed from you, upon such occasion, and in such
sor te, as Moses sommetime departed from out of Aegypte: or, as S. Augustine
from the Manichees. How be it, in very deed, you naue rather departed from out
of us. Chrysostom in Matthew. Hom. 46.
Chrysostom says, Sic de ista Noua Jerusalem, id est, de Ecclesia, qui
Spirituales Christiani fuerunt, relicta Corporali Ecclesia, quam perfidi
occupauerant violentia, exierunt ab illis. Magis autem illi exierunt a nobis,
sicut Johannes exponit. Non enim ille de Ecclesia exire videtur, qui
corporaliter exit, sed qui Spiritualiter Veritatis Ecclesiasticae Fundamenta
reliquit. Nos enim ab illis ex^uimus Corpore: illi a nobis animo. Nos enim ab
illis extuimus Loco: Illi a nobis Fide. Nos apud illos reliquimus Fundamenta
parietum: Illi apud nos reliquerunt Fundamenta Scripturarum. Nos ab illis
egressi sumus secundum aspectum Hominum: Illi autem a nobis secundum Iudicium
Dei. Relicta est autem deserta, ex quo de illa Corporali Ecclesia Spiritualis
exiuit: Id est, de populo suo, qui videbatur Christianus, and non erat, Populus
iste exiuit qui non videbatur, and erat. Magis autem, secundumquod diximus,
illi a nobis exierunt quam nos ab illis: Even so, touching this Nevve
Jerusalem, which is the C^urche, they, that were Spiritu. [Christian men,
lecuinge the Bodily Church, which the wicked by violence had invaded,
departed out from them: Or, as s S. John expounds it, they rather departed
out from us. For he seems not in deed to depart from the Church, that
Bodily departs: but he, that Spiritually leaves the Fundations of the
Ecclesiastical Truth. We have departed from them, in Body: they have departed
from us, in Mind. We from them, by Place: they from us, by Faith. We have
leafte with them the Fundations of the Wales: They have leafte with us the
Fundations of the Scriptures. We are departed forth from them, in the
sight of Man: They are departed from us, in the Judgment of God. But now,
after that the Spiritual Church is gonne forth, the Bodily Church is leafte
foresaken: That is to say, from that people, that seemed to be a Christian
people, and was not, this people is gonne forth, that seemed not out wardely,
but was so in deed. Notwithstanding, as we have said before, they have
rather departed from us, then we from them.

Ye say, The Church in fevve.
your Church of Rome, that now is, and the Primitive Church, is al One
Church. Even so the Moon both in the full, and in the wane, is al One Moon:
Even so Jerusalem, as well under David, as under Manass es, was al one City.
The Holy place, whether ye Majesty of God, or ye Abomination of Desolation
stand in it, is al one place. The Primitive Church, say you, and the Church
of Rome, that now is, is al one Church. Therefore we say, the Church of
Rome, that now is, in Truth, and Religion, ought to agree with the Primitive
Church.

Whether the Church may be brought to a fevve in number, or no, we had
occasion sommewhat to say before. The Anciente Father Irenaeus says,
Quemadmodum ibi in plurimis eorum, Irenaeus, Lib. 4. Cap. 46.
qui peccauerunt, non been sensit Deus, Sic and hic multi sunt vocati: pauci
vero electi: As in the Old Testamente, in many of them, that offended, God was
not pleased: Even so now in the Nevve Testamente, many are called, and few are
Chosen. In Consideration whereof, S. Hierome cries out in an Agony within him
self, Hieron in Esai. Lib. 8. Cap. 24. Fortalitium Fidei. Lib. 5.
Tanta erit Sanctorum paucitas: So small shall be the number of holy men. One of
your own Doctors says, as it is alleged once before, Licet in hoc bello
Daemonum cada^t Religiosi Principes, and Milites, and Praelati Ecclesiastici,
and Subditi, semper tamen manent aliqui, in quibus seruatur Veritas Fidei, and
Iustificatio bonae Conscientiae. Et, si non nisi duo viri Fideles remanerent in
mundo, tamen in illis saluaretur Ecclesia, quae est Vnitas Fidelium:
Notwithstanding in this war of Diuelles, both the Godly Princes, and
Soldiers, and Ecclesiastical Prelates, and Subjects be over thrown, yet
evermore there remain sum, in whom the Truth of Faith, and the
Righteousness of good Conscience is preserved. And, notwithstanding there
were but tv voo Faithful men remaininge in the world, yet even in them, the
Church of God, which is the Unity of the Faithful, should be saved.

But, for yt we say, we were brought up emonge you in Darkness, and
Ignorance, Ye enter out of season into a needelesse discourse of comparison of
Learning, In the Liberal Sciences, ye say, we are not comparable to the
Learned men of your side. It was not our meaning, M. Hardinge, to call the
Bright beams of your Liberal Learning into question. It appears, ye would
feign have it blased, and magnified to the vttermoste, and no way to be
disgraced. We meante only the knowledge of God, and the open Profession of
his Holy Word: In comparison of which knowledge, al other knowledge, what so
ever, is mere darkness.

How be it, touching any kind of the Liberal, and Learned Sciences, there was
no great cause, why ye should, either so highly rowse your self in your own
opinion, or so greatly disdeigne others. De Summa Trinita. Linwoode.
Ye may remember, that your Prouincial Constitutions begin with these
words, Ignorantia Sacerdotum.

It were no great Maisterie, to charge the Chief Doctoures of your side with
sum want of Learning. Ludouicus Viues says, Vt quidque Ius superioribus
saeculis minus tittum fuit studentium manibus, Ludoui Viues de Causis Corrupt.
Artium, Lib. 5.
ita purius ad nos peruenit: For the space of certain hundred years paste,
the less any Book came into ( your Learned) students hands, the purer, and
better it came to us. Meaning thereby, that every thing was the worse for
your Learned handelinge. Of Thomas, Scotus, Hugo, and others, of whom ye seem
to make so great accoumpte, your own friend Catharinus says, Scholastici
multa inerudite Comminiscuntur: Catharinus aduerius Petrum a Sold.
These Schole Doctoures imagine many m^ters unlearnedly. Erasmus says,
Portenta, quae nunc passim legimus in Commentarijs Recention Interpretum, tam
impudentia, and insulsa sunt, vt videa^tur suibus ea scripsisse, Erasm in
Scholijs in Hieronym ad Mar^ellam.
non Hominibus: The monstrous folies, yt we commonly read in ye Commentaries
of the late Interpreters, ( whereby he means the very croppe, and the
woorthieste of al your Scholastical Learned Doctoures) are so far without
shame, and so peeuishe, as if they had benne written for Swine, and not for
men. One of your Doctoures says, Comparison of Learning.
Apostolus, dicitur ab Apos, quod est Argumentum, vel praeeminentia, and
Stolon, quod est Missio: quasi praeeminenter Missus. An other says,
Apocrisarij, dicuntur Nuntij Domini Papae. Erasmus ad Archiepisc. Toleta. Extra
de Elect. and Electi Potest. Signifi. in Gloss. Manipul. Curat. Page 101.
Nam crisis dicitur Secretum: and Apos, dicitur Nuntius. An other says,
Cathedra, est nomen Graecum, and componitur a Cathos, quod est Fides, and edra,
quod est Sponda. An other says, Eleemosyna, dicitur ab Eleis, quod est,
Misereri, and Mois, quod est Aqua. Peter Crab in his late Scholies upon the
Councelles, says thus, Mulieres (...), id est, Cohabitantes Sacculos: Likewise
again he says, Phrygium factum est ex Pennis Pauonum. Of your Liberal
Learned Cleregie one says thus: Nec verba Canonis intelligunt, nec, Inter
Decreta Felicis pp. Conc. Tomo. 1. Page 168 In Donatione Constantini. Herma.
Riddus. Hierony. In Reg. Monacho. Ne ad Risum Provocentur Angelici Spiritus.
quae sint verba Consecrationis sciunt. They understand not the words of
their Canon: neither know they, which be the Words of Consecration. And
therefore he, that forged the Rule of Monks, under the name of S. Hierome,
charge them in any wise to pronounce every word distinctely, and wa^ily,
lest by their foolish utterance they should make the Angels to fall a
laughinge.

These few may serve you for a taste. Hereby, M. Hardinge, it may appear,
your Cleregie has no great cause, to make such triumph of their
Learning. How be it, we vpraide you not herewith: nor was this the cause of
our departure. Ye hold both Faith, and Learning, and Church, and Religion,
by enheritance. Christ has once prayed for Peter: Therefore your Faith, and
Learning can never fail. Yet notwithstanding, your late Books, freight with
so many uncivil, and vain speeches (for of your often Untruths I will say
nothing) sauoure more of Choler, Hierony in Proverb. Li. 2. Ca. 19.
then of Learning. S. Hierome says, Doctrina viri per patientiam noscitur.
Quia tanto quisque minus oftenditur doctus, quantoconuincitur minus patiens: A
man's Learning is known by his patience. For the less patiente a man
shows him self, the less he shows to be his Learning.

Would God, ye would humble your knowledge, and make it obediente to the
knowledge of God. Actor. 8.
Otherwise, that Peter said unto Simon Magus, of his moonie, may likewise be
said unto you, of your knowledge: Thy knowledge be with thee to thy
destruction. 1. Cor in 2. 3. Esdr. 4. 1. Cor. 13. Matthew. 13.
Our Learning is the Cross of Christ: of other Learning we make no
vauntes. God is called the God of Truth, and not of Learning. S. Paul
says, Al kind of Learning shall be abolished. God make us al Learned to the
Kingedome of Heaven.

The Apology, Cap. 13. Division. 1.
But, wherefore, I pray you, have they themselves, the Citizens, and dwellers
of Rome, removed, and comme down from those Seven Hills, whereupon Rome
sommetime stood, to dwell rather in the Plain, called the field of Mars? They
will say peradventure, because the conductes of Matter, wherewithout men
cannot commodiously live, have now failed, and are dried up in those Hills.
Well then, let them geeue us like leave in seekinge the Water of Eternal Life,
that they geeue them selves in seekinge the Water of the well. For that Water
verily failed amongst them. The Elders of the jews, says Jeremy, Hiere. 14.
sent their little ones to the VVateringes: and they, findinge no Water,
being in miserable case, and utterly lost for thirste, brought home again
their vessels empty. The nedy, and poor folk, Esai. 41.
says Esaie, sought about for Water: but no where found they any: their
tongue was even withered with thirste. Even so these men have broken in
pieces all the pipes, and conduites: they have stopped up all the springes, and
choked up the Fountain of Living Water with dyrte, and mire. And, as
Caligula, many years past, locked up fast all the storehouses of corn in
Rome, and thereby brought a general dearthe and famine amongst the people,
even so these men, by damminge up all the Fountains of Gods Word, have
brought the people into a pitiful thirst. They have brought into the world,
Amos. 8.
as says the Prophet Amos, a Hungre, and a Thirste: nor the Hunger of
Bread, nor the Thirste of Water, but of hearing the Word of God. With
great distress went they scatteringe about, seekinge sum spark of heavenly
light, to refreashe their consciences withal: but that light was already
thoroughly quenched out, so that they could find none. This was a rueful
state: This was a lamentable form of Gods Church. It was a misery, to live
therein, without the Gospel, without Light, and without al Comfort.

M. Hardinge.
Well, and witteely reasoned foresoothe. No no Sirs, if it were that wholesome
Water of Eternal life which ye thirste after, Untruth. For we are not
departed from the Catholic Church.
ye would never have departed from the high hill, the Catholic Church, and
come down into the valleis, where ye find the durty pudles of fleashely
pleasures, where the devil Behemoth, Job. 40.
as Job says, dormit in Iocis humentibus, sleapeth in woiste places. Al were
not sterued for hunger and thirst of that water of Gods Word. Therefore ye
speak both slanderously and ignorantly for divines, where ye say, that we
had broken in pieces all the pipes and conduites, that we had stopped up all the
springes, and choked, and dawned up all the Founteines of Living Water with
durte and mire.

Yet unawares or ignorantly, they call that faithles and pagane state, a
lamentable form of Gods Church, whereas they should have accoumpted it no
Church at al. For where is no word of God, no light, no Gospel at al, how can
there be any Church? Without these, any multitude is no more a Church, then
without Christ, a man is a Christian, then a dead man is a man. And thus with
malicious slaunderinge, not with learned reasons: with their own affirmations,
not with apt allegations, have they gone about to prove, that these many
hundred years the Church has erred* But thanks be to God, all this wind
shakes no corn. When al these hasty blastes be blown* over, the Church of
God shall stand still unmoved, upon the rock, Christ builded it on, and appear
glorious in her sted fastnes and truth, maugre the gain saieinge of al
Heretics, and shall appear to them terrible, as a strong army set in battle
raye. Cantic. 6.


The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, ye begin out of season to play with your Allegories, and
Mystical Fantasies. Your Catholic Church of Rome is the Mount: Worldly
pleasure is the Vale. By which Comparison, we must believe, that the Pope,
and his Cardinals, sittinge on high upon the Mount, pass their time there
only in Fasting, and prayer, and in all manner poverty, and penury, and
straitou^sse of Life, and have utterly abandoned al worldly pleasures.
Notwithstanding sum have said, Paralipomen. Vrspergen. in Clement. 5.
In Cardinalibus Superbia, Auaritia, Luxuria validissime dominantur: In the
Cardinals of Rome Pride, Avarice, and Lechery are in their greatest
Courage. How be it, touching as well this, as other your like folies,
conceminge the Church, I will not say, Ye keep your woonte: but I must
needs say, Ye do but trifle.

The Apology, Cap. 13. Division. 1.
Wherefore, Departing from the Church of Rome.
though our Departinge were a trouble to them, yet ought they to consider
withal, how just cause we had of our Departure.

M. Hardinge.
In deed our charity is such, as we confess it to be a grief vnto-vs, to
see you play the part of rebellious children, to use presumption for
submission, contempt for obedience, spite for love. Yet since that ye are
desperate and incorrigible, as by your departing from us the Church felt some
anguish and trouble, so now that ye are gone, it is releued, as the body is
eased, when after a purgation it has avoided evil humors. Now say you best.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We are not gonne from the Church of God, M. Hardinge: We are gonne only
from you, that have so irreverently abused the Church. But ye feel good ease,
ye say, and are well reliued by our departure, as, to use your homely
comparisons, a sick body is reliued by a purgation. God of his mercy grant,
that ye may likewise be purged of all the rest. So shall ye feel more ease,
and be better reliued.

S. Hierome says, Hierony. ad Fabiolam. De. 42. Mansionibus, Mansione. 1.
Hebraei dicunt, quod ea nocte, qua egressus est Israel ex Aegypto, omnia in
Aegypto Templa destructa sunt: sieve terrae motu, five ictu fulminum.
Spiritualiter autem dicimus, quod egredientibus nobis ex Aegypto, errorum Idola
corruant, and omnis Peruersarum Doctrinarum cultura quatiatur: The Rabines, or
Hebrewe Doctoures say, that the same night, that Israel departed out of
Egypt, all the Idolatrous Temples in Egypt were destroyed: either by
Earthquake, or by Lighteninge. But here of we learn, in a Spiritual sense,
that when we depart out of Egypt ( that is to say, from the company of
Idolaters) the Idolles of error fall to the ground, and all the honor of
false Doctrine is shaken down. Such relief, M. Hardinge, we trust, ye
shall find by our departure.

Beda, expoundinge these words of the Apocalypse, Comme forth from her, Beda
in Apocal. Lib. 3. Cap. 18.
my people, and be not partetakers of her sins, says thus: Inducit
discessionem, quae est ruina Babylonis: cum enim Loath discesserit a Sodomis,
Sodomae funditus tollentur: S. John speaks of the departure, which is the
ruin, and fall of Balylon. For, when Loath shall depart out of Sodom, then shall
Sodom utterly be overthrown.

Again he says, Beda in Apocal. Lib. 3. Cap. 19.
Post haec audiui vocem, Alleluia: Laus, and Gloria, and Virtus Deo nostro.
Haec nunc ex part dicit Ecclesia. Tunc autem perfect dicet, cum discessio
facta fuerit: After this I heard a voice, Alleluia: Praise, and Glory, and
Power be to our God. This song the Church in part sings already. But then
shall she in deed and perfitely singe it, when departure shall be made (from
Antichriste, or Babylon).

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 1.
For if they say, It is in no wise lawful for one, to leave the fellowship,
wherein he has benne brought up, they may as well in our names, and upon our
heads, likewise condemn the Prophets, the Apostles, and Christ him self.
For why complain they not also of this, that Loath went quite his way out of
Sodom: Abraham out of Chaldee, Example of Christ
the Israelites out of Egypt, Christ from the Jews, and Paul from the
Phariseis? For except it be possible, there may be a lawful cause of
Departinge, we see no reasone, why Loath, Abraham, the Israelites, Christ, and
Paul may not be accused of Sects, and Seditions, as well as others.

M. Hardinge.
Yet bring ye nothing to the purpose. Your proufes be so weak, and hang so
evil together, that we may well tell you (which Irenaeus objected to
Heretics) that ye make a rope of sand. We say not, it is in no wise lawful
for one to leave the fellowship, wherein he has benne brought up. But contrary
wise, Apocal. 18.
Thus mutche confessed is sufficient.
if the fellowship be naught and wicked, every one is bound to eschew it*
Depart from Babylon my people, and be not ye partakers of her sins, says the
heavenly voice to S. John. A sudden Conclusion.
Therefore the examples ye bring, help nothing your cause.

Loath went out of Sodom, Abraham of Chaldea, the Israelites of Egypt, Paul
from the Phariseis, by Gods special warninge. Where ye say, Christ went from
the Jews, unless ye refer it to his steppinge aside from them for a while:
ye should rather have said, the Jews went from Christ. But whereto
pertains this? Though ye were so malicious, as to compare the Catholic
Church to Sodom, to Chaldea, to Egypt, to the Jews and Phariseis: yet, I
wene, ye are not so proud, as A vain folly. For a good man may follow
Christ without presumptuous Comparison.
to compare your selves to Loath, to Abraham, to Gods peculiar people, to Paul,
to Christ himself. These departinges we allow, and God required them: yours
we blame, and God detesteth.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We compare not our selves, M. Hardinge, neither with Loath, nor with Abraham,
nor with Paul: least of al with Christ him self. But we humbly submit
our selves both in life, and in Doctrine, to be guided by their Examples. And
thus, I trust, we may lawfully do, without just note of presumption. S.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 79.
Data est tibi potestas diuinitus imitandi Christum, vt possis illi similis
fieri. Noli expauescere hoc audiens. Time^dum enim tibi potius est, si similis
illi fieri negligas: Thou haste power geeuen the from God to follow Christ,
that thou maiste be like unto him. Be thou not afraid to hear this thing.
Thou haste more cause to fear, if thou refuse to be like unto him. Likewise
says the Anciente Father Origin, Si quem imitati volumus, propositus est
nobis Christus ad imitandum: Origin. in Ezechiel. Homil. 7.
If we desire to follow any man, Christ is set before us, that we should
follow him.

But if it be so Provvde a part, in Religion, and Life to follow Christ, what
is he then, that claims to him self Christ's Authority, and calls him
self even by the name of Christ? You know, of whom it is written, Extra De
Tra^slatio Episcopi, Qua^to. Hostien. Bernard. De Co^sideratio. Lib. 2.
Papa potest, quicquid Christus ipse potest. The Pope can do, what so ever
Christ him self can do. Ye know, who is well contented, to hear him self
thus saluted: Touching Primacie, thou art Abel: touching Gouernemente, thou
art Noe^: touching Patriarkship, thou art Abraham: touching Order, thou art
Melchisedech: touching Dignity, thou art Aaron: touching Authority, thou
art Moses: touching Judgment, thou art Samuel: touching Power, thou art
Peter: touching Anointinge, thou art Christ. These words, I trow, M.
Harding, may sommewhat seem to sauoure of Pride.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 2.
And, if these men will needs condemn us for Heretics, because we do not
al things at their Commandment, whom (in Gods Name) or what kind of
men ought they themselves to be taken for, which despise the Commandment
of Christ, and of the Apostles?

M. Hardinge.
Our frailty concerning life, we accuse, and lamente, and commend our selves
to Gods infinite mercy. Touching belefe and necessary doctrine of faith,
rail ye at us never so mutche, we neither despise the Untruths notorious, and
manifest unto the world.
Commandments of Christ, nor the traditions of the Apostles.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 3.
If we be Schismatiques, because we have leaft them, by what name then shall
they he called themselves, which have foresaken ye Greeks, from whom they
first received their Faith, foresaken the Primitive Church, foresaken
Christ himself, and the Apostles, even as if Children should foresake their
parents?

M. Hardinge.
Who so ever depart from the Catholic Church, they be Schismatikes: ye have
departed from the Catholic Church, of Here M. Harfreely yeldeth us the first
six hundred, and three score years, that is to say, the whole time of the
Apostles, and Holy Fathers of the Church.
these nine hundred years: ergo ye be schismatikes. The first proposition ye
will not deny: The second your selves confess: the conclusion then must
needs be true. If we say the same, blame us not. Neither say we that only,
but also that ye are Heretics. Whereby the measure of your iniquity is
increaced. The same crime ye would impure unto us, if ye wisie how. If ye
have no more to lay to our charge, but that we have foresaken the Greeks, ye
shall not be offended with the world, if it give us the title, name, and
estimation of Catholics, as heretofore. For (remember your selves) we have not
forsaken: he Greeks, but the Greeks in some points have forsaken us. By the
name of us, always I understand the Catholic Church, even the Holy Roman
Church, whose faith we profess, and with whom we communicate.

Read the Answer.
And how stands it with your lerninge, that we received the faith first
from the Greeks? For where ye say, we have forsaken the Primitive Church, yea
Christ himself, and the Apos^les, ye have told us this so often, that now we
take them to be but words of course, and a common blaste of your railing
sprite. The Roman Church received the faith from Jerusalem Untruth, As
shall soon appear.
and not from Greece, as the rest of the world did, Esai. 2.
according to the Prophecy, De Sio^ exibit lex, etc. As for the land of
Britain our native country, if the faith were first brought hither by Joseph
of Arimathaea, and his fellows, as by old tradition we are told: Certainly we
received not our Faith first from the Church of Rome.
then was the Church here first planted by faithful Jews, and not by Greeks.
This being true, we marvel what ye mean, to charge us with forsaking the
Greeks, specially where ye say, we first received the faith from them*
Which is no truer, then that we received our English language from them.

The B. of Sarisburie.
It were no shame for you, M. Hardinge, to confess, that the Church of Rome
first received her Faith from the Churches of Graecia. Augu. Epist. 178.
Augu. Epist. 170. Chrysosto ad Popul. Antiochen. Homil. 14.
Neither are they so utterly void of Learning, that have said the same.
Rather I marvel, what Learning can lead you, to sat the contrary. S.
Augustine says, Terra Graecorum, vnde vbique destinata est Fides: The Land of
Graecia, from whence the Faith into al places was sent abroad. Again he
says, Radix Orientalium Ecclesiarum, vnde Euangelium in Aphricam venit:
Tripar. Histor. Lib. 4 Cap. 16. Sozom. Li 3. ca. 8 (...).
The Root of the East Churches, from whence the Gospel came into Aphrica. S.
Chrysostom says unto the people of Antioche, Christianorum nomen* velut ex
quodam Font, hinc incipiens, omnem mundum inundauit: The name of Christians
beginning first from this City of Antioche, as from a Spring, has flowed
over the whole world. The Bishops of the East wrote thus unto Julius the
Bishop of Rome: Ad Ecclesiam Romana^ ab Orient Praedicatores Dogmatis
adueneru^t: The Preachers of Christian Doctrine came from yt East to the
Church of Rome. The Faith brought to Rome out of Graecia.
Likewise S. Basile says, The Gospel of the Kingedome, springing up first in
the Church of Graecia, was from thence published abroad into al ye world.
Eusebius says, Lucis virtus, and Sacrae Religionis Lex, beneficio Dei, quasi
e sinu Orientis profecta, cunctum simul Orbem Sacro Iubare illustrauit: The
power of the Light, and the Law of Holy Religion, by Gods benefit,
springinge out, as it were, from the bosom of the East, Basil. In Epist ad
Epis. per Italiam and Galliam. Eusebi. De vita. Constan. Orati. 2. Cod. De
Sacrosa^. Ecclesiis. L. Iubemus.. Scie^tes.
has shined over the whole world together with a blessed beam. The
Emperor Justinian says, Constantinopolis, Religionis, and Fidei Matter
perpetua: Constantinople is the Everlasting Mother of Faith, and Religion.
And likewise again, Sacrosancta Co^stantinopolitanae Ciuitatis Ecclesia, Matter
Pietatis nostrae, and Christianorum Orthodoxae Religionis omnium: The most
Holy Church of the City of Constantinople, the Mother of our Holiness, and
the Mother of al Christians of the Catholic Faith.

In like sort, the Church of Constantinople, even until this day, intituleth
it self: Cod. in Eod. titu. 1. Decernimus. Epist. Eccle. Constantinop. Ad
Eccle. Pragen. Council. Trident. Oration Episcopi Bitontini.
(...): The Church of Constantinople, the Mother, and Maistresse of all that be
Catholic. To be short, if ye will not believe any of these, yet at least ye
may believe your own Fellows. The Bishop of Bitonto in your late Chapter at
Trident, uttered these words, as it may well appear, with lusty courage: Eia
igitur Graecia Matter Nostra, cui id torum debet, quod habet Latina Ecclesia: O
therefore our Mother Graecia: unto whom the Latin Church, or the Church of
Rome, is beholden for all, that ever she has.

These things, M. Hardinge, being true, we marvel, what should move you
to deny, that ye first received the Faith from the Church of Graecia.
Touching the matter it self, In opere Triparti. li. 2. ca. 1. In. 2. To.
Council.
it is written thus in your own Councelles, Si Graeci, per quandam Scissuram,
diuiduntur a Latinis, ita Latini a Graecis. Et ideo videtur, quod, Si Graeci
debent dici Schismatici propter huiusmodi Diuisionem, eadem ratione, and
Latini: praeterea Graeci magis servant Antiquas Consuetudines Apostolorum, and
Discipulorum Christi, in Barbis, etc. If the Greeks, by a certain Division, be
sundred from the Latins, even so be the Latins sundred from the Greeks. And
therefore it seems, if the Greeks in respect of this Division ought to be
called Schismatiques, that then the Latins also ought so to be called in like
case. Furthermore, the Greeks do more duly keep the Old Customs of the
Apostles, and of Christles Disciples, touching Beardes, etc. then do the
Latins.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 1.
For though those Greeks, who this day profess Religion, and the name of
Christ, have many things corrupted amongst them, yet hold they still a great
number of those things, which they received from the Apostles. They have
neither Private Masses, nor mangled Sacraments, nor Purgatories, nor Pardones.
And as for the titles of High Bishops, and those glorious names, they
esteem them so, as whosoever he were, that would take upon him the same, and
would be called, either Universal Bishop, or the Head of the Universal
Church, they make no doubt, to call such a one, both a passinge proud man,
and a man, that woorketh despite against all the other Bishops his Brethren,
and a plain Heretic.

M. Hardinge.
As ye have oftentimes belied us, Untruth. As it shall plainly appear.
so now ye belie the poor Greeks. So little are ye able to say somewhat,
and therein to say truth. For they have Mass commonly without company to
communicate with the Priest, which ye call Private Mass: so Untruth, As
large, as manifest.
is it al Greece over, so is it in Asia, in Syria, in Assyria, in Armenia, and
where so ever the Religion of Christ is professed: As among the Greeks in
Venis, I my self, and diverse of our country men have seen it commonly
practiced. Like wise pray they al for the dead, and think them to be relieved
by the prayers, oblations, almose, and deeds of charity, done for them by
the living. Which mind, and opinion implies that faith, Untruth, For the
Grecians never received these fantasies of Purgatory.
which the Church holds of purgatory.

But though (say ye) those Greeks have many things corrupted, yet hold they
still a great number of those things, which they received of the Apostles.
And will thou know, Reader, what they be? Forsoothe they have neither Private
Masses, nor mangled Sacraments, nor Purgatories, nor Pardons. Is not the wit
of this Defender to be commended, that makes a man to hold that, which he
has not? O, so merrily this man plaieth with his fancy.
Those Greeks hold still, says he. What hold they? Mary they have not this
and that. This is a new kind of holdinge, for a man to hold, that he has
not. If they hold still, then have they still. But they have not, says he:
then how hold they? A man may by the rules of this new Logique, thus
reason: The Turks, Saracenes, Jews, Infidels, Idolaters, yea, the sheep of
Cottesholde also, if ye will, have neither private Masses, nor Communion under
one kind, nor Purgatories, nor Pardons: Ergo, they hold a number of things,
which they received from the Apostles. The antecedent is true. Who so ever
denies the consequente, must compte this Defenders Logique very simple. What
if one should make this argument, This Defender has neither good Logique,
nor very fine Rhetorike, nor profounde Philosophy, nor the right knowledge of
Divinity: Ergo, he holds many Heresies? Though both the Antecedent, and
Consequent be true, yet is the argument naught. For by like reason one might
conclude, an honest unlearned catholic man to be an Heretic, which were
false and injurious. Such is the Logique, such are the topikes of this new
negative, and ablative divinity: for so may we worthily call it. Negative, in
respect of their blasphemous tongues, denieing sundry weighty points of our
Faith: Ablative, in respect of their wicked hands, casting away, throwinge
down, and taking away many good things, perteining to the maintenance of
Christen Religion, and Gods honor. Put them from their negatiues, and from
their ablatiues, then in what case shall they stand?

The B. of Sarisburie.
I am ashamed, the world should be combred with so childishe folies. This
Defenders wit, ye say, is to be commended. He makes a man to hold, that
be never had. And what hold they? say you. Mary, they have not this, and
that. This is a new kind of holdinge, for a man to hold, that he has not.
If they hold still, then have they still. But they have not: then how hold
they? Now surely, M. Hardinge, I trow, we shall Have, and Hold a merry man.
So pretty sport ye can make your self with Having, and Holdinge. It were
great pity, ye should ever be otherwise occupied. Annibal of Carthage, when
he had heard Phormio the Oratoure talk pleasantly a long while together,
Cicero, De Oratore. 2.
being afterward demanded, what he thought of his Eloquence, made aunsweare
in his homely sort, Multos se vidisse delitos senes: sed, qui magis, quam
Phormio, deliraret, vidisse neminem.

But, sum what to yield unto your pleasance, why may not a man Hold, that
be never Had, as well as Lose, that he never Had? In the Learned Gloses upon
your Decrees, Did. 17. Council. in Gloss.
ye may find this note amongst others, Nota, quod aliquis dicitur perdere,
quod nunqua^ habuit: Mark well this: A man may be said to Lose, that he never
Had. And yet, ye say commonly in the Schools, Priuatio semper praesupponit
habitum, The Losing of a thing always pre supposes the Having of the same.
Or, to answer you in plainer wise, why may not a man as well Hold nothing,
as you may talk so mutche, and yet say nothing? Galene said sommetime to
one, Galenus.
that spoke then in such substantial manner, as you speak now, Accipe
nihil: and tene fideliter: Take nothing: and hold it fast.

But to leave your folies, The Greek Church.
and seely toies, M. Hardinge, with your Turks, and Saracenes, and Sheep of
Cotesholde, we say not, The Greeks Hold still, that they never Had: But
we say, They Hold still, that they ever Had. Your Private Masses, and
your Dimi Communions they Hold not: for they Had them never. The Holy, and
Whole Communion in Both kinds, they Hold still: and sithence the Apostles
time they have had them ever.

They pray also for the Dead: And therein, ye say, is implied your Faith
of Purgatory. I will not here touch the simplicity of your Rhetorique, or
Logique, M. Hardinge: But only wish you, to have better regard to your
Divinity. For ought, that I can see, Prayer for the Dead, and your Fantasy
of Purgatory, were never so straitely coupled together, but that they might
well, and easily go a sunder. The Grecians, as they Pray for the Dead, so do
they Pray for the Apostles, for the Patriarchs, for the Prophets, and for the
Blessed Virgin our Lady: Liturgia Basilij, Liturgia Chrysostomi.
as you may soon perceive by S. Basiles, and by S. Chrysostomes Liturgy.
Yet, I think, ye would not have your Reader believe, as an Article of your
Faith, that the Apostles of Christ, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and the
Blessed Virgin Christ's Mother are still in Purgatory. What so ever other
opinion the Grecians have of the Dead, certain it is, they could never yet
be brought to believe your Purgatory.

Roffensis, Polydor. De Inuentoribus, li. 8. cap. 1.
one of your greatest Doctoures, as I have said before, says thus,
Purgatorium Graecis vsque ad hunc diem non est creditum: The Grecians until
this day believe not Purgatory. Thus, M. Hardinge, I know not, whether by
your Logique, or by your Divinity, (for both are marvelous) ye would
feign force your poor Greeks, to Hold that thing, that they never Had.

An other proper pastime ye make your self with your Negatiues, and
Ablatiues. And wherefore, it were hard to tell, sauinge that, I see, ye were
well disposed, and well it became you, to be merry. The Ancient Learned Fathers,
having to deal with impudent Heretics, that in defense of their Erroures,
avouched the Judgment of all the Old Bishops, and Doctoures, that had
benne before them, and the general consent of the Primitive, and whole
Universal Church, and that with as good regard of Truth, and as Faithefully,
as you do now, the better to discover the shameless boldness, and
nakedness of their Doctrine, were oftentimes likewise forced to use the
Negative, and so to drive the same Heretics, as we do you, to prove their
Affirmatiues: which thing to do, it was never possible. The Anciente Father
Irenaeus thus stayed him self, as we do, Irenaeus. li. 1. ca. ^.
by the Negative: Hoc neque Prophetae Praedicauerunt, neque Dominus docuit,
neque Apostoli tradiderunt: This thing neither did the Prophets publishe. nor
our Lord teach, Chrysostom. De Incomprehensi. Dei natura, Hom. 3. Leo. Epist.
93. cap. 12.
nor the Apostles deliver. By a like Negative Chrysostom says, Hanc Arborem
non Paulus plantauit, non Apollo rigauit, non Deus auxit: This Tree (of
Error) neither Paul planted, nor Apollo watered, nor God increased. In like
sort Leo says, Quid opus est in cor admittere, quod Lex non docuit, quod
Prophetia non cecinit, quod Euangelij Veritas non praedicauit, quod Apostolica
Doctrina non tradidit? What needs it, to believe that thing, that neither the
Law has taught, nor the Prophets have spoken, nor the Gospel has
preached, nor the Apostles have delivered? And again, Quomodo noua inducuntur,
quae nunquam nostri sensere Maiores? Leo, Epist. 97. cap. 3.
How are these new diuises brought in, that our Fathers never knew?

S. Augustine, August. Epist. 165
having reckened up a great number of the Bishops of Rome, by a general
Negative says thus: In hoc ordine Successionis nullus Donatista Episcopus
inuenitur: In all this order of Succession of Bishops, there is not one Bishop
found, Private Mass in the Greek Church.
that was a Donatiste. S. Gregory, being him self a Bishop of Rome, and
writing against the Title of Universal Bishop, says thus, Nemo Decessorum
meorum hoc tam prophano vocabulo vti consensit: Nullus Romanorum Pontificum hoc
singularitatis nomen assumsit: Gregorius, li. 4. Epist. 32.
None of al my Predecessors ever consented to use this ungodly Title: No
Bishop of Rome ever took upon him this name of Singularity.

These, and other like Negatiues, the Holy Fathers in Old times might safely
use without controlmente: for that there was no Doctoure of Louaine as yet up
starte, to carpe, and quarrel at their Divinity. Leave this childishe, and
unsavory sportinge, and triflinge with your Negatiues, M. Hardinge. It were a
great deal more seemly, for a man of Learning, and Gravity, and more to
your purpose, to prove your Affirmatiues.

They have Private Mass, ye say, in all Graecia, Asia, Syria, Assyria,
Armenia, and, where so ever the Religion of Christ is professed. All this we
must needs believe upon your word: for other proof ye offer to make none.
Notwithstanding, if they have such Private Masses in all those Countries, tell
us, I beseech you, who were the Authors, and Makers of these Masses? Ye will
say, S. James, S. Chrysostom, or S. Basile. For of these names, and Masses,
ye have told us many a tale. Yet, if ye consider the matter well, ye shall
find, that these self same Masses were our Communions, and nothing like to
your Masses: And, that the Holy Sacraments at the same, contrary to your
new diuises, were delivered generally in Both kinds to all the people.

S. Liturgia Iacobi.
James in his Mass says thus, Diaconi tollunt Discos, and Calices, ad
impertiendum populo: The Deacons take up the Disshes, and the Cups, to
minister the Sacrament unto the people.

S. Chrysostom in his Mass says thus, Liturgia Chrysostomi.
Post Mysteria feruntur ad locum, vbi populus debet communicare: Afterward the
Holy Mysteries, or Sacraments be brought unto the place, where the people
must receive together.

S. Basile in his Mass says thus, Litur. Basilij.
Nos omnes de vno Pane, and de vno Calice participantes, etc. Cantores cantant
Communionem: and sic Communicant Omnes: Al we receiuinge of One Bread, and
one Cup, etc. The Quiere sings the Communion: and so they Communicate Al
together. Therefore, M. Hardinge, ye must needs confess, either that the
Grecians this day use none of these Masses: or, that their Masses are not
your Masses, but our Communions: Which both are contrary to your self.

In the Armenians Liturgy, Georgius Cassa^der in Liturgijs.
it is written thus, Qui non sunt digni Communicare hanc Oblationem Dei, exeant
for as ante fores Ecclesiae, and ibi Orent: They, that are not worthy to
receive this Oblation of God, let them go forth before the Church door:
and there let them pray.

Of the Grecians order in this behalf, your great, and special Doctoure,
Cardinal Bessarion, Bessarion, De Sacrament. Eucharistiae.
being him self a Greek borne, says thus, Hoc ipse ordo rerum poscebat:
primum, Consecrare: deinde, Frangere: postea, distribuere: Quod nos in
praesenti facimus: This the very order of the things required: first, that
we should Consecrate, Circa annum Domini, 1450.
or Bless the Bread: Next, that we should Break it: Last of al, that we
should Divide it, (or deliver it to the people). Which thing we (Grecians)
do at this present day. Thus you see, M. Hardinge, that the Grecians this
day Consecrate, Break, and Divide the Sacrament unto the people, as we do.
Therefore it is untrue, that you say, They have this day your Private Mass.

Touching the Grecians, that live now in Venice, what order they use there, I
cannot tell. Private Mass in the Greek Church.
Notwithstanding, as I have heard say, Private Mass they have not. But if
they have, living under the Popes Jurisdiction, it is no marvel. Certain it
is, that Venice is no part of Grecia.

Matthias Illyricus, Matthi. Illyricus, in Testibus Veritatis. page 5.
being him self borne in Dalmatia, not far from the Confines, or Borders of
Grecia, and therefore, as it may be thought, the better acquainted with their
Orders, says thus: Ecclesia Graeca, eique coniunctae, Asiatica, Macedonica,
Mysica, Valachica, Rutenica, Moschouitica, and Aphricana, id est, totus Mundus,
vel certe eius maxima pars, nunquam Primatum Papae communi consensu
concesserunt: nunquam Purgatorium probauerunt: nunquam Priuatas Missas: nunquam
Communionem sub vna specie: The Church of Grecia, and the Churches of Asia,
Macedonia, Mysia, Valachia, Russia, Moschouia, and Aphrica, joined thereunto,
that is to say, in a manner the whole World, or at least, the greateste
part thereof, never granted the Pope his Supremacy: never allowed either
Purgatory, or Private Masses, or the Communion under one kind.

In the Proeme or Entry of the Council of Ferraria, Council. Ferrari^. in
Prooemio.
it is written thus, Proxima Dominica quindecim Graeci Sacerdotes domi
Imperatoris, iussu eius. Missam solenniter celebrarunt. Vbi etiam Marchio cum
suis Ciuibus adfuit, and Panem Benedictum, per Patriarchae dextram, more
Graecorum, accepit, atque libauit: The next Sonnedaie, fiftiene Greek
Priests within the Emperors Palaice, by his Commandment, said a Solemn
Mass (or Communion) where as the Marquese was present with his Citizens, and,
as the manner of the Grecians is, received, and tasted the Bread Consecrate,
at the hand of the Patriarch. Here it is to be noted by the way, that these
fiftiene Priests said not fiftiene Several Masses, but al together one only
Mass: Petrus Vrbeuetanus, in Vita Deusdedit Pap.
and that the same one Mass was no Private Ministration, but a Communion.
Whereof Petrus Vrbeuetanus says thus, Tum ad instar Graecorum, non cantabatur
in vna Ecclesia, nisi forsan vna Missa: Then there was song in one Church no
more, sauinge perchance one only Mass, as the manner of the Grecians is.

Likewise says Durandus, Offerebant magnum Panem, and omnibus sufficientem:
Quod adhuc Graeci seruare dicuntur: They offered up one great loaf, Dura^dus
in Rationali. li. 4.
that might suffice all the Church: Which order, they say, the Grecians
keep until this day.

By these few, I trust, M. Hardinge, it may soon appear, whether of us
have belied your poor Grecians.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 2.
Now then, since it is manifest, and out of al peradventure, that these men
are fallen from the Greeks, of whom they received the Gospel, of whom they
received the Faith, the True Religion, and their Church it self, what is the
matter, why they will not now be called home again to the same men, as it were,
to their Originalles, and first Founders? And why be they afraid to take a
pattern of the Apostles, and Old Fathers times, as though they al had benne
void of understanding? Do these men, ween ye, see more, or set more by
the Church of God, then they did, who first delivered us these things?

M. Hardinge.
Soft and fair, Sir Defender: you have not yet proved, that you say, is
manifest, and out of al peradventure. Remember you not the old homely verse
of your sophistry. Neque negatiuis, recte concludere si vis? Speak to the
purpose, or else I would you would make an end of your filly follies. For
in deed you trifle, and say nothing worth to be answered. And here little
cause do you minister unto me, to utter substantial stuff. Which I desire
the discrete Reader to consider, for mine excuse, that with a trifler I do
also but trifle.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, by your own confession, ye do but trifle with your
Filly follies: for that, I trow, your substantial, and better stuff was not
yet ready.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 3.
In deed, we have renounced that church, wherein we could neither have the
Word of God sincerely taught, nor the Sacraments rightly administered, nor
the name of God duly called upon: Which church also them selves confess to
be faulty in many points: And wherein was nothing hable to stay any wise
man, or one, that has consideration of his own safety.

M. Hardinge.
And why have ye renounced this Church, but for that ye might not be suffered
to set forth to the loss of Christen souls the detestable heresies of
VVicklef, Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and other your false Masters, which ye
call your sincere word of God, after your Schismatical, and Heretical
manner? That ye say, there was nothing in the Catholic Church, hable to
stay any wise man, or any that has consideration of his safety: it is one of
your impudent lies.

There were both wise men in the Church, and great multitudes of such as
had good regard of their soul health, always before the Devil had
such a hand upon Luther, and the rest of your new Apostles, and Apostates.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 4.
To conclude, we have foresaken the church, as it is now, not as it was in
Old times paste, and have so gonne from it, as Daniel went out of the Lions
Den, and the three children out of the Furnesse: and, to say the truth, we
have benne cast out by these men, (being cursed of them, as they use to
say, with Book, Bell, and Candel) rather then have gonne away from them of
our selves.

M. Hardinge.
The Church that now is, and the Church that was in Old time, is one
Church, as a man in his old age is the same man, he was in his youth.
Untruth. For God him self says, Comme forth from the mids of them, O my
people: Apocal. 18.
From the which Church no faults, or unperfections can excuse you for your
departinge. Daniel. 6. and. 3.
Neither have ye gone from it as Daniel was delivered out of the Lions Denn^,
nor as the three Children out of the Furnesse: but ye have departed wilfully
from the house of God, where touching Faith, al be of one accord, unto the
Synagog of Antichriste, unto Babylon of Sects, where is no order, but
confusion, unto the kingdom of Satan: and there ye remain as it were in a
Den of Lions, where that roaring Lion with his fellows, lies in wait, 1.
Pet. 5.
seckinge whom he may devour. Ye have stepped from the place of Spiritual
refrigerie, into the frieinge pan of Schisms and Heresies, A hot kind of
Divinity.
and from thence, after that ye have now boiled and fried, in malice and
rancoure against the Church, except ye repent, ye are like to leap into the
Furnesse of Hell, that for ever shall tormente you, and never consume you.
Complain not of your castinge out of the Church. To be excommunicate, ye
have deserved. And that kind of punishment is by a merciful discipline,
extended upon you, partly for your amendment, partly to conserve the rest of
the body whole from your pestiferous contagion.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Now ye begin to keep Hot Schools, M. Hardinge. Your Frieinge pannes,
and Furnesses, with other your like Kitchen implementes of Frieinge, and
Boilinge, are hot, and dangerous to deal withal.

The causes of our departure from you, are answered before.

The Church, ye say, that now is, and the Church, that was in Old times,
is one Church. Even so, as I showed you before, the Moon, being full, and the
same Moon eclipsed, is one Moon: Even so, a Man well advised, and the same Man
stark mad, Matthae. 21.
is one Man: Even so, the house of God, and a Cave of thieves, is one House.

Ye have Excommunicate us, Johan. 9. 12. 16. Johan. Epist. 3. Qui amat
Primatum gerere. Apocalyp. 13.
and put us from you. So did certain of your Predecessors, and Fathers,
Excommunicate Christ, and his Apostles. So did Diotrephes, that first claimed
your Papale Primacie, Excommunicate the Faithful of Christ, that were the
First Planters of the Gospel. So it is written in the Apocalypse, that
Antichriste shall Excommunicate al them, that will not Adoure the Image of the
Beast.

The Pope him self says, 24. Quae. 1. Ait.
Excommunicatus non potest Excommunicare: He that is Excommunicate him self,
has no Right, or Power to Excommunicate others. 24. Quae. 3. Comperimus, Rubri.
And in your own Law it is written thus, Qui illicite alium Excommunicat,
seipsum, non illum, condemnat: He that vnlawefully Excommunicateth an other,
Condemns not him, but him self.

S. Augustine says, August Ad Clericos Hipponen. Citatur. 11. Quae. 3. Quid
obest. Augustine. In Johan. Tract. 45.
Quid obest homini, si eum de illa Tabula delere velit Humana ignorantia, quem
de Libro viuentium non delet iniqua conscientia? What is a man the worse, if
the ignorance of a man strike him out of the Book of the Church, if il
Conscience strike him not out of the Book of Life? In this case S. Augustine
says, It comes sommetimes to pass, Vt plurimae sint Foris oues, and
plurimi sint Intus Lupi: That there be many Sheep without the Church, and
many Woulues within the Church.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 5.
And we are comme to that Church, wherein they them selves cannot deny (if
they will say truly, and as they think in their own conscience) but al
things be governed purely, and reverently, and as mutche, as we possibly
could, very near to the order used in the old time.

M. Hardinge.
Ye are come unto the malignant Church, to the Congregation of Reprobates,
whither as into a sincke in manner all the Heresies that Satan ever raised up
from the beginning, be avoided.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 1.
Let them compare our Churches and theirs together, and they shall see, that
them selves have most shamefully gonne from the Apopostles: and we most
justly have gonne from them. For we, folowinge the Example of Christ, of the
Apostles, and the Holy Fathers, geeue the people the Holy Communion, Whole, and
perfect: But these men, contrary to all the Fathers, to all the Apostles, and
contrary to Christ him self, do sever the Sacraments, and pluck away the
one part from the people, and that with most notorious Sacrilege, as Gelasius
terms it.

We have brought again the Lords Supper unto Christ's Institution, and have
made it a Communion in very deed, common, and indifferent to a great number,
according to the name. But these men have changed al things, contrary to
Christ's Institution, and have made a Private Mass, of the Holy Communion. And
so it comes to pass, that we geeue the Lords Supper unto the people: and
they grieve them a vain Pagent, to gase upon.

We affirm together with the Ancient Fathers, that the Body of Christ is
not eaten, but of the good, and Faithful, and of those, that are endued with
the Sprite of Christ. Their Doctrine is, that Christ's very Body Effectually,
and, as they speak, Really, and Substantially, may not only be eaten of the
wicked, and unfaithful men, but also (which is monstrous, and horrible to be
spoken) of Mise, and Dogs.

We use to pray in our Churches, 1. Corinthians. 14.
after that fashion, as, according to Paul's lesson, the people may know,
what we pray, and may answer, Amen, with a general consent. These men,
like soundinge Metal, yelle out in the Churches unknown, and strange words
without understanding, without knowledge, and without devotion: yea, and do
it of purpose, because the people should understand nothing at al.

M. Hardinge.
Untruth. For there is no better comparison, then bitvvene Contraries:
Contraria iuxta se posita, magis elucescunt.
As comparison can not duly be made between Light and Darkness, between
Truth and Lieing, between Christ and Belial: so neither between the Catholic
Church, and startinge holes of Heretics. You say much, and prove nothing.
The most ye have to crake of, which ye have never done withal, is your
ministringe of both kinds unto the people, your new found holy day the
English Communion, your Service in the vulgar tongue* and your vile objection
of Mise and Dogs. This is the storeboxe of M. Iuelles high Divinity, which
he makes no great store of, but shakes it abroad every where. To every
point I have said so mutche, as is Yenough, no doubt, and sufficient. For
in the self same four Articles, M. Hard. has uttered four score and
fourteen great untruths.
yenough, to stay the hearts of those, that fear God, in mine answer to M.
Iuelles challenge. To the matter of both kinds, and the objection made out of
Gelasius, in the second article. To that of Private Mass, in the first
article. To all that is said for the Church Service in the vulgar tongue, in
the third Article. To the objection of Mise, Dogs, and Worms, in the 23.
Article. The same here to rehearse again, I think it nedeles.

But where ye affirm the Body of Christ not to be eaten, but of the good,
and faithful only, if ye mean the Sacramental eating, so as it is eaten under
the Sacrament in the visible form of Bread, and Wine, and not of the
Unfruitful, and vain distinctio^s Read the Answer.
Spiritual eating only, that is false. In that ye say the Fathers be on your
side, meaning the * Sacramental eatinge, ye belie them. And so like wise
reporting our Doctrine to be, that wicked and unfaithful men may eat the
Body of * Christ effectually, ye be^^e us. We teach that the evil may eat
the Body of Christ Really, Comparison of churches.
that is, in deed, but not effectually. They only eat effectually, who
eatinge it worthily obtain the effect of Christ's Body: Which is the unity
of the mystical body of Christ, Gregor. Dialog. li. 4.
and increace of grace. This Book is full of Fables, and Vanities: and
therefore not thought to be S. Gregory's.
There is verily (says S. Gregory) in sinners, and in them which receive
unworthily, the true Fleashe of Christ, and his true Blood, sed essentia, non
salubri efficentia, but in substance, not in wholesome effect.

That evil men receive the true Body of Christ Sacramentally, Augustine.
Epist. 162.
no less then good, where I might allege in manner all the Old Fathers, S.
Augustine is directely to the Contrary. See the Answer.
S. Augustine only may suffice, who affirms the same, speakinge thus of
Judas. Tolerat ipse Dominus Iudam, diabolum, furem, and venditorem suum finit
accipere inter innocents Discipulos, quod norunt fideles, pretium nostrum. Our
Lord him self does tolerate Judas, and suffers a Devil, a Thief, and him
that sold him, to receive amongst his innocent Disciples Our Price, He
means the Sacrament of our Price.
our Price, which the Faithful do know. But what need any man to require the
testimonies of Fathers, 1. Corin. 11.
sith S. Paul teaches us, so to believe? Who so ever (says he) eats this
Bread, and drinks of the Cup of our Lord unworthily, he shal^e gilty of
the Body, and Blood of our Lord.

The B. of Sarisburie.
There is no better comparison to be made, M. Hardinge, then bitweene Light,
and Darkness: Truth, and Falsehed: Christ, and Belial. For one of these
contraries doothe evermore bewraie the other. And therefore Christ says,
Johan. 3.
He that doothe il, hates the Light, and comes not to it: lest his evil
dooinges should be espied. And this is it, M. Hardinge, that you so carefully
keep the people from the Light of Gods word: Plini. li. 18.
lest by comparison thereof, they should begin to loathe your Darkness.
Pliny says, Tritico reperto, continuo damnatum est Hordeum, and quadrupedum
refectibus traditum: As soon as Wheat was once found (by comparison
thereof) straight way Barley was refused, and given to Cattle to feed upon.

S. Cypria^. Ad Corneliu^, li. 1. Epi. 3.
Cyprian says, Haec est, frater, vera dementia, non cogitare, quod mendacia
non diu fallant: Noctem tam diu esse, donec illucescat dies: This is very mere
madness, my Brother, not to consider, that lies cannot long deceive the
world: ( Remember) it is Night no longer, Chrysostom. In Matthae. ca. 23.
but until the Day spring. And therefore Chrysostom says, as it is alleged
before, Haeretici claudunt Ianuas Veritatis: Heretics shut up the Gates of
the Truth. For they know right well, if the Truth may appear, their
falsehedde will soon be espied, Tertul. De praescription.
and the Churches shall be none of theires. Tertullian says, Ipsa Doctrina
Haereticorum cum Apostolica comparata, ex diuersitate, and contrarietate sua
pronuntiabit, neque Apostoli alicuius Authoris esse, neque Apostolici Viri: The
very Doctrine of Heretics compared together with the Apostles Doctrine, even
by the diversity, and contrariety, that is in it, bears witness of it
self, that it never came, neither from any Apostle of Christ, nor from any
Apostolic Man.

When the Emperor Adrianus had yielded to grant the Christians one Church
within the City of Rome, Aelius Lampridius.
certain of his Privy Counsel advised him in any wise not so to do: For
that, they said, if the Christians might have but one Church within the
City, the whole people would becomme Christians: and by comparison thereof,
their Idolles Churches should be forsaken. Restore you the Holy Communion, M.
Hardinge, and ye shall see your Masses, and Mockeries soon fall to ground,
1. Regum. 5. Hieronym. Ad Algasia^, Quae. 11.
as did the Idol Dagon at the presence of the Ark of God. S. Hierome says,
Mendacium Antichristi, Christi veritas deuorabit: The Truth of Christ shall
devour, and consume the Lieinge of Antichriste.

Touching the Shakinge out of Stoareboxes, ye had no great cause to
complain. For there is not one of al these matters, one only of Private Mass
excepted, that hitherto throughout this Apology has, to my remembrance,
benne touched, Infidelles, Dogs, Mise.
or mentioned more, then once. But it is a small matter, M. Hardinge, that may
suffice you, to make a quarrel.

That Mise, and Dogs may eat the very Natural Body of Christ, and that
Really, Substantially, and in deed, it is your Doctrine: it is not ours. For
we utterly abhor it, and defy it, as most detestable, and lothesome
villainy.

I marvel not, to hear you say, that wicked Creatures, and Faithless
Infidelles may eat Christ's Body, seeinge ye doubt not, to auouche the same
of Brute Beasts, August. in Ioha^. tracta. 26.
and Dombe Cattle. Yet, S. Augustine says, Hoc Manducare illam Escam, and
illum Potum Bibere, in Christo manner, and illum manentem in se habere: This is
the Eatinge of that Meat, and the drinkinge of that Drink, Johan. 6.
for a man to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwellinge within him. Even
so says Christ him self, He that eats my Fleashe, and Drinks my Blood.
( is neither wicked Creature, nor Faithless Infidelle, nor Dog, nor Mouse,
but) dwells in me, Augusti. Epist. 162.
and I in him.

But S. Augustine says, Judas accepit Pretium nostrum: Judas received our
Price: which by your exposition can be none other, but the Body of Christ.
O M. Hardinge, ye should not thus have mockte the world with this
Authority. You your self know, ye deal not plainly: you your self
know, that S. Augustine by these words (Our Price) meante only the
Sacrament of our Price. Chrysostom. Ad Haebr. Homi. 16.
So Chrysostom says, Baptisma Christi Sanguis Christi est: The Baptism of
Christ, is the Blood of Christ: Not for that it is so in deed, but for that
it is a Sacrament of the Blood of Christ. Even so it is noted in your own
Decrees: De Con. Dis. 2. Hoc est.
Ipsa immolatio carnis Christi, quae Sacerdotis manibus fit, Vocatur Christi
Passio, Mors, Crucifixio: Non Rei Veritate, sed Significante Mysterio: The
Oblation of the fleashe of Christ, that is wrought with the Priests hands,
is called the Passion, the Death, and the Crucifieinge of Christ: not in
Truth of matter, but in a Mystery Signifieinge. This Exposition ye may not
well refuse: It is S. Augustines: It is your own. Hereof we have spoken
otherwheres more at large. But, to put the matter out of doubt, that it may
appear, in what sense Judas received the Price of Christ's Death, S.
Augustine him self thereof says thus, Augustine. In Psalm. 3.
Christus adhibuit Iudam ad Conuiuium, in quo corporis, and Sanguinis sui
Figuram Discipulis suis commendauit, and tradidit: Christ received Judas unto
his Banquet, whereat he gave to his Disciples the Figure of his Body, and Blood.

The Book, that ye allege in the name of S. Gregory, is vain, and Childishe,
and full of Fables, and not S. Gregory's.

But S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.
Who so ever Eats of this Bread, and Drinks of the Cup of our Lord
unworthily, he shall be guilty of the Body, and Blood of our Lord. Even so
S. August. Contra Cresco. li. 1. ca. 23. August Contra Cresco. li. 2 ca. 13.
Augustine writes of the Water of Baptism: Baptismus valet, alijs ad Regnum:
alijs ad Iudicium: Baptism is available to sum unto the Kingdom of God: to
sum unto Judgment. Again he says, Baptismum multi habent, non ad Vitam
Aeternam, sed ad Poenam Aeternam, non been vtentes tanto bono: Sum have
Baptism, not to Life Everlasting, but to Pain Everlasting, not well vsinge
so good a thing.

Likewise says Tertullian, Tertullian. De Baptismo.
Si qui pondus intelligant Baptismi, magis timebunt consecutionem, quam
dilationem: They that understand the weighte of Baptism, will fear more the
geattinge of it, then the delate.

Yet ye press the matter further: S. Paul says, Who so eats unworthily of
this Bread, is guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ: Ergo, say you,
Christ's Body, and Blood must needs be Really Present. Here, Master
Hardinge, it were a worthy matter, Guilty of the Body and Blood etc.
to see, by what enginnes ye would prove these hasty Conclusions, or how ye
would force this Guilte, and this Presence to go together. For, think you,
that no man can be guilty of the Body, and Blood of Christ, but he, that has
Christ's Body, and Blood Really Present in his hand? Verily, S. Augustine
says, August. De Tempore, Sermo. 20.
Reus erit, non parui preiij, sed Sanguinis Christi, qui violat, and commaculat
Animam, Christi Sanguine, and Passione mundatam: He is Guilty of no small Price,
but even of the Blood of Christ, that (by Fornication, or Aduouterie)
defiles his own soul, that was made clean by the Passion, and Blood of
Christ. Yet has he not therefore Christ's Blood Really Present.

Athanasius says, Athana. De Passione, and Cruce Domini. Ezechiel. 33.
Adorantes Dominum, neque ita, vt dignum est eo, viuentes, non sentiunt se reos
fieri Dominicae Mortis: Worshippinge Our Lord, and not living so as is meet
for our Lord, they feel not, that thereby they are made Guilty of our Lords
Death. So says God by the Prophet Ezechiel, I will require the Blood of the
people at thy hand.

Christ says, Luke. 11.
God shall require of you the Blood of the Prophets, that has benne sheadde
from the beginning of the world.

This Guilte, M. Hardinge, may well stand without any Real Presence of the
Blood, either of Christ, or of the Prophets.

This therefore is S. Paul's meaning, that the wicked, resortinge unworthily
to the Holy Mysteries, and having no regard, what is meante thereby, despise
the Death, and Cross of Christ, and therefore are Guilty of the Lords Body,
and Blood, that are represented in the Sacrament.

Chrysostom says, Council. Nicen. 2. Actio. 6.
as he is alleged in the second Council of Nice, Is, qui Imaginem Imperatoris
violat, in prototypum Dignitatis iniustus est: He, that defiles the Emperoures
Image, is injurious to the Majesty of the Emperoures Person, that is
pourtraide in the Image.

S. Cyprian says, Cyprian. De Ablutione pedum.
Impijs, in Morte Christi nullus superest quaestus: sed iustissime eos
beneficia neglecta condemnant: The wicked have no gain by the Death of
Christ: but the benefits, that they have despised, do most justly condemn
them.

To comme near to the purpose, August. Ad Bonifaci. Epist. 50.
S. Augustine says, Habent Foris Sacramentum Corporis Christi: sed Rem ipsam
non tenent Intus, cuius est illud Sacramentum. Et ideo sibi iudicium manducant,
and bibunt: Outwardly they have the Sacrament of Christ's Body: But the thing
it self ( which is Christ's Body, represented by the Sacrament) inwardly in
their hearts they have not. And therefore they Eat, and Drink their own
judgment. S. Augustine says, they are Guilty, not because they receive, but
because they receive not the Body of Christ.

Again he says, August. In Ioha^. tracta. 26.
Qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus, procul dubio non
Manducat Spiritualiter Carnem eius, nec Bibit eius Sanguinem: licet Carnaliter,
and Visibiliter premat dentibus Sacramentum Corporis, and Sanguinis Christi:
Sed magis tantae rei Sacramentum ad Iudicium sibi Manducat and Bibit: He that
abides not in Christ, nor Christ in him, out of doubt he eats not
Spiritually his Fleashe, nor Drinks his Blood: not withstanding Carnally (
that is to say, with his bodily Mouth) and visibly he do press with his
teethe the Sacrament of the Body, and Blood of Christ: And rather, eats and
drinks ( not Christ's very Body, and Blood, but) the Sacrament of so great
a thing unto his Judgment. These words, M. Hardinge, be so plain, that I
cannot imagine, what ye should more desire. They are Guilty of the blood of
Christ, for that they despise the price, wherewith they were saved, not for
that they receive it Really into their mouths.

So S. Augustine says again, Reus erit Aeternae Mortis, quia vilem in se
habuit Sanguinem Redemptoris: Guilty of the Body and Blood etc.
The Aduouteroure is Guilty of Everlasting Death, because he despised in him
self the Blood of our Sau^oure.

The Distinction, that you imagine bitweene Real Receiuinge in the wicked, and
Effectual Receiuinge in the Godly, August. De Tempore, Sermo. 120.
as it is only of your self, without the Authority of any Doctoure, Greek,
or Latin, so is it nothing else, but a very Effectual, and Real Folly. For the
very Body of Christ, if it be not Effectually received, is not received.
Christ him self says, He that eats me, shall live by me. Ambros. De
Benediction. Patriarch. cap. 6.
S. Ambrose says, Hic panis est remissio peccatorum. Qui accipit, non moritur
morte peccatoris: This Bread is the Remission of Sins. He that receives it,
shall not die the death of Sinner.

S. Augustine says, Qui non sumit hanc Escam, non habet Vitam: and, qui eam
sumit, August. In Ioha^. tracta. 26.
habet Vitam, and hanc vtique Aeternam: He, that receives not this meat, has
no life: And he, that receives the same, has life, and that Everlasting.

Likewise again he says, August. ^odem loco.
Huius rei Sacramentum in Mensa Dominica praeparatur, and de Mensa Dominica
sumitur: quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium: Res vero' ipsa, cuius est
Sacramentum, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium, quicunque eius particeps
fuerit: The Sacrament hereof is prepared upon the Lords Table, and from the
Lords Table is received: to sum unto life, to sum unto destruction. But
the thing it self, ( that is, the Body of Christ,) whereof it is a
Sacrament, is received, of al men to life, and of no man to destruction,
whosoever shall be partaker of it.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 2.
But, not to tarry about rehearsing al points, wherein we and they differ,
for they have well nigh no end, we turn the Scriptures into al tongues: they
scant suffer them to be had abroad in any tongue.

M. Hardinge.
We This is nothing. but open mockery.
gladly suffer them to be had in every place of christendom in the learned
tongues, Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin ( to be readde of the vulgar Unlearned
people). Neither were they altogether forbidden to be had in sum vulgar
tongues, before the saucy maleperines of Heretics forced the governors of
the Church, for sauegarde of the people, Untruth, too fond for a child For
there was never such order taken by the Governors of the Church.
to take other order.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye can vouchesaue to allow us the Scriptures in the three Learned Tongues,
Greek, Hebrevve, and Latin: that is to say, in such sort, as the simple
people may in no wise touch them. But where did God ever sanctify these
three tongues, and call them Learned? Or, where were they ever so specially
Canonized, and allowed, above al other tongues, to the custody of the
Scriptures?

S. Augustine says, August. Epist. 48.
Scriptura Canonica tot Linguarum Literis, and ordine, and successione
Celebrationis Ecclesiasticae custoditur: The Canonical Scripture is keapte in
the Letters of so many tongues, and by the order, and succession of
Ecclesiastical publishinge. Again he says, August. De Doctrina Christiana.
li. 2. ca. 5.
Scriptura Diuina ab vna Lingua profecta, per varias interpretum Linguas,
long, lateque diffusa, innotuit Gentibus ad Salutem: The Holy Scriptures,
passing from one Tongue, and being published abroad, fane and wide, ( not
only by three learned Tongues, but also) by sundry Tongues of Interpretours,
have comme to the knowledge of Nations, and people, to their Salvation. Again
he says, Habemus Dei beneficium, August. In Psalm. 105.
qui Scripturas suas in multis Linguis esse voluit: We have the benefit of
God, that would have his Scriptures to be ( not only in Three, but) in many
Tongues.

S. Chrysostom says, The Scriptures in the vulgar tongues.
Syri, Aegyptij, Indi, Persae, Aethiopes, and innumerae aliae Gentes, Dogmata
ab hoc introducta, in suam transferentes Linguam, hommes Barbari, Philosophari
didicerunt: The Syrians, the Egyptians, the Indians, the Persians, the
Ethiopians, and other nations innumerable, translatinge into their own
tongues the Doctrine, Chrysostom. in Johan. Homil. 1. Hieronym. in Psalm. 86.
that they had received of S. John, being Barbarous people, endenvoured them
selves to learn wisdom. S. Hierome says, Scriptura Sancta populis omnibus
legitur, vt omnes intelligant: The Holy Scripture is readde to al Nations, that
al may understand it. It were hard to say, that all the Nations of the world
readde, or heard the Scriptures in Greek, Hebrewe, or Latin, to the intent,
they might the better understand the^. If these Authorities seem not plain,
and sufficient, Theodoret. De corrigend. Graecorum affectib. Lib. 5.
Theodoretus says further, Hebraici Libri, non modo in Graecum idioma
conuersi sunt, sed in Romanam quoque Linguam, Aegyptiam, Persicam, Indicam,
Armenicam, and Scythicam, atque adeo Sauromaticam: semelque vt dicam, in
Linguas omnes, quibus ad hanc diem Nationes vtuntur: The Hebrewe Books of the
Scriptures are translated, not only into the Greek, or Latin tongue, but
also into the tongues of Egypt, Persia, India, Armenia, Scythia, and Sarmatia:
and, to be short, into all the tongues, that until this day are used in the
world. This, I trow, is sommewhat more, then Greek, Hebrevve, and Latin.
This whole matter, in my Former Reply to M. Hardinge, Articulo. 15.
is further answered.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 3.
We allure the people to read, and to hear Gods Word: they drive the
people from it.

M. Hardinge.
Ye allure the people busely to hear, and read the Scriptures for evil
purpose. And thereby ye have filled their hearts, whom ye have deceived, with
pride, so as they think them selves able to judge of the highest questions,
that be in divinity. We keep the people, so far as we can for you, from
heresies, and require them rather to be hearers, then judges, and to learn
necessary knowledge of Gods word A mockery. For many hear not one Sermon in
twenty years.
at wholesome, and Godly sermons.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We teach not the people, to presume of Knowledge, as you teach them, to
presume of Ignorance: But only we exhort them, for the better satisfaction
of their consciences, to read the Scriptures, and therein to learn the good
will of God. And, not withstandinge ye may not allow them to be Judges, yt is
to say, to discern bitweene the Light of God, and your Darkness, yet ye
might suffer them to pike up sum small crommes, that fall from the Lords
Table. How be it, socrates says, Apolog. Sacratis Matthew. 11.
The simple unlearned people, in cases of Truth, judges oftentimes more
uprightly, then the deepest Philosophers. Likewise Christ says, I thank
thee, O Father, for that thou have hid these things from the wise, and
politic, and have opened the same to littel babes.

But ye will say, The Scriptures are hard, and above the reach of the people.
Even so said ye Pelagian Heretic Iulianus. And therefore S. Augustine thus
reproves him for the same: Augusti. Contra Julian. Li. 5. Ca. 1
Exaggeras, quam sit difficilis, paucisque conueniens erudiris Sanctarum
cognitio Literarum: Ye enlarge, and lay out with many words, how hard a
matter the knowledge of the Scriptures is, and meet only for a few learned
men. S. Chrysostom says, Scripturae and Seruo, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homil. 1.
and Rustico, and Viduae, and Puero, and illi, qui valde imprudens esse
videatur, faciles sunt ad intelligendum: The Scriptures are easy to the Sclaue,
to the Husbandeman, to the Widovve, to the Child, and to him, that may seem
to be very simple of understanding. Augusti. Episc 3.
S. Augustine says, Modus ipse dicendi, quo Sacra Scriptura co^texitur, etc.
quasi amicus familiaris, sine fuco ad cor loquitur indoctorum, atque doctoru^:
The phrase, or manner of speech, wherein ye Scriptures are written, etc.
speaks without color as a familiare friend unto the heart, as well of ye
Unlearned, as of the Learned. S. Cyril says, Cyrillus contra Julian. Lib. 7.
Scripturae, vt omnibus essent notae, paruis, and magnis, Vtiliter familiari
sermon commendatae sunt, ita vt nullius captum tra^scendant: The Scriptures,
that they might be easy to al men, as well small, as great, are profitably set
abroad in familiare speech: so, that they ouerreache no man's capacity. S.
Augustine says, Sunt quidam homines, Augu. in Psalm. 131
qui, cum audierint, quo'd debent esse humiles, nihil volunt discere: putantes,
quo'd, si aliquid didicerint, Superbi erunt, etc. Hos reprehendit Scriptura:
Sum men, when they hear say, they must be lowly, will learn nothing:
thinking, that, if they learn any thing, they shall be proud. But these are
reproved by the Scriptures. Likewise again S. Augustine says, Augu. In
Se^ten. exceptis ex Augustino, Pa. 1067.
Ipsa ignorantia in illis, qui intelligere noluerunt, sine dubitarione peccatum
est: In eis autem, qui non potuerunt, est poena peccati. Ergo, in vtrisque non
est excusatio, sed iusta damnatio: Ignorance in them, that would not
understand, without doubt is sin: But in them, that could not understand,
it is the punishment of sin. Therefore neither of them both has good
excuse: but either of them has just damnation.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 4.
We desire to have our cause known to all the world: they flee to comme to any
trial.

M. Hardinge.
Then why came ye not to the A worthy Council of forty Bishops, such as
they were: In the time of Paulus. 3
chief, and most lauful consistory of the world, the late general Council
at Trent? What trial should we come unto? Our Doctrine has had too high a
teacher, to be tried by men now. It has been approved too long, to be put in
daieinge in these days at the later end of the world.

The B. of Sarisburie.
That we made not our appearance at your late Chapter at Tridente, ye have
already made our excuse. The Journey was too long, to be taken in vain. Ye
say, your Doctrine, be it right, be it wrong, may not now be tried, nor put
in daieinge. So said sommetimes the Old Donatiane Heretics unto S.
Augustine, Disputare nolumus: Augu. Epist. 169.
and Baptizare volumus: Dispute we will not: But (continewe in our error,
and) Baptize we will.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 5.
We lean unto Knowledge: they unto Ignorance. We trust unto Light: they unto
Darkness.

M. Hardinge.
Ye lean to the favor of secular Princes, whom by flattery, and Heresy ye
may deceive. Crake not of your great knowledge, Esai. 5.
nor of your light. O be to them, cries our Lord in Esaie, that say, good is
evil, and evil is good: that put light for darkness, and darkness for light.
Your demeanor is so evil, your Doctrine so false, your tongue so railinge,
that we take your word for no slander.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We flatter our Princes, M. Hardinge, as Nathan flattered King David: as John
Baptiste flattered Herod: as S. Ambrose flattered Theodosius, and as salt
flattereth the green soar. In deed we despise not the Minister of God, as
sundry of your fellows have used to do: Dorman. Page 15. Stanislaus
Orichonius in Chimaera.
of whom one doubts not to say, The Pope is the Head: and Kings, and
Emperors are the Feet. An other says, The Priest is so far above the
King, as a Man is above a Beast. Such words of contempt, and villainy we
have not used. We yield to the King, that is dew to the King: we yield to
God, that is dew to God. We say to the Prince, Ambros. Lib. 5. Epist. 33.
as S. Ambrose sommetime said to the Emperor Valentinian: Noli te grauare
Imperator, vt putes te in ea, quae Diuina sunt, Imperiale aliquod ius habere:
Trouble not your self, Flattering of Princes
my Lord, to think, that you have any Princely Power over those things, that
perteine to God.

But if they be flatterers, that humbly advertise, and direct their Liege
Princes by the Word of God, Petr. De palude: de potestat. pp. (...). 40. Non
nos. on Glossa. Extrauag. Johan 22. ^um inter. in Glossa. Hostien De
tra^slaitone Praelais. Quanto.
what are they then, that say, as you say, Totus Mundus non potest accusare
Papam: Nemo potest dicere Papae, Domine cur ita facis? Sacrilegij instar esset,
disputare de facto Papae: Dominus Deus noster Papa: papapotest, quicquid Deus
ipse Potest: The whole world may not accuse the Pope: No man may say to the
Pope, Sir, why do ye thus? It were a sin as bodde as Sacrilege, to dispute
of any the Popes doings: Our Lord God the Pope: The Pope may do, what so
ever God him self may do. These, these, M. Hardinge, and a thousand other
your like speeches may seem sommewhat to smell of flattery.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division 6. and 7.
We reverence, as it becomes us, the Writings of the Apostles, and
Prophets: and they burn them.

Finally, we in Gods cause, desire to stand to Gods only judgment: they
will stand only to their own.

M. Hardinge.
What so ever ye pretend, the cause ye have taken in hand to defend, is not
Gods cause: neither is this stir, Hosiuscontra Brentu^ Lib. 1.
which ye make in the world, for Christ's sake. ^uther himself, when at a
disputation with doctor Eckius, inflamed with anger, and passinge the bounds
of modesty, was admonished of certain, for as mutche as it was Gods cause,
that was treated, to handle the matter more soberly and with the spirit of
softenes, he brake out into these words: Non propter Deu^ haecres caepta est,
nec propter Deum finietur. This matter is not bego^ne for Gods sake, neither for
Gods sake shall i^ be ended. Therefore speak no more to us of Gods cause. There
be other causes, ye move you to do, as ye do. Untruth, sta^dinge in open,
and willful corruption.


The B. of Sarisburie.
Luther, ye say, in disputation, was enflamed with anger, and passed the
bounds of modesty. No doubt, M. Hardinge, if he had had sum part of your
sobriety, and modesty, he might have done a great deal better. Touching
the matter, being zelously moved with the iniquity, and wicked wilfulness of
his Adversaries, he uttered these words, Iacobus Andreae contra Hosium. Page
352.
not of him self, but of Freere Eckius, that disputed against him: Eckius, and
his fellows never began this matter for Gods sake, nor for Gods sake will
they end it. For he saw, they had begone, and were bente to end it against
God, as being enflamed with ambition, and malice, and procured, and hired by
the Pope. Even so, M. Hardinge, may we also truly say, You, and your
Fellows have not begone these your Contentious Vanities for Gods sake: nor
for Gods sake will you end them.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 8.
Wherefore, if they will weigh al these things with a quiet mind, and fully
bente to hear, and to learn, they will not only allow this determination of
ours, who have foresaken Errors, and followed Christ, and his Apostles, but
themselves also will foresake their own selves, and join of their own
accord to our side, to go with us.

Here ends the Fifthe Part.
The Sixthe Part.
The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 1.
But peradventure they will say, it was treason, to attempt these matters
without a sacred General Council: For that therein consists the whole force
of the Church: there Christ has promised, he will ever be a present
assistant. Yet they themselves, without tarrienge for any General Council, have
broken the Commandments of God, and the Decrees of the Apostles: and, as we
said a little above, they have spoiled, and disanulled almost al, not only
the Ordinances, but even the Doctrine of the Primitive Church. And, where
they say, It is not lawful, to make a change without a Council, what was he,
that gave us these Laws, or, from whence had they this Iniunction?

M. Hardinge.
If general Councels continewe in that estimation, and Authority they have
ever had, their private conspiracies, and false conueiances in corners be like
to be dasshed. Now pri^keth forth their Secretary, who thinks him self a
fresh soldier in Rhetorike, and gives the onsette upon us, with a blind
peradventure. But Sir, what so ever you imagine us to say, touching a General
Council, we are not so simple as to grant (which your Peradventure seems to
surmise of us) that your Heretical, and most ungodly matters, which you
speak of, might without blame be attempted by license of any Council. Such
wicked changes in religion, as ye have made, neither is it lawful to make with
a Council, nor without a Council.

The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 2.
In deed King Agesilaus did but fondely: who, when he had a determinate
answer made him of the opinion and will of mighty Iuppiter, would afterward
bring the whole matter before Apollo, to know, whether he would allow
thereof, as his Father Iuppiter had done, or no. But yet should we do
mutche more fondely, when we hear God him self plainly speak to us in his
most Holy Scriptures, and may understand by them his will and meaning, if we
would afterward (as though this were of none effect) bring our whole cause to
be tried by a Council: which were nothing else, but to ask, whether men
would allow as God did, and, whether men would confirm Gods
Commandment by their Authority.

M. Hardinge.
For as mutche as the scriptures, wherein God speaks unto us, be in sundry
places not most open and plain to Vain folly. For what have Human, or
Natural senses to do with the sense of God?
human senses, and many by mistakinge them be deceived: were it not well done
of you, for the more surety, and better understanding of that ye go about, I
mean, in matters concerning religion, To take Counsel of men.
to follow the judgment of the Catholic Church represented in general
councels? Yea we say boldly, that surer it is in points of faith to lean
to the The Expositio^s of the Fathers very seldom agree togeat^ er: Yet are
they for the most part, contrary to the Church of Rome.
exposition of the Fathers agreinge together, and to follow the tradition of
the Church: then to trust to your selves, or to the letter of the scriptures,
scanned only by your own wits. For the Church is promised to be lead into
al Truth by the holy Ghost. Ye cannot say, any such promise has been made to
your particulare company. Therefore it were not fondly done, as ye say, but
wisely, say we, if ye tried, and examined your Doctrine, which ye pretend to
be according unto the Scriptures, by the The tradit (...), now used in the
Roman Church, are co^^only contrary to the Traditions of the Anciente
Learned Fathers. Therefore this Rule is deceitetul.
rule of Ecclesiastical Tradition, which is the chief rule to try every
Doctrine by.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We never despised the judgment of the Learned, and Holy Fathers: but rather
take them, and embrace them, as the Witnesses of Gods Truth. And therein we
find you the more blame worthy, M. Hardinge, for that, having without cause
renounced the judgment, and orders of the Primitive Church, and Anciente
Fathers, as to the wise, and Learned it may soon appear, yet nevertheless
ye evermore make vaunte of your Antiquity, and fraie the world with a visarde
of the Church, and a show of Old Fathers: as if a poor Sommonere, that had
lost his Commission, would serve Citations by the virtue of his empty bore.
And thus have ye set al your vain fantasies in place of Gods Church: and
your Church, in place of God: as, by the words, and witness of your own
Fellows, I have before showed more at large. Part. 5. Ca 10. Diui 2. Nic.
Cusanus de Authoritate Ecclisiae. etc. Hierem 2.
For example, Cardinal Cusanus says, Nulla sunt Christi Praecepta, nisi quae
per Ecclesiam pro talibus accepta sunt: The Commandments of Christ are no
Commandments, Unless they be so allowed by the Church.

Thus ye leave Iuppiter, and run to Apollo: or rather, ye foresake God, and
seek to Man: and, as it is written in the Prophet Hieremie, Ye leave the
Fountain of the Water of Life: and rippe up broken, and filthy Cesternes, that
can hold no Water. Tertullian thus vpbraideth the Heathens, Tertullian in
Apologetico. Clemens Alexa^drin in Oratione ad Genies. Chryso. in Epist. ad
Galat. Ca. 1.
Apud vos de humano arbitratu Diuinitas pensitatur: Emonge you the right of God
is weighed by the judgment of men. But Clemens Alexandrinus says, Quoniam
ipsum Verbum ad nos venit de Coelo, no^ est nobis amplius eundum ad Humanam
Doctrinam: For so mutche as the Word it self, ( that is, Christ) is comme to
us from Heaven, we may not now any more seek unto the Doctrine of Man.
Likewise S. Chrysostom says, Fuisset extremae absurditatis, eum, qui edoctus
fuerat a Deo, postea cum hominibus communicate: It had benne great folly for
S. Paul, having received his Doctrine from God him self, afterward to
confer thereof with men, that is to say, with Peter, or James, or with any
others.

The Apology, Cap. 1. Division. 3.
Why, I beseech you, except a Council will, and command, shall not Truth be
Truth, or God be God? If Christ had meante to do so from the beginning, as
that he would preach, or teach nothing, without the Bishops consent, but
refer all this Doctrine over to Annas, and Caiphas, where should now have
benne the Christian Faith? Or, who at any time should have heard the Gospel
taught? Peter verily, whom the Pope has oftener in his mouth, and more
reverently uses to speak of, then he does of Jesus Christ, did boldly
stand against the Holy Council, saieing, It is better to obey God, then Men.
And, after y^ Paul had once entierely embraced the Gospel, and had received
it, not from men, nor by man, but by the only VVil of God, he did not take
advise therein of fleash, and blood, nor brought his case before his
kinnesmen, and Brethren, but went foorthewith into Arabia, to preach Gods
Divine Mysteries, by Gods only Authority.

M. Hardinge.
If you occupy a flute no better, by my read, you shall give over your pipinge
and floutinge. Truth is truth, and God is God, whether any council will or
nil. Mary, as for the Truth, and for God, every council lawfully assembled
has will: so against the Truth and against God, it has no nil. When ye prove
unto us, that ye are specially called, as Paul was, and have a special
commission We preach against your folies, and fantasies: and not against
the Doctrine of the Church.
to preach against the Doctrine of the Church, as he had against the wicked
Jews, then a Gods name take no advise of any man, but forthwith preach, and
crieout so loud as ye list, so that ye go into Arabia, as Paul did, or
where else so ever ye will. For every good man would be loathe, England should be
troubled with you.

The Apology, Cap. 2. Division. 1.
Yet truly, we do not despise Councelles, Assemblies, and conferences of
Bishops, and Learned me^ne: neither have we done, that we have done,
altogether without Bishops, or without a Council. The matter has benne
treated in open Parlamente, with long consultation, and before a notable
Synod, and Convocation.

M. Hardinge.
Either your tongue agrees not with your heart, or else I will prove the
contrary by your own arguments, which in the next Paragraphe before this ye
have huddeled up. For whereas your matters are (as ye ordinarily say) evident
by plain scripture, and the Word of God is readen of every man (without
distinction and limitation) therefore ye do first of al play as fond a
part, as King Agesilaus did, who receiuinge an answer of mighty Jupiter,
would afterward bring the matter before Apollo. Yea furthermore, ye do
mutche more fondely then he, if when ye may hear God him self speak
plainly to you in the most holy scriptures, ye would bring the whole cause
to be tried by a Council.

How say ye then now, are not these your own proper reasons, etc. your
foresaid worshipful reasons, etc? If ye mean (as by reason ye must) the
Parlamentes of these later days, the first of al did make most for you: and
yet how open was it for you? Had ye any place at al in it? Were ye admitted
within the doors? Or had ye any thing to do in that assembly? Consider the^
with what consult atio^ your purposes were concluded. Did they tarry many
months about it? Had they Bishops? Untruth enclosed. For they had Divines:
and a solemn Disputation was appointed at VVeasteminster in the presence of
the States of the Realm But your Fellows fladde from it.
Had they Divines and the most learned, to reason to and fro with all liberty?
Was the Authority of the Universal Church of Christ, and the Doctrine of
the Aunciente Fathers considered? Ye say in Latin, plenis Comitijs, that is,
in the full and whole assembly, as though none at al had there resisted, but
every man had yielded to your matters. What say ye then of the spiritual
lords, a great part of the parlamente, and without al doubt, the part,
which must be chiefly and only regarded, when the question is of religion?
How many of the^ gave you their voice to your Gospel? Yea, which of them al did
not resist it? One alone, I must confess, was afterward made to break
unity, of whom a right good, and Catholic Bishop said to a noble man, we had
but one fool among us, and him ye have gotten unto you. But as of the
spiritual Lords ye had none at al (except that one, little worthy of the name
of a Bishop and lord, whose lerninge was small, and honor thereby mutche
steined) so of the temporal ye had not al: and so had ye also in the lower
house very many, and well learned, that speak against you.

But let us consider the notable convocation, in which your matter has been
treated. If ye mean the cleregie coming together at that first parliament
time, of which we speak, it was of Catholics, not of Sacramentaries,
Parlamente.
and it put up a bill against your procedinges: so far it was of from
confirminge them. If ye mean any since that time, in which your
superintendentships met together, for what cause was it a notable Synod,
and a notable convocation?

Ye be desperate in your lieinge, and crake of a full Parliament, and a notable
Synod, not regardinge by what means ye promote your cause to the multitude,
and save your selves from reproach of extreme folly. For otherwise ye, which
can so amplify the small and obscure meetinges of a few Caluintstes of one
little Island, what would ye not say of the last general Council, to which
more Nations were assembled together, then are shyres in England: more years
were bestowed in consultation, then weeks in your full Parliament: A notable
great company. There were only fouretie poor Bishops: and yet sum of
the samevvere no Bishops.
more Bishops defined and subscribed, then were Ministers of all sorts in
your notable Synod by many parts.

Lastly if they will needs have their matters seem to depend of their
Parliament, let us not be blamed, if we call it Parliament Religion, Parliament
Gospel, Parlamente Faith.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We will not discuss the Right, and Interest of the Parlamentes of England.
As mutche, as concerns Gods everlasting Truth, we hold not by
Parlamente, but by God. Parlamentes are uncertain, and often contrary, as we
have seen. But Gods Truth is one, and certain, and never changes. The
things, that were so suddenly, and so violently shaken down in the late
time of Queen Marie, are now, of Gods great mercy, by our most Noble,
and Gracious Lady Queen Elizabeth, advisedly, and soberly reared up again,
that they may the more firmly continewe, and stand the better. What so ever
want, ye imagine, was in that Parlamente, for as mutche, as we were no part
thereof, I trust, we may the more easily be excused. How be it, so
scornefully disdeigninge the whole State of so Noble a Realm, ye shall hardely
win the opinion, either of Sobriety, or of great Wisdom.

But your Bishops, ye say, withstoode us: and your Brethren in the
Convocation promoted a bille against our Doctrine. I know, M. Hardinge, they
subscribed then against us with the very same hands, with which, not long
before, they had openly protested, and solemnly sworn against the Pope: and
with which they have sithence received, and embraced our whole Religion, to
the utter condemnation of al your folies.

Only one fool, ye say, ye had amongst all your Bishops: And he was
soon gotten to comme to us. Happy were they, M. Hardinge, that had but one
fool in so great a company. If sum of your Louanian Cleregie had then
benne Bishops, I think, they might have benne sommewhat better stoared.
Notwithstanding, it was not well done, of your part, so vnciuilely to call
your Brother fool. All the rest of your Brethren, very few excepted, have
done the like. Yet fools, I trow, ye will not call them: lest happily your
own wits be called in question.

Where ye would seem to say, that the Parlamente holden in the first year
of the Queens Majesty's Reign, was no Parlamente, for that your Bishops
refused wilfully, to agree unto the Godly Laws there concluded, ye seem
therein to bewraie in your self sum want of skille. The wise, and learned
could soon have told you, that in the Parlamentes of England, matters have
evermore used to pass, not of necessity, by the special consent of the
Archebishoppes, and Bishops, as if without them no Statute might lawfully be
enacted: but only by the more part of the voices, yea although all the
Archebishoppes, and Bishops were never so earnestly bente against it. And
Statutes, so passinge in Parlamente, only by the voices of the Lords
Temporal, without the consent, and agreemente of the Lords Spiritual, have
nevertheless always benne confirmed, and ratified by the Real assente of the
Prince, and have benne enacted, and published under the names of the Lords
Spiritual, Parlamente.
and Temporal.

Read the Statutes of King Idwarde the First. There shall ye find, that in
a Parlamente solemnly holden by him at S. Edmundes Bury, the Archebishoppes,
and Bishops were quite shut forth. And yet the Parlamente held on, and
good, and wholesome Laws were there enacted, the departinge, or absence, or
malice of the Lords Spiritual notwithstanding. In the Records thereof it is
written thus, An. Dom. 1296.
Habito Rex cum suis Baronibus Parlamento, and Clero excuso, Statutum est, etc.
The King, keepinge the Parlamente with his Barons, the Cleregie, (that is to
say, the Archebishoppes, and Bishops) being shut forth, it was enacted,
etc.

Likewise, Anno 1273. In Prouisione de Martonae, Ca. 9.
In Prouisione de Martona, in the time of King Henry the third, whereas matter
was moved of Bastardie, touching ye Legitimation of Bastardes borne before
Marriage, the Statute paste wholly with the Lords Temporal, whether the Lords
Spiritual would, or no: Yea, and that contrary to the express Decrees,
Extra. Qui Filj sint Legitimi.
and Canons of the Church of Rome. The like hereof, as I am enfourmed, may be
found, Richardi. 2. An. 11. Ca. 3. How be it, in these cases, I must confess,
I walk sommewhat without my compass. Touching the Judgment hereof, I
refer me self wholly unto the Learned.

Further, whereas ye call the Doctrine of Christ, that now by Gods great
Mercy, and to your great grief is Universally, and freely Preached, a
Parlamente Religion, and a Parlamente Gospel, (for such sobriety becomes
you well, and may stand you in steed, when learning fails) ye might have
remembered, that Christ him self, at the beginning, was Universally received,
and honored through this Realm, by assente of Parlamente: and further, that
without Parlamente, your Pope him self was never received, no not in the lay
time of Oueene Marie. Yea, and even then, his Holiness was clogged with
Parlamente Conditions, that, what so ever had benne determined in Parlamente,
and was not repealed, were it never so contrary to his will, and Canons, should
remain still inviolable, and stand in force. Otherwise, his Holiness had
gonne home again. Such, M. Hardinge, is the Authority of a Parlamente.
Verily, if Parlamentes of Realms be no Parlamentes, then will your Pope be no
Pope. Therefore with like Sabrietie, and gravity of speech, ye might have
said, Our Fathers in old times had a Parlamente Christ: And your late
Fathers, and Brethren had a Parlamente Faith, a Parlamente Mass, and a
Parlamente Pope.

Neither is it so strange a matter, to see Ecclesiastical Causes debated in
Parlamente. Read the Laws of King Inas, King Elfrede, King Edward, King
Ethelstane, Leges Canuti.
King Edmunde, King Edgare, King Canute: And ye shall find, that our godly
Forefathers, the Princes, and Peers of this Realm, never vouchesaued to
entreat of matters of Peace, or War, or otherwise touching the Common state,
before al controversies of Religion, and Causes Ecclesiastical had benne
concluded. King Canute in his Parlamente, holden at Winchester upon
Christemasse day, after sundry Laws, and Orders made, Touching the Faith,
the keepinge of Holy Days, Public Prayers, learning of the Lords Prayer,
Receiuinge of the Communion thrice in the year, the manner, and form of
Baptism, Fasting, and other like matters of Religion, in the end thereof
says thus, I am sequitur Institutio legum Saecularium: Now follows an order
for Temporal Laws.

Thus we see, that the godly Catholic Princes in Old times, thought it
their duty, before al other affairs of the Common Weal, first to determine
matters of Religion, and that even by the Parlamentes of this Realm.

In a Parlamente holden by King William the Conqueroure it is written thus:
Tride^tine council. Superintendentes.
Rex, quia Vicarius Summi Regis est, ad hoc constituitur, vt Regnum, and
populum Domini, and super omnia, Sanctam Ecclesiam, Regar, and defendat, etc.
The King, for as mutche as he is the Vicare of the Highest King, is therefore
appointed to this purpose, that he should Rule, and defend the Kingedome,
and People of the Lord, and above al things the Holy Church, etc. Hereby it
appears, that Kings, and Princes are specially, and of purpose appointed by
God, not only to defend, but also to Govern, and Rule the Holy Church.

How he it, we give God thanks for the same, that is: and trust, that, for
his own names sake, he will confirm, that he has begone. The hearts of
Princes, and Determinations of Parlamentes are in his hand. If any thing
want, the Arm of the Lord is not shortened: He is hable to supply the same.

Ye magnify mutche your late Chapter of Tridente, Council. Trident. Sub Carolo
Quinto.
which you would so feign have called a General Council: with so many
Nations: so many Bishops: so many years of Consultation. Yet
notwithstanding of al these so many, and so many Nations, and Countries, if it
may please you to sit down, and to take the accoumpte, ye shall find there
were only poor forty Bishops, and certain of the same, (as Richard
Pates, the Bishop of VVoorcester, and Blind sir Roberte, Robert. Coecus. vide
Council. Trident. sub Paulo. 3 Matthias Plac. Illyricus in Protest. contra
Council. Trident. Pagin. 79.
the Archbishop of Armach) that only had the bare titles of Bishoprikes, and
in deed were no Bishops. Two others of your said so many, and so Notable
Learned, and Holy Bishops, being at your said worthy Counsel, were even
there killed in Aduouterie: y^ one stricken down with a Clubbe: the other taken
in the manoure by the Husband, and hanged by the neck, out of a great Lucane
window, into the street. For these, and other causes, Henry the French ^nge
openly, by his Embassadoure, protested against the same Council in the
presence of al your so many, and so many Bishops there, and said, Io
Sle^danus, Li. 23. Anno. 1551.
It was not a Council General, but a Private Couente, or Assembly of a fevve
certain people summoned together for gains sake.

Now, Conuentus quorundam Priuatus vtilitatis gratia institut^es.
whereas it has pleased you, as well here, as else where, to sport your self
with Superintendentes, and Superintendentshippes, and to refreashe your wits
with so vain a fancy of your own, if ye had benne so deeply traueiled in
the Doctoures, Nevve, or Old, as ye bear us in hand, ye might easily have
known, that a Superintendente, is an Anciente name, and signifies none other,
Augustine. De Ciuit. Li. 19 Ca. 19. Augustine. in Psalm. 126.
but a Bishop. S. Augustine says, Vocabulum Episcopatus inde ductum est,
quo'd ille, qui praeficitur, eis, quibus praeficitur, Superintendit. Ergo,
(...), Latin dicere possumus Superintendere. Again he says, Quod Graece
dicitur, Episcopus, hoc Latin, Superintentor, interpretatur. Chrysostom
says, Chrysostom. 1. ad Timoth. Hom 10. Hieronym. Ad ^uagrium. Anselm ad
Philippen. Ca. 1. Beda. 1. Petri. 2. Petrus de Palude, De Potest. Colla.
Apostolis, Arti. 1.
Episcopus ex eo dicitur, quo'd omnes inspiciat. S. Hierome says, (...), id
est, Superintendentes. Anselimus says, Episcopus Latin Superintendens
dicitur. Beda likewise says, Episcopus Latin Superintendens dicitur. Petrus
de Palude says, Episcopus dicitur Superintendens: Et Petrus fuit
Superintendens toti Mundo: Peter was the Superintendente of the whole World.
Your own Thomas of Aquine says, Episcopi dicuntur ex eo, quod Superintendunt.
Therefore, M. Hardinge, if Modesty move you not, yet at least for your
grauities sake, leave plaieinge with these vain, and childishe folies. The
Bishops of England have this day, not only the same Name, but also the
same room, and Authority, and Jurisdiction, that other Bishops have ever
had before. Thom. 2. 2. quae. 184. Ar. 6.


The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 1.
But, touching this Council, which is now sommoned by Pope Pius, wherein
men so lightly are condemned, being neither called, Al soars salued by the
Council of Tridente.
nor heard, nor seen, it is easy to gheasse, what we may look for, or hope
of it.

M. Hardinge.
The General Council of Trente is now at length by Gods special favor
concluded and ended. What have ye to say to it? Forbear your accustomed
lyinge, what have ye to say to it? For Untruths open, and without same. For
example, your Stevves, your Courteghianes, and Fornications were never touched.
matters of Faith, what is not sound and true? For * manners, what sore
lacks due salve? For * discipline, what disorder has not wholesome
restrainctes and punishments? What defectes be not prouidently considered,
how to be supplied? What abuses be not required to be taken a way, as far,
as man's wiste could devise, and the weakness of the present age can bear?

The B. of Sarisburie.
All this matter is fully answered by What, and by What. What matter of
Faith? What manners? What disorder? What defectes? What Abuses? But al
these vvhattes notwithstanding, what if your Pope, your Cardinals, and your
Cleregie, with the whole disorder of your Roman Church, with so many
Priests keepinge Concubines, with so many Non Residentes, with so many Doumbe
Bishops, and with so many thousands of common Harlottes, be in case now,
even as they were before? Will ye tell us nevertheless, that al your soars
be sufficiently salued? Or, must we believe, that your keepinge of Concubines,
your open Stews, and Fornications etc. be no soars? Verily, S. Bernarde
says, Bernard. in Cantica. Sermo. 33. Hulcote in Lib. Sapien. Lectio. 23
Bernard. in Conuers. Pauli. Bapt. Mantuan. Fastor. Lib. 4. Ad Leonem. 10.
Council. Trident.
as it is alleged before, Intestina, and insanabilis est plaga Ecclesiae: The
wound of the Church bleedeth inwardely, and is past cure: And again, A
planta pedis, vsque ad verticem Capitis non est in ea sanitas: There is no
whole part in the Church from the sole of the foot, to the top of the
Head. Baptista Mantuanus says, Aegrotatque Fides iam proxima morti: The
Faith of the Roman Church is sick, and almost dead.

In your Old Latin Translation of the Bible, there be sundry errors, so
open, and so gross, that a very Babe may soon epsy them: as it may more
plainly appear by Budaeus, Erasmus, Valla, Faber, Lindanus, and others. Yet,
that notwithstanding, your Council says precisely thus, Ne quis Veterem
vulgaram Editionem reijcere quouis praetextu audeat, vel praesumat: Let no
man dare, or presume by any manner of color, to refuse the Old Common
Translation of the Bible: As if your Councelles were yourposely summoned, to
maintain errors. If ye will so wilfully deceive us in sensible matters, how
may we then trust you in matters of Faith?

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 2.
In times past, when Nazianzene saw in his days, how men in such
Assemblies were so blind, and wilful, that they were carried with affections,
Nazian. ad Procopium.
and labored more to geate the victory, then the Truth, he pronounced
openly, that he never had seen a good end of any Council. What would he say
now, if he were alive at this day, and understood the heauinge, and shouinge
of these men? For at that time, though the matter were labored on al sides,
yet the controversies were well heard, and open errors were put clean away
by the general voice of al parts: But these men will neither have the case to
be freely disputed, nor yet how many errors soever there be, suffer they any
to be changed. For it is a common custom of theirs, often, and shamelesly to
boaste, that their Church cannot err, that in it there is no fault, and that
they must geeue place to us in nothing. Or, if there be any fault, yet must
it be tried by their Bishops, and Abbates only, because they be the
Directours, and Rulers of matters: for that they be the Church of God.
Aristotle says, that a city cannot consiste of Bastardes: but whether the
church of God may consiste of these men* let them selves consider. For
doubtelesse, neither be their Abbates, Abbates in deed, nor their Bishops
natural right Bishops.

M. Hardinge.
Gregory Nazianzene in his Epistle to Procopius says thus: I refuse to come
to whatsoever Council of Bishops. Because I could never yet to this day
see the end of any Council end wed with any profit, and after which,
things amiss were not rather made more grievous, then healed. Nazianzene in
that Epistle spoke of Untruth. For he speaks of al manner of Councelles, as
well General, as Prouincial: His words be, Prorsus decreui fugere Omnem
Conuentum Episcoporu^.
provincial Councelles, specially those that were holden in his troublesome
times, where most commonly Heretics through favor of their deceived Princes
bare the swea. Which in matters of Faith could hardely then obtain any
credit among the Catholics, unless they had benne confirmed by the
authority of the Bishop of Rome: of which sort at that age were few. Those
other Nazianzene had experience of, of these he had not. Albeit in deed the
utility of the Nicence Council in his time, that is to say, within so few
years after the same was holden, was not yet thoroughly espied, and fully
known abroad. Neither would he, if he were alive at this day, reprove the
Holy general Council of Trente, as ye do. For why should he?

This is a lusty kind of Divinity.
And how shameless be ye, to require us, to yield and give place unto you?
Who made you judges over us? Who gave you commission? Where is your warrant?

What need ye to show your malice so much at Bishops, and Abbattes?
Which of them hurts you? Have ye not in prison, or in custody Untruth. For
they are committed only by the appointemente of the Prince.
at your appointement all the Bishops of England, one Apostata yet living
excepted, which after sundry flightes and changinge of cotes, is fled from
the tents of the Church to your scattered troops? The Abbottes, have ye not
driven them away? Be ye yet a fraide of their shadows? As by Aristotle a
City can not consiste of Bastardes, no more can the Church of England
consiste of such Bastard Bishops, as ye be: what number of Abbottes ye have
left in Cloisters, such number of true Bishops have ye left in Churches.
One must I still except, who is a true Bishop by consecration (as I
understand) though a false man by Apostasy, and goinge from his Faith, and
from his Religion.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Touching the unlucky success of Councelles, the Ancient Father Nazianzene
says thus, Gregor. Nazianzenus ad Procopium. (...).
Equidem, vt vere, quod res est, scribam, prorsus decreui fugere Omnem
Conuentum Episcoporum. Nullius enim concilij bonum exitum vnquam vidi. Concilia
enim non minuunt mala, sed augent potius: To say the truth, I am utterly
determined never to comme to any Council of Bishops. For I never yet saw
good end of any Council. For Councelles abate not il things, but rather
increase them. These words thus uttered, whether they be universally true, or
otherwise, I will not reason. It may seem hereby, this Learned Father, for his
time, by experience found them true. And for ought, that may appear to the
contrary, notwithstanding any thing contained in your Gloss, he seems to
utter the same, as well of General Councelles, as of Prouincial.

Certainly after the Great General Council of Nice, the Arian Heretics
waxed more, and more mighty, then ever they had benne before. The Emperors
Constantius, and Valens, with their Wives, and Courts became Arians.
Constantinus the Great him self was also doubted to be an Arian. The success
of councels. Monks, and Abbates.
Liberius the Bishop of Rome, and Hosius that famous Learned Bishop of Spain,
gave their hands unto the Arians. Ten several sundry Prouincial councelles
gave their voices with the Arians. S. Hierome says, Ingemuit totus Orbis, and
Arianum se esse miratus est: The whole wordle began to groan, and marueiled,
that it had taken part with the Arians. Therefore Nazianzene says, He never
saw Council, Sozomenus. Hieronym. Aduersus Luciferianos.
nor Prouincial, nor General, that ended well: for that, as one says, The
greater side oftentimes over vveigheth the better. Even so said the French
Kings Embassadoure, in the behalf of his Prince, in your Chapter at Tridente:
Nostra, Patrumque nostrorum, and Auorum memoria, Synodos indictas fuisse,
Episcopos conuenisse, Tit. Liuius. Mayor pars vincit meliorem.
maximos in Germania, atque Italia Conue^tus peractos esse, scimus. Vix tamen
vllus, aut perexiguus inde fructus Christianitati constirit: We know, that
both in our Grandfathers, and Fathers, and our own time, Councelles have
benne summoned, Oration Synodica Legati Regis Franciae. An. 1562.
Bishops have met together, great and solemn Assemblies have benne
keapte, as well in Germany, as in Italy: yet scarcely any good at al, or very
little good came thereof to the state of Christendom.

Concerning Abbates, and Monasteries, we have said before. We have as many
Abbates in England this day, as either Christ ever had, or his Apostles.
Notwithstanding one of your Learned fellows of Louaine, for the good will he
bears to that Religion, Copus. Fol. 284.
tells us, that the Apostles were Monks, and Christ himself was the
Abbate. The Abbates, and Monks, that were in old times, were men given to
Study, August. Epist 81. August. Epist. 76
and Learning. And out of Monasteries learned men were then taken, as out of
Schools, and Universities, to the rule, and gouernemente of the Church. But
your Abbates now are as mutche like those Abbates, as your Church is like the
Primitive Church of Christ.

Erasmus says, Erasm. in Scholijs in Epistolam ad Rusticum Monachum.
Haud scio, an nunc magis expediret Ecclesiae Christianae, si pauciora essent
Monasteria, essetque omnium idem Cultus, eaedemque preces, eademque vitae
ratio: I know not whether it were better for the Church of Christ, that
there were fewer Monasteries: and that al men had one Service of God, one
kind of Prayer, and one order of Life.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 3.
But grant, they be the Church: let them be heard speak in Councelles: let
them alone have authority, to geeue consent: yet in old time, when the
Church of God (if ye will compare it with their Church) was very well governed,
both Elders, and Deacons, as says Cyprian, and certain also of the Common
People were called thereunto, and made acquainted with Ecclesiastical matters.

M. Hardinge.
Ah Syrs, would ye have the common people come to the General Council? Whom
mean ye, I pray you? Tinkers and Tapsters. fydlers and Pypers, such as your
ministers be? Alas poor souls. what should they do there? For there is no
tinking nor tipplinge, no fidlinge nor Pypinge. There may they shut up both
budgets and mouths. For neither can they speak in such an audience to be
understood, nor can they understand, what is spoken. Look in your Books
better, and you shall find Cyprian to make little for your purpose.

Had your matter benne good, it might have benne defended without lies. Being
as it is, altogether beside Truth and reason, for some color of mainetenance
of the same, ye pass all measure in lieinge. Where says S. Cyprian that
certain of the common people were called to Ecclesiastical Councelles? Yea,
specially where says he, S. Cyprians words be plain, Nihil sine consensu
plebis, etc. Lib. 3. Epist. 10.
that the common people were made judges of Ecclesiastical matters, Priests
unlearned.
for so has your Latin, which not without guile your Lady interpreter
commonly tourneth, were made acquainted with Eclcesiasticall matters? If you
had meante true dealinge. Defender, you would have quoted the place: but you
knew thereby your falsehead should have benne espied. Your (...) deceives
(...) It is not there.
The place which you mean, doubtless is in the second tome of S. Cyprians
works, where we find the sentences of the Bishops of Aphrike, De
Haereticis Baptizandis: Which proves your strange saieinge, by you fathered
upon that holy Martyr, nothing at al. The words be these, Cum in vnum
Carthagini conuenissent, etc. When many Bishops in the first day of
September were assembled together at Carthage, out of the province of Aphrike,
Numidia, Mauritanta, with their Priests, and Deacons, the most part of the
people also being present etc.

Now what can you gather out of them for your purpose more, but that a great
number of the people were present only in the Church, or other place, where
the Bishops were assembled? That certain of the common people were called to
this Council, there is no such word mentioned, nor by Cyprian, nor by any
else. Untruths, boldly avouched. Read the A^ivveare.
Neither were the Priests them selves (which this youthful Gentil woman
interprets Elders) and Deacons * called thither, but they * attended upon the
Bishops, as in such case it has benne accustomed: for sentence none might
give, in any Council, but * only Bishops. Then how much less were the
common people called to that Council, specially to sit as Judges in
Ecclesiastical matters? Mary, that you would so have it, I think well. For
such confusion might best serve you to procure the overthrow of good order,
in which the Church is governed: which if it be maineteined duly, your
disordered and rebellious state will soon be confounded.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Your Tinkers, and Tapsters, M. Hardinge, are ashamed in your behalf, to see
your folly. A poor seely iester, to win his dinner, would be loathe to
scoff so coldely. Certain of our Cleregie want the knowledge of Rhetorique,
Logique, Philosophy, the Hebrevve, the Greek, and the Latin tongues:
Therefore ye call them Tinkers, and Tapsters. Such is the Sobriety, and
Modesty of your talk. Of what School, or tongue then are your Priests, M.
Hardinge, that, for the more part, can neither Speak Latin, nor Read
English, nor understand the Articles of their Faith, nor any portion of the
Scriptures: Clovvdes without Rain: Lanternes without Light: Salt without
sauoure: Blind guides: Dombe Dogs: that, as one says, seem to have their
souls given them in steed of salt, to keep them from stinkinge? Of what
Art, or Occupation was he, De Con. Did. 4 Retulerunt. Julius. pp. 2. Alphon.
Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
that Baptized a child in Latin, in this sort, In nomine Patria, and Filia,
and Spirita Sancta? What a skilful Clerk was your Pope Julius. 2. that
assigninge a warrante, in steed of Fiat, wrote, Fiatur? Your own Doctor,
Alphonsus de Castro, says, Constat plures Papas adeo' illiteratos esse, vt
Grammaticam penit us ignorent: It is most certain, that many Popes be so
unlearned, that they be utterly ignorante of their Grammar. And, being utterly
ignorant of their Grammare Rules, I beseech you, for what other profounde
science of Logique, or Philosophi^, Felinus, de Rescriptis. Si quan^ do.
can ye praise them? An other of your Doctoures says, Papa propter defectum
literaturae non potest deponi: The Pope may not be deposed for lack of
Learning. That is to say, the Pope, though he be never so ignorante, or void
of knowledge, yet is as good a Pope, as the best.

An other of your Doctors says, Aureum Speculum, In Antilogia.
Venalitate Curiae Romanae, inaniter praeficiuntur Lenones, Coqui, Stabularij
equorum, and Pueri: Through the bribene of the Court of Rome, Baudes, Cooks,
Hostlers, and Children be placed in Offices to govern the Church. Shall we
therefore say, as you say, that al your Priests be Fiddlers, and Pipers,
Tinkers, and Tapsters?

Sum certain of our Cleregie be ignorante in the tongues, as yours be: but
not ignorante in knowledge, 2. Corin. 11.
as yours be. The woorste of them sees, and lamenteth your wilful ignorance.
Priests unlearned.
S. Augustine says, Multo minus malum est, indoctum esse, August. contra
Academic. Li. 3. Ca. 7.
quam indocilem: Leasse hurt is it, to be unlearned, then to be wilful, and
unapt to learn. Irenaeus says, Melius est, and vtilius, idiotas, and parum
scientes existere, Irenae. Lib. 2. Ca. 45.
and per Charitatem proximos Deo fieri, quam putare se multum scire, and multa
expertos, in suum Deum blasphemos inueniri: Better is it a great deal, for
men to be ignorante, and to know but little, and by love to draw near to
God, then to think them selves to know mutche, and to have great experience,
and yet to be found blasphemers against God.

S. Ambrose says, Ambros. De Fide, Li. 1. Cap. 3.
Non in Dialectica complacuit Deo, saluum facere populum suum. Regnum enim Dei
in simplicitate Fidei est, non in contentione Sermonis: It pleased not God, by
Logique to save his people: For the Kingedome of God stands not in contention
of talk, Ambros. De Incarnatione Domini. Ca. 9.
but in simplicity of Faith. Likewise he says, Verba Philosophorum excludit
simplex Veritas Piscatoru^: The simple plain Faith of Fishers confounds the
words of the learned Philosophers. The Ancient Father Origin says,
Sapientes huius saeculi, Origin. in Cantica, Homili. 4.
videntes absque Art Grammatica, and peritia Philosophica consurgere muros
Euangelij, v^lut cum irrisione quadam dicunt, perfacile hoc posse destrui
calliditate Sermonum, per astutas fallacias, and Argume^ta Dialectica: The wise
men of this world, seeinge the walls of the Gospel to rise up without
Grammare, and profounde knowledge in Philosophy, say scornefully amongst
them selves, that all this by suttletie of speech, and crafty shifts, and
Logical Arguments, may full easily be shaken down.

It appears by the Councelles of Carthage, Conci. Carthag. 3. Can. 19. Et
Council. Hippon.
and Hippo Regius, that in old times Children under fouretene years of age
were admitted to be Readers in the Church: and, notwithstanding either their
age, or want of learning, the people was well contented, with silence, and
reverence to give ear unto them.

S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Genes. Homi. 44.
in humanis negotijs, quando Rex Diademate coronatus, etc. Even in worldly
affairs, when the King sends soorthe his Proclamations, the Currer, or
pourseuante is oftentimes a man of small accoumpte, and sommetime so base, that
he never knew his own Father, or Grandefather. But they that receive the
Proclamation, have no regard unto him, that brought it: notwithstanding, in
respect of the Kings letters, that he brought, they give him honor, and
with silence, and reverence give attendance to the Proclamation.

These simple unlearned ones, whom you so disdainefully despise, shall rise up
in the day of our Lord, and condemn you with all your knowledge. God is hable
to make the poor Ass to speak, Numer. 22. Hieronym. in Psalm. 82.
to controlle blind Balaams wilful pourposes. S. Hierome says, Paulus, qui
Soloecismos facit in loquendo, Christi Crucem portat, and, quasi triumphans,
omnes capit: Totum Orbem subegit, ab Oceano vsque ad Mare Rubrum: Paul, that
is not hable to utter his mind in congrue speech, bears the Croise of
Christ, and takes al men Prisoners, as if it were in triu^phe: from the
Occean unto the Red Sea, he subdewed the whole world. Likewise S. Ambrose
says, Non quaero, Ambrosi. Ad Grattanum de Fide, Lib. 1. Ca. 5.
quid loquantur Philosophi: requiro quid faciant. Soli in suis Gymnasijs
remanserunt. Vide, quam Fides Argumentis praeponderet. Illi quotidie a suis
consortibus deseruntur, qui copiose disputant: Isti quotidie crescunt, qui
simpliciter credunt. Non creditur Philosophis: Creditur Piscatoribus: I
demand not, what these great learned Philosophers say, but what they do.
They are foresaken, and leafte alone in their Schools. Behold, how mutche
more weight there is in Faith, then in Arguments. They with their profounde
Reasons are daiely foresaken of their fellows: These with their Simple Faith
go forewarde, and increase daily. Men believe not the learned Philosophers:
They believe unlearned Fishers.

Priests, ye say, this youtheful Gentlevvooman interprets Elders. OM.
Hardinge, little needs y^ godly Learned, and virtuous Lady, to fear your so
vumanly, and childishe toies. If ye had benne either so sagely studied, as ye
pretend, and your friends have thought, have Priests, Deacons, and Lay men
in cou^celles.
ye might soon have learned, that Presbyter, a Priest, is nothing else, but
Senior, that is, an Elder. And therefore, whereas S. Paul says, Aduersus
Presbyterum accusationem ne admiseris: S. Cyprian translatinge the same, says
thus, Aduersus Maiorem natu accusatione^ ne receperis. Your own Doctoure
Thomas Aquin^s says, Presbyteri in Graeco dicuntur, quasi Seniores. 1. Timoth
(...).
Your own Gratian says, Presbyter Graece, Latin Senior interpretatur. S.
Hierome says, Idem est Presbyter, qui Episcopus. These two words, (...),
Cypria. ad Quirinum. Li 3. Ca. 76.
are expounded in Latin, Natu mayor, Natu maximus. So Plutarchus says,
(...), Old Trees: So Nazianzene says, (...): Goeinge by a staff, as old
men use to do. Therefore, Thomas Secundae Secundae. quast. 184 arti. 6.
M. Hardinge, it had benne more for your gravity, to have spared these
youtheful folies.

Ye say, The Priests, and Deacons waited only upon the Bishops: but
Sentence in Council they might give none. Did 21. Cl^ros. Hieronym. ad Titum,
Cap. 1. Plutarch. in Publicola.
This tale were true, M. Hardinge, if every your word were a Gospel. But S.
Luke would have told you far otherwise. For, speakinge of the first Christian
Council, holden in y^ Apostles time, he says thus: Conuenerunt Apostoli, and
Seniores, vt dispicerent de hoc negotio: The Apostles, and Elders met
together, to take order, touching this matter. And again in the Conclusion,
Placuit Apostolis, Actorum. 15. Nicephorus, Li. 8. Cap 15.
and Senioribus, cum tota Ecclesia: It seemed good to the Apostles, and Elders,
together with the whole Church. Nicephorus says, Athanasius inter Diaconos
Alexandriae Primarius, no^ minima pa^s Nicenae Synodi: Athanasius being ( not
a Bishop, but) one of the chief Deacons of Alexandria, was not the least part
of the Council of Nice. Tertullian in Apologetico.
Tertullian says, Praesident probati quique Seniores, honorem istu^ no^
pretio, sed testimonio adepti: The Judges in such Ecclesiastical Assemblies
be the best allowed Elders, having obtained that honor, not for money, but
by the witness of their Brethren. Council. Nicen. 2. Actio. 2. 4 and 6
And in the Second Council of Nice, Petrus Protopresbyter, and Petrus
Presbyter, not being Bishops, but only Priests, sent thither by Adrianus
the Bishop of Rome, gave their assentes, and subscribed their names before all the Bishops.

Touching S. Cyprian* ye say, as your gravity, and modesty leads you,
We lie, without color, and pass measure in Lieinge. And here, as men
do, that go by gheasse, and answer long before they know, ye find out a
place in S. Cyprian, that we thought not of: and, upon affiance thereof, ye
blow up your trumpe, and call us Liers. How be it, wise men think him a
hasty Judge, that pronounces before he know the cause. Cyprian. Lib. 3.
Epist. 10.
S. Cyprian says, A primordio Episcopatus mei, statui, nihil sine consilio
vestro, and sine consensu Plebis, mea priuatim sententia, gerere: From my
first entringe into the Bishoprike, I have determined to do nothing by mine
own authority, without your ad^^se (being the Priests, and Deacons), and
without the consent of the people. For dooinge the contrary hereof, the
Anciente Father Origin rebukes Bishops of Pride, and stateliness. Thus he
says, Quis hodie little, Origin. in Exodum, Homil. 11.
qui populis praesunt, Consilium dignatur inferioris saltem Sacerdotis
accipere? Ne dixerim Laici, vel Ge^tilis: What one now adays, of all the
Bishops, that have the ouersighte of the people, vouch^ saves to take the
Council of any Inferioure Priest? I will not say, of a Lay man, or of an
Heathen. S. Ambrose, touching a case of Faith against the Arians, Ambros.
Lib. ^. Epis. 32.
says thus: Veniant, si qui sunt, ad Ecclesiam. Audiant cum populo: Non vt
quisquam Iudex resideat: sed vt vnusquisque de suo affectu habeat examen: If
there be any of them, let them comme to the Church: Let them give care, and
hearken with the people: Not that any man there shall sit as Judge: but that
every man may have the examination of his own mind.

To conclude, your own Pope Nicolas, writing unto Michael the Greek
Emperor, Epist. Nicolai pp. ad Imp. Michaelem.
says thus, Vbinam legistis, Imperatores, Antecessores vestros, Synodalibus
conuentionibus interfuisse? Nisi forte in quibusdam, vbi de Fide tractatum est:
quae Vniuersalis est: quae omnium communis est: quae non solum ad Clericos,
verumetiam^ ad Laicos, and ad omnes omnino pertinet Christianos: Where did your
Majesty ever read, that your Predecessoures, being Emperoures, were ever
present at the Assemblies of Councelles? Unless it were, when question was
moved concerning the Faith. For Faith is Universal, and common to al men,
and belongs, not only to the Priests, but also to the Lay men, and
generally to al Christians. But hereof we shall have occasion to speak more
hereafter.

The Apology, Cap. 3. Division. 4.
But, I put case, these Abbates, and Bishops, have no knowledge: what if they
understand nothing, what Religion is, nor how we ought to think of God? I
put case, the pronouncinge, and ministringe of the Law be decayed in Priests,
and good counsel fail in the Elders, Micheae. 3.
and as the Prophet Micheas says, The Night be unto them in steed of a
vision, and darkness in steed of Prophesienge: Or, Psalm. 56.
as Esaias says, What if all the vvatchemen of the city be become blind?
What if the Salt have lost his propre strength and sauerinesse, Matthew. 5.
and as christ says, be good for no use, scante vvoorthe the castinge on the
dounghil?

M. Hardinge.
The world knows so well, (yea Heaven also) the great worthiness of those
Fathers in every respect, that, I should do them wrong here to praise them,
for that by your fond surmises you seek their dispraise.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Heaven, Matthias Flacius Illyricus, in Protestatione contra Council. Triden
Page 79.
and Earth knows, M. Hardinge, that two of your Reverend worthy Fathers,
notwithstanding their virtues, and al their great worthiness, were taken,
and slain in Aduouterie, even there present at your Council. Therefore ye
do your self sum wrong, in respect of your credit, so wastefully to
bestow your praises.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 1.
Well yet then, they will bring al matters before the Pope, who cannot err. To
this I say, first it is a madness to think, that the Holy Ghost takes his
flight from a General council, to run to Rome, to the end if he doubt, or
stick in any matter, and cannot expound it of him self, he may take counsel
of sum other Sprite, I wot not what, that is better learned, then him self.
For if this be true, what needed so many Bishops, with so great charges, and
so far iorneies, to have assembled their Convocation at this present at
Tridente? Yt had benne more wisdom, and better, at least it had benne a
mutche nearer, and handsommer way, to have brought al things rather before
the Pope, and to have comme straight forth, and have asked counsel at his
Divine Breaste. Secondly, it is also an unlawful dealinge, to toss our matter
from so many Bishops, and Abbates, and to bring it at last to the trial of
one only man, specially of him, who him self is appeached by us of heinous,
and foul enormities, and has not yet put in his Answer: who has also
aforehande condemned us without Judgment by order pronounced, and ere ever we
were called, to be Judged.

M. Hardinge.
We may less wonder at your iestinge in other things, sith now we set you
scoff and ieste in things touching God him self. Sir, set you so light by
the Holy Ghost. We Honor, and Adoure the Holy Ghost, as very God: But you
shamefully abuse the name of God.
as thus irreverently to talk of his flight and runninge to Rome, of his
doubtinge, and stickinge, of his unableness to declare doubtful cases, of
askinge counsel of an other spirit? Who ever uttered such vile talk of the
Holy Ghost, but some vile caitife, quite void of his grace? Can not you
conceive that reasonably the determinations of Councels be referred to the Pope
Christ's Vicare in Earth, unless ye utter such vnreuerent and profane
scoffs? It had become a wicked Celsus, a Porphyrius, a Julian, thus to talk,
rather then any Christian Hickescorner. You should at least have looked on your
square Cappe, and your white rochet, if you have any: if nothing else, they
would have told you, that such profane lightness became not your person.

Concerning the point it self, you touch, Untruths hudled together
without shame.
although the Pope have that Privilege, which Christ prayed to his Father
for to be given unto Peter, Luke. 22.
as being Peter's Successor, that his Faith fail not, and that be confirm
his Brethren, and therefore be an assured judge in matters of Faith: yet this
notwithstanding, councels be not assembled together in vain. For the Fathers
of the Council do A sage kind of mockery. For then doothe not the Pope
Confirm his Brethren: but rather is Confirmed by his Brethren.
help the Faith and Doctrine of the highest Pastor. Wherefore in the first
council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.
when as a great question rose, and Peter had said his judgment, not propped
with any testimony of the Holy Scriptures, James approved it, addinge thereto
the testimonies of the Prophets. For Gods providence so tendereth the Church,
that the chief By this Divinity James was a member of Peter.
members, though they depend of the Head, yet defend and healpe the Head.

Wherefore Seda admonishes discretely, Lib. Retra. in act. Apostolorum.
that Paul conferred the Gospel, which he had Preached amongst the Gentiles,
with the other Apostles, seekinge warely to be resolved, whether he Preached
rightly of the ceassinge of the obseruances of the Law. Not that he doubted
ought thereof himself, (says he) but that the minds of them, that were in
doubt, might be confirmed by the Authority of that Apostolic Council.

To that you allege secondly, as a great inconvenience, we tell you, that
forasmuch as the Pope is at every general Council laufully assembled, either
in person, as sundry Popes have benne, or by his Legates: VVisely. The Holy
Ghost that is present at the Council, for better advise, takes counsel of
the Pope.
neither it is an unlawful dealinge, nor such tossinge, as you term it,
matters maturely debated in the Council, to be referred to the Pope head of
the Council, not so much for a new trial, as for final confirmation. The
Fathers of the Nicene council besought S. Syluestes^, that what they had
ordained, he would confirm and ratify. And Leo what things the Council of
Chalcedon had decreed, touching matters of faith, says, that he approves
them. And the Council it self speakinge to Leo, says thus: Decretis tuis
nostrum honora Iudicium: With thy Decrees honor our Judgment. Likewise the
Fathers of other councels, required their constitutions to be strengthened by
confirmation of the Popes authority.

And sir, find you fault with the Pope, because he has not yet put in his
answer? I pray you, The whole world accuses him.
who accused him? Where, when, and whereof? In what laufull Court? Before
what laufull Judge? O you say, he has not yet put in his answer. Be it that
Hicke, Hob, and Hans of your sects have impudently accused him. How would ye
have him bring in his answer? To what seat of iudgmente, to what Consistory
can ye cite him, that is by Christ appointed A foul Untruth. For Christ
never gave the Pope any such Commission.
to be the Supreme judge of all his Church* the Sheepeherde of all his Flo^ke?
It is not for him you know, to bring in his answer in VVeshminster Haull, nor
in Sterre Chamber. Will ye have him appear before your high Commissioners in
the long Chapel at Powles, or in M. Crindalles chamber thereby, where ye
have said and done your pleasure, and deprived many honest men of their
benefices? Or will ye rather have him come to Geneua, The Sprite of Councelles.
to Zurich, to Frankforde, to Strasburg, to Wittenberg, or to some other
corner, where ye have your congregations, there to be judged by Jack and
Gille? I pity you, poor souls, that ye talk thus so far out of square,
and would the Pope to bring in his answer, ye know not where, having
neither just Court, or Consistory to call him unto, nor laufull judge, nor
law to pass upon him. For through your Schisms and Heresies, as ye have made
your selves Churchelesse, Christlesse, and Godless so also Courtlesse,
Iudgelesse, and Lawless. I can not compare you better then to the Rebels of
Northfolke under Captain Kete, amongst whom Mount Surrey was their London,
and an Oak or an Elm commonly called the tree of Reformation, was their
Westminster Halle. Such Prince, such Dominion: such Judge, such Consistory.

Ye complain, the Pope has condemned you without judgment by order
pronounced, and before ye were ever called to be judged. This is as true, as
that the Murderer or Thief answeareth the Judge at the bar, saieinge, not
gilty my Lord. Ye have benne sundry times called to laufull Consistories, to
Synodes, to Councels. Always either ye made not your appearance, or by right
of safeconduct conveyed your selves away, without any show of Obedience: or
upon promise of amendment, you were dimissed. How many Legates and Nuncios
have sundry Popes sent into Germany and other Provinces, to convent you, to
hear you, to move you to a better mind, and call you home, and with all
merciful means to gather you again into the lap of the Church? He may
say, to your condemnation, Esai. 5.
that was said of the Jews: what is that Iought to have done to Open
Blasphemy: The Church is the Popes Vineyarde.
my Vineyarde, which I have not done? But all was in vain, such has benne
your stubbournesse.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We ieste not at Gods Holy sprite, M. Hardinge. We know, it is the same
Sprite of Wisdom, that has renewed the face of the world, and discovered
the multitude of your folies. But well may we ieste at your unhandsome, and
open legierdumaine, that so vainly seek to blind us with a painted shadow
of the Sprite of God. Ye pretend long Prayers, mutche Fasting, great
conference of Doctors, and Scriptures, and the undoubted presence, and
assistance of Gods Holy Sprite in all your dooinges: and yet openly strive
against y^ manifest Word, and Sprite of God, and follow only your own
Sprite, which we may truly call the Sprite of Vanity. The Sprite, that
you mean, is nothing else, but the Sprite of Rome: which, you say, is the
Sprite of Truth, and cannot err. In one of your late Councelles, Nicolaus de
Clauengijs.
holden in Rome, as ye were singinge, Veni Creator Spiritus, God sent down
an Owl from the top of the Church, to sit amongst you: that the world
might know, in what sprite ye were assembled.

Elias, 3. Regum. 18.
the Prophet of God, iested thus at y^ Priests of Baal: Cry out alowde: It
is your God. Either he is occupied in sum talk: or he is in his Inn: or he
is trauailinge upon y^ way: or else perhaps he is a sleep. Yet neither was
Elias an Hicke Scorner: nor iested he at Gods Holy sprite: nor did he any
thing, y^ was unseemly for his person.

As for your Councelles, whether they be al, and evermore summoned by the
Sprite of God, or no, it may well be doubted. The University of Parise thus
protested, by way of Appeal, Appellatio Universe. Parisien. Anno. 1517.
against Pope Leo. 10. and his Council: Dominus Leo Papa Decimus, in quodam
Coetu in Ciuitate Romana, nescimus qualiter, non tamen in Spiritu Domini,
Congregato: Our Lord Pope Leo 10. in a certain Council, geathered in y^
City of Rome, by what mean, we know not: but surely not by the Sprite of
God. And touching your Late Chapter, or Conuenticle, which ye call the Council
of Trente, Oration Synodica, Anno. 1562.
the French Kings Embassadoure, being there in presence, said thus: Minus
legitima, minusue libera fuisse dicuntur illa Concilia. Qui aderant, ad
voluntatem alterius semper loquebantur: The saieinge is, that these were
neither Lavvful, nor Free Councelles. The Bishops, that were there, spoke (
not always of the Spirit of God, but) evermore to please sum other: By
which, Other, he meante the Pope.

Christ says unto Peter, Confirmation of Cou^celles
I have prayed for thee: and Paul went up to Jerusalem, to visit Peter:
Ergo, ye say, The Pope has Authority to confirm Councelles. O M. Hardinge,
your Logique of Louaine is marvelous hasty. Ye force your Conclusions, Luc.
22. Galat. 2.
to run in post. For what makes, either Christ's prayer for Peter, or
Paul's journey from Arabia to Jerusalem, for the Confirmation of Councelles?
Verily, here is no manner mention, neither of Confirmation, nor of Council, nor
of Pope.

Whereas Christ prayed namely for Peter, S. Augustine says, as he has
benne alleged before, August. De quae. Noui Testamen. quaest. 75.
Nunquid pro Petro rogabat: pro Iacobo, and Iohanne non rogabat? Did Christ
pray only for Peter: and did he not pray for James, and John?

Again he says, Augu. De Verb. Domi. In Euang. Secundum Luca^, Sermo. 36.
Hac nocte postulauit Satanas vexare vos, sicut triticum: Sed ego rogaui Patrem
pro vobis, ne deficiat Fides vestra: This might has Satan desired to threashe
you, as if ye were wheat. But I have prayed to my Father ( not only for
Peter, but) for you, that your Faith may not fail.

Touching that Paul went up to Jerusalem, of Courtesy, to see Peter, he
sought not thereby y^ allowance of his Doctrine, as a man, Galat. 2.
that otherwise stood in doubt, whether he had so long, for the space of
fourtiene years preached Truth, or Falsehedde: but rather found fault with
Peter's dissimulatio^ in Doctrine, and reproved him openly even unto the face.
S. Hierome says, Perrexit Jerusalem, non tam vt disceret aliquid ab
Apostolis, Hieronym. in Epist. ad Gal. ca. 1.
quam cum eis Euangelium, quod docuerat, collaturus: Paul went up to
Jerusalem, not so mutche to learn any thing of the Apostles, as to confer
with them touching the Gospel, that he had preached.

S. Chrysostom says further, Paulus nihil opus habebat Petro: nec illius
egebat voce: Chrysostom ad Galat. Cap 1.
sed honor par erat illi: Nihil enim hic dicam amplius: Paul had no need of
Peter: nor had any cause to crave his voice: but in honor, and worthiness,
was his equal: As for more, I will not say.

Concerning the Confirmation of Councelles, we have said otherwhere more at
large. Councelles were Confirmed, In the Former Reply, Artic. 4. Division. 26.
not only by the Bishop of Rome, but also by other Bishops, and Patriarchs:
and not only by other Bishops, but also by Kings, and Emperors. The
Emperor Martianus says, Sacro nostrae Serenitatis edicto venerandam Synodum
Confirmamus: By the Holy Edicte of our Majesty we Confirm this Reverend
Council. Council. Chalced. Actio. 3.
Likewise the Bishops in the Council of Constantinople, besought ye Emperor
Theodosius, Rogamus Clementiam tuam, Council. Constantinopolitan. 5.
vt per Literas tuae Pietatis ratum esse iubeas, Confirmesque Concilij
Decretum: We beseech your favor, that by your Majesty's Letters, ye will
ratify, and Confirm the Decree of the Council.

Touching the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem, your own Doctoure
says, Heruaeus de potestat. Pp. Ca. 14.
Postquam Petrus dixisset, Iacobus, Authoritate Pontificali* protulit
Definitiuam Sententiam: When Peter had said his mind, James, by his Episcopal
Authority, pronounced the Definitive Sentence: that is to say, gave his
Confirmation to the whole.

To conclude, Councelles have benne allowed, and holden for good, whether the
Bishop of Rome would, or no. Liberatus says, When Anatolius, by consent of the
Council of Chalcedon, Liberat. Cap. 13.
had obtained the Primacie, and the Bishop of Romes Legates stood against it,
their gainesaieinge of the Judges, and Bishops there was not received. And
notwithstanding the Apostolic See of Rome even hitherto stand against it,
yet the Decree of the Council, by the Authority, and mainteinance of the
Emperor, Quodammodo.
after a sort, stands still in force.

Mutche pleasant sport ye make us, with puttinge in the Popes answer. Be
it, say you, that Hicke, Hob, and Hans have accused the Pope. VVoulde ye have
him appear in this Court, or in that, to be judged by Jack, and Gil? The
whole world, M. Hardinge, has of long time charged the Pope with Ambition,
To judge the Pope.
Briberie, Simonie, Superstition, Idolatry, and open Corruption of the
ordinances, and will of God. If he disdeigne the judgment of so many, and
call the whole world Hicke, and Hob, let him not marvel, if the whole
world disdeigne him. If he may be both Judge, and Party, and may make
answer only before him self, I doubt not, but he shall have a good
favorable hearing.

I beseech the, Part. 5. Cap. 6. Diui. 7.
good Christian Reader, for shortenesse sake, consider that I have written
before, touching the Accusinge, and Iudgeing of the Pope. There shalt thou
see, Ennodius. 9. Q. 3. Nemo.
as Ennodius says, That the Pope together with the Power of Teaching, has
received free liberty to do il, without controlmente. Therefore he says,
Neque ab Augusto, neque ab omni Clero, neque a Regibus, neque a Populo Iudex
iudicabitur: The Pope, that is the Judge, shall be judged, neither by the
Emperor, nor by the whole Cleregie, nor by Kings, nor by the People. Such
a Prerogative, says Athanasius, Athanasi. co^tra Arianos Oration. 1.
was sommetime claimed by the Ariane Heretics: Cum ipsi sint rei, ac Iudicio
obnoxij, Chryso. in Matthae. Homil. 85.
veluti Caiaphas, iudicandi munus inuadunt: Whereas they the^ selves be guilty,
and in danger of Judgment, they play the part of Caiphas, and take upon them
to be judges them selves. In like manner Chrysostom sathe, Figura ibi duntaxat
Iudicij erat: re autem ipsa erat Latronum impetus: There was only a face of
Judgment: but in deed it was a biunte or violence of Thieves.

Ye say further, Esai. 5.
The Pope may say, to our condemnation, that God says unto the Jews: what
is it, that I ought to have done to my vinsyarde, but I have done it? And
thus ye give the Pope power, to callenge the Church of God, to be his own.
Even so Nero that wicked Tyran, when he had wasted, and consumed the City of
Rome, and burnte it with here, he called the same nevertheless by his own
name, Neronopolis, Neroes town. Heruaeus de potestat. Papae.
One of your Doctoures says, Huius Communitatis non est Dominus, nisi
Christus, vel Papa: There is no Lord of this common slate, (that is to say, of
the Church) but either Christ, or the Pope: As if Christ, and the Pope were
iointepourchasers.

But in deed Christ only is the Prince of Pastors. 1. Pet. 5. August. de
verb. Domi. in Euang. Secu^dum Johan. Sermo. 50. Esai. 5.
And the Church is his only Spouse, and not the Popes S. Augustine says
unto Christ, Tu Petro non dixisti, Palce Oues tuas: sed, Pasce Oues meas: Thou
saidste not unto Peter, Feed thy Sheep: but, Feed mine. Peter belongs unto
the Church: but the Church belongs not unto Peter.

The Church is not the Popes Vine: It is the Vine of the Lord of Sabbath. It
shall be sufficient for the Pope, if he may be only a branche in this Vine:
if he be not withered: if he be not cut of, and thrown into the fiere.

S. Augustine says, Augu. in Johan. Tracta. 323.
Qui hoc animo pascunt Oues Christi, vt Suas velint esse, non Christi, se
conuincuntur amare, non Christum: vel gloriandi, vel dominandi, vel acquirendi
cupiditate: They, that feed the Sheep of Christ, to that end, that they
would have them to be their Sheep, and not Christ's, are found to love them
selves, and not Christ, for desire, either of Glory, or of Gouernemente, or
of Gain.

The Apology, Cap. 4. Division. 2.
How say ye, do we divise these tales? Is not this the very course of the
Councelles in these days? Are not al things removed from the whole holy
Council, and brought before the Pope alone: that as though nothing had benne
done to purpose by the indgementes, and consentes of such a number, he alone
may add, alter, diminishe, disanulle, allow, remitte, and qualify, what so
ever he list? Whose words be these then? And why have the Bishops, and
Abbates in the last Council at Tridente but of late concluded thus in the end,
Sauinge alvvaies the Authority of the Sea Apostolic in all things? Or why
does Pope Paschale write so proudely of him self? De Election. and Electi
pote. Significasti.
As though, says he, there were any General Council hable to prescribe a
Law to the Church of Rome: whereas al Councelles both have benne made, and
have received their force, and strength by the Authority of the Church of
Rome: and in ordinances made by Councels, is ever plainly excepted the
Authority of the Roman Bishop. If they will have these things allowed for
good, why be Councelles called? But if they command them to be void, why are
they leafte in their Books, as things allowable?

M. Hardinge.
Sir, what neeede you bestow so mutche talk in vain? Is (...) not reason the
Who made all the Faithful of Christ, the Popes Members?
members acknoweledge the head? VVoulde you the members to work their actions
without the head? Is Pope Paschalis to be called proud for preferringe the
Church of Rome before a Council? Have not Councels ever ben thought to lack
their full Authority, Untruth plain, and manifest. For the Pope had no
Authority to call Cou^celles: As it shall appear.
which were not called and confirmed by the Bishop of Rome?

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Modesty, and Sobriety of Pope Paschalis claim shall better appear in
the next Division. Verily the Church of Rome, these many years, may seem
to have benne nothing else, but a Moother of Falsehed, and a School of Pride.
Pope Nicolas says, Nicola. Pp. 1. Ad Imp. Michael^. Council. Lateran. Sub
Leone 10. Sessione. 10.
De Sedis Apostolicae iudicio nemini licet iudicare: It is lawful for noman to
judge of the Popes Judgment. And of late years, Pope Leo said, Papa habet
Authoritatem super omnia Concilia: The Pope has Authority over al
Councelles. That al lawful Councelles have evermore benne summoned, and
confirmed by the Pope, it is a mauifest, and gross untruth: as hereafter it
shall be opened more at large.

Where ye say, It is reason, the Members should acknowledge their Head, For
shame, M. Hardinge, and for your credites sake, once leave these vanities. If
the Pope be any part of Gods Church, he is a Member, and not the Head: and
the Faithful of the Church of God, are Christ's Members, and not the Popes.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 1.
But be it so: Let the Bishop of Rome alone be above al Councelles, that is to
say, let sum one part be greater then the whole: let him be of greatter
Power, let him be of more Wisdom, then al his: and, Hieron. ad Euagrium.
in spite of Hieromes head, let the Authority of one City be greatter, then
the Authority of the whole world.

M. Hardinge.
It is a common manner of this Defender, what he must needs grant, to make a
show in words, as though it were free gift. So many times beggars will seem
gentilmen, and paiers of debte will seem geuers. Let the Bishop of Rome, (says
he) alone be above al councils. Untruth. Otherwise shevve us, by what
Authority he is so.
Sir, he is so: no thake to you. Yet speak you like a liberal gentilman: That
is to say, let some one part be greater then the whole. No sir, The Pope
above General cou^celles.
maugre your scoffinge head, part shall not be greater then the whole, but
part shall be greater then part. Full vvisely. As if the Pope were the Head,
and the whole Church were his Body: Or, As if the Pope were the Master,
and the Church his Family.
In a right sense is not the head greater then the body, the Bishop then his
cleregy, the * master of a house more then his family? Neither is the Council
the whole pardy, except your merry wit can devise us a whole body without a
head. Let him be of greater power, say you. And so he is. Let him be of more
wisdom, then al his. We say not so. It may be, that his Council has more
learning, The Council has more Wisdom, and Learning, then the Pope: yet
the Pope is in Wisdom, and Learning above the Council.
more knowledge and more wisdom, then his only person. Albeit, when we
speak of that wisdom of the Sea Apostolic, which is sure, infallible, and
cannot err: we mean not only the Popes singular person, but the head
Pastoure and Bishop, as he does those things, which perteine to that chair:
that is to say, in asmutche as he proceeds not upon his own private
judgment, O fond folly. For so any simple creature, so long as he is leadde
by the Holy Ghost, can never err.
but by the instincte of the Holy Ghost, promised by Christ to his vicare.
Where you say, And in spite of Hieromes head, let the Authority of one
City be greater them the Authority of the whole world: we tell you, that this
you speak more spitefully, then learnedly. For S. Hierome in his epistle to
Euagrius speaks Untruth, vain, and childish. For S. Hierome speaks
plainly of Authority: Si Authoritas quaeritur, Mayor est Orbis Vrbe.
only of a particular matter, blaminge the custom of Rome, where contrary to
the custom of the whole world, deacons in certain cases were preferred before
Priests, whereof we have spoken before.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Sir defender, ye say, speaks like a Liberal Gentleman. Again ye say, No
sir, Maugre your scoffinge head. These, and other like words, M. Hardinge,
are sittinge, and seemly for your person, and may well becomme your merry
wit.

Where we say, Let the Bishop of Rome be of greater power, then any General
Council, ye answer us readily, And so he is: Where we say, Let him be of
more Wisdom, then al other Bishops, Ye answer again, We say not so:
As if ye would allow the Pope Authority, and Power without Wisdom. Yet
wise men have said, that Power without Wisdom is the kingedome of Folly.

Sum of your friends have said, Si Totus Mundus sententiaret in aliquo
negotio contra Papam, videtur, quo'd standum esset Sententiae Papae: If the
whole world should geeue sentence in any matter against the Pope, it seems,
we ought rather to stand to the Popes judgment, then to the Judgment of
all the world. Albertus Pigghi us says, Certius est iudicium Papae, quam
iudicium Generalis concilij, aut Totius Orbis terrarum: The Judgment of the
Pope is more certain, then is the Judgment of a General Council, or else of all the whole world. An other says, Papa virtualiter est Tota Ecclesia: The Pope
by Power is the whole Universal Church. An other says, 9. quaest. 3. Nemo. In
Gloss.
Potestas solius Papae excedit Potestatem residuae Ecclesiae: The Popes only
Power excedeth the Power of all the Church biside. Alb Piggh. Eccl. Hiera. li.
6. ca. 13. Heruae. De potesta. Pp. Cap. 23. Petr. De Palude, de potestat. Pp.
Artic. 4.
An other says, Papa non potest subijcere se Concilio Generali: The Pope
cannot submit him self to a General Council. Upon these worthy Fundatio^s
ye have built up the Popes Infinite, and Universal Power: And therefore ye
say, Sir Defender would seem, to grant you of free gift, that he must
needs grant perforce, whether he will or no.

All this not withstandinge, M. Hardinge, others of your more indifferente
Doctoures, would have told you an other tale. S. Bernarde says, Quae mayor
superbia esse potest, Extra. De Iudicijs. Cum venissent. Ioha^. Andr. Berna.
Citatur a Pico Mirand. In quae. An Papa sit supra Council. Picus Mirandul. eodem
loco.
quam vt Vnus homo toti Congregationi iudicium suum praeferat, tanquam Solus
habeat Spiritum Sanctum? What greatter pride can there be, then that One man
should esteem his own judgment more, then the judgment of all the Church,
as if he only had the Sprite of God? Whereunto picus Mirandula adds these
words, Imo Simplici potius Rustico, and Infanti, and Aniculae magis, quam
Pontifici Maximo, and mill Episcopis credendu^ est, si isti contra Euangelium,
illi pro Euangelio faciant: Naie, we ought to believe a Simple plain
Husbandeman, or a Child, or an Old Wooman, rather then the Pope, and a
thousand Bishops, if the Pope, and ye Bishops speak against the Gospel,
and the others speak with the Gospel.

The Bishops in the Council of Ferraria say thus, Quacunque facultate Romana
Ecclesia praedita sit, Universally tamen Ecclesiae, quam Generalis Synodus prae
se fert, inferior est: With what so ever power the Church of Rome be endewed,
yet is it inferioure to the Universal Church, Conc. Ferrarion. Session 10.
that is represented by the General Council.

The Bishops in the Council of Basile say thus, Council. Basilien. Inter
Epistolas Synodales.
Etsi Papa sit Caput Ministeriale Ecclesiae, non tame^ est mayor tota Ecclesia.
Alioqui errante Po^tifice, quod saepe contingit, and contingere potest, tota
erraret Ecclesia: Although the Pope be the Ministerial head of the Church,
yet is he not greater, then all the Church. Otherwise, when so ever the Pope
erreth, which thing happens oftentimes, and may well happen, the whole
Church should likewise err.

Again they say, In appendice Conc. Basilien. Sacrosanctae Generali.
Nonnulli os suum ponenies in Coelum, Potestatem Romani Pontificis supra
Potestatem Sacrorum Generalium Conciliorum, contra Iuris Diuini, and Humani
Veritatem, a Sanctis Patribus alias declaratam, exaltare nituntur: Many men
settinge their face against the Heaven, go about to exalte the power of the
Bishop of Rome above the Power of Holy General Councelles, contrary to the
Truth of the Law, both of God, and man, declared unto us by the Holy Fathers.

Again they say, In eadem appe^dice, Et Primo.
Ecclesia Romana non est Vniuersa, sed est de Vniuersirate Corporis Mystici, id
est, Ecclesiae: Et sic est Membrum dicti Corporis Mystici, vt pater per Beatum
Gregorium. Igitur ex quo est Membru^ dicti Corporis, non est, nec esse potest
Caput illius: Cum differentia sit inter Caput, and Membra: The Church of Rome
is not Universal, but a part of the Universal Mystical Body of Christ, which
is the Church: and so is it a Member of Christ's said Body Mystical, as it
appears by S. Gregory. Therefore, for as mutche as it is a Member of the
said Body, it is not, neither can it be the Head of the same Body. For there
is a difference bitweene the Head, and the Body.

Likewise again they say, In eadem appe^dice, Eod. capite.
Allegant, Papam impune posse tollere Constitutionem Concilij Generalis, contra
prohibitionem ipsius Concilij Generalis: supponentes, Papa^ else Pastorem
Vniuersalis Ecclesiae. Sed ipsorum suppositum est falsum: and co^sequenter
ipsorum assertio super eo fundata est falsa: They say, The Pope may safely
abolishe the Decree of a General Council, notwithstanding the same General
Council have decreed the contrary: The Pope is not pastoure of the Vntuersal
Church.
supposinge, that the Pope is the Bishop of the Universal Church. But their
supposal is false: and so consequentely false is their Doctrine, that they
have builte thereupon.

Therefore, M. Hardinge, this part of your Book, emonge the rest, would
more advisedly have benne considered. D. Cole him self, notwithstanding
otherwise well inclined unto your faction, yet in this point is well content to
geeue you over. D. Cole.
Thus he says of him self: I hold herein rather with Gerson, that the
Council is above the Pope.

The Pope, ye say, in one respect, as he is a Man, in his own singular
person, may happen to err: But in an other respect, as he is Head
Pastoure, and Chief Bishop, and is placed in Peter's Chair, he cannot err.
And thus, as the Heathens, in old times, imagined their Centaurus to be half
a Man, and half a Horse: or their Ianus to have two faces, the one behind,
and the other before: even so have you imagined two Popes in one body: the one
goeinge backewarde, the other forewarde: the one bearinge Light, the other
Darkness: the one deceived, the other not deceived: the One speakinge Truth,
the other Falsehedde: and yet both these Popes incorporate together in one
Person. Give us leave therefore, M. Hardinge, to say now, as the whole
University of Parise said, Appellatio Vniuer. Parisien. a Leon. 10. An. 1517.
not long sithence, unto Pope Leo, A Domino nostro Papa, iam non been
consulto, appellamus: We appeal from our Lord the Pope, being, as now, not
well advised.

Certainly, Hierony. ad Heliodorum, De laud vitae Solitariae.
S. Hierome says, Non est facile, stare in loco Pauli, tenere gradum Petri,
iam cum Christo regnantium: ne forte veniat Angelus, qui scindat Velum Templi
tui, qui Candelabrum tuum de loco moueat: It is no easy matter, to stand in
Peter, or Paul's place now reigninge with Christ: lest the Angel comme, and
rent a sunder: he vele of thy Temple, and remove they Candesticke from his
place.

The place of S. Hierome to Euagrius, Part. 2. Ca. 3. Diuisi. 5.
is answered before.

The Apology, Cap. 5. Division. 2.
How then, if the Pope have seen none of these things, and have never read,
either the Scriptures, or the Old Fathers, or yet his own Councelles? How if
he favor the Arians, as once Pope Liberius did? Or have a wicked, and a
detestable opinion of the life to comme, and of the immortality of the Soul,
as Pope John had but few years sithence? Or, to increase his own Dignity,
do now corrupt other councelles, as Pope Zosimus corrupted the council
holden at Nice in times paste: and do say, that those things were divised
and appointed by the Holy Fathers, which never once came into their thought:
and, to have the full swaie of Authority, do wreaste the Scriptures, which
thing, as camotensis says, is an usual custom with the Popes? How if he have
renounced the Faith of christ, and beco^me an Apostata, as Lyranus says
many Popes have benne? And yet, for all this, shall the Holy Ghost with turninge
of a hand, knock at his breaste, and even whether he will, or no, yea, and
wholly against his will, kindle him a light, so as he may not err? Shall he
straight way be the Headespring of al Right, and shall all the treasures of
Wisdom, and Understanding be found in him, as it were laid up in stoare? Or,
if these things be not in him, can he geeue a right, and apt judgment of so
weighty matters? Or, if he be not hable to judge, would he have, that those
matters should be brought before him alone?

M. Hardinge.
To your how ifs, and what ifs I could sone make an answer by the contrary
What then? Should he therefore be above General Councelles?
And Sir, how if the Pope have seen al these things, the Scriptures, Fathers,
and Councels? What have you then to say? Is not your tale then at an end?
Were your matter good, and your self wise, you would nor so commonly use
that weak kirde of reasoning. But to a number of your how ifs, and what ifs,
for the readers sake, to put away al seruple, I give you this answer.

Gods wisdom (as the Scripture says) disposes al things sweetly, Sadly,
and sagely, and mutche to the purpose.
and in one instant forseeth the end, Sapien. 8.
and means that be necessary to the end. If he promise any man life
everlasting, withal he gives him grace also to do good deeds, Romans 8.
whereby to obtain the same. Whom he has glorified (says S. Paul) the^ he
has justified and called. So whereas he has by force of his prayer made to
the Father, promised to Peter, Matt. 16. Luc. 22.
and for the safety of the Church, Untruth, fond, and childishe: For Christ
prayed no more for Peter, the^ for others: nor ever made mention of Peter's
Successors.
to every Peter's Successor, that his faith shall not fail, and therefore has
willed him to confirm his brethren, that is, to remove al doubts and errors
from them: we are assured, he will give him such wit, diligence, learning,
and understanding, as this firmnes, and infallibility of faith, and
confirminge of brethren requires. Shall we stand in doubt whether that
happens in things supernatural, which we see to be in things natural, that
who gives the end, he gives also things, that perteine to the atteininge of
the end? If God would promise us abundance of corn for the next year to
come, O worthy, and grave reasons.
what were more folish, then to doubt, and say like to this Defender, how
if, and what if men will not til the ground, nor so we any seed? Doubtless if
they so we, they shall reepe if they sow not, neither shall they reepe. But
what? We may gather of the promise of God, that we shall have not only faier
and ceasonable wether, whereby the fruits of the earth may prove plentiful,
but also that the husbandmen shall emploie their endeavor, pains, and labor.
For the abundance of corn so promised shall not be given but to such, as til,
so we, and truail Even so whereas Christ has promised to the Untruth. For
Christ never entered into such couena^te with Peter's Successors.
Successors of Peter, firmnes of Faith, to the Apostles and their
Successors the spirit of Truth, and likewise to Councels gathered in his
name: we must persuade our selves, that nothing shall want necessary for the
controversies, touching faith, to be decided.

That you say of Liberius the Pope, is stark f^lse Untruth, plainly
reproved by S. Hierome.
He never favored the Arians. The most ye can find against him, is, that he
was compelled by the great persecution of Constantius the Emperor, to
subscribe to the Arians. Neither is that by the Aunciente writers of the
Ecclesiastical stories constantly affirmed but of the chief of them not spoken
of, where most occasion was, to signify it, if it had so ben: of some denied,
of some mentioned not as true, but as a false rumoure bruted abroad of him.
Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 15. Lib. de viris illustrib. in Chronicis.
By which rumor it seems S Hieromes Authority refused, as a man vvriting
rashely, he knevve not what.
S. Hierome was deceived, remaininge in the East, far from the places where
the Truth might more certainly be known. But were it true, that he
subscribed, as Peter denied Christ. yet being done The Pope denies Christ,
for lack of Charity, but not for lack of Faith.
for lack of Charity, and not by error in faith, well might that fact be
slanderous to the Church, but it was not a decre made in favor of the
Arians, neither to confirm that heresy.

That you report of Pope John the 22. is likewise most false. The worste that
Marsilius of Padua, and William Ockam Heretics wrote of him to flatter the
Emperor Lidouicus of Bauaria, is, that he had taught openly Untruth manifest
See the Answer.
(which also is referred to the time before he was Pope) Untruth. For he
held also, that the Souls of the wicked should not be pounisshed before the
Judgment.
that the souls of the just see not God until the day of judgment. That he
had a wicked, and a detestable opinion of the immortality of the soul, there
was no such his opinion, but it is your false slander, by which your wicked
and detestable malice imagined to deface the Church, and specially the
Authority of the holy See Apostolic. No story of any estimation mentions,
that he was of that first opinion, after he came to be Pope, much less that
he gave any definitive sentence of such matter. But contrariwise, Untruth,
contrary to that M Hardinge said immediately before. For then he held this
Error in the time of his Popedom.
when as he prepared him self to go to the definition of that question,
concerning the seeinge of God, which just souls have before the day of
judgment, as Benedictus theleuenth in sua extrauagante says, he was
prevented by death, so as he might not do it.

You belte Zosimus: Untruth manifestely reproved by the Counsel of Aphrica.
be corrupted not the Council of Nice: But signified to the Bishops of Aphrike
assembled in Council at Carthage, the Truth concerning the Canons of the
Nicene Council. The same may be proved by Julius the first, by the Epistle of
These be very vain, and childishe forgeries.
Athinasius, and other Bishops of Egypt, Thebats, and Libya, written to Marcus
the Pope of the Original of the, 72. Canons of the Nicene Council, that
remained in safe custody in the Church of Rome, subscribed with the hands of
the Fathers, that at the same Council were present And what credit was to be
given to the contrary informatio^ of only twenty Canons, that was returned
from the Bishops of Constantinople and Alexandria Untruth, without any
sauoure of vvitte, or learning. Why should M. Hardinge allege to foolish
Fables?
when Hereikes before had burned the Books, where the whole number was
contained, and left but those twenty, that al Books now commonly have?

If we should allege Camotensis, and Lyre, you would call them the black
guard, and set little by them. First she we us where they have that you allege
out of them. M Iuel alleges that of Canotensis in an other place. But where
it is, he keeps it to him self, and of him self it is likely it proceeded.
For his dealinge is such, as any false practice in respect of him, may seem
credible. Albeit what worshipful Doctor ye mean by Camotensis If ye know
him not, then may you best blame your Ignorance.
I know not: Peradventure ye mean Carnotensis, otherwise called Iuo I have
cause to guess, that so it should be. And yet four Books of sundry Printes
both English, and Latin so have. If there be any such, as I suppose there
is not, he is very obscure, nor worth the naminge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here ye say, And Sir, How if the Pope have seen al these things, the
Scriptures, the Fathers. the Councelles? Whether the Pope may err, or no.
What have you then to say? Is not your tale then at an end? No verily, M.
Hardinge. I would further desire God, to give him grace, to use them well, and
to his Glory. Notwithstanding your own Doctoures will soon put al these your
vvhattes, and vvhatifs, out of question. For, concerning the Popes great, and
high Learning, Alphons. contra Haeres. li. 1. ca. 4.
Alphonsus de Castro says, as he has benne alleged before, Constat, plures
Papas adeo illiteratos fuisse, vt Grammatica^ penitus ignorarent: It is
certainly known, that sundry Popes have benne so unskillful in learning,
that they never understood their Grammare. But, Christ has prayed for Peter,
and made sure promise, that his Faith should never fail. Therefore the Pope
is wise: the Pope is learned: the Pope is Catholic: the Pope cannot err. All this, and a great deal more, the Pope may claim only by Virtue of Christ's
prayer. Now therefore, if the Pope should err, or be in Heresy, he might sue
Christ in an Action of Couenante, and require him to perform his Promise.
Michae 3.
So says the Prophet Michaeas, Sacerdotes in mercede docebant, and Prophetae
in pecunia diuinabant: and super Dominum requieseebant, dicentes, Nonne est
Dominus in medio nostrum? The Priests taught the people for hiere: and the
Prophets Prophesied for moonie: and yet they rested them selves upon Gods
Promise, saieinge, And is not the Lord in the mids amongst us? Psalm. 118.
Hierem. 17.
But the Prophet says, Every man is a lier: Accursed is he, that trusts in
Man. Your own Doctor Alphonsus says, Omnis homo errare potest in Fide,
etiamsi Papa sit: Every man may err in Faith: yea, although he be the Pope.

How be it, Council. Tomo. 1. Tertull. Contra Praxeam.
that your Unlearned Reader may the better consider, how safely he may geeue
credit to your bare word, whether the Pope may be deceived in Faith, or
no, it may easily appear by these few Examples. Who so lists to seek,
may find more. pope Marcellinus offered up incense, and made Sacrifice unto
Diuelles. Beat. Rhenanus. Hieron. in praefatione de Viris illustribus.
Tertullian says, Episcopum Romanum agnoscentem iam Prophetias Montani,
Priscae, Maximillae, etc. The Bishop of Rome, well likinge now the Prophesies (
or Heresies) of Montanus, Prisca, and Maximilla, etc. Upon which words
Beatus Rhenanus notes thus, Episcopus Romanus Montanizat: The Bishop of Rome
favors the Heresy of Montanus. Pope Liberius was an Arian Heretic:
Council. Nicenum 2. Action. 7.
as hereafter it shall better appear. Pope Honorius was condemned for an
Heretic in two General Councelles. Council. Constantinop. 6. Acti. 13. Alpho^s
li. 1. ca 4 In Legenda Hilarij.
In the Council of Constantinople the words of his condemnation be alleged
thus: Synod. Romana. in Fasciculo rerum sciendarum impresso Coloniae. 1553.
Anathematizari curauimus Honorium, qui fuerat Papa Antiquae Romae: quia in
omnibus me^tem Sergij sequutus est, and impia dogmata confirmauit: We have
caused Honorius, yt late Pope of old Rome, to be accursed: for y^ in all
things he followed the mind of Sergius the Heretic, and confirmed his wicked
Doctrine. Alphonsus de Castro says, Anastasium Papam fauisse Nestorianis, qui
Historias legerit, non dubitat: Who so ever has readde ye stories, or course
of time, cannot doubt, but Pope Anastasius favored the Nestorian Heretics.
In the very Legende of Hilarious it is mentioned, that Pope Leo was an Arian
Heretic. In a Synod holden at Rome against Pope Hildebrande, it is written
thus, Incendio tradidimus Decreta eoru^ Heretica: We have burnte their
Heretical Decrees. Johannes Stella Venetus.
Pope Syluester. 2. was made Pope by Necromancie, and in recompense thereof,
Episto. Hulderici ad Nicolaum Papam.
promised him self both Body, and Soul unto the Devil. Huldericus y^ Bishop
of Augusta in Germany, expresses the Restrainte of Priests Marriage by these
words, Periculosum huius Haeresis Decretu^: The dangerous Decree of this
Heresy. Notwithstanding I have seen the same Epistle unto P. Nicolas, Erasm.
in Annotation. in Epist. ad Galat. Cap. 2. In faciem illi restiti.
together with an other Epistle to like purpose, written in old Veleme of
very Ancient Record, under the name of Volusianus the Bishop of Carthage? But
what need we to touch all the particulares? The Doctoures of the Great Schole
of Sorbona in Parise, have determined in their Articles, that S. Peter him
self erred in the Faith. The Council of Basile condemns Pope Eugenius by
these words: Eugenium contemptorem Sacrorum Canonum: Council. Basilien.
Sessione. 34.
Pacis, and Veritatis Ecclesiae Dei perturbatorem notorium: Vniuersalis
Ecclesiae Scandalizatorem: Simoniacum: Periurum: Incorrigibilem: Schismaticum:
a Fide deuium: Pertinacem Haereticum, etc. We condemn, and depose Pope
Eugenius, a despiser of the Holy Canons: a disturber of the Peace, and Unity
of the Church of God: a notorious offendoure of the whole Universal Church: a
Simoniste: a Foresworne man: a man Incorrigible: a Schismatique: a man fallen
from the Faith: and a willful Heretic. Of Pope John's Heresy, touching the
Immortality of the Soul, 24. Q. 3. Haeresis. In Conc. Consta^tien. in
Appendice, Ca. In primis. Quinimo idem Johan. Pp. 22. dixit, et pertinaciter
credidit, animam hominis cum Corpore humano mori, and extingui, ad instar
animalium brutorum.
we shall speak more hereafter. S. Hierome says, Qui Scripturam intelligit
aliter, quam sensus Spiritus Sancti flagitat, quo scripta est, licet ab
Ecclesia non recesserit, tamen Haereticus appellari potest: Who so ever
otherwise understands the Scriptures, then the sense of the Holy Ghost
requires, by whom they were written, ( as, it is most certain, the Pope in
infinite places both has done, and does) although he be not departed from
the Church, yet he may well be called an Heretic.

Now, if Idolaters, Montanistes, Arians, Monothelites, Nestorians, Deniers of
the Immortality, Simonistes, Sorcerers, Maineteiners of Filthiness, and other
Obstinate, and Wilful Heretics may err, then, what so ever M. Hardinge, and
his Fellows shall say to the contrary, it is easily seen, that the Pope may
err.

Verily the Council of Basile says thus, Multi e Summis Pontificibus in
Haereses, and Errores lapsi esse dicuntur, and leguntur: Certum est, Papam
Errare posse: Concilium saepe condemnauit, atque deposuit Papam, tam ratione
Fidei, quam Morum: It is reported, and readde, that many Popes have fallen into
Errors, and Heresies: It is certain, that the Pope may err: The Council
has oftentimes condemned, and removed y^ Pope, in respect, as well of his
Heresy in Faith, as of his lewdenesse in life. Council. Basilien. inter Epist.
Synodales. visellius. 24. Q. 1. A rectas In Glossa.
Visellus says, Summorum Pontificum quidam pestilenter errauerunt: Certain
of the Bishops of Rome have benne in Pestilente Heresies. Your own Gloss
says, Certum est, quod Papa Errare potest: It is certain, that y^ Pope may
err. An other of your Doctoures says, Interdum possit aliquis esse, qui esst
a Sede remouendus: vt si esset Foemina, vel Hereticus: sicut fuerunt aliqui:
and ob hoc non numerantur in Catalogo Paparum: The Pope may sommetimes be
such a one, as may seem worthy to be removed: Johan. De Parisijs, de
potesiat. Regia and Pap. Heruaeus de potesta. Pp. Cap. 18. Gerson, Anliceat
appellare a Pp. Hostien de Concessione Praebe^dae. Proposuit. Extra. de
Electione. Significasti. Abb.
as if he were a VVooman, or an Heretic: And certain such there have benne:
and therefore they be not reckened in ye Calendare of the Popes. An other
says, Aliqui Papae inuenti sunt flagitiosi, and Haeretici: Sum Popes have
benne found wicked men, and Heretics. An other says, Et Papa, and
Episcopi sunt deuiabiles a Fide: Both Popes, and Bishops may wander from the
Faith. An other says, Papa mandans, aliquid fieri, quod sonet in Haeresim,
turbat statum Ecclesiae, and non est ei parendum: The Pope commaundinge any
thing to be done, that sounds of Heresy, troubles the state of the
Church: and we may not obeie him. An other says, Papa potest else
Haereticus, and de Haeresi iudicari: The Pope may be an Heretic, and of
Heresy may be judged.

Al these were ye Popes undoubted fre^des. But now let us hear the Pope him
self. Pope Pius. 2. otherwise called Aeneas Syluius, says thus: Quid si
criminosus Papa contraria Fidei praedicet, Haereticisque Dogmatibus imbuat
Subditos? What if a notorious wicked Pope teach things contrary to the
Faith, and with Heretical Doctrine peruerte his Subjects?

I would not stand so long in so clear a case, were it not, that M. Harding,
all this notwithstanding, tells us so sadly, and bids us believe it upon
his warrante, that the Pope undoubtedly can never err. Stanislaus Hosius, ye
greatest stickler of that side, Hosius in Confessione Petricouion. Cap. 29.
Alphons. Contra Haeres. li. 1. ca. 4.
blussheth not to say thus, Numere^tur omnes, etc. Reckon al ye Popes, that
ever were, from Peter, until this Julius, that now is: There never sat in this
Chair any Arian, any Donatiste, any Pelagian, or any other, that professed any
manner Heresy. Yet nevertheless, your own Doctor Alphonsus says, Non
credo, aliquem esse adeo Impudentem Papae Assentatorem, vt ei tribuere hoc
velit, vt nec Errare, nec in Interpretatione Sacrarum Literarum hallucinari
possit: I believe, there (...) so shameless a Flatterer of the Pope, that will
grant him this Prerogative, that he can never err, nor be deceived in the
expoundinge of the Scriptures. Here, M. Hardinge, your own principal Doctoure
Alphonsus calls al them, y^ maintain your Doctrine, and say, as you say,
The shameless Flatterers of the Pope. Certainly, I think, it may safely be
said: If a man will take y^ view of al Christendom, he shall not find so many
Heretics in any one See, what so ever, as may be found in the Sea of Rome.
Franc. Petrarch. Epist. 20.
And, for y^ cause, perhaps. Fra^ciscus Petrarcha calls Rome Asylu^ Haeresum,
and Erroru^: The Sainctuarie of Errors, and Heresies: And in his Italian
Sonetres he calls it, The Schole of Error, and the Temple of Heresy.

As for Nicolaus Lyra, ye doubt of our dealinge, for that the Printer has
not quoted the place. Schola di Errori, e Tempio di Eresia.
It may please you therefore to peruse his notes upon the xvi. Chapter of S.
Mathevve. There emonge other ye shall find these words: Nicol. Lyra in
Matthae. Cap. 16.
Ex hoc patet, quo'd Ecclesia non consistit in hominibus, ratione Potestatis,
vel Dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, vel Saecularis: Quia multi principes, and Summi
Pontifices inuenti sunt apostatasse a Fide: Hereby it appears, that the
Church stands not in men, in consideration, either of their Power, or of
their Dignity, either Ecclesiastical, or Temporal. For many Princes, and
Popes have benne found to have straied from the Faith. Baldus de offic.
praesid. L. Saepe.
Therefore Baldus says, Cautela est, quo'd quis dicat, Credo, quod credit
Sancta Matter Ecclesia: non, quod credit Papa: It is to be marked, that a man
many say, I believe, that the Church believes: but not, I believe, that the
Pope believes. Ye say, Christ prayed for Peter: Ergo, the Pope cannot err.
But where was Christ's Prayer then, when so many Heretics were Popes in Rome?
Will ye say, that Christ prayed for Arians, for Nestorians, for Montanistes,
for Monothelites, for Simonistes, for Idolaters, for Necromancers, for
Poisoners, for Murderers, and for Dame Iohane too? Or, that by the virtue of
Christ's Prayer, none of these could ever Err? Or, y^ the Popes Erroures must
go for Truth, or his Heresies be holden as Right Religion, only because you
tell us, that, what so ever he say, He cannot Err? O M. Hardinge, I showed
you before, y^ Christ prayed, not only for Peter, but also for all the rest
of his Disciples. Origin says, as he is before alleged, Orig. in Matthew.
Tractat. 2.
Number audebimus dicere, quo'd aduersus vnum Petrum non praeualiturae sint Porrae
Inferorum: aduersus coeteros Apostolos praeualiturae sint? Shall we dare to
san^ yt the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against only Peter? and that ye
same Gates shall prevail against al other the Apostles? Cyprian. in Orationem
Dominicam.
S. Cyprian says, Rogabat pro delictis nostris, sicut iple declarat, cum dicit
ad Petrum: Ego Rogaui pro te, ne deficiat Fides tua: Christ prayed ( not for
Peter only, but) for our sins, as he him self declares, saieing unto
Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith should not fail. S. Augustine,
expou^ding the same words, Aug. De Verbis Domi. secund. Lucam Sern. 36
Chryso. in Matthae. Homil. 33.
says thus: Ego rogaui Patrem pro vobis, ne deficiat Fides vestra: I have
prayed ( not only for Peter, but also) for you, yt your Faith should not
fail. Chrysostom says, Omnis Christianus, qui suscipit Verbum Petri,
Thronus fit Petri: and petrus sedet in co: Every Christian man, that receives
the word of Peter, is made Peter's Chair: and Peter him self sits in him.

Otherwise, M. Hardinge, they are not al Peter's, that sit in place of Peter.
S. Ambrose says, Ambros. De Poeniten. Li. 1. Ca. ^. Hierony. in Sophontam.
Cap. 1. Pope Liberius.
Non habent Haereditatem Petri, qui Fidem Petri non habent: They have not
Peter's Enheritance, that have not the Faith of Peter.

S. Hierome says, Auferet Dominus nomina vanae gloriae, and admirationis
falsae, quae versantur in Ecclesia: God will take a way these names of vain
Glory, and false oste^tation, that are used in the Church.

Where we say, Pope Liberius favored the Arians, that, ye say, is stark
false. And yet, Hieron De Eccl. Scriptorib. In Fortunatiano.
ye know, S. Hierome is the reporter of that falsehed. But S. Hierome, ye
say, was deceived. In such Reverence, and Regard ye have the Doctoures,
and Learned Fathers of the Church. Ye believe them no further, then ye list.
I doubt not, but S. Hierome might better say, M. Hardinge is deceived.
Certainly? Alphonsus, your own Doctoure, says, De Liberio Papa, Constat
fuisse Arianum: Touching Pope Liberius, Alphons. Contra Haeres. li. 1. ca. 4.
Platy. in Liberio. Antonin. Par. 2. Tit. 10. ca. 4. ^ 5. Iouerius.
it is well known, he was an Arian. Platyna says, Liberius, vt quidam volunt,
in rebus omnibus sensit cum Haereticis: Pope Liberius, as sum say, was in all
points of one judgment with the (Arian) Heretics.

Antoninus the Archbishop of Florence, says, Liberius Papa consensit
praeceptis Augusti (Ariani) vt vna cum Haereticis Communicaret: Pope Liberius
so consented to the Commandments of the Arian Emperor, that he
communicated with the Heretics. Herman Gigas. Historta Longobardica.
So says louerius in the Abbriedgement of Councelles: So says Hermannus
Gigas: so says your very Legende, commonly called Historia Longobardica. Among
others, Erasmus says, Ariana Haeresis, and Romanum Pontifice^ inuoluit, Erasm.
in Annotationib. in Hieronym. Contra Lucifertan.
and ipsos Imperatores: The Aria^s Heresi entangled, and wrapped both Pope and
Emperor. By the Pope namely he means Liberius. Yet you doubt not to say,
S. Hierome was shamefully deceived, and wrote of ignorance, he knew not what.

Likewise, ye say, That we report of Pope John, is most false. Our report
is, Pope John.
That Pope John denied the Immortality of the Soul: not thoroughly, and
altogether, but only in that he said, Until the time of the Last Judgment,
the Soul lies still, as in a traunse, as doothe the body, without sense of
joy, or pain. Wherein he, not only withstoode the express Word of God,
but also unawares quite ouerthrewe his own whole Kingedome of Purgatory, which
is the greatest, and fairest of al his three Crowns. For what avail his
Pardo^nes, and Tre^talles, if the soul lie still a sleep until the day of
Judgment, and feel no pain? Verily, after the last Judgment, by common
consent, there shall be no Purgatory. Now, if there be no place of Purgatory,
neither before, nor after the last Judgment, then may we well conclude, that
absolutely, and without doubt there is no Purgatory. The first Authors of
this error, Augustine. Ad Quoduultdeu^. Gerson in Sermon Paschali. Copus
Dialog. 1. Page 50.
as S. Augustine says, were the Heretics called Arabici. Touching Pope
John's error, Gerson says thus, Johannes Papa. 22. decreuit, etc. Pope John.
22. decreed, that ye Souls of the wicked should not be pounished, before the
day of the last Judgment: which error the University of Parise
condemned for Heresy, and caused the Pope to recante. One of your own
Companions of Louaine says, Pope John keapte this error secretly to him
self, and never had the open consent of the Church of Rome. And, for better
excuse hereof, he says, Page 51.
Petrus, non Fidem Christi, sed Christum, salua Fide, negauit: Peter denied,
not the Faith of Christ, but, his Faith saved, he denied no more but Christ.
And so, by this pretty shifte of your Louanian Divinity, ye have both Christ
without Faith, and also Faith without Christ. Thus, M. Hardinge, it is
plain by your own Doctoures, and Fellows, y^ our report of Pope John is
neither a false sclaunder, as you say, Pope Zosimus.
nor proceeds of detestable, and wicked malice.

For the rest, ye say, we belie Pope Zosimus. He corrupted not the Council
of Nice. Artic 4. Diui. 6. Council. Aphric. Can. 101.
For trial whereof, I refer me self to my Former Reply unto your Answer.
Certainly, what so ever learned man will stand in denial hereof, he must
needs want color in his face. The fraud was notoriously found, and detected
to y^ whole world by y^ Ancient Learned Fathers. An Epistle forged under
thename of Athanasius. The Counsel of Nice corrupted.
Cyrillus, and Articus, y^ one being Patriarch of Alexandria, the other of
Antioche, and was reproved, and published by two hundred, and seventeen
Bishops, openly in the Council of Aphrica. The peeuishe forged Epistle, that
ye allege under the name of the Learned Godly Father Athanasius, The
fantastical burninge of the Canons of Nice without fire, with other your like
childishe vanities, scarcely meet for children to play withal, are likewise
answered.

One of your own Louanian company confesses, In the Reply. Artic. 4. Diui.
6.
that in the late Council of Florence, the Greeks there made open complainte,
that the Bishop of Rome had corrupted the Canons of the Council of Nice.
Alypius y^ Bishop of Tagasta^, speakinge hereof in the Council of Carthage,
says thus: Adhuc tamen me mouet, quoniam cum inspiceremus Graeca Exemplaria
huius Synodi Nicenae, Copus Page 78. Council. Florent. Sessione. 20.
ista ibi, nescio, qua ratione, minime inuenimus: Yet this thing moves me,
that when we examined, and conferred the Originalles of the Nicene Council,
written in Greek, I know not, Council. Carthaginen. 6. Cap. 4. Epist.
Bonifacij 2 ad Eulalium.
by what means, thiese things we found not there.

Yet Pope Bonifacius, to save the Credit of the Sea of Rome, was forced to
say, and publishe openly, that the said Alypius, and Aurelius the Bishop of
Carthage, and S. Augustine the Bishop of Hippo, and two hundred and fourteen
other Bishops, that had espied, and reveled this falsehedde, were al
enflamed, and leadde by the Devil. Copus, Page 93.
And one of your own sudden Doctoures of Louaine says, Haec omnia, tanquam
somnia, ta^quam fabulae, tanquam superflua, abolita, antiquata, calcata sunt:
Al these Decrees (of these Councelles, of Carthage, and Aphrica) are abolished,
and repealed, and trodden under foot, as Dreams, and Fables, and things
superfluous. This, M. Hardinge, is the weighinge of your Councelles. If they
like you, they are the express Voices of the Holy Ghost: If they like you
not, they are Dreams, and Fables, and things Superfluous.

Camotensis, Johan. Camotensis.
ye say, is sum woorshipful Doctor, such as by our own judgment, might
pass in ye Black guard. Yet was he a Bishop, M. Harding, in all respects far
better, the^ either your Leontius, or your Hippolytus, or your new found
Clemens, whom ye call the Apostles Felovve, or your vain fable of
Amphilochius. Ye would seem to find fault with the name: and think, we
should not have written, Camotensis, but rather, Iuo Carnotensis. Your gheasse
ye show us: but reason thereof ye show us none. Ye might as well have
said, Fulbertus Carnotensis, who being very mutche consumed, and spente with
sickness, as it is learnedly noted emonge other your Verities, for a
restoratiue, suckte our Ladies breaste, and by virtue thereof was made whole.
Ye might likewise have gheased, it had benne Io. Sarisburiensis, Hermann. Rid.
10. Sarisburien. in Polycratico. Corn. Agrippa, De vanit. Scientiarum.
otherwise called by sum, Rupertus Carnotensis. For he says, In Ecclesia
Romana sedent Scribae, and Pharisaei: In the Church of Rome sit the Scribes,
and the Phariseis. But in deed, this Writers name is Johannes Camotensis,
alleged by Cornelius Agrippa. His words be these: Angelis praecipiunt:
potestatem habent in Mortuos: Vim faciunt Scripturis, vt habeant Plenitudinem
Potestatis. Ipse Papa iam factus est intolerabilis. Eius pompam, and fastum
nullus Tyrannorum vnquam ae quauit. Legati Romanorum Pontificum sic bacchantur
in Prouincijs, acsi ad flagellandam Ecclesiam satan egressus sit a facie
Domini: They say their Commandments upon the Angels of God: They have
power upon the Dead: They wreast, and rack the Scriptures, that they may
have the Fullness of Power. The Pope him self is now becomme intolerable. No
Tyran was ever hable to match him in Pomp, and Pride. The Popes Legates keep
such revel in Kindomes, and Countries, as if Satan were sent abroad from
the face of the Lord, to scourge the Church. This is not your Iuo
Carnotensis: It is Johannes Camotensis: And this is his judgment of your
Church of Rome.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 1.
What will ye say, if the Popes Advocates, Abbates, and Bishops dissemble not
the matter, but show them selves open enemies to the Gospel, and, though they
see, yet will not see, but wrie the Scriptures, and witingly, and knowingly
corrupt, and countrefeite the Word of God, and foully, and wickedly apply
to the Pope, all the same things, which evidently, and properly be spoken of
the Person of christ only, nor by no means can be applied to any other?
Host. cap. Quanto.
And what though they say, The Pope is al, and above al? Or, Abbas Panor. de
Elect. ca. Venerabilis.
That the Pope can do asmutche, as christ can do: and, That one judgment
place, and one counsel House serves for the Pope, and for christ, both
together? Or, That the Pope is the same Light, Cornelius Episcopus, in
Council. Tridentino.
which should comme into the world: Which words christ spoke of him
self alone: and, That, who so is an evil doer, hates, and flies from that
Light? Or, that all the other Bishops have received of the Popes Fullness?

M. Hardinge.
You have never done with your what ifs. Your interpreter good Gentil woman,
that favors your pleasant Divinity so much, seems to be weary of it. her
self. For here she tourneth your, Quid si, into what will ye say, if. And
now Sir, do you demand of us, as Madame Interpreter makes you to speak,
what we will say. Forsooth, for this you allege against the Popes advocates,
Abbattes, and Bishops, we say, that the most part is very false, and
slanderous: somewhat may be taken for truth in a right sense. As for the
advocates, I mind not to be their Advocate, Hostiensis. Panormitanus.
neither have they need of my help. Let them answer one for an other:
Hostiensis for Abbot Panormitan, and he for Hostiensis. In good sooth were
those excellent men at this day living, I think verily, they would not do
you that honor, as to answer you them selves. Or if they would vouchesaue to
do so much, I doubt not, but they would make short work with you, and
take you up roundly for haltinge, with one word, Mentitis, dasshinge all your
allegations. Which word in your Divinity is a verb Commune.

Thus leauinge Hostiensis, and Panormitan to defense of the Canonistes,
tellinge you by the way that in questions of Divinity we stand not always
to their saieinges: Cornelius Episcopus Bitontinus.
we answer you on the behalf of Cornelius the Bishop of Bitonto in Italy,
(for him ye mean, I suppose, puttinge in your margent the name of Cornelius
only) that he never said, Untruth, blasphemouse, unadvisedly defended. For
the words be plain, papa Lux venit in Mundum.
the Pope is the Light, which should come into the world, in that sense, as
it is spoken of Christ. If you were hardely charged to show, where he said
it, or where be wrote it, * you would be found a lier, as in many other
points you are found already. That he never wrote it in any of his eloquent
Italian Sermons, set forth in Printe, I am assured. And more has he not set
forth. Now it remains, that you tell us where he says so, * or else
confess your slanderous lie.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Where ye say, M. Hardinge, as, I think, ye have learned of a child, that,
Mentiris, is a Verb Common, if ye hold on, as ye have begone, ye will
shortly alter y^ Property thereof to your self, and make it hencefoorthe a
verb Private. Touching Hostiensis, and Panormitane, I will say nothing, but
only refer you to the places.

As for Cornelius the Bishop of Bitonto, for as mutche as, contrary to your
Nature, ye plead ignorance, and say, ye cannot find the place, read
therefore these words in his Oration, openly pronounced in your late Chapter
at Tridente: Quis erit tam iniustus rerum aestimator, Council. Trident. sub.
Paulo. 3.
qui non dicat, Papa Lux venit in Mundum: sed dilexerunt homines Tenebras magis
quam Lucem. Omnis, qui male agit, Oration Cornelij Episcopi Bitontini.
odit Lucem: and non venit ad Lucem: vt non arguantur opera eius, quia mala
sunt: Who will so vniuslely weight things, but he will say, The Pope is the
Light, that is comme into the world? But men have loved darkness, more
then (the Pope, that is) the Light. Who so ever doothe evil, hates the
Light: and comes not to the Light: lest his works should be discoured,
for that they be evil.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 2.
Shortly, what though they make Decrees expressly against Gods Word,
and that not in hucker mucker, or covertly, but openly, and in the face of the
world: must it needs yet be Gospel straight, what so ever they say? Shall
these be Gods Holy Army? Or, will Christ be at hand among them there? Shall
the Holy Ghost flow in their tongues, or can they with truth say, We, and
the Holy Ghost have thought so?

M. Hardinge.
After a great meany of your foolish and false what ifs, you conclude
shortly, with What if, they make decrees expressly against Gods Word,
and that openly in the face of the World? Hereto we answer, requitinge your
what if, with an other what if, and say, What if the Learned and holy
Fathers, etc.

The Apology, Cap. 6. Division. 3.
In deed Peter Asotus, and his companion Hosius, stick not to affirm, Hosius
contra Brentium, Lib. 2.
that the same Council, wherein our Saueour Jesus christ was condemned to die,
had both the Sprite of Prophesieinge, and the Holy Ghost, and the Sprite of
Truth: and, that it was neither a false, nor a triflinge saieinge, when those
Bishops said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die: and, that
they, so saieinge, did light upon the very Truth of Judgment (for so be
Hosius words) and, that the same plainly was a just Decree, whereby they
pronounced, that Christ was worthy to die. This, me thinks, is strange,
that these men are not hable to speak for them selves, and to defend their
own cause, but they must also take part with Annas, and Caiphas. For, if
they will call that a lauful, and a good Council, wherein the Son of God was
most shamefully condemned to die, what Council will they then allow for false,
and naught? And yet (as al their Councelles, to say truth, commonly be)
necessity compelled them, to pronounce these things of the Council holden by
Annas, and Caiphas.

M. Hardinge.
Such dishonest toies better become Brentius, that shameless railinge
Heretic. Now to you, Sir Defender. You belie Hosius, as Brentius of whom you
borrowed this, belied the Reuerente Father Peter ae Soto. Either you have readen
the place of Hosius, or you have not. If you have not, then are you to blame,
to say so mutche evil, that you know not. If you have readen the place, then
is your fault plain malice, in puttinge that to Hosius, the contrary whereof
you find in the place by your self alleged by which you lead us, as it were
by the hand, to behold and consider your own dishonestie. How just cause
you have to reprehende Hosius, for that he wrote against Brentius in defense
of Petrus a Soto, touching the Council in which Christ was condemned by
Caiphas, it should best appear to him, that would read the whole place,
where Hosius treats that matter. The same would I here have rehearsed, to the
discoueringe of your false dealinge, and shameless lieing, were not the same
very long. The Sprite of Truth in Annas, and Caiphas.


First, this is the Truth, touching the whole A discrete, and a worthy
proctoure. The Acts were naught, and the sentence good. The Sentence was,
That Christ should die the death.
The Acts of those Priests of the Jews Synagog were wicked, and contrary to
Christ. * But their Sentence, though them selves were never so evil, was not
only true, but also to mankind most profitable. And S. John in his Gospel
wi^nesseth, it was the oracle of God. For when after long deliberation of the
Council, Caiphas the high Bishop and president of that Council, had
pronounced his sentence, whereunto all the rest almost gave their consent,
Joan. 19.
It is expedient for us, that one man die for the people, and not that all the
Nation perish: the Euangeliste thereto added his verdite, saying, This he
said, not of him self, but whereas he was high Bishop of that year, he
Prophesied. Therefore let this be the true conclusion of the whole matter. The
acts of that council were wicked, the sentence was true and good. Now Hosius
treats this matter so learnedly, and so substantially, as you can not truly
take any advantage of his words to reprehende him. He stateth him self upon
the Scripture, a good ground to stand upon. Which Scripture refers doubt
full, and hard questions to the Priests of the Leuiticall order. Of whom it
is said, Indicabunt tibi Iudicij Veritate^: This Truth of Judgment was,
That the Son of God was a Blahpsemer, and had de^^rued to die.
They shall show unto thee the Truth of Judgment. In this judgment, says
Hosius, though it were never so wicked, yet was the truth of judgment. How
that might be, there he proves it to Brentius by most manifest arguments.

Where ye impute to Hosius, to have said, that the same plainly was a just
decree, Untruth For thus said Caiphas: And his Judgment Hosius defends,
as true, and godly.
whereby they pronounced that Christ was worthy to die, that is your
slanderous lie, not Hosius saieinge. * For he says the clean contrary, and
that sundry times, that it was a wicked Council, and most unjust decree. God
forebidde any Christen man should say, that Christ was worthy to die.
Christ, by Hosius Judgment, was guilty of death.
He says, it might have benne truly pronounced by Caiphas, that he was gilty
of death. And there he shows how, very religiously, and wisely admonishinge
the reader, that he was most innocent, and deserved not to die. And thus, Sir,
you may see, we take not part with Annas, and Caiphas, as you rail, and yet
be able, God be thanked, to defend our true cause, and declare you to the
world to be false teachers. Therefore belie us no more.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Good Christian Reader, this whole matter concerns only the credit, and
certainetie of General Councelles. Sotus, and Hosius say, what so ever is
determined in Council, must be taken, as the undoubted Judgment, and Word
of God. Hereunto the Godly Learned Father, Johannes Brentius, replieth thus,
Councelles sommetimes have erred, and have utterly wanted the Sprite of God: as
it may appear by that in a Council the Son of God was condemned, and judged
to die the death. Hosius answeareth, When Annas, and Caiphas sat as
Presidentes in the Counsel, and Christ y^ Son of God, was by them condemned
to die, yet nevertheless y^ same Counsel had the assistance of the Holy
Ghost, and the undoubted Sprite of Truth. For, Hosius, Li. 2. contra Brentium.
speakinge of the same Council, he says thus, Vides, Brenti, quemadmodum non
defuerit Sacerdotio Leuitico Spiritus Propheticus, Spiritus Sanctus, Spiritus
Veritatis: Ye see, friend Brentius, how that the Leuitical Priesthood ( that
pronounced sentence of death against Christ) wanted not the Sprite of
Prophecy, the Holy Ghost, Pagi. 62. b.
the Sprite of Truth. Again he says, Ex quo tempore Primus Pare^s noster de
vento ligno gustauit, factus est Mortis Reus Christus Dei, etc. Nec falsum fuit
illud, Pagi. 63. a.
quod dixerunt, Nos legem habemus, and secundum Legem hanc debet mori: From the
tune, that our First Father tasted of the forebidden fruit Christ the Son
of God became guilty of death: Neither was it false, that the Jews said,
We have a Law, and according to that Law he ought to die. With this
Sprite, I trow, he was inspired, that wrote this Marginal Note upon your
Decrees, Iudaei mortaliter peccassent, Did. 13. Item. In Margin.
nisi Christum Crucifixissent: The jews had committed mortal sin, if they
had not nailed Christ unto the Cross. Again, Hosius says, Hosius contra
Brent. Page 63. b
Nulla esse potest tanta Pontificum improbitas, quae impedire queat, quo' minus
vera sit illa Dei Promissio, Qui indicabunt tibi Iudicij Veritatem: Be the
wickedness of Bishops never so great, it can never hinder, but that this
promise of God shall ever be true, The Bishops shall shevve thee the truth of
Judgment.

This therefore, M. Hardinge, is your Doctoures meaning: It is sufficient,
that Bishops only meet in Council. God will supply all the rest. What so
ever they determine, the Holy Ghost will assist them: they cannot err. All this
is as true, as that Hosius your Doctoure says, Annas, and Caiphas could not
err in pronouncinge Sentence of death against Christ.

But, for excuse hereof, sommewhat to salve a festry matter, ye tell us a long
tedious tale, without head, or foot: and that your Reader may think, ye
say somewhat, ye cry out alowde, Shameless railinge Heretics: We belie
Hosius: we belie Sotus: Our false dealinge: our shameless lieinge: we are
impudente, and continevve in lieinge. These, M. Hardinge, be the proufes, and
grounds of your Doctrine, and the most sauerie, and fairest Flowers in your
garlande.

The substance of your tale is this: The Acts of the Council, where Christ
was condemned, were lewd, and wicked: But the Sentence of death pronounced by
the Bishops against Christ, was just, and true. And thus by your dalliance
in dark words, and by your blind Distinction, bitweene Act, and Sentence,
ye seek shifts, to mock the world. Ye should plainly have told us,
what were these Sentences: and what were these Acts: and what great
difference ye can epsy bitweene Act, and Sentence: or, when ever ye
heard of Sentence in Judgment without Act: or, of perfect Act without
Sentence: or, how the Sentence of the Judge may be true, if the Act be
false: or, how the Act may be right, if the Sentence be wrong. For your
credites sake, leave these toies, M. Hardinge. Ye have used them over long.
They are too childishe for a child: they becomme not your gravity: they
deceive the simple.

In deed, I can easily believe, that neither Sotus, nor Hosius was ever so
wicked, to say, that Christ was rightly, and vvorthily done to death. How
be it, he, that says, The sentence of death, pronounced in Council against
Christ, was just, and true, seems in deed to say no less. The very
case, and course of your Doctrine undoubtedly forced them thus to say. For, if
al Cou^celles be good, and Holy, without exception, then must that also be a
good, and a Holy Council, that was assembled against God, and against his
Christ.

Hosius your Doctors, Hosius in Confessione Petricouien. Ca. 29.
to make the matter plain, says thus, Iudasne sit, an Petrus, an Paulus, Deus
attendi not vult: Sed solum hoc, quo'd sedet in Cathedra Petri: quo'd
Apostolus: quo'd Christi Legatus: quo'd Angelus est Domini exercituum: de cuius
ore Legem requirere iussus es. Hoc solum spectari vult. Si Judas est,
quandoquidem Apostolus est, nihil te moueat, quo'd Fur est: God will never have
thee consider, whether the Pope be a Judas, or a Peter, or a Paul. It is
sufficient, only that he sits in Peter's Chair: that he is an Apostle:
that he is christ's Embassadoure: that he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts:
from whose mouth thou art commounded to require the Law. This thing only
Christ would have thee to consider. Be it Judas: for as mutche as he is an
Apostle, let it not move thee, though he be a Thief.

But Caiphas said, It is good, that one man die for the people, lest all the
people perish. Ergo, say you, Caiphas had the Sprite of God. Alas, M.
Hardinge, although you little pass for your Divinity, yet why have you no more
regard unto your Logique? Every child knows, that this is a Paralogismus,
or a deceiteful kind of reasoninge, called Fallacia Accidentis. And, that ye
may the better epsy your oversight, Like as ye say, Caiphas prophesied
blindely, him self not understanding, what he said, Ergo, he had the Holy
Ghost:

Even so may ye say, Balaams Ass reproved his master, and spoke the
Truth, as Caiphas did. Ergo, Balaams Ass had the Holy Ghost. S. Paul
says, No man can say, The Lord Jesus, but in the Sprite of God. Hereof, by
your Logique, ye may reason thus: The Devil said unto Christ, I know, that
thou art Christ the Son of the Living God: 1. Corin. 12.
Ergo, the Devil had the Sprite of God.

It pitieth me, M. Hardinge, to see your folies. Although Caiphas unawares, and
against his will, by the enforcemente, and power of God, at one only time spoke
words of Truth, as did also Balaams Ass, and the Devil, yet it follows
not, that we should therefore at al times run to Caiphas, to seek the
Truth.

S, Augustine says, August. Epist. 58.
Quando Deus voluit, etiam mutum iumentum rationabiliter loquutum est. Nec
ideo' admoniti sunt homines, in deliberationibus suis, etiam Asinina expectare
Consilia: When it pleased God, Balaams Ass, being a doum be beast, was
hable to speak, as a man. Yet are not men therefore commanded, in all their
Consultations, and doubteful cases to seek Counsel of an Ass.

As for the Lies, Shames, and Sclaunders, ye would so liberally lay upon us,
it may please you, to take them freely home again. If ye be full freight, and
have stoare sufficient of your own, yet may you divide them emonge your
poor Louanian Brethren. It shall be a work of Supererogation. For yewisse,
they have of their own yenough already. To conclude, your whole drifte herein
is, to force your Reader, to have a good opinion of Annas, and Caiphas, that
condemned Christ, to die the death: for that, as Hosius says, they had the
Sprite of Prophecy, the Holy Ghost, and the Sprite of Truth: and therefore
could not err in their Judgment.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 1.
But will these men (I say) refourme us the Church, being themselves both
the Persons guilty, and the Judges to? Will they abate their own Ambition,
and their Pride? Will they overthrow their own causes, and geeue sentence
against the^ selves, that they must leave of to be unlearned Bishops,
Slowbellies, Heapers together of Benefices, takers upon them as Princes, and
Men of war? Will the Abbates, the Popes dear darlinges judge that Monk for
a Thief, which labors not for his living: and that it is against al
law, to suffer such a one to live, and to be found either in City, or in
Country, al of other men's charges? Or else, that a Monk ought to lie on the
ground, to live hardely with Herbs, and Peason, to study earnestly, to
Argue, to Pray, to Work with hand, and fully to bend him self, to come to
the Ministry of the Church? In faith, as soon will y^ Phariseis, and
Scribes repair again the Temple of God, and restore it unto us a House of
Prayer, in steed of a Den of Thieves.

M. Hardinge.
Ye leap with a light skippe from one thing to an other: neither dwell ye
long in any one point, but in lieinge.

But ye say, they be both the persons guilty, and the Judges also. Judges
doubtelesse they be. For their vocation is lawful, ye cannot disprove it.
Guilty also they be, we deny not: but whereof? Of frail living, not of false
teachinge. ( for commonly they teach nothing). And where? In the court of
conscience, Untruth. For their life is notorious to the world.
not in the court of man. Or if any of them be, both before this council,
and in this council godly orders have benne decreed for wholesome reformation.
Monks, Freeres, Nuns.


As for Monckes, ye may not look now, that either they get their living
only by their hands labor, or that they be bound to the hard discipline,
which Monks lived in, for twelve hundred years paste. Now be other days,
other manners. Such great austeritie is to be wondered at, and to be wisshed
for. But whether the Religious men of our time be to be compelled thereto, I
leave it to wise consideration. If it may be lawful to direct us in such
spiritual cases, by an old example of externe prudencie, me thinks the
discretion of Jacobs answer to his Brother Esau is worth to be thought on.
When ^sau courteously offered his brother Jacob recourninge from Mesopotamia
with all his train of householde and cattle, to go with him, and keep him
company, the rest of the journey that remained from the place of their first
meetinge: Jacob full mildely said, Sir, you know, if it like your Lordship,
Gene. 33.
that I have here with me tender babes, M. Hardinge likeneth his Monks to
droaues of Cattle.
ewes with lamb, * and Kine with calfe. If I ouerlabour them with fast
goeinge, my flocks will die all in a day. May it please your Lordship to go
before me your servant: I will follow after the flock fayer and soft, so as
I shall see my little ones able to bear it.

Like wise if there be not a discrete moderation used. but al Monckes be
rigorously driven to the ausieritie of life, they lived in of old time, in
this so great looseness of manners, specially the discipline of all religions
being so far slaked in comparison of the ancient seueritte: it is to be
feared, we shall rather see Cloisters foresaken ( which God grant), then a
Godly reformation procured ( which will never be).

In the end of this Paragraphe, ye show your self to despair of our
amendment. God give you grace so to do for your parts, as we may have good
cause to hope better of you. But whether we amend our faults, or other wise,
what pertains that to the ^^stification of your new Gospel, and to the
disproufe of the Catholic Faith by us defended? You k^^w, it is no good
argument a moribus ad doctrinam. Who would not hiss you and trampe you out
of schools, if ye made this fond reason: The Papis^es lives be fauliy, Ergo
their teachinge is false? To this head all the reasons of your Apology in
effect may be reduced: and they hold Per locum topicum noui Euangelij a malis
moribus. Here M. Hardinge compares the Popes, and his Bishops with the
Scr^b^s and Phariseis.
Does not Christ him self confute all such your feeble reasons, where he
sateth. Matthew. 23.
The Scribes, and Phariseis sit in the chair of Moses: what so ever they
say to you, do ye, but after their works do ye not?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Ye say, If your Monks, and Freeres should now be forced to keep the old
Discipline, and severity of their Fundations, they would rather break their
Closters, and leave al together. And therefore by a fit comparison, ye
resemble them to the heavy droaues of Jacobs cattle. Whereby ye seem
secretly to geeue us to imagine, that the Monks covvle is not always so holy
a wo^de, as is pretended.

S. Hierome, discribinge the life, and order of Monks in his time, says thus,
Nihil arrogant sibi de continentia supercilij. Hieronym. ad Marcellam, vt
commigret Bethlehem.
Humilitatis inter omnes contentio est. Quicunque nouissimus fuerit, hic primus
putatur In vest nulla discretio: nulla admiratio. Vicunque placuerit incedere,
nec deiractionis est, nec laudis leiunia neminem subleuant: nec defertur
inediae: nec moderata saturitas condemnatur. Suo Domino stat vnusquisque, aut
cadit. Nemo iudicat alterum, ne a Domino iudicetur: They brag not of their
Sole, or single life. Al contention is, who may be most humble. Who so ever
is last, he is coumpted first. There is neither difference, nor woonderinge
in Apparel. How so ever it pleases a man to go, he is neither sclaundered
for it, nor commended. Noman is euanced for his Fasting. Neither is abstinence
praised, nor sobre refreassinge condemned. Each man either stands, or falls
to his Lord. Noman judges other, least of the Lord he him self be Judged.

But, ye say, your Monks now adays are waxen nice, and cranke. Such
extreme rigor, and severity they may not bear.

Such Holy men they were, Sulpitius Seuerus in Chronico.
of whom Sulpitius Seuerus writes: Sedentes munera expectant, atque omne
vitae decus mercede corruptum habent: dum quasi venalem nalem prae se ferunt
sanctimoniam: These Freeres sit still, and look for money: and have all the
beauty of their life corrupted with hiere, Hieronym. Ad Eustochium de
Virginita. seruanda.
settinge their holiness out to sale. Of such Holy Nuns, S. Hierome
tells us, Post Coenam dubiam Apostolos somniant: After they have well filled
their bellies, they dream of the Apostles. In like sort, he writes of
certain Monks: Apud hos affectata sunt omnia: Laxae manicae: Caligae
follicantes: Vestis crassior: Crebra suspiria: Visitatio Virginu^: Detractio
Clericorum. Et, In eadem Episto. ad Eustochium.
si quando Dies Festus venerit, saturantur ad vomitum: Emonge these men, al
things are countrefeite: Their Wide sleeves: their great Boots: their
course Gown: their often sighs: their Visitinge of Virgins: their
backebitinge of Priests. And, if there comme a Holy Day, they eat, until
they be feign to perbreake. This, no doubt, is that Holiness, that Christ
brought into the world.

But your life, ye say, is no prejudice to your Faith: How so ever you
live, yet is your Doctrine right good, and Catholic. And that ye prove by
the words of Christ: Matthae. 23.
The Scribes, and Phariseis sit on Moses Chair. What so ever they say to
you, do ye: but after their works, do ye not. If this be the best
claim, ye can hold by, then suffer us, M. Hardinge, to say to you, as
Christ sommetime said to them, whom ye confess to be your Fathers: Woe
be unto you, ye scribes, In eod. Capite.
and Phariseis, ye Hypocrites. Ye devour, and raven up poor Widow
houses, under the color of long prayer. Outwardely ye seem Holy: But
within ye are full of Hypocrisy, and wickedness.

The Valentinian Heretics, in Old times, used in like case to say of them
selves: Irenaeus. li. 1. ca. ^
Quemadmodum aurum, in coeno depositum, non amittit decorem suum, ita dicunt,
semeripsos, in quibuscunque materialibus operibus sint, nihil noceri, neque
amittere Spiritualem Substantiam: As goulde, notwithstanding it be laid in
dounge, yet nevertheless keeps his beauty still, So they say of them selves,
in what so ever corruptible works they live, yet are they never the worse:
nor can they lose the Spiritual Substance of their Faith. August. De morib.
Manichae. li. 2. ca. 19. and 20.
S. Augustine says unto the Old Heretics, called the Manichees: Dicitis,
non oportere omnino quaeri quales sunt homines, qui vestram Sectam profitentur:
sed qualis sit ipsa Professio. Quid vobis fallacius, quid infidiosius, quid
malitiosius dici, aut inueniti potest? Ye say, we may not examine, what
men they be, that profess your Sect: but only, what is their Profession.
What thing can there be found more false, more deceiteful, more maliceous,
then you are?

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 2.
There have benne, I know, certain of their own companions, which have
found fault with many errors in the Church, as Pope Adrian, Aeneas Syluius,
Cardinal Poole, Pighius, and others, as is before said: they held afterward
their Council at Trident, in the self same place, where it is now appointed.
There assembled many Bishops, and Abbates, and others, whom it behooved, for
that matter. They were alone by them selves: what so ever they did, no body
gainesaide it: for they had quite shut out, and barred our side from al
manner of Assemblies: and there they sat six years, feeding folks with a
maruilous expectation of their doings. The first six Months, as though it
were greatly needeful, they made many Determinations of the Holy Trinity, of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: which were godly things in
deed, but not so necessary for that time. Let us see, in all that while, of so
many, so manifest, so often confessed by them, and so evident Errors, what
one Error have they amended? The Freedom of the Council of Trident.
From what kind of Idolatry have they reclaimed the people? What Superstition
have they taken away? What piece of their Tyranny, and Pomp have they
diminshed? As though all the world may not now see, that this is a
Conspiracy, and not a Council: and that these Bishops, whom the Pope has
now called together, be wholly sworn, and become bound, to bear him their
faithful allegiaunce, and will do no manner of thing, but that they perceive
pleases him, and healpeth to auance his Power, and as he will have it: Or, that
they reckon not of the number of men's voices, rather then of the weight, and
value of the same: Or, that Might, there does not oftentimes ouercomme Right.

M. Hardinge.
As you proceed, you talk your pleasure of the godly and learned Fathers
assembled in the late Council of Trent. By the way, as your manner is, your
drop lies. Of which, one is, that they had quite shut out, and barred
your side from al manner of assemblies: Untruth manifest, as hereafter at
shall appear.
which is a foul lie. That the first six months, they occupied them
selves with making many determinations of the holy Trinity, that also is an
other lie. For then the world had no need of any new determinations or
decrees, concerning the Trinity: what it shall have hereafter by occasion of
your chief Master John A sclaunderous Untruth. For M. Calvin was ever an
enemy unto the Arians.
Caluines Doctrine, it is more feared, then yet perceived.

Where ye would feign see of so many, so manifest, so often confessed by
themselfes, and so evident errors, what one error they have amended: they are
not like to satisfy your longinge. And yet they have taken order for the
amendment Untruth most impudente. For their own confessed, and known
Errors they never once touched.
of so many, as they know. Neither is any of the same about any point of our
faith, but about things of less weight. Your exaggeration of the terms so
many, so manifest, so often confessed by them, and so evident, reports in one
sentence your so many, so manifest, so often confuted by us, and so evident
lies. When you follow your hot humor, and ask, from what kind of Idolatry
the Fathers of the Tridentine Council have reclaimed the people, you go to
far. What so ever blasphemy ye utter in books and Sermons against the
adoration of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, we know no kind of
Idolatry used in the Church. Untruth, Confessed by M. Hardings own
Fellows. Read the Answer.
Neither is any Idolatry committed by us in worshippinge of Saints, in
praieinge to them, nor in the reverence we exhibit to their Images, as ye
bear the people in hand. O profounde Divinity.
As I can not w^l take a hear from your lieing bearde, so wish I, that I
could pluck malice from your blasphemous heart.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Whether the Learned men of our side were shut te out from the right, and
liberty of your Council, Part. 1. Diut. 19. Part 6. ca. 8. Diui. 1. Cicero,
In verrem action. 1. In Council Triden. Anno. 1562.
or no, it may soon appear, partly by that is already said: partly by that
shall be said hereafter. Verily, the Pope, for his Praemunire, will not suffer any
Bishop, to geeue voice in Council, on less he have him first solemnly sworn
to the Sea of Rome: and therefore they be al called his Creatures. So Cicero
says, Verres, when he had bribed, and spoiled the whole Ilelande of
Sicilia, thought it not good, to suffer his name, or any part of his dooinges
to comme in hazard, but only before a Judge, or Arbiter of his own.

Therefore, the French Kings Embassadoure, as it is said before, protested
thus openly even in your said Council, Minus legitima, minusque libera
dicuntur fuisse illa Concilia: qui aderant, ad voluntatem alterius semper
loquebantur: These Councelles are coumpted neither so free, nor so laweful, as
they ought to be: they that were there, spoke evermore to please an other: (
by which Other, he meante the the Pope). And for that cause, the Emperoures
Majesty, by his Embassadoure Hurtadus Mendoza solemnly protested against the
assembly of the same Council. His words he these: Ego Iacobus Hurtadus
Mendoza, uomine Pientissimi, and Inuictissimi Domini mei, Caroli Caesaris
Romani Imperatoris, ex illius speciali mandato, ac nomine totius Sacri Romani
Imperij, aliorumque Regnorum, ac Dominiorum suorum protestor, Anno. 1547.
Citatur ab Illyrico in Protestatione contra Council. Triden.
Nullam posse esse Authoritatem assetorum legatorum Sanctitatis Vestrae, and
little Episcoporu^, qui sunt Bononiae, Sanctitati vestrae maiori ex part
obnoxiorum, atque ab illius nutu omnino pendentium, vt in Religionis, and morum
Reformationis causa, etc. legem praescribant: I lamas Hurtado Mendoza, in the
name of ye most godly, and most mighty Prince my Lord Charles, the Roman
Emperor, by his special Commission, and in ye name of y^ whole Roman
Empiere, and al others his Realms, and Dominions do proteste, that the
Authority of the pretensed Legates of your holiness, and of such other
Bishops, as be now at Bononia, ( unto which town the Council of Trident
was then adiourned) for the most part bound unto your Holiness, and wholly
hanginge upon your beck, is of no force, namely to make Laws in cause of
Reformation of Religion, and manners.

And, Paralipomen^ Vrspergen. Aeneas Syluius ad Capitulum Moguntinum. Johan.
Sleidanus Anno. 1523. li. 4. Hoc enim esse colligare manus Pontificis.
that it may appear, in what obedience, and servile subjection, al Bishops
be unto the Pope, Aeneas Syluius, otherwise called Pope Pius the Second, says
thus, Quo'd si Episcopus Papae contradicat etiam vera loquendo, nihilominus
peccat contra Iufiorandum Papae praestitum: If a Bishop speak against the
Pope, yea, although he speak the truth, yet nevertheless he sins against
the Oath, that he has made unto the Pope. Therefore, where as at the late
Conference at Norenberg, it was required by the Princes, and States of
Germany, that al Bishops coming to the Council, might both be discharged
from their Oath made to the Pope, and also sworn to speak, and to promote
the Truth, the Popes Legate there made answer in great disdeigne, that it
might not so be: For that so the Popes hands should be bound. Hereby, M.
Hardinge, a blind man may easily see the form, and Freedom of your
Councelles. If the Bishops be Free to say the Truth, then is the Pope
leafte in Bondage.

Whether your Fathers, in the Chapter at Tridente, sat there six whole
Moonethes, debatinge, and reasoning about the Trinity, or no, of certain
knowledge, I cannot tell. But certainly, what thing else they did, either in all that time, Cassa^der in Co^sultatione de Co^munione subvtraque specie: In
Praefatione: Anno 1562.
or long after, you can hardely show us. Therefore, if they did not this, for
as mutche, as nothing else appears of their dooinges, we must imagine, they
sat mute in a Muminerie, and said nothing. Notwithstanding, Cassander
says, they bestowed one whole Summer in great, and holy Disputations about
meaner matters, then the Trinity: I mean, only about the Communion of the
Cup. Martinus Kemnitius says, They held Disputations there, and kept
great stir Seven whole Moonethes together, about the Justification of Faith
and Works: Marti. Remmitius in Examine Council Triden. page 638.
and yet in the end leaft it worse, then they found it. We say, You your
selves have espied mani disorders in your church of Rome, as it is plain by
your own Confessions. To reckon the^ al in particular, it were too long. I
have partly touched the^ heretofore. Albertus Pigghius confesses, there be
Abuses in your Mass: Alber. Pigghi. In controuer. De Missa Priuata. In Council.
Tridenti. An. 1562.
The French Kings Ambassador, at your lay Tridentine Chapter, says thus,
Vel Praefectorum Ecclesiae incuria, vel etiam (ne quid grauius dicam)
praepostera Pietate, irrepsisse in Ecclesiam res nonnullas Antiquatione,
Abrogatione, vel Moderatione dignas, fateamur necesse est: We must needs
confess, that either by the negligence of the Bishops, or by some disordered
opinion of Holiness (for I will say no more: he means falsehed, Picus Miran.
Ad Leonem Pp. 10. In Council. Lateran.
and Mockery, and Wiltal Avarice) certain things are brought into the
Church, worthy either to be put away, and abolished, or at least, to be
qualified.

Picus Mirandula besoughte Pope Leo. 10. to abate the vain Multitude of your
Ceremonies: to refourme your Prayers: and to cut of your Fables:

One of your own Louanian Fellows says, Copus Dialo. 1. page 115.
Even now a days, many good men mislike so many Appeals to Rome: Idolatry
in the Church of Rome.
Sum others find fault with your Pardonnes: Sum with your Simonie: some
with your Stevves: sum with your licenceous keepinge, and mainteininge of
Concubines.

I will not enlarge the matter further. These, and other like things are
confessed by your selves. Other greater matters I will not touch. For in cases
of Faith, for your credites sake, ye may grant no manner Error. For,
otherwise it might be thought, ye have neither the Faith, nor the Life of
Christian men.

Now therefore tell us, M. Hardinge, what one Abuse of all the Abuses in your
Mass: what one Disorder, or Deformity, of so many Disorders, and Deformities
in your Church: What one vain Ceremony: What one Childishe Fable: What
Appeal to Rome: What Simonie: What Pardonne: What Stevves: What Courteghianes:
What Concubines have ye reformed? If ye redress not those gross, and
sensible Abuses, that ye see with your eyes: how then will ye redress other
more secret matters, that perteine only to Faith, and be not seen? If ye will
not refourme your open Stevves, when will ye refourme the Church of God? But
ye are bold to assure us, that there is no kind of Idolatry, nor ever was
any in your whole Church of Rome. Notwithstanding, sum others of your
best Learned Friends have thought otherwise, as it shall appear.

First, Epiphani. li. 3. In Oratione, De Fide catholica. (...).
Epiphanius says of certain Persians, named Magusaei, Idola quidem
detestantur: tamen Idolis cultum exhibent: They abhor the sight of Idolles:
yet they fall down, and woorship Idolles. Again, he reports certain words
of S. Paul, as uttered of him by the Sprite of Prophecy, Erunt Mortuis Cultum
Diuinum praestantes, quemadmodum etiam. in Israel impie coluerunt: They shall
give godly honor unto dead men, like as also they did in Israel.

What opinion ye have had of Saints departed, I need not here to remember.
Cardinal Bembus, in an Epistle unto the Emperor Charles. 5. calls the
Blessed Virgin, Epiphani. contra Collyridian. Bembus in Epis. ad Carolum 5.
Lipomanus. Page in 289.
Dominam Deam nostram: Our Lady and Goddess. Your great Hercules, Lipomanus,
cries out in his marginal agony, Ecce quam potentissima est sancta Dei
Genitrix: and quomodo nullus saluus fieri possit nisi per eam: Behold, how
mighty is the holy Mother of God, and how noman may be saved, but by her.

It seems, this Error began to spring long sithence, even in the time
of the Old Fathers: and that hereof Faustus, the Heretic, took occasion
thus to charge the Catholics for the same. August. Contra Faustum. li. 20.
cap 21.
Idola vertistis in Martyrs: Ye have changed the Heathen Idolles into your
Martyrs. Further, ye say, the Reverence, that ye geeue unto Saints Images,
is no Idolatry. Yet Polydorus Vergilius, speaking hereof, says thus: Quia
Sacerdotes populum non docent, and vulgo ex vsu suo tacere putantur, Polydor.
Virgil. De Inuentoribus rerum. li. 6. cap. 13.
idcirco' eo' insaniae deuentum est, vt haec pars Pietatis parum differat ab
Impietare: For that the Priests iustructe not the people, and are thought to
hold their peace for gains sake, the matter is brought to such a dotage,
that this part of Devotion differs but little from Extreme Wickedness. And
Ludouicus Viues says, he sees no great difference bitweene many Christian
men woorshipping their Images, Ludo. Viues, in li. De Ciuita. Dei Catharinus
in Libello de Imaginibus.
and an Heathen man adouring his Idolles. Catharinus, one of your great
Doctors of Tridente, says thus: An licet Adorare Imagines ipsas, and illis
cultu^ praebere? Sunt qui hoc omnino' negent, and clament, esse Idololatriam.
Videntur autem non futilibus Argumentis moueri: nec absque Maiorum, imo' etiam
Scripturarum Authoritate: Whether is it lawful to Woorship the very Images, or
no? Sum men say, nay: and call it Idolatry. And they seem to be moved
with no light Arguments, nor without the Authority, as well of the Fathers, as
of the Scriptures.

Iacobus Nanclantus says, Jacob. Nanclantus. in Epist. ad Roma. cap. 1.
Non solum fatendum est, Fideles in Ecclesia Adorare coram Imagine, sed and
Adorare Imaginem, fine quo volueris scrupulo: quin and ^o illam venerari cultu,
quo and prototypon eius. Propter quod, si illud habet Adorari Latria, and illa
habet Adorari Latria: We must grant, that the Faithful people in the church,
do not only vvoorshippe before the Image, but also vvorshippe the Image it
self: and that without any manner scruple of Conscience, whatsoever. And
further, They vvorshippe the Image with the self same honor, vvherevvith
they vvoorshippe the thing it self, that is represented by the Image. As if
the thing it self be vvoorshipped with godly honor, then must the Image it
self likewise be vvoorshipped with godly honor. Hereto agrees one other
of your late Writers, Iacobus Payua. Jacob. Payua. li. 9 Fortalitiu^ Fidei.
Rob. Holcote. In librum Sapien. Lectione. 158.
And an other of your like Doctors says, This is the very use, and practice
of your Church of rome. But, Robertus Holcote says, This kind of
vvorshippinge, is plain Idolatry. Ye will say, Ye know the Image is no
God. And this, ye think, is excuse sufficient. But so likewise said the
Heathens of their Idols: and yet, as S. Augustine says, they were Idolaters
notwithstanding.

Ye will say, Augu. De Verb. Domi. Secundum Matt. Sermo 6. Augustine. Ad
Quodvult deum. Paul. Venet. li. 3. Cap. 27.
It is the Image of an Apostle of Christ, or of God him self: and therefore
it can be no Idolatry. But S. Augustine says, Marcellina colebat Imaginem
Jesus, and Pauli, and Homeri, and Pythagorae, Adorando, Incensumque ponendo:
Marcellina Woorshipped the Image of Jesus, and of Paul, and of Homere, and of
Pythagoras, by kneelinge unto them, and burninge Incense before them. Yet
nevertheless she was an Idolater. The Saracenes this date, make their
Sacrifices in Mount Mecha, not to Devils, or Heathen Gods: But to Abraham,
and Isaac, and S. Thomas: yet ace they not therefore excused of Idolatry.
Gregor. Nyssen. In Orat. funebri de Placilla.
Gregorius the Bishop of Nyssa, S. Basiles Brother, says thus: Qui Creaturam
Adorat, etsi in Nomine Christi id faciat, tamen Simulachrorum Cultor est,
Christi Nomen Simulachro imponens: He that woorshipper a Creature,
notwithstanding he do it in the Name of Christ, yet is he a woorshipper of
Images, as geeuing the name of Christ unto an Image. By these few, M.
Harding, it may soon appear, that your Churches are not void of al
Idolatry.

The Apology, Cap. 7. Division. 3.
And therefore we know, that diverse times many good men, and Catholic
Bishops did tarry at home, and would not come, when such Councelles were
called, wherein men so apparently labored to serve factions, and to take
parts, because they knew, they should but lose their travail, and do no
good, seeinge whereunto their enemies minds were so wholly bente. Athanasius
denied to comme, when he was called by the Emperor to his Council at
Caesaria, perceiuinge plainly he should but come among his enemies, which
deadly hated him. The same Athanasius, when he came afterward to the Council
at Syrmium, and foresawe what would be the end, by reason of the outrage, and
malice of his enemies, he packed up his carriage, and went away immediately.
John Chrysostom, although the Emperor Constantius, Histor. Tripari. lib. 10.
cap. 13. Eusebius. li 1. ca. 17.
commanded him by four sundry letters, to come to the Arians Council, yet
keapte he him self at home still. When Maximus, the Bishop of Jerusalem, sat
in the Council of Palestine, the Old Father Paphnutius took him by the hand,
and leadde him out at the doors, saieinge: It is not lavvful for us, to
confer of these matters with wicked men. The Bishops of the East would
not comme to the Syrmian Council, after they knew, Athanasius had gotten him
self thence again. Cyril called men back by letters from the Council of
them, which were named Patropassians. Paulinus, Bishop of Trier, and many
others more, refused to comme to the council at Millaine, when they understood,
what a stir, and rule Auxentius keapte there: for they saw, it was in vain
to go thither, where not reason, but faction should prevail: and where folk
contended, not for the Truth, and right judgment of the matter, but for
Partiality, and Favor.

And, al be it those Fathers had such maliceous and stiff necked enemies,
yet if they had comme, they should have had free speech at least in the
councelles.

M. Hardinge.
First, And why not as well, as M. Hard. may call the whole Church the
Popes Vineyarde? page 283. b. Or, all the Bishops through the world the Popes
Sheep? Page 308. b.
here I note the falsehed of the Lady enterpreter, who turns the Latin
speaking of Athanasius. Cum vocatus esset ab Imperatore ad Concilium
Caesariense: When he was called by the Emperor to his Council at Caesarca.
Where by addinge the word his, of her own, she or a worse shrewe under her
name, goes about to persuade, as Heretics do, that the Councels be to be
accounted the Councels of Temporal Princes, not of Bishops: and that they be
the heads of them, not the Bishop of Rome. This mutche to her. Now Sir to you
Defender. Al these examples serve you to no purpose. It is not denied you, but
that in cases, men may refuse to comme to Councels. Your examples declare,
that Catholic Bishops shunned to come unto the unlawful Councels of
Heretics. But ye holdinge strange opinions, condemned by the Church, deny
to comme to the lauful Councels of Catholic Bishops. When ye have proved us
to be Heretics, I mean the Fathers of the late Council, then may ye justly
allege the example of Athanasius, Chrysostom, Maximus, Paphnutius, Cyril,
Paulinu, and such other, for not coming to the Council.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Had you not had a shrewde sharp wit, M. Hardinge, and a very good likinge
of the same, ye could never have made your self so great sport of so small
a matter. The Lady Interpreter pitieth your case, and wishes you a little more
discretion: and would be mutche ashamed to answer your folies.

If the Council, we speak of, were not the Emperoures Council, then mutche
less was it the Popes Council. For in those days, as hereafter it shall be
declared more at large, Councelles were summoned by Emperoures, and not by
Popes. And what reason have you to show us, that the Council, being summoned by
the Emperor, might not be called the Emperor Council, as well, as the Pope,
being admitted, and allowed by y^ Emperor, might be called the Emperoures
Priest? Odoacer, In Council. Romano. 3. sub Symmacho. pp.
in the third Council of Rome, in the time of Pope Symmachus, said thus:
Miramur, praetermissis nobis, quicqua^ fuisse tentatu^: Cum etia^ Sacerdote
nostro superstite, nihil sine nobis debuisset affumi: We ma^ueile, that any
thing was attempted without our knowledge: for as mutche as, Our Priest ( he
means the Pope) being alive, nothing may be done without us. Liberat. cap.
11.
Liberatus says, Flauianus Episcopus Eutychem ad Concilium Suum venire
praecepit: Flauianus the Bishop ( not of Rome, but of Antioche) Commanded
Eutyches to comme to his Council. Hereafter, M. Harding, ye may take time, to
study for sum better quarrel. Surely this was very simple.

Ye excuse Athanasius, Chrysostomus, Maximus, Paphnutius, Hilarious, Cyrillus,
Paulinus, and other Learned Bishops, and holy Fathers, for not appearing at
General Councels: for y^ they were summoned to appear before Heretics. As
for the Fathers of your late Tridentine Chapter, what so ever they were, ye
must in any wise call them Catholics. Yet notwithstanding, ye may
remember, y^ by such good Catholics, as you be, the same holy Fathers,
Athanasius, Chrysostomus. Maximus, Hilarious contra Arianos, and Auxentium.
Paphnutius. Hilarious, Cyrillus, Paulinus, and others were called Heretics.
Hilarious says: Congreger nunc Auxentius, quas volet in me Synodos, and
Haereticum me, vt saepe iam fecit, publico titulo proscribat: Now let
Auxentius, the Arian Heretic, call what Councelles he list against me: and
by open Proclamations let him publishe me for an Heretic, Theod. li. 2. ca. 3.
as he has oftentimes done already. The Arian Heretics said, y^ the
Catholic Christians, whom they called Homousians, which in their meaning was
as mutche, as Heretics, were the cause of al division.

S. Hierome says unto Marcus, Hieronym. Ad Marcum Presbyterum Celedensem.
Haereticus sum: quid ad te? Quiesce: iam dictu^ est: I am an Heretic: What
is that to thee? Hold your peace: ye have told your tale. By like right,
Christ him self, by certain your Anciente Fathers, was called a Samaritane,
a Deceiuer of the people, and an Heretic. And, if it may please you soberly,
and advisedly to consider the matter, ye shall find throughout the whole Body of
the Scriptures, y^ no people made ever so great crakes of the Church, as
they, that were the deadly Enemies of the Church: nor none were so ready to
conde^ue others of Heresy, as they, that in deed were them selves the
greatest Heretics.

The Apology, Cap. 8. Division. 1.
But now, sithence none of us may be suffered so mutche as to sit, or once
to be seen in these men's meetinges, mutche less suffered to speak freely
our mind: and seeinge the Popes Legates, Patriarchs, Archebishoppes,
Bishops, and Abbates, al being conspired together, al linked together in
one kind of fault, and al bound by one oath, sit alone by them selves, and
have power alone to geeue their consent: and at last, when they have al done,
as though they had done nothing, bring al their opinions to be judged at the
will, and pleasure of the Pope, being but one man, to the end he may pronounce
his own sentence of him self, who ought rather to have answered to his
complainte: sithence also the same Ancient, and christian Liberty, which of
al right should specially be in christian councelles, is now utterly taken
away from the council: for these causes, I say, wise and good men ought not
to marvel at this day, though we do the like now, that, they see, was
done in times past in like case, of so many Fathers, and Catholic Bishops:
which is, though we choose rather to sit at home, and leave our whole cause to
God, then to iournei thither, where as we neither can have place, nor be hable
to do any good: where as we can obtain no audience: where as Princes
Ambassadors be but used as mockinge stocks: and where as also al we be
condemned already before trial: as though the matter were a forehande
dispatched, and agreed upon.

M. Hardinge.
If I wish, ye would take my counsel in good part, and listen unto it, A
sage piece of Counsel, and meet for a Doctor of Divinity.
as it stands you upon, I would advise you to call in all the books of your
Apology, and that with no less diligence, then ye went about to suppress
the Books of my answer to M. Iuelles challenge, at their first coming
abroad. That done, to cast bruites abroad, that the Apology was made and
counterfeited by some crafty Papist, to bring you quite out of credit with all
the world. So might ye perhaps in time recover some part of your lost
estimation. For whiles your Books be in men's hands, they shall be an evident
witness to all the world, of your shameless lieing.

The Book of the Canons, and Decrees of the Council, has benne printed
almost in all parts of Christendom. Look who list, in every Book he shall
find three several solemn Safeconductes, granted by the Council, and
confirmed by the three Popes, under whom the same was celebrated. Which
Safeconductes contain first in most ample wise full Liberty, Power,
Authority, and assurance for all and singular persons of al Germany, of what
degree, state, condition, or quality so ever they be, that would come to that
ecumenical and general Council, to confer, propounde, and treat with all
freedom, of al things to be treated there, and to the same Council freely,
and safely to come, there to tarry and abide, and to offer and put up articles,
so many as they thought good, as well in writing, as by word, and with the
Fathers, and others thereto chosen, to confer, and without any reproaches, or
vpbraidinges to dispute, also at their pleasure safely again from thence to
depart.

An extension to other Nations.
The same holy Council in the holy Ghost lavvefully assembled, the same
Legates de latere of the Sea Apostolic, being president in it, to al and
singular others, which have not communion with us in those matters, that be
of Faith, of what so ever Kingdoms, Nations, Provinces, Cities, and Places,
in which openly, and without punishment, is preached, or taught, or believed
the contrary of that, which the holy Roman Church holds, gives Faith
public or Safeconducte, under the same form, and the same words, with
which it is given to the Germans.

This being most true, as the better part of the world sees, and the Books,
and public instruments extant do witness, your excuse of your refusal to
come to the Council, as Bishops of other Christian Realms did, is found
false. A full discrete kind of Mockery. They offer men liberty to comme,
and speak: but reserve the whole Judgment to them selves.
Ye had al free liberty and security, granted unto you for that behalf, in
so ample and large manner, as man's wit could denise.

The second cause why ye came not, is, for that the Popes Legates,
Patriarchs, Archebishoppes. Bishops, and Abbotes, al being conspired
together, al lincked together in one kind of fault, and al bound in one
Oath, sit alone by them selves, and have power alone to give their consent.
What is here that should let you to join with others for procuring unity,
and peace in Christendom? Complain ye of the Fathers concord and agreeinge
together? They agree together against God, and his Christ.
That is a sign, the spirit of God, author of charity and unity, governs
their hearts. In that respect, they seem to comme together in the holy
Ghost. And in deed, had ye gone thither, your heresie^ had benne confuted,
your selves required to yield, and to conform you to the Catholic church or
else ye had benne anathematized, accursed, and condemned.

Your third cause is, for that the determinations, and decrees of the Council,
be referred to the Pope. To that we have answered before. The Pope confirms
al, being head over the Council. But who made your Pope a King? And when
vvil he geeue his Real Consent against him self?
Does not the Queen so pardy confirm your acts of Parliament, by giving her
Roial assent unto them at the end of the Parliament? What thing can be done
perfitly by a body without the head? And who might better confirm Councels,
then he, whose Faith in pronouncinge sentence, rightly and duly, Luke. ^2.
in matters concerning Faith, we are assured by Christ's prayer, to be
infallible?

Your fourth cause is, for as mutche as the Ancient, and Christian liberty,
which of right should specially be in Christian Councels, is now utterly taken
away. This cause is not different from your first.

Your fifth cause is a false lie, that Princes Ambassadors be used, but as
mocking stocks. They are allowed a place: but touching Judgment, they may
say nothing.
Truth it is, they have most honorable seats in all Councels. In this
Council they sat by the Legates. Every Ambassador has his place there
according to the degree of honor, the kingdoms, commonweals, states, and
Princes be of, from whence, and from whom he comes.

The sixth, and last cause ye allege for your not coming to the Council is,
for that ye be condemned already before trial, as though the matter were
aforehand dispatched and agreed upon. In deed Untruth, without any color of
honest shame.
your heresies for the more part be and have been condemned about a thousand
years past. And therefore they are not now to be called unto a new trial, as
though the Church until this day, had benne deceived, and so many Fathers
ouerseene. This notwithstanding, may ye well say, touching that point, your
matter is before hand dispatched, and agreed upon. For they know, what ye can
say, and see, that ye say nothing, but only stand wilfully and stubbornly
in your false opinions, and fleshly pleasures.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We never suppressed any of your Books, M. Hardinge, as you know: The Popes
Saueconducte.
but are very well contented, to see them so common, that as now, children may
play with them in the Streets. Your manifest Untruths: your Simple
Conclusions: your often Contrarieties to your self: your New found
Authoures: your Childishe Fables: your Discourteous Speeches: your Rackinge,
Corrupting, and Misceportinge of the Doctors therein couteined, have mutche
bewraied the miserable feebleness of your cause. Your Fellows have no cause,
greatly to glory in such healpes: no more then in other your like
Pamflettes, unmeet of any wise man to be answered. This was your only, and
special policy, in the time of your late Kingdom. Ye suppressed, and called
in, and burnt al our Writings, what so ever, yea, the very Testament, and
Gospel of Christ, truly translated into English, naming them Heretical, and
Unlawful Books. And, if any man had conceled, and keapte unto him self for
his comfort, any such Book written by any of our side, by most terrible,
and bloody Proclamations, ye made it Felony. So mutche ye despaired, and
doubted your own folies.

As for the Books of our Apology, they have been spreadde so far, and
printed so often, in Latin, in Italian, in French, in Duitche, in English,
that, as now, it were hard to suppress them. Touching the shameless
lieinge, wherewith ye charge us. we are well content to stand to the Judgment
of the wise. Certainly, it shameth us mutche, to see so little shame in your
Writings.

Ye say, The Pope gave out his Saueconducte to all the Princes, and Free
Cities, and to the whole people of Germany, to come to the Council, to
propounde, to dispute at their pleasure, and, when they should think it
good, freely, and safely to return, with a large Extension to other Nations,
as ye say, to like purpose.

But first, M. Hardinge, what safety can there be in his Saueconducte, that
is not hable to save him self? Pope Eugenius the fourth, Council. Basilien.
Session. 3. and 4.
if he had comme to the Council of Basile, as you know, had benne quite
deposed from his Popedom, al his Saueconductes notwithstanding. Pope John.
22. gave out as sure a Saueconducte for the Council of Constance, as Pope Pius
could divise any for your late Chapter of Tridente. Yet notwithstanding al his
Safety, Council. Constan. Session. 2. 3. 4.
being him self present in the Council, he was pulled out of Peter's Chair,
and deprived of his Dignity, and stripte out of his Pontificalibus, and turned
home again in his Minoribus, and allowed only to be a Cardinal, and no longer
to be a Pope. Ye may remember, Cicero says, Qui multorum Custodem se
profiteatur, eum sapientes sui primum capitis aiunt Custodem esse oportere:
Cicero. Philip. 12
Wise men say, Who so will take upon him to save others, ought first to save
him self.

And what credit may we geeue to your Saueconductes? Illyricus in Protest.
contra Council. Tridentin. page 77.
Iacobus Nachiantes. the Bishop of Chioca, for that he had simpred out one
half word of truth to the mislikinge of the Legates, was feign to run to
Rome, to crepe to the Popes feet, and to crave Pardonne. Ye shamefully
betrayed, and cruelly murdered John Husse, and Hieronymus Pragensis in your
Counsel of Co^stance. Neither y^ Protection of the Emperor, nor the Popes
Saueconducte was hable to save the^. No, your selves have already ruled y^ case
in your said Council. For thus ye say, Fides non est seruanda Hereticis: Ye
may hold no Faith unto them, that ye call Heretics. Such is the
Safety, Council. Constan. Session. 19.
and Liberty of your Councelles.

Ye say, Our Learned Men were allowed to Propounde, to Talk, to Dispute. What
should this avail? For ye reserved the Determination, and whole Judgment
to your selves: and your selves are sworn to submit yours whole Judgment
to the Pope, The Agreement of the Tride^tine Fathers.
and without his Judgment to Judge nothing. And how may this seem a Free
Council, were the guilty party shall be the Judge?

Ye say, There is an Extension granted to other Nations. All this is true in
deed. But this same Truth discrieth your open Mockery. For if ye had
seen the Instrumente, in the end thereof ye should have found your said
Extension restrained only to them, Io. Fabritius in Recusatione Council.
Triden. Johan Sleidanus li. 23. Anno 1552.
that would Repent, and Recante the Truth of God, which you call Error.

How be it, not long sithence, the Bishops of your said Chapter at
Tridente were very loathe to allow any tolerable Sauecondite at al, either to
the Germans, or to any others.

But ye say, if we had comme to your Chapter, we had benne Confounded.
No doubts, with your Fiery Arguments. For such proufes must healpe you,
when others fail.

As for the gaie stuff, that your Tridentine Fathers, after their Nature
Deliberation, as they call it, and more then twenty years study, have sent
us out lately into the world, it is too simple to mock Children.

We find no fault with you, M. Hardinge, for that your Bishops, and
Abbates agree together: but for that they agree together, as did Herod, and
Pilate, Matt. 22. and. 26.
the Sadduceis, and Phariseis against Christ.

Neither may you well vaunte your selves of your great agreementes. Ye may
remember, that two of the Principal Pillars of your Chapter, Petrus a Soto.
Catharinus.
Petrus a Soto, and Catharinus, dissented even there openly, and shamefully,
and that in great points of Religion: and wrote, the one mightily against
the other: the one charginge the other with Error, and Heresy, and could
never be reconciled.

Notwithstanding, against other points of Gods Truth, both they, and the
rest joined stoutely together. S. Augustine says, August. In Psalm. 36.
Concione. 2.
Tunc inter se concordant, quando in perniciem Iusti conspirant. Non quia se
amant, sed quia eum, qui amandus erat, simul oderunt: Then they agree
together, when they conspire to destroy the Just: not for that they them
selves love one an other: but for that they both hate him, whom they ought to
love. Of such kind of Consent S. Hierome, although to a far contrary
purpose, imagines Iouinian thus to say: Hieronym. In Apolo^etico ad
Domnionem.
Quo'd me damnant Episcopi, non est ratio, sed conspiratio. Nolo mihi ille, vel
ille respondeat, quorum me Authoritas opprimere potest, docere non potest: That
the Bishops condemn me, there is no Reason in their dooinges, but a
Conspiracy. I would not, that this man, or that man should answer me,
which may oppress me by their Authority, and cannot teach me.

Whether it be conueniente, that the Pope, being notoriously accused of
manifest corruption in Gods Religion, should nevertheless be the whole,
and only Judge of the same, and pronounce sentence of him self, let it be
indifferently considered by the wise.

The Law says, ff. De Iurisdict. omniu^ Iudicum.
Nemo sibi debet Ius Dicere: No man may be his own Judge. Such Authority,
ye say, Kings have in Parlamentes. Hereof I am not hable to dispute. The
Princes right many times passes by Composition: and therefore is not evermore
one in all places. How be it, the Pope is a Bishop, and not a King: and other
Bishops be not his Subjects, but his Brethren.

Your fourth Objection is but a Cauil. Ye say, ye mock not Princes
Ambassadors, but place them next unto your Legates: to sit still, I trow,
and to tell the Clock. For voice in Judgment ye allow them none. Thus ye
proine their Authority, and allow them Honor. Notwithstanding, whether the
Emperors, and Princes Ambassadors may sit so near to the Popes Legates,
or no, I can not tell. The placinge of Ambassadors.
Verily the Emperor him self may not be so bold, to press so near unto
the Pope. For thus it is ordered in your Book of Ceremonies: Aduertendum est,
quod locus, vbi sedet Imperator, non sit altior loco, vbi tenet pedes Pontifex:
Ceremoniarium Roman. li. 1. Sect. 14. cap. 2.
This is to be noted, that the place, where the Emperor sits (in General
Council) be no higher, then the place, where the Pope sets his feet. That
is to say, the Emperor must sit at the Popes footestoole, and no higher.

All the parts of our Religion, which you call Heresies, ye say, are
already condemned, just a thousand years paste. Here, M. Hardinge, it would
have woonne you sum good credit, if ye could have told us, in what General
Council, under what Emperor, by what Doctors, by what Catholic Learned
Fathers, these great Errors were thus condemned. As now, ye roaue only at
large, and feed your simple Reader with your empty Calendares, of
thousands of years, and speak at randonne. If it had benne true, ye
would better have showed it: but being most untrue, as you know it to be,
for very shame, ye should never have said it.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division 1. and 2.
Nevertheless we can bear patiently, and quietly our own private wrongs.
But wherefore do they shut out Christian Kings, and good Princes from their
Convocation? Why do they so discourteously, or with such spite leave them out,
and as though they were not, either Christian men, or else could not judge,
will not have them made acquainted with the causes of Christian Religion, nor
understand the state of their own Churches?

Or, if the said Kings, and Princes happen to entermeddle in such matters,
and take upon them to do, that they may do, that they be commanded to do,
and ought of duty to do, and the same things, that, we know, both David,
and Solomon, and other good Princes have done, that is, if they, whiles the
Pope, and his Prelates siugge, and sleep, or else mischeuously withstand them,
do bridle the Priests sensuality, and drive them to do their duty, and
keep them still to it: If they do overthrow Idolles, if they take away
Superstition, and set up again the true woorshipping of God, why do they by
and by make an outcrie upon them, that such Princes trouble al, and press by
violence into an other bodies office, and do therein wickedly, and
malepeartly? What Scripture has at any time forbidden a Christian Prince to
be made privy to such causes? Who, but themselves alone, made ever any
such Law?

M. Hardinge.
Untruth, Vain, and unadvised, Read the Answer.
Ye confound the offices of the Spiritual Governors, and Temporal
Magistrates. What Kings and Princes may do, what they be commanded to do,
and ought of duty to do: in Gods name let them do, and well may they so do,
Who is he, that gainesaithe? If by the pretensed example of David and Solomon,
ye Untruth. It is not our Doctririe But why embolden you the Pope, to
entermeddle with Princes Offices?
animate them to intermeddle with Bishoply offices, then beware they (say we)
that Gods vengeance light not upon them for such wicked presumption, which
lighted upon king Ozias, ^. Par. 26.
for the like offense.

Ye teach Princes to use violence against Priests, as though their faults
could not be redressed by the Your Prelates be as blamevvorthy, and as
negligente, as the Priests.
Prelates of the Clergy, of whom ye speak by spiteful surmise, as though God
had utterly withdrawn his holy spirit from them. But forasmuch as Christ
assisteth his Church always, and shall never fail in things necessary, it is
not to be doubted, but the Church shall ever be provided of sum good
Governors, so as, though sum slugge and sleep, yet sum other shall wake,
and diligently attend their charge. Priests have their Ecclesiastical
courts, where their defaultes, and offenses may duly, and Canonically be
punished: and the offenders, by Priestly discipline, be redressed. Neither is
it convenient for a King, to come into Priests consistories, Untruth,
reproved by the Ancient practice of the Church: as it shall appear
nor to call Priests before him, to his own seat of judgment.

So many as be necessary to minister, and perform those things, that
apperteine to the building up of Christ's Body the Church, until it comme to
his perfection, S. Paul reckeneth by name, in his Epistle to the Ephesians,
Ephe. 4.
saieing that Christ has to that end, placed in his Church, Mark, that
Popes, and Cardinals in this rank are not named.
sum Apostles, sum Prophets, sum Evangelists, sum Shepeherdes, and
teachers, Kings, and Princes be not there named, as they, who have their
propre rank. That the people be to be stirred by us, to more fervent devotion
to worship God, and sum perhaps, to be warned of sum cases of superstition,
we grant. But that any other manner or kind of woorshippinge of God, is
either by us, or by temporal Princes, to be set up in Christ's Church, that
we deny.

The B. of Sarisburie.
We Confound not these Offices, M. Hardinge, as ye best know: but rather
teach each man, carefully to attend his own Office. You, and your Fathers
have brought Confusion of Offices into the Church of God, in that yes have
made your Pope Heir Apparente unto the Empiere: and have armed him with all
manner Authority, Spiritual, and Temporal: and have geeuen him the right of
Both Swerdes.

For thus your own Pope Nicolas tells you stoutely in his own behalf,
Christus Petro, Did. 22. Omnes.
Aeternae vitae Clauigero, Terreni simul, and Coelestis Imperij iura co^misit:
Christ has committed unto Peter, the Keiebearer of Everlasting Life, the
right, as well of the Earthely, as of the Heavenly Empiere. Thus by your
Doctrine, Priestehoode, Kingdom, Popedom, Empiere, are al conueighed wholly
into one man's hands: and so, by your handlinge, one man is Priest, King,
Pope, and Emperor, al at once. This perhaps unto the wise, may seem to be
sum Confusion of Offices.

Touching that ye write of the rasshe attempt of King Ozias, ye seem not
to understand, neither out words, nor your own. For we teach not Princes,
to Offer up Incense in Sacrifice, 2. Paralip. 26.
as Ozias did: or by intrusion to thruste them selves into Bishops roumes: or
to Preach, or to Minister Sacraments, or to Bind, or to Loose: But only to
discharge their own Offices, and to do that duty, that David, Solomon,
Ezechias, Josias, and other Noble, and godly Kings did, and evermore was
lawful for the Prince to do. As for Right of Place, and Voice in Council, it
pertains no less to the Prince, then to the Pope: as hereafter it shall
better appear.

Ye say, Christ shall always assiste his Church: and shall evermore provide
her of good Governors. Thus, be your negligence, and careless slothfulness
never so great, be your lives never so loose: be you Doumbe Dogs, not
hable to bark, be you Lanternes without Light, be you Salt without sauoure,
yet ye evermore dream sweetly of Christ's Promise, and assure your selves
undoubtedly of his assistance: Even as he that sommetime said, Pan curer oues,
ouiumque magistros. Would God your Bishops would do their duty, and do
it faithfully: The world should have less cause to complain.
Notwithstanding, Christ is evermore mindeful of his promise. For when he
sees his Church defaced, and laid waste, he raises up faitheful
Magistrates, and godly Princes, not to do the Priests, or Bishops duties:
but to force the Priests, and Bishops, to do their duties.

But ye say, Christ has placed in his Church, sum Apostles, sum
Prophets, A Bishop co^uented before the Magistrate.
sum Evangelists, sum Pastoures, sum Teachers. Kings, ye say, and
Princes be not there named. Hereof ye conclude, Ergo, The Prince may not
cause the Abuses of his Church to be reformed: nor ouersee the Priests,
Ephesians. 4.
and Bishops, if they be negligente: nor force them to do their duties.

I marvel, M. Hardinge, where ye learned so mutche Logique. How frame ye
this Argument? In what Mood? In what Figure? With what cement can ye make
these seely loose parts to cleave together? It pitieth me to see your case.
For by like form of Argument, and with mutche more likelihoode of Reason,
we may turn the same against your self, and may say thus: Christ has
placed in his Church, sum Apostles, sum Prophets, sum Evangelists,
sum Pastoures, sum Teachers: The Pope, and his Cardinals are not here
named: Apostles they are not, For the Apostles were but twelve: Prophets they
are not, for they Prophecy nothing: Evangelists they be not, for they
Preach not: Pastors, or Feeders they are not, for they Feed not: Doctors,
or Teachers they are not, for they teach not. Ergo, by this Authority of S.
Paul, and by your own Argument, The Pope, and his Cardinals be utterly
excluded, and may not meddle with the charge of the Church of God.

In such good Substantial sort Pope Paulus. 3. not long sithence, reasoned
against the Emperor Charles the Fifthe, Epistola Pauli. 3. ad Carolum. 5.
En ego supra Pastores meos: Behold, says God Almighty, I will pounishe my
Priests, and Bishops, for their negligence, and wickedness: Ergo, says
Pope Paulus, The Prince, or Emperor may not pounishe them.

In this your manner of Reasoning, M. Hardinge, there are welneare as many
Errors, as there be words. The first is, Ignoratio Elenchi: which is the
grossest Fallax of all the rest: Secondly, ye conclude without either Mood,
or Figure: as a very child may easily see. Thirdely, ye Reason a Meris
Particularibus, or, A non Distributo ad Distributum. Fourthely, these words,
Rule, or Charge of the Church, are words of double, and doubteful meaning.
And therefore your Syllogismus, such as it is, must needs stand of Four
Terms: which error in Reasoninge is too simple for a child.

Touching these words, Rule, and Charge, which I said, are double, and
doubteful, notwithstanding we say, both the Prince, and the Bishop have
Charge of the Church, yet the Prince, and the Bishop have not both one kind
of Charge. The Bishops Charge is, to Preach, to Minister Sacraments, to
Order Priests, to Excommunicate, to Absolve etc. The Princes charge is, not to
do any of these things him self, in his own Person, but only to see,
that they be done, and orderly, and truly done by the Bishops.

I grant, there be many Special Privileges granted upon great, and just
considerations, of the mere favor of the Prince, that a Priest, being
found neligente, or otherwise offendinge in his Ministry, should be
conuented, and pounished, not by the Temporal, or Civil Magistrate, but by y^
discretion of the Bishop.

But, that a Prince, or Magistrate may not lawfully call a Priest before
him, to his own seat of Judgment, or that many Catholic, and Godly
Princes have not so done, and done it lawfully, it is most untrue. The
Emperor Justinian him self, who of al others most enlarged the Churches
Privileges, Cod. Li. 1. de Epis. and Clericis. Nullus.
says thus: Nullus Episcopus inuitus ad Ciuilem, vel Militarem Iudicem, in
qualibet causa produeatur, vel exhibeatur: nisi Princeps iubeat: Let no Bishop
be brought, or presented, against his will, before the Captain, or Civil
Judge, what so ever the cause be: Unless the Prince shall so command it. The
Emperor Martianus commands, if the cause be criminal, that the Bishop be
conuented before the Lieutenant: Vt coram Praeside conueniatur. Pope
Innocentius. 3. him self confesses, that the Pope may make a Lay man his
Delegate, to hear, Cod. De Epis. audi. Si qui ex consensu.
and determine in Priests Causes. The like hereof ye may find in your own
Gloss: Papa Laico delegat causam Spiritualem: The Pope commits the hearing
of a Spiritual matter unto a Lay man. Yea, further ye shall find even in the
Popes own Decrees, Cod. De Epis. and Clericis. Cum Clericis.
that the Pope has committed a Spiritual matter in a cause of Simonie, to be
heard, and ended by a VVooman: and that Brunichildis, being a VVooman, by
virtue of the Popes Commission, summoned a Bishop, to appear, and solemnly to
make his Purgation before her. De Maiorit. and Obedient. Ca. 2. Innocent.
Notwithstanding, in your Gloss upon the same it is noted thus: Fuit tamen hic
nimium Papaliter Dispensatum: The Pope was too Popelike in this Dispensation.

The Emperor Constantinus wrote thus unto the Bishops, Il. q. 1. Clericum
nullus.
y^ had benne at the Council of Tyrus: Cuncti quotquot Synodum Tyri
compleuistis, sine mora ad Pietatis nostrae castra properate: ac re ipsa, quam
sincere ac recte iudicaueritis, ostendatis: 2. qu. 5. Mennam. Socrates, Lib. 1.
Cap. 34.
Idque Coram me, quem sincerum esse Dei Ministrum, ne vos quidem negabitis: Al
ye, that have benne at the Council of Tyrus, comme without delaie unto our
Camp, and show me plainly, and without Color, how uprightly ye have dealte
in Judgment: and that even before me self, whom you cannot deny to be the
true Seruante of God.

Justinian the Emperor, in the Law, y^ he makes, touching the Public
Prayers of the Church, says thus: We command al Bishops and Priests,
to Minister the Holy Oblation, Authen. Constitutione. 123.
and the Prayer at the Holy Baptism, not under silence, but with such voice,
as may be heard of the Faitheful People: to the intent, that the hearts of
the hearers may be sturred to more devotion, etc. Afterward he adds
further, And let the Holy Priests understand, that, if they neglecte any of
these things, they shall make answer therefore at the dreadeful Judgment of
the Great God, and our Saueoure Jesus Christ. And yet nevertheless we
ourselves understanding the same, vvil not pass it over, nor leave it
vnpounished. Hereby we see, that Godly Princes may summone Bishops, to
appear before them, even in Causes Ecclesiastical, to receive such
pounishment, as they have deserved. Likewise the Emperor Constantinus, in his
Letters unto the People of Nicomedia, speakinge of the wilful Errors, and
Heresies of Priests, and Bishops, says thus: Illorum temeraria
praesumptio, Theodoretus Li. 1 Ca. 19. Augustine contra Epist Parmeniani. Li. 1.
Ca. 7.
mea, hoc est, Ministri Christi, manu coercebitur: Their rash attemptes shall be
repressed by my hand, that is to say, by the hand of Christ's Seruante. So
likewise says S. Augustine unto the Donatistes: An forte de Religione fas non
est vt dicat Imperator, vel quos miserit Imperator? Cur ergo ad Imperatorem
Legati vestri venerunt? It is not lawful, that the Emperors, or the Emperors
deputee should pronounce in a case of Religion? Wherefore then went your own
Embassadoures to the Emperor?

But what speak we of other Priests, and Inferior Bishops? The Popes them
selves, notwithstanding al their Universal Power, have submitted them selves,
and made their Purgations before Kings, and Emperor. Pope Liberius made his
humble appearance before the Emperor Constantius: Theodor. Lib. 2. Cap. 16.
Pope Sixtus was accused, and made his Purgation before the Emperor
Valentinian: Pope Leo 3. 2. Quaest. 4. Man. dastis.
being accused by Paschalis, and Campulus, pleaded his cause before Carolus
Magnus at Rome, not yet chosen Emperor. Pope John. 22. was accused of
Heresy, 2. Quae. 4. Auditum.
and forced to recante the same unto Philip the French King.

Pope Leo 4. Gerson in Sermon Paschali. 2. quae. 7. Nos si.
in this wise humbly submits him self unto the Judgment of Jews the
Emperor: Nos si incompetenter aliquid egimus, and in Subditis iustae Legis
tramitem non conseruauimus, vestro admissorum nostrorum cuncta volumus emendare
iudicio: If we have done any thing out of order, and if we have not
followed the right course of the Law over our Subjects, we vvil amend al our
faults by your Majesty's Judgment.

Your own Gloss says, Papa potest dare potestatem Imperatori, vt deponat
ipsum: and sese in omnibus illi subijcere: The Pope may geeue the Emperor
power to depose him self: Did. 63. In Synodo. In Gloss. Francis. Zarabella,
De schemate, and Council.
and may in all things submit him self unto him. To be short, Franciscus
Zarabella says, Papa accusari potest coram Imperatore de quolibet crimine
notorio: Et Imperator requirere potest a Papa rationem Fidei: The Pope may be
accused before the Emperor of any notorious crime: and the Emperor may
require the Pope to yield an accoumpte of his Faith.

Now therefore, M. Hardinge, I report me to your own indifferent judgment,
how true it is, y^ ye say, It is not convenient, for a King to call
Priests before him to his own Seat of Judgment. Verily, this Note ye
might have found Glosed in your own Decretalles: Extra. De Maiorita. and
Obedie. Ca. 2. In Margin.
Quaeritur, quis exemit Clericum de Jurisdiction Imperatoris, cum prius esset
illi subiectus? Dicit Laurentius, quod Papa de consensu Principis: A question
is moved, Who has exempted a Priest from the Jurisdiction of the Emperor,
whereas before he was subject to the Emperors Court? Laurence says, The
Pope has exempted him, by the Consent of the Prince. Ye see therefore, M.
Hardinge, your Priests, Abbates, and Bishops have their Privileges, and
Exemptions, not by any right of Gods Word, but only by the Popes Policy,
and by the Special favor of the Prince.

The Apology, Cap. 9. Division. 3.
They will say to this, I gheasse, Civil Princes have learned to govern a
Common Wealth, and to order matters of War: but they understand not the
secret Mysteries of Religion. If that be so, what is the Pope, I pray you, at
this day, other then a Monarch, or a Prince? Or, what be the Cardinals, who
must be none other now, but Princes, and Kings Sons? What else be the
Patriarchs, and, for the most part, the Archebishoppes, the Bishops, the
Abbates? What be they else at this present in the Popes Kingedome, but worldely
Princes, but Dukes, and Earls, gorgeously accompanied with bands of men,
whither so ever they go: Oftentimes also gayly araied with Chains, and
Collars of gold? They have at times too, certain Orname^tes by them selves,
as Crosses, Pillars, Hattes, Miters, and Palles: which Pomp the Ancient
Bishops, Chrysostom, Augustine, and Ambrose never had. Settinge these things
aside, what teach they? What say they? What do they? How live they? I say
not, as may become a Bishop, but as may become a Christian man? Is it so
great a matter, to have a vain title, and by changinge a garment only to
have the name of a Bishop?

M. Hardinge.
The duty of civil Princes consists in civil matters: the duty of
Bishops, in spiritual things. That serves to the preservation of men's
persons: this to the Salvation of their Souls. Every high Priest (says S.
Paul) that is taken from among men, Heb. 5.
is ordained for men in things apperteining to God. Untruth manifest. For
we move no Prince to take upon him a Bishops Office.
Re move temporal Princes, to take upon them the office of the Pope, and
Bishops, as though it were a thing so indifferent, and so common, that when
Bishops be negligent, temporal men may do their steed. But the reason,
which to this end ye make, is so slender, as I wene, few Princes that fear
God, will be greatly moved to ad^enter that thing so much subject and (...)
your reason is this, Bishops entangled in vvorldly affairs.
consider it who will: They of the Cleregie (...) Ergo, Temporal (...) may
bear the office of Bishops. (...) and your Antecedent is false. For although
Bishops (...) changinge a garment only, as you say* yet that defect in them
should. (...) late* as to Kings, and Queens, to do the Office of (...)
false for the Bishops of the Catholic Church, (...) ordinated, and
consecrated.

Though the Pope have a Princely dominion, (...) some other Bishops: of
christendom have Dukedomes and Erledomes, though they ride well (...) some of
them otherwise then becomes that vocation, do wear (...) them: though they
have other ornaments to their (...). which grieueth you much in comparison
of the Untruth. For this is our Reason: A Temporal, Prince, say you, may
not, meddle in Ecclesiastical causes: But the Pope, say we, is nothing else
but a Temporal Prince: Ergo, by your Judgment.
beggary of your married estate: yet all this imbarreth them (...) but that they
be Bishops.

Though they teach not, The Pope may not meddle in Ecclesiastical Causes.
though they say not, though they do not, though they live not, as becomes.
Bishops, neither as becomes even a Christen man, Untruth. Read the
Answer.
as you rail, all this notwithstanding, yet be they Bishops, though evil
Bishops. Neither for all this may it be latefull for (...) to take their
office upon them. O glorious Thraso. Then was the Apostles state mutch more
beggarly.
Judas was an Apostle till the rope choked him. Neither for his wickedness
might Streuen, Mathias, or any other of the Disciples of his own presumpt to
have smepte into his r^^me. Now is this is true, so is your railinge talk
false, which malice has stirred you to utter.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Oui^ again we tell le you, M. Hardinge, we confound not these Offices:
notwithstanding you so often, and so lewd^ly report us, to your own
discredit. This ^^linge as not ours, but S. B^^nardes.
Our Princes never took upon them, y^ Office of Bishops: But your Bishops
have taken upon them the Office of Princes. Of your Bishops it is written in
your own Councelles: The Pope by M Hardinge compared with Judas.
Ecce, iam pe^e nulla est acti^ (...), quam non Sacerdotes administrent:
Behold, there is now in a (...) no (...) affair, but Priests, and Bishops
^aue it in hand. Such Bishops be they, of whom S. Chrysostom writes
thus, (...). Citatur ab Illyrico inter (...) Verit. Page 121. Chrysostom. In
Matthew. Hom. 35. Hieronym. Contra
Qui non credunt Iudicium Dei, nec timen^, abutentes Primatu suo Ecclesiastico
saeculariter, conuertunt eum in saecularem: They that neither believe, nor
fear the Judgment of God, (...) their Ecclesiastical Dignity in Seculare
sort, turn the same into Seculare Dignity: Such Bishops they be, of
whom S. Hierome says thus, Ipsi sibi and Laici sunt, and Episcopi: They them
selves be to them selves both Laiemenne, and Bishops too. And again,
Adorant Dominum, and Melchom, qui Saecedo pariter, and Domino putant se posse
seruire, and duobus Dominis satisfacere, Deo, and Mammonae: qui Militantes
Christo, obligant sese negotijs Saecularibus, and candem Imaginem offerunt and
Deo, and Caesari: They woorship the Lord, and Melchom both together,
thinkinge, that they may serve both the Woorlde, Hieronym. in Sophontam ca^.
Council. Trident. Sub Paulo 3. Admonitio Legator.
and the Lord, and satisfy two Masters at once, God, and Mammon: who
fightinge under Christ, bind them selves to worldly affairs, and offer up
one Image both to God, and to Caesar.

If ye will believe none of these, yet your Popes own Legates, in your late
Chapter at Tridente, speakinge of your Priestelike Apparel, say thus: Nihil a
Laic^s, praeterquam in Vestis genere, ac ne in hoc quidem differunt: Our
Priests differ nothing from Laiemenne, sauinge only in Apparel: naie, in
deed they differ not so mutche from them, as in Apparel.

Ye say, Auentinus. Le. 3. De Ruperto, Christum omnium Deorum esse
pauperrimum.
your Bishops are gaie, and gallante, attended, and guarded with Princelike
routes, both behind, and before: And thereof ye make no small accoumpte,
specially in respect of our estate, which you call beggarly. In such
disdeigne the Heathens sommetime said, That Christ was the Beggerliest, and
poorest of all the Gods that were in Heaven. Ecclesiastical bravery in
Apparel.
How be it, our Bishoprikes, sauinge that certain of your Fathers have
shamefully spoiled them, are now, even as they were before. Certainly y^
Poorest Bishoprike in England, as it is reported, is better in revenues,
theli sum three of your Popes Italian Bishoprikes in the Kingedome of Naples.
How be it, the Gospel of Christ stands not by Richesse, but by Truth. In
comparison of the one, we make small reckeninge of the other.

Nevertheless, the Wise, and Godly have evermore found fault with the
Ecclesiastical Bravery of your Roman Cleregie. Bernard. in Cantica. Sermo.
33. Holcote in Sapien. Lectio. 23. Bernard in Cantica. Sermo. 77.
S. Bernarde says, Inde est, quem quotidie ides, Meretriceus Nitor:
Histrionicus habitus: Regius Apparatus. Inde Aurum in Frenis, in Sellis, in
Calcaribus: Therehence comes their Whoorelike Finenesse: their Plaiers
VVeede: their Princely Apparel. Therehence comes their Goulde in their
Bridles, in their Saddels, and in their Spurs. Again he says, Incedunt
nitidi, and ornati, circumamicti varietatibus, tanquam Sponsa procedens de
thalamo suo. Nonne si quempiam talium eminus procedentem aspexeris, Spo^sam
potids putabis, quam Sponsae Custodem? They go trimmely, and finely in their
colors, as if a Spouse should comme from her Chamber. If thou should
suddenly see one of them lettinge a far of, would thou not rather
think, it were a Spouse, then the keeper of the Spouse?

Pope Bonifacius 8. in a great Iubilee, Paralipomena. Vrspergen.
and in a Solemn Procession, went apparelled in the Emperors Roabes: and had
the Crown Emperial on his Head, and the Svverde of Majesty borne before
him, as an Emperor.

This Spiritual Ioilitie, M. Hardinge, likes you well. Notwithstanding S.
Bernarde says, Bernard. De Consideratione ad Eugenium, Lib. 1.
Daemonum magis, quam Ouium, sunt haec pascua. Scilicet, sic factitabat Petrus:
sic Paulus ludebat: These be Pastoures for Devils, not for Sheep. No doubt,
Even thus did Peter: even such pastime plaide S. Paul.

Ye tell us further, Though they teach not, though they say not, though
they do not, though they live not, as becomes Bishops, nor as becomes a
Christian man, yet be they Bishops not withstandinge. Hereat we will not
greatly strive. For so the VVoulfe, if he once geate a Sheepehooke, and a
Cloak, may be a Shephearde: and a Blindeman, if he geate once into the Watch
Tower, may be a Spy. But miserable are the Poor Sheep, that so are fed:
miserable is that Poor Castle, that so is watched.

S. Augustine says, 8. quae. 1. Qui Episcopatum. Augustine.
Episcopatus est nomen Operis, non Honoris: vt intelligat, se non esse
Episcopum, qui praeesse dilexerit, non prodesse: A Bishops Office is a name
of Labor, and not of Honor: that, who so loves to rule, and not to
profit, may understand him self to be no Bishop. Again he says of such
a one, 2. quae. 7. qui nec. Augustine.
Canis impudicus dicendus est magis, quam Episcopus: He ought rather to be
called a shameless Dog, then a Bishop.

As for that, ye say, Your Bishops be duly Ordinated, and consecrated, S.
Augustine replieth, August. contra Donatist. Li. 6.
Ipsum Characterem multi, and Lupi, and Lupis imprimunt: Touching the outward
Consecration of a Bishop, many geeue it to VVoulues, and be VVoulues them
selves.

S. Bernarde, Bernard. De Consideratione ad Eugeni. Li. 3.
speakinge of your Priests, and Bishops, says, Habitu Milites: quaestu
Clericos: actu neutros exhibent. Nam neque vt Milites, pugnant: neque vt
Clerici, Euangelizant. Cuius ergo Ordinis sunt? Cum vtriusque esse cupiunt,
vtrunque deserunt: vtrunque confundunt. Vnusquisque, inquit, in suo Ordine
resurget. In quo isti? An qui sine Ordine peccaueru^t, sine Ordine peribunt?
Vereor, no^ alibi Ordinandos, quam vbi nullus Ordo, sed sempiternus horror
inhabitat: In their apparel, they are Soldiers: in their gains, they are
Priests, and Bishop: but in effect, and in deed, they are neither of
both. For neither do they fight in the field, as do Soldiers: nor do
they preach, as Priests, and Bishops. Of whether Order therefore be they?
Whereas they would be of both Orders, they foresake both, and confound
both. S. Paul says, Every man shall rise again in his own Order. 1. Corinthians. 15.
But in what Order shall these rise? Whether, for as mutche, as they have finned
without Order, shall they perish without Order? I fear me, they shall be Ordered
none otherwhere, but where as is no Order, but disorder, and horroure
Everlasting.

Thus plainly speak your own Doctoures, touching your Cleregie: which
plainness it pleases you, M. Hardinge, to call false, and malicious
railinge.

The Apology, Cap. 10. Division. 1.
Surely, to have the principal stay, and effect of al matters committed wholly
to these men's hands, who neither know, nor will know these things, nor yet
set a jot by any poincte of Religion, save that, which concerns their
belly, and riot, and to have them alone sit as Judges, and to be set up as
overseers in the Watch tower, being no better then Blind Spies: of the other
side, to have a christian Prince of good understanding, and of a right
judgment, to stand still like a block, or a stake, not to be suffered,
neither to geeue his voice, nor to show his judgment, but only to wait,
what these men shall will, and command, as one, which had neither ears, nor
eyes, nor wit, nor heart, and, whatsoever they geeue in charge, to allow it
without exception, blindely fulfilling their Commandments, be they never so
blasphemous, and wicked, yea, although they command him quite to destroy al
Religion, and to Crucify again Christ him self, This surely, bisides that
it is proud, and spiteful, is also beyond al right, and reason, and not to be
endured of Christian, and wise Princes. For why, I pray you, may Caiphas, and
Annas understand these matters, and may not David, and Ezechias do the same?
Is it lauful for a Cardinal, being a man of war, and delitinge in Blood, to
have place in a Council: and is it not lauful for a Christian Emperor, or a
King?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Hereto M. Hardinge says nothing, but that he has oftentimes said before.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 1.
Verily, we grant no further Liberty to our Magistrates, then that we know
has both benne geeuen them by the Word of God, and also confirmed by the
Examples of the very best governed Common Wealths.

M. Hardinge.
If a man should ask you, where that word of God is, that makes a
temporal Prince Supreme head of that part of the Church, which he has
gournement of in all civil matters, I am sure you can bring forth Untruth.
For we allege many other places bisides, as it may sooue appear.
no other word of God. then that, wherein S. Peter, 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13.
and S. Paul wills al men to obeie the Superior powers, especially
Kings. Which thing was written to all Christian men, whiles they lived
under Heathen Princes, and Infidels, as Claudius Caesar, and Nero were, whom, I
suppose, ye will not say to have benne heads of the whole Church, as they
were Monarkes and Princes of the whole world. Supreme Head. Supreme
Gouernoure.
If then by those Scriptures which cannot prove Nero (being a Then cannot the
Pope be Head of the Church: For he has persecuted the Church as mutche, as
Nero.
persecutour of Christ's Church) to have been head of the same, you will now
prove, that other Princes are supreme heads of the Church: it seems that
either you make Nero head of the Church with them, or give more unto them,
then the word of God will bear. And as for examples of good commonweals,
show us but one since Christ's ascension, wherein before Luthers time, any
Emperor Christian, or other Prince did attribute that title unto him self:
and we will say, that, when you speak of commonweals in the plural number,
you make but one lie: but in case you show us no one common weal that has so
done, then you lie in the plural number. Yea further, if at this day the
commonweals in Christendom, not only that are Catholic, but the best also
of those, that are Lutherishe, and newfangled, do abhor from that strange,
and unheard title of Mutche a do about nothing: For our Prince has not this
Title. But Queen Marie had, and used the same title of Supreme Head: as many
ways it may be proved.
supreme head of the Church, why do you say, that ye have, either word of
God for it, or example of approved commonweals?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Concerning the title of Supreme Head of the Church, we need not to search
for Scriptures to excuse it. For, first, we divised it not: Secondly, we use
it not: Thirdly, our Princes at this present claim it not. Your Fathers, M.
Harding, first entitled that most Noble, and most Worthy Prince, King
Henry the Eighth, with that Unused, and Strange Style, as it may well be
thought, the rather to bring him into the talk, and sclaunder of the world.

How be it, that the Prince is the Highest Judge, and Gouernoure over al his
Subjects what so ever, as well Priests, as Lay men, without exception, it
is most euidente, by that has benne already said: by that shall be said
hereafter: by the whole course of the Scriptures: and by the undoubted practice
of the Primitive Church. Verily, the Prince, as it shall afterward better
appear, had Both the Tables of the Law of God evermore committed to his
charge: as well the First, that pertains to Religion, as also the Second,
that pertains to Civil Gouernemente.

But now, M. Hardinge, if a man would ask you, by what Word of God your
Priests, and Bishops have exempted them selves from ye Judgment, and
Government of their Princes: Or, by what Word of God the Princes hand is
restreined more from his Cleregie, then from other his Subjects: or, by what
Word of God, ye would stablishe Two Supreme Gouernoures in one Realm, I
marvel, in what Scriptures ye would seek to find it. Your own Doctoures,
and Glosers say, as it is before alleged: Extra. De maiorita. and obedien. Ca.
2. In margi.
Quaeritur, quis exemit Clericum de Jurisdiction Imperatoris, cum prius esset
illi Subiectus? Dicit Laurentius, quod Papa de consensu Principis: Question is
moved, who has exempted the Priest from the Jurisdiction of the Emperor,
whereas before he was his Subject? Laure^tius says (not the Word of God,
but) the Pope exempted him, by the Consent of the Prince.

Further, M. Hardinge, we beseech you, by what Word of God can your Pope
claim him self, to be the Head of the Universal Church of God? Where is it
recorded? Where is it written? In what part of the Testamente, New or Old?
In what Law? In what Prophet? In what Epistle? In what Gospel? Where is his
Headship? Where is his Universal Power? If ye can find it, then may ye
show it: If it cannot be found, then should ye not say it. As for that
you, and other your Fellows have alleged before, for proof hereof, it is so
childish, and so weak, that, I think, ye cannot now comme again with the
same, without blusshinge.

Touching the Right, that we say, belongs unto al Christian Princes, it
has benne invested, Epist Eleutherij. Citatur inter Leges Edwardi Primi.
and planted in them from the beginning. For, to leave other Authorities of
the Scriptures, Pope Eleutherius him self wrote thus unto Lucius, sommetime
King of this Realm of England: Vos estis Vicarius Dei in Regno, iuxta
Prophetam Regium: You are Gods Vicare within your own Realm, according to
the Prophet David.

Paul the Bishop of Apamea, writes thus unto the Emperor Justinian, in a
cause mere Ecclesiastical, touching Religion: Transtulit ipsum Dominus, vt
Plenitudinem directionis vestrae custodiret Serenitati: Quintae Synodi Act io.
1 pijssimo.
Our Lord has taken Pope Agapetus away, that he might leave the Fullness of
order ( concerning these Heretics, Dioscorus, and Eutyches) unto your
Majesty.

Tertullian says, Tertullian. Ad Scapulam.
Colimus Imperatorem, vt hominem a Deo Secundum, Solo Deo Minorem: We Woorship
the Emperor, as a man next unto God, and inferioure only unto God.

And, nothwithstanding the name of Head of the Church belong peculiarely,
and only unto Christ, as his only Right, and Enheritance (for as the Church
is the Body, so Christ is the Head) yet may the same sommetimes also be
applied in sober meaning, and good sense, not only unto Princes, but also unto
others, far inferior unto Princes. Chrysostom says, Videntur mihi istae
mulieres Caput fuisse Ecclesiae, Chryso. in Epist. ad Phili. Hom. 13 A Wooman
Head of the Church. Chrysosto. ad Populum Antioch. Homil. 2.
quae illic erat: It seems unto me, that these vveemen were the Head of
the Church, that was at Philippi. Likewise again, speaking of the Emperor,
he says thus: Laesus est, qui non habet parem vllum super terram, Summitas,
and Caput omnium super terram hominum: We have offended him, that in the
Earth has no peer, the Top, and the Head of al men in the World. If
he were the Head of al men, then was he the Head, not only of Bishops,
and Cardinals, but also of the Pope him self: Unless the Pope were no man.

To conclude, our Princes need no more to claim their Lawful Authority, and
Emperial Right, by y^ Example of Nero, whereof ye have moved mutche untimely,
and wanton talk, then your Pope needs to claim his Usurped, and Colored
Power, by the Examples of Annas, and Caiphas.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 2.
For besides that, a Christian Prince has the charge of Both Tables committed
to him by God, to the end he may understand, that, not Temporal matters
only, but also Religious, and Ecclesiastical Causes perteine to his office,
etc.

M. Hardinge.
You will prove that Ecclesiastical causes perteine to a Kings of fice, because
he has the charge of both tables. If you mean that a King is bound to keep
both tables of the law, so is also every private man. And yet, as no private
man is supreme head of the Church by kepinge them, so neither the King is
proved thereby the A grave disputer. Ye conclude against that, that is not
avouched.
supreme head. If you mean that the King ought to see others to keep both
tables of the law: that may he do, either in appointinge temporal pains for
the transgressors of them, or in executinge the said pains upon the
transgressors. But as he cannot excommunicate any man for not apperinge, when
he is called, so can he not judge al causes of the law. For if a man sin
only in his heart, as for example, in murder, or aduoutrie: the King cannot
have to do with him. And yet the true supreme head of the Church shall have to
do with him. For that malicious and sinful thought Untruth, fond, and
manifest, and leadinge directely to desperation.
shall never be foregeuen, except the party come to be absolved of their
Successors, to whom Christ said, Johan. 20.
whose sins ye forgive* they are forgeuen: and whose sins ye retain, they
are retained. To commit murder in heart, is a sin, and it is retained until
it be forgeuen. Untruth joined with blasphemy. Read the Answer.
Neither can it be forgeuen. until he that is Judge, by the keie of discretion,
perceive that it is to be forgeuen. Which he cannot know, until it be
confessed with a contrite heart, by him who only knows it, and is bound to
tell it, for absolutions sake. If then there be a judge, who can see the law
kept in an higher point, and beyond the reach of the King, surely the King
shall not be supreme head* since an other is more like to God, then he. A^ who is
judge of the inward conscience, whereunto no King reaches, Matthew. 16.
but A fond folly. For this Keie is geeuen no more to the Pope, then to any
other Simple Priest.
only the minister of Christ* who is the spiritual King, and has given the
keys of his Kingdom to his minister.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, ye roa^e, and wander without a mark, and reply to that,
that was not spoken. I marvel, whereof ye can spinne your self such idle
talk. For we neither call our Princes the Heads of the Church of Christ:
(it was your Fathers invention, and not ours) nor say we, They have Power,
either to Excommunicate, or to Bind, or to Loose: nor have we leisure to make
such vain Conclusians.

Thus we say, the Prince is put in trust, as well with the First, as with
the Second Table of the Law of God: that is to say, as well with Religion,
and with Temporal Gouernemente: not only to keep, and perform the contents
of Both Tables, in his own Person (for so mutche every private man is bound
to do) but also to see, that al others his Subjects, as well Priests, as
Laiemenne, each man in his calling, do dewly keep them. This is it, that no
Private man is hable to do. August. in Epist. 50. Ad Bonifac.
Therefore S. Augustine says, In hoc seruiunt Domino Reges, in quantum sunt
Reges, cum ea faciunt ad seruiendum illi, quae non possunt facere, nisi Reges:
Herein Kings serve the Lord, in that they be Kings, when they do those
things to serve him, that noman can do, but only Kings. We say not, the
Prince is bound to do the Bishops deutie: And therefore it is the greatter
sol^e of your part, M. Hardinge, to obiecte it so often. Wise men use not so
to adventure their words in vain. But thus we say, The Prince to bound to
see the Bishops to do their deuties.

But what meante you, so far out of season, to talk so fondly of your Privy
Confessions, of Bindinge, and Loosinge, and Power of Keys? For, as it is
said before, we say not, that Princes may, either Bind, or Loose: or
Minister Sacraments: or Preach the Gospel: or sit down, and Hear
Confessions. Therefore with all this great adoo, ye foine only at your own
shadow, and hit nothing.

Ye say full discretely, If a man sin only in his heart, the King cannot
have to do with him, for that be cannot enter, to know his secrets. Here, I
beseech you, M. Hardinge, what entrance has the Pope, to know the secrets
of the Heart? Perhaps ye will say, the Pope may know all the world by
Confession. But S. Augustine says, Quid mihi est cum hominibus, August.
Confess. Lib. 10. Cap. 3.
vt audiant Confessiones meas, etc. Vnde sciunt, cum a me ipso de me ipso
audiunt, an verum dica^: qua^doquidem nemo scit hominu^ quid agatur in homine,
nisi Spiritus hominis, qui in ipso est: What have I to do with these men, that
they should hear my Confessions, etc. How know they, when they hear me
report of me self, whether I say true, or no? For noman knows, what is in
man, but the Sprite of man, Aug. in Psalm. 126
that is within him. Again he says unto the people, Intrantes vos, and
exeuntes possumus videre. Vsqueadeo autem non videmus, quid cogitetis in
cordibus vestris, vt neque quid agaris in domibus vestris videre possimus: We
may see you coming in, and goeinge forth. But we are so far from seeinge
the thoughts of your hearts, that we cannot see, what you do at home in your
houses. Likewise again he says, Aug. in Psalm. 127
Quid singulorum quorumque modo conscientiae dixerint, ad aures meas, quia homo
sum, peruenire non potuit. Ille, qui Absens est praesentia Corporis, sed
Praesens est Vigore Maiestatis, audiuit vos: What every of your Consciences
has said, it could not enter into my ears, for that I am but a Mortal man.
Notwithstanding, Christ, that is Absente, as touching the Presence of his
Body, but present by the Power of his Majesty, has heard you well. It is,
not the Pope, but God only, that tries the reins, and searches the heart.

Yet ye say, the True Supreme Head of the Church shall have to do with him,
that sins only secretly in his heart: For that malicious, and sinful
thought, say you, shall never be foregeuen, except the party comme to be
Absolved of their Successors, to whom Christ said, VVhoes sins ye
foregeue, etc. This, M. Hardinge, is the Supreme Folly of al others Folies. For
first, where ever heard you, that the Pope would lonce vouchesaue to Hear
Confessions? And, if he would, yet by yours own Doctoures Judgment, the
Pope has no more Power to Bind, and to Loose, then any other Poor Simple
Priest. As I have showed you before, Alphonsus de Castro says, Alphons. De
Haeresib. Lib. 2. De Absolutione. Origin. in Matthae. Tractat. 1.
Quando Absoluit Simplex Sacerdos, tantum Absoluit de Culpa, sicut Papa: When a
Simple Priest Absolueth, he Absolueth as mutche, touching the fault, as if
it were the Pope him self. Origin says, Quae sequuntur, velut ad Petrum
dicta, sunt omnium communia, etc. Quod si nos idem loquimur, quod Petrus
loquutus est, efficimur Petrus: The words, that follow, as spoken unto Peter,
are common unto al. If we speak the saine, that Peter spoke, then are we
made Peter. Even in the Popes own Gloss upon his Decretalles it is noted thus,
In necessitate Laicus potest and Audire Confessiones, and Absoluere: In case of
necessity a Laieman may both hear Confessions, Extra. De of fic. Iudicis
Ordina. Pastoralis. In Gloss.
and also give Absolution. Yet will ye not say, that every Laieman is Peter's
Successoure.

To what purpose then serves all this your vain talk, M. Hardinge, The true
Supreme Head of the Church shall have to do with him, that sins only in
his heart? For every Simple Priest, having the keie of Gods Word, enters
into the heart, and has to do with the same, as well, and as mutche, as the
Pope: and in respect of being Judge of y^ Conscience, is above Kings, and
Princes, nolesse then he.

But, where ye say, The malicious, and sinful thought shall never be forgeuen,
except the party comme to be Absolved of their Successors, to whom Christ
said, whoes sins ye foregeue, etc. this Doctrine is not only strange and
false, but also full of Desperation. Your own Gratian says, De poenit. Did. 1
Quis aliquado.
Latentia peccata non probantur necessario Sacerdoti confite^da: It is not
proved ( by any sufficient Authority either of Scriptures, or of Doctors)
that Secret Sins are of necessity to be uttered in Confession unto the
Priest. Again he says, De poenit. Dis. 1. Conuertimin^. In eodem Cap.
Datur intelligi, quod etiam ore tacente, veniam consequi possumus: It is given
us to understand, that we may obtain pardone, although we utter nothing
with our Mouth. And again, Non Sacerdotali iudicio, sed largitate Diuinae
Gratiae peccator emendatur: The Sinner is cleansed, not by the Judgment of
the Priest, but by the abundance of Gods Grace. De poenit. Dis. 1 Omnis qui.
Again he says, Confessio Sacerdoti offertur in signum veniae, non in causam
Remissionis accipiendae: Confession is made unto the Priest, in token of
Foregeuenesse already obtained: not as a cause of Foregeuenesse to be obtained.
Your very Gloss says, De poenit. Dis. 5. In poeniten. In Glossa.
Apud Graecos Confessio non est necessaria: quia non emanauit ad illos Traditio
talis: Among the Christians in Graecia Confession of Sins is not necessary:
for that this Tradition never came emonge them. Yet, M. Hardinge, I trow, ye
will not say, but their sins may be foregeuen.

Certainly Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. De Co^fess. and poenit.
Solus te Deus confitentem videat: Let God only see thee making the Confession
of thy Sins.

It was very mutche therefore, M. Hardinge, for you, so assuredly, and so
precisely to say, that sins can never be foregeuen without your Privy
Confession: and specially thereby to prove the Universal Headeship of the Pope.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 3.
Bisides also, that God by his Prophets often, and earnestly commands the
King, to cut down the Groves: to break down the Images, and Aultars of
Idols: and to Write out the Book of the Law for him self: The Prince
judges in Ecclesiastical causes.
and bisides that, the Prophet Esaias says, a King ought to be a Patron,
and a Nurse of the Church, etc.

M. Hardinge.
Your second argument for the Ecclesiastical Power of Kings is, because God
bad them to cut down superstitious groves, and overthrow idols: The King is
the Priests Executioner.
as though this were not an office of executinge a commandment, rather then
of decreeinge any thing. The Authority to discern an image of Christ from an
idol of the devil, belongs to them, who know, that an image is a name of
art, which is of God: an idol is a name of false woorshippinge, which is of
the Devil. So that an image is godly: and idol deuilishe. When the Priest
has judged this, or that, to be an idol, or when it is evident, that so it is,
then the king shall do well to break it down. O Vanity of Vanities: Aaron the
Bishop set up the Golden Calfe, and cried unto the people, This is thy God.
But Moses the Civil Magistrate, or Prince, brake it down.
But if the King will break down the image of Christ, when the Priest
tells him it is a godly representation, and no idol: then the King does
more then his office requires: And shall not only not prove his supremacy,
but also shall incur danger to be rejected of God, 1. Reg. 28.
as King Saul was, when he despised to keep the commandment of Samuel the
high Priest.

Whereas you allege for a Kings Ecclesiastical Power, that he was commanded
to write out the Book of the law for him self: why left ye out that, which
follows there immediately, accipiens exemplar a Sacerdotibus Leuiticae tribus?
Deuteronomy. 17.
The King must write out a Book of the Deuteronomie: but the example thereof
he must receive of the Priests that be of the tribe of Leut. If in spiritual
matters the King were above the Priests. Full discretely. As though Kings had
not Officers, to keep their Records.
why had he not the Kepinge of the Law in his own hands? Why must he take
it of the Priests? why did not rather the Priests come to him, since the
inferior takes al his right of the superior? If the Priests must give the
holy scripture unto the King, then verily must he take such as they give
him, and with such meaning, as they give unto it. So that if you had not
Untruth. For we have falsified no part hereof: as it shall appear.
falsefied the meaning of Gods word by leauinge out half the sentence, this
place had proved against you. It is to be weyed to what end a King is
required to have, and to read that holy Book. Verily not to take upon him the
part of a judge in causes of Religion: but as there it is expressed, to
the intent he learn to fear his Lord God, Deuteronomy. 17.
and keep his words, and ceremomonies in the law commanded, and that his
heart be not lifted up into pride, above his brethren, etc. Here M. Hard.
would feign say sommevvhat if he vviste what it were. Read the Answer.
I omit, that you read, Librum legis, whereas the Church reads
Deuteronomium: * it were too long to enter into that disputation. The book of
the law, signifies the whole law: the Deuteronomie is but one of the five
books.

Where Esaie calls a King a Patron of the Church, I have not found. But
were it he called him so, it betokens, that he should defend the Church
from worldly ennimies, as in repellinge the Turks, in expellinge Heretics,
and such like Kingely acts. Which proves no spiritual supremacy, but
under God a fealty, and serviceable power. I find where Esaie says, Et erunt
Reges nutricij tui, and Reginae nutrices tuae. Cap. 49.
Kings shall be thy fosterers, and Queen's thy nourses. But not every nourse, or
fosterer is above him, who is nourished. By this pretty Conclusion, the King is
the Servant: and the Priest is the Master.
A faitheful servant oftentimes fostereth the master. Yet is he not above his
master. Besides, S. Hierome understands the Kings, whom Esaie names, to be
the Apostles: according to which sense, it makes nothing to the purpose it
is alleged for.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Al Christian Princes are mutche beholden to you, M. Harding: ye make them so
like to Polyphemus y^ Giante. after his eyes were stricken out: that is to say,
to a man mighty in body, and great in boanes: but stark blind, and no way
hable to guide him self. A King, ye say, may not take upon him, to Judge,
or Pronounce in matters of Religion, be they never so clear: but only must
hearken, and be ready to execute, what so ever shall be thought good, and
commanded by your Bishops: as if he were only your Bishops man. So says
your Holy Father Pope Bonifacius. 8. Gladius Materialis exercendus est manu
Regum, De Mayor. and Obedien. Vnam Sanctam.
and Militum: Sed ad nutum, and patientram Sacerdotis: The Material, or
Temporal Sword must be used by the hand of Kings, The Prince judges in
Ecclesiastical causes.
and Soldiers: but at the beck, and sufferance of the Priest: By which
Priest he means the Pope.

But David says, Now, ye Kings, have understanding: Be learned, ye, that
judge the Earth. Psalm. 2.
Good Kings have oftentimes reformed Religion, and have lawfully controlled,
and corrected, and deposed idle, and wicked Bishops: as before, in place
conueniente, Authen. Constitu. 123. (...).
it is largely proved. The Emperor Justinian threateneth, if the Bishop
offended in saieing the public service, or in the Ministration of the
Sacraments, that then he him self would use his Authority over him, and see
him pounished. Franciscus Zarabella says, that for any crime notorious, the
Emperor may summone the Pope, to appear before his Majesty, and may
require him, to yield a reckening of his Faith. And yet will ye say, The
Emperor is still the Popes man, Fancis. Zarabell. De Schemate, and Council.
and may judge nothing in Causes of Religion without him?

The King, ye say, is not hable to Judge, whether an Idol be an Idol, or
no, but by the leadinge, and teachinge of the Priest. So well ye wish al
Christian Princes were instructed, that they should not be hable, either to
see, or to speak without you. But, what if you Priests say, as it has often
happened, God is an Idol, and an Idol is God? Esai 5. Actor. 19. Johan. 18.
Light is Darkness: and Darkness is Light? what if they say, Great is
Diana the Goddess of Ephesus? What if they condemn the innocente, and say,
as they smometime said of Christ, Unless this man were a malefactoure, we
would never have brought him to thy hand? Yet must the Prince nevertheless
draw his Sword, and strike, when, and whom so ever the Priest bids: and
blindely execute his wicked will? M. Hardinge, Page 302 a. M. Hardinge. Page 192
a. Page 192. b.
In deed, M. Hardinge, you say precisely: If the matter decreed be Spiritual,
and apperteininge to Faith, the Prince ought to obeie without question, or
grudge Likewise again ye say, It shall be yenough for you, to do, as the
Successoures of Peter bid you to do. Christ now requires of you, not to
obeie Peter, and Paul: but to obeie him, that sits in their Chair: What
so ever he say, True, or false. For this, no doubt, must be your meaning.

The King was bound to write out the Book of the Law. This, ye say,
proves not the Kings Superiority over the Priests. No verily, M. Hardinge:
Neither was it alleged by us to that purpose. Nevertheless, hereby it
appears, that God would have the King to be learned in his Laws.

But the King must receive the Book of the Priest, and of none other:
Therefore, say you, the Priest is above the King. Me thinks, M. Hardinge,
even for your credites sake, ye should look better to your Logique. For what
avails the delivery of a Book, Ceremoniari. Lib. 2. Sectio. 2.
to make the Priest, either higher, or lower? When the Pope is at his
Consecration, the Cardinal, that is his Orderer, delivers him a Book of the
Epistles, and Gospelles. And will ye thereof conclude, that the said Cardinal
is above the Pope? Mary, God forebidde.

Gods meaning, Paul. Phagius in Deuter. Cap. 17.
touching this Ceremony. was this, that the Kings Book should he true, and
fautlesse. And therefore God commanded him to take a Copy thereof, out of the
Registrie, or Records, which were thought to be void of al corruption, and
were evermore keapte in the Temple, under the Custody of the Priests. Paulus
Phagius says, Every Private man was commanded to have one Book severally to
him self: But the King was commanded to have two. And, for as mutche as the
King was a Public Person, therefore God willed him to take his Copy out of
the public Records of the Temple.

Your own Hugo cardinalis says, Hugo in Deute. Cap. 17.
Accipiet exemplar a Sacerdotibus: non a quibussibet, sed a bonis: Vbi nihil
fucatum est: nihil corruptum: He shall take his Copy of y^ Priests: not of
every Priest, what so ever: but of the good: that in the same Copy there be
nothing, neither colored, nor corrupted.

All this, M. Hardinge, will hardely prove your strange Conclusion, that the
Priest was Superioure to the King: Deuteronomie. A copy. A Double.
It seems mutche better to prove the contrary, that the Priest was the
Kings Inferioure, and his Subject, and his Clerk of Records, as being
appointed to keep his Books. So S. Augustine says, Augusti. Contra Faustum.
Lib. 16. Cap. 21. Et in Psalm. 58. Et sape alibi.
the Jews this day keep the very true Books of the Scriptures: Al be it,
not for their own use, but only for ours. And therefore, he says, they be,
not our Superiors, but our Servants.

Certainly, concerning the Kings, and Priests of the Old Law, one of
your own friends, whom for many causes ye may not well refuse, says thus:
In Veteri Lege Sacerdotium indignius erat Potestate Regia, and ei Subiectum: In
the Old Law the Priests Office was Inferioure to the Prince, Johan. De
paris. De potesta. Reg. et Papali. Cap. 5.
and Subject Unto him.

Ye say, If the Priest must geeue the Holy Scriptures to the King, then
verily must he take such, as they geeue him: and with such meaning, as
they geeue unto it. Yea, I trow, though they tear their roabes against
Christ, as Caiphas did, and cry out, He blasphemeth, yet must we by your
Judgment, evermore seek to them for the sense, and meaning of the
Scriptures. For this is the ground, and Fundation of your Divinity: The
Scripture of God has none other sense, but as it shall please the Priest to
geeue unto it. But S. Chrysostom, speakinge of the same Priests, and
Bishops, from whom we have received the self same Scriptures, says thus:
Chrysosto. in Genesim. Homil. 9.
Literae quidem Legis apud illos sunt: Sensus autem apud nos: The Letters, or
words of the Scriptures are with them: but the true meaning of them is with
us.

Here you mutche disadvantage your self, and, as ye say, omit, that we
read, Librum Legis, whereas the Church reads, Deuteronomium: for that, as
ye say, it were too long for you, to enter into that disputation. Therefore,
M. Hardinge, we will patiently abide your leisure, vnt il ye have found out
the whole mystery, and considered it better. In the mean season, it shall not
be good for you, to be over rank with your Commentaries, until ye better
understand the Text. Certainly, the wise and learned think, that herein ye
are mutche deceived. For, whereas the Words are these, Describet sibi
Deuteronomium Legis huius, they think, that, Deuteronomium, in this place, is
not put for any one certain several Book of the Five Books of Moses, as it
is otherwise commonly used, but rather for a Copy, or a Draught of the Whole
Law. And in this sense they say, that, (...), is none other, but (...), that
is to say, a Copy, or a Double. Questo Doppio. Le Double.
The Italian Translation has thus, Esso si scriuera questo Doppio de la
Leg. The French Translation has. Le double. Leo Judas translateth it thus,
Describet sibi Exemplum Legis huius: He shall write out for him self a Copy of
this Law. And, for sum proof hereof, it is thus written in the Book of
Joshua: Afterward Joshua readde out of the words of the Law, both the
Blessings, and the Curses, Joshua. 8.
according to every thing, that is written in the Book of the Law. And
there was not one word of all the things, that Moses Commanded, but Josua
readde the same before the whole congregation of Israel.

Where we allege the words of the Prophet Esai, Kings shall be thy
Fosterers, and Queens thy Nurces: ye say, Every Nurce, or Fosterer, is not
above him, that is nourished. A faitheful seruante oftentimes fostereth his
Master. Yet is not he above his Master. So loathe ye are, the King should
be Superioure to a Priest. And thus hanc ye brought about by your handsome
Conclusions, that your Priests be the Masters, and Kings their Servants.
And therefore it is discretely noted in your Gloss, Imperator Romanus est
Procurator, Dis. 98. Si Imperator. In Glossa.
sieve Defensor Romanae Ecclesiae: The Emperor of Rome is the Steward, or
Bailife of the Church of Rome.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 4. and 5.
I say, The Pope a King. Moses a Priest.
bisides al these things, we see by Histories, and by Examples of the best
times, that good Princes ever took the Administration of Ecclesiastical matters
to perteine to their duty.

Moses, Exodus 32.
being a Civil Magistrate, and chief Guide of the people, both received
from God, and delivered to the people all the order for Religion, and
Sacrifices, and gave Aaron the Bishop a vehemente, and soar rebuke for making
the Golden Calfe, and for sufferinge the Corruption of Religion.

M. Hardinge.
Moses was not only a Civil Magistrate. Untruth. For at that time he was no
Priest.
but also a Priest. In that he had both offices, Untruth. For it proves the
contrary. Read the Answer.
it proves that a Priest may have both: but not contrariwise, that a King may
have both For the greater may include the less, but the less can not include
the greater. Untruth, confessed by M. H. friends. For in the time of Moses
Law, the Priest was inferiors to the Prince.
The office of a Priest is the highest of al. Substantial Arguments, whereby
to prove the Pope a King.
And Christ coming naturally of the Kings line from David in the tribe of
Judah, yet esteemed that honor nothing in respect of that he was a Priest
according to the order of Melchisedech. Therefore Melchisedech also being both
Priest and King, was not yet said to be the figure of Christ so mutche
concerning his Kingedome, Psalm. 109.
as his Priesthood. For David said of Christ, Thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchtsedech. As for his Kingedome, it was included in his
Priests office. And therefore when we speak of Christ's Kingedome, though in
every respect he be the very King in deed of al Kings, Justinius in Dial.
aduersus Typh. Exodus 19. 1. Pet. 2.
and Lord of al Lords: yet we assign it also to have been upon the Cross,
vbiregnauit a ligno Deus, where God reigned from the woodde. According to the
same meaning, whereas the people of Israel were called Regnum Sacerdotale, a
Priestly Kingedome: S. Peter writing to the Christians, turned the order of
the words, calling the Church of Christ, Sacerdotium Regale, a Kingely
Priesthood. Moses was both a Priest and a Civil Gouernoure, as being a
figure of Christ, who joined both together, making the tribe of Judah, which
was before kingly, now also to be Priestly. Therefore S. Augustine upon those
words of David, Psalm. 98. Moses and Aaron are in the number of his Priests,
concludes, that Moses must needs have benne a Priest. Discretely reasoned.
For all this pertains as well to a Simple Priest, as to the Pope.
For (says he) if he were not a Priest, what was he? Nunquid mayor sacerdote
esse potuit, could he be greater then a Priest? As who should say, there is
no greater dignity, then priesthood. And, saying Moses had the greatest
dignity, for he ruled al, and consecrated Aaron high Bishop, and his sons
Priests, therefore him self must needs have been a Priest. Louania^ Logique.
Moses Consecrated Aaron: Ergo, The Pope is a King.
Now if Moses were both, and his chief office was Priesthood, it follows
by that example, that the Pope may rule temporally, but not that a King may
rule spiritually. This you have gained nothing by this example.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here M. Hardinge has many great words of small weight. The final
Conclusion, and Summa summarum is this: The Pope must needs be a King. And
that he proves, as his manner is, by these his young vntiedy Arguments:
Moses, being a Civil Magistrate, or a Prince, had also the Priesthood, and
was a Priest: Ergo, says he, The Pope, being a Priest, must have also the
Kingedome, and be a King. And thus he peeceth these matters handsomely
together, as though, what so ever were once in Moses, ought of necessity to
be also in y^ Pope. But if a man should desire him to prove his Argument, and
to make it good, and to show us, how these pieces may be framed together, I
think, he would be feign to take a day. First, whether Moses were a Priest,
or no, it is not certain. As for that, Psalm. 98.
M. Harding allegeth these words of David, Moses, and Aaron in Sacerdotibus
eius, he him self well knows, that the Hebrewe word there, is doubteful,
and signifies as well a Prince, as a Priest. S. Hierome says, Vnus Legis,
The Pope is a King. Moses a Priest.
alte^ Sacerdotij Regulam tenuit: Moses held the Rule of the Law: Aaron the
Rule of Priesthood. Again he says, Emisit ante faciem nostram Mosen
Spiritualem Legem, and Aaron magnum Sacerdotem: God sent out before our face,
Moses (not as the Priest, but as) the Spiritual Law, Hiero, in Psalm. 98
Hierony in Micheam Cap. 6. Hugo. in Psalm. 98.
and Aaron the great Priest. Even Hugo, your own Doctoure, touching the same
words, says thus, Moses etsi, etc. Notwithstanding Moses were not a
Priest, yet because he hallowed the peoples prayers, etc. he was called a
Priest. For in the Scriptures Great, and Noble men are called by the name
of Priest. Who so lists to know more hereof, let him read Sanctes
Pagninus, David Kimchi, Nicolaus Lyra, etc.

But, if Moses in deed were a Priest, ye should do well, M. Hardinge, to
resolve us, Fiest, whether he were a Priest borne, or else afterward made a
Priest. A Priest borne, I trow, ye will not say. If ye say, he was
afterward made a Priest, then tell us, by what Bishop, or other Creature was
he Consecrate? At whoes hands received he Authority? When, where, and to what
purpose? What Priestelike Apparel ever ware he? Or, in what Office, or
Ministry ever showed he him self to be a Priest? Hebrae. 5.
S. Paul says, A Priest is appointed to offer up Oblations, and Sacrifices
for sin. What Oblations, or Sacrifices for sin, can ye tell us, that Moses
offered? If he were neither Borne a Priest, nor made a Priest, nor ever
known by office to be a Priest, then was he, I trow, a very strange Priest.

If Moses were the Highest Priest, and Head of the Church, and Aaron likewise
the Highest Priest, and in so mutche the Head of the Church too, as well as
he, then had y^ Church two highest Bishops, and two Heads both
together: Which thing were monstrous, not only in speech, but also in
Nature.

Notwithstanding, whether Moses at any one certain time were a Priest, or
no, it is a matter not worthy the striuinge. Certain it is, that before the
Law was written Kings, and Princes, and the best borne, and Enheritours,
and y^ wealthiest of the people, Hierony. in Qu Hebraici, in Genesim.
were ever Priests. S. Hierome says, Hebraei tradunt, Primogenitos functos
Officio Sacerdotum, and habuisse Vestimentum Sacerdotale: quo induti, Deo
Victimas offerebant, antequam Aaron in Sacerdotium eligeretur: The Hebrevve
Rabbines say, that the First borne children did the office of the Priests,
and had the Priestelike Apparel, and wearing the same, offered up their
Sacrifices unto God, until the time, Hierony. in Job. Cap. 1.
that Aaron was chosen into the Priestehoode. Again he says, Priuilegium
Offerendi Primogenitis, vel maxim Regibus debebatur: The Privilege of offering
up Sacrifices was dew to y^ First borne of the children, but most of al unto
Kings. The Heathen Roman Emperors, Did. 10. De Capitulis, in Gloss. Inter
acta Gelasij.
as Vespasianus, Traianus, and others, to increase their Majesty toward
their Subjects, biside the state of the Emprere, would also be called
Pontifices Maximi.

Therefore we will grant M. Harding, seeinge he has taken so mutch pains,
about a matter not worthy so long talk, that Moses for sum little short
time was a Priest. Exodus 29.
Yet, nevertheless had he no Ordinary Priesthood: neither was he a Priest
more, then for the space of two, or three hours, only until he had
Consecrated Aaron, and his children: and no longer. Immediately afterward, all this great Priestehoode was at an end. One of your own Doctors, M. Hardinge,
says thus, Heruaeus, de Potestat. pp. Ca. 18.
Non erant Sacerdotes Legales, Dignitate, and Officio, sicut Aaron: Licet in
necessitate, and propter defectum Sacerdotum, aliquos actus Sacerdotum
fecerint: vt, quod Moses inunxit Aaron: propter quod Moses Sacerdos dicitur in
Psalmo: The Firstborne were not Priests in Office, and Dignity, as Aaron was:
notwithstanding, in case of necessity, and for lack of Priests, they did
sum part of the Priests Office: as, that Moses anointed, or Consecrated
Aaron: for which thing Moses in the Psalm is called a Priest.

This, The Pope is a King.
M. Hardinge, is that Fundation, that must needs bear the burden of your
whole Church of Rome. The Pope, ye say, must be a King, because Moses was
both Prince, and Priest. And yet your own Fellows say, Moses by Office, and
Dignity, was never Priest. Ye say, The Pope, being a Bishop, may be a
King: But of the other side, a King may in no wise be a Bishop: and thus,
either vnwitingely, or willingly, ye seem to overthrow your own Position.
For the Example, that ye ground upon, of Aaron, and Moses, proves quite the
contrary. For Moses, being a Prince, did also the Office of a Bishop. But
Aaron, being the Bishop, did never ye Office of a Prince. Therefore hereof ye
might better Conclude, ye a Prince may be a Bishop: But a Bishop may not be a
King. Streighten your boltes therefore, M. Harding, and shave the^ better,
before ye so suddenly, I will not say, so rudely, shoot them from you.
Nevertheless, ye say, the Priesthood, which is the more, may contain the
Kingedome, being y^ less. In this respect, I trow, Extra. De Maiorita and
Obedien. Solitae, In Glossa.
your Gloss, as it is said before, compares the Pope to the Son, and the
Emperor to the Moon: and finds out substantially by good Geometrical
Proportion, that the Pope is just seven and fifty times greater, then the
Emperor. How be it, your own Doctors say, as I have likewise showed before,
that in the Law of Moses, Johan. De Paris. De potestat. Regia and Pap ca. 5.
the Prince was greater then the Priest.

That ye allege of the Priesthood, and Kingedome of Christ, serves you to
small purpose. For, I beseech you, what Crown, what Scepter, what Svverde bare
Christ? What Ecclesiastical Priesthood had he, but only, that he executed
upon the Cross? Verily touching any Civil show, or outward Office, as he was
no King, Johan. 18.
so was he no Priest. As he said, My Kingdom is not of this world: So might
he also have said, My Priesthood is not of this world. Otherwise, he was
both King, and Priest, in Power, and Virtue: but not appare^tly in outward
office.

One of your Fellows says thus, Heruaeus de Potestat. Pp. Cap. 8.
Pater, per Sanctos Expositores, quod Christus non habuit in Temporalibus
Authoritatem, vel Iudicium. Sed dare potuit, and dare habuit Virtutis
Documentum: It appears by the Holy Expositours, that Christ had neither
Authority, nor Judgment in things Temporal. But he could both geeue, and
had to geeue Instructions of Virtue.

As for these two words of S. 1. Pet. 2.
Peter, Ye are a Kingely Priesthood, ye would not have alleged them to this
purpose, had ye not benne in your dream. For think you, that S. Peter
called the whole Body of the Church of Christ, a Kingely Priesthood, for
that you fancy your Pope to be together both Priest, and King? Certainly,
the Church of God was a Kingely Priesthood, before either the Church of Rome
was a Church, or the Pope of Rome was a Pope. Ye should have sum care to
deal more reverently with the Word of God: For it is Holy. S. Peter's
meaning is this, that every Faithful Christian man is now, after a Spiritual,
or Ghostly meaning, not only a Priest, but also a King: and therefore he
calls the whole Church a Kingely Priesthood. Tertullian says thus,
Tertul. in Exhorta. ad Castit. Apocal. 1.
Nonne and Laici Sacerdotes sumus? Regnum quoqque nos, and Sacerdotes Deo, and
Patri suo fecit: And we, that be Laiemen, are we not Priests? Truly Christ
has made even us a kingdom, and Priests unto his Father. S. Augustine says,
Aug. Q Euang. Lib. 2. Cap. 40.
Hoc Sacerdotio Regali consecrantur omnes pertinentes ad Corpus Christi, Summi,
and Very Principis Sacerdotum: With this Roial Priesthood al they are
consecrate, that perteine to the Body of Christ, which is the high, and true
Prince of Priests. Augu. De Ciuit. Dei Li. 20. Ca. 10 Ambros. in Luca^. Lib.
5. ap 6.
Again he says, Omnes sunt Sacerdotes, quia Membra sunt vnius Sacerdotis: Al
be Priests, because they are the Members of one Priest. S. Ambrose says,
Omnes Filij Ecclesiae Sacerdotes sunt: All the Children of the Church be
Priests.

S. Hierome says, Genus Sacerdotale, and Regale sumus omnes, qui Baptizati in
Christo, Hierony. in Malachi. Cap. 1.
Christi censemur Nomine: Al we are that Priestely, and Kingely Kindred, The
Pope is a king. kingely Priestehoode.
that being Baptized in Christ, are called Christians, by the name of Christ.

Chrysostom says, Et tu in Baptismo, and Rex efficeris, and Sacerdos, and
Propheta: Even thou in thy Baptism art made both a King, and a Priest, and a
Prophet.

Now, M. Hardinge, let us take the vlewe of your Priestely Conclusions.

Moses once did one part of the Bishops Office, Chrysostom. 2. Cor. Homil. 3.
to Consecrate Aaron, and his children: and that* never at any time else*
neither after, nor before: Christ Rath a Spiritual Priesthood, and a Spiritual
Kingdom: for otherwise Ordinary Priesthood, and Earthely Kingedome he had
none: S. Peter calls the whole Church of Christ, a Kingely Priesthood:
Ergo, say you, The Pope bears both the Office of a Priest, and also the
Right, and State of an Earthly King.

To dissemble al other the fond weakness of these folies, Christ him self
says to the Pope, Matthew. 20.
and to al other Priests, and Bishops: The Kings of Nations rule over them:
and they, that are great, exercise Authority over the people: But it shall not
be so amongst you. Did. 10. Quoniam idem.
S. Cyprian says, as he is alleged by Gratian, Christus actibus proprijs, and
Dignitatibus distinctis officia Potestatis vtriusque discreuit: Christ by
several deuties, and distinct honors, has set a difference bitweene the
Offices of both Powers.

Whereupon your own Gloss says, Hic est Argumentum, quod Papa non habet
vtrunque Gladium: Glossa.
Here is a good Argument, that the Pope has not both Swerdes.

S. Bernarde says thus unto Pope Eugenius, Bernar. De Considera. Lib. 2.
Planu^ est, quod Apostolis interdicitur Dominatus. Ergo tu tibi vsurpare aude,
aut Domina^s Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus Dominatum. Plane ab alterutro
prohiberis. Si Vtrunque similiter habere vis, perdes vtrunque Alioqui ne te
putes exceptum illorum numero, de quibus conqueritur Dominus, dicens: Ipsi
regnauerunt, and non ex me: It is plain, that Temporal Dominion is forebidden
the Apostles. Now therefore, thou, being Pope, dare to usurp, either the
Apostleship, being a Prince: or the Princehoode, being the successoure of the
Apostles. Doubtelesse from the one of them thou art forebidden. If thou will
indifferentely have both, thou shalt lose both. Otherwise think not, thou
canste be excepted from the mimber of them, of whom the Lord complains,
They have made them selves kings, and not by me.

Concerning the place of S. Peter, one of your company says, it nothing
furthereth the Popes Kingedome. Heruaeus, de Potestat. Pp. Ca. 18.
Thus he says, Sacerdotium dicitur Regale, a Regno, non huius mundi, sed
Coeli: S. Peter calls us a Kingely Priesthood, of the Kingedome of Heaven,
not of the Kingedome of this world. Yet is this the self same Kingdom, that
the Pope craves, and that by the Authority of S. Peter.

Notwithstanding one of your company there, has sent us home lately other
news from Louaine. Dorman. Fol. 40.
His words be these: Vos estis Regale Sacerdotium, You are a Kingly
Priesthood: as who should say, the Priesthood before, was not Kingly, for
that then Kings ruled over Priests: But now is the Priesthood Kingely, for
that to it be subject even Kings themselves. Thus, unless your Priests may
rule Kings, and Princes, and all the world at their pleasure, ye think, they
have no Kingly Priesthood. In the Council, Conc. Macrense. Citatur ab Illyrico
inter Testes Verita. Page 121.
holden at Macra in France, it is written thus: Solus Dominus noster Jesus
Christus vere fieri potuit and Rex, and Sacerdos. Post Incarnationem vero, and
Resurrectionem, and Ascensionem eius in Coelum, nec Rex Pontificis Dignitatem:
nec Pontifex Regiam Potestatem sibi vsurpare praesumpsit: Only our Lord Jesus
Christ might truly be both Priest, and King. But sithence his Incarnation,
and Resurrection, and Ascension into heaven, neither has the King presumed to
take upon him ye Dignity, or office of a Bishop, nor has the Bishop presumed
to usurp the Power, and Majesty of a Prince.

To be short, M. Hardinge, we say not, as you so often, and so untruly have
reported, that the King may in any wise execute the Bishops Office. But
thus we say, and because it is true, therefore we say it: The King may
lawfully correct, Joshua.
and chastise the Negligence, and Falsehedde of the Bishops: and that in so
dooinge, he does only his own Office, and not the Bishops.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 6.
Joshua also, Joshua. Cap. 1.
though he were none other, then a Civil Magistrate, yet as soon as he was
chose^ by God, and set as a Ruler over the people, he received Commandments,
specially touching Religion, and the Service of God.

M. Hardinge.
There is no doubt, but Iosue received commission, and commandment to
woorship God, but none to rule Priests in spiritual matters. Number. 27.
Ye rather he was commanded to go forth, and come in at the voice and word
of Eleazarus the high Priest, he and all the Children of Israel. Do not these
men prove their matter handsomely?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Joshua was commanded to go in, and out, and to be directed by the voice of
Eleazarus the High Priest: Therefore, ye say, in Spiritual Causes, the
Priests may not be controlled by the Prince. Ye deliver out your
Arguments, M. Hardinge, before they be ready. These pieces would have benne
better tied together.

Though the Prince be commanded to hear the Priest, yet if the Priest be
negligente, or deceive the people, he may by his Ordinary Authority
controlle the Priest.

When Aaron, the High Priest, had consented to the making, and woorshippinge
of the Golden Calfe, Exodus 32.
Moses, being then the Temporal Prince, rebuked him sharply unto his face:
and in so dooinge, did not the Bishops Office, but only his own. As
touching Joshua, whom ye would feign have restreined from al Ecclesiastical
Causes, he caused the people to be Circumcised: He caused Aultars for their
Bloody Sacrifices to be erected: He caused the Priests to make their
Sacrifices: He caused the Deuteronomie to be written in stoanes: He caused
both the Blessings, and the Cursses of God to be pronounced: He spoke openly
to the people, and fraied them from Idolatry. Al these were cases, not of
Civil Policy, August. Contra Cresconium, Li. 3. Cap. 51.
but of Religion. S. Augustine says, In hoc Reges Deo seruiu^t, sicut eis
Diuinitus praecipitur, in qua^tum sunt Reges, si in suo Regno bona iubeant,
mala prohibeant: non solum quae pertinent ad Humanam Societatem, verum etiam,
quae ad Diuinam Religionem: Herein Kings serve God, as it is commanded them
from above, in that they be Kings, if within their Kingedome they command
good things, and forebidde evil: not only in things perteininge to Human
Felovveship, or Civil Order, but also in things perteining to Gods
Religion. Ye may see therefore, M. Hardinge, how handsomely so ever we
prove our matters, that* of your part, hitherto they are but unhandsomely, and
coursely answered.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 7.
King David, when the whole Religion of God was altogether brought out of
frame by wicked King Saul, 1. Paralip. 13.
brought home again the Ark of God, that is to say, he restoared Religion
again: and was not only amongst them him self, as a counselor, and
furtherer of the work, but he appointed also Hymns, and Psalms, put in
order the companies, and was the only dooer in setting forth that whole
Solemn Triumph, and in effect ruled the Priests.

M. Hardinge.
As David restored all things to good order, King David orders matters of
Religion.
after the evil King Saul, An il comparison. For that the one set up, the
other pluckte down.
so did Queen Marie redress disorders before committed. 1. Paral. 15.
But as Queen Marie did it by the mean of Priests, so King David in
priestly matters called for Sadoch, and Abiathar. In deed David passed other
Princes herein, because he had the A simple shifte God vvote. For other Kings,
that did the like, were no Prophets.
gift of Prophecy, whereby he wrote Psalms, which to this day we singe.
But all this makes nothing to prove him Judge of Spiritual matters. He did
not usurp the Authority to Sacrifice, to discern the lepre, and to do the
like things of Priestly charge.

The B. of Sarisburie.
King David, ye say, restoared Religion by mean of the Priests. Nay,
verily, M. Hardinge: for by mean of the Priests, the Religion utterly was
decayed. Therefore ye spoil that Most Noble Prince of his worthy praises:
and give them to others, that never deserved them. The Holy Tabernacle was
broken, and lost: ye Ark of God was keapte, not in the Temple, but in a
Private man's house: the people had no common place to resort unto, to hear
Gods VVil: they had each man his own Private chaple in their Hills, and
Groaues.

David therefore called the Bishops, and Priests together: He showed them,
in what sort the Religion of God was defaced: he willed them to bring the Arc
into Sion: he was present him self: he appointed, and ordered the whole
Triumph: He assigned, 1. Paralipom. 16. 1. Paralipom. 24.
which of the Levites, and in what order they should serve before the Arc:
He alloted Aarons Children, which were the Priests, to walk each man in his
several office.

So likewise it is written of King Solomon, touching the same: King Solomon,
according to the decree, 2. Paralipom. 8.
and order of his Father David, appointed the Offices of the Priests in their
several Ministeries, and the Levites, each man in his Order: that they should
praise God, and minister before the Priests. For so David, the man of God, had
commanded. 2 Paralipom. 19.
Likewise it is written of King Iosaphat, He appointed, and ordered the
Levites, and Priests.

Thus then did these godly Princes: and thus dooinge, they usurped not the
Bishops office, but only did that, they lawfully might do, and apperteined
wholly unto them selves.

Where ye say, David was a Prophet, and not only a King, as though he had
done these things by the virtue of his Prophecy, and not by the right of
his Princely Power, this poor shifte is very simple. For notwithstanding King
David were a Prophet, yet King Iosaphat, and other Princes, that did the
like, were no Prophe^es: neither do we read of any other Prophet, that ever
attempted to do the like: nor did David these things, as a Prophet, but as a
King.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 8.
King Solomon builte unto the Lord the Temple, which his Father David had but
pourposed in his mind to do: 2. Paral. 6.
and after the finishinge thereof, he made a godly Oration to the people,
concerning Religion, and the Service of God: 3. Reg. 8.
He afterward displaced Abiathar the Priest, and set Sadok in his place.

M. Hardinge.
Salomons buildinge of the Temple, 3. Reg. 2.
and prayinge therein proves no Supremacy over the Priests in Spiritual
thinges^ His puttinge of Abiathar out of his dignity and rome, Untruth. For
what Superior Bishops Authority used Solomon in the Deposition of Abiathar?
was like to that Queen Marie did to Cranmere. King Solomon Judges in
Spiritual cases.
Whom she might have removed for treason, as Solomon laid the like to
Abiathar: yet she chose rather to burn him for Heresy. But this proves
Untruth manifest. Read the Answer.
only an our ward execution of justice, without any prejudice to the
Substance of our question: Which is, whether a temporal Prince may determine
the causes of Religion, or no.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The deposinge of Abiathar, ye say, was only the execution of outward
Justice: like to that, Queen Marie did to Doctoure Craumere the Archbishop of
Canturburie. Wherein ye show your self to be mutche ouerseene. For these
comparisons are in no wise like. Solomon, by his Princely Authority, lawfully
deposed the High Priest Abiathar: But Queen Marie deposed not, nor could she
by your Canonnes lawfully depose ye Archbishop of Canturburie: nor do you
think it in any case lawful, that a Bishop should be deposed by a Prince.
For, Deposition, ye say, is a Spiritual po^nishement, and only belongs
unto a Bishop. And your Law says, Eius est Destituere, cuius est Instituere:
He may Depose a Priest, that has Authority to place a Priest. Therefore
these two Princes dooinges were not like. But, touching the High Priest
Abiathar, King Solomon summoned him to appear before him: King Solomon sat
in Judgment, and heard the Accusations, wherewith he was charged: King
Solomon pronounced Sentence against him: King Solomon deposed him: King
Solomon appointed Sadoch to succeed him. It all this be not sufficient, over
and bisides these things, 2. Parali. 5. 6. 7. 8.
King Solomon placed the Ark of God: King Solomon Sanctified, and Hallowed
the Temple: King Solomon offered up burnte Sacrifice: King Solomon directed,
and ordered the Priests in their several Offices: King Solomon blessed the
whole people. 2. Paralip. 8.
And, as it is written, The Priests, and Levites leaftes nothing undone, of
al, that was commanded them by the King. If these cases be not Spiritual,
tell us then, what cases may be allowed for Spiritual? Thus the Godly King
Solomon thought it lawful for him, to deal, not only in matters of Temporal
Gouernemente, but also in Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual cases of Religion.
Therefore, M. Hardinge, it is but a teie, that ye tell us of the execution of
outward Justice.

Concerning that most Grave, and Godly, and Learned Father, the Archbishop
of Canturburie, with whom ye did, what so ever your pleasure was, God grant,
his blood be never required at your hands.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 9.
After this, when the Temple of God was in shameful wise polluted through the
naughtiness, 2. Paral. 29.
and negligence of Priests, King Ezechias commanded the same to be cleansed
from the rubble and ^ilthe, the Priests to light up Candelles, to burn
Incense, and to do their Divine Service, according to the old allowed
custom. The same King also commanded the Brazen Serpente, 4. Reg. 18.
which then the people wickedly woorshipped, to be taken down, and beaten to
powder.

M. Hardinge.
How often shall I tell you, that this proves no more, but that good Kings do
good deeds, maintain true Religion, and pull down the false, as the
Constable of France burned the Pu^pites of the Huguenots in Paris? But these
factes prove not, that Kings and Constables be judges of Religion, which is
good, Ezechias.
and which is evil: 4. Reg. 20. 4. Reg. 9.
which true, which false: For therein they Untruth. For the Priests did
nothing, but against their vvilles. Read the Answer.
follow the judgment and advise of Priests, and Prophets, who ^e about them,
as This is far from the purpose. For Esaias, and Elizaeus neither were
Priests, no^ had the e^ecution of Priestly Offices.
Esaias was at hand with good King Ezechias to direct his doings: and so was
Elizaeus with King Iehu.

The B. of Sarisburie.
King Ezechias, ye say, and other Kings followed the advice, and Judgment
of the Priests, and Prophets. This tale, M. Hardinge, is not only unlikely,
but also untrue. For ye know, that Esaias, and Elizaeus, notwithstanding
they were the Prophets of God, yet were they neither Priests, nor Bishops,
nor had any manner of Ordinary Ministration in the Church. The Bishops, and
Priests, of whom ye speak, had disordered, and wasted Gods whole
Religion. The Holy place of God was fulle of filthiness: the Gates of the
Temple were shut up, 2. Paralip. 29.
that no man might enter in: The people had turned away their faces from the
Tabernacle of the Lord: There was no Incense: There was no Sacrifice. Al these
things had happened through the negligence, and wickedness of the Priests.
2. Paralip. 30.
In the Old Latin Text it is written thus: Sacerdotes, and Leuitae tandem
Sanctificati obtulerunt Holocausta: The Priests, and Levites, at the last, or
with mutche adoo, were Sanctified, and offered up Sacrifices. Upon which place
the Later Translation says thus: Sacerdotes, and Leuitae pudore suffusi,
Sanctificauerunt se: The Priests, and Levites, even for very shame, Sanctified
them selves. So ready were they, to call upon, and to further the King in his
godly purpose. They held back, what they could, and yielded to nothing, but
with mutche adoo, and for very shame. They did nothing, but by the Kings
Commandment: and made him a reckeninge of their dooinges.

How be it, perhaps ye will discharge this whole matter with one ordinary
excuse, and tell us, that al these were but Temporal Cases.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 10.
King Iehosaphat overthrew, and utterly made away the Hille Aultars, 1.
Paralip. 17.
and Groaues, whereby he saw Gods Honor hindered, and the people holden
back with Private Superstition from the ordinary Temple, which was at
Jerusalem: whereto they should by order have resorted yearly from every part
of the Realm.

M. Hardinge.
Ye put us in mind to consider, how that your selves are those Private Hille
Aulters, and dark Groaues. For ye be they, that stop the people from the
common Temple of Christendom, the Catholic Church: out of which is no
Salvation, the head whereof sits in Peter's chair at Rome. For settinge
order both in matters of Common Weal, and others, Iehosaphat said thus,
concerning Religion: Amarias Sacerdos and pontifex vester in ijs, 2. Par. 19.
quae ad Deum pertinent, praesidebit: Amarias the Priest and High Bishop for
such matters as perteine to God, he shall be head over you.

The B. of Sarisburie.
All this whole matter, touching as well King Iehosophat, as also Amarias the
High Priest, is answered in that is paste before.

The Apology, Cap. 11. Division. 11.
King Josias with great diligence put the Priests, and Bishops in mind of
their duties: 4. Reg. 12. 4. Reg. 10.
King Iohas bridled the Riote, and Arrogancy of the Priests: Iehu put to
death the wicked Prophets.

M. Hardinge.
The puttinge of Priests, losias. Iohas. Iehu.
and Bishops in mind of their duty, is not a Supremacy in determininge
Ecclesiastical causes. And whereas you say, that King Ioas bridled the r^ot,
and arrogancy of the Priests, if it were so, it was well done. But Ye might
have found it, 4 Reg. Ca. 12.
I find not those words in the text. Concerning that Iehu did, it is a But
he Judged them, and condemned them for False Propheres. This was no mere
Temporal office.
mere temporal Office, to put false preachers, and Heretics to death. Neither
can it belong to Priests, unless they have also civil jurisdiction. Much
less does that act prove, that Kings be Supreme heads over the Church,
and ought to be Judges in controversies and questions of Religion.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Concerning the story of King Iohas, I report me to that is written of him
in the Book of Kings. 4. Regum. 12.
He sequestered the Oblations of the people, which the Priests had bestowed
lewdely, and wantonly upon them selves, and, by his own Authority, turned the
same to the Reparations of the Temple. Of King Josias, 2. Paralipom. 35.
it is written thus: Constituit Josias Sacerdotes in officijs suis: King
Josias appointed the Priests to minister in their several Offices. And
again, Mundauit Iudam, and Jerusalem ab Excelsis, and Lucis: King Josias
cleansed, and rid Judah, and Jerusalem from their Hille Aultars, and their
Groaues.

But ye will say, He did al things by y^ discretion of the Priests, and
Bishops. This thing in deed is necessary, while the Priests, and
Bishops be, learned, and godly. 4. Regum. 21.
But King Josias did far otherwise: for he sent the Bishop him self unto Olda
the Prophetisse, to learn the discretion, and Judgment of a VVooman: and so
was directed in matters of Highest Religion, by a VVooman, and not by a Priest.
These Examples be so manifest, that one of your Fellows there is feign thus to
excuse the matter, Dorman. Fol. 37.
by over mutche Antiquity. If we would in these days, says he, use in all
points the Examples of the Old Law, there would follow an huge number of
inconveniences. Dorman. Fol. 39.
It is no good reason, to say, that therefore our Kings now a days must
have the like Authority. Thus says he, As though the Princes right were now
abated, and altered, as the Ceremonies of the Law: and were otherwise now,
then it was before: Or, as if the Coming of Christ into the world, and the
Preachinge of the Gospel, had pourposely benne to repress and pulle down the
State of Kings.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 1.
And, to rehearse no more Examples out of the Old Law, let us rather consider
sithence the Birthe of christ, how the church has benne governed in the
time of the Gospel.

M. Hardinge.
If we consider the Office of a King in it self, it is Even so I^ppiter, or
Baa^s Bishop, was as well a Bishop, as the Bishop of Rome.
one every where, not only among Christen Princes, but also among Heathen. *
The definition of a King, which agrees to Julius Caesar, or to Alexander the
Great, as they were Monarkes, and Princes, is one with the definition of a
King which agrees to Henry the Eight, or to Charles the Fifthe. Neither can
the Pope meddle more with Religion, then Annas, or Ca^phas.
So that no more could King Henry as King, meddle with Religion, then
Alexander, or Julius Caesar. * His place is chief among the lay, even when
they are in the Church at the Service of God: and Untruth* For if the Bishop
had offended, he was sub^ecte to the Prince, as well within the Church, a^
without*
without the Church in all Temporal things and causes, he is over the
Priests themselves.

And because all these examples are taken out of the Old Testamente, I will
geeue thee a true resolution out of the same Book, what authority Priests
had, and what authority Kings had. Moses gave this rule, Deuteronomy* 17.
concerning the same matter. If (says he) thou perceive an hard, and
doubtful judgment to be with thee between blood and blood, cause and
cause, Lepre and Lepre, and see the words of the judges within thy gates to
vary, arise, and go up to the place, which thy Lord God shall chose, The
Prince a ludge in Ecclesiastical causes.
and thou shalt come to the Priests of the stock of Leui, and to the Judge
that shall be for the time, and thou shalt demand of them: who shall show
the truth of judgment to thee.

But neither the Priest by this place may meddle with that jurisdiction, which
belonged to the Temporal judge, neither the Judge with that which was
spiritual and belonginge only to the Priest. 1. Paral. 26.
For of such causes Azarias the Priest and Bishop said to King Ozias, It is
not thy office, Ozias, to burn incense unto our Lord. It is the office of the
Priests: That is to say, of the Sons of Aaron: Who are consecrated to do
such Ministeries. But this the King might do even in matters of Religion.
The Prince is Executioner to the Priest.
When the High Priest had given sentence, he might see the execution thereof
to be done. But Untruth evident. Read the Answer.
otherwise what so ever King or Temporal judge might not do in his own
person, much less might he judge, whether an other did well therein, or no.
And this concerning the Old Testament.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Office of a King, ye say, was no more in King Henry the Eighth, or in
Charles the Fifthe, then it was in the Heathen Princes, Julius Caesar, or
Alexander the Great. And therefore, ye say, a Christian Princes Office
stands only in Matters Temporal: and for that cause ye so often call him a
Mere, Lay, Temporal Prince: as if he were in Authority not mutche better,
then an Heathen Magistrate.

Even so, M. Harding, is your Pope no more a Bishop, or perhaps, mutche less a
Bishop, then Annas, and Caiphas: Neither is your Priest more a Priest, then
the Priest of Dagon, or Baal. The difference stands, not in Office, but
only in Truth. Yet nevertheless, ye know, that Heathen Princes had
evermore a Sovereign Authority, not only over their Priests, and Bishops,
but also over al Cases of Religion. Aristotel. Foliticor. Li. 3. Socrates, Lib.
5. in Prooemio. (...).
Aristotle says, (...): The King, that is Lord, and Ruler of things, that
perteine unto the Gods.

And therefore Socrates in his story says, Imperatores vna complexi sumus,
etc. We have also herein comprised the Emperors Lives, for that, sithence the
Emperors were first Christened, the affairs of the Church have hanged of
them, and the greatest Councelles both have benne, and are keapte by their
advise.

Ye say, The Prince in doubteful Cases was commanded to take Counsel of the
Highest Priest. This is true. But will ye conclude hereof, that the Highest
Priest may say, and do, what he lists, without controlmente? What if the
High Priest would answer thus, as he answered sommetime in deed, This
Christ is a Samaritane, a deceiuer of the people, and has a Devil? What if he
tear his own roabes for anger, and cry out, He Blasphemeth: he is worthy
to die? Yet must the Emperor needs give ear unto him, and believe him
without exception? Certainly, in the Old Law, if the Bishop either had
benne negligente in his Office, or of malice, or ignorance had answered
untruth, he was evermore under the General controlmente of the Prince.

Within the Church, ye say, the Prince is inferioure to the Priest:
notwithstanding, without the Church he is in Temporal cases above the
Priest. Thus ye fetch your matter round, within, without, and round about,
with all the Circumstances: as if Princes were as changeable, as your self: and
would be other without, then they are within.

In deed, in that the Priest does his Office, in that he either opens
Gods VVil, or declares his threats, or rebukes sin, or Excommunicateth,
and cutteth of a dead member from the Body, so far forth the Prince, be he
never so mighty, is infe^iour unto him. But in this respect the Prince is
infertoure, not only to the Pope, or Bishop, but also to any other simple
Priest: And the Pope him self, The Prince is a ludge in Ecclesiastical causes.
in this respect, is inferioure to his Confessoure, be he never so poor a
Priest. So the Emperor Constantinus was woonte to say to the godly
Bishops: Be you Bishops within the Church: and I will be Bishop without.
But if the Bishop had been faulty, either in Negligence, or in Falsehedde,
whether he had benne within the Church, 9. Quaest. 3. Nemo, in Gloss. Abb.
Eusebius. De vita Constant. Orat. 4 De Maiorita and Obedient. vnam Sanctam.
or abroad, he was always to be controlled by the Prince.

Ye say, When the High Priest had geeuen Sentence, the Prince might see
the Execution thereof to be done. And thus ye make the Emperor the Popes
man, to put his Sentence in Execution. So Pope Bonifacius S. tells you,
Materialis Gladius exercendus est manu Regum, and Militum, sed ad nutum, and
Patientiam Sacerdotis: The Temporal Sword must be drawn by the hand of
Kings, and Soldiers: but at the beck, and sufferance of the Priest.

But, I beseehe you, at whose beck did King Solomon depose Abiathar the High
Priest? At whose beck did Josias, and other godly Princes, of whom we have
said before, redress the Religion of God, which they found shamefully
decaled? At whose beck did they rebuke the careless negligence of the
Priests? Verily, Heruaeus De Potestate Papae, Cap. 18. Augustine. Epist. 166.
ad Donatistas.
one of your own Doctors says, In Veteri Lege Sacerdotes, qui Reges
inungebant, indubitanter Regibus subdebantur: In the Old Law, the Bishops,
that a^ointed the Kings, out of doubt were subject unto the Kings.

And S. Augustine says, Quando Imperatores Veritatem tenent, and ipsa
Veritate contra Errotem iubent, quisquis illud contempserit, ipse sibi iudicium
acquirit. Nam and inter homines poenas Iuit, and apud Deum frontem non habebit,
qui hoc facere noluit, quod ei per Cor Regis ipsa Veritas iussit: When the
Emperor holds the Truth, and by force of the same Truth geeueth out
Laws, and Proclamations against Error, who so ever despises the same,
procures judgment against him self. For he shall be pounished before men,
and before God he shall have no face, that refused to do that thing, that the
Truth it self, through the heart of the Prince, has commanded him.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 2.
The Christian Emperors in the old time, appointed the Councelles of the
Bishops. Constantine called the Council at Nice: Theodosius the first,
called the Council at Constantinople: Theodosius the second, the council at
Ephesus: Martian, the Council at Chalcedon.

M. Hardinge.
The calling or summoninge of Councelles may be done A discrete Distinction:
As if the Emperor received his Authority from the Pope.
either by way of authority, which the caller himself has: or by way of
authority, which he takes of an another. If Constantine, the two Theodosians,
and Marcian called the four first general Councelles by their Authority
only, then were they no general Councelles. Neither could their decrees
bind the whole world. For although they were great Emperors, yet was not
the whole Christian world under them. And therefore those Christian Bishops,
who lived in Persia, in Ethiopia, in Scotland, in Scythia, or in any other
land not subject to the Emperor, were neither bound to come, nor bound to
obey the Laws made by them, who were not their Superiors. But if it be far
from reason, that a general Council should not bind all Bishops and all
Christians, it is also far reason, to say, that Emperors called general
Councelles by their own only authority. In deed they called them by the
assent of the Bishop of Rome Untruth manifest, as it shall appear.
Who being the general Shepeherde of Christ's stock, and therefore also of
all Bishops, might command All the Bishops througout the whole world
are the Popes Sheep.
all his Sheep to come together, except they were reasonably to be excused:
and they were bound to be hear his voice, and to obey his decree. So that,
although ye proved the Emperors to have summoned and called the four first
Councels, yet were ye not able to prove, they did it Untruth. For the
Emperor may summone Councels whether the Pope vvil, or no.
without the assent of the Bishops of Rome, which for the time sat in Peter's
chair. And by the force of that assent the deed must take effect. And this
much generally.

Now to prove unto you, that Untruth. For Syluester was dead long before
the summoninge of the Council.
S. Syluester assented to the calling of the first Council at Nice, it is to
be considered, that he only has authority to ratify, who has authority to
command, and to give assent and strength from the beginning. For none other
difference is between commaundinge, assentinge, auctorizinge, and ratifying,
but that assentinge is common to them al, commaundinge is a thing that goes
before the fact, auctorizinge is the making of a thing good by present
agreeinge to it, whiles it is done, ratifyinge is the allowinge of it, when it
is done. If then I show, both that the Pope did ratify the calling of the
general Councels, and auctorize them: I show much more that he assented to
the calling of them. The auctorizinge is proved, by reason he sent his
Legates to every of them. As Untruth, vain, and unadvised. For neither was
Hosius Syluesters Legate, nor was Syluester then alive.
S. Syluester sent Osius Cordubensis of the province of Spain unto Nice, with
Victor and Vincentius, Pr^estes of the City of Rome. Of which the last two,
being them selves no Bishops, yet for that they were Legates of the chief
Bishop, did in Untruth impudente. For they had the fourth place in the
Council, and subscribed after Eustathius.
the first place put unto the decrees of that council their consent and
names, writing after thus sort: Pro venerabili vito Papa and Episcopo nostro
Syluestro subscripsimus: We have subscribed for the reverent man our Pope and
Bishop Syluester. And at the very Untruth. Unless a dead man may Summone
Councelles.
same time, that the general council was kept at Nice, S. Syluester called
an other Council in Rome, at the which two hundred seventy and five Bishops
were assembled. And it is expressly written in the same Council, Syluester
collegit vniuersam Synodum Episcoporum cum consilio Augusti, vel matris eius:
Syluester gathered together the whole Synod of the Bishops with the Counsel
of the By the Counsel of the Emperor, or of his Mother: vvisely: He vvoteth
not whether. And yet the Emperors Mother was dead before: Sozom. Lib. 2. Ca.
2. and. 3.
Emperor or * his mother. Why his counsel was needeful, it appears there.
Because the Emperor bare the charges of their diete, and carriage. So that
his counsel was necessary, not chiefly for Religion, but rather for
supportation of the charges of so great a journey. For then neither was the
Bishop of Rome, nor other Bishops endewed with so large possessions, as they
were afterward.

Now to return to the Council of Nice. The Emperor was in deed the cause
of their coming together, as well for that him self persuaded that mean of
concord, as also for that liberally, he defraied the charges. Yet called he
not the Bishops of his own head. And that these men might have seen in the
Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 10. ca. 1. Mark, ex sacerdotum sententia.
where Rufinus writes: Tum ille ex Sacerdotum sententia apud vrbem Nicaeam
Episcopale concilium conuocat: Then the Emperor calls together a Council of
Bishops according to the determination of the Priests. He did it according
as it seemed Full Clerkely proved. For Ruffinus says, The Emperor herein
followed the advice of Alexander the Bishop of Alexandria, etc. But of the Pope
there is no mention.
good to the Bishops. And shall we think the Bishop of Rome was none of them
that consented to the calling? Ye as verily he was the chiefest of al. How can
it otherwise seem? For when all the decrees were made, In sum. Nice. Council.
Placuit vt haec omnia mitterentur ad Episcopu^ vrbis Romae Syluestrum: It was
thought good, that all those acts, and decrees should be sent to Untruth
so^dly forged. For Syluester was dead long before.
Syluester Bishop of the City of Rome. If he were the last, that had the vewe
and confirminge of all things, there is no doubt, but he had a voice and
great authority in calling the Council.

What other is that, which Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History
witnesses, saying, Cum vtique regula Ecclesiastica iubeat, non oportere
Untruth, standinge in plain corruption of the words. See the Ansvvear.
praeter sententiam Romani Pontisicis concilia celebrari: Whereas the
Ecclesiastical rule commands, that no councels ought to be kept besides
the determinate consent of the Bishop of Rome? We know (says Athanasius,
and the Bishops of Aegypte assembled in Council at Alexandria) that in the
great council of Nice of 318 Bishops, Hist. trip. li. 4. ca. 9. Epistola
Aegyptior. po^tificum. Ruf. Li. 10. cap. a. Hist. trip. Li. 7. ca. 12.
it was with one accord by all confirmed there, that without the determination
of the Bishop of Rome, neither councels should be kept, nor Bishops
condemned. I omit here as a thing well known, how Constantine the Emperor
refused in express words, to be judge over Bishops, saying, that God had
given them power to judge of him: much less did he arrogate to him self only
and chiefly authority to summon councels, or to judge Bishoply affairs. As
for me (says Valentinian the Emperor) in as much as I am but one of the
people, it is not lawful to search such matters: (he speaks of the Heretics
Doctrines) but let the Priests, to whom this charge belongs, be gathered
together within them selves, where they will, etc.

Concerning the second Council, which was the first of those that were
kept at Constantinople, it may be, that Theodosius called it, as Constantine
called the first at Nice. But what authority Damasus bare in the same, it
appears partly by that he had his So had sundry other Bishops.
Legates there, partly also by that Photius Patriarch of Constantinople writes
in his Epistle to Michael Prince of Bulgaria. Where having declared the
coming together of the Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Jerusalem, he says
thus: Photius in Lib. de concilijs.
Quibus haud mult^ post and Damasus Episcopus Romae eadem confirmans, atque
idem sentiens accessit. To which (Patriarchs of Alexandria and Jerusalem) not
long after, Damasus the Bishop of Rome joined him self, confirminge Other
Bishops likewise gave their Co^sentes, and Confirmed etc. Yet had they no
Authority to Summone Councelles.
and determininge the same matter. This much says Photius of the second
Council, the confirmation whereof he does attribute, not to Theodosius the
Emperor, but to Damasus the Pope.

But what did Theodosius then? (will some man say). Did he nothing? yeas
verily he did very much, as in the said Epistle Phot^us records. Then did
great Theodosius (says he) in deed worthy of great praise rule the Empire,
who was him self also a defender, and a mainteiner of Godliness. Behold what
the Emperors part was, not to sit in judgment of matters of Religion, and
Untruth manifest. For Theodosius the Emperor expressly determined, what
should be holden for Christian Faith.
determine, which was the true Faith, but to defend it, and maintain it.
And that thou may see, reader, plainly, what Theodosius thought of Religion,
whom these Defenders would make a judge in causes of Religion: Cap. 7.
I advise thee to read the ninth Book of the Tripartite History, where
appear many great arguments of his own Faith: Which he publishes to the
world from Thessalonica, in a public law, to be such, as Peter had taught
the Romans, Untruth, guilefully enclosed. For Theodosius willed his
Subjects, to follow as well the ^aithe of sundry other Bishops, as the
Popes.
and as Damasus who succeeded Peter, taught at that day, requiringe all his
subjects to believe the same. He required not them to follow his own Private
Faith, Ruf. Lib. 11. Cap. 3.
but Peter's Faith, and the Popes Faith. And whereas there were two Bishops
of Alexandria at that time, the one, whose name was Peter, holdinge with the
Bishop of Rome, the other named Lucius, not so: Theodosius commanded his
subjects to believe, as Peter did, who followed the first Peter, and Damasus
the Bishop of Rome.

Touching the third general Council, it was kept in deed under Theodosius
the younger at Ephesus. But he was not supreme head there. Yea rather who
knows not, that Cyrillus being him self Patriarch of Alexandria, yet was
president at Ephesus, bearinge the steed, and person of Pope Celestine? If
Cyrill was in steed of the Bishop of Rome there president, A fond folly. For
the Bishop of Rome had evermore the First Place in Councelles: Yet was he not
therefore the Head of the Church.
who may doubt, but that he was Supreme Head of the Church, in whose name the
President sat? Does the President of the Queens Majesty's Counsel use to
sit at her counsel in the name of any other inferior person? If Theodosius
were supreme and chief, why sat not Cyrill in his name, as president? But
saying that Photius writes, Li. 14. c. 34.
and Nicephorus also, that Cyrill Archbishop of Alexandria sat in the steed
of Celestine Pope of Rome over that Council kept at Ephesus, undoubtedly it
can not be denied, but that Celestine was supreme head, as well of the Church,
as of the General Council.

It is not therefore only to be considered, that Theodosius sent abroad his
messengers to summon the Fathers to the General Council, but also it is to be
considered, No doubt by the Authority of the Pope. And so was the Emperor
only the Popes man.
by whose authority it was done. If in our time it had pleased the Emperor
Ferdinande of Famous Memory to have sent his Messengers to the Kings and
Princes of Spain, France, England, Hungary, Bemelande, Pole, and to the
Estates, and Dukes of Italy, and Germany, to summon them to the Council,
which the Pope thought good to indict at Trente: I think verily the Pope
would have thanked the Emperor for it, and him self should have saved so
much charges, as men of experience know, such an enterprise to require. But
now, since the Pope has of his own sufficient to bear the charges of such
affairs, he asks not any more of the Emperor such expenses, as in old
time to that necessary purpose by the Emperors were allowed.

Last of all Martian (say you) called the fourth General Council at
Chalcedon. We answer. He called it not in such sort as ye mean, to wit,
as supreme Head and ruler thereof, but as one hable to send messengers for the
Bishops about the world, and to sustain the charges, also willinge to see
peace, and concord in the Church of God. Who list to read the Epistles of
Pope Leo to Pul^^eria the Emperesse, to Martian himself, to Theodosius, to
Flauianus Archbishop of Constan^^nople, to the Synod first assembled at
Ephesus, afterward for certain causes at Chalcedon: in the same Epistles he
may see both the cause of the council, and what Untruth. For the Council
was summoned to Chalcedon, quite contrary to the Popes vvil. Read the
Answer.
conference was had thereof with the said Leo Bishop of Rome, who sent first
to Ephesus, Iulianus a Bishop, Renatus a Priest, and Hilarious a Deacon: The
Summoninge of Councelles.
and afterward to Chalcedon, Paschasinus, and Lucentius Bishops, and
Bonifacius a Priest, to represente hius person. In one of the said Epistles
written to the Second Synod at Ephesus, Leo Epist. 15.
Leo says thus: Religiosissima Clementissimi principis Fides etc. The most
religious Faith of our most element Prince knowinge it to perteine chiefly
to his re^me, if within the Catholic Church no branche of error spring,
has deferred this reverence to Gods ordinances, as to use the authority of
the sea Apostolic, to achieue the effect of a Holy purpose. as though he were
desirous by the most blessed Peter himself, that to be declared, which in
his confession was praised. By which words It is plain, that in matters of
Religion the Emperor proceeded not upon his own Head, but Untruth most
manifest: Read the Answer:
was directed by the Sea of Peter. What shall I say more?

If the Emperor first Christened the Pope, let the Emperor be superior in
things to Godward. But if the Pope Christened the Emperor, (as Untruth. For
he was Christened by Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia, long after that
Syluester was dead.
Syluester did Constantine) let the spiritual Father in that degree of rule be
above the spiritual Child.

The B. of Sarisburie.
No man could utter so many Untruths together, with such assiance, without
sum cunninge. First, M. Hardinge, ye bear us in hand, that the Emperors
of the World, in those days, summoned Councelles, not by their own
Authority, but by the Authority, and Warrante of the Pope: As if the Popes
Authority at that time, had benne many degrees above the Emperor.
Notwithstanding, Pope Pius. 2. Aeneas Syluius in Epist.
as you know, says thus, Ante Nicenam Synodum vnusquisque sibi vixit: and
paruus respectus ad Romanam Ecclesiam habebatur: Before the Council of Nice,
each Bishop lived severally to him self: and little regard was there then had
to the Church of Rome. Inter ^pistolas Augustine. Epis. 96.
Pope Innocentius complains, that he had not Authority sufficient, to force
Pelagius, being but one man, to comme before him: mutche less had he
Authority sufficient, to command, and call the whole world. Pope Leo both
was an humble suitor himself unto y^ Emperor Martianus, that it would please
his Majesty to command a Council, and also entreated other Bishops to
promote the cause. Thus he writes, Humiliter, ac sapienter exposcite, Leo ad
Clerum and pleb^m Constan. Epist. 23.
vt Pet^tiom nostrae, qua Plenariam indici Synodum postulamus, Clementissimus
Imperator dignetur annuere: Make suite with discrete, and humble Prayer, that
our most Gracious Emperor would vouchesaue to grant our request, in
that we have desired a General Council. It is not likely, that Pope Leo would
thus have written, if his own Authority had benne sufficient.

Naie, it is the more unlikely, that the Emperor should herein at any time
use the Authority of the Pope, for that the Pope him self was never hable to
summone Bishops, as hereafter it shall appear, but only by the Authority of
the Emperor. Theodoret. Li. 5. Cap. 9 (...) Eusebius. Lib. 10 Cap. 5.
Pope, Damasus commanded the Bishops of the East, to comme to Rome: How be
it, not in his own name, for that had benne no warrante, but by the Emperors
special letters. Eusebius says thus, (...): Exemplar Regiarum Literarum,
quibus iubet Romae Episcoporum Concilium celebrari: This is a Copy of the
Emperors Write, whereby he commanded a Council to be keapte In Rome. As for
the Pope, notwithstanding al his Universal Power, he was commanded by the
Emperors Summone, to be present at Councelles, as well as others.

In the Council of Chalcedon it is written thus: Eodem tenore a Pijssimis, and
Christianissimis Imperatoribus, Council. Chalcedonen. Actio^ ^. Page 748.
Sanctissimus noster Papa, Romanae Ecclesiae praepositus Leo, vocatus est: By
order of the same Write, Our most Holy Pope Leo, ruler of the Church of
Rome, was called to the Council by the most Godly, and most Christian
Emperors.

Sozomenus says, The Summoninge of Councelles.
Constantinus scripsit ad omnes Praesides Ecclesiarum, vt ad diem adessent: Ad
Episcopos Apostolicarum Sedium: Ad Macarium Hierosoly mitanum: ad Iulium
Romanum, etc. The Emperor Constantinus sent out his Letters unto all the
Rulers of the Churches, (...). Lib. 1. Cap 17. Theodoret. Lia. Cap. 7. (...).
that they should meet al at Nice upon a da^e: unto the Bishops of the
Apostolic Sees: unto Macarius y^ Bishop of Jerusalem: and unto Julius the
Bishop of Rome etc. But sulius excused his absence because of his age.
Otherwise of Obedience, and Dewtie toward the Emperor, he was as mutche
bound, to have made his appearance there, as the rest of his Brethren.

Ye say, If the Emperor should have summoned the Council by his own
Authority, then the Bishops of Persia, and Scotland, which Countries were
not then under the Obedience of the Roman Empiere, would not have appeared
upon the Summone, and so had it benne no General Council. This cauil wants
both truth, and sauoure. For proof whereof, I will bring forth your self,
M. Hardinge, to reprove your self. Ye should not so soon have foregotten
your own Decree, specially conceived, and published in this self same Book.
Thus you say: these be your own words: A Council is not accoumpted General,
M. Hardinge. (...) 32. ^.
because Bishops of al Countries under Heaven be assembled: but because many
be assembled, and al be lawfully called. Otherwise your Late Chapter of
Tridente, with your worthy number of Forty Prelates, whereof certain were
only May Bishops, otherwise by you called Nullatenses, could never have
benne a General Council.

Certainly it cannot appear, that there was any Bishop, either of Scotland,
or of England, then called Britain, at any of the first four Councelles,
either at Nice, or at Ephesus, or at Constantinople, or at Chalcedon. Yet are
these Councelles nevertheless called General.

Touching the rest, the Emperor was then the only Monarke of the world:
Chrysostom. Ad Popul. An^^othe. Homi. 2.
and, as Chrysostom calls him, Summitas, and Caput omnium super terram
hominum: The Top, and Head of al men in the world. No doubt, who so ever
would then have refused the Emperors Summone, mutche more would he have
refused the Summone of the Pope.

To quali^^e the matter, ye sat, the Emperor did these things, although not
by the Popes vvarrante, yet, at the least, by the Popes Consent, and never
otherwise. Here likewise is an other Untruth. For the Emperor commanded
Councelles, both when he would, and whither he would, whether the Pope
would, or no, many times without any manner of regard had to his pleasure.
Pope Leo wrote thus unto the Emperor Theodosius, Omnes nostrae Ecclesiae, ^eo
ad (...) seon, ^pis. 24.
Omnes Mansue^udini Vestrae cum gemitibus, and Lachrymis supplicant Sacerd^^es,
vt Generalem Synodum iubeatis intra Italiam celebrari: Al our Churches, and al
our Priests most humbly beseech your Majesty with sobbes, and tears, that
ye will command a General Council to be holden within Italy. In like sort
he caused the Cleregie of ^onstantinople, to be su^ters unto his Majesty for
the same: yet nevertheless the Emperor continewed still in his purpose: and,
contrary to the Popes humble petition, kept the Council, not in Italy, but
at Chalcedon: where also, as it is said before, Pope Leo him self was
summoned to appear by the Emperors Commandment, with other Bishops.

Of such Authority was the Popes consent in Summoninge of Councelles. He
humbly craved it upon his knees, with sighs, and tears: and could not geate
it. Hereof Aeneas Syluius, which afterward was Pope Pius. 2, says thus,
(...) Syluiu^. De ^^on^^l. Basilien. Lib. 1.
Ex hisce Authoritatibus mirum in modum se putant armatos, qui Concilia negant
sieri posse sine consensu Papae. Quorum sententia, si, vt ipsi volunt,
inuiolata persistat, ruinam secum Ecclesiae trahit. Quid enim remedij erit, The
Summoninge of councelles.
si criminosus papa perturbet Ecclesiam: si animas perdat: si animas peruertat
malo exemplo populos: si denique contraria Fidei praedicet, Haereticisque
Dogmatibus imbuat subditos? Sinemusne cum ipso cuncta ruere? At ego, dum
veteres lego Historias, dum Actus perspicio Apostolorum, hunc equidem morem non
inuenlo, vt Soli Papae Concilia conuocauerint: Nec post, tempore Constantini
Magni, and aliorum Augustorum, ad Congreganda concilia quaesitus est magnopere
Romani consensus Papae: By these Authorities they think them selves armed,
that say, no Council may be keapte without the consent of the Pope. Whose
Judgment, if it should stand, as they would have it, would draw with it
the decaie, and ruin of the Church. For what remedy were there then, if the
Pope him self were vicious, destroyed Souls, ouerthrewe the people with evil
examples, taught Doctrine contrary to the Faith, and filled his Subjects full
of Heresies? Should we suffer al to go to the Devil? Verily, when I read the
Old stories, and consider the Acts of the Apostles, I find no such order
in those days, that only the Pope should Summone Councelles. And afterward,
in the time of Coustantine the Great, and of other Emperors, when Councelles
should be called, there was no great accoumpte made of the Popes consent.
Cusanus, De Concordia Cathosica, Lib. 3. Ca. 15.
Cardinal Cusanus says, Negligente, aut Contradicente papa, Imperator potest
praeceptiue Synodos indicere, ad prouidendum fluctuanti Ecclesiae: If the Pope
be negligente, or, if he say naie, the Emperor, to stay the w^ueringe state
of the Church, may command Councelles by his own Authority. Thus ye
Emperor Sigismunde called a Council at constance: notwithstanding it stood
Pope John mutche upon, never to yaelde his consent unto it. For in the same
Council he was deprived, and of a Pope was made a Cardinal.

Ye say, y^ Pope had Authority to Confirm Councelles, Ergo, Mutche more he
had Authority to call Councelles. And here ye tell us a very solemn tale,
what is Co^mau^dinge: what is Assentinge: what is Authorizinge; what is
Ratifieinge: as if it had benne somewhat to the purpose. But if your reason
hold, then must General Cou^celles have many Callers. For as I shall hereafter
sufficiently prove, not only y^ Pope, or the other principal Patriarchs, but
also al other Bishops, y^ were present, yea Emperors, Kings, Lieutenantes,
and Counselors had Authority to Confirm Councelles. Sozomen. Lib. 6. Cap. 23.
Sozomenus says, Nec Romanus, nec Vicentinus, nec alij confirmarunt: This
Council was Confirmed, neither by the Bishop of Rome, nor by the Bishop of
Vicentia, nor by the rest of the Bishops. And the Emperor Martianus says,
Council. Chalcedon. Actio. 3. Page 804.
Sacrosancto nostrae serenitatis Edicto venerandam Synodum Confirmamus: We
Confirm the Reverend Council by the Holy Edicte of our Majesty. Ye say,
Pope Syluester sent that Famous Learned Father Hosius, the Bishop of Corduba,
to the Council of Nice, to represente his person. This may well pass emonge
the rest of your Truths. For neither was Hosius there in the Popes behalf,
but in his own: nor was Pope Syluester then alive, or hable to send him,
duringe the whole time of the Nicene Council: notwithsstandinge any thing,
that your Fabulare, Peter Crabbe, has said to the contrary. As for Hosius,
the Bishop of Corduba, of what Authority, and estimation he was in all
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, it may appear by these words of Athanasius: In
qua Synodo Dux ille, Athanasi. Apologia. 2.
and Antesignanus non fuit? Quae Ecclesia istius Praesidentiae non pulcherrima
monumenta retinet? In what Council has not Hosius benne Chief, and
Presidente? What Church is without sum notable remembrance of his
gouernmente? Certainly, M. Hardinge, it seems, he was a great deal too
good, to be sent so far in a dead man's errante.

Notwithstanding, Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 17.
Julius, being then Bishop of Rome, for that he was unable to travail,
because of his age, sent thither two Priests. Vitus, and Vincentius, to
supply his room. Thus he did, not of pride, the better by his absence to
maineteine a state, but only for that he was forced of necessity so to do.
For if he had benne hable to travail so far, The Summoninge of councelles.
he had benne forced to go thither him self. Therefore Pope Agatho afterward
thus excused his Absence unto the Emperor: Christianissimi Domini Filij,
secundum Pijssimam Iussionem Mansuetudinis vestrae, Council. Constantinopolitan.
Actio. 4. Ad Heraclium. and Tiberium Imper. Page 288. Athanasi. ad Antiochen.
to. 2.
pro Obedientia, quam debuimus, praesentes confamulos nostros misimus: My most
Christian Lords, and Children, according to the most godly Commandment of
your Majesty's, and according to the Obedience, that we owe of dewtie, we
have sent these present our Fellow Servants.

Other Bishops in like cases of age, or infirmity, did the like. For
example, Lucifer, the Bishop of Sardinia, sent Herennius, and Agapetus: and
Paulinus sent Maximus, and Calemerus to the Council of Nice, to be in their
steedes.

Ye say, Vitus, and Vincentius, for that they were the Popes Legates, had
therefore the First place in Subscription emonge the Bishops. Here is an
other great Untruth. Theodoret, Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
For Theoderetus says, the First, and Chief of all that company, both in
place, and in speech, was, not Vitus, or Vincentius, the Popes Legates, but
Eustathius the Patriarch of Antioche.

Touching these two the Popes Legates, Sozomen. Lib. 1. Cap. 17. Athanasi.
Apologia 2.
Sozomenus places them only in the Fourth room: Athanasius says,
Subscripserunt, Hosius ab Hispania, Julius Romanus per Archidamum, and
Philoxenum Presbyteros: They Subscribed their names to the Council, Hosius that
came out of Spain, and Julius the Bishop of Rome, by Archidamus, and
Philoxenus Priests, that were his Legates: By which words he allows the
Bishop of Romes Legates the Second place in Subscription: but not the First.
And thus, ye see, Hosius the Bishop of Corduba subscribeth before Julius the
Bishop of Rome.

In the Council of Aphrica, Council. Aphric. Ca. 100. Council. Chalcedon. Actio.
1. Sancta.
Philippus, and Asellius the Popes Legates, had the Last Place in Subscription
after al others. In the Council of Chalcedon, Philippus, one of the Popes
Legates, had a hundred, and seven and fifty others to Subscribe before him.

These Fathers, I trow, would not have benne so unmannerly in their dealinge,
if they had taken the Pope for the Head of the whole Universal Church,
Sozom. li 1. ca. 17 Athanas Apologia. 2. Theodoret. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. Micephor.
Lib. Cap. 14.
to have placed his Legate behind so many. Further, ye say, At the very same
time, that the General Council was keapte at Nice, S. Syluester called an other
Council in Rome. This, I trow, M. Hardinge, is an other Untruth: Unless ye
have power to raise up dead men, to keep Councelles, For Syluester was dead
long before.

Sozomenus says, Vitus, and Vincentius were sent to Nice, not by Pope
Syluester, who then was dead, but by Pope Julius, y^ was y^ second after him.
The like may easily appear by Athanasius, Tabula Herma^ni Contracti:
Syluester Papa motitur. Marcus Papa Vixit octo Menses. Julius Papa. Hoc tempore
Constant^nus indixit Nice ^um Concilium. Anno Domi. 324.

Theodoretus, Nicephorus, and others. Therefore, M. Hardinge, you must needs
divise two Councelles of Nice about one time: two Syluesters Popes: two
VVriters of this one story, the one true, the other false. Otherwise, this
frail stuff will never hold. Ye are over easy to credit Fables.

The Council, that ye imagine, was holden in Rome by Pope Syluester, is
nothing else but a heap of childishe Vanitises. The Holy discrete Learned
Fathers say there, Nemo Presbyterorum Chrisma conficiat: quoniam Christus a
Chrismate vocatur: Praesul Summus non iudicabitur a quoquam: Quoniam scriptum
est, Non est Discipulus supra Magistrum. Neque ab Augusto, neque ab omni Clero,
neque a Regibus, neque ab omni Populo Iudex iudicabitur: Co^c. Romans Ca. 5. Ca.
3. Ca. 12.
No Priest may make, or halowe the Chrisme: For Christ of Chrisme has his
name. The Higheste Prelate ( that is, the Pope) more be judged of noma^: For it
is written, The Scholar is not above his Master. The Judge (that is, the pope)
shall not be judged, neither by the Emperor, nor by all the Cleregie, nor by
Kings, and Princes, nor by the whole people. Such and other like good stuff
have you in your Council of Rome.

Notwithstanding, The Summoninge of Councelles.
of what credit so ever this Council were, yet, M. Hardinge, it utterly
overthrows your whole purpose. For, if ever there were any such Council
summoned in Rome, it was summoned, not by Syluester y^ dead Pope, but by the
Authority of the Emperor y^ the^ was alive. So Eusebius writes of the
Council of Rome, holden in the time of Pope Meltiades, as it is said before:
Eusebius. Li. 10. ca. 5.
Exemplar Regiarum Literarum, etc. Here is a Copy of the Emperoures Write,
whereby he has commanded a Council of Bishops to be keapte at Rome.

Likewise the Bishops assembled in the Council of Constantinople, wrote unto
the Bishops in the Council of Rome: Theodoretus, li. 5 Cap. 9.
Cum indixissetis, etc. After ye had called a Council to Rome, ye warned us
also to comme thither, as the Members of your own Body, by the most godly
Emperors Write.

By these it appears, if there were any such Council called to Rome, it was
called by the Emperor, and not by the Pope.

Ye say, the Emperor in such affairs was advised evermore by the
Bishops. This is not unlikely, and therefore easily may be granted.
Notwithstanding, for ought, that may appear, he was more advised oftentimes
by sum other Bishops, then by the Pope, as it shall appear. Eusebius,
touching the Emperor Constantinus, writes thus: Quasi Communis quidam
Episcopus a Deo constitutus, Eusebius. Devita Constantini, Oratione. 1. Ruffin.
li. 1. ca. 1.
Ministrorum Dei Synodos conuocauit: As if he had benne one Common Bishop
appointed by God, he appointed Councelles of Bishops to assemble together.
Ruffinus says, The Emperor was advised hereto by Alexander, the Bishop of
Alexandria, and by other Bishops, and Priests of Egypt. Here is no mention
of the Pope. In the like cases of Ecclesiastical Affairs, Athanasius was an
earnest suitor unto the Emperor Constantius: Dioscorus, unto Theodosius: and
so others, unto other.

But of the Popes omnipotente consent, without which, ye tell us, no
Emperor may summone a Council, there is noman that makes mention.

Ye say, There ought no Council to be keapte without the determinate consent
of the Bishop of Rome. This also is an other of your Untruths, standing in the
manifest corruption of the words of Socrates: as in my Former Reply I have
declared more at large. Arti. 4. Diui. 26 Socrat li. ^ ca. 17 (...). Cassiodor.
Lib. 4. Cap. 19. Regula Iuris, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus debet approbari.
The words of Socrates be these, Non licet scribere Ecclesiastica Decreta
praeter sententiam Episcopi Romani: It is provided, that Ecclesiastical Laws
be not made without the consent of the Bishop of Rome: For that the Bishop of
Rome was one of the Four Great Patriarchs, whoes assentes in all General
Councelles were thought necessary. But Socrates means such Ecclesiastical
Laws, as perteine to the whole Church of God. For this is a Rule agreeable
to reason, That touches al, must be allowed by all.

Now, whereas ye have exchanged the Allovveinge of Canons, into the
Summoninge, or Calling of Councelles, it may please you to remember, that
Allovveinge of Canons was common to all the Members of the Council, and
specially to the Four Principal Patriarchs, as it is said before: But the
Authority of Calling Councelles belonged only to the Emperor.

That ye allege of Athanasius, is a vain, and a shameless Forgerie: as I
have otherwhere declared more at large. Such Religion, such Doctors.
Such Folly is worthy no other answer.

Valentinian the Emperor, Sozom. Li. 6. ca. 7
ye say, accoumpted him self as one of the people: and therefore said, It
was not lawful for him, to Examine matters of Religion. Thus he said, either of
humility, or else for want of time. His foretne Enemies, his Wars, and his
Civil Cares had filled his head with other thoughts. Nicephorus imagines
him thus to say, Nicephor. Lib. 1^ Cap 3.
Mihi negotijs occupatio, and Reipublicae curis distento, res huiusmodi
inquirere non est facile: For me, being thus occupied with Business, and
Public Cares, The Summoninge of Councelles.
it is not easy to enquire of such matters. Otherwise, that Ecclesiastical
Causes be within the Princes Charge, I doubt not, but hereafter it shall well
appear. King Odoacer said unto Pope Symmachus, and unto the Cleregie of
Rome, Council. Roman. 3 Cap. 2.
as it is alleged once before: Miramur, quicquam tenratum fuisse sine nobis.
Nam, viuente nostro Presbytero, sine nobis nihil tentari oportuit: We
marvel, that any thing was attempted without us: For without us nothing
should have benne done, so long as Our priest ( he means the Pope) was
alive.

After this ye fille the house full with Patriarchs of Constantinople,
Patriarchs of Alexandria, Patriarchs of Jerusalem, Princes of Bulgaria, and
with other like great, and stately persons. The Conclusion hereof is this, That
Pope Damasus gave his consent to the Council of Constantinople. All this, M.
Hardinge, ye might soon have obtained with more favor, and less a do.
How be it, ye may not hereof well reason thus, The Pope consented unto the
Council: Ergo, The Pope had Authority to call the Council: lest children
wonder at your Logique.

In the mean while, ye say, the Emperor Theodosius ruled the Empiere:
whereby ye gene us to understand, that he had no charge over the Church. And
thus ye continewe still to enriche your self, and to heap your Reader with
Untruths.

Certainly the Bishops in the Council of Constantinople wrote thus in humble
wise unto the same Emperor Theodosius: Obsecramus Clementiam tuam, Post
Conci. Ephesinum Primum.
vt, quemadmodum Literis honorasti Ecclesiam, quibus nos Conuocasti, ita
finalem Conclusionem nostrorum Decretorum corroboves sententia tua, and
Sigillo: We beseech your Majesty, that, as ye have honored the Church by
your Letters, wherewith ye have called us together, so it may please you, to
Confirm the final Conclusion of our Decrees with your Sentence, and with your
Seal.

Further, as it appears by your own Allegation, the same Emperor
Theodosius took upon him, The Emperor limiteth the Catholic Faith.
to bound, and to limite the Catholic Faith, and that even in the Body of
his Civil Laws: which thing neither could he have done without Judgment:
nor would he have done without Authority. But, if ye ineane, that by this
Determination of the Emperor Theodosius, that Faith only should be taken
for Catholic, that was then professed by Pope Damasus, and should afterward
be professed by others succeding in Peter's Chair, then have ye secretly
conueighed us in an other Untruth. The place it self will soon reprove you.
Cod. Theodosian. Lib. 16. Titu de Fide Catholic. Cunctos Populos
The Emperors words be these, Cunctos populos in tali volumus Religione
versari, quam Diuinum Petrum Apostolum tradidisse Romany, Religio vsque nunc
ab eo insinuata declarat: quamque Pontificem Damasum sequi claret, and Petrum
Alexandriae Episcopum, Virum Apostolicae sanctitatis: We will el men to walk
in that Religion, which Holy Peter the Apostle delivered to the Romans, as
the Faith first enkendled by him, and still contine wed until this day, does
declare: which Religion also it is plain, that Pope Damasus follows, and
Peter the Bishop of Alexandria, a man of Apostolic holiness. Here the
Emperor Theodosius commands his Subjects to follow, as well the Faith of
Peter the Bishop of Alexandria, as of Damasus the Bishop of Rome.

And yet in the next title folowinge, he opens his own meaning in this wise
by other Eramples, Cod. Theodosi. li. 16. Titu. 3. Sozom. li. 7. ca 9
more at large: Episcopis tradi omnes Ecclesias mox iubemus, quos constabit vti
Communione Nectarij Episcopi Constantinopolitanae Ecclesiae, and Timothei, etc.
We command, that forthwith the Churches be restoared to al Bishops, of
whom it shall appear, that they Communicate with Nestorius the Bishop of
Constantinople, or with Timotheus: or such as shall have fellowship, or
agreemente in Faith, with the Bishops of Alexandria in Egypt: and with
Pelagius the Bishop of Laodicea: and with Diodorus the Bishop of Tarsus in
Asia: and with Amphilochius the Bishop of Iconium: and with Optimus the Bishop
of Antioche: and with Helladius the Bishop of Caesaria: and with Otreius the
Bishop of Melite: and with Gregorius the Bishop of Nyssa: and with Terennius
the Bishop of Scythia: and with Marmarius the Bishop of Martianopolis. Every of
these several Bishops, M. Hardinge, by the Emperoures judgment, in trial of
the Catholic Faith, had as great Authority, and weighte, as the Bishop of
Rome.

But Pope Coelestinus, ye say, desired Cyrillus the Bishop of Alexandria, to
represente his person, and to supply his rouine in the Council of Ephesus,
that is to say, to have the First place in the Council. For the First Place
in all Ecclesiastical Assemblies was alloted to the Bishop of Rome: Dis. 22.
Renoua^tes.
The Second, to the Bishop of Constantinople: The Third, to y^ Bishop of
Alexandria: The Fourth, to the Bishop of Antioche: The Fifthe, to the Bishop of
Jerusalem.

This packinge of places therefore bitweene Coelestinus, and Cyrillus, was a
Mystery, pourposely canuessed, to keep the Bishop of Constantinople, whom the
Pope evermore envied, out of countenance. For by this Policy, the Bishop of
Alexandria, that should have had the Third Place, was handsomely shifted into
the First: and the Bishop of Constantinople, which, in the Bishop of Romes
absence, should have had the First Place, was removed down to the Second.

How be it, what avails all this, M. Hardinge, to further your purpose, and
to prove, that Councelles were summoned by the Pope? Verily it appears not
hitherto, that either Coelestinus, or Cyrillus, or any other Bishop had any
such Power, or Authority to summone Councelles. This is it, that ye should
have proved. As for the First, or Second Place, we moved no question.

Again, ye seem to say, the Pope of right was evermore Presidente in all
Councelles. This, if ye know it, is an other Untruth: If ye know it not,
it is an error. Theodoretus, li. 3. Cap. 7.
For it is plain, that in the First Council of Nice Pope Julius was not
Presidente, but Eustathius the Bishop of Antioche. The Popes Legates, as it is
said before, Euagri. Lib. 4. Cap. 38.
were placed beneath in the fourth room: In the Fifthe Council of
Constantinople, Menna the Bishop of the same City, was President, and not the
Pope. Nicephor. Li. 17. Cap. 27.
In the Second Ephesine Council, Dioscorus the Bishop of Alexandria was
Presidente. In the Second Council of Carthage it seems Gennedius was the
Presidente.

This Dignity then passed not by Enheritance, Council. Chalced. Acti. 1.
Dioscoro. Exactis Conci. Carthag. 2.
or by Succession, as the Pope now would seem to claim it: but, either by
choice of the Council, or by favor of the Prince. Thus Hosius the Bishop of
Corduba in Spain, not by right of his place, Sozom. li. 3. ca. 12. Socra. li.
2. ca. 20. Athanas. Apologia 2.
but for the worthiness of his person, was appointed Presidente in the
Council of Sardica. And Athanasius speaks of him in this wise with great
admiration, Cuius non fuit ille Concilij Princeps? In what Council has not
Hosius benne the Presidente, or Chief?

Ye say, Pope Syluester Christened the Emperor Constantinus, and therefore
was his Spiritual Father. This may pass emonge other your Truths. For your
Popes, by their Omnipotente Power may Minister Sacraments, being dead. And
yet, notwithstanding all this were true, M. Hardinge, yet your cause thereby
were little furthereo. Unless perhaps ye will reason thus: Pope Syluester
Christened the Emperor: Ergo, The Pope has Authority, to Call Councelles.
How be it, unless this Argument be better digested, your very Sophisters of
Louaine will hardely allow it.

But in deed, that whole tale, touching the Christeninge of the Emperor
Constantine, Inter Acta Liberij. Cap. 6. Eusebius. De vita Constan. Orat. 4.
is nothing else, but a peeuishe fable. Constantius, the Emperors own Son,
utterly denies, that Syluester ever Baptized Constantinus his Father. Eusebius
says, Constantinus was Christened, not in the floorishing state of his age,
but only a little before he died: not in Rome, but at Nicomedia, in the
Kingdom of Epirus: not in a corner, but in the presence of many Bishops:
and, as S. Hierome says, not by Pope Syluester, that then was dead, but by
Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia. Socra. Anno Aetatis suae. 65. (...).
For proof whereof, S. Ambrose says, Constantino in vltimis constituto,
Gratia Baptismatis omnia peccata dimisit: The Grace of Baptism foregaue
Constantine al his sins, even at the ending of his life. Therefore, M.
Hardinge, we must needs say, that, either your tale is untrue, which is not
strange: or else Constantine was twice Baptized, which is very unlikely.

Cardinal Poole, Hieronym. in Chronico.
seeinge the matter to pass so clear, tells us roundely in one word, that
Eusebius, and Constantius were Ariane Heretics, and therefore refuses the
whole story written by Eusebius, Ambro. de obit^^ Theodosij.
touching the Christening of Constantine. But, sommewhat to soothe you in your
tale, let a Fable stand for Truth: and let us grant you an impossibility,
Cardinal. Polus de Baptismo Co^stantini, Page 87.
y^ Constantine was Baptized by Pope Syluester being dead. Yet will you needs
geather hereof, that the Emperor is Subject to the Pope? Or, that the Pope
has Authority to call Councelles? What will you then say, when the Emperor
is Baptized by sum other Priest, or Bishop, or by a Midvvife? Shall every of
these therefore require to have, and to do y^ like? Or, must we believe,
that such a Priest, Bishop, or Midvvife shall have Authority to call
Councelles? In deed, this were a good short way to geate Supremacy. But it
might have pleased you, to remember, that y^ Cardinal of Ostia uses always of
Office to Consecrat the Pope. Yet, I trow, ye will not therefore place him
above the Pope. Elizaeus anointed King Iehu: yet was he not therefore above the
King. Heruaeus de Potestat. Pp. Ca. 18.
Your own Doctoure says, Quod hoc Argumentum non concludat, patet: quia in
Veteri Lege, Sacerdotes, qui Reges inungebant, indubitanter Regibus
Subdebantur: It appears, that this Argument concludes nothing. For in the
Old Law, the Priests, that anointed the Kings, were undoubtedly subject
to the Kings.

To conclude, what right Emperoures had in Summoninge of Councelles, by these
few Authorities, and Examples folowinge, it may soon appear. Eusebius
says, Eusebius. de Vita Constan. Orat. 3.
Co^stantinus Synodu^ Oecumenica^ Collegit, and Episcopos, vt Vndique
accelerarent, honorificis literis conuocauit: ( Not the Pope, but) Constantine
geathered a General Council, and by honorable Writes called y^ Bishops of al
Countries to repair thither. Theodor. Lib. 1. Cap. 9.
Theodoretus says, A great, and a Holy Council was geathered to Nice, by the
Grace of God, and ( not by the Pope, but) by the Godly Emperor. Sozomenus
says, Sozom. li. 1. ca. 17.
( Not the Pope, but) The Emperor Constantine wrote unto all the Rulers of the
Churches, that they should be at Nice by a day: to the Bishops of the
Apostolic Sees, to Macarius the Bishop of Jerusalem, and to Julius the
Bishop of Rome. In which words this also may be noted, that y^ Pope then was
under the Emperors Summone, no less then others.

In the Council of Constantinople, the Bishops wrote thus unto the Emperor,
Ex ma^dato tuae Pietatis Constantinopolim co^uenimus: Council. Constantinopoli.
1.
We are comme to Constantinople, ( not by y^ Popes Authority, but) by your
Majesty's Commission. Athanasius says, Athana. de Synodis Artmin. and
Seleuceen.
Ab Imperatore, praefectisque Literae sequentes in omnem partem missae sunt,
eos, qui illuc ituri essent, conuocantes: These Letters, or Writes folowinge
were sent out into al places ( not from the Pope, but) from the Emperor, and
his Lieutenantes, summoning them, that should comme unto the Council. S.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. Epist. 1. Ad Innocentiu^. Ambros. in Council.
Aquileien.
We went in, and humbly besought ( not y^ Pope, but) the most Christian
Prince, to call a Council. S. Ambrose, speakinge of him self, and of other
Bishops, being then at the Council of Aquileia, says thus: Nos conuenimus
Aquileiam iuxta Praeceptum Imperatoris: Were are met together at Aquileia,
by the Commandment of the Emperor, ( and, not of the Pope).

S. Hierome says, Orientis, atque Occidentis Episcopos ob quasdam
Ecclesiasticas dissensines Romam Imperiales Literae contraxerunt: To stay
certain Ecclesiastical dissensions ( not any the Popes Letters of
Commandment, but) the Emperors Writes caused the Bishops, Hierony. in
Epitaphio Paulae.
as well of the East, as of the VVeaste, to draw to Rome.

Of Pope Leo, we have said before. Being Pope, and, as M. Hardinge
imagines, hable to summone the world with a beck, thus he writes to the
Emperor Theodosius: Leo, Epist. 9. Ad Theodosium Imperatorem.
Dignetur pietas vestra supplicationi nostrae annuere, vt intra Italiam haberi
iubeatis Episcopale Concilium: We beseech your Godly Majesty, to grant unto
our humble request, that it may please you to command a Council of
Bishops to be holden within Italy.

Sozomenus says, The Pope humbly desires the Emperor to summone a Council.
The Arians besought ( not the Pope, but) the Emperor Constantius, to
command a Council, to be holden at Antioche. The same Arians afterward
besought ( not the Pope, but) the same Emperor Constantius, to summone an
other Council to Millaine. Again sozomenus says, The Catholic Bishops
sent Hypatianus their Embassadoure, to entreat ( not the Pope, but) the
Emperor, Sozom li. 4. ca. 22 Socrat. li. 2. ca 8. Theodoret. Li. 2. Cap. 15.
that, to redress certain Erroures, they might have leave to meet together.
Pope Liberius says, A Council is holden at Millaine ( not by my Authority,
but) by the Commandment of the Prince. Pope Leo says, The great Council
of Chalcedon was sommoned ( not by him self, but) by the travail of Martianus
the Emperor. Ruffi. li. 1. ca. 19. Sozom. li. 6. ca. 7. Inter Acta Liberij.
The Emperor Constantius Commanded two several Councelles to be keapte at
one time: the one at Seleucea in Isauria in the East: the other at Ariminum in
Italy in the VVeaste. Socrates says, Sithence the Emperors were first
Christened, the state of the Church has hanged of them: and the greateste
Councelles have benne, Leo ad Anatoliu^. Socra. li. 2. ca. 37 Socrates, Lib. 5.
in prooemio.
and be keapte by their advise.

Thus many Anciente Councelles we are hable to show you, summoned by
Emperors. Now show you, M. Hardinge, either that the Emperor did al these
things by the Authority of the Pope: or, that the Emperor was only y^
Popes Summoner, to call to Council such, and so many, as it should like his
Holiness to command: Or, that the Pope did ever sommone any one Ancient
General Council by his own only right, without further Commission from the
Emperor, then will we say, ye have said sum thing. As for all, that ye
have now said, in good soothe, it is less, then nothing.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 3.
And when Rufine, the Heretic, had alleged for his Authority a Council,
which, as he thought, should make for him: S. Hierome his Adversary, to
confute him, Tell us ( quod he) what Emperor commanded that Council to be
called? The same S. Hierome again in his Epitaphe upon Paula, makes mention
of the Emperors Letters, which gave commandment, to call the Bishops of
Italy, and Graecia to Rome, to a Council.

M. Hardinge.
Bisides that ye Untruth, prceding of Ignorance: as it may soon appear.
do strangely, to call Rufine an Heretic, we say, that S. Hierome might well
demand, what Emperor summoned that Council, which was never summoned. Again
we confess, that some Emperors have summoned both Latin and Greek Bishops.
Read the former Answer.
But ye prove not, that any did it as supreme head, and as judge in matters of
Religion, but by the consent of the Bishops of Rome, as I have declared before.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Were you not a stranger in your own Books, M. Harding, ye would not think
it so strange a matter, to hear Ruffinus called an Heretic. S. Hierome
doubted not so to call him. Hierony in Apologia contra Ruffinum.
Thus he says: Dum mihi inconstantiae crimen impingit, se Haereticu^, etc: Ita
verrit Origene^, vt, qui in Trinitate Catholiquum legeret, in alijs Haereticu^
non caueret: While Ruffinus charge me with inconstancy, he proves him self
to be an Heretic, etc. Ruffinus has so translated Origin into Latin, that
who so finds him Catholic touching the Trinity, should never suspecte
him, in any thing else, to be an Heretic. In eadem Apologia.
Again he says unto him, Solos Haereticos non recipimus, quos vos solos
recipitis: Only Heretics we receive not into our houses: And yet them only
you receive.

Anastasius, the Bishop of Rome, has thus published his Judgment of the same
Ruffinus: Anastasius ad Episcopum Hierosolymoru^. Apud Hieronym. To. 4.
Omni suspicione seposita, Ruffinum scito, quod proptia mente Origenis dicta in
Latinu^ transtulit, ac probauit. Nec dissimilis ab eo est, qui alienis vitijs
praestat assensum. Illud tamen scire te cupio, ita haberi a nostris partibus
alienum, vt quid agat, vbi sit, nec scire cupiamus: Al suspicio^ set aparte,
know thou, yt Ruffinus has translated Origin (the Heretics) words into
Latin, according to his own likinge, and well allows the same. And, who
so ever gives his consent unto an other man's fault, it not unlike unto
him. Notwithstanding thus mutche I would have thee to know, that Ruffinus is
so far from our fellowship, or profession of Faith, that we desire not to
know, neither what he does, nor where he is.

Vincentius says, Vincent. in Speculo, li. 17. ca. 99.
that S. Hierome charged Ruffinus with the Pelagian Heresy. Erasmus says,
Ruffinus non fuit alienus ab Origenistarum Haeresi: Ruffinus was not clear
from the Origenians Heresy. Again, speakinge of the same Heretics, Erasmus
in Vita Hieronymi.
he says, Huius rei^ Dux, and signifer Aquileiensis Ruffinus fuit. Again,
Notat, nescio quem: ipsum, opinor, Ruffinum, qui in eam Haeresim inductus est a
Magistro quopiam, Erasm in Epist. Hieronym. ad Principiam. In Schol.
etc. Again, Monet, vt explosa factione Origenistarum, cos etiam eijciat, qui
clam, and oblique essent Origenistae, Ruffinum, and illius amicos: The
Captain, and standarde bearer of this Heresy, was Ruffinus of Aquileia, etc.
Again, S. Hierome here notes sum body, I know not whom: but I think,
Ruffinus him self: that was brought into this Heresy by sum teacher, Erasm.
in Argumento Epistolae Theophili ad Hieronym.
etc. Again, He warns his friend, that having renounced the Origenian
Heretics, he would likewise renounce them, that privily, and in secret were
Origenian Heretics, meaning Ruffinus, and his friends.

Likewise again he says, Ruffinus grauissima suspicione premebatur, quod
esset Origenista. Sub hoc enim titulo Arianorum Haeresis conata est
repullulascere: Ruffinus was grievously supected to be an Origenian Heretic.
Erasm. De Libris Origenis.
For under that name the Arian Heresy began to revive. Thus ye see, M.
Hardinge, it was not so great an Heresy, to say, that Ruffinus was an
Heretic.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division. 4.
Continually for the space of Five Hundred years, the Emperor alone appointed
the Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and called the Councelles of the Bishops
together.

We now therefore marvel the more at the unreasonable dealinge of the Bishop
of Rome, who knowinge, what was the Emperors right, when the Church was well
ordered, knowing also that it is now a common right to al Princes, for so
mutche as Kings are now fully possessed in the several parts of the whole
Empire, doothe so without consideration, assign that office alone to him
self, and takes it sufficient in Summoning a General Council, to make that
man, that is Prince of the whole world, no otherwise partaker thereof, then he
would make his own servant.

M. Hardinge.
Where you say, The Emperor alone celebrated, kept, or held Councelles,
for so is your Latin, This is M. Hardinges modesty. Read the Answer next
goinge before this, saving one.
it is too impudently faced, without any face, without proof, without Truth.
They were Celebrated, or holden vntruthplaine, and evident. For many times the
Popes Legares were Underlings and Inferiors unto others.
by the popes Legates, the Patriarchs, and Bishops, and not by Emperors. Al
be it, Emperors might (...) them, Untruth. For the Emperoures Ambassadors
sitting in Council, were called Illustrissimi Iudices.
but not as Judges. And they have ever benne called Episcopalia Concilia, not
No More were they called Co^cilia Papalia.
(...) cratoria, Councelles of Bishops, not of Emperors. And diverse
Councels, not accounted General (...) kept by Bishops before any Emperor
was Christened. As those, which were kept by S. (...) Jerusalem, Actor. 15.
mentioned in the Acts of the Aposties: in the time of victor the Pope, in
Palestina and other places, concerning the kepinge of Easier: At Rome about the
time of Pope Fabian, against the Nouatian Heresy: At Antioche, against Paulus
Samosatenus, and many others. Al which (...) were kept, not only without the
presence of the Emperoures person, but So were the most part of the same
Councelles keapte without, either the Presence, or the Power, or Authority
of the Pope.
also without his Power, or Authority. And yet, if he were head of the
Church, it could not have benne done without him.

If you say, He was not then Christened, I answer, that Christianity is no
part of his Imperial Power. It is a spiritual Power, whereby he is made the
son of God. He may thereby be ruled by a Christian Bishop. But verily, he
has no Power geeuen to him, whereby he may rule Bishops. O folly of folies.
As if the Emperors Power were either enceased, or empaired by his Baptism.
Baptism makes a man the Child of the Church. But * it is Imposition of
hands, in consecratinge a Christian Priesie to be a Bishop, that gives him
rule over others, and not the Sacrament of Baptism. Therefore, Emperors were
not the holders or kepers of Councelles, the first five hundred years. Yea,
three hundred were fully expired, before the Emperor professed openly the
Christian Faith. So mutche the less may you marvel, that now the Bishop
of Rome, calls and keeps Councelles, chiefly by his own authority. A
substantial good reason. But what if S. Ambrose say, He Succedeth Judas?
For he succedeth Peter, not Nero. He took his authority of Christ imm^
diatly, not of the people of Rome. Be the Emperor Christian, or not
Christian, the Bishop of Rome by The Pope a Christian man by Nature of Office.
nature of his Bishops office, is not only always a Christian man, but also
a chief Priest.

Where you say, the Bishop of Rome in summoning the late Council, did besides
good consideration, in that he made a man, that is Prince of the whole world,
no other wise partaker thereof, then he would make his own seruainte: you
forgette your self foully, and seem to recke little what you speak, so you
utter your malice For who is that, whom you call Prince of the whole world?
What contradiction is this? Said you not in the same sentence before, that
kings are now fully possessed in the several parts of the whole Empire? How
then call you Ferdinande It is written in your own Gloss, Iura commentia
decunt, quod Imperator est Dominus Mundi.
Prince of the whole world? Well, this is but one of the common ornaments of
your Rhetorique. Sir the Emperor Ferdinande, of famous memory, was not so
abused of Pius the fourth, that blessed man, Bishop of Rome in these our days.
Ye rather are they, who abuse the Emperors Majesty. For ye depose him clean
from his seat: ye find fault that ever Leo the third made an Emperor in
the VVeste. Ye complain openly that the Emperial Majesty had not continued
still at Constantinople. Bilike, to the intent the Turk might now have had it,
who is known to suffer in his Dominions al Faithes, and Religions: for which
cause it may seem, ye fauer him. As for Pope Pius that now is, he deferred
the old privilege of honor unto the Emperor Ferdinande, without the old
burden. For where as in old times Untruths two together. For nether was
it so, not does Socrates record it so.
Councelles were holden by authority of the Pope, * as Socrates witnesses,
yet the Emperor bare the charge of calling the Bishops together. Lib. 8.
ca. 2.
But now the Pope him self bare a great part of that burden, and
communicated his propose fully with the Emperor.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Whether it were the Emperor alone, that appointed Ecclesiastical Councelles,
it may appear by that we have already said. The Pope alone, I assure you,
pererssuccessours.
it was not. May, the Emperor, as it is said, and proved before, oftentimes
held such Assemblies, when, and where him selfed listed, whether the Pope
would, or no. The Popes duty was only to appear emongeste other Bishops,
when he was called.

I grant, such Councelles had their name of Bishops, and were called
Concilia Episcopalia, for that matters there were specially ordered by the
discretion, and judgment of the Bishops. But will you therefore conclude,
that the same Councelles perteined nothing to the Prince? Certainly, the
Emperor Constantinus Commanded all the Bishops to appear before him, and
to yield him a reckeninge of their Determinatio^s in the Council. This was the
tenoure of his Write: Sozomen. li. 2. ca. 28.
Quotquot Synodum Tyri habitam compleuistis, sine mora ad Pietatis nostrae
Castra properetis: ac re ipsa, quam sincere, ac recte iudicaueritis,
ostendatis: Idque Coram me: Socrat li. 1. ca. 33.
quem sincerum esse Dei Ministrum, ne vos quidem ipsi negabitis: As many of
you, as have keapte the Council at Tyrus, repair to our Camp without desaie:
and show me in deed, how sincerely, and rightly ye have proceeded: And that,
even before me: whom you your selves cannot deny to be the Sincere Seruante
of God.

Athanasius was the greatteste trauailer in the Council of Nice against the
Arians: Triparti. Histo. li. 2. ca. 2.
yet was he then no Bishop, but only a Deacon. But hereof we have
sufficiently said before.

Christianity, ye say, is no part of the Emperial Power. Ye might
likewise have said, Christianity is no part of the Papale Power. Verily, it
can not well appear, that Peter, and Paul had ever any such Christianity.
The Emperors right is neither increased, nor abated by his Baptissne. Whether
he be Faithful, or Unfaithful, he is the Minister of God, and bears the
Sword to pounishe sin.

Ye say, The Pope succedeth Peter, and not Nero: Therefore he calls, and
keeps Councelles chiefly by his own Authority. Of such proper
Arguments, M. Hardinge, we marvel not mutche, though ye make no stoare.
How be it, sum men have thought, ye do S. Peter great wrong,
appointinge him such Children, to be his Heirs. For many of them, in all
their dealinges, have resembled Nero, Bernard. De Co^sideratione. li 4.
Citatur ab Illyrico inter Test. veritat. page 387. Erasmus, In Adagio, Sileni
Alcibiadis.
more then Peter. S. Bernarde says thus unto Pope Eugenius: In his
successisti, non Petro, sed Constantino: In these things ye have succeeded,
not Peter the Apostle, but the Emperor Constantine. Pope Adrian the fourth
was woonte to say: Succedimus, non Petro in docendo, sed Romulo in parricidio:
We succeed, not Peter in teachinge, but Romulus in killinge our Brethren.

Erasmus says, Pontifices nunc sunt Vicarij lulij Caesaris, Alexandri Magni,
Croesi, Xerxis: non Christi, non Petri: The Popes now are the Vicares of
Julius Caesar, of Alexander the Great, of Croesus, and of Xerxes: not of
Peter. It is written in a Sermon, bearinge the name of S. Ambrose: Qui
debuerint esse Vicarij Apostolorum, Ambro. Citatur ab Illyrico inter Test. page
142. Robert. Gallus, cap. 5.
factisunt Socij Iudae: They, that should have benne the Apostles Vicares, are
now becomme Judas Fellows. Robertus Gallus, that lived wel-neare three hundred
years past, imagines, Christ thus to say of the Pope: Quis posuit Idolum
hoc in Sede mea, vt imperaret Gregi meo? Who set this Idol in my room, and
made him Ruler over my Flock?

Yet, Dis. 19. Sic omnes. In Gloss. Cardinal. Cusanus, De Autho. Eccle. and
concilij Supra and contra Scripturam
you say, the Pope is always, not only a Christian man, but also a Chief
Priest, (not by Faith, but) by the nature of his Office. Even so your Gloss
tells you, Papa Sanctitatem recipit a Cathedra: The Pope receives his
holiness of his Chair: that is to say, of the nature of his Office. Cardinal
Cosanus says, Veritas adhaeret Cathedrae, etc. Veritas per Christum Cathedrae
alligata est, non Personis. Ait enim: Super Cathedram Mosi sederunt Scribae,
and Pharisaei: The Truth cleaves fast to the Popes Chair, etc. Christ
has nailed his Truth to the Popes Chair, and not to his person. For he
says, The Scribes, and Phariseis are placed in Moses Chair. An other says,
Dis. 40. Non nos. In Gloss.
Tameisi Papa non sit bonus, tamen semper praesumitur esse bonus. In Papa si
desint bona acquisita per meritum, sufficient, quae a loci praedecessore
praestantur: Notwithstanding the Pope be not good, Part hereof has benne
touched before.
yet he is ever presumed to be good. If the Pope lack good virtues of his
own, the virtues of Peter, his Predecessoure, are sufficient.

There were never so many Heretics in any one See, as have benne in the Sea
of Rome: as I have already sufficientely, and fully proved. And yet, ye say.
The Pope cannot err. There were never so notorious Examples, or, as Platyna
calls them, Platyna. In Benedict. 4.
Monsters of filthy life: Yet, ye say, they are al Holy Fathers, and hold
their Christianity by Nature of office. How be it, your Doctoure Alphonsus
says, Alphonsus, Aduersus Hareses. li. 1. ca. 9.
Quamuis credere teneamur ex Fide, Verum Petri Successorem esse Supremum
Pastorem Totius Ecclesiae, non tamen tenemur eadem Fide credere. Leonem, aut
Clementem esse Verum Petri Successorem: Although we be bound to believe, that
the True Successoure of Peter is the Higheste Pastoure of all the Church, yet
are we not bound with like Faith to believe, that Pope Leo, and Pope Clemente
are the True Successoures of Peter. Matthae. 3.
John the Baptiste said rightly unto the Phariseis, that likewise made vauntes
of their Succession, Never say, Abraham is your Father. For God is hable even
of these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham. Chrysostom. In Opere
Imperficto. Homi. 43. Did. 41. Multi. Gregori. Nazia^. In Sanctum Lauacrum.
Chrysostom says: Non locus Sanctificat hominem, sed homo locum: Nec
Cathedra facit Sacerdotem, sed Sacerdos Cathedram: The place sanctifies not
the Man, but the Man sanctifies the Place: Neither doothe the Chair make the
Priest, but the Priest makes the Chair. Nazianzene says: Non locorum est
Gratia, sed Spiritus: The grace of God goes not by Place, but by the Holy
Ghost.

Chrysostom says: Omnis Christianus, qui suscipit Verbum Petri, fit Thronus
Petri: Chrysostom. In Mat. Homi. 33.
et Petrus sedet in eo: Every Christian man, that receives the word of
Peter, is made Peter's Chair: and S. Peter reasteth in him.

But here have you found out a foul contradiction in our words. Who is he,
say you, whom ye call the Prince of the world? Not the Pope, M. Hardinge:
Lest ye should happily be deceived: Notwithstanding, your Fellows have so
often told us, In sexto. li. 3. Tituil. 16. ca. vnica.
Papa rotius Orbis obtinet Principatum: The Pope has the Princehoode of all the
world.

The Emperoures Majesty we find oftentimes entitled by this name: But your
Popes Holiness, so entitled, we find never: Unless it be in sum certain
late Decrees, and Gloses of his own. Al be it, you of late have mutche abated
the Emperoures Honor, and have made him only the Popes man. For thus ye
say: Imperator (Occidentis) est Procurator, sieve Defensor Romanae Ecclesiae:
Did. 98. Si Imperator. In Gloss.
The Emperor (of the Weaste) is the Proctoure, or Steward of the Church of
Rome.

Yet, Chrysostom. Ad Popul. Antioche^. Homi. 2.
Chrysostom says, Imperator est Summitas, and Caput omnium super terram
hominu^: The Emperor is the Top, and Head of al men upon the Earth. In
the Council of Chalcedon, the Emperor is called, Dominus Vniuersi Mundi:
Council. Chalce. Actio. 1. In nomine.
The Lord of the Whole World.

Perhaps ye will say, The State of the Empiere is now empouerished: And
therefore the Emperor has lost his Title. Yet your own Doctors, and
Glosers could have told you: Extra de Maiorita. and Obedie^. vnam sanctam. In
Gloss.
Iura communia dicunt, quod Imperator est Dominus Mundi: Notwithstanding the
decaie of y^ Empiere, The Common Laws say, that the Emperor is the Lord of
the World. Rob. Hol^ote, speakinge of the Emperor of Germany, says thus:
Hic est Rex Regum, cui omnes subditae sunt Nationes, and Populi, Holcote, In
Sapien. Lectio. 199. Otho Irisinge^sis
etc. The Emperor is the King of Kings, unto whom al Nations, and Countries
be in subjection. The Romans of late years wrote thus unto the Emperor
Conradus: Excellentissimo, and Praeclarissimo Vrbis, and Oibis totius O^mino,
etc. Unto the most excellent, The Emperor the Lord of the world
and most Noble Emperor, the Lord both of the City, and also of all the
whole World. Therefore, M. Hardinge, to move this vain quarrel, without sum
cause, it was great folly.

Councelles, ye say, In old times were holden by Authority of the Pope. For
proof whereof, ye allege Socrates in the eight book, and the second
Chapter: But Word, or Sentence, ye allege none. How be it, it was a great
oversight, to allege the Eighth Book of Socrates, whereas Socrates him self
never wrote but Seven, and so far to ouerleape your Authoure. Notwithstanding,
this small Error may well be dissembled amongst so many. How be it, touching
the thing it self, ye may as easily find it in the Eighth Book of
Socrates, that never was written, as else where. For in deed emongeste al, that
ever he wrote, this thing certainly, that you allege, he wrote never.

The Apology, Cap. 12. Division, 5. and Ca. 13. Diui. 1.
And, although the modesty, and mildness of the Emperor Ferdinando be so
great, that he can bear this wrong, because peradventure he understands
not well the Popes packinge, yet ought not the Pope of his holiness to offer
him that wrong, nor to claim an other man's right, as his own.

But hereto sum will reply: The Emperor in deed called Councelles at that
time, ye speak of, because the Bishop of Rome was not yet grown so great,
as he is now: but yet the Emperor did not then sit together with the
Bishops in Council, or once bare any stroke with his Authority in their
consultations. I answer, nay, that it is not so. For, as witnesses
Theodorete, the Emperor Constantine, sat not only together with them in
the council at Nice, but gave also advise to the Bishops, how it was best to
try out the matter by the Apostles, and Prophets writings, as appears by
these his own words. In disputation (says he) of matters of Divinity, we
have set before us to follow, the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost. For the
Evangelists, and the Apostles works, and the Prophets saieinges shevve us
sufficiently, what opinion we ought to have of the vvil of God.

M. Hardinge.
For the sittinge of Emperoures in Councelles, you treat a common place not
necessary. No man ever denied, but Emperoures may sit in them. we
acknowledge two sorts of settinge: one for the assessours, an other for the
Judge Untruth For Cusanus says, Inuenio Imperatores in Co^cil^^s iudicia fec
sse. Read the Answer.
No Emperor ever sat as a Judge in Council: but many, both Emperoures in
person, and their Lieutenauntes for them have sitten, as being ready to assiste
and defend that, In vita Constant. lib. 3. Theodorit. Lib. 1. ca. 7. (...).
which the Bishops had Judged and decreed.

What manner a seat great Constantine had in the first Council at Nice,
Eusebius in his life, and Theodoritus does declare. After that all the Bishops
were set in their seats, to the number of 318 in came the Emperor last
with a small company. Untruth enclosed. For this low little Chair was al of
beaten gold, and was let in the highest place of the Council.
A low little chair being set for him in the midst, he would not sit
down, before the Bishops had reverently signified so mutche unto him, and as
Theodoritus writes, not before he had desired the Bishops to permit him so
to do. Now think you that the Supreme head of the Church should have Vain
folly. For the Prince never comes into the Parliament House, before the Lords
b^ set
comme in last, and hane sitten Untruth. For S^zomen says, ^^at thro^u^, ille
^^ximus, Salios omnes superaus.
beneath his subjects, and have stayed to sit, until they had as it were
given him leave?

Neither consulted he with the Bishops, Constantine in the council of Nice.
but required them to consult of the matters, they came for, as Theodorite
witnesses. Neither spoke he there so generally as you report, nor framed his
tale in that sort as you feign, Untruth evident. For Cassiodorus expounds
it thus, Quid de Diuina Lege sapere debeamus.
universally of the will of God, but of the Godhed, saieinge, that the books of
the Gospels, and of the Apostles, and the Oracles of the Prophets do plainly
teach us, what we ought to think of the Godhed, (...). For the controversy
about which the Arians made so mutche adoo, was touching the equality of
Godhed in Christ, and his consubstantialitie with God the Father. And by those
words and other, which there he uttered, he took not upon him to define, or
Judge, but only to exhort them, to agree together in one Faith. For among
those Bishops certain there were, that favored the Heresy of Arius. Such
examples you bring for defense of your part, as make mutche against you. Not
that you delight in making a rod for your self, but because you have no
better: and somewhat must you needs say, lest the stage you play your part
on, should stand still.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Emperoures, ye say, sat in Councelles, as Assessours only, but not as
Judges: That is to say, they sat by the Bishops, and held theirpeace, and
told the clock, and said nothing. Yet your Doctors say, Assessor
Episcopi non potest esse Laicus: The Assessoure of a Bishop may not be a
Laieman. De Rescriptis. Statutum.. Assessorem. Geminianus. Eusebius. In vita
Constant. Ora. 3.
But, touching the matter it self, Eusebius, that was always near about the
Emperor Constantine, and wrote his life, and was present at the Council,
says thus: Constantinus, quasi Communis quidam Episcopus a Deo constitutus,
Ministrorum Dei Synodos conuocauit: Nec dedignatus est adesse, and considere in
medio illorum, consorsque fieri ipsorum, etc. Constantine, as if he had benne a
Common Bishop appoited by God, called together Councelles of Gods Ministers:
and disdeigned not him self to sit in the mids amongst them, and to be
partetaker of their dooinges. (...) Eusebius. eode^ loco.
Again, Constantinus him self says thus: Ego intereram Concilio, tanquam
vnus ex vobis: I was present at the Council emongeste you, as one of you.
Again Eusebius says, Vnus, and Vnicus Deus instituit Constantinum Ministrum
suum, and Doctorem Pietatis omnibus terris: The One, and Only God has
appointed Constantine to be his Minister, and the Doctoure of true Godliness
unto al Nations. And Theodoretus says, Laudatissimus Rex Apostolicas curas
suscipiebat animo suo: Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 24.
At Pontifices, no^ solum non ae dificare Ecclesiam, sed etia^ illus fundamenta
labefactare conabantur: The good Emperor had Apostolic Cares in his
heart: But the Bishops did not only not build up the Church of God, but
also overthrew the fundations of the same.

And again Eusebius says: Eusebius. In vita Constanti. Ora. 1. Nicepho. in
praefatione ad Emmanuelem.
Constantinus erat Vocalissimus Dei praeco, and quasi Seruator, ac Medicus
animarum: Constantine the Emperor was a most Clear Preacher of God, and as
it were, the Saueoure, and Physicion of Souls. In this sort Nicephorus
writes unto the Emperor Emmanuel Palaeologus: Tu es Dux Professionis Fidei
nostrae, etc. Your Majesty is the Captain of the Profession of our Faith:
your Majesty has restored the Catholic, and universal Church. Your
Majesty has reformed the Temple of God from Marchantes, and Exchaungers of
the Heavenly Doctrine, and from Heretics, by the word of Truth.

Ye say, When the Bishops were set, in came the Emperor last with a
small company. Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 7. (...).
Whereof ye would have us to geather, y^ he came only as sum inferioure
person, and not as a Judge. How be it, Theodoretus says, Constantinus
iussit Episcopos ingredi: Constantine Commanded the Bishops to go in.

And Eusebius says: Sedit tota Synodus reuerenter, vt par fuit, cum silentio
expectans aduentum Principis: The whole Council sat in reverent, and comely
order, quietely, and in silence lookinge for the Princes coming.

This is no good proof, M. Hardinge, that the Emperor in the Council was
inferioure to the Bishops. Nay, the Bishops were commanded to take their
places, to sit in silence, and to wait for the Emperoures coming, as his
Subjects. Again he says: Signo, quo aduentus Imperatoris indicatus est,
(...).
dato, omnibus exuergentibus, ipse deinde ingressus est medius, tanquam aliquis
Dei coelestis Angelus: When the watch word was given, that the Emperor was
comme, the Bishops stood up from their places, and his Majesty past along
through the mids of them, as if he had benne an Angel of God.

But the Emperor, ye say, sat upon a little low stool, and therein showed
him self inferioure to the Bishops. Yea, M. Hardinge, but Eusebius says,
that the same little low stool was made of whole beaten gould: (...).
And therein, I trow, he was sommewhat above the Bishops.

Ye say, he sat allow, and in the mids of the Bishops: and hereof ye
conclude, he was their Inferioure. So Julius Caesar, notwithstanding he were
the Emperor of Rome, yet, when he came into the College of Poets, he was well
contented, to be placed in the lowest room: And yet was he not therefore
thiere Inferioure.

But, touching the Emperor Constantines place in the Council, Eusebius says
thus: (...)
Accessit ad summum gradum ordinum: He went up to the highest rising of all the
benches. Sozomenus says: Imperator peruenit ad Caput Concilij: and sedit in
Throno quodam, quem ipse sibi fecerat. Erat autem Thronus ille Maximus, and
alios omnes superans: The Emperor went up to the headde, or highest place of
the Council: and sat down in a Throne of estate, that he had prepared for him
self. But this Throne was very great, and far passed all the rest. In the
mean season, the Popes Legate sat, as it is said before, neither in the
First place, nor in the Second, nor in the Third, but in the Fourth. Hereby
it seems, to appear plainly, that Constantinus the Emperor had his place
in the Council above the Bishops.

Notwithstanding, sithence that time the Pope has determined, it must now
be otherwise. Ceremoniarium. li. 1. Sect. 14. ca. 2.
His order is this, as it has benne alleged before: Seeds Imperatoris
parabitur, etc. The Emperoures Seat shall be prepared next unto the Popes
Seat, and shall have two steps joined unto the same: but neither so broad,
nor so long, as be the Popes. It shall be apparelled with clothe of gold: but
Canopie ever the head it shall have none. Et aduertendum, quo'd locus, vbi
sedet Imperator, non sit altior loco, vbi tenet pedes Pontifex.
How be it, this thing is specially to be marked, that the place, whereupon
the Emperor sittethe, may be no higher, then the place, where the Pope
sets his Feet. Thus we see, the Emperor is allowed, to sit at the
Popes foot stool: but in any case to mount no higher.

The Emperor, ye say, stood still (no doubt, with Cappe in hand) and
durst not sit down without leave: And thereby testified, him self to be
Inferioure to the Bishops. These cold Conclusions will hardely serve. For
Traianus, being the Emperor of Rome, was contented him self to stand
afoote, and, for honors sake, commanded the Consulles to sit down. Yet was
he not therefore Inferioure in dignity to the Consulles.

Helena the Empress, Ruffinus. li. 1. ca. 7.
apparelled her self like a Seruante, and ministered unto the Holy Virgins,
and gave them water to their hands, as if in deed she had benne their
Servant: yet was she not therefore Inferioure unto the Virgins.

The same Emperor Constantine at the time of the Sermons, Eusebius. In vita
Constant. Ora. 4.
stood upright, and would not sit: for the reverence, that he bare to the
Word of God. Yet was he not Inferioure to the Preacher. This was that good
Emperoures modesty, and Humility, M. Hardinge: but not his dewtie. It were
wisdom for Princes, to take heed, they commit not ouermutche to your
hands. For, what so ever they once yield of mere Courtesy, straight way ye
claim it, as your own.

How be it, touching the Emperoures Sittinge in the Council, it was far
otherwise, then you report it. Sozomenus says: Imperator resedit in Throno,
qui illi paratus fuerat: and Synodus iussa est sedere: The Emperor sat down
in his Chair of estate provided for him: Sozome li. 1. ca. 19. (...).
and ( then) the Council was Commanded to sit down. Hereby it appears,
the Emperor needed not the Bishops leave: but rather gave leave to the
Bishops.

No doubt, that Godly, and Mild Prince, beeinge in that Reverend assembly,
bare him self with mutche Reverence. And therefore Eusebius says, He sat not
down, Eusebius. In vita Constanti. Ora. 4. (...).
before the Bishops had beckened unto him. But he adds withal, Post
Imperatorem, idem fecerunt omnes: ( Not before, but) After that the Emperor
was set, they sat down al together.

Now, M. Hardinge, if he that sat First in the Council, were the Head of the
Church, as you seem to say, then may I reason thus: The Pope, or his Legate
in that Council sat not First: Ergo, the Pope then was not Head of the
Church.

Again, The Emperor in that Council sat First: Ergo, by your own
Conclusion, the Emperor was the Head of the Church. Certainly, the Pope
him self says plainly, The Emperor Constantine was the President, or
Ruler of the Nicene Council. His words be these: Constantinus Praesidens
Sanctae synodo, 12. Quae. 1. Fitturam. Gregor.
quae apud Nicaeam congregata est: Constantinus the Emperor, being
Presidente of the Holy Council, that was keapte at Nice. These be not our
words, but the Popes, registered even in his own Records. Therefore, I
trust, ye will not refuse to geeue them credit.

But you say, The Emperor determined, and defined nothing. Yet the
Emperor him self, Eusebius. In vita Constant. Orat. 2.
contrary to your saieinge, says thus: Ego suscepi, and perfeci res
salutiferas, persuasus Verbo tuo: O Lord, I took in hand, and brought to
pass wholesome things, being persuaded by thy Word.

And again, writing hereof unto the Bishops of sundry Churches, he says:
Ego vobiscum interfui, tanquam vnus ex vobis. Non enim negauerim, conseruum me
vestrum esse: Eusebius. In vita Constan Orat. 3.
Qua de re mihi maxim gratulor: I was present at the Council with you, as one
of you. For I cannot deny me self to be your Felovve Seruante. In which
thing I most reioise.

Likewise again he says: Ego Nicaeam contraxi magnum numerum Episcoporum:
Socra. li. 1. ca. (...).
Cum quibus, cum essem vnus ex vobis, and Conseruus vester vehementer esse
cuperem, etiam ipse suscepi inquisitionem Veritatis: I caused a great company
of Bishops to come to Nice: with whom together I took in hand the
Examination of the Truth, being me self one of you, and mutche desieringe
to be therein your Fellow Seruante.

Likewise says Eusebius, Imperator, quasi Iuculentam facem accendens, ne quae
occultae Erroris reliquiae superessent, Eusebius. In vita Constan. Orat. 3. (...).
oculo Regio circumspexit: The Emperor, as having enkendled a great flame,
lookte well about with his Princely Eye, that no privy remnantes of error
should reaste behind.

The Bishops in the same Nicene Council, being at variance emongeste them
selves, offered up their Books of accusation, not unto the Pope, or to his
Legates, Socrat. li. 1. ca. 8.
of whom they had then no great regard, but unto the Emperor. Neither did
the Emperor put over their quarelles unto the Popes Judgment, but unto the
Judgment of God.

Again, the same Emperor Constantine says, If any Bishop wickedly
offend, by the hand of Gods seruante, that is to say, by my hand, he
shall be pounished.

To be short, Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Cardinal Cusanus says: Sciendum est, quod in vniuersalibus octo Concilijs,
vbi Imperatores interfuerunt, and non Papa, semper inuenio Imperatores, and
Iudices suos cum Senatu Primatum habuisse, Cardinal. Cusae. De praesidentia.
and officium Praesidentiae per interlocutiones, and ex consensu Synodi, sine
ma^dato, conclusiones, and iudicia fecisse. Et non reperitur instantia in octo
Concilijs, praeter quam in tertia Action Concilij Chalcedonensis: We must
know, that in the Eight General Councelles, where the Emperoures were present,
and not the Pope, I evermore find, that the Emperoures, and their Judges,
with the Senate had the Gouernemente, and Office of Presidence, by hearing,
and conferring of matters: and that they made Conclusions, and Judgments, with
the consent of the Council, and without any further Commission. And there is
no manner instance, or exception to be found in the first Eight Councelles,
sauinge only in the third Action of the Council of Chalcedon.

Here ye see plainly, by the Authority of Cardinal Cusanus, one of your
own special Doctors, that in the Eight first General Councelles, the
Emperor was Presidente, and not the Pope.

Where as the Emperor willed the Bishops to conclude their matters by the
Apostolical, and Prophetical Scriptures, He speaks not, say you, so
generally, as we report him, nor frames his tale in that sort, as we
saine, universally of the vvil of God, but of the Godhedde. For, (...), in your
fancy signifies only the Substance, and Nature of God, and not Gods VVil,
or his Religion. Here, M. Hardinge, it were sum point of Learning, to
know, what skilful Greek Reader told you this tale. Tripar. Histo. lib. 2.
cap. 5.
Verily, Cassiodorus, in plain wise, tra^slateth it thus: Euangelici, and
Apostolici libri erudiunt nos, quid de Sacra Lege sapiamus: The Books of the
Evangelists, and Apostles, teach us, what we ought to think ( not only of
the Substance, and Nature of God, but also) of the Holy Law.

Therefore Theodoretus adds further these words: Accipiamus Explicationes
quaestionum nostrarum ex dictis Sancti Spiritus: Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 7.
(...).
Let us take the resolution of our questions, out of the words of the Holy
Ghost. And immediately before he says: De rebus Diuinis disputantes,
praescripram habemus Doctrinam Sancti Spiritus: In our Disputations ( not only
of the Godhedde, but also) of Godly matters, we have laid before us the
Doctrine of the Holy Gospel. In like sense S. Hilarie says: Non est relictus
hominum eloquijs de Dei rebus alius, praeterquam Dei Sermo. Hilari. De
Trinitat. li. 7. De rebus Dei. (...).
Omnia reliqua and arcta, and conclusa, and impedita sunt, and obscura: In
matters, touching God, there is no speech leafte unto men, but only the
word of God. Al other Authorities be short, and narrow, and dark, and
troublesome. Believe them not henceforth therefore, M. Hardinge, that tell you,
that, (...), signifies only the Substance, and Nature of Gods Divinity.
For, as ye may easily see, your Gloss is vain, and fights directely
against the Text.

The Apology, Cap. 13. Division. 2.
The Emperor Theodosius (as says Socrates) did not only sit amongst the
Bishops, but also ordered the whole argueinge of the cause, and tare in
pieces the Heretics Books, and allowed for good the Judgment of the
Catholics.

M. Hardinge.
It is wonder to see, how these men abuse the Ecclesiastical histories.
Whereas they talk a little before of the sitting of Emperors in general
Councelles, a man would think, that now also Theodosius had benne said to
have sitten among Bishops As if a private Council, were no Council.
in some general Council. But there is no such matter. Hist. tripar. lib. 9.
ca. 19.
Theodosius the Emperor conferred with Nectarius the Bishop of Constantinople,
how al Christen men might be brought to an unity in Faith. And after that
Nectarius had learned of Sisinnius a great Clerk, the best way to be, if all the heads of each Heresy and Sect, might be induced to be judged by the old
Fathers and Doctors of the Church: the godly Emperor hearing this advise,
caused both the Heretics, and Catholics also, to write each of them such
things, as each of them had to say for his Belefe. And after prayer made,
reading over all the writings, Fond folly. As though the Emperor could
Condemn the Heretics or allow the Catholics, without Judgment.
he rejected the Arians, the Macedonians, and the Eunomians, embracing only
their sentence, who agreed upon the Consubstantialitie of the son of God.
Here (say these Defenders) Theodosius did not only sit amongst the
Bishops, but also ordered the whole arguing of the cause, tearing the papers
of the Heretics, and allowing the Judgment of the Catholics. To which
objection I make this answer. First, that Theodosius here took counsel of
Nectarius the Bishop, and followed it: Secondely, that he intended not to Judge,
whether opinion of all the Sects were truer, A worthy reason. The Emperor
sought means to abandon Heresies: Ergo, He judged not, whether part was the
truer.
but only sought how to rid the Church of controversies. Otherwise he
would not only have taken counsel of Nectarius the Catholic Bishop, but also
of the Arians, Macedonians, and Eunomians. For he is not a right Judge, that
calls one side only to him, and in judgment is ruled by it. If then it be
plain, that the Emperor only consulted with Catholics, it is no less
plain, Untruth, Contrary to the plain story.
that he sat not Judge upon the Catholics. What did he then? Verily he
intended to execute that judgment, which the Bishops had pronounced at Nice,
and therefore he conferred only with men of that side. And because he was
enstructed, that by disputation no good should come, he chose this way, to make
al to write their opinions. Not that he minded now to learn his Faith out of
their writings, since he had learned that long before, and professed the same
in his Baptism: but he sought a way, whereby to put al Heretics to silence.
Therefore, having read all the writings, and having made his prayer to God for
grace, And how could he make choice without Judgment?
to chose the better side, Jacob. 1. 1. Cor. 6.
which also he made not doubtinge of his Faith (for else he were an Infidel,
and unworthy to be a Judge, even in the Temporal matters among Christians) but
partly he declared, that al goodness is to be asked of God, Thus M. Hardinge
makes the Emperor a dissemblinge Hypocrite.
partly he would the Heretics to understand, that he wont not to work with
affection, but with the fear of God. Thus having prayed and readen the
writings, he executed the judgment of the Nicene Council, and rejected those
Heretics.

Now to return to the words of the Apology, how say they, that the
Emperor not only sat among Bishops, but also causae disceptationi
praefuit, was chief Ruler and moderatour of the reasoning, and debating of the
matter? They cannot say thus, as of a Council, whereof they talk. A fond
cauil. It was a private Council of sundry Bishops, and the Judgment
thereof was specially directed by the Emperor.
For there was no Council indicted, not only by the Pope, but neither by the
Emperor, nor by any other Archbishop. It was a private calling together of
certain heads of each Sect, and not a solemn ordinary council. If there
were no Council of Bishops, no sittinge of Bishops: if no sitting, no
presidence at al. How then was Theodosius President, and Judge of
Ecclesiastical causes?

If we shall report the thing, as it was in truth done, only Theodosius used
a politic way, to put Heretics to silence. In Actis co^cilij Aquileiensis.
Other judgment he took not upon him, as he that protested always, that
Spiritual causes, and controursies of Doctrine could not better be decided,
then by Bishops. For which saieinge, S. Ambrose praised him. So that we are
sure of Theodosius, that he never meante to intermedle with Ecclesiastical
matters, Thus the Emperor is become the Bishops man.
otherwise then to execute the Bishops Decrees.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, ye say, it is a wonder, to see, how these men abuse the
Ecclesiastical stories. It was a Private Council, ye say, whereat Theodosius
was present, and not a General: As if this poor healpe were sufficient, to
salve the matter: or, as if a Private Council, were no Council: Or, as if an
Emperor might sit as a Judge in private Councelles, but not in General. The
story in brief is this, Theodosius the Emperor, Theodosius Judges
Ecclestical causes.
the better to bring his Churches into Unity, Commanded an Assembly of y^
Bishops, and best Learned, to appear before him, and each part to write a
several Confession of his Faith, that he him self might Judge bitweene them,
which Faith were the best. Having received their writings, he willed
Public Prayers to be made, Sozomen li. 7. ca. 12.
and also both openly, and privately prayed him self, that it might please
God, Socrat. li. 5. ca. 10.
to assiste him with his Holy Sprite, and to make him hable to Judge justly.

Then he perused, and considered each Confession a sunder by it self: allowed
only the Catholics: and Condemned the Confessions, that were written by the
Arians, and Eunomians, and tare them in pieces. This is the true report of the
story, M. Hardinge. Whatsoever ye have added hereunto, as your manner is, it
is your own. Now, whether the Emperor Theodosius took upon him, to Hear,
and Determine Ecclesiastical Causes of Religion. or no, I report me to your
own indifferente judgment.

But ye will say, The Emperor presumed not, to Judge any thing of him
self: but was wholly ruled by the Bishops, as the executoure of their wills.
And hereof, ye say, ye are well assured. Thus by your handlinge, ye make the
Prince only your Bishops man: to strike blindely, whomsoever your Bishop shall
Command: to Condemn, to Deprive, to Spoil, to Kille his own Subjects: not
of any Judgment, or Knowledge, but only upon the doubteful Credit, and at
the pleasure of your Bishop. So simple ye make this Godly Emperor in his
dealing. He willed the Congregation to pray: He prayed him self, that God
would direct him with his Sprite, and geeue him wisdom, to discern the
Truth: He Conferred the Confessions: He weighed each Reason: He allowed one
side for true and godly: All the rest he Condemned for false, and wicked. And
yet, ye say, ye are sure of Theodosius, that he intended not to Judge,
whether of al these Sects were the truer. And so, by your discretion, he
both Allowed, and Condemned without Judgment, he knew not, what.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 1.
In the Council of Chalcedon a Civil Magistrate Condemned for Heretics, by
the Sentence of his own mouth, the Bishops, Dioscorus, Iuuenal, and
Thalassius, and gave Judgment, to put them down from their Dignities in the
Church.

M. Hardinge.
Where true, and good matter wants, for defense of this cause, these men
care not what they bring, so they make a show of some Learning, to deceive
the unlearned. First, for condemnation of Heretics, by sentence of a Civil
Magistrate, they allege the name of the long Council of Chalcedon, not showing
in what Action or part thereof it may be found. True it is, that al these
three are named in that Council, Dioscorus, Iuuenalis, and Thalassius. Untruth
enclosed, standing in ignorance. For if M. Hard. had read the Council, he might
have sound it.
But that al three were condemned, we find not. Mutche less, that were
condemned by any Civil Magistrate, do we find. The condemnation of Dioscorus
Archbishop of Alexandria, was pronounced by the Legates of the Pope of Rome,
in form as follows.

Paschasinus, Actio. 3.
having asked the consent of the Fathers present in the Council to the
condemnation of Dioscorus, after his faults rehearsed, with his two fellows
Lucentius Bishop of Tusculum, and Bonifacius Priest of the great Church of
Rome, said: The most holy, and blessed Archbishop of the great, and elder
Rome Leo, by us, and by this present holy Synod, with the thrice most blessed
and worthy of al praise, Peter the Apostle, This was spoken even like the
Popes Legate. For S. Paul says, Christ was the Rock, etc.
who is the rock and highest top of the Catholic Church, and who is the
foundation of the right Faith, has deprived Dioscorus, as well of the dignity
of his Bishoprike, Dioscorus, Iuuenasis, Thalassius.
as also of his Priestly ministry. This was the sentence pronounced by the
Popes Legates, in the name of the Bishop of Rome, under the Authority of
Peter. Which sentence the whole Council allowed. This being true, how did
the Civil Magistrate condemn Dioscorus? Was then the Bishop of Lilybaeum, or
the Pope, in whose name he gave sentence, a Civil Magistrate? This is the
patience of M Hardinges Sprite. When he shall read the Council, and see his
own error, he will be colder.
What is impudency, what is licentious lieinge, what is deceitful dealinge,
if this be not?

Of Iuuenalis Archibishop of Jerusalem, and Thalassius Archbishop of Caesaria
in Cappadocia, thus mutche I say. They might well have a rebuke for misusinge
them selves in the second Council at Ephesus, Actio. 1. ex noua translat.
where they sat, like Judges, Untruth, vain and childishe. For then there
belo^ged no such Authority to the Sea of Rome.
without authority of thee See of Rome (which, as Lucentius said in the
Synod of Chalcedon, was never orderly done, neither was it lauful to be
done) they might, I say, take a rebuke for so presuming besides the Popes
authority: but for as mutche as they Untruth, shameless above measure. For
they never asked pardonne, for sitting without the Popes Authority.
maintained not thiere fact, but among other Bishops of the Eastcried out.
Omnes peccauimus, Omnes veniam postulamus: We have al sinned, We al beseech
pardonne: Yea for as mutche as Iuuenalis rejected the fault upon Elpidius, who
did not command Eusebius the accuser of Eutyches to comme in, and Thalassius
said, he was not cause thereof: it may well be, they were pardonned, although
the honorable Judges, and Senate said unto them: In Iudicio Fidei non est
defensio: In a Judgment of Faith, this is no excuse. But in case they were
deposed, M. Harding is well assured, before he know.
then are we sure, Manifest untruth Read the Answer.
it was not done by the Civil Magistrates otherwise, then that they might
allow, and execute the sentence of Deposition before geeuen.

The B. of Sarisburie.
If the Council of Chalcedon seem over long, with better reading ye may
make it shorter. That Dioscorus, Iuuenalis, and Thalassius were al three
condemned in that Council, that, ye say, ye find not. How be it, if ^ee
had sought it better, ye might soon have found it. One of your own Friends
of Louaine says, that herein ye were toomutche ouerseene. The very words,
truly recorded in the Council, are these: Videtur nobis iustum esse, eidem
poenae Dioscorum Reuerendum Episcopum Alexandriae, C^pus. Dialo. 1. page 28.
and Iuuenalem Reuerendum Episcopum Hierosolymorum, and Thalassium Reuerendum
Episcopum Caesariae Cappadociae subiacere: Council. Chalice. Act. 1. page 831.
and a Sancto Concilio, secundum Regulas, ab Episcopali dignitate fieri
alienos: Unto us it seems right, that Dioscorus, the Reverend Bishop of
Alexandria, and Iuuenalis, the Reverend Bishop of Jerusalem, and Thalassius,
the Reverend Bishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia, should be put to the same
pounishemente: and by the holy Council, according to the Canons, should be
removed from their Episcopal dignities. Euagrius. li. 2. cap. 4.
The which words ye might also have found fully reported in Euagrius.

Likewise also says Pope Leo, touching the same: De nominibus Dioscori,
Iuuenalis, Leo Epist. 40. Ad Anatolium.
and Eustachij (vel potius, Thalassij) ad Sacrum Altar non recitandis,
dilectionem tuam hoc decet custodire: Touching the names of Dioscorus,
Iuuenalis, and Eustachius ( or rather, Thalassius) not to be rehearsed at the
Holy Altar ( which was the Communion Table) ye must keep this order.

But ye say, Notwithstanding these Bishops were condemned in the Council,
yet the Civil or Lay Judges condemned them not. For they were there (ye say)
only to see good order, and to keep peace. This, M. Hardinge, is your own
only idle gheaste, without any manner further Authority, only grounded upon
your self. Certainly, the words of the Council be plain: Gloriosissimi
Iudices, and amplissimus Senatus dixerunt: The most Noble Judges, and most
worthy Senate said. Likewise says Euagrius, Council. chalce. Actio. 1. Euag.
li. 2. ca. 4.
(...): The Lords of the Emperors Council decreed these things.

Neither were the Civil Judges then so scrupulous, to think, they might not
deal in Cases of Religion, as it may well appear by their words. For thus
they say: Gloriosissimi sudices, and Amplissimus Senatus dixerunt. De Recta,
and Catholica Fide, Council. Chalce. Act. page 831
perfectius sequenti die, conuenienti Concilio, diligentiorem Examinationem
fieri opottere, perspicimus: Dioscorus, Iuuenalis, Thalassius.
The most Noble Judges, and most worthy Senate said, We see, that,
touching the Right Catholic Faith, the next day, when the Council shall
meet, there must be had a more diligente Examinatione.

And when the matters were concluded, and published, the Bishops of the East
brake out into favorable shootes, in this sort: Iustum, and Rectum Iudiciu^
Vita longa Senatui: Multi anni Imperatori: Just, and Right is this
Judgment: Long life unto the Senate: Many years unto the Emperor. For in all cases, as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal, the Emperor was Judge over al.
What so ever the Council had determined, without the Emperoures consent, it had
no force. And therefore both the Bishops, and other Temporal Judges in the
Council, used oftentimes to suspende, and to stay their Decrees in this sort:
Videtur nobis iustum, Council Chalced. Actio. 1. page 831. Euag^i. li. 2. ca. 4.
(...).
si placuerit Diuinissimo, and Pijssimo Domino nostro: Unto us it seems
right, if it shall also like our most virtuous, and most Godly Lord (the
Emperor). In the end, they conclude thus: Omnibus, quae acta sunt, ad Sacrum
Apicem referendis: So that al our dooinges be remitted to the Emperoures
Majesty. Al which words are borrowed, as the recte, out of the
Ecclesiastical story of Euagrius.

Ye say, luuenalis, and Thalassius might well have a rebuke, for sittinge like
Judges in the Second Council of Ephesus, without Authority of the Pope. O M.
Harding, either ye are mutche deceived, and prefume to speak before ye
know, which were great folly: or else ye speak directely against your
knowledge, and Conscience, and willingely seek to deceive others: which were
great wickedness. Verily, ye might easily have known, that these three
Bishops were condemned, not for intruding upon the Popes authority, as ye
have imagined, but only for Condemninge other Godly Bishops, wickedly, and
without cause. The words of the Council are plain: Gloriosissimi Iudices
dixerunt, Vos quidem primitus docuistis, quia per vim, Council. Chalcedonen.
Action. 1.
and necessitatem, in pura Charta Coacti estis subscribere ad damnationem
Sanctae memoriae Flauiani. Orientales, and, qui cum ipsis erant. Reuerendissimi
Episcopi, clamauerunt, Omnes peccauimus: Omnes veniam postulamus: The most
Nolse Iud (...) land, ye have here proved before us, that ye were driven by
force, and violence, in a ^^anke paper to subscribe your names to the
Condemnation of Flauianus of godly memory. The Bishops of the East, and
other Reverend Bishops, that were with them, cried out, We have al
offended: We al desire pardo^ne. This in deed was their fault, M. Hardinge:
All that you imagine of vsurpinge the Popes Authority, is but a fancy. For the
Popes Huge, and Universal Authority, whereby now he clamen^a the whole
Jurisdiction of all the world, at that time was not known.

The same Council of Chalcedon makes him Equal in Authority, and Dignity
with the Bishop of Constantinople. Council. Chalced. (...)
The words be these: Sedi Senioris Romae, propter Imperium Ciuitatis illius,
Patres consequenter Priuilegia reddiderunt. Et cadem intention permoti Centum
quinquaginta Deo amantissimi Episcopi, aequa Sanctissimae Sedi Nouae Romae
Priuilegia tribuerunt: rationabiliter iudicantes, Imperio, and Senatu Vrbem
Ornatam, aequis Senioris Regiae Romae Priuiulegijs frui, and in Ecclesiasticis,
sicut illa, Maiestatem habere negotijs: Unto the Sea of the Old Rome, in
consideration of the Empiere of that City, Our Fathers have accordingly
geeuen Privileges. And upon like consideration, the hundred and fifty godly
Bishops have geeuen equal, and like Privileges to the City of Nevve Rome: (
whereby is meante the City of Constantinople): For that they thought it
reasonable, that the same City of Constantinople, being now adourned with
Empiere and Senate, should also also have Privileges, Equal with Rome the
Elder: and have the same Majesty, and Authority in Ecclesiastical affairs,
that Rome has.

Thus, ye see, your Pope had not then a Power Peerless over all the World:
but was made Like, and Even, and Equal in all respects to one of his Brethren.
Therefore, if the Bishop of Rome were the Head of the Church, then was the
Bishop of Constantinople likewise y^ Head of the Church. And if the Bishop of
Romes Power were Universal, then was the Bishop of Constantinoples Power
Universal, as well as his. For the Council allows as mutche Ecclesiastical
Authority to the one Bishop, as to the other.

Now, shortly to consider the whole substance of your talk, First, ye
say, These three Bishops, Dioscorus, Iuuenalis, and Thalassius were never
condemned in the Council of Chalcedon: This, ye see, is One Untruth.
Secondely, ye say, The Civil Magistrate never condemned them. This is an
Other Untruth. Thirdely, ye say, Iuuenalis, and Thalassius were rebuked for
sitting as Judges in Council without the Popes Authority. These are two
other Untruths. For neither had the Pope any such Prerogative at that time,
nor was this the Cause of their Condemnation. And yet, as if ye would run
us over with terroure of words, ye cry out with a courrage, what is
Impudency, what is Licenceous Lieing, what is deceitful dealinge, if this be
not?

Touching these fiery terms, M. Hardinge, I dare not Answer you. But, as for
Plain lieinge, without a difference, if ye know not, what it is, look
through your own Books: and ye cannot fail of it. Verily, it is, to publishe
Untruths so largely, and so liberally, as you have done, only upon affiance
of the simplicity, and ignorance of your Reader, without regard, or fear, of
God, or Man.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 2.
In the Chirde Council at Constantinople, Constantine a Civil Magistrate, did
not only sit amongst the Bishops, but did also Subscribe with them. For,
says he, We have both readde, and Subscribed.

M. Hardinge.
The subscribing is not the matter, but the iudginge. Constantine subscribed to
the Council, as now al Christen Princes, being required, ought to subscribe to
the Tridentine Council. A Vain Distinction.
But Constantine used not this style, when he subscribed, Definiens subscripsi,
I have subscribed with giving definittiue sentence. Untruth manifest. Read
the Answer.
For so to subscribe, it apperteined only to Bishops.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 3.
In the Second Council called Arausi canum, the Princes Ambassadors, being
Noble Men borne, not only spoke their mind, touching Religion, but set to
their hands also, as well as the Bishops. For thus it is written in the
later end of that Council: Petrus, Marcellinus, Felix, and Liberius, being
Most Noble Men, and famous Lieurenantes, and Captains of France, and also
Peers of the Realm, have given their consent, and ser to their hands.
Further, Syagrius, Opilio, Pantagathus, Deodatus, Cariattho, and Marcellus,
men of very great honor, have Subscribed.

M. Hardinge.
what if all the laiemen of the world had subscribed by the word of
consenting, or agreeing to the Bishops decrees, each one writing thus, as in
that case, the old manner was, consentiens subscripsi? What other thing is
proved thereby, then that they thought it necessary to allow that, which
Bishops had determined? The Temporal Magistrate Subscribeth in coucel.
Which we wish ye would do.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 4.
If it be so then, that Lieutenantes, Chief Captains, and Peers have had
Authority to Subscribe in council, have not Emperors, and Kings the like
Authority

M. Hardinge.
Kings, and Queen's, not only might, but ought to subscribe, when they are
required.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here, M. Hardinge, ye are driven to many shifts. Sum of you say, that
Princes Ambassadors, and Civil Magistrates had no right to Subscribe in
Council, but only by license, and sufferance of the Bishops. Sum others
have found out a certain difference in Subscriptions. The Bishop, ye say,
Subscribed in one Form, and the Civil Magistrate in an other: The Bishop
thus, Definiens Subscripsi, By giving my Definitive Sentence, I have
Subscribed: The Lay Magistrate thus, Consentiens Subscripsi, Geuinge Consent
hereto, I have Subscribed. Thus have you found out a knotte in a russhe: and
divised a Diversity without a Difference. Certainly in the Old councelles
there appears only one Form of Subscriptions, and no more. And afterward
these Two Words, Definiens, and Consenriens, wherein you imagine so great a
difference, were used indifferently, as well of Bishops, Consentiens
Subscripsi. Conci. Chalced. Actio. 1. Pa. 780. Conc. Parisien. 1.
as of others: as each man was best affected. Sommetime the Bishop Subscribed,
Co^sentiens: Sommetime the Laieman Subscribed, Definiens, without seruple. In
the Council of Chalcedon it is written thus, Ego Dorotheus Episcopus Consensi,
and Subscripsi: I Bishop Dorothee have Consented, and Subscribed. Likewise it
is written in the Council of Parise, Ego Probianus Episcopus Biturice^sis
consensi, and Subscripsi: I Probiane the Bishop of Bourges have Consented,
Marius Victorinus Contra Arianos, Lib. 2. Definiens Subscripsi. Euag. Li. 2.
Ca. 4. Sozom li. 4. ca. 16 (...). Aeneas Syluiut de Gestis Council. Constantien.
li. 1.
and Subscribed. Marius Victorinus says, Nicenae Fidei multa Episcoporum
milia Consenserunt: Many thousand Bishops Consented unto the Nicene Faith.

Of the other side, the Lay Prince in Council has had Authority, not only
to Consent, and agree unto others, but also to Define, and Determine, and that
in Cases of Religion, as by many euidente Examples it may appear. Euagrius
says, as it is before alleged, (...): They, y^ were of y^ Senate, or the
Lords of ye Council, Determined these things. Sozomenus says, Imperator
Constantinus iussit december Episcopos Orientis, and totidem Occidentis, quos
Synodus designasser, ad Aulam suam venire, and sibi exponere Decreta Concilij:
vt ipse quoqque consideraret, an secundum Scripturas inter se conuenissent: and
de rebus agendis, quae optima viderentur, Determinaret: The Emperor
Constantine commanded, that ten Bishops of the East, and ten of the
Weaste, chosen by the Council, should repair to his Court, and open unto him
the Decrees of the Council: that his Majesty might consider, whether they were
agreed according to the Scriptures: and that he might further, ( not only
Consent, or agree, but also) Determine, and Conclude, what were best to be
done. Aeneas Syluius, which afterward was Pope Pius. 2. says thus: Visum
est Spiritui Sancto, and nobis: vnde apparet, alios, quam Episcopos, in
Concilijs habuisse vocem Decidentem: It seems good to the Holy Ghost, and to
us. Hereby it appears, that sum other, biside Bishops, had a voice
Definitive in Councelles. And again he says, Nec ego cuiusuis Episcopi
mendacium, Eodem Loco.
quamuis ditissimi, Veritati praeponam Pauperis Presbyteri. Nec dedignari debet
Episcopus, si aliquando ignarus, and rudis, sequacem non habeat multitudine^:
Neither w^l I set more by any Bishops lie, be he never so rich, then I
would set by any Priests Truth, be he never so poor. Neither more the
ignorante, and unlearned Bishop disdeigne, if he see the people va willinge to
follow him.

Gerson says, Iudicium, and Conclusio Fidei, licet Authoritatiue specte^t ad
Praelatos, and Doctores, spectare tamen possunt ad alios, quam Theologos
Deliberatio, sicut and Cognitio super his, quae Fidem recipient. Ita, vt ad
Laicos etiam hoc possit extendi: Gerson, Quae veritates sint credendae.
and plus aliquando, quam ad multos Clericorum: Notwithstanding the
Judgment, and Conclusion of Faith belong by Authority unto Bishops, and
Doctors, yet as well the Deliberation hereof, as also the knowledge, and
Judgment, concerning matters, that touch the Faith, may belong unto
others too bisides the Divines, or Doctoures, and Professors of Divinity.
Yea, it more sommetimes be extended even unto the Laiemenne: And more
sommetimes unto them, then unto many Priests.

The Emperor Justinian in Ecclesiastical Causes, oftentimes uses these
words, Authen Collaet. Tit. 6. Quomodo opor. Episcop.
Definimus, Mandamus, lubemus, etc. We Determine, we Conclude, we Command,
we Bid. Touching Bishops, he writes thus, Definimus, vt nullus Deo
amabilium Episcoporum foris a sua Ecclesia, plus quam per totum annum abesse
audeat: We Define, or Determine, that none of the Godly Bishops shall dare to
be absent from his Church, more then by the space of one whole year. Here, ye
see, the Temporal Prince, in an Ecclesiastical Cause says, Definimus. To be
short, Pope Nicolas him self says, writing unto the Emperor Michael,
Vbinam legistis, Dis 96. Vbinam.
Imperatores Antecessores vestros Synodalibus Contentionibus interfuisse? Nisi
forte in quibusdam, vbi de Fide tractatum est: quae Vniuersalis est: quae
omnium Communis est: quae non solum ad Clericos, verum etiam ad Laicos, and ad
omnes omnino pertinet Christianos: Where have you readde, that your
Predecessors, being Emperors, were ever Present at our Disputations in
Councelles? Unless happily it were in certain cases, whereas matter was
moved touching the Faith. For Faith is Universal, and Common to al: and
pertains not only unto Priests, but also unto Laiemen: and generally, and
thorovvly to al Christians Thus ye see, M. Hardinge, by the Popes own
Judgment, that Cases, and Disputations of the Faith, belong as well to the
Temporal Prince, as to the Pope.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 5.
Truly, there had benne no need to handle so plain a matter, as this is, with
so many words, and so at length, if we had not to do with those men, who
for a desire they have to strive, and to win the maisterie, use of course to
deny al things, be they never so clear, yea, the very same, which they
presently see, and behold with their own eyes.

M. Hardinge.
The matter, ye speak of, is so clear, that from the beginning of the world
to this day, Untruth evident, as by sundry examples i^ shall appear.
no secular Prince can be named, who by the ordinary power of a Prince, without
the gift of prophecy, or special revelation, did laudably intermeddle with
Religion, as a judge and ruler of spiritual causes. The reason thereof is
clear. Religion is an order of Divine worshippinge, belonginge to God only:
whereupon no man has power, but he that is called thereto by God. He is called
in the judgment of men, who can show his calling out wardly, as by
consecration, and imposition of hands. Priests and Bishops are called to be
the dispensatours of the mysteries of God. Mat. 16. and 18.
In that consecration the keys of knowledge, and discretion, the power of
blindinge and loosinge is given. O Vain mao. What pertein^ these keys to
General Councelles? For by them every poor Priest has as good right in
Council, as the Pope.
If a secular Prince can not show the keys given to him, how dares he
adventure to break up rather then to open the clasped book of God, The Prince
may deal in Ecclesiastical Causes.
the door of the Church, and the gates of the Kingedome of heaven? Wherefore
S. Ambrose said unto Valentinian. Quando audiuisti, Imperator, in causa Fidei
Laicos de Episcopo iudicasse? Li. 5. epis. 32
When haste thou heard, Emperor, Laymen to have been judges of a Bishop in
the cause of Faith? And yet now these men think, that which S. Ambrose
never heard of, not only to have been used continually the first five hundred
years after Christ's birthe, but also to be as clear a matter, as if we
beheld it with our eyes.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Temporal Prince, ye say, has not the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven:
Ergo, he may not judge in Ecclesiastical Causes, nor geeue Definitive Sentence
in General Council. This is a very sely poor Argument, M. Hardinge, as
hereafter it shall appear. But S. Ambrose says unto the Emperor
Valentinian: When did your Majesty ever hear, that in a Cause of Faith, a
Laiemenne were Judges over Bishops? Here, M. Hardinge, by the way, S.
Amrbose geeueth you to understand, that unless it be in a Cause of Faith, a
Laieman may be Judge over a Bishop: which thing is contrary, Part 6. Cap.
9. Diui. 2.
not only to your Former Doctrine, but also to the whole course, and practice
of your Church of Rome.

How be it, touching the meaning of these words, it behooves us to know,
First the cause, wherefore S. Ambrose so shunned, and fled the Emperors
Judgment: Next, before what Judges he desired to be tried.

First, the Emperor Valentinian, at that time, was very young, as well in Age,
as also in Faith: He was not yet Baptized: He knew not the Principles of
Christ's Religion: Ambros. Lib. 5. Epist. 33. Mandatur denique, Trade
Basilicam. Allegatur, Imperatori licere omnia.
He was an Arian Heretic, and believed not the Godhedde of Christ, but bent
al his study, and power to maintain the Arians: He would have thruste out
the Christianes, and would have possessed the Heretics in their Churches:
and to that end had raised his Power, and filled Millaine full of Soldiers: He
said, It was lawful for him, to do, what him listed. Briefly, his whole
dealinge was full of force, and violence, such as has benne seen in sum
Countries, not many years sithence.

In consideration hereof, Ambros. Li 5. Epist 32. Ad Valentinian. Lib. 5.
Epist. 33.
S. Ambrose woorthily refused him to be his Judge. And therefore he said unto
him, Toll Legem, si vis esse Cerramen: Take away the rigor of your Law,
if ye will have the matter tried by Disputation. Again, Noli te grauare,
Imperator, vt putes te in ea, quae Diuina sunt, Imperiale aliquod ius habere:
Noli te extollere: Esto Deo subiectus. Scriptum est, quae Dei, Deo: quae
Caesaris, Caesari: O my Lord, trouble not your self, to think, you have any
Princely Power over those things, that perteine to God. Vaunte not your self:
be subject unto God. It is written, Give unto God, that belongs unto God:
Give unto Caesar, that belongs unto Caesar.

But, as S. Ambrose says, The Emperor has no Power over Gods causes,
so may we likewise, and as truly say, The Pope has no Power over Gods
causes. S. Chrysostom says, Siquidem est in Causa Fidei, fuge illum, and
euita: Chrysostom. ad Hebrae. Homil. 34.
non solum si homo fuerit, verum etiam si Angelus de Coelo descenderit: If it
be a Matter of Faith, ( wherein he seeks to abuse thee) flee him, and shun
him: not only, if he be a man, but also if an Angel should comme down from
Heaven. Thus it appears, S. Ambrose refused not the Emperors Power, and
Authority of Judgment in Cases Ecclesiastical, but only his wilful
Ignorance, and his Tyranny: For that he knew, Ambros. Lib. 5. Epist. 32.
Dicentes, de Pide in Ecclesia coram populo debere trae^tari.
his Judgment was corrupted, and not indifferente.

And for that cause he says, Venissem, Imperator, ad Consistorium Clementiae
tuae, etc. O my Lord, I would have made mine appearance at your Consistory,
to have uttered these things in your Presence, if either the Bishops, or the
People would have suffered me. For they told me, that Matters of Faith ought
to be disputed in the Church openly before the people. Again he says,
Veniant sane, si qui sunt, in Ecclesiam: Audiant cum Populo: no^, vt quisqua^
resideat Iudex, sed vt vnusquisque de suo affectu habeat examen, and eligat,
quem sequatur: Let them hardely comme to the Church: let them hearken
together with ye People: not that any man should sit as Judge: but y^ every
man may after his own mind examine the matter, and so choose, whom he may
follow. Of such Tyranny in Councelles Athanasius likewise complains: In
Eadem Episto. Athanas. Apolo. 2. Poteramus.
Quo iure co^tra nos Synodum vllam constituere potuerunt? Aut qua front talem
Conuentum Synodum appellare audent, cui Comes Praesedit? Vbi Spiculator
apparebat? Vbi Commentariensis, sieve Carcerarius pro Diaconis Ecclesiae
aduentantes introducebat? Comes imperio vtebatur: Nos a Militibus ducebamur: By
what Law could they keep a Council against us? Or with what face could
they call such an Assembly by the name of a Council? Where as the Lord
Lieutenante was Presidente? Where the Hangeman was Apparitoure? Where the
Iailer presented the suitors in steed of the Deacons of the Church? The
Lieutenante did al things by Authority and Commandment: We were taken by
the Soldiers, and carried to Prison.

Therefore he says, Fiat Ecclesiastica Synodus long a Palatio: vbi nec
Imperator praesto est: Athanas. Ad Solitariam vitam agentes. Has Literas.
nec comes se ingerit: nec Iudex minatur: and vbi Solus Timor Dei ad omnia
sufficit, etc. Let there be made an Ecclesiastical Synod, far from the
Emperors Palaice: where as neither the Emperor is Present: nor the
Lieutenante thrusts in him self: nor the Judge with his threats makes
men afraid: but where as the fear of God to al pourposes is sufficient.
For this cause S. Ambrose refused to be tried by the Emperor Valentinian:
That is to say, as then it was, by a rasshe young man: by a man Unbaptized, and
therefore no Christian: by a Tyranne: and by an Arian Heretic, that utterly
denied the Godhedde of Christ.

Otherwise Athanasius him self was well contented to commit his whole cause
unto the Emperor. For thus he says, Postulamus, causam istam Pientissimo
Imperatori reseruari: Athanas. Apol. 2. Cum multas.
apud quem licebit, and iura Ecclesiae, and nostra proponere. Plane enim
confidimus, eius Pietatem, cognitis nostris rationibus, nequaquam nos
coudemnaturam esse: We require, that the Emperoures most godly, and most
Religious Majesty may have the hearing of the same matter: Before whom we
may open both our Churches Right, and also our own. For we have good hope,
that his Godliness, understanding our Reasons, will never condemn us.

Likewise S. Augustine says unto the Donatian Hereriques, An forte de
Religione fas non est, Augusti. contra Epist. Parme^iani. Lib. 1.
vt dicat Imperator, vel quos miserit Imperator? Our ergo ad Imperatorem vestri
venere legati? Cur eum fecerunt Causae suae Iudicem? Is it not lawful, for the
Emperor, or his Deputee, to give Sentence in a matter of Religion? Wherefore
then went your Ambassadors to the Emperor? Why made they him the Judge of
their cause?

Thus, M. Hardinge, it appears, that you, in defraudinge Emperors, and
Kings of their Emperial, and Princely Right, are feign to take part with the
Donatian Heretics.

As for us, we claim no other right in Ecclesiastical Causes unto our
Christian Princes this day, then that may well appear, has benne justly
used, both by Constantinus the Emperor, and also by other Catholic, and
Godly Princes.

The Emperor Theodosius wrote thus unto the Council of Chalcedon: Quoniam
scimus, Liberatus. Ca. 1^.
Magnificentissimum Florentium Patritium esse Fidelem, and probatum in Recta
Fide, volumus eum interesse audientiae Synodi: quoniam sermo de Fide est: For
that we know, the most Noble Florentius to be faitheful, and well approved in
the Right Faith, therefore we will, that he be present at the hearing, and
debatinge of Cases in the Council: for as mutche as the Disputation is of the
Faith.

For Pope Nicolas himself says, as it is alleged before, Fides Vniuersalis
est: Fides omnium Communis est: Fides no^ solum ad Clericos, verum etiam ad
Laicos, Dis. 96. Vbinam.
and ad omnes omnino pertinet Christianos: Hespeaketh of questions of Faith
moved in Cou^celles.
Faith is Universal: Faith is common to al: Faith pertains, not only unto
Priests, but also unto Laiemenne, and generally to al Christians.

As touching the Pope, and his Universality of Power, in, and over al
Councelles of Bishops, we may rightly say, as Athanasius says of
Constantius the Arian Emperor, Obtendit in speciem Episcoporum Iudicium: sed
interim facit, Athanas. Ad Solitariam Vitam agentes.
quod ipsi libet. Quid opus est Hominibus Titulo Episcopis? He makes a show of
Judgments, or Determinations of Bishops: In the mean while he doothe, what
he lists him self. What are we the near for these men, that bear only
the name of Bishops? Such commonly be the Popes Prelates. What so ever
Learning they have bisides, Divinity is commonly the least part of their
study. And therefore, when they are assembled in Council, they may well judge
by Authority, but not by Learning.

Verily, Luitprandus.
Luitprandus says, Imperator, vti experientia didicimus, intelligit negotia
Dei, and facit, and amat ea: and tuetur omnibus viribus, and Ecclesiasticas
res, and Ciuiles. Sed Johannes Papa facit contra haec omnia: We see by
experience, that the Emperor understands Gods causes, Johan. 13.
and favors, and perfourmeth the same: and with all his Power mainteineth
both Ecclesiastical, and Temporal matters. But Pope John does all the contrary.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 6.
The Emperor Justinian made a Law to correct the behaueour of the Cleregie,
and to cut short the insolente Iewdenesse of the Priests. And, albeit he
were a Christian, and a Catholic Prince, yet put he down from their
Papal Throne, two Popes, Syluerius, and Vigilius, notwithstanding they were
Peter's Successors, and Christ's Vicars.

M. Hardinge.
Justinians law concerning good order to be kept among Pristes morally was
good, and bound them by the force of reason. If he made any other Law
touching matters of Religion, Pope Ioannes then being, approved it, or at the least, Iustianian Untruth. For he did but confer with the Pope, touching
his Laws. Touching the askinge of allowance, there appears nothing.
asked approbation thereof, Untruth. For he did but confer with the Pope,
touching his Laws. Touching the askinge of allowance, there appears
nothing.
as it may appear in his own Epistle, wherein he confesses in the fact it
self, that his Laws could not bind in supernatural causes belonginge to
faith, except the head of the Universal Church confirm them. Syluerius and
Vigilius were deposed rather by Theodora the Emperesse, then by Justinian the
Emperor. Untruth. For it was not tyranny, but just Judgment. And
Justinian gave Balisarius great thanks for so dooinge.
Ye do wrong to impute that wicked tyranny unto him. Untruth. For it was no
tyranny, but just Judgment. And Justinian gave Balisarius great thanks
for so dooinge.
He is not to be burdened there with, unless the man be countable for his
wives iniquities.

How so ever it was, that extraordinary violence and tyranny can not justly
be alleged to the defense of your false assertion. Neither would your self
have mentioned the same, if ye could have found better matter. As hungry
Dogs eat durty puddinges, according to the proverb, clean yenough for
such unclean writers, so your foul matters be defended by foul factes.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Justinian, ye say, might well make sum Moral Law, to keep Priests, and
Bishops in good order. Wherein nevertheless Pope Paul. 3. condemns you
utterly: For thus he writes, and reasons substantially against the Emperor
Charles the Fifthe: Ezechiel. 34. Paulus 3. in Epistola ad Carol. 5.
Ecce ego super Pastores meos: Behold, says Almighty God, I me self will
ouersee my Sheepheardes: Ergo, says Pope Paulus, The Emperor may not deal
with the manners of Priests, and Bishops.

How be it, the Emperors made Laws, Touching the Holy Trinity: Touching
the Faith: Touching Baptism: Touching the Holy Communion: Touching the
Public Prayers: Touching the Scriptures: Touching the keepinge of Holy
days: Touching Churches, and Chaples: Touching the Consecration of
Bishops: Touching Non Residences: Touching Perjury, etc. It were mutche
for you, M. Hardinge, to say, as now ye would seem to say, Al these were
Moral Laws, Cod. De Sacrosanct. Ecclesijs. Omni innouaetione.
and perteined only to good order. But the Pope, ye say, allowed the
Emperors Ecclesiastical Laws: Otherwise, of the Emperors own Authority,
they had no force. The truth hereof, by the Particulares, may soon appear.

By one of the Emperors Laws it is provided, That the Bishop of
Constantinople shall have Equal Power, Liberatus, Ca. 13. Imperatoris
Patrocinio.
and Prerogative with the Bishop of Rome. This Law the Pope could never
brook. And yet that notwithstanding, Liberatus says, It holds still by the
Emperors Authority, whether the Pope will, or no: Cod. De Sacrosanct.
Ecclesiis. Omni innouatione.
Again, it is provided in the same Law, that the Churches of Illyricum, in
their doubteful cases, shall appeal to Constantinople, and not to Rome:

The Emperor Constantine says, If the Bishop move trouble ( by Doctrine, or
otherwise,) by my hand he shall be pounished: For my hand is the hand of
Gods Minister: Theodoret. Li. 1. Cap. 20. Ministri Dei, hoc est, meae manis,
coercebitur.


Justinian the Emperor in his Law commands, That the Priest, or Bishop
in pronouncinge the Public Prayers, and in the Ministration of the
Sacraments, lift up his voice, and speak alowde, that the people may say,
Amen, and be sturred to more Devotion: Again, he says, as it is noted in the
Gloss upon the Authentiques, Papa Temporalibus immiscere se non debet: Authen.
Titul. 123.
The Pope may not intermeddle with Temporal Causes:

In the same Laws, Authen. Colla. 1. Quomodo oporteat Episcopos.
the same Emperor Justinian says, We Commounde the most Holy
Archebishoppes, and Patriarchs, of Rome, of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of
Antioche, and of Jerusalem: The same Emperor Justinian commands, That al
Monks, Authen. Colla. 9. Titu. 15. De Sanctiss. Episcopis. Iubemus Beatissimos
Archiepiscopos, Senioris Romae, etc.
either be driven to study the Scriptures, or else be forced to Bodily Labor:
Carolus Magnus made a Law, That nothing should be readde openly in the
Church, sauinge only the Canonical Books of the Holy Scriptures: And that
the Faitheful People should receive the Holy Communion every Sonnedaie. I
leave the rehearsal of infinite other like Examples.

Now, M. Hardinge, will you say, or may we believe, that al these, and other
like Laws were allowed by the Pope?

In deed your Gloser says, Authen. Tit. 133. Ansigisus Lib. 1. Cap. 19.
Ad quid intromittit se Imperator de Spiritualibus, vel Ecclesiasticis, cum
sciat ad se non pertinere? Wherefore doothe the Emperor thus busy him self
with these Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical matters, seeinge he knows, they are no
part of his Charge? Carolus Magnus Lib. 6. Cap. 162. Authen. Colla. 1. Titu.
6. Quomodo oporteat.
To so profounde a question, after a long solemn study, he diuiseth this
answer: Dic, quod Authoritate Papae hoc facit: Scie thou, that he doothe it
by the Popes Authority: And then the whole matter is discharged, and al is well.

Notwithstanding, sum likelihoode hereof ye would seem to geather, even
out of Justinians own words. Gloss. in verbu^ Sancimus.
For thus he says unto the Pope, although far otherwise, then you have forced
him to say: Omnia, quae ad Ecclesiarum statum pertinent, approved in the Right
Faith, The Prince may deal in Ecclesiastical Causes.
therefore we will, that he be present at the hearing, and debatinge of Cases
in the Council: for as mutche as the Disputation is of the Faith.

For Pope Nicolas him self says, as it is alleged before, Fides Vniuersalis
est: Fides omnium Communis est: Fides no^ solum ad Clericos, verum etiam ad
Laicos, Dis. 96 Vbinam.
and ad omnes omnino pertinet Christianos: He speaks of questions of Faith
moved in Cou^celles.
Faith is Universal: Faith is common to al: Faith pertains, not only unto
Priests, but also unto Laiemenne, and generally to al Christians.

As touching the Pope, and his Universality of Power, in, and over al
Councelles of Bishops, we may rightly say, as Athanasius says of
Constantius the Arian Emperor, Obtendit in speciem Episcoporum Iudicium: sed
interim facit, quod ipsi libet. Quid opus est Hominibus Titulo Episcopis? He
makes a show of Judgments, Athanas. Ad Solitariam Vitam agentes.
or Determinations of Bishops: In the mean while he doothe, what he lists
him self. What are we the near for these men, that bear only the name
of Bishops? Such commonly be the Popes Prelates. What so ever Learning
they have bisides, Divinity is commonly the least part of their study. And
therefore, when they are assembled in Council, they may well judge by
Authority, but not by Learning.

Verily, Luitprandus.
Luitprandus says, Imperator, vti experientia didicimus, intelligit negotia
Dei, and facit, and amat ea: and tuetur omnibus viribus, and Ecclesiasticas
res, and Ciuiles. Sed Johannes Papa facit contra haec omnia: We see by
experience, that the Emperor understands Gods causes, Johan. 13.
and favors, and perfourmeth the same: and with all his power mainteineth
both Ecclesiastical, and Temporal matters. But Pope John does all the contrary.

The Apology, Cap. 14. Division. 6.
The Emperor Justinian made a Law to correct the behaueour of the Cleregie,
and to cut short the insolente lewdenesse of the Priests. And, albeit he
were a Christian, and a Catholic Prince, yet put he down from their
Papal Throne, two Popes, Syluerius, and Vigilius, notwithstanding they were
Peter's Successors, and Christ's Vicars.

M. Hardinge.
Justinians law concerning good order to be kept among Priests morally was
good, and bound them by the force of reason. If he made any other Law
touching matters of Religion, Pope Ioannes then being, approved it, or at the least, Justinian Untruth. For he did but confer with the Pope, touching his
Laws. Touching the askinge of allowance, there appears nothing.
asked approbation thereof, Untruth. For he did but confer with the Pope,
touching his Laws. Touching the askinge of allowance, there appears
nothing.
as it may appear in his own Epistle, wherein he confesses in the fact it
self, that his Laws could not bind in supernatural causes belonginge to
faith, except the head of the Universal Church confirm them. Syluerius and
Vigilius were deposed rather by Theodora the Emperesse, then by Justinian the
Emperor. Untruth. For it was no tyranny, but just Judgment. And
Justinian gave Belisarius great thanks for so dooinge.
Ye do wrong to impute that wicked tyranny unto him. Untruth. For it was no
tyranny, but just Judgment. And Justinian gave Belisarius great thanks for
so dooinge.
He is not to be burdened there with, unless the man be countable for his
wives iniquities.

How so ever it was, that extraordinary violence and tyranny can not justly
be alleged to the defense of your false assertion. Neither would your self
have mentioned the same, if ye could have found better matter. As hungry
Dogs eat durty puddinges, according to the proverb, clean yenough for
such unclean writers, so your foul matters be defended by foul factes.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Justinian, The Prince may deal in Ecclesiastical causes.
ye say, might well make sum Moral Law, to keep Priests, and Bishops in
good order. Wherein nevertheless Pope Paul. 3. condemns you utterly: For
thus he writes, and reasons substantially against the Emperor Charles the
Fifthe: Ezechiel. 34. Paulus 3. in Epistola ad Carol. 5.
Ecce ego super Pastores meos: Behold, says Almighty God, I me self will
ouersee my Sheepheardes: Ergo, says Pope Paulus, The Emperor may not deal
with the manners of Priests, and Bishops.

How be it, the Emperors made Laws, Touching the Holy Trinity: Touching
the Faith: Touching Baptism: Touching the Holy Communion: Touching the
Public Prayers: Touching the Scriptures: Touching the keepinge of Holy
days: Touching Churches, and Chaples: Touching the Consecration of
Bishops: Touching Non Residences: Touching Perjury, etc. It were mutche
for you, M. Hardinge, to say, as now ye would seem to say, Al these were
Moral Laws, Cod. De Sacrosanct. Ecclesijs. Omni innouaetione.
and perteined only to good order. But the Pope, ye say, allowed the
Emperors Ecclesiastical Laws: Otherwise, of the Emperors own Authority,
they had no force. The truth hereof, by the Particulares, may soon appear.

By one of the Emperors Laws it is provided, That the Bishop of
Constantinople shall have Equal Power, Liberatus, Ca. 13. Imperatoris
Patrocinio.
and Prerogative with the Bishop of Rome. This Law the Pope could never
brook. And yet that notwithstanding, Liberatus says, It holds still by the
Emperors Authority, whether the Pope will, or no: Cod. De Sacrosanct.
Ecclesiis. Omni innouatione.
Again, it is provided in the same Law, that the Churches of Illyricum, in
their doubteful cases, shall appeal to Constantinople, and not to Rome:

The Emperor Constantine says, If the Bishop move trouble ( by Doctrine, or
otherwise,) by my hand he shall be pounished: For my hand is the hand of
Gods Minister: Theodoret. Li. 1. Cap. 20. Ministri Dei, hoc est, mea manis,
coercebitur.


Justinian the Emperor in his Law commands, That the Priest, or Bishop
in pronouncinge the Public Prayers, and in the Ministration of the
Sacraments, lift up his voice, and speak alowde, that the people may say,
Amen, and be sturred to more Devotion: Again, he says, as it is noted in the
Gloss upon the Authentiques, Papa Temporalibus immiscere se non debet: Authen.
Titul. 123.
The Pope may not intermeddle with Temporal Causes:

In the same Laws, Authen. Colla. 1. Quomodo oporteat Episcopos.
the same Emperor Justinian says, We Commounde the most Holy
Archebishoppes, and Patriarchs, of Rome, of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of
Antioche, and of Jerusalem: The same Emperor Justinian commands, That al
Monks, Authen. Colla. 9. Titu. 15. De Sanctiss. Episcopis. Iubemus Beatissimos
Archiepiscopos, Senioris Romae, etc.
either be driven to study the Scriptures, or else be forced to Bodily Labor:
Carolus Magnus made a Law, That nothing should be readde openly in the
Church, sauinge only the Canonical Books of the Holy Scriptures: And that
the Faitheful People should receive the Holy Communion every Sonnedaie. I
leave the rehearsal of infinite other like Examples.

Now, M. Hardinge, will you say, or may we believe, that al these, and other
like Laws were allowed by the Pope?

In deed your Gloser says, Authen. Tit. 133. Ansigisus Lib. 1. Cap. 19.
Ad quid intromittit se Imperator de Spiritualibus, vel Ecclesiasticis, cum
sciat ad se non pertinere? Wherefore doothe the Emperor thus busy him self
with these Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical matters, seeinge he knows, they are no
part of his Charge? Carolus Magnus Lib. 6. Cap. 162. Authen. Colla. 1. Titu.
6. Quomodo oporteat.
To so profounde a question, after a long solemn study, he diuiseth this
answer: Dic, quod Authoritate Papae hoc facit: Scie thou, that he doothe it
by the Popes Authority: And then the whole matter is discharged, and al is well.

Notwithstanding, sum likelihoode hereof ye would seem to geather, even
out of Justinians own words. Gloss. in verbu^ Sanc^mus.
For thus he says unto the Pope, although far otherwise, then you have forced
him to say: Omnia, quae ad Ecclesiarum statum pertinent, festinauimus ad
notitiam defer Vestrae Sanctitatis. Necessarium ducimus, vt ad notitiam
Vestrae Sanctitatis peruenirent. Nec enim patimur, quicquam, quod ad
Ecclesiarum Statum pertinet, vt non etiam Vestrae innotescat Sanctitati: quae
Caput est omnium Sanctarum Ecclesiarum: What so ever things perteine to the
state of the Churches, Cod. De Summa Trinita. and Fide Catho. Inter Claras.
we have spedily brought to the knowledge of your Holiness. We thought it
necessary, that your Holiness should have knowledge thereof. We suffer not
any thing, that concerns the State of the Churches, but it be brought to the
knowledge of your Holiness: which is the Head, or Chief of all the Holy
Churches.

The Emperor wills the Pope, to take knowledge of his Laws, for that he
was the Chief of the Four Principal Patriarchs, and, in respect of his See,
the greatest Bishop of all the World: for which cause also he calls him, the
Head, Cod. De Veteri Iure Enucleando. Chrysostom. ad Romanos. Homi. 18.
or Chief of al Churches. So Justinian says, Roma est Caput Orbis Terrarum:
Rome is the Head of all the World. So S. Chrysostom says, Caput
Prophetarum Elias: Elias, the Head of the Prophets. So says Prudentius,
Sancta Bethlem Caput est Orbis: The Holy town of Bethlem is the Head of the
World.

So Nazianzene calls S. Basile, Prudentius in Enchiridio.
(...), Oculum Orbis Terrarum: The Eye of all the Earth. So Justinian calls
the Bishop of Constantinople, an Universal Patriarch: Nazianzenus in Epist. ad
Basili.
Epiphanio Universally Patriarchae.

These, and other like words, pass oftentimes in favor, as Titles of
Honor. But they importe not always that Universal Gouernemente, Authen.
Colla. 1. Vt determinatus.
or Infinite Authority, that the Pope sithence has imagined. But, touching
the Confirmation, and allowance of the Emperors Laws, in these words of
Justinian ye find nothing: Unless ye will say, Notitia, is Latin for,
Allowance: or, Peruenire, is Latin to Confirm.

The Emperors purpose was, as it plainly appears by his words, by these,
and al other means, to bring the Sea of Rome into credit. For thus he says,
Properamus, Cod. De summa Trinita. and Fide Cath. Inter Claras.
Honorem, and Authoritatem Crescere Sedis Vestrae: Omnes Sacerdotes Vniuersi
Orientalis Tractus, and subijcere, and vnire Sedi Vestrae Sanctitatis
properauimus. Plus ita Vestrae Sedis crescer Authoritas: We labor, to auance
the Honor, and Authority of your See: We labor to subdewe, and to join
all the Priests of ye East Part unto the Sea of your Holiness. Thus shall the
Authority of your See the more increase.

Notwithstanding, Gregor. Haloander, Et Azo.
it is noted by the Learned of your own side, that these Epistles bitweene the
Emperor, and the Pope, in the Oldest Allowed Books are not found: and
therefore are suspected to sauoure of sum Roman forgerie. Hereby it is easy
to understand, that until the time of the Emperor Justinian, which was
welneare six hundred years after Christ, the Bishops of the East Church
were not subject to the Bishop of Rome: and, that for so long time, the Pope
was not yet known for the Head of the Universal Church of God.

One of your own Allowed Doctors says thus, Heruae. De Potest. Papae. Ca.
17.
Dicere, quo'd Princeps non potest facere Leges, vel eis vti, quousque fuerint
approbatae per Papam, falsum est: To say, that the Prince cannot, either make,
or use his Laws, before the Pope have allowed them, it is plainly false.

Abbate Panormitane, Extra. De Constituti. Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae. Numero 9.
to qualify the matter, says thus, Lex Principis Praeiudicialis Ecclesijs,
non extenditur ad Ecclesias, nisi express approbetur per Papam: Sed, si fauet
Ecclesijs, intelligitur approbata, nisi express reprobetur: The Princes Law,
if it be Prejudicial, or hurteful to the Church, is not extended unto the
Church, unless it be expressly allowed by the Pope: But if it be profitable
for the Church, we must think, it is allowed, unless it be expressly
disallowed.

But here, M. Hardinge, this one thing ye may note by the way: that,
notwithstanding you cannot find, by any shifte, or color, whereof ye lack
no stoare, that the Pope has Authority to allow the Emperors Laws: yet,
of the other side, we are hable readily to find, that the Emperor has
Authority to allow the Popes Laws. For so the Emperor Justinian him
self says: A praecedentibus nos Imperatoribus, and a nobis ipsis recte
dictum est, Oportere Sacras Regulas pro Legibus valere: It is well said, both
by other Emperors our Predecessors, Authen. Colla. 1. Quomodo oporteat.
and also by us, that the Holy Canons must be holden for Laws.

Likewise says Pope Honorius. 3. Imperator Iustinianus decreuit, vt Canones
Patrum vim Legum habere oporteat: Extra, De Iuramen. Calum. Inhaerentes.
The Emperor Justinian has decreed, that the Canons of the Fathers shall have
the force of Laws.

But, what can be so plain, as that Justinian hereof writes him self? These
be his words: Authen. De Eccles. diuersis Capitulis.
Nisi intra praescriptum tempus ad Ecclesias suas redeant, deponantur, and alij
in illorum locum surrogentur, idque Authoritate, and vi huius Praesentis Legis:
Unless Bishops, and Priests, repair again unto their Churches by a day
appointed, let them be deprived from their liuinges, and let others be placed
in their roumes, ( not by the Authority of the Pope, (...). August. Epist. 48.
Cod. De veteri Iure Enuclean. L. 1.
but) by the force, and Authority of this Present Law. So says S.
Augustine, Reges in Terris seruiunt Christo, faciendo Leges pro Christo: Kings
in the world serve Christ, in that they make Laws for Christ. Likewise
says Justinian, Legum Authoritas and Diuinas, and Humanas res been disponit:
By the Authority of the (Emperors) Laws both Heavenly, and worldly things
are well ordered. And again, Nullum genus rerum est, quod non sit penitus
quaerendum Authoritate Imperatoris. Is enim recipit a Deo communem
gubernationem, Authen. Titu. 133 (...).
and Principalitatem super omnes homines: There is no kind of thing, but it
may be thoroughly examined by the Authority of the Emperor. For he receives
from God a General Gouernemente, and Principality over al men: that is, as
well of the Cleregie, eas of the Laity.

So says Paulus the Bishop of Apamea unto the same Emperor Justinian, upon
the death of Agapetus the Bishop of Rome: Council Constantinop. 5. Action. 1.
Transtulit ipsum Dominus, vt Plenitudinem directionis Vestrae custodiret
Serenitati: Our Lord has taken the Pope away, that he might reserve the
whole f^lnesse of order unto your Majesty.

Touching the Deprivation of the two Popes, Syluerius, and Vigilius, ye
say, It was done only by Theodora the Empress, and not by the Emperor
Justinian: and therein, ye think, ye have taken us in sum great
advantage. Notwithstanding in your own Pontifical it is written thus, Council.
Tomo. 2. in vita Vigilij.
Belisarium interrogauit Imperator, quomodo se haberet cum Romany: vel quomodo
in loco Syluerij statuisset Vigilium. Tunc gratias ei egerunt Imperator, and
Augusta: The Emperor demanded of his Captain Belisarius, how he had done
with the Romans: and how he had deposed Pope Syluerius, and placed Vigilius
in his steed. Upon his answer, both the Emperor, and the Empress gave
him thanks. Now ye know, ff. In Regulis Iuris.
it is a Rule in Law, Ratihabitio retrotrahitur, and mandato comparatur: The
Allowance of a thing done, is as good, as a Commission for the dooinge.

Sum of your Friends have said, Petrus De Palud. De Potesta. Papae, Arti. 4.
Eutropij appendix, De Syluerio.
Totus Mundus non potest Deponere, aut Iudicare Papam: The whole world cannot
Depose, or Judge the Pope. Yet Eutropius says, Si quando Imperialis Legatus
mitteretur a Principe, vt Romanus Pontifex proficisceretur Constantinopolim ad
Imperatorem, omni neglecta occasion, ibat: etiamsi pro certo sciret, se iturum
in exilium: If the Emperors Embassadoure had commanded ye Bishop of Rome to
appear at Constantinople before the Emperor, he went straight way without
excuse: Yea, although he certainly knevve, that he should be bannished. Here
I leave sundry Examples of Emperors, that by their Authority have Deposed,
not only other Bishops, but also Popes: Ennodius: Inter Decreta Bonifacij. 1.
As the Example of Honorius, that Deposed Pope Bonifacius: Of Theodoricus, that
Deposed Pope Symmachus: Of Otho, that Deposed Pope John, 12: Of Henry, that
Deposed Pope Benedictus. 9. and that, as it is recorded, not by wilful might,
or Tyranny, but, Imperiali, and Canonica Censura: By his Emperial, and by ye
Canonical Censures. Yea, one of your own Friends says thus: Populus
commendabiliter Zelo Fidei commotus, Constantinum Papam, qui erat Ecclesiae in
scandalum, priuauit oculis, and Deposuit: The people of Rome, moved with the
Zele of Faith, Johannes De Parisijs, De Potest. Regia, and Papali.
took Pope Constantine, and pulled out his eyes, and Deposed him, for that he
was sclaunderous unto the Church: and they deserved great Praise for the same.

How be it, Idem, eodem Ioco.
ye say, these two Popes, Syluerius, and Vigilius were Good Men, and Godly
Fathers: and therefore the remouinge of them was Violence, and Tyranny. And
hereto ye apply the unsavory Similitude of your Homely Puddinges.
Notwithstanding, what Virtue, or Holiness was in either of these men, it
may soon appear by the story. Pope Syluerius was chosen Pope by Corruption,
Council. Tom. 2. In Syluerio. Euagrius, Lib. 4. Cap. 19.
and Simonie, contrary to the will of the Cleregie: Pope Vigilius accused him
of Treason, for that he would have betrayed the City of Rome to the
Gotthians. As for Pope Vigilius, your Pontifical says, He was a False
Witness against his Predecessoure, Pope Syluerius: He sought vndewe means to
remove him, and to place him self: He keapte him in Prison, and sterued him
for hunger: He gave a great sum of money to procure the Popedom to him
self: He killed his own Notarie: He killed a young man, being a Widows
Son: And of these crimes he was accused before the Emperor. Such Virtue,
and such Holiness the world found in them. Therefore the Godly Emperor
in remouinge of them, used neither Extraordinary Violence, as you say, nor
Injurious Tyranny.

Your own fellows say, Heruaeus, De Potest. Papae. Ca. 13.
Si Papa sit incorrigibilis, nec Cardinales possint per se amouere scandalum de
Ecclesia, tunc in subsidium iuris, deberent supplicando inuocare Brachium
Saeculare. Et tunc Imperator, requisitus a Cardinalibus, deberet procedere
contra Papam: If the Pope be incorrigible, and the Cardinals be not hable of
them selves to remove the offense from the Church, then ought they, for aid
of the Law, by way of entreaty, to call upon the Seculare Power. And then
the Emperor, being thus desired, ought to proceed orderly against the Pope.

Franciscus Zarabella says, as he is alleged before, Papa potest accusari
coram Imperatore, Franc. Zarabella De Schemate, and Concilio.
de quolibet crimine notorio: Et Imperator requirere potest a Papa rationem
Fidei: The Pope in any notorious crime may be accused before the Emperor:
And the Emperor may require the Pope, to yield a reckeninge of his Faith.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 1.
Let us see then, such men, as have Authority over the Bishops, such
men, as receive from God Commandments co^cerninge Religion, such, as
bring home again the Ark of God, make Holy Hymns, ouersee the Priests,
build the Temple, make Orations touching Divine Service, cleanse y^ Temples,
destroy the Hill Aultars, burn the Idolles Groves, teach the Priests their
duty, write them out Precepts, how they should live, kille the wicked
Prophets, displace the High Priests, call together the Councelles of
Bishops, sit together with the Bishops, instructinge them what they
ought to do, condemn, and pounishe Heretical Bishopes, be made acquainted
with matters of Religion, The Popes Power Supernatural.
which Subscribe, and geeue Sentence, and do al these things, not by any
other Man's Commission, but in their own name, and that both uprightly, and
Godly: Shall we say, It pertains not to such men, to have to do with
Religion? Or, shall we say, A Christian Magistrate, which deals amongst
others in these matters, doothe either naughtily, or presumptuously, or
wickedly? The most Aunciente, and Christian Emperors, and Kings, that ever
were, did occupy them selves in these matters: and yet were they never, for
this cause, noted either of wickedness, or of Presumption. And what is he,
that canue find out, either more Catholic Princes, or more Notable Examples?

M. Hardinge.
Now then Kings, and Emperors, Untruths three together. Open, and
Manifest. Read the Answer.
who have their first authority by the positive Law of Nations, Untruths
three together. Open, and Manifest. Read the Answer.
not by supernatural grace from God, as Priests have: who can have no more
power then the people has, Untruths three together. Open, and Manifest.
Read the Answer.
of whom they take their Temporal jurisdiction: Who have ever untruth,
Confessed by M. Hardinges own Doctors.
benne annoincted and Blessed by Bishops, who so ever blesses being greater
then he that is blessed: Shall we say, that such Kings, and Emperors have
authority to rule the Church, And is not the Pope a Son of the Church? Then
is he not the Son of God.
whose Sons they are? To be Supreme Heads over them, whom they ought to
kneel unto for Absolution? To control their spiritual Judges, whom if they
Sin by human frailty, they Untruth. For that the Prince ought so do,
Constantinus never said it. Did. 22. Omnes.
ought to cover with their clokes, Untruth. For that the Prince ought so do,
Constantinus never said it. Did. 22. Omnes.
as the Great Constantine said: to degrade them, of whom they must be
Baptized, Anoincted, Crowned, and Buried?

The B. of Sarisburie.
Now, M. Hardinge, ye huddle up hastily your poor Arguments in heaps
together. One, or two of them only I mind to touch: The rest are not
worth the sturringe. First ye say, The Popes Power is of God, The Princes
Power is only of Man. The one Supernatural, the other Natural. In such sort
your Pope Nicolas adourneth, and magnifieth his own Chair. For thus he says
with a ioily courrage: Illud Verbum, quo constructum est Coelum, and Terra, quo
denique omnia ficta sunt Elementa, Romanam fundauit Ecclesiam: The Word of
God, whereby Heaven, and Earth was made, and whereby all the Elements were
fashioned, the same Word founded the Church of Rome. As if the Church of
Rome, and other Churches, were not al of one Fundation. An other of your Popes
Reteiners says, Papatus est Summa Virtus Creata: Johan. De Parisijs, De
Potesta. Regia. and Papali.
The Popedom is the Highest Virtue, or Power, that ever God made: that is to
say, the Popedom is above Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, and all the Powers, in, under, or above the Heavens.

An other says, even as you say, and, as I have partly said before: Rex
per Hominem fit: Sacerdos autem proxime nascitur ex Deo ipso: Quantum Deus
praestat Sacerdoti, Stanislaus Orichouius in Chimaera. Fo. 97, and 99.
tantum Sacerdos praestat Regi: The King is made by Man: But the Priest is
immediately begotten of God. As mutche as God excels the Priest, so mutche
the Priest excels the King.

And, notwithstanding all this Supernatural Power be as well in the Simplest
Priest, Petrus De Palude De Potestate Curator. Arti. 6.
as in the Pope, yet an other of your Doctors says, Papa eligitur secundum
Ius Diuinum: alij vero Episcopi, secundum Ius Humanum: The Pope is chosen by
the Law of God: But other Bishops are chosen by the Law of Man. Thus ye
think no color too dear, to painte out the Popes face, and to make it
fair and glorious.

But the Princes Power, ye say, is Temporal, and Natural, and only from
beneathe, and only of Man: and therefore can be no greatter, then Man may
geeue him. This is your Louanian Divinity, M. Hardinge: So highely ye
esteem the Dignity, and Majesty of the Prince. Proverb. 8. Romans 13.
But God him self says, Per me Reges regnant: Kings rule by me ( and not by
Man). S. Paul says, Non est Potestas, nisi a Deo: There is no Power, or
Princehoode, but from God. Likewise Christ him self said unto Pilate, Johan.
19.
Thou could have no Power over me, unless it were given thee ( not from
man, but) from above. To like purpose the Emperor Justinian says, Maxima in
omnibus sunt Dona Dei, Authen. Colla. 1. Quomodo oporteat Episcopos. Maxima.
a Superna collata Clementia, Sacerdotium, and Imperium etc. Ex vno codemque
Principio vtraque procedentia Humanam exornant vitam: Priestehoode, and
Princehoode be in all things the greattest gifts of God, given unto us from
the Mercy above. These two floweinge ( not the one only from Man, and the
other from God, but) both from one Original, do adourne and bewtifie the Life
of Man. Upon which words it is noted in your Gloss, Idem Principium habent,
and parum differunt: Glosa, In verbum, Vtraque.
Priestehoode, and Princehoode have one Original, and small difference. He
says not, as you say, The odds bitweene these two is so great, as is
bitweene Natural, and Supernatural: bitweene Heaven, and Earth: or, bitweene
God, and Man: But he says plainly, Priestehoode, and Princehoode have one
Original, and little odds, and small difference. And therefore an other of your
Doctors says, Supponunt, quod Potestas Regalis sit Corporalis, and non
Spiritualis: Heruaeus, De Potesta. Papae. Ca. ^5.
and quod habeat Curam Corporum, and non Animarum: quod falsum est: They
imagine, that the Princes Power is only Bodily, and not Ghostely: and, that
the Prince has the Charge of men's Bodies, but none of their Souls: But this
is stark false.

And whereas you so highly extolle your Popes Universal Power, as if it were
Supernatural, and Heavenly, and came only from God, An other of your Doctors
says, Johan. De Parisijs, De Potesta. Regia, and Papali.
Ea, quae sunt Iurisdictionis Papae, non sunt supra Naturam, and Conditionem
negotij, nec supra Conditionem hominum. Quia non est supra conditionem hominis,
quod homines praesint hominibus. Imo natural est quodammodo: Such things,
as belong to the Popes Jurisdiction, are not above Nature, nor above the
Condition of the thing it self, nor above the Capacity of a Man. For it is
not above the Nature of a Man, for Man to rule over Men. Naie rather, in a
sort, it is Natural. Now, M. Hardinge, if the Princes Power be from God, as
well, as the Popes: If the Popes Power concerning Jurisdiction, be Natural, as
well as the Princes: If they flow both from one Original: If they have so small
difference, what meante you then, by these odious Comparisons, so highly, and
so ambitiously to auance the one, and so disdeignefully, and scornefully to
abase the other? Touching the Princes Power, we are certainly assured by
Gods Holy Word, It is from God. As for the Popes Infinite, and Universal
Power, throughout the whole Scriptures, from the Genesis unto the Apocalypse,
unless it be the Power of Darkness, ye can find nothing.

Ye say, Kings have evermore benne Anointed, and Blessed by Bishops. This
is an other foul Untruth. For you might easily have known, ye Christian
Kings in old times were never Anointed. Heruaeus, De Potestae. Papae. Ca. 18.
Your own Doctoure says, In Nouo Testamento non legimus, quod Sacerdotes
debeant inungere Reges: Nec etiam nunc obseruatur in omnibus Regibus
Christianis: vt patet in Regibus Hispaniae: We read not in the New
Testamente, that Priests, or Bishops ought to anointe Kings. Neither is
that order at this day used amongst al Kings, that be Christened: as it
appears by the Kings of Spain. Again ye say, and that ye bring in, as
a special good Argument of your side, The Emperor kneeleth to the Priest
for Absolution: Ergo, The Emperor is not the Head of the Church. How may
a man answer such Folies, better then with the like Folly? The Pope him
self, by your own Decrees, is bound to Confess his Sins, and kneeleth to
a Simple Priest for Absolution. For your Canonistes say, Papa tenetur
Confiteri peccata sua vni Sacerdoti: Et Simplex Sacerdos potest illum Ligare,
and Absoluere: The Pope is bound to confess his Sins to sum one Priest:
and a Simple Priest may both Bind him, and Absolve him. Ergo, by your own
Conclusion, The Pope is not Head of the Church. Such a handesome proctoure
the Pope has gotten to promote his Cause.

With such pretty stuff, M. Hardinge, ye think to ouerrenne, and to
conquer the world.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 2.
Wherefore, if it were lawful for them to do thus, being but civil
Magistrates, and having the chief rule of common Weals, what offense have
our Princes at this day made, which may not have leave to do the like,
being in the like Degree? Or what especial gift of Learning, or of
Judgment, or of Holiness have these men now, that they, contrary to the
Custom of all the Aunciente and Catholic Bishops, who used to confer with
Princes, and Peers, concerning Religion, do now thus reiecte and cast of
Christian Princes from knowinge of the cause, and from their meetinges?

M. Hardinge.
We answer, it was Untruth, As it may easily appear by that, has benne
said before.
never lawful in any Temporal Prince, to judge in causes of Religion.
Untruth, As it may easily appear by that, has benne said before.
Neither did any Prince before this time ever use it.

The B. of Sarisburie.
This is an other of your Absolute Truths, M. Hardinge. For answer whereof,
Part. 6. Cap. 14. Diuis. 4 and 5.
it may please you indifferently to weighe, that I have written alitle before
touching the same.

The Apology, Cap. 15. Division. 3.
Well, thus doing, they wisely, and warily provide for them selves, and for
their Kingedome, which otherwise they see is like shortly to comme to naught.
For if so be they, whom God has placed in greatest Dignity, did see, and
perceive these men's practices, how christ's commandments be despised by
them, how the Light of the Gospel is darkened, and quenched out by them, and
how them selves also be subtly beguiled, and mocked, and unawares be deluded
by them, and the way to the Kingedome of Heaven stopped up before them, no
doubt they would never so quietly suffer them selves, neither to be disdeined
after such a proud sort, nor so despitefully to be scorned, and abused by
them. But now through their own lack of understanding, and through their
own blindness, these men have them fast yoked, and in their danger.

M. Hardinge.
Bishops Otherwise it were not the Kingedome of Darkness.
can not uphold their kingdom by wrong doing: When they be once espied:
and not before.
that is the way to pull them down. Therefore we are well assured that your
Schismatic Superintendentship can not stand, though all the power of the
world were bente to hold it up. Your wicked state is not planted of God, and
therefore it shall be rooted out. Affiance in Darkness.
It is God, that rules: it is God that sets up, and puts down. This
state of Christ's Church has continewed, and the successor of Peter has
governed it, whereas the groundless buildinge of all the Heretics from Simon
Magus downewarde to this day has failed. Luther is rotten, and his new
found Religion decayed, and the Pope sits in Peter's chair, and so shall
his successors to the end.

Ye would men to believe, that Emperors, and Kings are deceived by the Popes,
and Bishops. But I pray you, what is the cause, that Princes can not epsy
these deceites (if any such were) as well as ye? If them selves lack your
knowledge, yet have they wise men about them, who for their duties sake,
and their alleagiance to them* would soon advertise them* how by the Bishops
they be subtly beguiled, and mocked.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Of the maineteinance of your Kingedome, M. Hardinge, Christ said unto
certain your Forefathers, Hoc est tempus Vestrum, and Potestas Tenebrarum:
This is your time, Luke. 22. Matthae. 15.
and the Power of Darkness. Blind they are, and the Guides of the Blind. If
the Blind lead the Blind, they will both fall into the diche. The Lion, or
wild Bulle, be they never so cruel, or great of courrage, yet, if ye may
once closely cover their eyes, ye may easily lead them, whither ye list,
without resistance. Even so does the Pope hoodevvinke, and blindefolde the
Princes of the world: which done, he makes them to hold his Stirope, to
lead his Horse, to kneel down, and to kiss his Shoe, and to attend upon
him, at his pleasure. But, if they knew, either him, or them selves, they
would not do it.

S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Opere imperfecto. Homil. 44.
as it is noted before, Haeretici Sacerdotes claudunt Ianuas Veritatis. Sciunt
enim, si manifestara esset Veritas, quod ipsorum Ecclesia esset relinquenda:
and ipsi de Sacerdotali Dignitate ad Humilitatem venirent popularem: Heretical
Bishops shut up the gates of the Truth* For they know, that, if the Truth
be once laid open, their Church shall be foresaken: And they from their
Pontifical Dignity, shall be brought down to the baseness of the people.

Petrus Ferrariensis, Petrus Ferrarien. Citatur ab Illyrico, Inter Testes
Veritatis.
in consideration hereof, complains thus, O miseros Imperatores, and
Saeculares Principes, qui haec, and alia sustinetis, and vos seruos Ecclesiae
facitis: Et Mundum per eos infinitis modis vsurpari videtis: nec de remedio
cogitatis: Quia prudentiae, and Sapientiae non intenditis: Alas, miserable are
ye, the Emperors, and Princes of the world, that abide these, and other
like things ( at ye Popes hands,) and make your selves slaves unto the
Church. Ye see, the world is by innumerable ways miserably abused by them:
yet ye never bethink your selves of any remedy: Because ye apply not your
minds to wisdom, and knowledge.

S. Hieronym. in Esaiam, Lib. 9. Cap. 30.
Hierome says, Vt sagittent in obscuro rectos cord. Isti tantam sibi
assumunt Authoritatem, vt sieve Dextra doceant, seu Sinistra, id est, sieve bona,
sieve mala, ^olint Discipulos ratione discutere, sed se praecessores sequi. Tunc
hi, qui prius decipiebant, nequaquam vltra ad eos valebunt accedere, postquam
se senserint intellectos: To strike in the dark, them, that be simple of
heart. These men challenge unto them selves such Authority, that, whether
they teach with the Right hand, or with the Leafte, that is to say, whether
they teach good things, or badde, they will not have their Disciples, or
Hearers, with reason to examine their saieinges, but only to follow them,
being their Leaders. For then they, which before deceived the people, can no
more comme unto them, after they once perceive, they be espied.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 1.
Verily, we for our parts, as we have said, have done nothing in alteringe
Religion, upon either Rashness, or Arrogancy: nor nothing, but with good
leisure, and great consideration. Neither had we ever intended to do it,
except both the manifest, and most assured VVil of God, opened to us in his
Holy Scriptures, and the regard of our own Salvation had even constreined us
thereunto. For though we have departed from that Church, which these men
call Catholic, and by that means geate us envy amongst them, that want skill
to judge, yet is this yenough for us, and it ought to be yenough for every
wise, and good man, and one that makes account of Everlasting Life, that we
have gonne from that church which had power to err: which christ, who can
not err, told so long before, it should err: and which we our selves did
evidently see with our eyes, to have gonne from the Old Holy Fathers, and from
the Apostles, and from Christ him self, and from the Primitive and catholic
church of God: and we are comme, as near, as we possibly could, to the
Church of the Apostles, and of the Old catholic Bishops and Fathers:
which Church, we know, has hitherto benne sound, and perfect, and, as
Tertullian terms it, a Pure Virgin, spotted as then with no Idolatry, nor
with any foul, or shameful fault: and have directed, according to their
Customs, and Ordinances, not only our Doctrine, but also the Sacraments,
and the Form of common Prayer.

M. Hardinge.
Ye have treated hereof, after your accustomed manner, that is to say, with all
Untruth, and Lies.

Ye comme in with many gaie words. VVhereto with guilty conscience in
wardely ye say yea, thereto with lieinge tongue out wardely do ye not say
naie?

This generation of loose Apostates, incestuous Vowbreakers, Sacrilegious
Churcherobbers, despisers of all Holiness, breakers of the dead men's
wills, ouerthrowers of all aunciente order, and discipline.

If it be so, where be your Signs? where be your Miracles? where be the
examples of your rare Virtue, and Holiness?

The B. of Sarisburie.
The rest of your speech we will pass over, as talk of course. Touching
your curious demand of Signs, and Miracles, Pope Leo may answer you. For,
Matthae. 27.
whereas certain of your Forefathers in old times said, If he be the King
of Israel, let him comme down from the Cross, and we will believe him: Pope
Leo says thus unto them, Leo in Sermon. De Passione Domini.
Non erat vestrae coecitatis arbitrio, Stulti Scribae, and Impij Sacerdotes,
ostendenda potentia Saluatoris: Ye foolish Scribes, and wicked Priests, the
Power of our Saueour was not to be showed at the discretion of your
Blindness. God shows his Miracles when, and where, and to whom he will.

S. Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homi. 49.
Chrysostom says, In fine temporis concedenda est potestas Diabolo, vt
faciat Signa vtilia: vt iam Ministros Christi non per hoc cognoscanius, quia
vtilia faciunt Signa, sed quia omnino haec Signa non faciunt: In the end of
time Power shall be given to the Devil, to work profitable Signs, and
Miracles: So that then we cannot know the Ministers of Christ, by that they
work profitable Miracles, but by that they work no Miracles at al.

S. Augustine. De Vnitate Ecclesiae. Ca. 16.
Augustine says, Non dicat, Ideo verum est, quia illa, vel illa mirabilia
fecit, vel iste, vel ille: aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum nostrorum
orant, and exaudiuntur: aut quia illa, vel illa ibi contingunt, etc.
Remoueantur ista, vel Figmenta mendacium hominum, Miracles.
vel portenta Fallacium Spirituum: Let no man say, Therefore it is true, for
that this man, or that man has wrought this, or that Miracle: or, for that
men make their Prayers at the Toumbes of our dead, and obtain their
desires: or, for that these, or these Miracles be wrought there etc. Away with
these things: they may be either the Iugglinges, and Mockeries of deceiteful
men, or else Illusions of Lieinge Sprites. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 49.
Again, S. Chrysostom says, Per Signa cognoscebatur, qui essent Very
Christiani, qui Falsi. Nunc autem Signorum operatio omnino' leuata est: Magis
autem inuenitur apud eos, qui falsi sunt Christiani: In old times it was
known by Miracles, who were the True Christians, and who the False. But now
the woorkinge of Miracles is taken quite away: and is rather found emonge
them, that be false Christians. Augustine. in Johan. Tracta. 13.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Contra istos Mirabiliarios cautum me fecit Deus
meus, dicendo: In nouissimis diebus exurgent Pseudoprophetae facientes Signa,
and Portenta, vt inducant in errorem, si fieri possit, etiam Electos: Against
these Moungers of Miracles my God has armed me, Matthae. 24.
saieinge: In the later days there shall rise up False Prophets woorkinge
Signs, and woonders, to deceive the Elect of God, if it be possible.

Neither is the Gospel of Christ preached this day utterly without Miracles.
The Blind see: the Doumbe speak: your Idolles are fallen: your Great Babylon
is comme to ground. These, M. Hardinge, if you have eyes to see them, are no
small Miracles. Chrysostom. in. 1. Corin. Homil. 6. August. De Verbis Domi.
Secund. Matthae. Sermon 18. Eodem loco.
S. Chrysostom says, The Conversion of the world is a Miracle. S. Augustine
says, Modo Caro Coeca non aperit oculos Miraculo Domini: Et Cor Coecum aperit
oculos Sermon Domini: Now adays the Blind fleashe opens not her eyes by
the Miracle of our Lord: Put the Blind heart Opens his eyes at the Word
of our Lord. And again, Modo Aures Corporis surde^ non aperiuntur. Sed quam
multi habent clausas Aures Cordis, quae tamen, Verbo Dei penetrante, patescant?
Now adays the deaf Ears of the Body be not opened: yet many there are, that
have the Ears of their heart shut up: which Ears not withstandinge are
opened by entringe of the Word of God.

Therefore we may rightly say to you with other words of S. Augustine,
Quisquis adhuc Prodigia, Augustine. De Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 22. Cap. 8.
vt credat, inquirit. Magnum est ipse prodigium: qui, mundo credente, non
credit: Who so ever yet requires Miracles, to bring him to the Faith, is him
self a great Miracle: that, the world beleeuinge, remains still in
unbelief.

Where as the Phariseis said of Christ, Let him now comme down from the
Cross, Hieronym. in Matthae. 27.
and we will believe him, S. Hierome says unto them, Etiamsi de Cruce
descenderet, similiter non crederetis: Yea, although he should comme down
from the Cross, yet would ye not believe him.

But it were a world, to behold the Glorious Countenance of your Miracles.
Your Crosses can speak: your Idolles can go: your Images can light their
own Lamps: your Holy Water is hable to calm the Sea, to chase away Mise,
and to make barren Women to conceive. If ye doubt hereof, confer with M.
Cope, Copus, Dialog. 1. Page 18.
one of your own Louanian company: or with that Worthy Prelate the Bishop of
Verona, your Holy Father Lipomanus. I am ashamed to remember, that you are not
ashamed even now, in these days, to publishe in Writing. How be it, such
Religion, such Miracles. S. Hierome says, Hieronymus ad Algasiam.
Mendacium Antichristi Christi Veritas deuorabit: The Truth of Christ shall
deucure, and consume the Falsehedde of Antichriste.

The Apology, Cap. 16. Division. 2.
And, as we know, both Christ him self, and al good men heretofore have
done, we have called home again to the Original, and first Fundation, that
Religion, which has benne fowly neglected, and utterly corrupted by these
men. For we thought it meet, thence to take the Pattern of Refourminge
Religion, from whence the ground of Religion was first taken: Because this
one Reasone, as says the most Ancient Father Tertullian, has great force
against al Heresies, Look, what soever was first, that is true: and
what soever is later, that is corrupt. Irenaeus oftentimes appealed to the
Oldest Churches, which had benne nearest to Christ's time, and which, it was
hard to believe, had benne in error. But why, at this day, is not the same
common regard, and consideration had? Why return we not to the Pattern of the
Old Churches? Why may not we hear, at this time amongst us, the same
saieinge, which was openly pronounced in times paste in the Council at Nice,
by so many Bishops, and Catholic Fathers, and no body once speakinge
against it? (...) Hold still the Old Customs.

M. Hardinge.
Ye say much in your own commendation, but lies be no proufes. Ye have not
called Religion home again to the Original and first Fundation, as ye say:
but ye have quite overthrown all true Religion from the fundation. As for your
apishe novelty, ye have taken the pattern thereof from Satan auctour of
division, the ancient ennemie of Christ, and of his true religion. We
admit the saieinge of Tertullian (though it be not altogether as ye allege
it) that this reason has great force against all heresies, Contra Praxeam.
What so ever was first, that is true. what so ever is latter, that is
corrupt. Of the Blessed Sacrament, Christ said first etc. Here followed
sommevvhat, touching the Sacrament, and Sacrifice: which matters are
othervvhere ansvveared more at large.


Ye would seem to be feign, that we followed the advice of Irenaeus. We are
content with all our hearts. And with Irenaeus we appeal to that tradition,
which is from the Apostles, which (as he says) is kept in the Churches by
Priests, Lib. 3. ca. 2.
that succeeded them. With Irenaeus leauinge other Churches, whose successions
of Bishops it were a long work to rehearse, we require to have recourse
for trial of our Faith to the Tradition of doctrine of the Roman Church,
which he terms, Lib. 3. ca. 3.
Greatest, Oldest, best known to al, founded, and set up by the two most
glorious Apostles, Peter, and Paul. We appeal to the Faith of that Church,
taught abroad in the world, and by successions of Bishops brought down unto
us. For to this Church, Irenaeus never knevve the disorders, and deformities,
that now are in the Church of Rome.
says Irenaeus, must all the Church of Christ repair, where so ever it be:
for that it is the chief of all, and for that the tradition of the true
doctrine, which the Apostles leaft behind them, Untruth. For, as now, it is
al vnfaithefully perverted.
is there faithfully kept. Wherefore if ye would after the council of
Irenaeus resort to Rome for decision of the controversies, that be bet wixte
you and us, and would them to be tried by that sense of doctrine, Untruth
manifest, and apparente to all the world.
which has continewed by successions of Bishops even from Peter to Pius the
fourth, now Pope, and would stand to the authority of that See Apostolic: al
strife were ended, we should be at accord. But we have little hope ye will
follow this godly counsel of S. Irenaeus that blessed Martyr, whose body your
brethren the Huguenotes of France, vilanously burned at Lions, Anno Dom. 1562.
after it had rested there thirten hundred years and more.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Preeminence, Irenae. Li. 3. ca. 3. Valde longum est, omnit^n Ecclesiarum
cnumerare Successiones.
that Irenaeus gives to the Church of Rome, stands in Consent, and Unity,
and Agreemente of Doctrine, not in Superiority, or Gouernmente over all the
world. For proof whereof, ye may understand, that Irenaeus in the same
place likewise specially notes the Church of Smyrna planted by Polycarpus:
and the Church of Ephesus, planted by S. John: and generally sundry other
Great Churches, The Pattern of the Faith.
planted by men of Apostolical Dignity: unto which he wills us in like
manner to repair: and not only to y^ Church of Rome.

The Emperor Theodsius wills his Subjects, to conform them selves in
Doctrine, Cod. Theodosij, Li. 16. Titul. 3.
not only to the Roman Bishop, but also, either to Nectarius the Bishop of
Constantinople: or to Timotheus the Bishop of Alexandria: or to Pelagius the
Bishop of Laodicea: or to Diodorus the Bishop of Tharsus: or to Amphilochius
the Bishop of Iconium: or to Optimus the Bishop of Antioche: or to Helladius
the Bishop of Caesarea: or to Otreius the Bishop of Melite: or to Gregorius the
Bishop of Nice: or to Terennius the Bishop of Scythia: or to Marmarius the
Bishop of Martianopolis. Unto al, and every of these notable great Churches,
y^ Emperor wills al other inferioure Churches to repair.

By such Examples the Fathers in the Council of Chalcedon were contented, to
direct their Faith. For thus they brake out in a general shoot, Omnes ita
credimus: Council. Chalicedonen. Actio. 2.
Leo Papa ita credit: Cyrillus ita credit: Leo, and Anatolius ita credunt: Al
we believe thus: Pope Leo believes thus: Cyrillus (the Bishop of Alexandria)
believes thus: Leo, and Anatolius (the Bishop of Constantiaople) believe thus.

So says Tertullian, Tertul Contra Marcion. Li. 4.
Videamus, quod lac a Paulo Corinthij hauserint: ad quam Regulam Galathae sint
recocti: quid legant Philippenses, Thessalonicenses, Ephesij: quid etiam Romani
de proximo sonent: quibus Euangelium Petrus, and Paulus sanguine quoque suo
signatum reliquerunt: Let us see, what milk the Corinthians suckte of S.
Paul: after what Pattern the Galathians were reformed: what the Philippians
read, what the Thessaloniens, what the Ephesiens: what sound the Romans
geeue, that are so near us: unto whom Peter, and Paul have leafte the Gospel
sealed, and confirmed with their Blood. In like sort writes Gregory
Nazianzene of the Church of Caesarea: Nazianzen. Epistol. 30.
Cuiuslibet Ecclesiae, tanquam Corporis Christi, habenda est ratio: maxim vero
nostrae (Caesariensis) quae and ab initio fuit, and nunc est, Matter prope
omnium Ecclesiarum: Eam Christiana Respublica, velut Centrum suum Circulus,
vndique obseruat, non solum propter Orthodoxam Doctrinam vbique ab initio
praedicatam, sed etiam propter conspicuam Concordiae Gratiam, quam diuinitus
accepit: We must make great accoumpte of al Churches, even as of the Body of
Christ: but specially of this our Church of Caesarea: for that it has benne
from the beginning, and still is in a manner the Mother of al Churches. The
whole Christian Common Weal beholds this Church of every side, even as the
Circle beholds the Center: not only for the Catholic Doctrine, that from
thence has benne published euerywhere, but also for the notable Grace of
Concord, that it has received from above.

Thus the Aunciente Godly Fathers willed the Faitheful, to have recourse unto
every of these Churches, of Smyrna, of Ephesus, of Constantinople, of
Alexandria, of Laodicea, of Tharsus, of Iconium, of Antioche, of Caesarea, of
Melite, of Nice, of Scythia, of Martianopolis, of Corinthus, of Galatia, of
Philippi, of Thessalonica, of Ephesus, and of Rome: not for any secret
unremovable virtue in them contained, Irenae. Li. 3. ca. 3. In qua semper
conseruata est ea, quae est ab Apostolis Traditio.
but only, as Irenaeus says, for y^ the Tradition, and Doctrine of the
Apostles had continewed there still without corruption. Therefore Tertullian
says, Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae
Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur: apud quas ipsae Authenticae Literae eorum
recitantur, sonantes vocem, and repraesentantes faciem vniuscuiusque Proxima
est tibi Achaia: Habes Corinthum. Si non long es a Macedonia, habes Philippos,
habes Thessalonicenses. Tertul. De praescriptionib. contra Haereticos.
Si pores in Asiam tendere, habes Ephesum. Si autem Italiae adiaces, liabes
Romam: vnde nobis quoque Authoritas praesto est: Run over, and behold the
Apostolic Churches, where as the Apostles Chaires are yet still continewed,
and where as the Authentical Writings of the Apostles are openly pronounced,
soundinge out the voice, The Pattern of the Faith.
and representinge the face of each one of them. The next Country to you is
Achaia: There have you the Church of Corinthe. If ye be not for from
Macedonia, there have ye the Church of Philippi, and the Church of
Thessalonica: If ye may go over into Asia, there have ye the Church of
Ephesus. If ye border near to Italy, there have ye the Church of Rome:
from whence we also (dwellinge in Aphrica) may with speed receive Authority.

Again, touching the name of a Church Apostolic, whereby ye would
evermore seem to understand the Church of Rome, he says thus: Tot, ac
tantae Ecclesiae, Tertul. De Praescription, contra Haereticos.
vna est illa ab Apostolis Prima, ex qua omnes. Sic omnes prime, and omnes
Apostolicae, dum vnam omnes proba^t Vnitatem: These so many, and so great
Churches, are all that same one first Church, planted by the Apostles, from
whence issued all the rest. And so are they al First Churches, and al
Apostolic, in that they al follow one Unity.

Thus the Anciente Fathers taught the People to refourme them selves by the
Example, and Doctrine, not only of the Church of Rome, but also of al other
Notable Apostolic Churches.

Neither were they directed only by the Authority of Anciente Churches, but
also by the Authority of certain particulare Worthy Men. For Resolution
in cases of doubt, sum sent to S. Augustine: sum to S. Hierome: sum to
the Bishops of France: Eusebius. Li. 5. Ca. 3.
sum to the Bishops of Rome: and sum to others. S. Hierome thus writes
unto S. Augustine: Tu, vt Episcopus in toto Orb notissimus, August. Epist. 11.
debes hanc promulgare Sententiam, and in assensum tuum omnes Coepiscopos
trahere: Thou, as the most notable Bishop in all the world, oughteste to
publishe this Decree, and to draw al thy Felowbishoppes unto thy Judgment.
Yet was S. Augustine the Bishop of Hippo in Aphrica, and not of Rome.
Certainly, wheresoever any flame of Truth, and Learning may appear, out of
what place so ever it break forth, men will of them selves willingely, and
greedily flee unto it.

Damasus, the Bishop of Rome, wrote unto S. Hierome in doubteful Cases, to
know his counsel. Damas. Hierony. Hieronymus ad Algasiam.
S. Hierome him self says, Filius meus Apodemius de Oceani littore, atque
vltimis Galliarum finibus, Roma praeterita, quaesiuit Bethlehem: My son
Apodemius, coming from the shore of the Ocean Sea, and from the furtheste
Coaste of France, leauinge Rome, sought for Bethlehem, where I dwell, (to
confer with me).

Likewise S. Ambrose says, Post Alexandrinae Ecclesiae, Episcopi quoque
Romanae Ecclesiae Definitionem, Ambros. Lib. 10. Epist. 83.
per Literas plaerique meam adhuc expectant Sententiam: After y^ Resolution of
the Church of Alexandria, and also of the Bishop of the Church of Rome, many
men yet write Letters unto me, and would also understand my judgment.
Pope Liberius him self writes thus unto Athanasius, the Bishop of Alexandria:
Apud Athanasi. Tomo primo.
Si mecum sentis, quoeso subscribas: quo certiores reddamur, number eiusdem
nobiscum suffragij sis, eademque statuas de Vera Fide: vt and ego securior
efficiar, Tuaque mandata indesinenter obeam: If ye be of my Judgment, then I
beseech you, to subscribe ( your name unto these Articles): that I may be out
of doubt, whether you think, as I think, touching the True Faith: and,
that I may be the better confirmed in me self, and may evermore do your
Commandments without delaie. Here you see your Head of the Church offers
him self with all vis Universal Power, to be at the Commandment of an other
inferioure Bishop. Bernarde, being but an Abbate, writes thus unto Pope
Eugenius: Aiunt, non vos esse Papam, Bernar. Epis. 238.
sed me. Et vndique ad me confluunt, qui habent negotia: They say, that I am
Pope, and not you. And on every side, they, that have suites, comme renninge
unto me.

Thus were men woonte to seek for Counsel, Hierony. in Apologia aduers.
Ruffin.
not only at Rome, but also, where so ever it might be found. And therefore
was Origin called, Magister Ecclesiarum, The Pattern of the Faith.
The Enformer, or Master of the Churches: S. Basile, Canon Fidei, The Rule of
the Faith: Eusebius Samosatensis, Regula Veritatis, The Standarde of the
Truth: Nazian. ad Simpliciam. Nazian. ad Heronem.
Athanasius, Orbis oculus, The eye of the world: And in doubteful Cases they
were as diligently sought upon, as the Pope.

Here, by the way, it were a worthy matter to consider sum of the Profound,
and Learned Resolutions, that we have received from the Sea of Rome. Augustine
the Italian Monk, whom sum have called the Apostle of England, demanded of
Pope Gregory, Gregor. Lib. 12. Indicti. 7. Ca. 9.
by way of great Counsel, whether a Woman with Child might be Baptized, or
no: and how long afterward it might be lawful for her to comme to Church.

Bonifacius, the Apostle of Germany, demanded the like questions of Pope
Zachary, Inter Decreta Zachariae.
whether lays, Davves, Storkes, Beauers, Otters, Hares, and VVilde Horses be
man's meat, or no: what order were to be taken with Man, or Horse, having
the Fallinge sickness: At what time of the year it may be lawful, or
wholesome for folks, to eat Bacon: and, if a man list to eat it Ravve, how
old it ought to be, Inter Decreta Alexandri 3. par. 30. Ca. 2. Si maculam in
oculo.
before he eat it: What may be done, if a Priest have a black in his eye:
Who may hallovve Oil: who may wear the palle: At what time, in what place,
in what sort, over, or under, openly, or secretly, it may be lawful to wear
it.

To these, and other like doubteful, and profounde questions, the Pope has
given out his Answeares, Inter Decreta Gregor. 2. Ad Bonifacium.
and that in such grave, and solemn sort, as if no other Creature under
Heaven, bisides his Holiness, were hable to understand such high Mysteries.

There fell out sommetime an Odious quarrel bitweene the Thomist s, Augusti.
De Ciuitate, Li. 20. Cap. 26. Viues.
and Scotistes, whether the Blessed Virgin were conceived in sin, or no. The
one side said, Yea: the other cried, Nay. There were Learned men of both
sides: Parties grew: The Schools were enflamed: the world was troubled: No
Conference, no Doctoure, no Council was hable to quiet the matter, and to make
them friends. The Scotistes alleged for them selves the Council of Basile: The
Thomistes cried out, the Council of Basile was disorderly summoned, and
therefore unlawful. In the mids of this heat, Pope Sixtus took upon him, to
be Judge bitweene them, and to determine the bottom of y^ Cause. In
conclusion, when all the world lookte to be resolved, and satisfied in the
question, the Pope Commanded both the Thomistes, and the Scotistes, to
depart home, and to dispute no more of the matter, but to let al alone: and so
leafte them as doubteful, as he found them.

A great contention fell out bitweene them, of Ratispone in Germany, and the
Abbie of S. Denise in France, Io. Caluinus de Reliquijs.
whether of them had the whole Body of S. Denise: for that either part said,
and bare the world in hand, they had the whole. To Rome they went: The Pope
sat sadly in Judgment: and examined their Allegations, and grew to
conclusion: and in the end, gave his advised, and Definitive Sentence, that
either part, as well they of France, as also the others of Germany, had the
whole Body of S Denise: and that who so ever would say nay, should be an
Heretic. Of such substance, and certainetie are the Oracles of your See of
Rome.

Sum of your friends have said, Cardi. Cusanus, De Authoritat, Ecclesi. and
Con. supra, and contra Scripturam.
Veritas per Christum Cathedrae alligata est, non personis: Christ has
fastened his Truth, not to the Popes person, but to his Chair: Meaning
thereby, that the Pope, what so ever he decree, or say, sittinge in S. Peter's
Chair, can never err. And thus, by this Doctors Judgment, we are taught,
to geeue credit rather to the Popes Chair, then to the Pope.

Yet nevertheless, The Pattern of the Faith.
the same Irenaeus, whom ye have here alleged, openly reproved Pope Victor:
and S. Cyprian like wise reproved Pope Steuin: for that they thought, Eusebius.
Li. 5. ca. 26. Cyprian. ad Pompeium.
notwithstanding their Chair, they were in error. Brasmus, speaking of the
Answer of Pope Innocentius unto the Council of Carthage, says thus, In hac
Epistola and Dictionem, and Ingenium, and Eruditionem tali Praesule dignam
cogimur desiderare: Inter Episto. Augu. Ep. 91. Erasm. Ambros. De Sacram. Li.
3. Ca. 1.
In this Epistle we miss both Eloquence, and Wit, and Learning meet for
such a Prelate. S. Ambrose says, In omnibus cupio sequi Ecclesiam Romanam.
Sed tamen and nos Homines sensum habemus. Ideo quod alibi rectius seruatur, and
nos recte custodimus: I desire in all things to follow the Church of Rome.
How be it, we our selves, for that we be men, have understanding, and
Judgment too. Therefore, what so ever is better keapte in other places, we
do well to keep the same.

But, touching the state of Rome, that now is, Arnulphus said openly in y^
Council of Remes, Arnulphus in Council. Remensi.
Cum hoc tempore Romae nullus sit, vt fama est, qui Sacras Literas didicerit,
qua front aliquis illorum docere audebit, quod non didicerit? For as mutche
as, now a days, as it is reported, there is none in Rome, that has Learned
the Scriptures, with what face dares any of them to teach us that thing,
that he him self never learned?

It is not sufficient to say, The Pope sits in Peter's Chair. As
Antichriste may sit in place of Christ, so may Judas sit in place of
Peter. S. Hierome says, Hierony. in Osee Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
Bethel, quae prius vocabatur Domus Dei, postquam Vituli in ea positi sunt,
appellata est Bethauen, id est, Domus inutilis, and Domus idoli: Bethel, that
before was called the House of God, after yt Hieroboams Golden Calves were
set up in it, was called Bethauen, that is to say, a House unprofitable, and
the House of an Idol.

Therefore we think it better, to examine, and try the grounds of your
Religion by the Word of God, that is one, and Uniform, and enduereth for
ever, then by your touch of Rome, that is so uncertain, and so mutable, and
so often has deceived us. Cyprian. ad Pompeium.
S. Cyprian says, Si ad Diuinae Traditionis Caput, and Originem reuertamur,
cessat error humanus: If we return to the Head, and Original of the heavenly
Tradition (which is the Word of God) al human error gives place.

Touching the rest of your needelesse talk, our Brethren in France, whom in
your pleasante manner ye call Huguenotes, burnte not the Body of Irenaeus. They
knew, he was a Blessed Martyr of God: and his Body sommetime the Temple of the
Holy Ghost. Without any reproach, or villainy, either done, or meante to that
Holy Father, if they burnte any thing, which also may well be doubted, they
burnte only an Idol, that you had so irreverently set up against the
Glory of God. Chrysosto. in Genesim. Homil. 67.
Chrysostom says, Joseph moriens air, Ossa mea efferetis hinc vobiscum: Ne
Aegyptij memores beneficiorum eius, Corpus Iusti haberent in occasionem
Impietatis: Joseph lieinge in his death bed, said unto his Children, and
Neuewes, ye shall carry my bones with you forth out of Egypt: Lest the
Egyptians remembringe the good things, he had done, should use that good
man's Body to an occasion of Wickedness, or Idolatry.

So says S. Augustine, Augusti. De mirabilib. Sacrae Scripturae, Lib. 1. Cap.
vltimo.
Nemo conscius erat Sepulchri Mosis, ne populus, si cognouisset, vbi esset,
adoraret: Noman was made privy to Moses Grave: lest, if the people had
known, where his Body had benne, they should adoure it.

Your objection of the Sacrifice is otherwhere answered more at large. S.
Augustine says, In the Former Reply. Artic. 17 Augusti. contra Iudaeos, Cap.
1. Augu. in Psalm. 41.
Nunc manibus non offerimus Carnem: Sed Cord, and ore offerimus Laudem: Now
we offer not up fleashe with our hands: but with Heart, and mouth we offer
praise. Again he says, Intus habeo Sacrificium, quo flectam Deum meum:
Within me self I have a Sacrifice, where with I may pacify my God.

The Apology, Cap. 17. Division. 1. and 2.
When Eldras went about to repair the ruins of the Temple of God, he sent
not to Ephesus, although the most beautiful and gorgeous Temple of Diana were
there: and when he purposed to restore the Sacrifices and ceremonies of God, he
sent not to Rome, although peradventure he had heard, that there were the
solemn Sacrifices called Hecatombae, and other called Solitaurilia,
Lectisternia, and Supplicationes, and Numa Pompilius Ceremonial Books, or
Manuals, or Portueses. He thought it yenough for him, to let before his eyes,
and follow the Pattern of the Old Temple, which Solomon at the beginning
builded, according as God had appointed him, and also those old customs and
ceremonies, which God him self had written out by special words for Moses.

The Prophet Aggaeus, after the Temple was repaired again by Esdras, and the
people might think, they had a very just cause to rejoice on their own
behalf, for so great a benefit received of Almighty God, yet made he the^ al
burst out into tears, because that they which were yet alive, and had seen
the former buildinge of the Temple, before the Babylonians destroyed it, called
to mind, how far of it was yet, from that beauty, and excellency, which it
had in the old times past before. For then in deed would they have thought
the Temple woorthily repaired, if it had answered to the Anciente Pattern, and
to the Majesty of the first Temple. S. Paul, because he would amend the
abuse of the Lords Supper, which the corinthians even then begone to
corrupt, he set before them christ's Institution, to follow, saieinge: I have
delivered unto you, that thing, that I first received of the Lord. And, when
Christ confuted the Error of the Phariseis, Ye must, says he, return to
the first beginning: for from the beginning it was not thus. And, when he
found great fault with the Priests for their uncleanness of life, and
covetousness, and would cleanse the Temple from al evil Abuses, This house,
says he, at the first beginning was a House of Prayer, wherein all the people
might deuoutely, and sincerely pray together. And so it were your part to
use it now also at this day. For it was not builded to the end it should be a
den of thieves. Likewise all the good and commendable Princes mentioned of in
the Scriptures, were praised specially by these words, that they had walked
in the ways of their Father David: That is, because they had returned to the
First and Original Fundation, and had restoared the Religion even to the
perfection wherein David leaft it. And therefore, when we likewise saw, that al
things were quite trodde^ under foot by these men, and that nothing remained
in the Temple of God, but pitiful spoils, and decaies, we reckened it the
wisest, and the safeste way, to set before our eyes those Churches, which
we knew for a suertie, that they never had erred, and yet never had, neither
Private Mass, nor Prayers in a strange, and Barbarous Language, nor this
Corruption of Sacraments, and other toies.

And, for so mutche as our desire was, to have the Temple of the Lord restored
anew, we would seek none other Fundation, the^ the same, which, we knew, was
long agone laid by the Apostles, that is to wite, Our Saueour Jesus Christ.
And, for so mutche as we heard God him self speakinge unto us in his
Word, and saw also the notable Examples of the Old, and Primitive Church:
again, how uncertain a matter it was, to wait for a General Council, and,
that the success thereof would be mutche more uncertain: but specially, for
so mutche as we were most ascertained of Gods VVil, and therefore counted it
a wickedness to be too careful, and ouercumbred about the Judgments of
Mortal Men, we could no longer stand taking advise with fleashe, and
blood, but rather thought good, to do the same thing, that both might
rightly be done, and has many a time benne done, as well of other good men, as
also of many Catholic Bishops: that is, to remedy our own Churches by a
Prouincial Synod. For thus we know, the Old Fathers used to put matters in
experience, before they came to the Public Universal Council. There remain
yet at this day Canons, written in Councelles of Free Cities, as of Carthage
under Cyprian, as of Ancyra, Neocesarea, and Gangra, which is in Paphlagonia,
as sum think, before that the name of the General Council at Nice was ever
heard of. After this fashion in Old time did they spedily meet with, and
cut short those Heretics, the Pelagians, and the Donatistes at home, by
Private Disputation, without any General Council. Thus also, when the Emperor
Constantius evidently, and earnestly took part with Auxentius, the Bishop of
the Arians faction, Ambrose, the Bishop of the Christians, appealed, not unto a
General Council, where he saw no good could be done, by reason of the
Emperors might, and great labor: but only to his own Cleregie, and
People, that is to say, to a Prouincial Synod. And thus it was decreed in the
council at Nice, that the Bishops should assemble twice every year. And in
the council at carthage it was decreed, that the Bishops should meet
together in each of their Provinces, at least once in the year: which was
done, as says the council at chalcedon, of purpose, that if any Errors, or
Abuses had happened to spring up any where, they might immediately at the
first entry be destroyed, even where they first began. So likewise when
Secundus and Palladius rejected the council at Aquileia, because it was not a
General and common council, S. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine made answer, that
no man ought to take it for a new, or strange matter, that the Bishops of
the VVeast Part of the world did call together Synodes, and make Private
Assemblies in their Provinces, for that it was a thing before then used by the
Weaste Bishops not seldom, and by the Bishops of Graecia used oftentimes
and commonly to be done. And so Charles the Great being Emperor, held a
Prouincial counsel in Germany, for puttinge away Images, contrary to the
Second council at Nice. Neither pardy even amongst us is this so very a
strange, and new a trade. For we have had ere now in England Prouincial
Synodes, and have governed our churches by home made Laws. What should one
say more? Of a truth, even those greatest councelles, and where most
Assembly of people ever was (whereof these men use to make such an
exceedinge rekeninge) compare them with all the churches, which thoughout the
world acknowledge, and profess the Name of christ, and what else, I pray
you, can they seem to be, but certain Private councelles of Bishops, and
Prouincial Synodes? For admit peradventure, Italy, France, Spain,
England, Germany, Denmark, and Scotland meet together: if there want
Asia, Graecia, Armenia, Persia, Media, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Ethiopia, India,
and Mauritania, in all which places there be both many christian men and
also Bishops: how can any man, being in his right mind, think such a
council to be a General council? And, where so many parts of the world do
lack, how can they truly say, they have the consent of the whole world?
Or what manner of council, ween you, was the same last at Tridente? Or how
might it be termed a General Council, whereas out of al Christians Kingedomes
and Nations, there came unto it but only forty Bishops, and of the same,
sum so conninge, that they might be thought meet, to be sent home again,
to learn their Grammare, and so well learned, that they had never studied
Divinity?

M. Hardinge.
Your waitinge for a general Council was not uncertain. For at the settinge
forth of your Apology, it was far and well entered, and almost ended. What
so ever success thereof should follow, ye ought not to have refused it
Untruth. For in many respects it was unlawful.
being in all respects lawful.

Your assurance of Gods will is none. That is but your common biewoorde, as it
has always benne of Heretics. Ye ought to have showed good evidence for your
being sure of Gods will, before ye attempted these great and dangerous changes
in Religion. Neither becomes it you to call the determinations of a General
Council the judgments of mortal men, so mutche as concerns declaration of
necessary points of faith, but the promptinge and teachinge of the Holy
Ghost.

As for your prouincial Synod, it was none. Synodes cannot be keapte without
Bishops. Before ye claim the name of a Synod for your packinge and hudlinge
together, ye must prove your selves Bishops, which ye are not able to do.
What so ever ye say, Untruth, by many examples soon reproved.
there were never good men, nor Catholic Bishops, that kept prouincial
Synodes, contrary to approved and lawful General Councels, Untruth. For our
Synod is most agreeable to the Old Councelles.
as your Synod is most contrary. Neither can ye pretend, that ye followed any
old fathers, puttinge things in experience before the coming to an
Universal Council.

Your Council prouincial holden in Germany by Charles the great, against the
second Nicene Council general, A great Untruth, As it may soon appear.
is a false forged matter, as the Book against Images is, which one Eli
Phili the man in the Moons son, Calvin, Illyricus, and other Heretics have
fathered upon that most godly, and Catholic Emperor.

The Council, which you mean, was a Godly, and a Catholic Council, holden at
Franck forde by Pope Adrian, and Charles the great, Untruth. For the words
be plain, Pseudosynodus pro Adora^dis Imaginibus, abdicata est. Ado.
against the wicked Council of the Heretics named * Imagebreakers, which
they held a little before that at Constantinople, which of those Heretics was
called the seventh, and general, of the Catholics Pseudosynodus, that is to
say, the false or forged Council. Of both these Councels, thus writes Abbas
Vrspergensis, so mutche commended of Melanchthon: In praefat. ad Ducem Bauariae.
The Council which a few years before was assembled at Constantinople, in
the time of Irene and Constantine her son, of them called the seventh and
General (in this Council holden at Frankforde) was repealed and put away by
consent of al, as void and superfluous, so as from thence forth it should
be named neither the seventh; nor ought else.

If you believe not this, as the witness of a Catholic writer, then believe
Anselmus Rid an erneste professor of your own the newest Gospel. In Catalogo
annorum and principum, etc. Bernae impresso, anno. 1550. In additionib. ad
Carrion. Pantaleo.
Who writes that Adrian the Bishop of Rome, and King Charles, at the Council
holden at Frankforde, execrated, and accursed as Heretical, the Council of the
Empiere of Constantinople and of the Greeks, which they held for
thabolishinge of Saints Images. Those be his very words. Believe Peucerus
Philip Melancthons son in law writing, that the Council of Nice, was kept
by common consent of the Greek Emperor and of Charles. If the second
Council of Nice, which was altogether for Images, was holden by consent of
Charles, how held he a Council in Germany, for puttinge away Images,
against the Council of Nice? Believe Carrion, and specially Pantaleo of Zurich,
a man of your own the most Euangelical Religion, who upon warrante of
thauthoritie of Regino writes, that the Council of Frank forde abrogated, and
disanulled the Greeks Council, that was against the woorship of Images.
Briefly, how falsely you and sundry other of your sect have herein belied
that worthy Prince Charles the great, it may easily appear by that Paulus
Aemylius writes of him: That he sent twelve Bishops out of France to the
Council then holden at Laterane in Rome, in which the Imagebreakers false
named and forged Council was abrogated.

Where of General Councels ye make private and prouincial Synodes, ye do
bisides learning, reason, and custom of the Church. A Council is not
accounted general because Bishops of al Countries under Heaven be assembled, by
this Rule, the Council of Tridente was not General.
but because many be assembled, and al be lawfully called. Else in times, when
Heresies reign, the Church should never have the necessary remedy of a
general Council: for always Heretics would refuse to come to it, as ye have,
to come to the late Council at Trente.

In Persia, Media, Egypt, Mauritania, I wene, ye find few Bishops at this
day, nor many in the other Countries, which ye reckon, and those in manner
altogether ignorant, and schismatikes. Yet the Patriarchs of Assyria, or Syria
Orientalis, and of Armenia, who of late years were at Rome, have for their
Provinces both subscribed to the Council of Trente, Untruth, vvithoutshame,
or measure.
and received the whole Decrees of the same for their peoples.

Your report of forty Bishops only present at the Council of Trent, and of
their slender lerning, is as true, as your Doctrine contrary to that Council
is, Untruth manifest. Read the Records. and Subscriptions of the same
Council.
that is to say, in plain terms, stark false. It is well known there were
at this late Council of Trent in this Popes time, well near two hundred Bishops.

The B. of Sarisburie.
What hope we might conceive of your Late Chapter of Tridente, we were
sufficiently warned by the former, holden under Pope Paulus. 3. and Pope
Julius. 3. wherein, notwithstanding your many years study, and great
conference of so many, and so Learned, and so excellent, and so mutche a do,
yet in the end, ye were never hable, neither to suppress your open stews,
nor to avoid your Priests Concubines, nor to cause your Bishops to be
residente upon their Charge, and to do their deuties, nor to resolve us,
whether the Pope be above the Council, Omnipotentis Dei benignitaie, and
Apostolorum Petri, and Pauli Authoritate freti. Ambros. Catharinus.
or the Council above the Pope. In the Summone, and first Entry of your
Assembly there, Pope Paul had forgotten Christ, and leafte him quite out of
Company, and supplied the want of him, with the Authority of Peter, and
Paul. An other of your Reverend Fathers there, makes Marie the Blessed
Virgin, Equal with Christ, and calls her, his most Faithful Felovve:
Fidelissimam Christi Sociam. An other of the same Company tells us, that the
Pope is the Light, that is comme into the world: Papa Lux venit in Mundum. To
be short, the whole Issue, and Conclusion of al your dooinges there, by the
full agreemente of al your Fathers, Cornel. Episcop. Bitontinus. Sessione. 6.
Salua semper in omnibus Sedis Apostolicae Authoritate.
hangs upon the Popes only pleasure. And, by your Doctrine, the Pope may
not be controlled, what so ever he do, neither by the Cleregie, nor by all the
whole World. And, what so ever the Pope shall will, to stay, or pass, your
Doctoures tell us, His only Will must stand for Law.

For these, and other like causes, both the Emperor Charles. 5. and also
Francise the French King, 9. Qu. 3. Nemo. 10. Sleidan. Anno. 1551. Illyric. in
protesta. aduers. Conc. Trident. Page 24 August de Vnitate Eccles. ca. 10 Eodem
Lib. ca. 7.
biside sundry other Christian Princes, made open Protestation against your
said Tridentine Conuenticle, being then removed to Bononia, and said, it was no
lawful General Council, but only an Assembly of a few certain persons, to
serve one man's affection, and to seek for gain. Such is the opinion, that
your own Princes have of your Assemblies.

It becomes us not, ye say, to call the determinations of your General
Councelles, the Judgments of Mortal men. Yet it became S. Augustine to
call the same, Concilia Contendentium Episcoporu^: The Councelles of
quarrelling Bishops.

And again, Humanarum contentionum animosa, and perniciosa certamina: The
bold, and hurteful Contentions of worldly quarrelles. But what need we many
words? Your own Panormitane says, Extra. de Consangui. and Affin. Non debet.
Leges Summorum Pontificum, and Concilioru^ appellantur Statuta Humana: and fic
stricte non possunt dici Ius Diuinum: The Laws, and Determinations of Popes,
and Councelles, are called the Determinations, and Laws of men: and so in
streite manner of speech, they cannot be called the Laws of God.

Ye say, we are no Bishops, and therefore have no Authority, to hold a
Synod. 1. Cor. 9.
Even so your Fathers in old time said, that S. Paul was no Apostle, and
that S. Basile, and S. Hilarie were no Bishops. Of S. Paul, it is plain. S.
Hilar. Contra Arianos, and Auxentium.
Hilarie says of him self, Auxentius de Persona mea calumniatus est,
damnatum me a Saturnino, audiri, vt Episcopum, non oportere: The Heretic
Auxe^tius laith a quarrel to my person: and, for as mutche as Saturninus, the
Heretic, has condemned me, he says, I may not be heard, as a Bishop.

Likewise the Arian Heretics used to say, that S. Basile, and other like
Learned, and Catholic Fathers of that time, were no Bishops. S. Basile
thereof writes thus: Cou^celles General repealed by Prouincial.
They call the Council of Catholic Bishops a Council of wicked men:
neither will they once vouchesaue to name them Bishops, lest they should
seem to allow the Decrees, that they have made against them. And they
challenge them to be no Bishops, for that, as they say, they are the
Captains of a wicked heresy. In like sort he writes unto Patrophilus,
Basil. Epist. 72. (...). Basil. Epist. 82. (...).
of the Heretic Eustathius: He takes great heed, lest he should happily
be forced to call us Bishops. Marc. 1.
Thus, M. Hardinge, in denieing us to be Bishops, 1. Cor. 15.
ye do none otherwise, but as other your Predecessors have done before you.

Of the Bishops, and Prelates of your side, I will say nothing. What your
own friends have thought of them, I have said before.

As for us, it shall be sufficient, if we be only the voice of a Crier in the
Wilderness. S. Paul, to auouthe his Apostleship, said openly thus, Gratia
Dei sum id quod sum: By the Grace of God, I am, that I am.

Ye say, a Prouincial Council may not repeal a Council General: as if the
Authority of your Councelles stood only in number, and not in Truth. How
be it, the Simple Truth of God shall ouerweigh Falsehedde, be it never so
General. But even thus said Auxentius, the Arian Heretic, against S.
Hilarie. These be his words, Ego quidem, pijssimi Imperatores, existimo, non
oportere sexcentorum Episcoporum Vnitatem, post rantos labores, ex contentione
Paucorum hominum refricari: My most Graceous Lords, in my Judgment, it is
not meet, after so great pains taken, for the contentions striuinge of a
few, to hazard the consent, and Unity of Six hundred Bishops. Thus the
Heretic Auxentius alleged great multitudes of his Companions, against S.
Hilarie, and the Catholics: which, he said, were but a few.

Notwithstanding, it were no hard matter, to show euidente Examples of
General Councelles, that have benne ouerruled by Particulares. The General
Council of Nice determined, as you say, that al appeals, out of al parts of
the world, should lie to Rome. Yet the Particulare, or Prouincial Council of
Aphrica says, Si prouocandum putauerint, non prouocent, nisi ad Aphricana
Concilia. Epist. Auxentij apud Hilarium. Council. Aphrican. Ca. 92. Sozom. li.
1. ca. 23 Council. Carthaginense. 2. ca. 2. Socra. li. 5. ca 17.
Ad transmarina autem qui putauerit appellandum, a nullo intra Aphricam in
Communionem recipiatur: If they shall think it good to appeal, let them not
appeal, but only to Cou^celles that shall be holden within Aphrica. But who so
ever shall appeal beyond the Seas ( that is to say, to Rome) let noman within
Aphrica receive him to his Communion.

The General Council of Nice durst not to dissolve Priests Marriage: The
Particulare Council of Carthage dissolved it utterly. The order of Private, or
Auriculare Confession, which, in your fantasy, was received generally
throughout the whole Church of God, was notwithstanding quite abolished in
the Church of Constantinople, only by the Particulare advise of Nectarius.

Your Black Freers in their Particulare Chapters, Augu. De Ciuita. li. 20.
Cap. 26. Viues.
have controlled, and cut of the General Determination of the Council of
Basile, touching the conceiving of our Lady in Original Sin. And Albertus
Pigghius, by his like Particulare Authority, Alber. Pigghius in Hierarchi.
tells you, that as well this Council of Basile, as also the Council of
Constance, being both General (in that they said, The Council is above the
Pope) Decreed plainly against Nature, against the manifest Scriptures,
against al Antiquity, and against the Catholic Faith of Christ.

Certainly, the Truth of God is not bound, neither to Person, nor to
Place. Where so ever it be, either in few, or in many, it is evermore
Catholic, even because it is the Truth of God. In the Council of
Constantinople it is written thus, Definierunt pariter, vt, si quid in
Prouincia qualiber emergeret, Historia Triparti. Li. 9. ca. 13
Prouinciae Concilio finiretur: The counsel of Frankforde.
The Fathers agreed al together, that, if any matter should happen to grow in
the Province, by a Council of the Province it should be ended. Likewise says
Isidorus: Manifestum est, quo'd illa, quae sunt per vnamquanque Prouinciam,
ipsius Prouinciae Synodus dispenset: sicut Niceno constat decretum esse
Concilio: Isidorus in Praefatione in Concilia.
It is clear, that matters happeninge in every Province, by a Prouincial Synod
may be ordered: as it is concluded in the Council of Nice. Likewise S. Ambrose
says, Sciebant esse consuerudinem, In Concilio Aquileien.
vt in Orient. Orientalium esset Concilium: Intra occidentem, Occidentalium:
They knew, it was a Custom, that a Council of the East Bishops should be
holden in the East: and a Council of the VVeaste Bishops aparte in the
Weaste.

S. Augusti. De Baptismo. contra Donatist. Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
Augustine says, Literas Episcoporum, and per Sermonem forte sapientiorem
cuiuslibet in ea re peritioris, licet reprehendi, si quid in eis forte a
Veritate deuiatum est: Bishops Letters, if they swerve any thing from the
Truth, may be controlled by the discretion of any other man, that has more
skill in the matter.

In like sort Abbate Panormitane your own Doctoure says, as it has benne
alleged before: Extra, de Electi. and Electi potest. significasti. Abb.
In concernentibus Fidem, etiam dictum Vnius Priuati esset praeferendum dicto
Papae, fi ille moueretur mehoribus rationibus Noui, and Veteris Testamenti: In
matters concerning the Faith, the saieinge of any one Private Man were to be
taken before the saieinge of the Pope: if he were moved with better reasons of
the Old, and Nevve Testamente, then the Pope.

How be it, we have not by our Prouincial Council removed, or shaken the
Authority of any one Anciente General Council, M. Harding. For of all the
Anciente Councelles, that have benne, touching the cases, that lie bitweene us
in controversy, ye are not yet hable to allege one. We have upon good causes
removed your Vanities, and unseemly Folies: and have restoared again, so
mutch, as in us late, the Decrees, and Canons of the Anciente Councelles.
Hincmarus, the Bishop of Remes, Hinemarus Remensis, Cap. 20.
says thus: Cum duarum, aut trium Prouinciarum Praesules in vnum conueniunt,
si Antiquorum Canonum iustitutione muniti, aliquid praedicationis, aut dogmatis
instituunt, quod tamen ab Antiquorum Patrum dogmaribus non discrepet,
Catholicum est, quod faciunt: and fortasse dici potest, Universal: When the
Bishops of two, or three Provinces meet together, if they by the warrante
of the Old Councelles, appointe any matter of preachinge, or Doctrine, so that
it disagree not from y^ Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, it is Catholic, yt
they do, and perhaps may be called Universal.

The credit of the Emperor Charles Book, reportinge the Decrees of the
Council of Frankfoorde, touching the Adoration of Images, I leave wholly to the
indifferente discretion of the Reader.

It was Printed, not at Geneua, as you surmise, but in Parise: The setter out
proves it, not to be forged, by many good, and likely Reasons. An Anciente
Copy of the same is yet still to be seen in Rome in Laterane, eue^ in the
Popes own Library. Augustinus Steuchus, Augu. Steuchus, De Donatione Constan.
li. 1. ca. 6 Eckius, de Imaginibus.
the Master of the same Library, reports y^ same. The Emperor Ludouicus,
Son unto Charles, wrote a Book, yet extante, and remaininge in France, to
like purpose. Freere Eckius also bears witness unto y^ same Book of the
Emperor Charles, although untruly, and guilefully, as his manner is. For he
says, that Charles wrote four Books in Defense of Images: whereas in deed
the Books are directely written against Images.

Although ye think Eli Phili, or, I know not, who, may easily be charged
with corruption, and forgerie, yet why the Pope him self should corrupt, and
forge his own Book, in his own Library, against him self, it were hard
for you to show good Reason.

The Council of Frankforde, ye say, was Godly, and Catholic, and made
Decrees against Imagebreakers, in the behalf of Images. Yet notwithstanding
Auentinus says, A council General.
In Frankfordiensi Concilio Scita Graecorum, de Adorandis Imaginibus, rescissa
sunt: Auen^^n. Fol. 3, 7.
In the Council of Frankford the Grecians Decrees, for the Adoration of Images,
Regino.
were quite abolished. Regino says, Pseudosynodus Graecorum, quam pro
adorandis Imaginibus fecerunt, reiecta est: The False Council of the Greeks,
which they made for Adoration of Images, was repealed in the Council of
Frankforde. Ado.
Likewise Ado says, Pseudosynodus, quam Graeci Septimam vocant, pro Adorandis
Imaginibus, abdicata est penitus: The False Council, which the Greeks call
the Seuenthe, wherein Decrees were made for the Adoration of Images, was there
utterly put away.

Hincmarus, the Archbishop of Remes, speakinge of the same Council of
Frankforde, Hincmar. ca. 20.
says thus: Pseudolynodus Graecorum destructa est, and penitus abdicata. De
cuius destructione, non Modicum Volumen, quod in Palatio adolescentulus legi,
ab eodem Imperatore Romam est per quosdam Episcopos missum: The False Council
of the Greeks was repealed, and utterly ouerthro wen in the Council of
Frankforde. Whereof, when I was a young man, I readde a pretty big Book in the
Popes Palaice in Rome: which Book was sent thither by certain Bishops
from the said Emperor Charles.

Certain words of the said Lewd, or False Council of the Greeks,
amongst others, Citantur in Libro Caroli Magni.
are these: Qui timet Deum, Adorat Imagines, vt Filium Dei: Qui Adorat
Imaginem, and dicit. hoc est Christus, non peccat: peccat, qui no^ Adorat
Imaginem. Qui non Adorat imaginem, est Haereticus. Imago Adoranda est eodom
cultu, quo Sancta Trinitas: He, that fears God, Adoureth an Image, as he
would Adoure the Son of God: He that Adoureth an Image, and says, This is
Christ, offends not: He offends, that Adoureth not an Image: He that
Adoureth not an Image, is an Heretic: we must Adoure an Image with the same
Reverence. wherewith we Adoure the Holy Trinity.

Now, whether these, and other like worthy saieinges, and sentences were to
be reproved, or no, it may please you, M. Hardinge, to consider.

That Council, ye say, is called General, not, whereun to al Christian
Nations do resort in deed: but whereunto al Christian Nations are lawfully
summoned. As this answer is true, and not denied, so by the same, your late
Council of Tridente, may in no wise be called General. For, what lawful
Sommones sent your Pope Pius, either to Preter Gian into Ethiopia: or to other
Bishops, and Christians in India, or ( Europa only, and that not whole,
excepted) into any other Kingedome, or Country of the world?

But ye say, In Persia, Media, Egypt, Mauritania, and in other Countries
adioininge, there are few Christians at this day to be found. Yet the
Authors of Nouus Orbis, Nouus Orbis.
discribing the state of the world, say thus, In all Countries vvhither so ever
ye comme. there be sum Christians. Again, In India many Kings, and princes
profess Christ. And again, In Armenia, and cilicia, in a manner, the whole
people is Christened. Only they are subject to the Cham of Tartarie. Eol. 324.
Their Priests be married: And, who so is unmarried, may be no Priest.

Ye say, The Patriarchs of Assyria, and Armenia (that never saw, neither the
one Country, nor the other) were at Rome (ye know not, when) and subscribed
to all the Articles of your Council of Tridente. O M. Hardinge, ye can grate no
great credit by open mockery. It is no hard matter for your Pope, out of his
own guard to make such Patriarchs yenough, one for Jerusalem, an other for
Constantinople, an other for Alexandria, an other for Antioche, an other for
Sidon, an other for Tyrus: and I marvel, if there be not sum Patriarch,
one, or other, for Sodom, and Gomorre. These poor Holy, and Hongry Fathers
are contented at al times, to yield their submissions, and to set their
hands to what so ever they shall be required, The number of the Bishops at
Tride^te
and in the names of those Countries, that they scareely over heard of, to
confess, the Pope their master, to be al, and more then al. With such daine
shows, and visa^des, it pleases you to smoothe the world.

It ye doubt hereof, ye may easily find, that one Augustinus de Roma, in
your late Council of Bau^le, Council. Basilien. Petrus Paluden. Patriar.
Hierosolymitanus. Ceremontar. li. 1 Section. 3.
hare the name of the Archbishop of Nazareth in lurie: Likewise, that one
Petrus Paludensis, a poor Freere Obsernante, not long sithence, bare the name
of the Patriarch of Jerusalem. But what need more Examples? Your own
Ceremoniarie of Rome tells you thus, Consucueruni Autiqui ponere Patriarchas
quatuor Ecclesiarum Principalium, inter Episcopos Cardinales mixtim. Nostro
tempore ponuntur immediate post Cardinales. Sunt enim quodammodo' Titulares:
They were woonte in old times, to place the Patriarchs of the four Principal
Churches together with the Cardinal Bishops, one with an other. But now
adays they are placed next beneathe all the Cardinals. For in a manner they
have now nothing else, but the names of Patriarchs.

It is most certain, that the Christian Patriarchs, and Bishops of those
Countries, will neither Communicate with the Pope, either in Sacraments, or in
Prayers: nor any wise yield to his Authority nor give any manner of honor,
or reverence to his person: no more then to Machomete, or Antichrist: as I
have sufficiently showed before.

Touching the Number of Bishops, present at your Former Assembly at
Tridente, I refer me self to the Records of the same. If ye find there
more then Forty Bishops, I am content to lose my credit. And yet of the
same number, Blind sir Roberte of Scotland, as I have said before, and M.
Pates of England were seely poor Bishops, God knows, endewed only with
bare names, without Bishoprikes. Flacius Illyricus In protestatione aduersus
Conci. Trident.
In your later Assembly, two of your Holy Fathers were stain there presently
in Aduouterie. By mean of which misfortune, your number by so mutche was
abated.

These be the great woorthies of the world: These Cornelius Bitontinus, one
of the same Company, calls the Stars of the Churches, and the Mighty Army
of Gods Angels. These have power to determine matters, that they never
understood, by Authority only, but not by knowledge.

Alphonsus de Castro, Alphansus aduersus Haereses, Lib. 1. Ca 4. Erasmus, In
Epistolam Hieronymi ad Eustochium.
as I have showed you before, says thus, It is certain, that sum Popes be
so void of Learning, that they understand not the Grammare Rules. Erasmus,
speakinge of sundry the great Learned of your side, says thus, Sibi
videntur Semidei, miro supercilio prae se despicientes Grammaticos: Qui si
Grammaticae litassent, non ad hunc modum se pueris deridendos propinarent: They
think them selves half Gods, and with high looks they despise poor
Grammariens. But if they had well Learned their Grammare, they would not offer
such occasions, that children, and babes should scorn at their folly.

Concerning the whole matter, your Doctors of Sorbona in Parise have concluded
thus, Vt Concilium legitime congregetur, sufficit, quo'd solennitas, and forma
luris solenniter sit seruata. Articul. 22.
Quia, si quis trahere velit hoc in disputationem, vtrum Praelati, qui ibi
sedent, habeant Rectam Intentionem, and vtrum sint Docti, and vtrum habeant
Scientiam Sacrarum Literarum, and animum obediendi Sanae Doctrinae, esset
processus in infinitum: That the Council be lawfully assembled, it is
sufficient, that y^ Solemnity, and form of Law be solemnly observed. For
if a man would cast doubts, whether the Bishops, that sit in Council,
have a good Meaning, and whether they be Learned, and whether they be skilful
in the Scriptures, and whether they have a mind to obeie sound Doctrine, or
no, then we should never make an end.

These be they, M. Hardinge, to whom ye would have us to geeue care, what so
ever they say, even as to the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost.

But S. Augustine contrae Cresconi. Lib. 3. Cap. 79.
Augustine says, Ecclesiae inter nos agitur causa, non mea. Ecclesia in nullo
homine spem ponere, a suo didicit Redemptore: It is the Churches cause, that
we talk of, it is not mine. The Church has learned of her Redeemer, to put
no trust in any man.

The Apology, Cap. 18. Division. 1.
How so ever it be, the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ depends not
upon Councelles, nor, as S. Paul says, upon the Judgments of Mortal
Creatures. And if they, which ought to be careful for Gods Church, will not
be wife, but slack their duty, and harden their hearts against God, and his
Christ, goeinge on still to peruerte the right ways of the Lord, God will
stir up the very stones, and make children, and babes cunninge, that there
may ever be sum, to confute these men's lies.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Hereto M. Hardinge answeareth nothing else, but thus, The Council is the
School of Truth: The Bishops cannot foreslowe their duties: The Church of
Rome cannot err. Which tales we have so often, and not without weariness
heard already. Petrus de Palude, Petrus De Palude, De Potesta. Papae. Arti. 4.
amongst other your Doctors says, Non est credendum, Ecclesiam Romanam
errasse a Fide. Ipsa enim potest e contrario cum Christo dicere, Ego
Testimonium perhibeo de meipsa. Testimonium meum verum est: No man may believe,
that the Church of Rome may err from the Faith: Contrariwise that Church
may say with Christ, I bear witness of me self. And my witness is
just, and true. Therefore so long, as the Church of Rome can speak for her
self, there is no doubt, but al is well.

The Apology, Cap. 18. Division. 2.
For God is able (not only without Councelles, but also, will the Councelles,
nil the Councelles) to maintain, and anaunce his own Kingedome. Full many be
the thoughts of man's harr ( says Solomon) but the Counsel of the Lord
abides steadfast: There is no wisdom, there is no knowledge, there is no
counsel against the Lord. Hilarious in psalm. mum 126.
Things endure not, says Hilarious, that be set up with man's
vvorkemanship: By an other manner of means must the Church of God be buiided
and preserved: For that Church is grounded upon the Fundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, and is holden fast together by one corner stone, which is
Christ Jesus.

M. Hardinge.
Where ye say, that by an other manner of means the Church of God must be
builded and preserved, show us what other means they are, and we must say,
ye are very cunninge men, who correct, I will not say, Magnificat, but
Christ's own ordinance for gouernemente of his Church, By this reckeninge,
it appears not, that God ever orderned Popes, or Car^^alles, to build his
Church.
who has ordained Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Shepeherdes, and Teachers
(as is before mentioned) In aedificationem Corporis Christi, To the buildinge
up of the Body of Christ, which is his Church. Ye shall pardon us if we
believe S. Paul before you. We see what is the mark ye shoot at, The
buildinge of Gods Church.
that the lawful successors of the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, and
the lawful Shepeherdes, and Doctors being put from the buildinge of Christ's
Body the Church, your selves may take the work in hand, and govern all,
set your hearts as reaste, it shall not be so.

The B. of Sarisburie.
In deed Christ has ordained Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
and Teachers, for the gouernmente of his Church: notwithstanding y^ same be
not always allowed to sit in Councelles, nor be always known by Rochetes,
or Miters. If God had not provided other Pastors, and Feeders, bisides your
Prelates, the whole Church might sterue for hunger. S. Paul's Words be true:
but your idle Constructions are untrue. We find not fault with Gods
Ordinance: but we rejoice in Gods Mercy, for that it has pleased him, to
visit his people, and to discover the multitude of these Vanities, wherewith
you have so long, and so discourteously beguiled the world. Therefore we
correct not Magnificat, M. Hardinge, as you say: but rather we humbly singe,
Te Deum laudamus, and rejoice in God our Saueoure. The right, and only way of
buildinge Gods House, is, to lay the Fundation thereof upon y^ Everlasting
word, and vvil of God. 1. Corin. 3. Esai. 8.
S. Paul says, Other Fundation noman can lay, but the same, that is said
already: which is Christ Jesus, The Prophet Esaie says, To the Law (of
God) and to the Testimony. If they speak not according to this Word, they
shall have no morninge Light. Therefore S. Hilarie says, as it is alleged in
the Apology, Aliter extruenda, Hilarious in Psalmum. 126.
aliter custodienda Ecclesia est: Fundamentum eius super Prophetas, and
Apostolos collocandum est. Ecclesia ita a Deo, id est, Doctrinis Dei
aedificata, non concidet: Otherwise must the Church be builte, and otherwise
must it be keapte. The Fundation of it must be said upon the Apostles, and
Prophets. The Church being thus builte by God, that is to say, by the
Doctrine of God, shall never false.

The Apology, Cap. 19. Division. 1.
But marvelous notable, and to very good purpose, for these days, be S.
Hieronym. in Naum. Cap. 3.
Hieromes words: Whom so ever ( says he) the Devil has deceived, and
entised to fall asleep, as it were with the svveere, and deadely
enchauntementes of the Maremaides the Sirenes, those persons doothe Gods
Word awake up, saieing unto them: Ephesians. 5.
Arise thou that sleapest, lift up thee self: and Christ shall geeue thee
light. Therefore at the coming of Christ, of Gods Word, of the
Ecclesiastical Doctrine, and of the full destruction of Niniue, and of that most
bevvtiful Harlot, then shall the people, which heretofore had benne cast in
a trau^ce under their Masters, be raised up, and shall make haste to go to the
Mountains of the Scriptures: and there shall they find hills, Imeanemoses, and
losua the Son of Nun: other Hills also, which are the Prophets: and
Hills of the Nevve Testament, which are the Apostles, and the evangelists.
And when the people shall flee for succoure to such Hills, and shall be
exercised in the readinge of this kind of mountains, though they find not
one to teach them (for the harvest shall be great, but the laborers fevv) yet
shall the good desire of the people be well accepted, in that they have gotten
them to such Hills: and the Negligence of their Masters shall be openly
reproved. These be S. Hieromes words, and that so plain, as there needs no
Interpretour. For they agree so just with the things, we now see with our
eyes, have already comme to pass, that we may verily think, he meante to
foretell, as it were, by the Spirit of Prophecy, and to painte before our
face, the Universal state of our time: the fall of the most gorgeous Harlot
Babylon: the repairinge again of Gods Church: the blindness, and slouthe
of the Bishops, and the good will, and forewardenesse of the people. For, who
is so blind, but he seethe, these men be the Masters, by whom the people,
as says S. Hierome, has benne leadde into error, and lulled a sleep? Or,
who sees not, that Rome, that is their Niniue, which sometime was painted
with fairest colors, now, her vizarde beeinge pulled of, is both better
seen, and less set by? Or, who sees not, that good men, being awaked,
as it were, out of their dead sleep, at the light of the Gospel, and at the
voice of God, have resorted to the Hills of the Scriptures, waitinge not at al
for the Councelles of such Masters?

M. Hardinge.
Ye wreste the saieinge of S. Hierome to your purpose, that is to say, so as
it may seem to be spoken against the Church, that now is, wherein ye make him
a Prophet. And that this place might sound the more against the Clergy, to
the commendation of the people, and to stir them to read the Scriptures:
after your accustomed manner ye stick not to add some what of your own in one
place: to take away a little of the Doctor in an other place: to alter the
words in an other place. Who looks so narrowly for trial of this, as your
secretary thought maliciously, when he wrote it: by diligent conference of
this Apology with S. Herome he shall find it.

Now, concerning the right sense of the place, S. Hieromes intent was not, to
foretell and paint before our face (as you say) the universal state of our
time, but to tell, and declare the meaning of the Prophet Nalium. Untruth.
For S. Hierome in the same place says, Haec in Consummatione Mundi magis
complentur etc. Hucusque de Mundi ruina.
signifiynge the state of the time now paste, to wit, the time of Christ's
first coming into the world: for the words do expressly speak thereof.
After S. Hieromes exposition, by Niniue, that Prophet means the world: by
the Assyrian King, the Devil. And there he prophecieth the ruin of the
world. and of the Devil at the coming of Christ. S. Hierome Untruth. For
he speaks oftentimes of her: and says plainly, that Rome is Babylon.
speaks never a word of your harlotte Babylon, whereof ye and your
unlearned ministers have never done bablinge, meaning thereby the Holy Roman
Church.

First you Sir defender, that penned this gear, have plaide a false part by
diuidinge the one member of the sentence into two: Or rather by puttinge in
one word, and leaving out an other. For, where S. In Comment. in Nahum. Cap.
3.
Hierome has thus, Et consummationis Niniue speciosissimae quondam Meretricis
(whereby he meante the undoing of the Devils power in the world once, that is
to say As though sithence the Birthe of Christ, there never had be^ne,
neither Niniue, nor Babylon, nor Ignorance, nor Negligence in the Cleregie.
before the coming of Christ, a most beautiful harlotte) that you might give
occasion of reproach to the Roman Church, which falsefiynge the doctors sense
you understand by Niniue, you have set it forth thus, Et consummationis
Niniue, and speciosissimae meretricis. Then you descant upon it, as though S.
Hierome had so written, and say that he sets before our face the fall of
the most gorgeous harlot Babylon, which you interpret to be Rome. And then
further corrupting S. Hieromes sense, you make him to speak of the repairinge
again of Gods Church, as though at this day it were by defaulte of the
catholic Clergy fallen down, and should be set up again by you and your
Ministers: also of the blindness of the Bishops of our time, that they be the
masters by whom the people has benne lead into error, and lulled asleep.
And hereto ye add, as says Hierome, where S. Hierome says not so neither
of the masters at Christ's first coming, but of the Devil, who brought the
people asleep, by whom he understands No doubt: if there be credit
sufficient in this Commentary.
not the people that lives now, but them that were deceived by the Devil
under evil masters, before the coming of Christ.

But because this defender thinks be has acquitted him self like a Clercke
by alleaginge this place out of S. Hierome against the Catholic Church, I
require all the learned to read over what S. Hierome writes upon the end of
the Prophet Nahum, from these words of the text, In Nahum. Cap. 3.
Brucus irruit and euolauit etc. forth to the end of the Chapter, and most
diligently to mark that goes immediately before the place by this defender
alleged. As for thee, good reader, that understand not the Latin tongue, I
assure thee, S. Hierome speaks those words As though the Popes Clerks
were not Heretics, and Teachers of False Doctrine.
of Heretics, * of teachers of evil doctrine, of such as will not bear the
voice of the Church, of which sort this new english Clergy is. And in that
discourse he commends to true beleuers, not only the Hills, that is, the
written Scriptures, but also the doctrine of the Church (as thou see in the
allegation put in the Apology) and before that be commends likewise Latibula
Doctorum, the Caves of the Doctors, in which the faithful people also as by
flyinge to the Hills, couche them selves safe from danger of the Devil
stirrer of Heresies. So that if the place be well scanned, by that allegation
they shall seem to have made a rod to whippe them selves. The whole place
being over long to recire here, a sentence or two. that are specially meante
of such as they be, may suffice.

Vae itaque his etc. woe then to those, which are teachers of perverse
doctrines in Niniue, by which is signified the world. Psalm. 151.
And aptly to them it is said, thy Shepeherdes have stepte, for they have
given sleep to their eyes, and slomberinge to their eieleddes. And therefore
have they not found a place for our Lord, nor atabernacle for the God of
Jacob. Neither have they heard out of Ephrata, that is to say, Frugifera
Ecclesia, the fruitful Church. Nor have they found the Church in the
thickettes of the woddes. Neither only the Shepeherdes of this rifferaffe (
mixticij huius, be means by (...), which is the word of the seventy
translatours, all sorts of people deceived by false teachers) and of the
locuste (they are the captain Heretics) which in time of froste sits in
the hedges, have slepte: but by the King of Assyrians (who is the Devil) they
have been lulled aslepe. For always it is the study of the Devil, how he may
bring asleep waking souls. Thus S. Hierome.

Now I report me to those that have eyes to see, whether out new Cleregy may
not serme those, whom the Devil has lulled asleep (gladly I use their own
term) in their new devises, in their own liked conceits, in their Schisms,
and Heresies, in their unjust possession of Benefices, and Bishoprikes, those
yet living, to whom the right belongs, in their presumption of that office
they are not duly called unto, in their malice toward the Church, in the
continual satisfiynge of their fleashly lusts, and in their unlawful and
lecherous embracinges.

Let them fear the dreadful saying of S. Hierome folowinge straight after
their allegation: Non est sanitas contritioni tuae, etc. There is no health for
thy bruze, thy woonde swells. Therefore the rifferaffe of Niniue can not be
healed, because he lays not down his pride, and the woonde is always
fresh, and daily he is woonded whiles the Devil strikes at him. And when all
comes to all, there is no health for his bruze. For although he seem to him
self hole, yet is his soul broken, and crusshed with the bytle of the whole
earth, that fownceth down upon it. And it is not healed, because continually
it is lifted up (with pride). But if it become humble, and submit it self to
Christ, Psalm. 50.
a contrite and an humble heart God despises not. Thus describes S. Hierome
these men. Neither let them say, they submit them selves to Christ, whom
and whose Gospel they have so much in their mouths, until they follow his
doctrine, saying of the governors of his Church, He that hears you, Luc.
10.
hears me: and he that despises you, despises me. And this much for
answer to the place of S. Hierome.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here is a marvelous work. Sir Defender sings discante, and quiteth him
self like a Clerk: He alters S. Hieromes mind: He says, S. Hierome
says so, where as S. Hierome says not so: He of Proud Niniue, has made the
Church of Rome: He of the Devil, has made Antichriste: He bableth about
Babylon: He divides one sentence into two: He puts in one word, and
leaves out an other: He is bulled a sleep: He scatters his rifferaffe: He
doothe, and says, I know not, Rome. Niuiue. Babylon.
what, what so ever it shall please M. Hardinge of his courtesy to report.

Touching this heinous imagined corruption, and alteringe of S. Hieromes
mind, Chrysostom. in Matthae. Homil. 19.
S. Chrysostom says. Qui mendax est, nemine^ putat verum dicere, ne ipsum
quidem Deum: He that him self is a lier, imagines, that noman says y^
truth, no not God him self. With such corruption, and change of words,
Palladius, a lewd fellow, thought him self sommetime hable to charge S.
Hierome. S. Hieromes words thereof are these: Hieronym. Ad Pammach. De optimo
genere Interpretandi.
Concionatur, me esse Falsarium: me Verbum non expressisse de Verbo: pro
Honorabili, dixisse Charissimum. Tom. 2.
Haec, and huiusmodi nugae, mea crimina sunt: He preaches, and publishes
abroad, In eadem Epist.
that I am a Falsarie: that I have not precisely translated word for word:
That I, in sleede of this work, Honorable, have written, dearly Beloved.
These things, and such trifles are laid to my charge.

To these folies S. Hierome answeareth thus, Cum ipsa Epistola doceat, nihil
mutatum esse de sensu, nec res additas, nec aliquod dogma confictum, faciunt
nae isti intelligendo, vt nihil intelligant: and dum alienam imperitiam volunt
coarguere, produnt suam: Whereas the Epistle it self declares, that there is
no alteration made in the sense, and that there is neither matter of substance
added, nor any Doctrine imagined, verily by their great cunninge, they prove
them selves fools: and seekinge to reprove other men's unskillfulness, they
betraie their own.

Ye say, S. Hierome in these words spoke nothing, neither of the Church
of Christ, nor of your Cleregie of Rome. For trial whereof, let S. Hierome him
self be heard to speak, as a witness indifferent of him self. First in
other places he says thus (To this place we shall resort afterward) Dicimus,
Hieronym. in Michaeam, Ca. 3.
No^ venient super nos mala. Audiamus sententiam Domini. Sion, and Jerusalem,
and Mons Te^pli speculatotium, and visio pacis, and Templus Christi in
consummatione, and in fine: We say, There shall no hurt comme upon us. Let us
hear the saieinge of our Lord. Sion, and Jerusalem, and the Mount, that is
the Watch Tower of the Temple, and the sight of peace, and the Temple, or
Church of Christ, shall be consumed, and brought to an end. These words be
plain: not only that haute Lady Niniue, but also the Church, or Temple, that
bears the Name of Christ, shall be consumed, and brought to an end.

Likewise he says, Hieronym. in Sophoniam. Ca. 2.
Quos Deus inseruit ex Oleastro in radicem Bonae Oliuae, si illi immemores
recesserint a Conditore suo, and Adorauerint Assyrium, cur illos Deus non
euertat, and ad eandem sitim reducat, in qua prius fuerunt? Even they, whom
God has graffed from out of the Wild Olive tree, into the root of the Good
oliuie, ( that is to say, the children of the Church) if they forgeate them
selves, and flee from their Maker, and woorship the King of Assyria ( that is
to say, Antichriste, or any other Creature, that is not God) why may not God
overthrow them, and bring them to the same thirste, and drouth, they were in
before?

Again he says, Hierony. in Matthae. Ca. 24. Li. 4.
Abominatio Desolationis, intelligi potest omne dogma peruersum: quod cum
viderimus stare in Loco Sancto, id est, in Ecclesia, debemus fugere de Iudaea
ad Montes: The Abomination of Desolation, may be taken for any Wicked
Doctrine: which when we shall see standinge in the Holy Place, that is to
say, in the Church of Christ, then we must flee from Jury to the
Mountains ( of the Scriptures).

And again likewise he says, Paxillus auferetur de Loco Fideli, hoc est, de
Ecclesia, per impietatem quotidie succrescentem: and, qui super eum ante
pependerant Fide, postea infidelitate frangentur, and cadent, and peribunt: The
Pin, or bar ( whereby he means Christ, for that the Faitheful hang upon
him, as in a house things are hanged up safely upon a Pin,) shall be taken
away from the place, that was Faitheful, that is to say, from the Church,
because of the wickedness, that daiely grows: And they, that before honge
upon him by Faith, afterward, by infidelity, shall be broken down, Rome,
Babylon,
and fall, and perish.

What so ever Gloss ye shall give to the other words of S. Hierome,
certainly these words are plain, and euidente, and will not easily receive
your Gloss. Likewise S. Gregory, speakinge, not of the First coming of
Christ, but of the time, Gregor. in Job. Ca. 9. Li. 19. Ca. 29.
that is discribed, to be before the end of the world, says thus: In diebus
illis Ecclesia, quasi quodam senio debilitata, per Praedicationem parere Filio^
non valebit: In those days the Church, as being ouermutche weakened with
age, shall not be hable by Preachinge to bear Children.

Now, Hieronym. In Hieremi. Lib. 1. Ca. 4.
touching your Cleregie, S. Hierome him self says, Ipsi quoque Sacerdotes,
qui Legem Domini docere deberent, and subiectos sibi populos a Leonis furore
defendere, quodam stupore infatuati, vertentur in amentiam: The Priests them
selves, that ought to teach the Law of our Lord, and to defend the people,
committed to their charge, from the fury of the Lion ( that is the Devil)
being amazed, and berefte of their wits, shall be turned into madness.

Again he says, Hieronym. in Naum. Ca. 3.
Scit Rex Assyrius, non posse se Oues decipere, nisi Pastores ante consopierit.
Semper Diaboli studium est, vigilantes animas consopire: The King of Assyria (
that is the Devil) knows, that he can never deceive the Sheep, unless
first he cast the Sheepeheardes into a trau^ce. It is evermore the Devils
policy, to lay watcheful Souls asleep.

And therefore again he says, Hieronym. In Sopboniam, Ca. 1.
Auferet Dominus nomina Vanae Gloriae, and Admirationis falsae, quae versantur
in Ecclesia. Sed and nomina Sacerdotum cum Sacerdotibus, qui frustra sibi
applaudunt in Episcopali nomine, and in Presbyterij Dignitate, and non in
opere: God will take away the names of Vain Glory, and False Credit, that
are in the Church: and the Names of Priests, together with the Priests them
selves, that vainly boaste them selves of the Name of Bishops, and of the
Dignity of Priestehoode, but do nothing.

But about Babylon, ye say, ye never make an end of Bablinge. What
Bablinge then, Hieronym. In Catalogo Scriptor. Eccle. in Marco.
I pray you, made S. Hierome, when he said, Petrus in Prima Epistola, sub
Nomine Babylonis, Romam significat? S. Peter in his First Epistle meante Rome
under the name of Babylon.

S. Augustine says, Roma est quasi Secunda Babylon: Rome is as the Second
Babylon. August. De Genesi contra Manichae. Li. 2. Ca. 1. Augustine. in Psalm.
44. Primasius in Apocalyp. Ca. 16.
Again he says, Ciues Babyloniae nos fecerunt: dimisimus Creatorem:
Adorauimus Creaturam: dimisimus eum, a quo facti sumus: Adorauimus illud, quod
fecimus: They have made us the Citizens of Babylon: ( for) we have leafte our
Creatoure, and have woorshipped a Creature: we have leafte him, that made us:
and have Adoured that thing, that we made our selves.

Likewise says Primasius, Tunc Babylon cadet, quando nouissime potestatem
persequendi Sanctos acceperit: Then shall Babylon comme to ground, when she
shall last of al take power to persequute the Saints of God.

And again, In idem Caput.
Vidi Mulierem sedentem super Vestem Coccineam, plenam Nominibus Blasphemiae,
habentem Capita Septem. Septem Capita dicit Septem Montes: Romam, quae super
Septem Montes praesidet, significans: I saw a VVooman sittinge upon a scarlet
roabe, fulle of Names of Blasphemy, having Seven Heads. Seven Heads he
calls the Seven Mountes, upon which Rome was builte: meaning thereby
Rome, that sits upon Seven Hills.

Ludouicus Vi^es, August. De Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 18. Ca. 22. Viues. Ambrosius
Ansbertus in Apacalyp. Li. 6.
your own very friend, says thus: Hieronymus, ad Marcellam scribens, non
aliam existimat discribi etc. S. Hierome, writing unto Marcella, thinks,
there is none other Babylon discribed by S. John in his Revelations, but the
City of Rome. Ambrosius Ansbertus says, Vbi est illa dudum super omnia
Regna exaltata Inclyta Roma, Babylon Secunda? Where is that Noble Rome,
euanced of late above al Kingedomes, the Second Babylon?

I pass over Beatus Rhenanus, The people shall flee to the scriptures.
Auentinus, Petrarcha, Dantes, and a great number of other your own
Doctors, mentioned before in place more conueniente: Al whom ye may not of
your courtesy charge with bablinge.

Ye say, S. Hierome meante not the state of our time: but only the state of
the time now paste: that is to say, as it is said before, The time of
Christ's first Coming into the World. And this, in your margin, ye call
the right sense of S. Hierome truly reported. How be it, your Reader, that
has eyes to see, may easily find, that this is your own only sense, M.
Hardinge, and not S. Hieromes. For, I beseech you, how was Niniue fully
destroyed, or what Gospelles were there written, Hieronym. In Naum. Ca. 3. The
true sense of S. Hieroms words.
at the First Coming of Christ into the world? S. Hieromes meaning, and
speech is plain, The people, before the second Coming of Christ, which
shall be in Glory, shall leave their negligente, and idle Scholemaisters,
which have of long time deceived them: and shall flee to the Mountains of
the Scriptures. And, al be it they find not one to teach them, yet shall
their desire, and endeavor be accepted before God, for that they have sought
unto these Mountains: and the negligence, and slouthefulnesse of their
Masters shall be reproved.

To like purpose S. Chrysostom. In Gene. Homi. 36.
Chrysostom says, Fieri non potest, vt is, qui Diuinis Scripturis magno
studio, feruentique desiderio vacat, semper negligatur. Licet enim desit nobis
hominis Magisterium, tamen ipse Dominus, superne intrans in corda nostra,
illustrat mentem: rationi iubar suum infundit: detegit occulta: doctorque fit
eorum, quae ignoramus: tantum si nos ea, quae a nobis sunt, afferre velimus: It
cannot possibly be, that he, that with earneste study, and feruente desire
reads the Scriptures, should evermore be foresaken. For although we want
the instruction of man, yet God him self from above entringe into our hearts,
lighteneth our mind: pours his beams into our wits: opens things, that
were hidden: and becomes unto us a Scholemaister of that, we know not:
only if we will do so mutche, as in us lies.

So says S. Hierome, Postquam conuersi fuerint, and Clarum Christi Lumen
aspexerint, Hierony. In Esai. lib. 12. ca 49. Psalm. 23.
pascent in vijs, and in semitis sanctarum Scripturarum: and dicent, Dominus
pascit me, and nihil mihi deerit: When they shall be turned, and shall behold the
clear light of Christ, they shall feed in the paths, and ways of the Holy
Scriptures, and shall say, The Lord feeds me: and I shall want nothing.

Again he says, Circundabit sibi, quasi murum firmissimum, Scripturarum
doctrinam: ne ad interiora eius possit hostis irrumpere: Hieronym. In Naum.
Cap. 3.
He will enclose him self with the Doctrine of the Scriptures, as with a
strong wall: that the Enemy may not enter into his heart. Again he says,
Haec est via: Ambulate in ca. Neque ad Dextram, neque ad Sinistram. Tunc omnes
Errores, Hierony. In Esai. lib. 9. Cap. 30.
and Idola, and Similitudines Veritatis comminnes, atque disperges, and ita
iudicabis immunda, vt ^a menstruatae mulieris sordidissimo Sanguini compares:
This is the way: walk in it. Go neither to the Right hand, nor to the
Leafte. Then shall then break, and scatter al Errors, and Idols, and
Countrefeite likeness of the Truth: and shall judge them to be so filthy,
that thou shall liken them to most vile, and lothesome blood.

But, for as mutche as ye say, Al these words of S. Hierome perteiue unto
sum other matter, I know not what, and not unto the overthrow of Babylon, or
fall of Antichriste, that shall be before the end of the world, notwithstanding
S. Hieromes words of them self be plain yenough, yet may it please you, to
consider these words of S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. In Matt. Homi 49.
touching the same. Thus he says: Tunc, qui in Iudaea sunt, fugiant ad
Montes, id est, qui sunt in Christianitate, conferant se ad Scripturas. Montes
sunt Scripturae Apostolorum, and Prophetarum, etc. Sciens Dominus tantam
confusionem rerum in nouissimis diebus esse futuram, ideo mandat, vt
Christiani, qui sunt in Christianitate, volentes firmitatem accipere Fidei
verae, ad nullam rem fugiant, nisi ad Scripturas. Alioqui, si ad alias res
respexerint, scandalizabuntur, and peribunt, non intelligentes, quae sit Vera
Ecclesia. Et per hoc incident in abominationem desolationis: Then let them,
that be in Ievvrie, flee unto the Mountains: that is to say, let them, that
be in Christ's profession, flee to the Scriptures. The Scriptures of the
Apostles, and Prophets, be the Mountains, etc. Our Lord knowinge, that there
should be such confusion in the last days, therefore commands, that
Christian men, that believe in Christ, willinge to have an assurance of the
True Faith, should have recourse to nothing else, but unto the Scriptures.
Otherwise, if they have regard to any other thing, they shall be offended, and
perish, not understanding, what is the true Church. And by mean hereof they
shall fall into the Abomination of desolation.

Here, M. Hardinge, no Gloss will serve. Certainly, these words were spoken,
not of the First coming of Christ into the world, as you imagine: but of
the Kingedome of Antichriste, and of the End, and consummation of the world.

Hereof S. Gregory says thus: Gregori. In Job. ca. 29. li. 19. ca* 9.
Ecclesia post eosdem dies, quibus deprimitur, tamen circa finem temporum
grandi praedicationis Virtute roborabitur: The Church after these days of her
affliction, shall afterward notwithstanding be strengthened with great Power,
and might of preachinge.

The Apology, Cap. 20. Division. 1.
But, by your favor, sum will say, these things ought not to have benne
attempted without the Bishop of Romes commandment, forsomutche as he only
is the knotte and band of Christian Society: He only is that Priest of
Leuies order, whom God signified in the Deuteronomie, from whom counsel in
matters of weight, and true judgment ought to be set: and, who so obeieth
not his judgment, the same man ought to be killed in the sight of his
brethren: and, that no Mortal Creature has Authority to be Judge over the
Pope, whatsoever he do: that Christ reigns in Heaven, and the Pope, in
Earth: that the Pope alone can do as mutche, as Christ, or God him self can
do: because Christ, and the Pope have but one Consistory: That without him
is no Faith, no Hope, no Church: and, who so goes from him, quite casts
away, and renounceth his own Salvation. Such talk have the Canonistes, the
Popes Parasites, but with small discretion, or sobrenesse. For they could
scantly say more, at least, they could not speak more highly of Christ him
self.

M. Hardinge.
What sum will say, we know not. We tell you, that your change of
Religion, and manifold Heresies ought not to have benne attempted at al,
neither without the Bishop of Romes commandment, nor with his
commandment. Touching the Bishop of Rome him self, you have never done
with him. He is a great block in your way. And so has he ever been in the
way of al Heretics. Yet could he never by you, or them be removed. To your
scoffs against him, and belieinge of the Canonistes before by you uttered,
and here idly repeted, my former answer may suffice.

The Apology, Cap. 20. Division. 2.
As for us truly, we have fallen from the Bishop of Rome, upon no manner of
worldly respect, or commodity. And would to Christ he so behaved him self,
that this falling away needed not: But so the case stood, that unless we
leafte him, we could not come to Christ. Neither will he now make any other
league with us, then such a one, 1. Reg. 11.
as Nahas the King of the Ammonites would have made in times paste with them
of the City of Iabes, which was, to put out the Right Eye of each one of the
Inhabitants. Even so will the Pope pluck from us the Holy Scripture, the
Gospel of our Salvation, and all the Confidence, which we have in Christ
Jesus. And upon other condition can he not agree upon peace with us.

M. Hardinge.
Ye are not fallen from the Bishop of Rome only, which were a damnable
schism, but ye are fallen from Christ's Church. Your comparison of the Pope
with king Nahas is not very agreeable. But sirs, ye speak more maliciously,
then credibly. Be ye good Christen men, and conform your selves to the
Catholic Faith, ( and deny Christ, and his Gospel: For, this also ye
should have added) and I warrant you, the Pope will not pluck from you,
neither the Scriptures, nor your confidence in Christ Jesus, no more then he
does from us.

The Apology, Cap. 20. Division. 3.
For whereas sum use to make so great a vaunte, that the Pope is only
Peter's Successor, as though thereby he carried the Holy Ghost in his bosom,
and cannot err, this is but a matter of nothing, and a very trifelinge tale.
Gods Grace is promised to a good mind, and to any one that fears him, not
unto Sees and Successio^s. Richesse, says S. Hierome, may make a Bishop to
be of more might, then the rest: but all the Bishops, whosoever they be, are
the Successors of the Apostles. If so be the Place, and Consecration only be
sufficient, why then, Manasses Succeeded David, and Caiphas Succeeded Aaron. And
it has benne often seen, that an Idol has benne placed in the Temple of God.
In old time, Archidamus the Lacedemonian boasted mutche of him self, how he
came of the blood of Hercules. But one Nicostratus, in this wise abated his
pride: Nay, quod he, thou seem not to descend from Hercules. For Hercules
destroyed evil men: and thou make good men evil. And when the Phariseis
bragged of their lineage, how they were of the kindred and blood of Abraham,
Johan. 8.
Ye, says Christ, seek to kill me, a man which have told you the
truth, as I heard it from God. Thus Abraham never did. Ye are of your
Father the Devil, and vvil needs obeie his vvil.

M. Hardinge.
The Pope succedeth Peter in authority and power. For whereas the Sheep of
Christ continewe to the worlds end, he is not wise, that thinks Christ to
have made a shepeherde temporary or for a time, over his perpetual flock.
Then what shepeherdly endoument our Lord gave to the first shepeherde, at the
institution of the shepeherdely office of the Church: that is he understood
to have geeuen ordinarely to every successor. Luke. 22.
To Peter he gave that he obtained by his prayer made to the Father, that his
Faith should not fail. Again, to him he gave grace that to perform, the
performance whereof at him he required, to wit, that he confirmed and
strengthened his brethren: wherefore the grace of steadfastness of Faith, and
of confirminge the waueringe and doubtful in Faith, every Pope obteineth of
the holy Ghost for the benefit of the Church. And so the Pope, although he
may err by personal error, in his own private judgment, as a man, and as
a particular Doctor in his own opinion: Untruth, joined with impudent
flattery, and extreme folly.
yet as he is Pope, the successor of Peter, the Vicar of Christ in earth,
the shepeherde of the universal Church, in public judgment, in
deliberation and definitive sentence Untruth, joined with impudent flattery,
and extreme folly.
he never erreth. Untruth, joined with impudent flattery, and extreme folly.
nor never erred. For when so ever he ordeineth or determines any thing by
his high Bishoply Authority, intendinge to bind Christen men to perform
or believe the same, he is always governed and helped with the grace and favor
of the holy Ghost. This is to Catholic Doctors a very certainty, though to
such doughty Clerks as ye are, it is but a matter of nothing, and a very
triflinge tale.

Gods grace in one respect, is promised both to a good mind, and to one that
fears God, and also in an other respect, to the successors of Peter. S.
Hieromes saieinge to Euagrius, which now you have alleged three or four
times, will not handsomely serve you for so diverse points, as a shipmans hose
for diverse legs. This place of S. Hierome is ansvveared before, Par. 2. ca.
3. Diui. 5.
Once again I tell you, thereby he means nothing else, but that, the greatness
of Rome ought not to give Authority to a wrong private custom, (by which
Deacons, in certain cases were preferred before Priests) against the right
general custom of the world. And bishops be the successors of the
Apostles, we grant, yet is the Pope the successor of Peter, Peter was the
Shepeheard, and the Apostles the Sheep. A vain untruth without ^auoure.
Cyprian s^the, Christus parem dedit Apostolis omnibus potestatem.
who was shepeherde of al Christ's Lambs and sheep, and therefore also Peter
was the Shepeheard, and the Apostles the Sheep. A vain untruth without
^auoure. Cyprian s^the, Christus parem dedit Apostolis omnibus potestatem.
of the Apostles them selves, and so has a higher authority.

As for your example of Archidamus, who boastingly fetched his petigree from
Hercules, you must consider, succession of virtue always follows not
succession of blood. Now we do^ acknowledge in the Pope a succession of
shepeherdly power, even such as was in Peter. The Pope succedeth in power
but notin Holiness.
Which power is not taken away by lack of Peter's holiness. Christ likewise
by his answer to the Phariseis, though he affirmed, they succeeded not Abraham
in love of truth, and that for their malice, they were of their Father the
Devil: yet ^e denied not, but that they came lineally of Abraham, and were of
his blood, though not of his godliness. Such succession mean not we,
speakinge of the Pope, whose succession is derived of Peter: but the succession
of power and authority, and All this may be called the Succession of folly.
of infallibility of Faith in judgment and sentence definitive.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Here we have found one Pope with two Capacities. In one respect he is a
Man: in an other respect he is above a Man: but whether, in that respect, he
be Angel, or Archangel, it is paste in silence. One way he Succedeth Peter: an
other way he Succedeth, I know not, whom. One way he may Err: an other
way, though he would never so feign, he cannot err. In his Bed, at his
Table, on Horseback, or else where, we may well mistruste him: for in these
places he may be deceived, as well, as others. But, in Council, in Consistory,
and in place of Judgment, it is most certain, ye say, he cannot err. For
in these places he has the Holy Ghost, I trow, at his Commandment. His
Power Pastoral, his Succession in Authority, and Infallibility of Faith,
his Place, his Chair, and his Consecration, Sallustius in Ciceronem.
are sufficient for ever to preserve him from Error. To like purpose
Salluste sommetime said of Cicero, Aliud Stans, aliud Sedens, de Republica
sentit: While he Stands up, he has one mind, touching the common State:
When he sits down, Nicola. Cusanus de Authoritate Ecclesi. etc. Dis. 19.
Sic omnes. in Glossa.
he has an other. Apolloes Nonne, while she sat mewed in her Cave, was
inspired, and Prophesied, and gave Oracles: but after that she came abroad,
she was no wiser, then other women. Thus your Doctors say, as it is before
reported, Veritas adhaeret Cathedrae: Papa sanctitatem recipit a Cathedra: The
Popes Truth is fastened unto his Chair: The Pope cannot Err.
The Pope from his Chair receives his Holiness.

It shameth me, M. Hardinge, to see you so vainly occupied about these
vanities. Ye may well be liberal in dealinge hereof. They cost you but little:
they are only your own. Scriptures, Doctoures, or Councels, to witness your
saieinges, ye allege none. For further declaration of this whole matter, I
beseech thee, good Christian Reader, Par. 6. ca. 5. Di. 2.
to consider the short treaty that I have written before, touching the
sundry Erroures, and euidente Heresies, that have benne notably found in
Popes. Alphonsus de Castro, one of M. Hardinges own special Doctors, says:
Alphonsus, De Haeresib. li. 1. ca. 4.
Non dubitamus, an Haereticum esse, and Papam esse, coire in vnum possint, etc.
Non enim credo, aliquem esse adeo Impudentem Papae Assentatorem, vt ei tribuere
hoc velit, vt nec Errare, nec in Interpretatione Sacrarum Literarum hallucinari
possit: We doubt not, whether one man may be a Pope, and an Heretic both
together. For, I believe, there is none so shameless a flatterer of the Pope,
that will say, (as you say, M. Hardinge) The Pope can never Err, nor be
deceived in the Exposition of the Scriptures.

Likewise Erasmus says: Si verum est, quod quidam asseuerant, Romanum
Pontificem Errore Iudiciali Errare non posse, Erasm in Annotationibus, In 1.
Corin. 7.
quid opus est Generalibus Concilijs? quid opus est, in Concilium accersere
Iurisconsultos, ac Theologos eruditos? Si Papa pronuntians labi non potest, cur
datus est Appellationi locus, vel ad Synodum, vel ad eundem rectius edoctum?
Quorsum attinet, tot Academias in tractandis Fidei quaestonibus distorqueri,
cum ex Vno Pontifice, quod verum est, audire liceat? Imo qui fit, vt huius
Pontificis decreta cum illius Pontificis decretis pugnent? If it be true, that
sum men say, that the Bishop of Rome can never Errre in Error of
Judgment, what need we then so many General Councelles? And in the same,
what need we so many Lavviers, and learned Divines? If the Pope cannot Err
in geeuinge sentence, wherefore lies there any Appeal from the Pope, either
to a Council, or else to the Pope him self being better enfourmed? What need
we to trouble so many Universities, in discussinge of Matters of Faith,
whereas we may learn the Truth of the Pope alone? Naie, how comes it
about, that one Popes Decrees are found contrary to an others: if it be so
certain, that the Pope, who so ever he be and what so ever he say, can never
Err?

That ye speak of Peter's Succession, is vain, and childishe. Of such folly
Athanasius says: Athana. In Apologia Secunda. Hieronymus ad Euagrium.
Persuasus est, in Magnitudine Vrbium Religionem esse sitam: This wise man
imagines, that Religion stands in the Greatenesse of Cities. S. Hierome
says: Potentia Diuitiarum, and Paupertatis Humilitas vel Sublimiorem, vel
Inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt:
The Wealth of Richesse, and the Baseness of Poverty makes a Bishop neither
Higher, nor Lower. But al Bishops be the Apostles Successors.

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division. 1.
Yet notwithstanding, because we will grant sum what to Succession, tell
us, has the Pope alone Succeeded Peter? And wherein, I pray you, in what
Religion, in what Office, in what piece of his life has he Succeeded him? What
one thing (tell me) had Peter ever like unto the Pope, or the Pope like unto
Peter? Except peradventure they will say thus, That Peter, when he was at Rome,
never taught the Gospel, never Fed the Flock, took away the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, hid the Treasures of his Lord, sat him down only in his
Castle of S. John Laterane, and pointed out with his finger all the places of
Purgatory, and kinds of pounishementes, committinge sum poor Souls to be
tormented, and other sum again suddenly releasing thence at his own
pleasure, taking money for so doing: or, that he gave order to say private
Masses in every corner: or that he mumbled up the Holy Service with a low
voice, and in an unknown language: or, that he hanged up the Sacrament in
every Temple, and on every Altar, and carried the same about before him,
whither soever he went, upon an amblinge Iannet, with lights, and belles: or,
that he Consecrated with his Holy Breath, Oil, Wax, VVulle, Belles,
Chalices, Churches, and Aultars: or that he sold Jubilees, Graces, Liberties,
Aduousons, Preuentions, First fruits, Palles, the vvearinge of Palles,
Bulls, Indulgences, and Pardons: or that he called him self by the name of
the Head of the Church, the Highest Bishop, Bishop of Bishops, alone most
Holy: or, that by usurpation he took upon him self the Right and Authority
over other Bishops Churches: or that he Exempted him self from the Power of
any Civil gouernemente: or that he maintained Wars, and set Princes together
at variance: or that he sittinge in his Chair, with his triple Crown full of
labelles, with sumptuous and Persianlike gorgiousnesse, with his Roial Scepter,
with his Diadem of gould, and glitteringe with stones, was carried about, not
upon palfraie, but upon the shoulders of Noble Men. These things, no doubt,
did Peter at Rome in times paste, and leafte them in charge to his Successors,
as you would say, from hand to hand: for these things be now a days done
at Rome by the Popes, and be so done, as though nothing else ought to be done.

M. Hardinge.
The Pope alone has succeeded S. Peter. Ask you wherein? in what Religion? in
what office? We tell you, he succeeded in Peter's Chair, in which he sat at
Rome, and ruled the Church, in Christian Religion, Untruth. For the Pope
feeds not.
in that office which Christ committed to Peter, when he said, Pasce oues
meas, Feed my Sheep. Then which office he never gave greater, nor with like
circumstance of charge, nor to any other gave he it, then to Peter. For to him
alone, he said, Feed my Sheep. What ask ye us of this officers life?

You ask what thing had Peter ever like unto the Pope, or the Pope like unto
Peter. We tell you. Peter had authority to fide Christ's sheep, like unto the
Pope. And the Pope has authority to feed Christ's Sheep, like unto Peter, And
well proved.
Like power, like commission. He that gave them authority to feed, gave them
also authority to do what so ever may perteine to feding.

The B. of Sarisburie.
For that ye tell us so many fair tales of Peter's Succession, we demand
of you, wherein the Pope succedeth Peter? You answer, He succedeth him in his
Chair: as if Peter had benne sommetime enstalled in Rome, and had sat
solemnly al day with his Triple Crown, in his Pontificalibus, and in a
Chair of goulde. And thus, having lost both Religion, and Doctrine, ye
think it sufficient, at least to hold by the Chair: Peter's successoure.
as if a Soldier, that had lost his sword, would play the man with ^he
scaberde. But so Caiphas succeeded Aaron: So wicked Manasses succeeded David: So
may Antichriste easily sit in Peter's Chair.

Chrysostom says: Non Cathedra facit Sacerdotem: sed Sacerdos Cathedram. Nec
Locus Sanctificat Hominem: Dis. 40. Multi.
sed Homo Locum: It is not the Chair, that makes the Bishop: But it is the
Bishop, that makes the Chair. Neither is it the Place, that halloweth the
Man: But it is the Man, that halloweth the Place. Likewise S. Hierome says:
Dis. 40. Non est facile.
Non Sanctorum Filij sunt, qui tenet loca Sanctorum: Theiare not always the
Children of Holy men, that sit in the roum^^^^ Holy men.

He doothe great wrong unto S. Peter, that places such a one in such a
Chair. For neither is the Pope in any thing like S. Peter: nor was S. Peter
in any thing like the Pope. When Simeones saw that Arsacius, an unlearned,
and an unworthy Old Doatinge man, Nicepho. li. 13. cap. 28.
was placed in Chrysostomes room, he cried out, pro pudor: Quis, cui? Out for
shame: what a soary hind is this? and in whose place have we set him? Even
so may we justly say of the Popes sittinge in Peter's Chair, pro pudor,
Quis, Cui?

The Apology, Cap. 21. Division. 2.
Or contrariwise, peradventure they had rather say thus, that the Pope doothe
now all the same things, which we know, Peter did many a day ago: that
is, that he renneth up and down into every Country, to Preach the Gospel,
not only openly abroad, but also privately from house to house: that he is
diligente, and applies that business, in season, and out of season, in due
time, and out of due time: that he doothe the part of an Euangeliste, that he
fulfilleth the work, and Ministry of Christ, that he is the watcheman of
the House of Israel, receives answeares, and words at Gods mouth: and, even
as he receives them, so he delivers them over to the people: That he is the
Salt of the Earth: That he is the Light of the world: that he doothe not
Feed him self, but his Flock: that he doothe not entangle him self with
the worldly cares of this life: that he does not use a Sou^raintie over the
Lords people: that he seeks not to have other men Minister unto him, but
him self rather Ministers unto others: that he takes al Bishops as his
Fellows, and Equalles: that he is Subject to Princes, as to persons sent
from God: that he geeueth to caesar that, which is cesars: and that he, as the
Old Bishops of Rome did without contradiction, calls the Emperor his
Lord. Unless therefore the Popes do the like now a days, as Peter did the
things aforesaid, there is no cause at al, why they should glory so mutche
of Peter's name, and of his Succession.

M. Hardinge.
The Pope now runs not up and down into every country, he goes not
openly and privately, from house to house, and to every alehouse, as ye would
him to do, like one of your ministers: Neither, I trow, ye masters, that be
Superintendentes your selves, think it convenient, that ye go from house to
house, to preach your Gospel at these dates. And would ye the Pope to abase
him self to that ye think becomes not your selves? He has (as meet it
is) other fit men to help to bear his burthea with him. And whereas one
body suffiseth not for so great and so many affairs: for Counsel, he has many
heads: for oversight, many eyes: for ear, many hearts: for preachinge, many
tounges: for work, many hands: for knowledge, many ears: for expedition of
matters, many feet: for the great weight of his charge, many shoulders:
briefly, for all necessary and behoofeful cases, convenient helps. The like
helps would S. Peter use, were he now living.

The B. of Sarisburie.
To speak of the Popes renninge up, and down, from alehouse to alehouse, it
is great folly. It should be sufficient, if he would go from Church to
Church, and remember his Charge, and Feed the Flock, and Preach the Gospel.
Ye say, The Pope has many heads, many eyes, many hearts, many tongues, many
hands, many ears. many shoulders: And thus, of your Pope ye make a Monster,
with many eyes, ears, tongues, and hearts of others, and none of his own. A
wise man sommetime said: Improbe facit, Titus Liuius.
qui, cum alienis oculis omnia ei agenda sint, postulet aliorum vitas committi
sibi: It is but lewdely done, if a man, that must ouersee al things with
other men's eyes, desiere to have the lives of others committed over to his
charge.

God geeue him eyes to see, and ears to hear, and heart to understand: that
he may know the time of Gods Visitation.

The Apology, Cap. 22. Division. 1.
Mutche less cause have they, to complain of our departinge, and to call us
again to be fellows and friends with them, and to believe as they believe. Men
say, that one Cobilon a Lacedemonian, when he was sent Embassadoure to the
King of the Persians, to treat of a league, and sound by chance them of the
Court plaieing at dice, he returned straight way home again, leauinge his
message undone. And when he was asked, why he had slackte to do the
things, which he had received by public Commission to do, he made answer,
he thought it should be a great reproach to his Common Wealth, to make a
league with Dicers. But, if we should content our selves to return to the
Pope, and to his Errors, and to make a covenant, not only with Dicers, but
also with men far more vngraceous, and wicked, then any Dicers be: bisides
that, this should be a great blotte to our good name, it should also be a very
dangerous matter, both to kendle Gods wrath against us, and to clogge and
condemn our own Souls for ever.

M. Hardinge.
Ye do well to compare your selves with this Cobilon. For in deed We flee
wicked Company, as he did.
ye do as he did. Ye were sent Untruth. For where did Christ ever send us
to the B. of Rome?
by Christ to his Vicare, Peter's Successor, to be fed and governed like
sheep under the shepeherde Christ and his Church be a perfect body, he the
head, the true beleuers knitte together in charity the members* each one in
his order and degree. He is the vine, we the boughs and branches. By this
Rule the Pope is leaft void of life: for that he is divided from Christ, that
is the head.
What member cut of from the body, lives? what boughe broken from the
tree, grows? As every such member dies, and bough withers: So if ye
remain not in the Catholic Church, which is the body of Christ, ye draw
no life from the head, ye have no part of the Spirit, that from thence
redoundeth to every member, ye have no portion of the vital iouysse that
issues from the root. Then what remains, but that ye be cast into the
fire? For this cause S. Cyprian and other Fathers, often times have said, that
out and besides the Church, there is no salvation.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Christ never told us, neither of any his Vicare General: nor of Rome: nor of
Laterane: nor of Peter's Chair: nor willed us to have recourse to the Bishop of
Rome, more then to any other several Bishop. Therefore, M. Harding, we must
reckon this amongst the rest of your Untruths.

It is true, that you say, A member divided from the Body cannot live. But
your Conclusion is Untrue, like the rest. For, Rome is not the Body, but only
a Member of the Body: Rome is not the Tree, but only a Boughe: Rome is not the
Head, but only a Spring. And therefore, seeinge, it is now divided from
that Body: seeinge, it is broken from that Tree: seeing, it is cut of from that
Head, it is no marvel, though it be sterued, though it be wethered,
though it be leafte dry, without either Sprite, or life: As this day it
appears to the eyes of al them, that will behold it.

The Apology, Cap. 22. Division. 2.
For of very truth, we have departed from him, whom we saw, had blinded the
whole world this many a hundred year: From him, who too far presumpteously
was woonte to say, he could not err, and, what so ever he did, no mortal man
had power to condemn him, neither Kings, nor Emperoures, nor the whole
Clergy, nor yet all the people in the world together, no, though he should
carry away with him a thousand Souls into Hell: From him, who took upon him
power to command, not only men, but even the Angels of God, to go, to
return, to lead Souls into Purgatory, and to bring them back again, when
he list him self: who, Gregory says, without al doubt, is the very
forerenner, and standerd bearer of Antichriste, and has utterly forsaken the
Catholic Faith: From whom also these ringleaders of ours, who now with might,
and maine resist the Gospel, and the truth, which they know to be the
truth, have ere this departed every one of their own accord, and good will:
and would even now also gladly depart from him again, if the note of
inconstancy, and shame, and their own estimation among the people, were not a
let unto them. In conclusion, we have departed from him, to whom we were not
bound, and who had nothing to lay for him self, but only, I know not
what, virtue, or power of the place, where he dwells, and a continuance of
Succession.

M. Hardinge.
As ye confess your departinge, so would God ye understood your gylte.

Those reverent Fathers, and Godly learned men, whose romes ye hold
wrongfully, whom it liked your interpreter to call Ringleaders, resist not the
Gospel, but suffer persecution for the Gospel. Your Gospel, that is to say,
your vile heresies and blaspemies, worthily they detes^e. Your new troth,
that is to say, your false and wicked lies, they abhor. Neither ever
departed they from any part of the duty of Catholic men, M. Hardinges
Reverend Fathers continued twenty years together in Hypocrifie.
by their own accord and good will, as ye say. M. Hardinges Reverend Fathers
continued twenty years together in Hypocrifie.
But wherein they slepte aside, they were compelled by such fear, as might
happen to a right constant man, I mean the terror of death, which, as
Aristotle says, of al terrible things is most terrible. Now because yet
they find the terroure of a gilty conscience, more terrible then death of
their persons, they entende by Gods grace assisting them, never so to step
aside again, but rather to suffer what so ever extremities. Whose blood, or
the blood of any of them, if God to his honor shall at any time permit mitte
you to draw, Persequution.
which so mutche ye thirst, sone after look ye for the retourninge of the
Israelites again, that text being then fulfilled, Complerae sunt iniquitates
Amorrhaeorum.

Were not they well assured of the truth, most certain it is, what so ever
ye say, they would not make so foolish a bargain as your selves do, as to
buy vain estimation among the people, with the certain loss of their souls.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Certain of your friends, whom ye call Reverend Fathers, suffer
imprisonement, ye say, and persequution for the Gospel. Notwithstanding, it
is not so long sithence the said Reverend Fathers, were them selves the
Burners, and Persequutours of the Gospel. Epiphanius. (...).
Such complainte sommetime made Arius the wicked Heretic. For thus he
writes, I Arius, that suffer persequution for the Truth, that ever
prevails. Ruffinus, notwithstanding he were a great favorer of the
Origenian Heretics, yet he said, even as you say, Nostra Fides,
persequutionis Haereticorum tempore, cum in Sancta Alexandrina Ecclesia
degeremus, in carceribus, and Exilijs, Hieronym. Aduersus Ruffinum lib. 2.
Hiero. eode^ loco.
quae pro fide inferebantur, probata est: While we lived in the Holy Church
of Alexandria, in the time of the persequution of Heretics, Our Faith was
proved in prisones, and Banishementes, which were laid upon us for the
Faithes sake. Unto whom S. Hierome in his pleasante manner answeareth thus:
Miror qu'd non adiecerit, Vinctus Jesus Christi: Liberatus sum de ore Leonis:
Alexandriae ad bestias depugnaui: Cursum Consummaui: Fidem seruaui: Superest
mihi corona Iustitiae: I marvel mutche, that he said not further. Ruffinus
the Prisoner of Jesus Christ: I was delivered out of the Lions mouth: I was
thrown amongeste wild beasts at Alexandria: I have paste my Course: I have
keapte the Faith: Now there remainethe for me the Crown of Righteousness.

Thus the Woulfe, when he is restreined from spoil and raven, may likewise
complain of Persequution.

S. Hieronym. Ad Apronium.
Hierome, writing unto Apronius of the state of the East Churches, where he
then lived, says thus: Hic quieta sunt omnia. Etsi enim venena pectoris non
amiserint, tamen os impietatis non audent aperire. Sed sunt sicut aspides
surdae, obturantes aures suas: Al things here are quiet. For, al be it they
have not leafte the poison of their bartes, yet they dare not open their
wicked mouths. But they are as the deaf Serpents, shuttinge up their ears,
and will hear nothing.

The said Reverend Fathers, that, as now, sit so firmly of your side, not
long ago, were well contented, both to mainetaine, and to publisshe the
contrary, as well, as you. How be it, all this, you say, they did not of good
will, but only of fear, and of such fear, as may happen upon a constant
man: that is to say, of mere Hypocrisy, and Dissimulation, and by open
flatteringe of their Prince.

And thus, to save your Fathers from being Schismatiques, ye are well content
to make them Hypocrites. Stephan Gardi. De vera Obedie^.
Thus say you. But your said Reuerendes them selves would have told you
far otherwise.

Doctor Gardener of him self says thus: He examineth the matter with al his
senses.
In the discussing, and trial of the truth, I did not so easily content me
self. But I so framed me self, that, as it had benne in askinge the
judgment of al my senses, unless I perceived, that I first of al heard
them with mine ears, smelled them with my nose, savve them with mine eyes,
He is persuaded by the vvoorkinge of Gods grace.
and felt them with my hands, I thought, I had not seen yenough. Again he
says: This advised consideration has pulled away al scrupulous doubts:
And by the vvoorkinge of Gods Grace, He is compelled by the power of the
Truth.
has conueighed and brought them into the light of the verity.

And again, In deed to tell you at a word, that compelled me, that
compels al men, even the mighty power of the Truth.

Likewise says Doctor Bonner, Truth prevails.
touching the same: Doctor Bonner, In praefatione in Veram Obedientiam.
The matter was not rashely taken in hand: but with Judgment, and wisdom
examined, and discussed. Again he says, The Bishop of Winchester had long
ago thorovvely bulted this matter, even unto the branne.

If these tales be true, He examineth the matter to the vttermoste.
M. Hardinge, then is your tale most untrue. Certainly, being directly
contrary, to make them both true, it is not possible.

But here ye begin to fraie us with your Prophetical threats. If we once
begin to touch your Blood, then, ye say, your Louanian Israel
immediately afterward shall be restoared: I think, you mean, Domus Jacob de
populo Barbaro.

In such blind Prognostications, I have no skill. God oftentimes suffers
iniquity, and falshedde to prevail for a season, to chasten the unkindness
of his people. Let his will be done with mercy, as it shall seem good in his
eyes. But if ye prevail again, ye shall prevail to your own confusion. Well
ye may repress the Truth of God, as your Fathers have often done before:
But utterly to abolishe it, ye shall never be hable.

Such vain hope had the Jews in old times, to recover their Religion,
and Ceremonies, and utterly to overthrow the Ghospel of Christ. They
conspired together, got Masons, and Carpenters, and began to cast the
fundatio^, to repair their Temple. Chrysostom. In Oration. contra Iudaeos.
Immediately the Emperor Constantine raised a power, and set upon them, and
put them to the sword, as Rebels, and Traitors. Others, that he spared
alive, he made slaves, and cut of sum their tongues, sum their hands,
sum their cares, sum their noses: sum he burnte in the face: and so
sent them abroad, for an example, from Town to Town throughout the World.

Afterward, Ambrosius, li. 5. Epist. 29.
when the wicked Emperor Julian, in despite of Christ, had given the Jews
leave to build, and repair, as is said before, and, the Princes power
assistinge them, no power seemed hable to withstand their purpose, then God
him self from Heaven above encou^tred with them. Earthequakes brake out, and
ouerthrewe their buildinges. Lightninges fell down, and burnte both the
tools in their hands, and the coats on their backs. Then was the Gospel
of Christ more bewtieful, and more glorious, then ever it had benne before.

S. Gregory says, Gregor. In primum Regum. cap. 4. li 3. ca. 5.
Tulerunt Dagon, and restituerunt eum in locum suum. Hoc est, in Templo, vbi
Arca Dei posita fuerat. Quid est ergo Dagon in locum suum restituere, nisi
Idololatriae statu^ subtili co^sideratione perquirere? Et quia, quo subtilius
Idololatriae error aspicitur, eo verius condemnatur, subiunctu^ est, Rursus
diluculo surgentes inuenerunt Dagon iacentem super faciem coram Arca Domini:
They took the Idol Dagon, and restoared him again into his place: that is to
say, in the Temple of God, where the Ark of God was placed before. And what
is it, to restoare again Dagon into his place, but discretely, and advisedly
to examine the state of Idolatry? And, for as mutche as, the better the
Error of Idolatry is seen, the better it is condemned, therefore it
follows further, They risinge in the morninge, found Dagon lieinge flat upon
his face, before the Ark of the Lord.

Even so, M. Hardinge, if ye raise up your Dagon once again, once again he
shall comme to ground, and shall squatte his hands, and feet, and be utterly
dismembered by the fall, and shall lie grouelinge, as a block, before the
presence of the Ark of God. Prouer. 21.
There is no Counsel against the Lord.

The Noble Prince Joshua, after that he had once, by Gods commandment,
destroyed the City of Jericho, Joshua. 6.
adjured al his posterity in this sort: Accursed be he before Iehoua the
Lord, that shall stand up, and restoare this City of Hiericho. In the death
of his eldest son he shall lay the fundation: and in the death of his
yongeste child he shall close the gates.

Theodoretus says, Persequution.
The wicked shall not be hable to prevail against God. Theodoret. Eccle.
histor. fol. 285. in Graeco. (...)
But if they once geate the over hand, yet shall they comme down again: as it
is written by the Prophet Esai.

As for draweing of your blood, ye need not so greatly to complain. The
Gospel of Christ is not bloody. It has hitherto prevailed without any one
drop of al your blood. God give you grace, to repent, left your own blood
be upon your own head in the day of the Lord. Fire, and sword, and
merciless Cruelty are the only instruments of your Doctrine. And therefore
ye seem now to say, Genesis 27.
in your blind hope, as cursed Esau sommetime said of his Brother Jacob.
Venient dies luctus patris mei, and occidam Iacobum Fratrem meum: The days
shall comme, that my Father shall die. Then will I kille my Brother Jacob.

Athanasius says, Athanasius, Ad Solitariam vita^ agentes.
Caedi Christianorum proprium est: Caedere autem Christianos, Pilati, and
Caiphae, officia sunt: It is the part of Christians, to suffer persecution:
But to persecute the Christians, it is the very office of Pilate, and Caiphas.

We will say unto you with S. Augustine: Augustine. Co^tra Epistola^
Fundamenti. cap. 1.
Illi in vos saeuiant, qui nesciunt, quo cum labor verum inueniatur, and quam
difficile caueantur errores: Let them persecute you, and use cruelty over you,
that know not, what a labor it is, to find the truth: and how hard it
is, to beware of error.

Again he says: Nemo de praeteritis insultat Erroribus, nisi qui Diuinam
Misericordiam expertus non est, vt careret erroribus. Tantum id agamus, vt
errores aliquando finiantur: No man vpbraideth others with erroures paste, but
he, that has not felt Gods Divine Mercy, to be void of erroures. Let
this be our only labor, that erroures at last may have an end.

We will say of you, as S. Peter sommetime said of Simon the Sorcerer, when
the people for anger, seeinge his falsehedde, would have stoned him to death,
Abdias in Tetro
Imo viuat, and Regnum Christi crescere videat, vel inuitus: Naie, naie, let
him live: and let him see the kingdom of Christ to grow, and prosper, even
against his will.

The Apology, Cap. 23. Division. 1.
And as for us, we of al others most justly have leafte him. For our Kings,
yea even they, which with greatest Reverence did follow, and obeie the
Authority, and Faith of the Bishops of Rome, have long since found, and
felt well yenough the yoke, and Tyranny of the Popes kingdom. For the Bishops
of Rome sometime took the Crown from the Head of our King, Henry the
Second, and compelled him to put aside al his Princely state, and Majesty,
and, like a mere Private man, to come unto their Legate with great
summission, and humility, so as al his Subjects might laugh him to scorn.
More then this, they caused Bishops, and Monks, and sum part of the
Nobility, to be in the field against our King John, and set all the people
at liberty from their oaths, whereby they ought allegiance to their King: and
at last, wickedly, and most abominably they bereeued the same King, not
only of his Kingedome, but also of his life. Bisides this, they
Excommunicated, and cursed King Henry the Eighte, that most famous Prince,
and stirred up against him, sommetime the Emperor, sommetime the French
King: and as mutche as in them was, put our Realm in hazard to have benne a
very pray, and spoil unto the Enemy. Yet were they but fools, and mad
men, to think, that either so mighty a Prince could be feared with bugges,
and rattles: or else, that so Noble, and great a Kingdom might so easily, even
at one morsel, be devoured, and swalowed up.

M. Hardinge.
Concerning the case between these three Kings of England, and the Bishops
of Rome for the time being, I say little. If they did well, and the Bishops
evil, they have their reward: the other, their punishemente. ^f otherwise, or
how so ever each one at Gods judgment shall have his deserved measure. But be
it granted, al were true, ye say, though we know the more part to be false.
What though King Henry the second were evil treated of Pope Alexander, about
the murdering of S. Thomas the Archbishop of Cantorbury, and King John
likewise of that zealous and learned Pope Innocentius the third? etc.

The B. of Sarisburie.
Notwithstanding the Pope, as his manner has benne, raise Commotion within
the Realm, and arm the subjects against their Sovereign, and pulle the
Crown Emperial from his head, yet, by your Doctrine, who so ever dare speak
in his Princes right, is a fool, and kills him self: as if there were no
life, or salvation, but only under the frantike government of the Pope.
Such obedience, and loialtie the Pope has taught you toward your Prince.

The Apology, Cap. 23. Division. 2.
And yet, as though all this were too little, they would needs have made all the
Realm Tributarie to them, and exacted thence yearly most unjust and
wrongeful taxes. So dear cost us the frendeship of the City of Rome.
Wherefore, if they have gotten these things of us by extortion, through their
fraud, and subtle sleightes, we see no reason, why we may not pluck away
the same from them again, by lawful ways, and just means. And, if our
Kings in that darkness, and blindness of the former times, gave them these
things of their own accord, and liberality, for Religions sake, being
moved with a certain opinion of their fained holiness: now, when the
ignorance and error is spied out, may the Kings their Successors take
them away again, saying they have the same Authority, the Kings their
Ancestors had before. For the gift is void, except it be allowed by the
will of the geeuer: and that cannot seem a perfect will, which is dimmed, and
hindered by error.

M. Hardinge.
As for Peterpens, and what other so ever sums of money were yearly paid to
the Church of Rome, which were not by extorcion suttil sleightes by the Popes
gotten, as ye slander, but freely and discretely by the prince and the realm
No doubt. For the very cause hereof was Avarice, and treachery.
for a great cause granted, it is not a thing that so mutche grieueth the
Pope, as your departure from the true faith and Church does, as it may well
appear by that which happened in Queen Mary's reign. In which time although
the Pope were acknowledged* yet him self never was known to have demanded
his Peterpens, or any other yearly paimentes again. But what is this to your
schisms and Heresies? This healpethe you nothing for answer to the heinous
crime of your Apostasy. The liberality of our country to the sea of Rome,
which is the mother of all the VVeaste Churches, The Popes Exactions.
has been so small in comparison of certain other Realms, as with the honor
of the Realm it might not seem to find it self grieved therewith. Yet here ye
set a gnatte to an Elephante, and make great adoo about a little. The Realm
is not so mutche enriched by retaininge that small sum from the Pope, as it is
dishonored by your indiscreet talk, saueringe altogether of misery and
niggardnes. Ye should have showed better stuff at least in the end of your
book. The last act of a fable, by rules of Poeterie should be best. Ye
have done like a foolish Poet, making your end so badde. The Pope seeks
not your money, he seeks you He seeks the safety of your souls. But
remember the Old Verse, Curia Romana non captat Oue^ sine lana.
He seeks, like a good shepherde, how to reduce the streied sheep of
England unto the fold of Christ's Church, God grant we may see his good
intent happily acheued.

The B. of Sarisburie.
The Pope has enriched him self, and gotten the treasures of the world into
his own hands, not by fraud, or guile, as you say, but only by the free
liberality of Kings, August. De Verbis Domini Secundum Matthew. Sermo. 19.
and Princes. Yet S. Augustine says, Non possumus dicere, Nemo nos inuasores
arguit: viole^tiae nullus accusat: Quasi non maiorem interdum praedam a
viduabus blandimenta cliciant, quam tormenta. Nec interest apud Deum, vtrum vi,
an circumuentione quis res alienas occupet: dummodo quoquo pacto teneat
alienum: We cannot say, No man charge us with extorsion: noman accuses us
of violence. For oftentimes of poor widows a man may geate more by
flattery, then by rackinge. And there is no difference before God, whether a
man hold an other man's goods by open violence, or by guile: if the thing,
that he holds, be not his own.

But how may this by your learning, M. Hardinge, be called the liberality of
the Prince? He is liberal, that is free in bestowing of his own. But you tell
us, that all the Temporal goods of the world are the Popes, and not the
Princes: and that the Prince has nothing, but by favor and sufferance of
the Pope. Your Doctors words be these, Archidiacon De Haeresi. Ver. Et quia
tanta Fo. 15 Matthae. 4. Citatur a Felino* de Offic. and potest. iudicis
delega. Ex part. 1. Johan* De Parisijs, de potestat. Regia, and Papali.
Papa est Dominus omnium temporalium: secundum illud dictum Petri, Dabo tibi
omnia regna mundi: The Pope is the Lord of al temporal goods: according to
that saieinge of S. Peter (that S. Peter never spoke: for they are the words
of the Devil) I will give thee all the Kingdoms of the world.

An other of your Doctors says thus, Dicunt, quod solus Papa est verus
Dominus temporalium, ita quod potest auferre ab alio, quod alias suum est. Sed
praelati caeteri, and Principes, non sunt Domini, sed Tutores, Procuratores and
Dispensatores: They say, that the Pope only is the very Lord of Temporal
things so that he may take from any man, that is his own. As for other
Prelates, and Princes, they be the overseers, and fermours, and stewardes of
wordly things, but not the Lords. And Matthias Parisiensis says, that Pope
Innocentius 3 called King John the King of England, Vasallum suum, That is to
say, his feed man, or his Tenante: meaning thereby, that the Realm of
England was the Popes, and not the Kings. If all this be true, how can the
Kings of England, in granting any thing to the Pope, be counted liberal?
Matthias Parisien. in Iohanne.
Verily it is an easy kind of liberality for a man to give that thing, that is
not his own.

But the Pope, ye say, sets no more by all his revenues out of England,
then an Elephante by a gnat: and that therefore, during the whole time of
Queen Marie, he never demanded of us any manner of yearly paimente. We must
bear with your error herein, M. Hardinge, for that ye never were the Popes
Collectoure, and therefore not mutche acquainted with his Books. Otherwise ye
might have remembered, that Cardinal Poole, being not the Pope, but only a
Legate, or messenger from the Pope, had a thousand pounds paid him yearly
of one Bishoprike in England, toward the provision of his kitchen. Ye might
have remembered, that all the Bishops of England, paid the Pope the whole
first fruits of al their liuinges: which by any common estimation, amounted
to more sommewhat, then a Gnatte. And although I were never, neither skilful,
nor curious in the Popes Collections, yet, as well for the discovery of so
great untruth, as also for the better satisfaction of the Reader, I have
thought it good, briefly, and by the way to touch, what may be found in
old Records of good credit, touching the same.

First therefore the Archbishop of Canturburie paid unto the Pope for his
Annates, or First fruits, at every vacation, ten thousand Florenes:
bisides other five thousand Florenes for the use, and right of his Palle.

The Archbishop of York paid likewise for his First fruits ten thousand
Florenes, and, as it is thought, other five thousand Florenes for his Palle.

The Bishop of Elie paid for his First Fruits seven thousand Florenes.

The Bishop of London paid for his First Fruits three thousand Florenes.

The Bishop of Wincester paid for his First Fruits xij. thousand Florenes.

The Bishop of Exceter paid for his First Fruits six thousand Florenes.

The Bishop of Lincoln paid for his First Fruits five thousand Florenes.

The Bishop of Lichefielde, and Couentrie paid for his First Fruits three
thousand Florenes.

The Bishop of Herforde paid for his First Fruits one thousand, and eight
hundred Florenes.

The Bishop of Sarisburie paid for his First Fruits four thousand, and five
hundred Florenes. And so the reaste, each man accordingly after his rate.

Here is to be noted, that a Florene is an Italian Crown, of the valewe of
four shillinges and six pense sterlinge.

Thus mutche I have noted only for example. By these few the discreet Reader
may easily gheasse the Exactions, and paimentes of the other Bishops.

The whole value of the Popes First Fruits throughout Europe, Legatio Adriant
Papae. 6. Excusae VVittenbergae, An. 1538.
as I find in one Record (although very imperfect, for that it lacks
sundry great, known, and notable Bishoprikes, as Durham, Carlisle, Worcester,
Norvviche, Bathe, Chichester, which, with many other more Archebishoprikes, and
Bishoprikes, as well within the Dominions of our Kings of England, as also in
sundry other Christian Kingedomes, and Countries, are leafte vnreckened)
arises to the Sum of two thousand thousand, four hundred three scoare
thousand, eight hundred fouretie and three Florenes.

Notwithstanding ye make your Pope as big, as an Elephante, yet, M. H.
these reckeninges are over huge, in any reasonable proportion, to be resembled
to a gnatte. Here I leave out the yearly perquisites, that ye Pope made of his
Elections, Preuentions, Dispensations, Pluralities, Trialities, Torquottes,
Tolerations: for his Bulls, his S^ales, his Signatures: for Eatinge Fleash,
for Eggs, for White Meat, for Priests Concubines, and for other like
merchandise. I know not what. The sum whereof not withstandinge amounts to
more then niene hundred thousand Florenes. As for your Smoke farthinges, and
Peter pense, I make no reckeninge: by the vile, and contemptuous report
whereof, ye show your self, not only ignorante, and unskillful, in that ye
write, which argues sum folly, but also injurious unto your Country. Read
Matthias Parisiensis, and ye shall find, both by what tyranny, and
treachery, and also what masses, and intolerable sums of money the Popes
Ministers have carried out of this Realm.

The Pope, Anno. 1215.
says he, being diseased with a Spiritual dropsy, that is to say, with an
unquenchable thirst of money, shook out all the Priests purses, and spoiled
the Abbeys of al their Treasures.

Again, Anno. 1246.
The Pope made a Decree in Rome, that the goods, and moneys of al Bishops,
and Priests decessed within England, should be taken to his use.

The Pope gave strait commandment to the Bishops of England, Eodem Anno.
that al Persons, and Vicares being resident upon their Benefices, should
pay yearly unto him the third part of all the valewes of their said
benefices: And, that al Parsonnes, and Vicares, being not residente, should
pay unto him yearly the one fusse half part of their benefices. Al these
paiementes to continewe, duringe the space of three whole years. Which
amounts at the least to the sum of a hundred and three scoare and x.
thousand pounds.

The Bishops of England, Anno. 1247.
after great, and forceable entreaty, agreed together to give the Pope a
Contribution of eleven thousand Marks.

At that time the poor Prior of Wincester was forced to pay yearly three
hundred, Anno eodem.
threescoare and five Marks toward the furniture of the Popes Table.

The Pope made a strait Decree, Eodem anno.
that al Bishops Elect should immediately travail out of England to Rome,
to attend upon his Holiness, as Matthias says, Vt Romanorum loculos
impregnaret, in ruinam Regni Angliae: To stuff the Romans purses, and to
decaie the Kingedome of England.

The Pope had the Tenthes of all the Spiritual Liuinges in England, Matthaeus
VVestmonasteriensis: Anno 1301. Anno. 1255.
duringe the space of ten whole years.

Rustandus the Popes Legate exacted intolerable great paimentes of the Cleregie
of England in a Synod holden in London, as Matthias says, Per scripta Papae
plena iniurijs, and iniquitate, quae possent patientissimum cor virulenter
sauciare: All this he did by the Authorite of the Popes Letters, full of injury,
and iniquity: Which were hable most cruelly to wound any heart, were it
never so patiente. The Bishops of London, and Worcester answered the Popes
Legate, that they would rather lose their lives, then they would geeue their
consent to so open injury, and servitude, and intolerable oppression of the
Church.

The King had entered into an Obligation to pay unto the Pope two hundred
thousand Marks, bisides other fifty thousand pound sterlinge, For paiement
whereof, the Bishop of Herforde, being then the Popes Agente, had bound the
Bishops of England, before they were ware. Such like pretty gnattes your
Pope can strain, if Kings and Princes will give him leave.

Ioh innes Sarisburiensis, Johan. Sarisburien. Li. 6. Ca. 24.
otherwise called Rupertus Carnotensis, in the familiare talk, that he had
with Pope Adriane. 4. said thus unto him: Ipse Romanus Pontifex omnibus fere
est intolerabils: Lae^atur spolijs Ecclesiarum: quaestum omnem reputat
pietatem: Prouinciarum diripit spolia, acsi Thesauros Croesi studeat reparare:
The Pope is now becomme intolerable almost to all the world: He reioiseth in
ye spoil of Churches: Al manner of gain he counts Holiness: He makes
such havoc of Kingedomes, and Provinces, Lib. 5. Cap. 16. Acsi mittaturab
Inferis Tesiphone, vel Megera. Anno. 1247. Anno. 1257.
as if he had intended to repair again croesus Treasury. Again, His Legates
so rage, and rampe for money, as if ye Infernal Furies were sent from Hell to
go at liberty. What shall we need many words? Ambition, and Avarice have no
bottom. Matthias Parisiensis says, In Romana Curia omnia possunt pecuniae:
Money may do al things in y^ Court of Rome. And he calls these insatiable
prollinges of the Pope, Quotidianas Extorsiones, Daily Extorsions. Again he
says, that the King of England, upon a very frivolous, and fond matter, made
true paiemente unto Pope Alexander the fourth, Quod est horribile cogitatu. D.
Bonner. in praefatione in Libe^l Stephani Gardineri de Vera Obedien. Anno. 1240.
of niene hundred, and fifty thousand Marks. Which thing, he says, is
horrible, and abominable to be thought of. To be short, that ye may the
better view y^ bigness, and quantity of your Gnatte, Doctoure Boner hereof
writes thus: The Popes pray in England was so great, that it came to as
mutche almost, as the Revenues of the Crown.

Therefore Matthias says, Imperator reprehendit Regem Angliae, quod
permitteret terram suam tam impudenter per Papam depauperari: The Emperor
frendely reproved Henry the 3. King of England, for that he suffered the
Kingdom so impudently to be compouerisshed by the Pope.

Again he says, King Henry the third made open co^plainte by this
Ambassador in the Council of Lions in France, of the Popes innumerable
Exactions.

Likewise he says before, Anno. 1215.
Rex Henricus 3. repressit impetum Legati. propter violentiam Denariorum: The
King stayed the attemptes of the Popes Legate touching his intolerable
greediness in prollinge for money.

Ye see therefore, M. Harding, neither is this gnatte so little, as by your
scorneful comparison, to the great dishonor of this Noble Realm, ye would
seem to make it: nor is the grief, and complainte thereof so new, as ye
bear us in hand. VVilihelmus Malmesburien Anno. 1031.
King Canutus, the King of England almost six hundred years ago, being
at Rome, wrote home to the Archebishoppes, and Bishops, and States of the
Realm, on this wise: Conquestus sum item coram Domino Papa, and mihi valde
displicere dixi, quod mei Archiepiscopi in tantum angariabatur immensitate
pecuniarum, quae ab eis expetebatur, etc. Also I have made my complaint unto
the Pope, and told him, that it match ^^sliketh me, that my Archebishoppes
should be vexed with such unreasonable sums of money required of them.

Likewise Matthias Parisiensis writes of King William the Conqueror, Anno.
1094.
Concipiens indignationem contra Papam, allegauit quod nullus Archiepiscopus
vel Episcopus de Regno suo, ad Curiam Romanam, vel ad Papam haberet respectum:
King William, upon displeasure conceived against the Pope, said, that no
Archbishop, or Bishop of his Realm, should from thencefoorth have regard
either to the Court of Rome, or to the Pope.

All this notwithstanding, ye say, the Pope is an Elephant: and al these
Sums, in Comparison of his treasures, are but a gnatte.

Verily, al these, and other far greater reckeninges the Realm of England is
well hable to defraie. Neither make we any accoumpte of the money, but of the
deceitful extorting of ye money: neither is it dishonorable to ye Realm, to
repress these lewd, and injurious mockeries, and to preserve the subject
from open spoil. Other Kings, and Countries have oftentimes done the same.
Jews the French King. whom, Ludouicus. 9.
for his Holiness, they have made a Saint, hereof complains thus,
Exactiones impositas per Romanam Curiam, quibus Regnum nostru^ miserabiliter
depauperatum est, leuari, aut colligi nullatenus volumus: These Exactions, or
paimentes of money laid upon us by the Court of Rome, by mean whereof our
Realm is miserably empouerished, we will not in any wise to be levied, or
geathered. The gains, and pelferies, that the Phariseis made of the people,
were not so great. Nevertheless Christ said unto them, Matthew. 23.
VVoe be unto you, ye Scribes and Phariseis, that raven up poor widow
houses, under pretense of long praieinge.

Rome, ye say, is the Mother Church of all the VVeast: and therefore, I trow,
we are bound to pay, what so ever paimentes she shall require. If we allow
such simple reasons, then is the Pope likewise bound to pay to the Church
of Jerusalem, what so ever paiementes she shall require. For Jerusalem is in
deed ye Mother Church, not only of the Weaste, but also of all the whole
world. How be it, it is a cruel Mother, that deuoureth up her own Children.
S. Paul says, Non debent filij parentibus thesaurizare, 2. Corin. 12. Lib.
6. Cap. 24.
sed parents filijs: The Children ought not to lay up treasure for their
parents, but the Parents for their Children. But Johannes Sarisburiensis in
his Polycraticon says, Roma nunc non tam matrem exhibet, quam nouercam: Rome
now shows her self not so mutche a natural Mother, as a Stepmother: For
she spoileth, and deuoureth her Children.

This Defender, ye say, in making his end so badde, has plained the part
of a foolish Poet. Here, M. Hardinge, we have good cause to think, your
Divinity is waxen cold, seeinge you are thus driven to plead in Poetry. But
may we believe, the Church of Rome is grown so Holy, that money is now
becomme the vileste part of al her Play? Certainly, if your Pope once lose
his money, al his Plaiers will soon sit a cold. Felin. De Offic. et Potest.
Iudicis delegati. Ex part. 1.
One of your own Doctors says thus, Cessante tali redditu, qui maximus est,
attenta hodierna Tyrannide, Seeds Apostolica contemneretur: If this rent (of
Simonie) which is very great, were once staide, consideringe the Tyranny of
Princes, that now is, the Apostolic See of Rome vvoulde be despised. In
which words thus mutche is also to be noted by the way, that what so ever
Prince will not suffer the Pope to take what him lists, must be taken, and
judged, as a Tyranne. Therefore Ioannes Andreae, one of your greattest
Canonistes, In sexto. De Elect. and Electi potest. Fundamenta. In Gloss.
says thus, Roma fundata fuit a Praedonibus: and adhuc de primordijs retinet:
dicta Roma, quasi rodens manus. Vnde versus, Roma manus rodit: quos rodere non
valet, odit: The first fundation of Rome was laid by Thieves: and hitherto
she sauoureth of her beginning: and is called Roma, quia rodit manus. Thereof
comes the common verse, Rome bireth you by the hands. And whom she cannot
bite, them she hates.

The state of the Roman Popedom spronge first of money, and increased by
money, and stands now, neither by Truth of Doctrine, nor by severity of
Discipline, nor by Prayer, nor by Holiness, nor by ought else, but only by
money. Set money aparte, and the Pope is equal with other Bishops. Codrus
Vrceus says, Codrus Vrceus. Sermon. 1.
Pontifex Maximus, si non Virtute, tamen Pecunia: The Pope is the greatteste
Bishop, although not in Virtue, yet at least in money. Therefore we may say
of the Pope, Cicero ad Attic. Lib. 2.
as Diphilus sommetime said of Pompeius, Nostra miseria Magnus es. Baptista
Mantuanus, speakinge of the state of Rome, says thus, Venalia nobis
Templa, Secerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale, Deus^ue:
Bmongeste us, in Rome, Churches, Priests, Altars, Masses, Crowns, Fire,
Incense, Prayers, and Heaven are set to sale. Ye God him self emongeste us
may be had for money.

Budaeus says, Eudaeus in Pandectis.
Sanctiones Pontificiae non moribus regendis vsui sunt: sed, propemodum
dixerim, Argentariae faciendae Authoritatem videntur accommodare: The Popes
Canons serve not now, to guide men's lives, but, if I may so say, they
serve rather to make a bank, and to geate money.

Bernarde of Clunice says thus, Roma dat omnibus omnia dantibus: Bernardus
Clun^acen. in Satyra
Omnia Romae Cum Pretio. Rome gives al things to them, that give al things:
Al things at Rome will pass for money. In Sexto. De Elect. and Electi
Potestat. Fundamenta. In Margin.
Even in the Popes own Decretales ye shall find it noted thus, Roma est Caput
Auaritiae. Ideo omnia ibi venduntur: Rome is the Head of al Covetous
treachery. And therefore al things there are set to sale.

Yea Thomas Becket him self, whom a little before, ye called a Saint, when,
for his wilful disobedience, and Treason committed against his Prince, he had
for aid, and succoure, fled to Rome, and saw, that nothing would be
wrought there without money, In Epist. ad Archi^pis. Moguntinum.
thus he wrote he wrote thereof to the Bishop of Menze: Matter Roma facta est
Meretrix, and prostituta est pro mercede: Rome our Mother is becomme an Harlot,
and for money, and meede laiethe her self to sale. To be short, ye know,
that our Fathers, long sithence, were woonte to say, Curia Romana non captat
Ouem sine lana: The Court of Rome will not take the Sheep without the fliese.

Therefore, M. Hardinge, your Poet concluded in good order, and went not so
far bisides his Rules. For, money is both the First, and the Middle, and the
last Act of al your Fable.

Christ sommetime thruste such Buiers, Matthew. 21.
Sellers, Brokers, and Scorsers out of the Temple: But contrariwise, ye have
received in Buiers, and Sellers, and thruste out Christ: and so have turned
the House of God into a Cave of Thieves. S. Paul says thus unto the people of
Ephesus, Actor. 20.
Argentum, and Aurum nullius concupiui: I have desired nomans Gould, or Silver.
Upon which words, in the Gloss it is noted thus, Per hoc Lupi cognoscuntur,
qui talia concupiscunt: Hereby, they, 1. qu. 1. Nunquam Diuinatio.
that desire such things, are known for woulues. S. Hierome says, Quia
Prophetae pecuniam accipiebant, Prophetiae little facta est Diuinatio: For that
the Prophets fell to taking of money, therefore their Propheste was becomme a
Soothe saieinge: that is to same, it was of the Devil, and not of God.

Thus, M. Hardinge, to conclude, what so ever fault ye can find with the
Defenders Poetry, Verily, by the judgment of your nearest friends, Money was
the best paare of al your Fable.

The Recapitulation of the Apology.
THus thou see, good Christian Reader, It is no new thing, though at this
day the Religion of Christ be enterteined with despites, and checkes, being
but lately restoared, and, as it were, coming up again anewe: for so mutche
as the like has chanced both to Christ him self, and to his Apostles: yet
nevertheless, for fear thou maiste suffer thee self to be leadde amiss, and
to be seduced with those exclamations of our Adversaries, we have declared at
large unto thee the very whole manner of our Religion, what our Faith is of God
the Father, of his only Son Jesus Christ, of the Holy Ghost, of the
Church, of the Sacraments, of the Ministry, of the Scriptures, of
Ceremonies, and of every part of Christian Belief. We have said, that we
abandon, and deteste, as plagues, and poisons, al those old Heresies, which
either the sacred Scriptures, or the Anciente Councelles have utterly
condemned: that we call home again, asmutche as in us liethe, the right
Discipline of the Church, which our Adversaries have quite brought into a
poor and weak case: That we pounishe al licenceousnesse of life, and
unruliness of manners, by the old, and long continued Laws, and with as
mutche sharpness as is conueniente, and liethe in our power: That we
maintain still the state of Kingedomes, in the same condition, and state of
honor wherein we found them, without any diminishinge, or alteration,
reseruinge unto our Princes their Majesty, and worldly preeminence safe, and
without empairinge, to our possible power: That we have so gotten our selves
away from that Church, which they had made a den of Thieves, and wherein
nothing was in good frame, or once like to the Church of God, and which by
their own confessions had erred many ways, even as Lot in times past gate him
out of Sodom, or Abraham out of Chaidee, not upon a desire of contention, but
by the warninge of God him self: And that we have searched out of the Holy
Bible, which we are sure, cannot deceive, one sure form of Religion, and have
returned again unto the Primitive Church of the Anciente Fathers, and
Apostles, that is to say, to the ground, and beginning of things, unto the
very ^undations, and headspringes of Christ's Church.

And in very truth we have not tarried in this matter for the Authority, or
consent of the Tridentine Council, wherein we saw nothing done uprightly,
nor by good order: where also every body was sworn to the maintenance of one
man: where Princes Ambassadors were contemned: where not one of our Divines
could be heard, and where parts taking, and Ambition was openly and
earnestly procured and wrought: but as the Holy Fathers in former time, and as
our Predecessors have commonly done, we have restored our Churches by a
Prouincial Convocation, and have clean shaken of, as our duty was, the yoke,
and tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, to whom we were not bound: who also had
no manner of thing like, neither to Christ, nor to Peter, nor to an Apostle,
nor yet like to any Bishop at al. Finally, we say, that we agree amongst our
selves, touching the whole Judgment, and chief substance of Christian
Religion, and with one mouth, and with one spirit do woorship God, and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore, O Christian and Godly Reader, for so mutche, as thou seeste the
Reasons, and Causes, both why we have resto^red Religion, and why we have
foresaken these men, thou ought not to marvel, though we have chosen to
obeie our Master Christ, rather then men. S. Paul has given us warning,
that we should not suffer our selves to be carried away with such sundry
learninges, and to flee their companies, specially such as would sow
debate and varience, clean contrary to the Doctrine, which they had received
of Christ, and the Apostles.

Long sithence have these men's crafts, and treacheries decayed, and
vanished, and fled away at the sight, and light of the Gospel, even as the
owl doothe at the son risinge. And albeit their trumperie be builte up, and
reared as high as the Sky, yet even in a momente, and as it were of it self,
falls it down again to the ground, and comes to naught.

For you must not think, that al these things have comme to pass by
chance, or at adventure: It has benne Gods pleasure, that, against al men's
wills well nigh, the Gospel of Jesus Christ should be spread abroad
throughout y^ whole world at these days. And therefore men folowinge Gods
commandment, have of their own free will resorted unto the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ.

And, for our parts, truly we have sought hereby, neither glory, nor
wealth, nor pleasure, nor ease. For there is plenty of al these things with
our Adversaries.

And, when we were of their side, we enioied such worldly commodities
mutche more liberally, and bountifully, then we do now.

Neither do we esche we Concord, and Peace. But, to have peace with man, we
will not be at war with God. The name of Peace is a sweet, and pleasante
thing, says Hilarious: But yet beware, says he, Peace is one thing, and
bondage is an other. For, if it should so be, as they seek to have it, that
Christ should be commanded to keep silence, that the Truth of the Gospel
should be betrayed, that horrible errors should be cloked, that Christian
men's eyes should be bleared, and that they might be suffered to conspire
openly against God: this were not a Peace, but a most ungodly covenant of
servitude. There is a Peace, says Nazianzene, that is unprofitable: again,
there is a Discord, says he, that is profitable. For we must conditionally
desire Peace, so far, as is lawful before God, Matthew. 10.
and so far, as we may conveniently. For otherwise, Christ him self brought
not Peace into the world, but a sword. Wherefore if the Pope will have us
reconciled to him, his duty is first to be reconciled to God: For from
thence, says Cyprian, spring Schisms and Sects, because men seek not
the Head, and have not their recourse to the Fountain (of the Scriptures) and
keep not the Rules given by the Heavenly Teacher: For, says he, that is not
Peace, but war: neither is he joined unto the Church, which is severed
from the Gospel. As for these men, they use to make a marchendise of the name
of Peace. For that Peace, which they so ^aine would have, is only a reast of
idle bellies. They, and we might easily be brought to atonemente, touching al
these matters, were it not that Ambition. Gluttony, and excess doothe let it.
Hence comes their whyninge: their heart is on their Halfepennie. Out of
doubt, their clamours, and stirs be to none other end, but to maintain
more shamefully, and naughtily il gotten goods.

Now a days the Pardoners complain of us, the Dataries, the Popes
Collectours, 1. Tim. 6.
the Bawdes, and others which think gain to be godliness, and serve not
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies. Many a day ago, and in the old
world, a woonderful great advantage grew hereby to these kind of people.
But now they reckon al is lost unto the^, that Christ gains. The Pope him
self makes a great complaint at this present, that Charity in people is
waxen cold. And why so, trow ye. Forsoothe because his profits decaie more,
and more. And for this cause does he hale us into hatred, all that ever he
may, laieinge lode upon us with despiteful railinges, and condemning us for
Heretics, to the end, they, that understand not the meter, may think there
be no worse men upon earth, then we be. Notwithstanding, we in the mean
season are never the more ashamed for all this: neither ought we to be ashamed
of the Gospel: For we set more by the Glory of God, then we do by the
estimation of men. We are sure, al is true, that we teach, and we may
not either go against our own conscience, or bear any witness against God
For if we deny any part of the Gospel of Jesus Christ before men, he on
the other side will deny us before his Father. And if there be any, that will
still be offended, and cannot endure Christ's Doctrine, such, say we, be
blind, and Leaders of the blind: the Truth nevertheless must be preached,
and preferred above al: and we must with patience wait for Gods Judgment.

Let these folk in the mean time take good heed, what they do, and let them
be well advised of their own Salvation, and cease to hate, and persecute the
Gospel of the Son of God, for fear lest they feel him once a redresser, and
revenger of his own cause. God will not suffer him self to be made a mockinge
stock. The world espieth a good while ago, what there is adooinge abroad.
This flame, the more it is keapte down, so mutche the more with greater force,
and strength doothe it break out, and fly abroad. The unfaithfulness shall
not disapointe Gods faithful promise. And, if they shall refuse, to lay
away this their hardenesse of heart, and to receive the Gospel of Christ,
then shall Publicanes, and sinners go before them into the Kingedome of Heaven.

God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, open the eyes of them al, that
they may be hable to see that blessed hope, whereunto they have benne called:
so as we may altogether in one, glorify him alone, who is the true God, and
also that same Jesus Christ, whom he sent down to us from Heaven: unto whom
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be geeuen al Honor, and Glory
Everlastingly. So be it.

FINIS.
To Master Hardinge.
IT appears, M. Hardinge, by that ye have lately sent us over, and
specially by the vnpleasante verdure of your speech, that my late Reply has
sommewhat disordered your quiet mind. Which thing notwithstanding I
might easily have gheassed, was not unlikely to comme to pass, specially
being before not utterly unskillful of your affections, Yet, as I never sought
to write any thing, that of purpose, and justly might offend you (the
right of the cause, and the Defense of the Truth evermore foreprised) even so
am I now right soary, to see you so unable to master your passions, and so
unadvisedly to make them open unto so many. If it grieve you in respect of
your credit, for that I have thus discovered your errors, that was your
fault: it was not mine. If ye had not made your errors known, they should
never, of my part, have benne discovered. If you knew, how soary I am in your
behalf, ye would not so impatientely be offended.

It misliketh you, that I have alleged so many Doctors, and Councelles, and,
as you say, have so ambitiously painted my Margin with so many Authorities,
both Greek, and Latin. Yet you, for your part, have not spared, over and
bisides these two tongues, to painte your Margin, for a surcharge, with
words in Hebrewe: bisides other such ranks of your English Scholies, so
many, so thick, and so close together, that it were a hard matter, to force
in one word of Truth to stand amongst them. It is no courteous dealinge,
M. Hardinge, to reprove that in others, that you so commonly do your self.

If the Number of Doctors have offended you, I do not marvel: A cowardely
Chalenger would always wisshe the Defendente to comme unarmed unto the
fight. If I had alleged, either no Doctors at al, or nothing to purpose, as
your woonte commonly is to do, ye would have borne it a great deal better.
How be it, my Authorities of Doctors, and Councelles, be they never so many,
yet, as you have used them, are few yenough. For of the whole number, by your
good skill, more then three parts are leafte untouched. And in deed this was
the wiseste way. Children, where they cannot read, think it best, to skippe
over.

Whereas I examine, and lay abroad all the parts, and branches of your
Arguments, and show, how directly ye grow to your Conclusions, that your
Reader may see, by what weapons ye seek to master him, this you say is a
kind of scoffinge. Ye tell me, I rack, and alter, and abuse your
Arguments, and play with shadows of mine own. But, M. Hardinge, if ye will
have your Arguments to pass smoothely without controlment, then learn
hencefoorthe to make them better. Ye are over tender, if ye look to speak,
what ye list, and yet to hear nothing, but to your likinge: and, to send
abroad such simple wares, to serve the people, and yet may suffer noman to
tell you of it. Verily, where ye say, I have of purpose Changed your
Arguments, if ye make them otherwise, then I have made them, having always
an eye unto your Conclusion, ye shall be forced to make them worse. Touching
the Scoffs, wherewith ye find your self so mutche agreeued, doubtelesse,
who so had that grace, that is in you, as may well appear throughout al your
Books, might soon deserve to be called a scoffer.

Where ye say, you, and your Fellows have espied a thousand foul great
Lies in my writings: had not one of you benne a great Father of Lies, ye
could never have hitte so readily upon the number. Such an Auditoure, I
trow, Laurent. Surius Carthusian. In praefatione in Nauclerum.
was he, that found us out eleven thousand Lies in Sleidans story. The very
multitude hereof, and the hugeness of the heap, as it be wraieth well your
stomach, so in any indifferent judgment, it decaieth the credit of your
reckeninge. A man may reasonably think, it is as possible, to find two
hundred, and fifty Untruths in your Book, as in mine to find a thousand.
Verily, as I never minded to defend any thing, what so ever, that in any my
writings, shall be found amiss, so I see, by the view of your accomptes, it
were no hard matter, with your eyes, to find Untruths in the Gospel. For what
so ever I say, be it never so true, yet, if it like not your taste, it is a
Lie: Whatsoever I allege, or translate, it is corrupted. So evil is my luck:
I can touch nothing, but it is either too mutche, or too little: or too
short, or too long: or too black, or too white: or one way, or other it
stands awry. M. Hardinge, Reioinder: Fol. 203. b.
If I translate, Nonnulli Sacerdotes, Sundry Priests, ye cry out, A
corrupter, a falsarie. I should have said, Certain Priests, or, Sum
Priests: but I should not in any wise have said, Sundry.

If I translate, (...), Vna nutritos, Fed together, ye tell the world, It
is Falsehedde, it is foul corruption. Thus, ye say, I should have
translated it, M. Hardinge, Reioinder: Fol. 115. b.
Eodem cibo alitos, Fed with one kind of meat: as if (...) in Greek, were
not Vna in Latin, or had not Relation to the Place. Deal herein with your
friends, M. Hardinge, as you may: The Greek Reader will allow you no such
Translations. If I happen to say, M. Hard, says, The thing, that we
receive in the Sacrament, is no Bread, M. Hard. Reioind. fol. 163. b.
Ye cry, Alarma: Look, ye say, in my Book, Reader: M. Ievvel is an untrue
man: Here he is taken with a lie: Mark well: I say, It is not Bread: I say
not, It is No Bread. Not Bread, ye say. No Bread, ye say not: As if
there were so many miles distance bitweene No and Nor.

These, and such like, be the shameful Untruths, and horrible Lies, that
you, and your Fellows with great seekinge, and diligence have espied. And
thus, if a man happen to use Ensis, for Gladius, or Nam, for Enim, or Que, for
Et, ye think it cause sufficient to make a Tragedy. How be it I doubt not,
but in my Reply, being so long, and so full of necessary allegations, ye
may happen to find sum over sightes of greatter importance. And in
acknowledginge, and refourminge of the same, ye shall find me as sharp, and
eger, as your self. But these few examples I have touched by the way, that
it might appear, how inquisitiue, and fierce ye are, to seek occasions:
and that your Reader may see, ye hunte wantonly, and run riote, and open
oftetimes without a cause. Yet notwithstanding, if ye can tell us sadly, as
your manner is; that M. Jewel brings triflinge objections, and trasshe, and
pelf, and nothing to purpose, without learning, without reason, without
wit: that he racketh, that he stretches, that he wringeth, that he
wreasteth, that he nippeth, and clippeth the Doctors, and Councelles: (for
these be the words, whereby ye thought, ye might best utter your preaty
fancies): If ye can cry out, False parts, False reports, False dealinges,
False Marchantes, False Balance, False Dise, and al is False: If ye can say,
Lo, Sir Defender, ye vvrangle, ye trifle, ye are taken tardee, ye have
proved nothing, ye have nothing to answer: If ye can thus say, and say
it boldly, it shall be sufficient: al is safe: your friends will think, ye
have said sommewhat, and that ye would never have framed such a
countenance, to say nothing.

Ye tell us full often, we are no Bishops: I trow, for that we have not
sworn our obedience to the Pope. And therefore ye geeue the world to
understand, we can consecrate no Ministers, we can hold no Synodes, we
can do nothing. Even so certain your Forefathers in Old times told S.
Paul, 2. Corinthians. 9.
He was no Apostle: and others afterward by like authority told S. Basile,
and S. Hilarie, they were no Bishops. But, M. Hardinge, they were False
Apostles, they were Arian Heretics, that so told them. It booteth not, to
try our titles before you. We will only say with S. Paul: 1. Corinthians 15.
By the Grace of God we are, that we are. And, we trust, we have not his
Grace in vain.

But specially, and above al other things, and that throughout al your three
Books, ye say, that Sir Defender is unlearned: that his best skill is in a
few Figures of Rhetorique: that he has neither Greek, nor Logique, nor
Philosophy, nor Divinity: that he has readde no kind of Doctors, nor New,
nor Old, nor of his own, nor of others: that all the furniture of his Book
was brought to his hand, sum by Greek Readers, sum by Scholemaisters, M.
Hard. Confuta. 21^. a Et 259. a. and commonly in other places.
sum by Ciuilians, sum by Canonistes, sum by Summistes, sum by Glosers,
sum by others: that he has nothing else but patched Notebookes, huddled
together by snappes, and pieces. Some part hereof, or rather the whole al
together, without exception, to do you pleasure, I would easily have granted
you, M. Hardinge, upon small suite, with more favor, and less adoo. Take from
me, what learning ye list: distreine it, and pound it at your pleasure: I
will never trouble you with Repleuin. How be it, if ye utter all this of your
indifferente judgment, and certain knowledge, yet is it impertinente: for
we pleaded of Faith, and not of Learning: if otherwise ye speak it of
heat of mind, and abundance of Cholere, and thereupon thus proclaim it unto
the world, it is great folly. Truly ye never saw Sir Defenders Books, nor
never set your foot within his study. A wise Judge will seldom pronounce,
before he know. If it shall please you, for trial hereof, to send your friend,
he may happily see, that Sir Defender has al these Summistes, and Canonistes,
and Greekereaders, and Scholemaisters, of his own.

Notwithstanding, it may becomme us both to say, as a Heathen wiseman
sommetime said, Socrates.
This only thing we know, that we know nothing. Gods Truth
depends not of our knowledge. Our Tongues shall cease, and our knowledge shall
fail: But the Glory of God shall stand for ever. For my part, I will say to
you with S. Augustine, Quaere doctiores: sed cave praesumptores: Seek others
of more Learning: but bevvare of them, that praesume of Learning. If any
praise fall out in this respect, bestow it freely upon your Greeke-readers,
and Scholemaisters, who, in your judgment, have best deserved it. It shall be
sufficient for me, to have said the Truth: which, though it appear never
so simple, is hable to remove a Mountain of Learning. But happy are your
Brethren of Louaine, that are so speedily grown Learned upon the sudden, not
by great study, I trow, but rather by destinee. As soon as they had once
sauoured the soil of that country, they lookte only upon two poor Titles
of the Law, Extra. Li. 5.
De Maledicis, and De Clerico promoto per saltum: and suddenly they were
transfourmed, and now go for Doctors.

As for your Learning, M. Hardinge, we never reproved it. How be it, greatly
to fear it, we have no cause. God geeue you Grace, ye may wholly turn it to
his glory: lest in the day of the Lord it be laid against you. He is over
well learned, that bends his Learning against God.

But, if we be so utterly void of al manner of Learning, paintinge, as you
say, our Books, and Margines with the Names, and Authorities of so many
Doctors, what may your friends then think of you, that standing so long in
the Defense of your Private Mass, are not yet hable to allege one Doctoure,
nor Greek, nor Latin, nor one, nor other? It seems great marvel, ye
should have such abundance of Doctors, and show so few, specially where
it stands you so mutche upon, to open your stoare. Consider, I beseech you,
your late Reioinder: wherein, as it is thought, nothing of your part is
leafte untouched. Of the Seven and twenty Articles contained in my Reply, ye
have taken upon you only to answer One. And yet of the same One, ye have
scarcely touched the tenthe part. Your purpose should have benne therein, by
euidente Examples, and good Authorities, substantially to have proved your
Private Mass.

Now consider the order, and plainness of your dealinge. Ye bestow welneare
the third part of your Book about the Sacrifice: as though there were no
Sacrifice without Private Mass. All the rest ye consume in idle discourses,
and needelesse talks, of Consecration, of the Intention of the Priest, of
Minglinge the water with the wine, of the Name of the Mass, of
Transubstantiation, of Real Presence, of Church Feasts, (which in old time
were called Agapae), of Singular Communion, of Communion of Faith, of our
Union with Christ, of sendinge abroad the Sacrament, of Priests vviues, of
Vows, of Bigamie, of Good works, of Only Faith, of Public Prayer in a
tongue unknown, of Ceremonies, of Fourmes, of Accidents, of the Epistles
Decretal, of Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus, Abdias, Leontius, etc. Hereof ye have
told us such things, as perhaps we knew before, and were not hard to be
known, and perteined full little to the purpose. Ye should rather have proved,
that within the first six hundred years after Christ, sum one, or other
of the Holy Learned Catholic Fathers Ministered the Holy Communion openly in
the Church, and received the Sacrament Alone not diuidinge the same to any
other, the whole multitude of the people sittinge, or standinge by, and
lookinge on him. This was the matter, that lay bitweene us: Hereunto ye should
have laid your force: This was it, ye should have proved. For proof of
such things, as needed no proof, ye have brought forth great shows of
Learning. But as touching your Private Mass, which only ye had taken in
hand to prove, ye have hitherto proved nothing. Your Reader, M. Hardinge,
can never be, neither so simple, nor so partial, but he must needs have an
eye unto your issue, and remember, what ye had in hand. If amongst so many,
and so Learned words, he find not one word of that he sought for, may he
not think, he has lost his labor, and that there is sum folly in your
fardle? May he not say within him self, Quo nunc se proripit iste? What
shall I make of these vagaries? what means this man, to shoot so fair biside
the mark? He must needs perceive by your silence, that, notwithstanding
your so many fair, and liberal promises, yet the thing, he sought for,
cannot be found. Naie, you your self, for excuse hereof, by express words
have told us plainly, M. Hard. Reioind. fol. 281. a. Et fol. 88. a.
It might be, that none received the Sacrament with the Priest: And again,
Whether the Priest had alvvaies a company, M. Hard. in his Reioinder, in the
Preface to the Reader. and. In the same Preface. and ij. M. Hardinge,
Reioinder: Fol. 210. a.
to receive with him, or sommetimes received alone, that is a circumstance of
a fact: the proof whereof by manifest Testimonies, cannot with reason be
demanded. Again, It is contentious, to put us to proof of the Circumstance.
Again, It forces not, whether we bring forth Testimonies of the six
hundred years, or no. Again, Whether I can shevve, that a Mass was said
without company present to receive with the Priest, that said it, or no,
what skilleth it? Again, I must tell you, that I seek not for Private
Mass, Reioinder. 219. a.
which to find, your scoffinge pretends me to be desirous. I seek not for
that, which I acknovvledge not. And again, It forces not greatly, whether
it may be proved, or no: Which is as mutche, as if ye had told us in
plainer wise, that for the space of six hundred years after Christ, ye can
hear no tidinges in any Doctoure, or Council, of your Private Mass. Which
thing, thus of your part confessed, to our purpose is sufficient.

Now, touching the Authority of your Amphilochius, not long sithence, ye
thought his force had benne invincible. And therefore ye stood up alofte, M.
Hardinge in his Answer, Fol. 29. a.
and braied alowde, Now M Ievvel, and his Consacramentaries do stagger, I
doubt not. And for that cause, as if it had benne sum great worthy
Authoure, ye alleged him seven times, with special reverence, in one Book.
Roioinder. fol. 267. b.
And yet now at the last, ye are content, for shame, to turn him over, and
to let him go. Perhaps ye thought, for the while, a weak threede was
sufficient to lead the people: and that, as folks use sommetimes to please
children, ye might quench their thirste with an empty cup. Thus mutche
hitherto, touching sum parts of your Reioinder.

Concerning your Former Book, which ye have entitled, a Confutation, I
need to say nothing. By the judgment of the wise, it says sufficiently
of it self. But what meante you, M. Hardinge, therein to make so large
discourse, I will not say, in the Defense, (for that word your friends may
not bear) but at the least in the favor of Open Stevves: and to call the
same, M. Hard. Confu. fol. 162. b.
Malum necessarium, that is to say, although an il thing, yet such a
thing, as no good Common weal may be without it? What meante you, to that
purpose, to show us the name, and Authority of S. Augustine: and thus to
vpbraide us in the end, Confu. fol. 162. a
In good soothe, Masters, ye are too young, to co^trolle the City of Rome in
her doings? What needed you to bestow so fine eloquence in so foul a cause?
M. Hard. Confu. fol. 163. a.
Is vice grown so cold in Louaine, that it must be enflamed, and authorized
by open Writing? What meante you to allege the Prophet David, the
Euangeliste S. Mathevve, Confut. 251. a. and deinceps.
and S. Paul the Apostle for proof of your Pardonnes? VVil ye tell us, that
David, Matthevve, and Paul were Pardoners? Or, if ye dare to tell us so,
must we believe it? If ye so manifestly mock us with open folies, how may
we trust you in higher Mysteries? 2. Corin. 4.
S. Paul says, Though our outward man be corrupted, yet our inward man is
renewed day by day. Here ye tell us, in great soothe, M. Hard. Confut.
fol. 117. a. Luke. 22. M. Hard Confut. fol. 192. b.
that these words undoubtedly serve to prove Purgatory.

Christ says unto Peter, I have prayed for thee etc. Therefore, ye say,
Christ now requires us, not to be obediente to Peter, or Paul, but to the
Pope, that sits in their Chair. Christ says, M. Hard. Confu. Fol. 99. a.
The Son of Man came, not to destroy, but to save: Ergo, say you, The
Bread, and Wine in the Sacrament lose no part of their former virtues: but
remain in Fourmes, and Accidents, even as they were before: as if the Son
of God had come down from Heaven to save Accidents.

Thus ye nippe of the sense, and meaning of the Holy Scriptures, and feed us
only with empty words: as if ye would pike away the corn, and geeue us
the chafe: or conueigh away the jewels, and throw us the bag. O M.
Hardinge, be not wilful: let your own conscience lead you. Was this the
meaning of S. Paul? was this the coming of Christ into the world? was
this the sense of the Holy Ghost? I will not say, what Old Doctor, or
Anciente Father, but, what Summiste, what Canoniste, what Child, what
Heretic, ever either so indiscreetly, or so irreverently used the Word of
God?

I leave the misconstrueinge, and falsifieinge of so many Fathers: the
allowinge, and soothinge of manifest Forgeries: the vpholdinge of Abuses, and
open Erroures: your weak Proufes: your seely Conjectures: your simple
Gheasses: your great Ouersightes: your bold Affirmations: your heaps of
Untruths: your disdeigneful Scorns: your immoderate Scoffs: your vngentile,
and uncivil words, as for example, Villanes, Thieves, Fools, Disardes,
Lourdaines etc. I leave other your unmannerly, and uncleanly speeches:
Confuta. 318. b.
Hungry Dogs eat dirty puddinges: As common as life with beggars: Confuta.
250. b.
They serve the belly, and the things beneath the belly.

Was this a present, M. Hardinge, meet either for the Modesty of a Virgin,
or for the Majesty of a Prince: specially such a Virgin, and such a
Prince, so Chaste, so Grave, so Learned, so Wise, so Virtuous, so Godly, as
Christendom seldom has seen the like? What? thought you, that either her
wisdom could not epsy your frauds, and mockeries: or, that her chaste
ears could quietly bear your lothesome talk? Or, thought you by the weight
of such reasons, to move Mountains, and to work woonders, and to force
her Majesty to leave christ and his Gospel, and comme to Louaine to follow
you?

Ye threape her Majesty fondely with kindness, and, as ye would have the
world imagine, with good likinge, and fauouringe of your side: as if her
Majesty, having benne brought up from her cradle in the knowledge and fear of
God, and through Gods great Mercy, and according to his known VVil, by
the good advise, and counsel of the states of her Realm, having reformed the
House of God from the filthe, and soil of your diuises, she stood now in a
mammeringe, and were not hable to discern, either Falsehedde from Truth, or
Darkness from Light: or, as if your Errors were not so gross, that a blind
man may groape them with his Fingers.

Ye tell her Majesty, she has neither Parlamente, nor Law, nor Church,
Confut. fol. 42. a. and so throughout the whole Book.
nor Cleregie: The Church of England ye commonly call the Tovver of
Babylon, the Synagog of Antichriste, and the School of Satan: ye charge her
Majesty with disordered proceedinges, with mainteinance of Infidelity,
Confut. fol. 5. a. 15. a. 38. a. 49. a. and so through the whole.
of Sacrilege, of Schism, of Heresy: For your possible power, ye dishonor
her Majesty, both abroad, and at home: where ye may geate credit to your
folies, ye sclaunder the gouernmente: ye disquiete her Majesty's louinge
Subjects: ye breed Seditions: ye procure Rebellions: ye hazard her
estate. And yet dare ye to powder all this poison with a few dissembled, and
sugared words, and to offer the same unto her Majesty for a present? Well,
M. Hardinge, if ye had foreseen the thanks, that her Majesty most justly
yielded you for your travails, ye would not have benne so bold, so rudely
to press into her presence. It behooued you, to be advised, not only, what
ye wrote, but also what Personage should view your writings.

If ye shall happen to write hereafter, send us fewer words, and more
Learning. If ye shall divise to talk any more of your Private Mass, leave
your vagaries, and go directly to the purpose. Tell us no more such long
tales, either of the Sacrifice, or of other matters so far from the question.
It is no good Logique, to shifte of the thing, ye have in hand, and to mock
your poor Reader with an other. Tread not so nicely, and so gingerly, M.
Hardinge. Say not, your Mass is a Circumstance, and a matter of Fact,
Reioinder. 232. b 233. a.
and stands only upon supposalles, and gheasses, and therefore needs no
further proof. Why soulde ye so trifle with the simple? This is the Issue,
that falls out bitweene us: Whether any one of all the Anciente Learned
Fathers etc. ever said your Private Mass etc. This is it, that is denied. If
ye prove not this, what so ever ye prove, ye prove nothing. Bring out sum
Learned Father: show sum Catholic Doctoure: keep them no longer forth
coming. The world looks ye should deal plainly.

Deny no more the manifest Truth: auouche no more the open Falsehedde: Let
there be sum probability, and likelihoode in your saieinges. Leave your
immoderate, and discourteous talks. They are tokens of stomach, and not of
Learning. Therein ye have deserved the honor above al others. In such
kind of Eloquence noman can match you, but your self. A good cause might
have benne pleaded with better words. The more intemperate, and fiery ye
show your self without cause, the more in the end will appear your folly. If
ye have hitherto taken any pleasure in speakinge il, at my hand, by hearing
il, ye shall not lose it. If ye bring us more Fables of your Pardonnes, and
Purgatories: If ye feed us, as ye have done, with Untruths: If ye deprave
the Scriptures: If ye falsify the Doctoures: If ye Conclude without
Premises: If ye place your Antecedente at Rome, and your Consequente at
Louaine: If ye stuff so mutche paper, and blotte so many leaves, and show us
nothing: briefly, if ye write none otherwise, then ye have done hitherto,
no wise man wilgreately fear your force.

Deceive not the simple. They are bought with price: They are the people of
God, for whom Christ has sheadde his Blood. Your shifts be miserable. Ye
trouble your self, as a bird the lime. The more ye stir, the faster ye
cleave: the longer ye strive, the weaker ye are. Ye cannot bridle the
flowinge Seas: ye cannot blind the Sonnebeames Kick not still against the
spur: Geeue place unto the Glory of God. VVil ye, nil ye, the Truth will
conquer. God geeue us both humble hearts, and the people eyes to see: that al
fleashe may be obediente to his will. Amen.

From London. 27. Octobris. 1567. John Sarisburie.

A Table of the principal matters Contained in this Book.
A
ABsolutio^ of mad men. 139. Absolution stands not in the vvil of the
Priest. 139. The Abomination of desolation. 446. Abuses in the mass,
confessed by Pigghius. 456. Refourminge of Abuses. 133. Accidents without
subject. 253. Adoration of the Sacrament. 269. We need no Advocates unto
God. 316. Agreement in Religion. 194. Altars, or Communion Tables. 333. S.
Ambrose refused the Emperors judgment in Ecclesiastical causes. 689. Ambition
in the Clergy, the cause of great evil. 409. Anacletus fondely misconstrued
by M. Hardinge. 226. 227. Antichriste. 446. Antichriste in the Church of God.
447. 448. Antichriste shall cou^terfaite Chastity. 482. Antichriste in the
Temple of God, and what Antichriste shall be. 434. Antonius learned in the
Scriptures. 195. VVeemen dissemblinge themselves in men's Apparel. 376. Choice
of Apparel for Religions sake 346. 347. No difference in Apparel. 346. 347
348. Superstitious holiness in Apparel. 344 345. Ecclesiastical bravery in
Apparel. 641. The Apostles equal with Peter. 106, 107, 108. The Apostles
above Kings and Princes. 397. The Apology authorized. 17. Athenes standinge.
376* 377. S. Augustines judgment refused. ^98. Augustine the Italian Monk.
11. Augustine the Italia^ Monk, alive at the time of the war. 493.
Augustine the Italian Monk inflamer of the war. ibidem. Augustine the
Italian monk, Bishop in England. 492. The authority of the Doctors, and
Fathers. 18. 19. Pretense of Antiquity. 495. 496.
B.
Bacon. 454. Baptism. 203. Baptism of Infantes. 150. By Biptisme we are
united unto Christ. 241. We are partakers of Christ's Body and Blood in the
Sacrament of Baptism. 271. Christ is he that Baptiseth. 215. The Power of
Baptism. 217. Baptism is the Power of Resurrection. 221. Baptism received
without Faith. 216. Believe them not, spoken of Antichrist and his followers.
208. To Believe in God. 84. The recantation of Berengarius. 348. The Bernates
lavvful war against the Duke of Sauoye. 389. Binding stands in willful
refusing of the Word of God. 142. Bishops called and conuented before the
Prince. 637. 638. 639. A Bishop may not put away his wise under pretense of
holiness. 185. Bishops sworn unto the Pope: and the form of the Oath
expressed. 43. Difference bitvveene Bishop and Priest. 198. Bishops within
the Princes check. 398. A Bishop bearing civil office. 512. Bishops proud,
and disdeigneful in old times. 409. Bishops, no Bishops. 117. The
substance of Bread remains in the Sacrament. 231. The Bread is the body of
Christ, in what sense. 246. 255. 257. 479. 480. The Bread of the Sacrament
passes by natural digestio^, by the Judgment of Origin. 258. 261. The Bread
remains in substance as it was before. 247. 248. 249. 251. 252. 257. The
Bread changed, in what sense. 247 248. 249. The Bread not annihilate. 248.
The Bread has a certain likeness of Christ's Body. 254. The Buildinge and
repairinge of Gods Church. 716. Burninge of the Scriptures. 477.
C.
Calixtus, for Anacletus. 226. The Calendar of Bishops names. 374. 375. Carnal
liberty. 335. 336. Cathechumeni, or Beginners in the Fa^the. 139. Catholic,
in many, or in fevv. 93 Catholic Church, and what is meant thereby. 49.
Ceremonies. 308. S. Augustine found fault with the multitude of Ceremonies.
308. 309. Ceremonies more esteemed then the commandments of God. 308. 310.
Vain Ceremonies ought to be removed with al speed convenient. 309. Ceremonies
have power to quiet the conscience, and to remitte sin 554. Diversity of
Ceremonies. 309. Vow of Chastity, and lavvful to break the same. 168. 169.
170. Counterfaite Chastity a mark of Antichriste. 183. Chastity the gift of
God, and may not be commanded by any man. 167. No one Chief but Christ. 340.
Christ's humanity in one place. 85 87 88. 89. Christ and the Pope have one
place of Judgment. 95. Christ's Body never promised to our bodily mouth. 274.
To touch or to hold Christ. 288 Christ the only Pope. 106. Christ's Blood
not in the holy Cups. 265. Christ's Body in one place. 276. 277. Christians
hated, and sclaundered. 49. To approach unto Christ. 288. To receive or bear
Christ. 285. 286. The spiritual receiving of Christ's Body. 348. Christ's Body
crusshed and torn with teeth. 349. Christ's Body geeueth life. 241. Christ's
Body in Heaven. 233. Christ's Body verily present in the holy supper, in what
sense. 271. 273. 276. The Christians in Graeciae and Asia abhor the Pope and
his Cleregie. 457. The Church of Rome is departed from the primitive Church
of God. 566. The deformities of the Church of Rome. 568. The Church in fevve.
571. The Church known by Gods word. 3. The Church of Rome can never
err, true or false. 430. 436. 437. 439. 440. 444. 445. Readinge of Chapters in
the Church. 552. 553. The Church is above the word of God. 557. 558. 559.
560. The Church of Rome can not fail. 565. The miserable state of the Church
of Rome. 462. 463. The Pope is the whole Church. 558. The Church known by
the word of God. 463. 464. 465. The state of the Church decayed in the time
of the old Fathers. 442. The Authority of the Churches in Africa, as good as
the authority of the Church of Rome. 440. The Church may err. 445. The
Church, if it depend of one man, shall sone decay. 448. 450. The Church in
fevve or many. 441. 442. 443. No Idolatry in the Church of Rome. 628. 629.
The Church may be in a fevve. 93. 94. To believe in the Church: to believe in
Saints. 85. The Pope not the head of the Church. 95. The Roman Church
compared with the Churches of the Gospel. 585. The State and Unity of the
Church, depends of the Pope. 53. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome, is the
express word of God. 200. The Roman Church received the faith from the
Greeks. 577. Every Bishop, the head of his several Church. 95. Vain Titles
of the Church of Rome. 40. The authority of the Church. 55. Hear the
Church. ibidem. No Salvation without the Church of Rome. 36. The Church
known by Gods word. 55. The Roman Church unlike the Church of the
ancient Fathers. 21. The Church of Rome fallen from God. 36. The Church of
Rome is the Catholic Church. 36. The Church builte upon John, as well as
upon Peter. 107. The Church invisible. 391. The Greeks abhor the Church of
Rome. 36. The Civil Magistrate to be obeyed. 394. The erroures and abuses of
the Cleregie. 96. 104. The Communion in one Kind, used first by Heretics.
230. Causes of the Communion under one kind. 328. 329. Priests Concubines.
511. A Priest keepinge a Concubine, may not therefore be refused in his
ministration. 511. Concupiscence is verily sin. 217. 218. Confession not
commanded. 155. 156. Confession auricular never named of the Ancient Fathers.
257. Confession of sins venial. 151. Confession of sins appointed, not by
Gods Word, but by Tradition. 133. Sins forgeeuen without Confession.
143. Confession of sins, not necessary. 133. 143 151. Confession made by
ha^dvvriting or by a broker. 137. Confession to be made only unto God. 140.
Confirmation of Bishops. 129. Confession made unto a lay man 137.
Consecration, and diverse judgments of the same. 208. 209. Consecration of
Bishops. 130. The donation of Constantine. 401. 537. 538. Constantine was
Christened by Syluester: A fable. 670. Constantine the Emperor in the Council
of Nice. 677. 678. 679. 680. The Emperor Constantine stood upright at the
Sermon, and would not sit. 678. Courteghians remaininge still in Rome. 382.
Councelles lavvfully called without the Popes consent. 529. Decrees of
Councelles ratified, whether the Pope vvoulde or no. 53. The Authority of
Councelles. 50 Priests, Ministers, and Deacons in Councelles. 603. The credit
of Councelles. 593. The Holy Ghost in Councils. 606 No good end of any
Councils. 599 The Pope not alvvaie president in Councelles. 57. The Authority
of Councelles and Fathers. 57. Liberty of voice, and disputation denied in the
Council of Trente. 43. 44. The Truth of Judgment was in that Council that
pronounced sentence against Christ. 622 The Authority of Councelles. 19
Authority to call Councelles. 529 Confirmation of Councelles. 607 Councelles
may be summoned whether the Pope vvil or no. 665. Council of Tridente. 597.
The Pope not President in Councelles. 669. Councelles of Bishops. 674. The
Emperor summoned general Councels. 663. 664. 667. 670. 672. The Pope was
summoned to come to Councels. 663. 666. The Pope Confirms Councelles. 665.
The Popes Legates had not the first place in Councelles. 666. The freedom of
the Council of Trent. 627. 632. 633. Godly men have refused to come to
Councels. 629. 630. Councels called the determinations of men. 710. Councelles
general, repealed by Councelles prouincial. 711. Dissensions in the Tridentine
Council. 634. Emperors and Kings Ambassadors in Council without voice. 634.
The Council of Tridente of small credit. 710. The Council of Frankesorde. 712 A
Council general, what it is. 713 In the Summon of the Council of Trente, the
Pope had, forgotten the name of Christ. 710 The credit of Councelles, 488.
The Emperors authority over Councelles. 674. Council general, not general.
708 The Authority of Councels, certain or uncertain. 486. The number of
Bishops in the Council of Trident. 714. The Civil Prince or Magistrate
subscribeth in Council. 686. Diverse forms of Creedes. 83.
D.
The office of Deacons. 98. Departinge from the Church of Rome. 568. 569. 570.
574. 582. Departinge from the Pope. 104. Vain Devotion. 293. Disputation. 41.
Dissensions in Religion. 337. 338. Dissentions in Religion among the old
Fathers. 340. Dissentions among the school Doctors. 341. 349. 350. The
Division of the Empiere. 403 A Divine power in the Pope. 403 The Duke of
Sauoi^ spoiled, 389.
E.
To Eat God. 278. 279. 239. 240. It is one thing to Eat Christ in Sacrament,
and an other to Eat Christ in deed. 283. Gross imagination of the Eating of
Christ's Body. 279. 280. The Emperor a child of the Church. 155. The
Emperor bound to swear obedience to the Pope. 399. The Emperor so far
beneath the Pope, as the Moon is beneath the Son. 400. The Emperor
Stevvarde of the Church of Rome. 119. The Emperor may translate the
Supremacy from the Pope, to an other. 119. The Emperor Prince of the whole
world. 675. The Emperor poisoned in the Sacrament. 408. The Emperor may
lavvfully make Ecclesiastical laws. 692. 693. The Emperor inferior only
unto God. 424. The Emperor may depose the Pope. 405. The Emperor vvaited
upon the Pope with bare head and bare foot. 417. The Emperor is the Popes
man 413. The Emperor limiteth the Catholic Faith. 668. The Enemies of God
are cruel. 554 The Entention of the Priest. 209 Epiphanius rent an Image. 504.
Equality of Bishops. 109. 111. 112. The other Apostles Equal with Peter.
105. The Pope Equal with other Bishops. 109. Erroures and abuses of the
Church of Rome confessed by her own children. 627. Errors in the old
Fathers. 337. 338. Errors among the Fathers touching the Body of Christ. 353.
The Popes immoderate and Unreasonable Exactions of money. 734. 735. 736. 737.
738. To follovv the Example of Christ 575. Exorcistes. 98. Unjust
Excommunication. 41. Excommunication without cause. 583.
F.
One learned Father received before a Council. 52. Fables and tales readde in
Churches. 520. The first Faith. 170. Perfitte Faith in Heathens. 320. The
Faith planted in England before Augustine. 11. Christ's body present only
by Faith. 235. We aseende by Faith into Heaven, and so eat the fleashe of
Christ. 269. 270. 287. The holy Fathers ouersightes in the allegation of
stories. 416. The Body of Christ eaten by Faith. 221. 224. By Faith we
see, and touch Christ. 271. 272. 273. 289. Faith is the kaie of the kingdom
of Heaven. 138. The Authority of the Fathers. 52. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64.
69. Faith of Infantes. 216. Faith eats. (...) 234. 235. 239. The Faith of
the parents helps the Infantes. 216. The pattern of the Faith. 702. 703.
706. 707. Faith eats Christ being absente. 220. 221. Christ present by
Faith. 289. Fasting upon any certain days, not appointed. 197. 198. Fasting
with fleashe. 197. Faith without works, is no Faith. 321. Fond Faith is
no Faith. 293. By Faith we eat Christ. 289. Christ's death applied by
Faith. 298. By Faith we are incorporate unto Christ. 241. 243. Church in
fevve, or many. 327. 328 Shifte of Figures used by. M. Hardinge. 269. A Figure
is not the thing it self. 205. Flamines, and Archiflamines. 121. The
flourishing state of King Pipinus life. 406. Fornication in a Priest more
tolerable then marriage. 366. 367. Simple Fornication, whether it be sin, or
no sin. 360. Fornication vvinked at by the Popes Canons. 362. The form of
Baptism. 203. Form, and Substance. 98. 89. Forms, and accide^tes. 205. 231.
232. A priest may not be deposed for Fornication. 189. Franciscus Dandal^s.
414. Free vvil, how free, how bond. 13^ Perfect fulfilling of the law. 316.
317 The fulfilling of the Law, possible, or impossible. 317.
G.
Gerson. 454. Gods Truth mutable. 438. The credit of Gods Word hangs
on the Pope. 438. The Gospel increased of small beginninges. 34. The Gospel of
Christ reproved for novelty. 490. 491. 496. The fruits of the Gospel. 51.
The Gospel of Christ shall not stand. 22. The Gospel of Christ
sclaunde^rously called gross and fleashely. 32. The increase of the Gospel.
38. The Gospel in Princes Courts. 34. 35. The Authority of Gratian. 28.
Gratian often deceived. 226. The Greeks have neither private Mass nor half
communion nor Purgatory. 578. 579. 580. Guilty of the Body, and Blood, etc.
587. 588.
H.
The Half communion vveakely proved. 480. 481. M. Harding abateth five hundred
years of his reckeninge. 32. M. Harding misallegeth S. Augustine. 141. M.
Harding fondly applies these words of Christ, The son of man came not to
destroy, but to save. 254. 255. M. Harding misconstrueth S. Augustine. 61. 62.
M. Hardinge mistaketh Joshua for Osee. 101. Head of the Church. 94. Henry 4.
and his qualities. 419. A vvoma^ Head of the Church. 644 Heretics alleged
Scriptures. 57. 58. 59. 60. 467. Heretics suppress the Scriptutes. 481. The
Definition of Heresy. 46. The note of Herersie may not be dissembled. 45.
Heretics discredit the Scriptures. 488. Heretics allege the Doctoures and
Fathers. 495. Heretics accuse the Scriptures. 78. 474. Popes have benne
Heretics. 612. 614. 615. 616. 617. Heretics confound al things, because
they cannot discern the Creator from the Creature. 295. Ruffinus an Heretic.
672. Heretics alleged Councelles, and Fathers. 57. Heresy in good part. 48.
49. Heretics vvoulde be called Catholics. 433. Heretics hold by
Tradition. 199. Heretics clothed with the name of the Church. 2. Condemned
of Heresi upon light occasions. 46. Godly men accused of Heresi. 631.
Hieremie set over Kingdoms and nations, in what sense. 399 The Higheste
Priest. 526. 527. Holy Orders. 96. 97. Holy Orders without offices. 98. The
Holy Ghost is God. 90. Holy Water. 21. Hosius Judgment of the Scriptures.
468. Hosius mistaken. 472. Huldericus the Bishop of Augusta. 186. Husband of
one wife, and the meaning thereof, 174. Hus, and Hierome of Prage. 48.
I.
S. James Epistle. 193. The ignorance of the Cleregie in times paste. 371.
Images in Churches. 505. Adouring of Images. 503. Images painted in wales.
502. The blasphemous Invocation of our Lady, called by M. Hard. a spiritual
daliance. 313. India converted. 37. Innocentius 3. said, he would either lose
his Triple miter, or else he vvoulde pulle the emperor Philips Crovvn^ Empeperial
from his head. 398. Invocation of Saints. 311. Dame Iohane the Pope. 374.
Johannes Casa. 383. Johannes Diazius slain by the procurement of his Brother.
383 Johannes Camo^ensis. 618. Gods Judgment follows the Judgment of the
Priest, Reproved. 154. The Priest Judge over sin. 152. The Just man
trusts not in his own righteousnese. 323. The lust man sins, and
deserves evil. 321. 322. Justification by Faith only. 74. Justinian the
Emperor deposed ij. Popes. 690. 691.
K.
The word of God is the Keie. 144. 152. The Popes Keie shuts, and opens
not. 143. Many Priests have not the Keie of Knowledge. 136. Confusion of
Keys. 160. Peter's Kaie greater then his fellows. 161. 162. 163. The Keie of
Instruction, and the Keie of Correction. 149. Peter's Keie equal with the rest
162. 163. Sum Priests have no Keie at al. 145. Knowledge is not the
principal Keie. ibidem. Kings, and Emperors hold the Popes stirope, and lead
his horse, bear his train, and cari^ his dishe. 412. Kings may lavvfully
deal in Ecclesiastical causes. 636. 645. 647. 648. 654. 655. 656. 657. 658.
659. 660. 682. 683. 684. 688. Kings not alvvaies anointed by Bishops. 696.
King John of England poisoned. 409. Kings Fosterers, and Queens Nurses of the
Church. 649.
L.
The Lamb laid upon the Table, in what sense. 282. 283. Lay men, after a
certain sort, be Priests. 131. They mystical Latin tongue. 517 The Lamb of
God is slain in the Holy Supper, in what sense 286. A Lay man may remitte
Sins. 137. Lenten fast. 198. Lenten fast, and Lenten meats. 270 God causes
his light to shine out of barbarous and despised places. 391. Liga Sotularia.
388. Laghtes. 13. Lights, and tapers in Churches, 20
M.
Priests have Married. 514. Marriage lets not Prayer. 172. Good causes why
Priests should be set at liberty, touching Marriage. 187. 188. 189. 190.
Priests Married within holy orders. 175. 176. Marriage hinders. 182. The
restrainte of Marriage the doctrine of Deu^lles. 182. 183. Bishops and
Priests Mar^ied. 166. 167. 184. Marriage hinders not the Bishops duty.
177. The Apostles doctrine touching Marriage. 184. 185. 186. Marriage
Condemned. 165. Second Marriage is Fornication, in what sense. 174. 175. Not
lavveful to break Priests marriage. 185. Marriage contracted after a vow is
Lavveful. 459. Priests Marriage allowed. 173. Second Marriage condemned. 166
Marriage furthereth the Bishops duty. 178. 179. 180. Marriage forbidden, not
fornication. 182. All the Apostles, John excepted, were Married. 166. 184.
Better to Marry, then to burn. 184. Bishops twice Married. 174. A Priest
may Marry. 171. Monks Married. 176 Priests Marriage not forbidden. 185.
186. Christ's death applied by the Mass without Faith. 297. Matrimony
chaste and pure. 513. Church in many, or fevve. 38. 39. Matrimony, neither
good, nor il. 178. The cares of Matrimony, ibide^. The blessed Virgin Marie,
Idolatrously abused by Heretics. 312. Martyrdom stands not in the death,
but in the cause. 30. The Books of the Machabees. 193 The Mass seven hundred
years in furnishinge. 194. Godly men, counted mad. 80. A Priest being
Married ought not therefore to be refused in the ministration. 513. One Mass,
or Communion, in one day. 524. The Emperor appointed Metropolitanes. 122.
Trust in Merits. 77. Mediatoure of Salvation: Mediator of intercession. 311.
Merit and Mercy. 319. 321. Miracles. 37. 294. 699. Miracles wrought by
fained Christians. 700. The servants of Christ known by that they work
no Miracles. 699. Miracles wrought by subtle men, or by the Devil. 294.
Whether a Mouse may eat the Body of Christ, M. Hardings Doctors cannot
tell. 236. 260. The order of Monks in old times. 624. Superstition and
covetousness in Monks. 625. Monks life, Gods service. 509. Lavveful
suppressinge of Monasteries. 600. Monasteries suppressed by the godly Fathers.
510. Monks living by their labor of their hands. 508. 509. 510. Monks
from Christ, and the Prophets. 66. To be the Mother of God, is less then to
be the child of God. 314 Multiplication of keys. 145.
N.
Nevvenes in Religion. 32. 490. 491. Nominales and Reales. 344. Nouatus. 134.
O.
Obedience. 16. Obedience unto man. 345. Christ's Body offered, in what sense.
277. Oil hallowed. 20. Oil in S. James. 73. One Head, one Judge. 336. One
only Bishop. 122. 451. 452. Peter the Only Bishop. 106. One Head. 101. One
Shepherd, and one Flock. 102. One Bishoprike, Expounded. 112. 113 Open
confession. 140. Origens Judgment of the Sacrament. 501. Our God, our Lord:
My God, my Lord. 386.
P.
Paphnutius. 173. The story of Paphnutius reproved. ibid. Parlaments holden
without co^sente of Bishops. 596. Pardons. 402. Matters of Religion
determined in Parliament. 596. Parliament, no Parliament. 595. Patriarchs without
office. 714. We may not believe Paul, if he speak as of him self. 108.
Paul had no need of Poter. 106. S. Paul, and S. James accorded. 75 Pauperes
a Lugduno. 454. The People does communicate by the mouth of the Priest. 297
The People is in the cup. 283. Patience in Persecution. 335. Persecution a
toke^ of the truth 10. Persecution for Love. 24. 25. The Godly work no
Persecution. 732. The wicked complain of Persecution. 730. Truth grows by
Persecution. 484. Persecution, and deliting in Blood. 30 Persecution for the
Truths sake. 484. The Church increases by Persecution. 31. Peter over mutche
auanced. 111. Peter the Shepherd, and the Apostles the sheep. 106. Peter
Martyr and others falsely slaundered. 475. The Apostles received their power
of Peter. 106. Petrus Aloisius the Popes son. 382 Pius 4. endangered by his
Cardidinalles. 41. The Popes Chair of Porphyrie stoane. 379. The Pope
prevails by darkness and Ignorance. 698. Whether the Pope be Judas, or Peter,
it skilleth not. 622. A certain Divine Power in the Pope. 541. The Pope is
the Head spring of al Laws. 542. 543. The Pope Lord and God. 540. The Pope
has power over the Angels of God. 543. Popes and Cardinals nothing^
differinge from civil Princes. 640. 641. The Pope Vicar to Julius Caesar. 674.
The Popes Pardons. 547. 548. The Pope succedeth Constantinus. 674. The Pope
noted for Antichriste. 457. 458. 459. 460. Al other Bishops receive of the
Popes fullness. 531. The Pope may not be judged by any Prince, or other
power. 532 533. The Pope uses both siverdes 522. 523. 528. Emperors and
kings receive their free liberty of the Pope 534. 535 The Pope above the
Emperosi^e as far as the son is above the Moon. 536. The Pope has al
Laws in his breaste. 482. Popes or Bishops of Rome, Priests sons. 166.
Wherein the Pope is like to Peter. 726. The Pope can never err. 725. The Pope
is above Kings and Emperoures. 397. The Pope a Christian man by the virtue of
his office. 674. 675. The Pope absolueth by a deputy. 161. The Pope is a King.
650. 651. 652. The Pope is no King. 653. The Popes power supernatural. 695,
696. The Pope and his clergy unlearned. 705. The Pope Peter's Successor. 675.
The Pope choketh the power of al other Bishops. 125. The Pope ridinge in his
Pontificalibus. 293. 294. Pope Hildebrande. 420. 421. The Pope treads on the
Emperoures neck. 422. The Popes factes whatsoever they be, are excused. 423.
The Pope inferior to the Prince. 425. 426. The Pope submits him self to the
Emperor. 425. The Pope no universal Bishop, but limited only to a part. 427
The Popes and Cardinals by their own friends compared to the Scribes and
Phariseis. 430 We are bound to obey, not Peter and Paul, but the Pope. 431
The Pope heir apparent unto the Empire. 417. The Pope overthrows the
Emperors crown with his foot. 418. The Pope may depose kings and
Emperors. 404. 405. The Pope, whatsoever he be, is ever holy. 423. The Pope
armeth Henry the son against his Father. 419. The Popes saueconducte. 633.
The Popes Legates, firebrandes of troubles. 402. The Pope vvoulde have deposed
Philippe the French King. 407 The Popes faith can not fail. 436 The Pope
claimed the Kingdom of France to him self. 407. No Salvation without the
Pope. 104. The Pope Judge in his own cause. 608. The Pope appoints Kings
and Emperors to kiss his feet. 410. The Pope keeps not his own Councels.
525. Pope John's error, touching the immortality of the soul. 617. The Pope
discovered. 4. The Pope above the general Council. 609. 610. 611. Christ, and
his Apostles could not rule the Church better the^ it is now ruled by the
Pope. 551. Pet^^e Popes. 100. The Pope may dispense against Gods word. 51.
330. 331. Al power given to the Pope 532. Pope Zofimus corrupted the Council
of Nice. 612. The Pope uncertain of his own succession. 129. The Pope
admitted by the Emperors letters parents. 130. The Pope teaches Humility in
the Schole of pride. 410. The Popes universal power. 104. The Popes power not
Universal. 115. 116. 123. The Priest has the same power that Christ had.
138. The Pope receives his civil jurisdiction from ^he Prince. 534. 535 The
Pope is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. 544. It were best the whole
world in all cases were ruled by the Pope alone. 400. The Pope so far above
the King as God is above a man. 397. The Pope, the Prince, both of the
heavenly, and also of the vvorldly Kingdom. 95. The Pope has free liberty
to do evil. 533. The Popes Authority was but small before the Council of
Nice. 115. The Pope the Headshepheard. 17. The Pope equal in credit with
other Bishops. 52. 53. The Pope may make a Bishop only by his word. 129.
The Pope summo^^^d by the Emperor to appear at Councils. 57 The Popes credit
above the Gospel. 51. One Pope contrary in judgment to an other. 52. 100.
466. The Pope may err as a Private man: but in public judgment he cannot
err. 52. The Popes equal with the other Patriarchs. 53^. Al power geeuen to
the Pope. 103 The Popes power over Purgatory. 542. The Pope is no mere
natural man 541. The Pope the universal Bishop of all the world. 530. Pope
Leo, touchi^g his own Sec. 111 The Pope, Prince of Pastors. 112. The Pope
equal with the other Petriarkes. 115. The Pope no universal Bishop. 118. 121.
The Pope hardly obtained to be called the head of the church. 118 The Pope
above the whole Church. 65. A simple Priest above the pope. 397. To disobeie
the Pope. 40. The Pope increased in power, abated in holiness. 16. The
dissolution of the Empiere wrought by the Pope. Ibidem. The Pope may bestow
the Empire at his pleasure. 400. Pope Zachary deposed Childericus the French
King. 403. The Pope is al, and above al. 619. The Popes judgment above all the
judgment of the world* 482. The increasing of the Popes temporal power. 403.
Pope Victor poisoned in the Chalice. 40^. The Pope is more then God. 397. The
Popes stool of Porphyris stoane. 410. Kings and Princes swear obedience to
the Pope. 396. The Pope places him self above the Empier. 398. The Pope him
self vvoulde not be called the universal Bishop. 45^ The Pope can have no
Superioure. 424. The Pope is Christ. 461. The Pope and his Clergy fallen from
God. 453. Departing from the Pope. 430. 431. The Pope had no authority to
summone Councels. 671. The Popes honor prejudicial to to the honor of God. 398.
The Pope is the only Lord of temporal things. 426. Pope Syluester dead
before the Council of Nice. 666. The Emperors place in Council at the Popes
feet. 635. A private man saieing the truth, is to be heard before the Pope.
431. Popes and Cardinals entangled with vvorldly affairs. 640. It is
sufficient for us to do^^es the Pope wills us. 431. The Ambition of the
Pope. 426. The Pope is the light that came in to the world. 619. The Pope is
not the head of al Churches. 451. 452. The Pope has invaded the right of al
inferior Bishops. 452. Pope Adrian confess^th that al evil grevve from the Sea of Rome. 454 455. The Pope and his Clergy, Spoilers and Trai^^^rs. 462.
463. Prayer in a strange tongue. 516. The Pride of Rome. 110. 119. Moses a
Priest. 651. Priests Concubines allowed. 363. 367 370. Priests take upon
the^ the proud looks of the Phariseis. 153. 154. Lay men in a certain sense
to be called Priests. 652. The Priests power in remittinge sin. 158. 159.
Priests, or elders. 603. Prince of Priests, or hiest Bishop* a title given to
many Bishops 121 Godly Princes careful for Gods causes. 34. 35. The Prince
the Supreme gouernoure in Ecclesiastical causes. 643. 644. 645. 647. The
Prince, touching his obedience toward God, is a private man. 394. The
Prince bound to write out the book of the Law. 648. 649. Flatteringe of
Princes. 591. Private Mass coldely avouched by M. Hardinge. 225. 226. 227. The
Prophets of God called Heretics. 233. The Popes power over Purgatory. 299.
Old fantasies of Purgatory. 299. 300. Prayer for the dead imports not
Purgatory. 300. Vain proves for Purgatory. 301. The Blood of Christ is our
true Purgatory. 301. 305. 306. There is no Purgatory. 302. Scriptures
disprouing Purgatotie. 304 Purgatory Imagined by the Heathens 305. Contrary
opinions of Purgatory. 306. Roffensis confesses that the old Fathers made
little mention of Purgatory. 307. The Greeks never believed Purgatory. 302.
307. S. Augustine doubts of Purgatory 305. M. Hardinge imagines double fire
in Purgatory. 306. S. Augustine denies Purgatory. ibid. Paul and Peter
must pass through Purgatory. 301.
Q.
Quoda^modo miscetur mihi. 242. 243
R.
Readers. 98. Readinge of the Scriptures without prayer. 195. Children of
xiiij. years of age admitted to be Readers in the Church. 602. Rebellion. 16.
The Boures Rebellion in Germany. 388 Recourse to Rome. 702. 703. 704.
Reconciliation of dissensions. 354. Regimente of vveemenne. 389. Relikes, or
dead men's boanes. 705. The King determines cases in Religion. 12. The cause
of Resurrection. 324. 325. The good man vvoorketh good things, without hope of
Revvard. 320 Our perfection of Righteousness is imperfect. 317. 318. The
Roman Religion in many points agreeable with the Manichees. 17. The Roman
cleregie deceivers, false teachers, and Pilates. 461. The Roman Faith shall
never fail. 22 The Roman Faith spoken of thorough the world. 436. The
filthy life of the Roman Clergy. 367. 368. Erroures and abuses in the
Roman Church confessed. 24. Rome is Babylon. 719. 720. Fond questions
resolved at Rome. 704. The Tragedies of Rome. 79. Rome the root of evil. 455.
Departure from the Church of Rome. 17.
S.
Two Sacraments. 202. 214. Sacraments ministered without understanding.
203. Sacraments sanctify, and contain grace. 203. 204. Sacraments be
signs. 205. Vehement phrases of the Sacraments, 246. The grace of the
Sacraments. 235. The number of Sacraments. 212. 213. Sacraments be words
visible. 145. Sacrament turned into a Divine substance. 252. The Bread and
Wine of the Sacrament do nourishe. 205. The Scaramentes of the old Law,
and the nevve. 206. The visible parts of Sacraments are things corruptible.
257. 260. Gods special vvoorking in all Sacraments. 254. The Sacrament is a
figure. 244. Gods omnipotente power in the Sacraments. 245. In the
Sacrament, or by the Sacrament. 232. Sacraments are Seals of Gods
promises. 134. Sacraments necessary, and how. 149. 150 The dividing or
breaking of the Sacrament. 521. Nature, Power, Virtue in Sacraments. 253. 254.
M. Harding refers the Judgment of Sacraments to his senses. 255.
Disdaineful speeches of the Sacraments used by M. Hardinge. 268. Christ is
crucified, and dies in the Sacrament. 269. The Sacrament changed into the
substance of our fleashe. 259. Sacraments are signs. 73. Vehement speeches of
the Sacrament 239. The Bread changed into a Sacrament 244. The Sacrament under
both kinds of Christ's Institution. 229. 230. The Sacraments of the nevve
Law give grace, in what sense. 062. The difference bitvveene the Sacrament,
and the substance of the Sacrament. 222. 224. The Sacraments work in us
the hope of Resurrection. 221. 222. The carieing about of the Sacrament 293.
295. The Sacrament depends not on the Minister. 215. The Sacrament is one
thing, and Christ's Body is an other thing. 222 230. 232. 268. The Sacrifice
of Melchisedeth. 434. Saints offices distincted. 313. Sale of Masses, and of
Merits. 292. Certainty of Salvation. 75. The School Doctors. 19. The
Scripture a dead letter. 473. 474 The Scriptures translated into diverse
tongues. 588. 589. The Scriptures preserved by Gods providence. 478. The
people ought to read the Scriptures. 506. The Scriptures preserved by the Iues
478. The Scriptures inferioure to the Church. 474. The Scriptures take their
force of the Church of Rome. 456. 593. Ignorance of Scriptures is sin. 590.
The Scripture stands in the sense, and not in the words. 54. 72. 194.
How know you that these be the Scriptures? a fond question. 200.
Scriptures at diverse times, diuersely expounded. 78. Scripture receaueth
authority of the Church. 77. The old translation of the Scriptures corrupted.
598. The Scriptures fovvly abused. 53. 77. 467. Scriptures only to be read in
Churches. 519. Scriptures follow the Church, and not the Church the
Scriptures. 78. We may not hear an Angel of God against the Scriptures.
485. The Heretics alleged the Scriptures. 72. The simplest of the people in
old times disputed of the Scriptures. 507 The Scriptures disclose al errors.
481 Grace to discern Scriptures. 201. Boastinge of the Holy Ghost without
the Scriptures. 65. Gods Scriptures levvdely scorned. 193. Scriptures forged.
201. The authority of the Scriptures. 69. The simple people may read the
Scrip (...). 589. 590. The people cannot judge of the Scriptures, because the
Scholar is not above his Master. 487. Toward the end of the world, the
people shall flee to the Scriptures. 716. 721. Scriptures sufficiete to debate
al doubts. 58. 59. 61. 62. 64. 69. The Scriptures of God must be expounded by
the Sprite of God. 65. Search the Scriptures. 72. To selle Christ. 292.
Simple error. 46. 50. A Priest may not be deposed for simple fornication.
362. 363. 364. 365. Simple fornication, whether it be sin, or no. 361. The
Judge of Sin. 140. ^53. The word of God forgeueth Sins. 158. Sin
forgiven without Cousesno^. 155. The Pope cannot commit Simonie. 560. 561.
562. 563. Unchaste single life, worse then aduoutrie. 170. Filthiness
maintained under the color of single life. 167. 168. The Priest forgeueth not
Sin. 154. Sins forgeuen by hearing the word of God. 138. The fruits of
single life. 187. 188. 189. Singe^s. 98. Spiritual eating of Christ's Body.
271 272. 274. 280. Stevves in Rome. 369. 370. 371. 373. Stubbernenesse. 46. 50.
590. Substance. 251. ^ubstance, by M. Hardinges Judgment, signifies
Accidents. 253. Succession. 127. Succession not sufficient. 132. Succession in
Peter's Chair. 727. The Succession of Popes. 131. 132. Christ was able to
shevve no succession. 128. The Pope has his holiness by Succession. 39.
Certainty of Succession. Ibidem. Summus Sacerdos. 526. 527. Superstitious
choice of meats. 270. Superintendents. 597. Sursum corda, used in the time of
the holy mysteries. 275.
T.
Temple. 328. Theophylacte ansvvered. 239. He that enters not by the word
of God, is a Thief. 102. The Popes tyranny over Princes. 732. Tyranny and
cruelty in the Popes. 79 Freere Ticelles Proclamation. 34. Traditions. 195.
Vain Traditions fathered upon the Apostles. 66. Tradition is the sense of the
Scripture. 72. Traditions and Errors cut of by Gods word. 67.
Traditions equal with Gods word. 195. Traditions used for the word of God.
196. 197. Traditions broken. 195. Tradition against the Scripture. 65. 66
Traditions abused. 66. Transubstantiation nevve and doubtful. 237 238.
Tridentine Counsel referred al to the Pope. 634. Truth deuoureth falsehed.
585. Truth blinded with falsehed. 7. The Truth still a stranger. 9. Truth il
entreated, and sclaundered, 4. 5 Truth vvil conquer. 284. Truth prevails.
731. The sprite of Truth in Annas and Caiphas. 621.
V.
Valentinian the Emperor refused to hear Ecclesiastical causes. 667. Venial
sins remitted other ways, then by the blood of Christ. 151. The Pope
changes vice into virtue. 564. Vigilantius. 13. The Church is the Popes
Vineyard. 608. The perpetual virginity of our Lady. 200. The vicious life of
the Roman Clergy. 358. I vvil no more drink of this fruit of the Vine,
expounded. 262. One universal Bishop. 99. 122. Universal power committed no
more to Peter, then to Paul. 124. An University in Rome. 377. The Popes
vauntinge of his universal power. 125. Pope Gregory refuses the name of
Universal Bishop. 124. Reasons for the Universality of the Pope. 100. 101.
Unity, a token of the Truth. 352. The Universal Church depends on the
Pope. 452. The Universal church may fail. 450 Unity among the wicked. 352.
The Unity of the Church reasteth (not in one Christ, but) in one Pope. 100.
466. 467. Pride it self desires Unity. 100. Ministers Unlearned. 602. The
Roman clergy Unlearned. 601. 602. A Vow simple, or solemn. 499. Vow
annexed unto holy orders. 171. Volusianus the Bishop of Carthage. 366
VV.
Water was not water, but blood. 246 Watches. 13. VVeemen changed into men.
380. Wicked men commended. 421. The Wicked eat not the Body of Christ. 210.
241. 273. 349. 586. The Wicked receive the Body of Christ, in what sense.
210. Willful stubbernenesse. 435. VVitenberg. 391. A poor husbandman bringinge
the Word of God, ought to be believed before Pope or Counsel. 611. The
Authority of Gods Word. 194
Z.
Zele, and grief of mind against the enemies of God. 3.
FINIS.

