A DISCOVERY OF THE ERRORS OF THE ENGLISH ANABAPTISTS.

As also an Admonition to all such as are led by the like spirit of error.

Wherein is set down all their several and maine points of error, which they
hold.

With a full answer to every one of them severally, wherein the truth is
manifested.

By Edmond lessop who sometime walked in the said errors with them.

PSALM. 40. 1. I waited patiently upon the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry.

He brought me also out of the horrible pit, and mirie clay, and has set my
feet upon the rock, and orders my goings.

And he has put in my mouth a new song of praise unto our God: many shall see
it, and fear, and trust in the Lord.

Therefore have I not hid thy righteousness within my heart, but have declared
thy truth and thy salvation, and have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth
from the great congregation.

ver. 10. LONDON, Printed by W. Jones for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at
his shop in Cheapside at the sign of the Bible. 1623.

Their principal points which are handled in this Book: viz.
1 That God did predestinate all men to be saved, upon condition that they
repent and believe the Gospel. 2 That God did not elect before all time, to
grace and life, any particular persons; but in time he does elect qualities, as
faith and obedience; and then finding these qualities in men, he does elect
their persons for the qualities sake. 3 That all men have free will in
themselves, as well to repent of their sins, to believe the Gospel and
obtain salvation, as they have to remain in hardness of heart and unbelief,
and in the estate of damnation. 4 That the steadfastness of man's justification
and salvation does depend upon his own will, in continuing in the act of
believing and works of righteousness; and that such as have faith in Christ
Jesus, regenerate persons having their names written in the book of life, may
fall away from all, may become unregenerate, and have their names rased out of
the book of life again, and perish: and that God does alter and change his
purpose and promise, and come to hate and reject such as he has formerly loved
and justified. 5 That there is no Original sin, but that all children of all
manner of people in the world, as well heathens, Infidels, Idolaters,
worshippers of Devils, all kind of blasphemers, fornicators, and unclean
persons whatsoever, (as of the faithful) are free from all pollution of sin,
both in the conception and birth; and dying before they commit actual sins,
are saved. 6 That none ought to be baptized but such men and women of years
only, as have attained to true repentance and justifying faith, being both in
the account of the Church and in the sight of God regenerate persons: and that
the baptism of children used, is no baptism at all, but is the mark of the
Beast spoken of in Reuelat. 13. 7 That the Church of England is a false and
Antichristian Church, and ought to be separated from. As also a touch of the
errors of the Familists. 8 And that a King or Magistrate cannot be a true
Christian, except he give over his kingly office or Magistracy.
AN ADVERTISEMENT to the Christian Reader.
WHereas Beloved, there has risen and sprung up from amongst us, many
dangerous and erroneous opinions, in these our last days, about the subject of
Religion, let it not therefore seem strange unto you, being the Spirit of God,
did not only foresee, but also foretold of the same, long before they did
appear, every one being divided into sundry and several factions, all
pretending to worship the true and everliving God in spirit and in truth,
speaking peace unto themselves, when as the most of them do yet lie wallowing
in the puddle of iniquity, and cradle of security, being not purged in heart:
all which do rise two sundry ways, being branches of one stock, derived from
one principal head, (namely) the spirit of error: The first is, in that they
contemn, or so little, or lightly esteem that means, which by Gods
providence is affoorded unto us under our peaceable dread Sovereign Lord the
King. Secondly, they being self conceited, or as Saint Paul speaks, advancing
themselves in those things they never saw, rashly puffed up with carnal minds,
supposing they know some thing more then others, vnderualuing all, and
ouerualuing themselves; the conceit whereof causes them to fall to Schism,
and separate from all others, when as indeed and in truth they being examined,
by the word and Spirit of God, it will appear to the godly wise, that as yet
most of them know nothing aright, or as they ought to know, if ever they expect
the salvation of their souls. For if they were but possessed with the true
knowledge an live of God in Christ, and so were of a sound mind, at Saint Paul
exhorts all to be, it would rather cause humiliation, then exaltation, which
would truly teach every one how to d^meane and carry himself, about so weighty
a subject. The neglect hereof does bring them into a labyrinth of errors,
following after a form of godliness, through the wisdom and knowledge of the
brain only, without the power thereof, contenting themselves in the out side
of religion, blessing themselves in what they can do, and measuring the love
of God to themselves by their own doings, as of old, their predecessors, the
Scribes and Pharisees did: following shadows instead of substances, dreaming of
a kind of felicity in this form and in that, seeking peace and rest to their
souls, where it is not to be found; which condition of theirs, I cannot but
condole, desiring with the Prophet, That my head were water, and mine eyes a
fountain or well of tears, that I might weep day and night for their misery.
And in special for them, who are near and dear unto me, in the bonds of
nature. For poor souls, they cover their spiritual misery, with Adams fig
tree leaves, or with the spiders web, striving for an outward separation in the
flesh, when alas it is much to be feared, that with many of them there is little
or no care at all for a separation of the soul from sin: challenging and
assuming unto themselves soundnes of religion, and assurance of Gods love, ever
measuring themselves by themselves, and not by that eternal wisdom, which is
Justified of her children, being blinded through self-love, not willing to
judge themselves, and so become low in their own eyes, that God might be all
in all, but contrariwise judging and condemning all, but themselves, after this
manner do they follow the vision of their own hearts, deceiving and being
deceived, running and flitting from one opinion unto another, being unstable in
all their ways. Which practice of theirs may well be compared unto certain
flies, feeding on the back of a gald horse, which is ever flitting or removing
from one place to another, until at last they come to suck so much venom
therefrom, whereby they burst asunder: so likewise do all such persons, who
have not their hearts established with true saving grace, but with sundry
meats (that is to say) with sundry strange and different opinions, (I call
them strange, because they were never heard of in all the Scriptures, as
hereafter shall appear,) running from one form of religion unto another,
until at last they come to suck and feed upon that poysonable heresy of the
Familists, who are not worthy to have so much as the name or title of religion
given unto them, it being not only the last strain or faction they commonly
run into, but also destroying and damnable, whereby the word of God is by them
blasphemed, and the way of life and truth evil spoken of, to the great
dishonor of the great and mighty Ichouah, who will one day break and tear
them in pieces (as with a rod of iron) when none shall be able to deliver them,
as a just recompense of reward for all such as take pleasure therein. So then
beloved brethren, friends or kindred, of what sex or condition soever, whether
young or old, rich or poor, be exhorted and forewarned hereby, not giving the
least heed unto any lying spirits, under what pretense soever they have, may,
can or will present themselves unto you; but (on the contrary) labor by the
grace and power you have, or shall receive of the Lord, to resist and avoid
them, even as our Lord and Master did that archspirit and enemy of all
mankind, knowing that if the least way be given, you will be in danger to be
inthralled and ensnared by their deceiuings. And although some of them be more
defective and more dangerous to infect the souls of men then others be, as
most certain there are, for there are degrees as well in difference of
spirits, as of nature and natural parts, yet (I say) they which may conceive
have most soundness in their opinion, it will be found upon due and just
trial, not to be that which they would seem both unto themselves and others
to be, which hereafter will appear. Of these things, my beloved, I can in some
measure best advertise you, being through want of the true saving knowledge and
understanding of God and his truth, caught and entangled by some of them,
wandering up and down amongst the dry hills and mountains, conceiving comfort,
when alas I was far from it; and the farther I wandered up and down in that
Egyptian darkness, the more intricate labyrinth of error and darkness my
soul was plunged into; like unto a blind man who having not his perfect sight,
goes on in darkness, until at last he falls into a pit of destruction, for
want of a guide to conduct and lead him; and especially when I walked with the
Anabaptists, which way and practice of theirs, shall evidently appear to every
honest, true and sanctified heart, not only to ouerturne and race the
foundation of all Christian religion, but also (in as much as in them lies) to
destroy the faith of Jesus Christ: all which time, though strangely deluded,
yet was I kept by the power and providence of God from being seduced and led
into that destroying and irrecouerable way of death before mentioned, namely,
the Familists though very nigh unto it, having one foot entered therein, whiles
I walked with the people aforesaid, until at last the Lord in his appointed
time was pleased to give me a true sight of the misery wherein I was plunged;
one means whereof being the rod of correction, which God had laid upon me, it
drove me the more seriously to examine things, and to consider with my self,
whether the cause (for which I suffered) would any whit avail me unto
salvation, or whether it would minister comfort unto me in that great and
teerible day of the Lord. So upon a more serious suruay of those positions I
then maintained, I found them all too light, yea so light, as they were not
able to stand against those truths which the holy Scriptures teach and
maintain: whereupon immediately I rejected my former received opinions, as
erroneous and wicked; so that I may say (and that truly) with that holy man
David, It was good for me that I was corrected and chastised, for till then I
went astray. Yet notwithstanding, though I was clean escaped therefrom, within
a short time after, I was so far from having or enjoying true peace and
comfort, that in stead thereof, my poor distressed soul was accompanied with
nothing but strange fears, terrors and guiltiness of conscience, crying out
against me for nothing but vengeance; the misery whereof was such, as caused me
to lament the time wherein I was borne, not regarding wife, children, or any
friends whatsoever that came to visit me. The misery wherein I was, did deprive
me of being sensible of the least joy, either in heaven or on earth, being
altogether benumbed therewith, compassed and set about with many strange and
fearful apparitions of temptations; the primary and first cause thereof, was
that original guilt which I drew from the loins of my first parents, being
the very seed and spawne of all my actual transgressions; and so being
confounded and utterly lost, yea often times in despair, fearing there was mo
mercy with God for me, my sins being so heavy a burden upon my soul; then
(even then) when I was in greatest despair, God by his Spirit was pleased to
work in me a contrite and broken heart, whereby it was turned from being a
stubburne and stony, by dissoluing (...) into a heart of flesh, as soft as
water; and therein (through (...) infinite love and goodness) did by a more
special work (...) his Spirit, write his everlasting covenant of love and
mercy ^^ich it so much sued, sought and longed for, with full assur^^^^ of the
remission of all my sins, whereby I stand sealed (...) the day of my redemption
is accomplished in the second resurrection; that as certain as my Red^emer
lives and cannot die, so certain I am that one day I shall enjoy that
glorious inheritance, purchased through the merits of Jesus Christ; which
happy and blessed estate, my soul could not enjoy, whiles it stuck fast in
the quick sands of Anabaptistry, being even welnigh smothered and overwhelmed
in error and darkness, until the Lord was pleased to open the eyes of my
understanding, by hearing the word and doctrine of truth, which is maintained
by and in the Church of England, as namely the doctrine of repentance, free
justification by faith, Gods eternal predestination and election from the
foundation of the world, that no man has free will or power to obtain his
own salvation, and that original sin to be in all the posterity of Adam,
ever since we fell from that happy and blessed estate which once we had in
him, with many other excellent truths; all which is such a certain and sure
foundation that whosoever can attain to walk in the power thereof, the gates
of hell shall never overcome nor destroy him: yet notwithstanding all these
truths there maintained, I dare not attribute so great a work as this unto any
mortal man whatsoever, any otherwise, then his ministry to be the ordinary
means thereof, but desire to give the praise (both now and for ever) only to
God, unto whom it is due, he being the principal and chief worker therein, by
the powerful minstration of his holy Spirit, that so he may be all in all unto
all. And thus in all humility of soul, I humbly take my leave, proceeding
unto that which follows, beseeching God (even the God of all peace, grace,
mercy and love) to confirm, direct and inform all our hearts by his holy
Spirit, whereby we may not only come to understand the truth thereof, but also
to practice the same in our lives and conuersations, to the praise of the
glory of his grace, until we come to be safe arrived at the promised
Jerusalem, which is the haven or port of eternal rest, therein shall all
tears be wiped from our eyes, and so enjoy the presence of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, the Prince of our salvation; to whom with the Father and
the holy Spirit, be all praise, honor and glory given of his Saints for
evermore. Amen.

Yours in all Christian duty, Edmond Iessop.

A DISCOVERY OF THE ERRORS OF THE ANABAPTISTS.
Their first point. That God did predestinate all men to be saved, upon
condition that they repent, and believe the Gospel.
We answer.

GOD did not predestinate all men to be saved, nor any man upon any condition,
either of repentance, faith, or whatsoever else was to be expected or could be
foreseen in them.

But his predestination was in this sort:

First, God (before he created any thing) saw and foreknew what would be the
nature and event of all things; how though he made as excellent creatures as
could be created, yet there would be weakness and folly found in them; because
to be absolutely perfect and unchangeable, is proper only to God the Creator.
So that it was impossible God should make his creature equal with himself, to
will all things that be good perfectly and unchangeably, and to do all things
that such a will can desire; for then he must be God, able to create, which is
impossible, because there can be but one God, which is the first beginner and
Lord of all creatures. This one God foreseeing (I say) what would become of the
best creatures he could make; how though he should require nothing at their
hands but that which they might easily observe (and it was meet and very
requisite they should acknowledge a duty to him their first beginner and Lord,
in whose goodness and power their life and safety did depend,) yet they would
neglect the same, and fall from him: he therefore of his mere goodness (having
great respect unto his creature which he had resolved to make; and being
exceeding willing, not for any thing he could foresee in them, but for his own
good pleasure and glory sake, to save and glorify of the same, Prou. 8. 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
consulting with himself and with his eternal Wisdom which way and how he
might bring his desire to pass) did determine, by election, in and through the
same his eternal Wisdom, his everlasting and only Son, which was before
the depths ever with him as his counselor and hearts delight, to sustain of
the one sort, I mean the Angels, and to redeem of the other sort, I mean
mankind, such a complete sufficient company of both, Revel. 5. 9.
as himself pleased, to be at his right hand, to behold his glory, to
minister before him, and to partake of his pleasures for evermore. And because
there was no way else, but by redemption to save mankind, by reason the first
man being once fallen, all the rest then in his loins, who were to come of him
by generation, fell together with him; and that there was not any one in heaven
or in earth, that was able to undo the works of the devil, and to deliver
those his elect from his servitude and bondage, but only the same his eternal
Wisdom, the Word whereby he made the world; therefore as he had chosen them in
him, so did he decree to send him into the world, and in a wonderful manner to
take man's nature and flesh on him, that therein he might accomplish his
purpose, and bring his counsel and desire to pass, in subduing his and their
enemy, and purchasing redemption for them by his death and resurrection. And
as he did determine before the world was, Romans 8. 29* 30.
to send him; so did he predestinate them (whom he had chosen in him and
foreknew) to be conformed to his image, that he might be the first borne among
many brethren; the rest he resolved to leave, Prou. 1. 31.
and to reward them with the fruit of their own ways.

Thus God foresaw all things, thus did he by his wisdom find out a way to
sustain and restore of his creatures, this was his decree, and in this sort
did he predestinate. God did not, neither is he ever said in Scripture to
predestinate any to do evil, nor to preordaine any to condemnation, but upon
the foresight of their folly and wickedness, as the cause and ground thereof:
and so the salvation of man is freely and only in God, in Christ; and the
condemnation of man is merely and truly of himself, without any secret
reservation whatsoever: as it is written, Hosea 13. 9.
O Israel, destruction is of thy self, but thy salvation is of God.

Their second point. That God did not elect before all time, to grace and life,
any particular persons; but in time he does elect qualities, as faith and
obedience, and then finding these qualities in men, he does elect their persons
for the qualities sake.
Answ.

TO affirm that God did not elect in Christ, before all time, some particular
persons to grace, holiness and life eternal, is to deny Gods free and
undeserved love; and to say, that God does elect qualities, is senseless; and
to teach, that God does elect persons for qualities sake, is very erroneous and
Antichristian.

We say therefore, that Gods election is after this manner: First, before men or
qualities of any sort were, God of his mere love did elect and choose in
Christ, out of the whole posterity and race of mankind, which he foresaw, and
were before him, as if they had actually been, a seed, a remnant, to be his
people, to be his heritage, to be holy and without blame before him in love, as
Saint Paul does testify, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6.
saying, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, 1 Pet.
1. 2.
according as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, Rom
9. 11, 12, 13.
that we should be holy and without blame before him in love; having
predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his own will, to the praise of the glory of
his grace. Whence it is evident, that God did choose a people to himself, even
before the foundation of the world, not for qualities sake, which then were
not, but for his own good pleasure sake, and to the end that they should be in
time qualified with spiritual and heavenly gifts, holy affections, blameless
life and holy conversation, even as he did predestinate them also before the
world unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, which was to be actually
fulfilled in time, that so all might be to the praise of the glory of his
grace.

And for further proof, that election is before qualities of faith and
obedience, and not of qualities, but of persons to be qualified; see what
Christ himself says, (foretelling of the great abomination of desolation,
and days of the tribulation of Antichrist, which should come into the world,
whereby the truth should be cast to the ground, and the Saints of the most High
consumed) But for the elects sake those days shall be shortened: Math. 24. 22.
Meaning by the elect, not qualities, nor persons qualified, but persons to be
qualified, not then being, nor to be till many hundred years after, even till
these our times, as experience has proved. For those days of desolation were
not then begun, neither did that Man of sin rise up till near four hundred
years after; and those elect were to be in the days of his consumption, Dan.
9. 27.
when his days of desolation should begin to grow short, as the text shows,
which time is now at last come into the world. And although his time of
desolation has been long, and that his days of tyranny are not yet fully
ended, yet nevertheless both it and they, are now well wasted and shortened,
according to the word of the Lord, and his Gospel shines in stead thereof, not
only in other kingdoms and parts abroad, but chiefly in this our Land, blessed
be his name therefore; which had it not been, had Antichrist with his days of
desolation continued still in the full strength and height they were, Reu. 19.
11, 12, 13.
had not he that sits on the white horse, whose name is called the Word of
God, taken his own cause in hand, 2. Thessal. 2. 8.
and with the spirit of his mouth consumed and cut short (as he daily does)
those abominable days of the Man of sin, questionless, no flesh should now
in these last times have bin saved, but all had bin overwhelmed with his
deceit, Math. 24.
as it is written, And except those days should be shortened, ver. 22.
there should no flesh be saved; but for the elects sake those days shall be
shortened: nay they are shortened, Romans 8. 30.
the light of the Gospel shines, and the elect are thereby daily called,
sanctified and saved.

Hence it is evident, that election is before calling and justification (even
as predestination is, Ephesians 1. 4.
) seeing God does count and call them his elect, so long before they are in
being; and that election is to those blessed ends, whereof the Gospel is the
only means. Romans 1. 16.


And for further confirmation of this point, Saint Paul declares, that all the
seed which God did covenant with Abraham, Romans 9. 7.
to call in Isaac, saying, In Isaac shall thy seed by called, yea Isaac
himself and Jacob likewise, were chosen of God in Christ, and known of him,
before either Christ or one thousand part of that seed were borne; being only
promised of God to Abraham, as a seed and generation spiritual, not of Isaac
and his natural offspring only, but of the Gentiles also, and were to be
derived in a spiritual manner of that one seed the Messiah promised, in which
Abraham believed, though he were not to come into the world for many hundred
years after; in respect whereof God said unto him, I have made thee a father
of many nations. Romans 4* 17.
This seed of Abraham, Saint Paul calls the children of promise, Romans 9. 8.
because they are all borne by promise, Gal. 3. 29. and 4. 28.
as was Isaac, being of that one seed which is Christ, and part of that small
remnant which he had reserved in him before the foundation of the world, but
for whose sake we had not continued till now, but had been made like Sodom
long before this day. And that this seed and children of Abraham were* chosen
of God in Christ before they were borne, Saint Paul further proves it by the
words spoken to Rebecca concerning Jacob, Romans 9. 10, 11.
saying, And not only this, but when Rebecca also was conceived by one, even
by our father Isaac; for the children being not yet borne, nor having done good
or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
works, but by reason of him that calls, it was said unto her, The elder shall
serve the younger; as it is witten: Jacob have I loved, ver. 12.
and Esaw have I hated. By this word of promise concerning Jacob, Saint Paul
proves more fully (I say) that which in substance he had declared before by
the word of promise, as touching Isaac, and as concerning the seed which God
did promise Abraham to call in Isaac; namely that the purpose of God according
to election, Ephesians. 1. 3.
his free love in choosing us first in Christ, is the true ground and principal
cause of all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, which in time we come to
enjoy in him. For doubtless there was no cause in Jacob more then in Esaw, why
God should have this respect unto him more then to Esaw; the seed of evil was
sown in him also, Romans 5. 12, 14, 18.
and their natures were both corrupt, even from their conception, yea from
Adam, in whose loins both they and their parents were when he transgressed.
And as the tree or plant, which for want of strength being young and tender,
cannot yield forth fruit, whereby it nature may be shown, Psalm. 51* 5.
yet (being in nature evil) the substance and root of evil is therein, ver. 7.
and so as without a replantation and conjunction with some tree or plant of
better nature, it can bring forth no other but evil fruit: so Jacob as well as
Esaw, his nature being also corrupt and evil, John 3. 6.
had not God intercepted him, Job 14. 4.
and (as he had chosen him before in Christ) so by a new birth or replantation
changed his nature, his heart I mean, he would have brought forth no other but
evil fruit also (as well as his brother Esaw) even to his last hour, and so
have perished together. Thus much shall serve for the truth of Gods election.

Their third point is: That all men have free will in themselves, as well to
repent of their sins, to believe the Gospel and obtain salvation, as they
have to remain in hardness of heart and unbelief, and in the estate of
damnation.
Answ.

TO teach that all or that any men have as free will in themselves to repent,
to believe the Gospel, and obtain salvation, as they have to remain in the
contraries, is very erroneous and Antichristian.

But the truth is this.

That as we have all sinned in and from our father Adam, Romans 3. 9. and 5. 12,
14, 18.
and are excluded from the glory of God and from the joy of his presence;
Philip. 2. 13.
so have we all lost and are deprived of all possibility in will or power of
nature to act any thing either inward or outward, Romans 9. 16.
as touching the law, Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
or as concerning the Gospel, whereby to recover our selves again, Ioh. 6.
44, 65. and 15. 16.
or ever to obtain that which we have lost. Ier. 10. 23.
So that notwithstanding the Gospel be preached to all, 2. Cor. 3. 5.
and that every one is invited to the feast thereof, Math. 22. 5, 14.
and that there is not any other way or means whereby we may possibly recover
and live; Luke 14. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
yet the most part of ye world do utterly refuse to come, so much as to the
outward acceptance thereof: and those that do come, who being enlightened by
the holy Ghost, do assent unto the truth of the Gospel, and so come in unto
the outward profession thereof, yet for all this (such is the evil heart of
man) if God should not vouchsafe (according to his eternal purpose and
promise) to call in a more special manner them whom he foreknew, Rom 8. 28, 29.
and 1 16.
and had predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, 1. Cor. 1.
24. 26.
to call them (I say) by a more special gift and power of the holy Ghost, Luk
4. 18.
first to repentance, in turning their hearts from all the delight and pleasure
they had taken in sin and in the vanities of the flesh and this world, Esaias
61. 1.
into a wonderful great sorrow of heart, mourning and weeping for the same,
Ezekiel 36. 27.
causing them also with many tears to lament the time that ever they took
pleasure therein; Math. 15. 24.
and falling down at the feet of God, with humble hearts confess unto him
those their sins and follies, desiring unspeakably and restlesly, mercy and
forgiveness at his hands, love and reconciliation with him; Ezekiel. 11. 19.
thus taking first away their hard and stony hearts, and giving them hearts of
flesh, Ier. 32 39.
soft and tender hearts; and then (in the second place) to write (not with ink
and pen, 2. Cor. 3. 3, 4.
but with the special finger of his holy Spirit, not in tables of stone, but
in these the fleshly tables of their hearts) these their repentant hearts, his
covenant of mercy and love, assuring them that their sins be forgiven, and
that he is reconciled with them, and they with him in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 26,
27.
whom now they have put on by faith. If God should not have vouchsafed (I say)
thus to call them whom he had predestined, thus to justify them and cloathe
them, (but that he is faithful and cannot lie, keeping his covenant for ever,
as touching that seed which he did promise to call in Isaac) they would and
should have perished with the rest, notwithstanding any free will or power they
have in nature (more then they) to attain to these things. Object.


But peradventure some impudent person will object, that if God does call and
sanctify some in such a special manner, by more special gifts of the Spirit,
then he does afford to others; then his not affoording the same unto them, is
the cause of their misery.

To answer them, Answ.
put the case that there were two young men, that having received at their
parents hands their portions, have through riot and lewdness spent all, and
brought themselves into so great poverty and debt, as that they have no way or
means whereby (possibly) they can recover and raise themselves again, but are
both like to live in misery to their dying days: tell me, have they not been
(themselves) the authors of this their own ruin and decay? and is not this
misery just upon? I suppose (as little grace as thou have) thou will answer,
Yea. But admit there were a man of great substance, who should out of his own
bounty, freely, and of his own accord deliver one of these young men out of
his misery, pay his debts, and restore him to his former estate again; Is
this rich man, by his free bounty to the one, become now the cause of the
others misery? do thou dare to affirm it? Mat, 20. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Must thine eye needs now be evil, because he is bountiful? Is it not lawful
for him to bestow his own where and on whom he pleases? Or do thou mean,
Object.
that his not doing the like for the other, is the cause of his continual
misery. To answer thee, Answ.
did he not bring himself into it? and was it not of it self, continual and
just by thine own confession? How then may the thing that never was done, be
the cause of that which is in being? Can the effect be before the cause? I have
heard that the cause is before the effect, but I never heard that the effect is
or can be before the cause. But if I should admit of thine opinion, that all
men have free will in themselves, to choose, as they have to refuse grace
offered; to see what the issue thereof will be, let me ask thee, what is the
reason then, that but some men do choose grace? is it because they have a
better, and more inclinable will in them by nature then their fellows? If
there be no special gift of grace to move them, it must be some special gift
or quality of nature. For such a special differing effect, must have a
special differing cause. Or will thou say, it is by the operation or secret
motion of some planet (as some heathenishly conceive:) if so, yet it is in some
sort natural. The effects we speak of, are the baptism of repentance, and
the purification of faith, called in Scripture, the baptism or birth of water
and of the holy Ghost, which are the parts of our regeneration: now can any
gifts or qualities of nature, or operations of planets, produce or cause such
effects as these? Nay doublesse; for causes are always greater then effects;
and greater things then these, are not to be found in the natures of men or
planets, but in God, who by the special power and virtue of his holy Spirit,
does cause these great effects, Ioh. 3. 5.
does work and produce this new and heavenly birth; Iam. 1, 17, 18.
and therefore the persons thus qualified, are said in Scripture to be borne of
God, 1. Ioh. 3. 9. If thou say, that God put this difference in the will of
man by creation; then thou make God the author and cause of sin, which thou
would seem to avoid, by excluding his special gifts of the Spirit, fearing
as if it led thee to it; whereas it is but thy gross apprehension that makes
thee fear; and by this means thou runnest thy self out of breath, thou
know not whither. So then to conclude this point with Saint Paul's words,
Romans 9. 16.
It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy.

Their fourth point is: That the steadfastness of man's justification and
salvation does depend upon his own will, in continuing in the act of believing
and works of righteousness; and that such as have faith in Christ Jesus,
regenerate persons having their names written in the book of life, may fall
away from all, may become unregenerate, and have their names rased out of the
book of life again, and perish: and that God does alter and change his
purpose and promise, and come to hate and reject such as he has formerly loved
and justified.
Answ.

TO teach that the stedfastnes of man's justification and salvation, does depend
upon his own will, in continuing in the act of believing and works of
righteousness; and that such as have faith in Christ, regenerate persons, having
their names written in the book of life, may fall away from all, become
unregenerate, and have their names rased out of the book of life, and perish;
and y^ God does alter his purpose and promise of mercy and love, and come to
hate and reject such as he has formerly loved and justified: to teach all this
(I say) is to deny the very foundation, and to make God unfaithful, and is
one of the maine errors of the Antichristian Church of Rome.

But the doctrine of the Church of God is this: That such as to whom God has
given true repentance, and faith in Christ whereby they are justified from
their sins, and have their hearts sanctified, such as have their parts in the
first resurrection, Revel. 13. 8.
whose names were written in the book of life from the foundation of the
world, shall never fall away from this estate, nor from any part thereof;
because they stand not, neither are kept by the strength of their own will, 1.
Pet. 1. 5.
act of faith, or works of righteousness, Romans 5. 10.
but by the power and strength of God, in and through the virtue and life of
Christ their head. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6.
For as God the Father did of himself, first choose them in Christ his Son,
Romans 8. 29. 30.
and predestinate them unto the adoption of children, and to be conformed to
the image of his Son, even from the foundation of the world; and as he also
in time calls them to repentance, justifies them, and purifieth their hearts
by faith, through grace in Christ, Acts 15. 9. and 10. 43.
and by the Spirit of his Son, which he sends forth into their hearts, Romans
8. 15, 16.
does adopt them to be his children, (...). 29.
and conform them to the image and likeness of his Son, both in respect of
his death, and also in regard of his resurrection, dying to sin, and rising
to holiness and newness of life; from minding earthly things, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3.
to set their affections on things that are above, where Christ sits at his
right hand: so (I say) it is God which in and through his Son, does keep and
defend them, as it is written, Who are kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation. 1. Pet. 1. 5.
Yea he is the rock of their salvation, Psalm. 62. 2, 6, 7.
and strong tower of defense; he is their watchman, Esaias 40. 11.
which does neither slumber nor sleep; Psalm. 23. 1.
their shepherd that feeds them, as the Psalmist speaks; Ioh. 15 1, 2.
he is the husbandman, that did not only ingraft and plant them in his Son
the true vine, and cause them to bear fruit in him, but every branch that
bears fruit in him, he purges, that it may bear more fruit; Ioh. 10. 29.
and 17. 6. 10, 12*
he gave them his Son, and his Son them, and the Son rejects none that
come unto him, but takes them into his protection, and 10. 14. 4.
like the good shepherd, and they hear his voice, and he knows them, and
they follow him, and he will give them eternal life, and they shall not perish,
ver. 28, 29, 30.
for none are able to pluck them out of his hands; and the Father that gave
them him, is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of his
Fathers hands. Nay if Satan should desire to sift them, Luk 22. 31.
and that their faith (through the violence of temptation) should seem to
fail, as touching their act of believing, and that their fruit (by means
thereof) should not appear, (for so it may sometimes befall them, as it did
the Apostle Peter) yet notwithstanding, the Lord their rock, Psalm. 62. 7. 2.
Pet. 2. 4. 5, 6.
the foundation and chief corner stone, whereon these lively stones are built,
sustaineth and vpholdeth them; the virtue and strength of him, Ioh. 15. 5.
the true vine, in which they are ingraffed, the Son in whom they have believed
(he having also prayed the Father, Luke 22. 32.
that their faith fail not) shall raise them up* refresh them, and make them
to flourish again, as well in regard of their faith, as fruits; and being thus
converted and raised up, shall be able thenceforth to strengthen their brethren.
And in these respects and considerations, Christ faith to Peter, Math. 16. 18.
Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. For as at the first they were not justified from their
sins by their own act of believing, though their act of believing were
necessary unto their justification; nor yet by their works of righteousness
which followed, though they were also necessary for the proof and
manifestation of their faith; but by the free grace of God in Jesus Christ,
ministered unto them by his word and Spirit, which their act of faith only (in
their hearts) does entertain: so neither do they stand, or are vpholden, by
their act of believing, though it be necessary also, for their continual
comfort, that they should be evermore exercised, as in the word and promise of
God, so in the act of believing, going on still from strength to strength,
drawing nearer and nearer unto God, in the full assurance of faith, until at
last they come to see his face, and enjoy his presence, in the promised
Jerusalem, where is all fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11.
and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore, (as assuredly one
day they shall;) not yet by their works of righteousness, though it be
likewise necessary, that they should be always walking in, and working the
works of righteousness: but the steadfastness and certainty of their estates in
Christ, their life, salvation, and glory everlasting, depends on the
steadfastness, certainty and unchangeableness of Gods purpose, promise, love,
and on the love and life of Christ their head, which was once dead, but is now
alive, and lives still for evermore. And so sure and certain as God
purposes, and it comes to pass, Ioh. 13. 1.
as he promises and fails not, loves once, and loves to the end; so sure
as Christ which loves them lives, shall they abide in him, live by him, and
not die for ever; Ioh. 6. 56, 57.
as it is written, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in
me, and I in him. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father,
so he that eats me, even he shall live by me. For he is the bread of life;
Ioh. 6. 47.
and every one that believes in him, does (in a spiritual manner) eat of him,
and so lives by him, and shall have everlasting life. For as Saint Paul
reasons, If when we were enemies, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being
reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. So that he that is once justified by
the blood of Christ, and reconciled to God through faith in him, his estate is
certain and permanent: and though the mountains shall depart, and the hills be
moved, yet shall not the kindness and love of God in Christ depart, nor the
covenant of peace toward them in him, be ever removed from them, as the
Prophet testifies. Nay what shall or can possibly separate them from the love
of Christ, or from the love of God the Father toward them in him? Shall
tribulation, Romans 8. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As
it is written, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are counted as
sheep for the slaughter. Nay says Saint Paul, In all these things we are more
then conquerours through him that loved us. For I am persuaded (says he) that
neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Thus, as God did predestinate, call, justify and sanctify them; so it is he
that keeps and defends them; and the stedfastnes of their estates in him,
does depend upon the stedfastnes and immutabilitie of his purpose, promise,
love, and on the love and life of Christ; and all is free, without any respect
of will, faith, or works of ours, in him and of him; to whom be all power and
glory, praise and thanksgiving for ever. Amen.

But some will object and say, What then means the Scriptures, Object.
which so often speak of falling away from righteousness, from faith; from
Christ, from God; as where it says, Ezekiel. 18. 24.
But when the righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and dies in them; for the iniquities that he has done, shall be
die. And again it is said, that he which takes the plough by the hand and
looks behind him, is not meet for the kingdom of God. And again, When a
soul spirit is cast out of a man, and he walking in dry places, finds no
rest, but returns to the house from whence he came out; and finding it swept
and garnished, enters therein with seven more worse then himself; and the end
of that man shall be worse then the beginning. And again, some are said to
believe for a time, to be offended when tribulation comes. And some branches
are said to be taken away from the vine. Others to withdraw themselves, and to
depart away from the living God: to be made partakers of the holy Ghost, and to
taste of the good word of God and of the powers of the world to come, and to
fall away, not to be renewed again by repentance. That a man may be sanctified
by the blood of the testament, and afterward tread under foot the Son of God,
and count the same blood as an unholy thing, and despite the Spirit of grace.
Some to be clean escaped from the filthiness of the world, and after this to
be entangled again, whose end also is worse then the beginning, likened unto
the dog that returns to his own vomit, and to the sow that is washed, and
turns to wallow in the mire again: And some that do make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience; with diverse other sayings to this purpose. Also these
doubtful speeches: He that endures to the end. If ye hold fast unto the end:
Whose house ye are if ye continue. He that ouercometh and keeps my words unto
the end. And again: Let them be blotted out of the book of the living. I will
take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City. These
Scriptures seem to contradict all that is said before, and to prove that there
is no estate to be attained unto, but may be fallen from, lost and undone
again.

These Scriptures may seem (with men not instructed of God) to contradict all
what have been mentioned before, Answ.
and to prove a falling away from all grace whatsoever; but with such as God
has been pleased to instruct, it is otherwise: and although not only your
sects, but the Antichristian Church of Rome, the Arminians and others, do
conceive and teach from these Scriptures, that there is no estate to be
attained unto in this life, but men may fall therefrom and perish: and because
you will not admit (as it were too gross ye should) of contradiction in
Scriptures, wrest and wring all the former Scriptures which do clearly prove
the contrary, either to make for this your erroneous conceit, or else (at
least) not to oppose the same; yet I say nevertheless, the truth is, that ye
are deceived, not only in this, but in the other of your points, being (most of
them) of the same nature, but all tending to the wrong mark.

It is true, these Scriptures do plainly show, that men may attain to many
excellent graces and gifts of the holy Ghost; they may receive the word with
joy, take the plough by the hand, be enlightened, believe and be baptized; they
may be branches in the vine; they may have a foul spirit cast out of them, and
be swept and garnished; they may taste of the heavenly gift, and be made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and taste of the good word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come; they may be in some respects sanctified by the
blood of the testament, and be clean escaped from the pollutions of the world;
they may have a kind of righteousness, and be in some sort termed righteous men;
they may have faith to cast out devils, and do many great works: all this they
may attain unto, and yet come short of the chief things, fall away from all,
lose all, and Christ may (notwithstanding all these things) justly and truly
say unto them (in the day of account) Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I
never knew ye.

And it is as true, that there be greater and more special things then all
these, which whosoever can attain, shall as certainly abide in Christ and be
saved, as Christ abides in the Father and lives. But the greatest difficulty
lies in this, to distinguish these things rightly asunder, according to the
meaning of the Scriptures, that so their true difference being discerned of us,
we may not only avoid the great confusion, which the want thereof has caused
in the minds of many, and the sundry errors, they through their ignorance have
fallen into, but may be brought to examine and prove our selves by the rule
thereof, whether our estates be yet such as will abide the trial in the day of
account, or no. If we find that they be, we have then great cause of comfort:
if not, then have we great reason to fear, and with all speed to humble our
souls before God, and earnestly ^o desire him, that he would be pleased to
form his son Christ in us, and to conform us unto his image, which is the
estate that will give us boldness in the day of his appearing.

Now that we may rightly understand these things, and discern their true
difference, let us observe, that as the Gospel has two several operations in
the hearts and consciences of men, 2. Cor. 2. 15, 16
(to some it is the savor of life unto life, and to others the savor of death
unto death, not of it self, but through the wickedness of men's hearts:) so
likewise there is a twofold administration thereof, the one general, common
to all, the other special, peculiar to a few: that which is general and
common, is a public declaration, that such a thing there is, whereby all men
in general have this benefit, (namely) y^ whereas after Adam had sinned, before
the promise was made, that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents
head, there was no time nor place for repentance to any, nor remission of sins
upon any ground to be expected; now since that time, by virtue of the promise,
all sin i^ made pardonable, there is time and place for repentance to all,
and remission of sins thereupon granted; so that whosoever shall come, and
with sorrow of heart confess his sins unto God, and humbly desire mercy and
forgiveness at his hands, Romans 16. 15. 16.
shall receive it; and thus far the Gospel is preached to all, Col. 1. 23.
even to every creature under heaven, Mark. 10. 15.
as Saint Paul speaks: so that there is not, nor has been a nation or
people, Math, 28. 19.
in any time or part of the world, that can truly say, we have not heard it;
for (as it is written) their sound went forth throughout all the earth, Psalm.
19.
and their words unto the ends of the world; and so all are left without
excuse, because God has not left himself without witness. But the manner and
measure of Gods declaration of his Gospel, has been diverse: he declared it
unto the nations of the Gentiles in former times, yea and at this present does
in diverse parts of the world, Romans 10. 18.
only by the works which he has created, and benefits that he daily gives
them, Romans 1. 20.
as the heavens and firmament, Act. 14. 16, 17.
day and night, Sun and rain, and in that he gives them fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness, with many other blessings; all
which do (in their manner and kind) preach and declare unto them, that God is
good and gracious to mankind, and has some special respect unto him, and do
also call upon them daily to seek him that made all, and gives all those good
things unto them, and proves unto them, Act. 17. 27.
that if they had sought, they might have found, in him, yet greater things,
which some of them (doubles) have attained unto, and the rest by this means are
left without excuse. He showed it to the nation of the Hebrews, not only by
his works and benefits, which they (especially had in great abundance,) but in
another more excellent manner, and in a far greater measure, Heb. 1. 1. 2.
as namely by the testimonies of the Fathers, and by the ministry of Moses
and the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1. 19. 10, 21.
who received it from God, and spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; Heb.
4. 1. 2.
he stretched forth his hand all the day long unto that people, preaching his
Gospel (the word of faith unto them; so as that they of all other, had least
reason to say in their hearts, Who shall ascend into heaven for us, Romans 10, 7,
8, ver. 6.
to fetch it us? or who shall go down into the deep to bring it us, that we
may hear it and do it? but the word was nigh enough unto them, even in their
mouths and in their hearts, etc; and if the Gentiles were left without excuse,
much more they.

And now he has spoken and declared it unto us in these last times by his
Son Jesus Christ, Heb 1. 2.
that Seed which was promised to Adam, to Abraham, was spoken of by Moses, Romans
2. 14.
foretold by the Prophets, in whom, by whom, and through whom, all blessings,
all hope, all grace, and life is granted, is purchased, is to be attained, by
him (I say) and by his holy Apostles, in the power and gifts of the holy Ghost,
he has declared unto us all things clearly, many whereof being such as in all
other former ages were not known: so that the earth flows with the knowledge
of the Gospel in these days, above all those other times past, and many have
been enlightened through the preaching of it, by the Spirit, and have believed
and given their assents unto the truth of it; many have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and have been made partakers of the holy Ghost, have tasted of the good
word of God, and of the powers of the world to come; many are able to preach
and discourse thereof in great and excellent measure; and if the Hebrews could
at no time (truly say, we have not heard it) nor yet those Gentiles that had
not the Law, to wit, those Scriptures and ordinances of the Law, which the
Hebrews had: what can we then say, who have not only had all the means and
light which those Gentiles and Hebrews had, but also the plain revelation of
the Gospel, according as it was foretold to be in these last times, confirmed
by the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and left recorded unto us by his
holy Apostles in full measure; how can it be (I say) therefore, but that the
things which we have heard and believed, will be unto us the savor of death
unto death in a fuller and larger measure, then unto any of them, seeing we
have received a greater and larger measure of knowledge, if we obey not the
Gospel, if we attain not unto the special grace and benefits thereof: for as
the Lord himself testifies, He that knows his masters will, and does it
not, Luk 12. 47.
shall be beaten with many stripes.

But some will say, we have not only knowledge of his will, but obedience
also, we are not like unto those strange fornicators and idolaters of the
Gentiles, nor as the cruel, unbelieving Hebrews, which killed the Prophets,
and murdered the Lord of glory; neither are we of the common sinners of the
world, though we have been so heretofore; nay the power of the holy Ghost, by
the preaching of the word of God, has altered us, the foul spirit is now cast
out by a stronger then he, we are now clean escaped from the filthiness of
the world, our lives and actions are reformed, we apply our selves now to the
hearing of the word, we confer thereof, and read it often, we pray also often,
we receive the Sacraments often, we instruct our children and our servants in the
principles of Christian religion, we keep the Sabbath, we distribute of our
goods to the poor, we neglect no duty which we conceive we ought to perform;
so that we are washed and sanctified by the blood of the testament.

I confess, thou have here a kind of obedience, and do (in part) thy
masters will, and art so far forth sanctified by the blood of the testament,
for by it, all graces and gifts of the Spirit are purchased, and thou could
never have attained to these things but by virtue of it; yet I say,
notwithstanding all this, the chief thing may be wanting in thee; for if this
be to do thy masters will, according to our Saviors meaning, then (doubtless)
the Scribes and Pharisees did his will as well as thee; they made clean the
outside of the cup and platter, they had such a kind of belief, Math. 23. 24,
24 25, 26, 27, 28.
and were as strict in all outward observations as all this, and yet their
insides were foul, their hearts were full of rancor and malice; and so may it
be with thee for all this. Here is a fair blade indeed, but where is the
fruit? Do thou not know that except thy righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5. 20.
thou shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of God? Herod heard John gladly,
and did many things willingly; and Judas no doubt was fair in the leaf, but
his heart was ever corrupt, as the Evangelist testifies, Ioh. 12. 6.
saying, This he spoke, not that he had care of the poor, but that he was
covetous, and carried the bag. Luke 6. 43.
How think thou, can an evil tree bring forth good fruit? Iam. 3. 11. 12.
or can one and the same fountain, bring forth sweet waters, and bitter? Or
can a stinking polluted fountain, bring forth sweet waters? The heart of man
is the tree or fountain, from whence either good or evil comes, as Christ
himself testifies; A good man out of the good treasure of the heart, Luke 6.
44.
brings forth that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure
of his heart, ver. 45.
brings forth that which is evil. If thy heart be evil and unclean, how
can thou then bring forth from thence any good fruit? Acts. 8, 13.
Grant thou art sanctified outwardly, Ioh. 6. 66.
thou have believed and art baptized, thou hear the word with joy, Mat. 13.
20.
thou art all as before is spoken, yet if in heart thou be hard and
unrepentant, proud, puffed up, covetous, unmerciful, one that love thy self
and this present evil world, envious to others, cruel, what will all thy
belief and righteousness avail thee? Nay, admit thou had all faith, so as
thou could move mountains, and that thou should give all thy goods to the
poor, and thy body to be burned, and that no man could tax thy heart by any
evil fruit that yet appeared, nor thy self perceive thine own heart to be
evil; Iam. 1. 8.
yet if thou have not that faith which works by love, Gal. 5. 6.
that love with her natural properties, which the Apostle describes, saying,
Love suffers long, 1. Cor. 13. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
and is kind, it enuieth not, it vaunteth not it self, it is not puffed up, it
behaueth not it self unseemly, it seeks not her own, it is not easily
provoked, it thinks none evil, it rejoices not in iniquite, but it
rejoices in the truth; It bears all things, it belieueth all things, it
hops all things, it endures all things. I say if thou have not that faith
which brings forth these effects, thou art nothing, thou art but as a
sounding brass, and as a tinckling Cimball, notwithstanding all thy gifts of
knowledge, faith, prophecy, righteousness, or whatsoever, and shall be found to
be, but either as the high ways side, or as the stony ground, Mat. 13. 4. 5.
6. 7.
or thornie ground mentioned in the Gospel, which endured not, which never
came to bring forth goodfruit, neither in the greatest, nor least measure,
(like unto the good ground described after, ver 8.
) and thy end will be like that earth, which notwithstanding the rain comes
often upon it, brings forth nothing but thorns and briars, and is therefore
near unto cursing; and as the tree, Heb. 6. 8.
which though it have had much dressing, Mark. 11. 13. 14.
yet because it brings not forth goodfruit, is hewn down and cast into the
fire. Consider therefore what need there is, that we should dilligently
enquire into these things, and see the difference between these two estates,
and that our care and study, might, and daily should be to learn the best.

Now touching the special administration of the Gospel, and those gifts of
the Spirit, which are perticuliar to afew, even Gods elect only.

The special administration of the Gospel is this, Luke 4. 18.
namely a particular application, Act. 10. 36. 37. and Act. 26. 18.
or preaching the word of promise, Mat. 3. 11.
the glad tidings of peace, the forgiveness of sins to the soul of a sinner,
Esa. 40. 20.
whereby he is truly possessed of the grace and love of God in Jesus Christ
through faith in him, and of the forgiveness of his sins; And this is never
done but by a special gift and power of the holy Ghost. Now the course which
God does take to effect and bring this thing to pass, is this; when and after
such time, as God by the general administration of his Gospel, has made
known, and by a common gift of the Spirit, has caused them to believe, and
assent unto, the sum, or necessary parts thereof, as namely, that repentance
and remission of sins is granted to sinners, and salvation to all that can
attain thereto: then does he by a special and more effectual gift of the
Spirit, work upon the hearts of his elect, whom he fore knew, and had
predestinate, calling them to repentance (that is to say) turning them from all
their sins, and from the ways of all the fleshly, and sinful pleasures,
wherein their souls had formerly delighted, into a great fear and sorrow for
the same, and with many tears to lament the time that ever they took pleasure
therein; and falling down before him, with humble and contrite hearts,
confess their sins unto him, desiring in an unspeakable manner, mercy and
forgiveness at his hands, peace, love, and reconciliation with him; which till
they obtain, they can take no rest, they have no joy, they cannot be
satisfied, none of all their former delights will afford them now any comfort;
they stand aloof looking strangely upon them, like friends in adversity,
finding them now no fit companions for them; Nay, there is not any thing, that
will, or can relieve their poor distressed souls, 2. Cor. 1. 21. 22.
or give them their desired content, Ephesians. 1. 13.
but only the love of God in Jesus Christ, sealed in their hearts by his holy
Spirit of promise. These are those poor which the Scriptures speak of, unto
whom Christ was sent to preach good tidings, the bruised and broken in heart,
Math. 11. 28.
them that labor sore, and are heavy laden, the sick, the lost, the dead,
which Christ came to bind up, to heal, to seek out, to quicken and raise to
life; these I say, and none but these, are they whom the Prophet speaks of,
testifying of the Savior, and of the special administration of the Gospel of
peace: saying, Esa. 61. 1. 2. 3.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and he has anointed me to preach good
tidings to the poor, he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, Luke 4.
18. 19.
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of
vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them that
mourn in Sion, to give unto them, beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they might
be called, Trees of righteousness, the plantation of the Lord, that he may be
glorifiea. Luke 7. 22.
And these are the poor, of whom Christ himself speaks, Mat. 11. 5.
saying, And the poor have the Gospel preached unto them; or receive the
Gospel, as some translations have it; for the word does import such a
preaching, as does imply a receiving of it, in the heart of him to whom it is
so preached, as also does the words of Esaias before mentioned. And although all
have it preached unto them in the former general manner, yet none have it
preached unto them in this special peculiar sort, but these poor repentant
persons only, who alone are capable of the receipt thereof, by faith unto
Justification; (and this is that effect of the holy Ghost in the heart of man,
Mat. 21. 26.
) which the Scriptures call, The baptism of John, Mark. 1. 4.
the baptism of water, the baptism of repentance, the birth of water, Ioh 3.
5.
the baptism which John preached, the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
Ephesians. 6. 15.
repentance; which is, the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Heb. 6. 1.
the first principal of the doctrine of Christ, Ioh. 3. 5.
the beginning and first part of regeneration, as the Scripture declares it;
the labor and travel in the birth, but not the full perfection of the new
birth, Mat. 11. 28.
only the soul of the sinner trauelleth ready to be delivered; this is the
second effect of the holy Ghost, but the first peculiar. Then does God in the
third place, reach forth his hand, and takes hold of this poor laboring
soul, and by another special effect, and power of the holy Ghost, does
deliver him, and bring him forth, washes him and cleanses him from his blood,
wherein he lay polluted, his sins which cried out so justly against him, and
lay so heavy upon him, eases him of all, and writes in his heart of flesh, 2
Cor. 3. 3.
his contrite repentant heart, his covenant of mercy and love, which it so
much desired, assuring it, Ier. 31. 34.
that he is now reconciled with him, and that his sins are clean forgiven and
forgotten, Heb. 10. 17.
never to be reckoned or remembered more; Ier. 31. 38, 39. 40.
and that he has loved him, and does love him in Jesus Christ, and will never
put him out of favor, so long as Christ remains in favor.

This is the special administration of the word, and that gift of the Spirit,
whereby Christ is formed in the heart of the poor repentant sinner through
faith, by which he is justified from all his sins, and his heart sanctified,
and is the second part and finishing of the new birth; and these are always
together in the act of justification, the word, the Spirit, and faith; so that
a sinner cannot be said to be actually justified, till the covenant of
remission of sins, which God has made to the repentant sinner, be applied by
the Spirit to his broken heart, and that he believes in his heart that his
sins be forgiven, and that God loves him in Jesus Christ: and this
administation of the word, gift of the Spirit and faith, are expressed in
Scripture, and distinguished from all other administrations, of the word, gifts
of the Spirit, and kinds of faith whatsoever, by several distinct names.

As first, this administration of the word is called in Scripture, The glad
tidings of peace and good things, good tidings, the binding up of the broken
heart, liberty to the captives, The opening of the prison to them that are
bound, Comfort to the mourners, The reviving of the spirits of the humble and
contrite, The covenant of the remission of sins, The covenant of life and
peace, The kingdom of God; Ease, Rest to the soul. The word of his grace, The
word preaching peace by Jesus Christ, The word of reconciliation, etc.

And it is so called in regard of the great and special benefit it brings,
and does administer unto the soul of the repe^tant sinner, by the application
of the Spirit. And for that it is directed of God, and appointed to be preached
to such, and to no (...) For though the Gospel be preached to all, in a
general consideration (as before is showed,) yet (as it is here intended) it
belongs to none, nor is to be preached to any but the repentant only. And
repentance, though it be a part of the Gospel, as it is sometimes in a general
manner proposed, yea the beginning and first principle thereof, and a peculiar
gift of the Spirit, as before also is noted; yet (as it is intended in these
several Scriptures) repentance is no part, but only the preparation
thereunto, or the making ready the heart of a sinner for the same; in which
consideration, John the Baptist, and our Savior both preached, Math. 3. 2.
saying, Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand: where they make repentance
to be one thing, Math. 4. 17.
and the kingdom of God (the glad tidings of the Gospel) another; and require
repentance in the first place, as a thing necessary to be effected in them,
before they could receive by faith the glad tidings of the Gospel, the
kingdom of God, which was at hand to follow after, and to be preached unto
them thereupon. Which order was also observed by the Prophets before; as David,
To day (says he) if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, etc.
lest ye enter not into his rest. In which words he declares plainly to the
people, that if they would believe the promise of entrance into rest, and so by
faith enter thereinto, they should vnharden their hearts, that is to say
repent, otherwise there was no possibility of believing, of entrance.

And secondly, as the special administration of the word, which is so peculiar
to the repentant, is distinguished from all other common administrations; so is
the Spirit, or rather the effect of the Spirit, by which this glad tidings of
peace is applied unto, and written in the heart of the repentant, Mat. 3. 11.
set forth and distinguished also in Scripture from other gifts of the Spirit,
Ioh 3 5.
by peculiar and distinct names: Tit. 3. 5.
as, The baptism of the holy Ghost, The birth of the Spirit, Romans 8. 5.
The renewing of the holy Ghost, The Spirit of Christ; Gal. 4. 6.
The Spirit of the Son, which cries Abba, Father; Rom 8 15.
the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit of life, the Spirit of truth, Romans 8. 2.
the Comforter, the anointing of the holy Ghost, and such like. Job. 16. 13.
And it is so called in regard of the special effects it works in the hearts
of the repentant, Ioh. 16. 7.
beyond those that are common to others, 1 Ioh.
as faith, righteousness, peace, Romans 14.
joy in the holy Ghost, and other unspeakable comforts and treasures of life.

And thirdly, as the word and Spirit, so the faith which the Spirit causes in
the heart of the repentant (by the application of the same word of God, and the
testification of his love unto it) is also expressed and distinguished from all
other kinds of faith, by special distinct names: Tit. 11.
as, The faith of Gods elect, The faith of Christ, The faith of Jesus Christ,
Iam. 2. 1.
The effectual faith, The faith of the Son of God, Philip. 1. 9.
The faith of the Saints, Their most holy faith, Their precious faith, Gal. 3.
22.
The faith which justifies, The faith which sanctifies the heart, Jude 3.
The faith of Abraham, The faith which works by love, Jude 20. 2. Pet. 1. 1.
etc. And it is so called, in regard of the special grace, Romans 5. 1.
mercy and love of God in Jesus Christ, which is shed abroad and sealed (by
the Spirit) in the heart of him that possesses it; Act. 15. 9.
and also in respect of the excellent fruit it does produce and cause to come
forth of the same heart, Romans 4. 16.
which is now truly sanctified by it, Gal. 5. 6.
and in which (Christ being now formed) dwells: as, mortification to sin
and to this present world; love to God, and to Christ the Lord, who has so
truly loved them; love to the truth, love to the children of God, love to all
men: which fruit we will also search for the true nature of, and enquire how
the Scriptures do sever it from all outward appearances and shows which come
near unto it, having the form thereof, but is not the same in truth and power.

Like as the trees that are planted by the river side, Psalm. 1. 3.
do bring forth their fruit in due season; and as the good ground, which having
received the seed that is sown therein, Math. 13. 23.
brings forth fruit, a hundred, sixty, and thirty fold; Heb. 6 7.
and as the earth which drinking in the rain that comes often upon it, brings
forth herbs, meet for him by whom it is dressed: so do these righteous trees
and branches of the Lords own planting, Esaias 61. 3.
his good ground and earth, which he has thus dressed and watered, bring
forth fruit meet for him their Lord, the good husbandman, that has planted
and dressed them. First, as they have received mercy at the hands of God by
faith, and are assuredly persuaded in their hearts of the forgiveness of their
sins: so do they now perfectly and truly, even from their very hearts, hate
all sin, yea and the garment that is defiled therewith, Jude 23.
and abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
mourning and lamenting when at any time they do but think thereon; and
mortifying their members and affections of flesh, do restrain them from their
old accustomed ways, remembering that they are washed and redeemed with a great
price, even with the blood of the Lamb of God, that they should now be holy, as
their heavenly Father is holy, that has chosen them. And though they find the
law of their members to rebel and fight against the law of their minds, Romans 7.
23.
enticing them night and day, with strong motions and persuasions to regard and
give entertainment again to their former lusts and pleasures, yet they
remembering the day of their fear and great distress, sigh and weep in soul,
to think that they should yet be constrained by the force of their own flesh
and members thereof to cast but an eye, or once to think upon that which now
their souls do loathe, and from which they have been so graciously delivered.
And therefore remembering Lots wife, and the end of those that having taken the
plough by the hand, look behind them, by whose examples their Lord has
forwarned them, dare not presume to turn aside, and grieve the holy Spirit,
whereby they are sealed unto the day of redemption: but if they should (through
the strength of temptation and their own weakness) fall, they go forth and
weep bitterly, till they be restored by faith to strength again; and never
fall or look behind them so, as to give entertainment in soul, to their old
delights of sin again, or to embrace this present world, or pleasures thereof
as aforetime: nay, though they be hated, reviled, and scorned of all men, and
made a gazing stock both to men and Angels, yet still they go on their way
out of the camp following their Lord, and willingly bearing his reproach,
counting his rebukes, greater riches then all the pleasures of the Egypt of
this world, which is now crucified to them, and they to it. And so in patience
possess they their souls, having an assured hope, that though now they go on
their way weeping, sowing precious seed, yet there will come a day wherein they
shall return with joy, Psalm. 126. 5. 6,
reap the fruit of their labors, and bring their sheaues with them.

Secondly, Gal. 5. 24.
as they do hate sin and mortify the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof, and crucify unto themselves this present world and themselves unto
it; so do they now, on the contrary part, love God with all their heart, 1.
Ioh. 4. 19.
and with all their soul, and delight in him and in his ways: Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.
and this their love unto him is caused by that love wherewith he first loved
them, which he has shed forth and sealed in their hearts by his holy Spirit,
and wherEof they are now assuredly persuaded, 1. Ioh. 4. 19.
as it is written, We love him, because he loved us first. And as to be
beloved of God, is a blessing beyond all comparison, a treasure not to be
uttered, so their love to him is a fruit, which no man is able to conceive the
nature of, but they alone in whose hearts his love is first shed forth, and
they certainly persuaded thereof.

And as they love God the Father, so do they love Christ his Son, who has
redeemed them from the thraldom of their sins; and their love to him is
likewise caused, by his love which was first made known to them, Romans 5. 8. 9.
10.
and is expressed in this, that while they were his enemies, he died for them,
that they should be reconciled to God his Father, Romans 8. 15.
and be made the Sons of God by adoption in him. And greater love then this
has no man, that one should die for his enemies (and specially such a one) to
bring them to so great honor, therefore their love to him is also unspeakable.

And as they love God the Father, and Christ the Redeemer, so love they the
children of God who are borne of him, and made partakers with them of his grace
and love in Christ; As it is written, He that loves him that begets, 1.
Ioh. 5. 1.
loves him also that is begotten of him. And this their love unto the children
of God, as it is not now for natural respects, though in that regard they also
love them, but because they are in grace and love with God, and do belong to
Christ, whom they serve and belong unto: So their love unto them is heavenly
and spiritual, and such as no man has, nor can attain unto, Ioh. 3. 5,
unless he be borne from above of water and the Spirit, as they are. For the
children of this world who are borne but of flesh, as they know not the
children of God (that are borne and begotten of him) because they know not him
that has begotten them, nor Christ whom they serve and follow: so neither do,
nor can they love them for his sake, nor have part and fellowship with them in
their spiritual and heavenly communion. They pray together as children of one
Father the Lord of hosts, and praise his name with one accord; they suffer
together as members of one body, 1. Cor. 12. 26. 27
even that body whereof Christ is the head; Romans 12. 15. 16.
they weep together, and they rejoice together, and are of like affection one
toward another; and if any of them have this worlds goods, Luke 16. 9.
(called in Scripture the unrighteous Mammon, because of the unrighteous use
which the lovers thereof do apply them to,) they (according to the
commandment of their Lord, like unto the unjust Steward) make them friends
therewith. If Christ hunger, they feed him; If he thirst, they give him to
drink; If he be naked, they cloth him; If he be sick or in prison, they visit
him. And though he himself be now in heaven, and they cannot do it to him,
neither needs he as touching his own person, yet in so much as they do it to
his brethren the children of God, they do it to him, and he and his Father
both, will be their friends in time of need, and will receive them into
everlasting habitation. Yea though they have not the plenty of this worlds
goods, but shall out of their pennury cast into this his treasury, the least
mite, or shall give to eat, to any of the servants of God, and brethren of
Christ, out of their scarsitie, the least portion of bread or oil, or but a
cup of cold water to drink, because they belong to Christ, they shall not lose
their reward, but in the day when he shall come in his glory, and all his holy
Angels with him. And when he shall sit in the Throne of his glory, and that
all, of all nations shall be gathered before him and called to account, he will
say unto them, Come ye blessed of my Father, Mat. 25. 34. 35 36.
inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world; for I
was an hungry, and ye fed me; I was a thrist, and ye gave me drink; I was
naked, and ye clothed me, etc. And whereas on the other side, he will say unto
all that have not done any of these things for his sake. ver. 41.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels;
for I was a hungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was a thirst and ye gave me no
drink; I was naked, and ye clothed me not, etc.

For the love that is showed to the children of God, the brethren of Christ,
because they belong to him. Of all the fruits and works of righteousness, that
can be performed by man, to man, is of greatest esteem with God, and has the
promise of reward above them all, not by reason of any worthiness of desert,
that is therein, but only for his promise sake, and because it pleases him
for his Son Christ's sake, so to accept of it and reward it. And therefore for
this especially shall all men be called to account in the day of judgment, and
judged according as they have done, or have not done the same. And because it
is the chiefest fruit, whereby the inward estate of the children of God is
known and discerned from the children of this world, in whom it is not, but
the contrary evils. Therefore does the Lord put us in mind thereof before
hand, because we should now in our life times before that day comes, learn
to know the Lord, that we may also know the children of God, 1. Ioh. 3. 14. 5.
2.
and love them. Hereby we know that we are translated from Death to life,
because we love the brethren. And hereby we know that we love the children of
God, when we love God and keep his Commandments.

And last of all this fruit of faith does extend it self to every man else
whatsoever, (only such excepted) as do hate God, and have blasphemed the holy
Ghost, whose sin shall never be forgiven them, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come, who may not be prayed for, but are to be held as execrable
unto the day of the Lord. They love (I say) all men as brethren, yea even their
enemies, and knowing that they are both, (as touching nature) descended of one
stock, and that they themselves were once far off, and strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel as well as they, and also that God does as freely
inuit them, and call upon them to repent and believe his Gospel as he did
them. And because no man can tell when, or to whom God will give repentance and
remission of sins, therefore they love them as brethren, and do exhort and
beseech them daily that they would repent and turn unto God, and humbly
confess their sins unto him, and earnestly seek and desire grace and mercy
at his hands, declaring unto them what great things he has done for the
redemption of man, and what grace and love (they for their parts) have already
found, who were by sin as far spent as they. Though they hate these, yet do
they love them, and pray unto God for them with many tears. If they hunger
fhey feed them, If they thirst they give them to drink, Romans 12. 20.
If they want clothing, or harbor, or be in any other kind of distress, they
(according to that portion God has given them,) minister unto them. If they
curse them, yet they bless them, If they persecute and kill them, ver. 14.
yet still they love them, and make request to God for them, Act 7. 60.
that he would not lay their sin to their charge, Mat. 5. 48.
but forgive them. This is the perfection which the Scriptures speak of, Ioh
7. 34. 35.
the new commandment, Reu. 7. 14.
the garment washed white in the blood of the Lamb, Mat. 5. 20.
the righteousness of Saints, even that righteousness which exceeds the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; yea, and the fair pretended
righteousness of all pharisaicall unregenerate christians, who for a like kind
of stricknes, in some such outward observations, would feign be counted holy,
though their hearts were never sanctified: This fruit, I say, does far surmount
their blade also: This is the first resurrection, which the Spirit mentions,
Reu. 20. 6.
saying, Bessed and holy is he which has part in the first Resurrection, on
such the second death shall have no power. These are they that be risen with
Christ, Col. 3 12.
and seek those things that are above where Christ sits at the right hand
of God, to whom old things are past away, 2. Cor. 5. 17.
and all things are become new, these are not of the world, Ioh. 17. 16.
neither do they love the world, nor the things of the world, 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
but the love of God the Father is in their hearts, Phil. 3. 20.
and the love of Christ, their conversation is in heaven, and they mind
heavenly things: the Lord their God is now their portion, he is their refuge in
all times of need, in all their distresses they fly to him for succor, and
from his hands only do they expect relief; therefore to him only do they
pray as to their God and Father, on his name they call, and on no other, early
in the morning, and late in the evening with broaken and contrite hearts, (the
sacrifice which he never did despise) come they before him, and humbling
themselves, their souls and bodies at his sootestoole, confess unto him their
great weakness, and unworthiness, and knowing they have no other God or Father,
in whom they may put their trust, but him alone: Therefore in sure
consideration of his grace and love, being confounded in themselves and
ashamed, as touching their own will and works, and giving all praise and
honor unto his holy name, they do beseech him, (though they be not worthy the
least of his mercies) that he would be pleased (notwithstanding) to extend his
grace and love unto them, and pour forth his holy Spirit, the ruler and
governor of his kingdom here on earth, into their hearts, to comfort,
sanctify, and guide them in his truh, that being guided and sanctified
thereby, they may evermore do his will, obey his commandments, and walk
before him here on earth, even as his holy Angels and servants do in heaven.
And acknowledging his goodness toward them, his providence, and care, in
feeding and clothing them, and giving them all other things which the
necessities of this their present life requires; do request him also, that he
would daily supply and continue the same, with his continual blessing thereon,
receiving them always with thanksgiving, knowing that they are all sanctified
by his word and prayer. And calling to mind their manifold sins and
trespasses, which they in their flesh and bodies of death do daily commit
against him, pour out their souls in tears before him, bewailing their
wretchedness and misserie herein, beseeching him for his Son Jesus Christ his
sake, through whom they have now great confidence of his grace, that he would
not lay their sins to their charge, but forgive them, having also a true
testimony in their consciences (which they likewise clear before him) that
they are at peace with all men, and do forgive even their enemies; and so
withal do earnestly entreat him, that he would vouchsafe them his gracious
and Fatherly perfection to sustain and keep them, that no temptation may at
any time prevail against them, to lead, or any way to induce them to commit
evil in his sight, but that they may by the power of his grace and holy Spirit
withstand the same. And so reposing their trust and whole affiance in him, they
rest in peace, knowing also, and acknowledging that the kingdom and the power,
and the glory is his for ever and ever Amen. Thus these just and sanctified
servants of God, go one from strength to strength, as the Prophet speaks,
and from faith to faith, never giving over, nor turning back, nor falling away
from the living God, like those that have an evil heart and unfaithful, but
still step forward, drawing nearer and nearer unto God, with a true and good
heart in the full assurance of faith, Romans 1. 17.
until they come to see his face in the promised Jerusalem. For the just do
live by faith, as it is written, Heb. 10. 37. 38. 39.
For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.
Now the just shall live by faith: But if any draw back, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in them. But says the Apostle we are not of them, that draw back to
perdition, but of them that follow faith, unto the saving of the Soul. In
these words, he puts a plain difference, and does distinguish between them,
whose hearts being evil, and unfaithful, do turn back to perdition, and
them whose hearts are true and just, and who having the full assurance of
faith, do persevere and continue unto the salvation of their souls. As if he
should have said: There be some indeed (whose hearts were never sanctified by
the faith of Gods elect, the faith of Abraham; But only by a general kind of
faith, their outward parts, their house was a little Superficially swept,
which fall back to destruction; ( but we) meaning himself, and such
sanctified souls with him, as himself was, we are not of that sort, but of
another, even of them which do believe after another manner, who have the faith
of Abraham, the faith of Gods elect, the effectual faith, the faith of Christ,
the faith that works by love, the faith which makes a sinner just, the faith
by which the just do live, and are saved. Which very thing Saint John also
cleereth, speaking of the Antichrists, that were gone out from them. They went
out from us (says he) but they were not of us; 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
If they had bin of us, they would no doubt, have continued with us; But they
went out from us, that it might be made manifest, that they were not all of us.
In which words he proves planly, that if they had ever been of the faithful
sort, (namely the sanctified in heart) whereof John was one, they had never
fallen back, but had (without all doubt) continued, but by this their falling
off, it was made manifest (which was not so clear before) that they were never
of them, what outward shows soever they made. The very same (again) is
manifest concerning Judas; for after he had played his treacherous part, that he
was discovered and burst in pieces, the Spirit of God taking notice of his
former pretended charity to the poor, which he uttered in these words. Why
was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, Ioh. 12. 5.
and given to the poor; And of this evil couetuous and theuish heart at the
same time, he says, This he spoke, ver. 6.
not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag,
and bare what was put therein. So that Judas was never any of the faithful,
his heart was never upright from the beginning, he believed not in his heart
unto Justification, he had not the faith of the Saints, the faith that works
by love, the faith of Christ, as Christ himself testifies against him, Ioh. 6.
saying, But there are some of you which belieueth not, and Judas was one of
them, and the special man aimed at, as Saint John in the next words notes,
saying, ver. 64.
For Jesus knew from the beginning, who they were that believed not, ver. 65.
and who should betray him. And Jesus said unto them, therefore said I unto
you, that no man can come unto me, except it be given him of my Father. Meaning
by coming unto him, believing in him unto justification, as he said, Mat. 11.
28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, Ioh. 6. 37.
etc. And again, All that the Father gives me, comes to me, and him that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out. ver. 66.
Therefore the text says. From that time many of his Disciples went back, and
walked no more with him. And Judas though he tarried after them (yet a while) it
was but to make up the full measure of his sins; For his heart was then as
evil, if not worse then theirs, as Christ testifies to his face, in the
presence and hearing of the other Apostles, saying, ver. 70.
Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil. This he spoke of
Judas, and though he be here said among the rest to be chosen, it is to be
understood but of his outward office, and in respect of the common gifts of
the Spirit which he had received.

And although this was the case of Judas, and of his fellow disciples, who
could not relish the words of eternal life, ver. 53. 54.
which Christ spoke, saying, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you: and the case of those Antichrists,
and of those unfaithful evil hearted draw-backs, as it has been the case of
many thousands more, and is still at this day; yet the case of Peter, of John,
and the rest of the Apostles was far otherwise, as is now also the case of all
regenerate true hearted Christians; they believe to the saving of the soul;
they eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, spiritually by
faith, and have eternal life abiding in them; they dwell in Christ, and Christ
in them; they are borne of God, and therefore draw not back, sin not to
perdition, for the seed whereby they are begotten remains in them, neither
can they so sin, because they are borne of God; nay, they are sealed (by the
holy Spirit of promise) unto the day of redemption; they overcome the world,
endure and keep his words and works unto the end; they are the lively stones
of Gods temple, built upon the chief corner stone, who are made a spiritual
house, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; 1.
Pet. 2. 5. 6.
his Church, Math. 16. 18.
against which, the gates of hell shall not prevail; they are the good ground
spoken of, the good trees, which cannot bring forth evil fruit, but good only;
the evil which they do (at any time) is not their fruit, because it
proceeds not from their hearts, but is done unwillingly, through weakness,
for in their hearts they serve the law of God. Romans 7. 22.
The Scriptures account that to be a man's fruit, which comes from his heart,
whether it be good or evil, because thereby the nature of the fountain (which
is the heart) is known, as the nature of trees are by their fruit. So that
the nature of a good man (I mean that which is borne of the Spirit, not his
fleshly nature) is now to bring forth good fruit only, as Christ testifies,
saying, A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, Luke 6. 45.
brings forth that which is good. 2. Cor. 13. 8.
We can do nothing against the truth, says the Apostle. Math. 7. 18.
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit.

And whereas the Scriptures speak so often after this manner: Reu. 2. 25, 26.
If ye hold fast vuto the end. If ye continue. Him that ouercometh, and keeps
my words, and works to the end: then are ye his house, then will he approve of
ye, then shall ye be saved. And on the contrary, He that looks behind him; He
that endures not; If any draw back, or fall away, etc. he is not meet for
the kingdom of God; My soul shall have no pleasure in him; There remains no
more sacrifice for sin. The drift of the Spirit of God is to inform us of the
different estates and conditions of Christians; of the danger of the one
estate, and of the well being and safety of the other; that so we seeing the
difference, and being forewarned thereof, might not depend upon that which is
so dangerous, but strive unto that, wherein there is safety.

And where it says of some, Psalm. 69. 28.
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living. I will put his name out of
the book of life. The meaning is not, that God will put any man's name out of
the book of life, that is written therein, but his meaning is, that such
desperate and wicked persons, as blaspheme his truth and Spirit, shall be set
down as it were with a blot, cursed, utterly excluded, and pronounced against,
for such as there is no hope, or place for repentance, as was Judas and others
of his companions, of whom it was foresaid: ver. 28.
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living; let them not be written
with the righteous, etc. ver. 26.
for they persecue him whom thou have smitten, they talk to the grief of
those whom thou have chosen. So that whereas men may seem to have a place
among the Saints in the Church of God, and to be in as good an estate as they,
by reason of some gifts of the Spirit, which they may receive, and some
alteration the word of God may work in them; yet) being never sanctified in
heart, by the faith of the Son of God) in time they discover themselves to be
in heart evil, and adversaries to the truth, and such as God does by his word
exclude and pronouuce cursed children, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots,
Jude 12.
such as never had nor shall have their names written with his people, in his
records of life, which before their discovery might seem both to themselves
and to others, to have; and therefore it is said, Luke 8. 18.
And from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he seems to
have; which seems also to be an improper speech: for how can that which a man
has not, be said to be taken from him. He had something, may some say; and it
is true, he had heard and received the word with joy, but not in deepenesse of
root, not in a good heart, his heart was never sanctified by faith, like unto
his, that brought forth fruit, he was enlightened, and had tasted of the good
word of God, and of the powers of the world to come; but he seemed and made
show to have more, he presumed (no doubt) that his name was written in the
book of life, which was more then that he had received could warrant him. This
his pretended show is now also taken from him, and his name is (openly) by the
just sentence of Gods word, put out of all hope, of being, or ever to be
written in the book of life, and he is now (like the earth, which brings
forth nothing but briars and thorns) near unto cursing; Heb. 6. 8.
it is impossible he should now be renewed. For nothing is secret (says the
text) that shall not be made manifest, Luke 12. 2. 3.
nor any thing hid, that shall not be known, and come to light; Luke 8. 18.
Therefore (says he) take heed how ye hear. For whosoever has, to him shall
be given, and he shall have abundance; and whosoever has not, from him shall
be taken away, even that which he seems to have.

But what is the book of life; for peradventure it is a secret to some?
doubtless, It is both Gods secret, and revealed decree or will, concerning
such as shall be saved; by that which is revealed, the secret is made known.
His secret decree, we have in the first beginning of our writing showed, (which
briefly is this:) That God (before the world was) foreseeing the fall of
mankind, did choose in Christ a certain number of them to life and salvation,
which were all foreseen and known of him, and recorded by his decree, in the
roll of Christ, before they were; his revealed will or decree, (which we have
before also at large expressed) is (briefly this) namely, the special promises
and testimonies of life and salvation, which are most fully and often recorded,
and testified in the Scriptures of God, to, and concerning such persons, in
such manner qualified, as we have before (according to the Scriptures)
described. So that every man so qualified, may see and know, through the Spirit
of God, in and by the same records, his name, to wit, his person, soul and
body, decreed and recorded of God in Christ, even from the foundation of the
world, to be for life and salvation. This is the book of life of the Lamb
slain, Reu. 17. 8.
for in him it was and is done, and of this decree there is no alteration. Reu.
13. 8.
And whereas it seems to some, Mal. 3. 6.
that God does alter his purpose, and change his word, because he sometimes
promises blessings and life to men, which (by reason they, on their parts, do
not that which he requires) he performs not; and likewise threatens
judgment, which by reason men repent, he executes not. The truth is, it does
but so seem to ignorant men, who do not rightly conceive of the power of God,
nor understand the drift and scope of his word. For God is not like unto men,
to purpose one thing to day, and resolve upon another to morrow; but whatsoever
he has decreed in his heart, shall surely come to pass, though he sometimes
use to speak after the manner of men, because he knows they are but men whom
he speaks unto. He publishes his Gospel to all men in general, and does
promise salvation to all men that repent and believe, and he requires
repentance and faith of all, yet (notwithstanding) but few do repent and
believe, and so come to salvation; does God therefore alter his purpose, and
change his word? He also gave a law to all men before, and required obedience
thereunto, promising life likewise to all that obeyed it, but no man ever kept
it, and lived thereby; did God therefore alter his purpose and change his word?
nay, God did never purpose in his heart, nor promise, that any man should here
(in the flesh) keep his law and live by it, though the Familists say he did;
neither was it given to that end, though they affirm it was. For if it had
been so, God would never have given the other; nay he knew, such was man's
miserable condition by his fall, and the fiery sharpnes of that law against
him, that it was so far impossible for him to keep the same, and live
thereby, as that it utterly slew him, and kept him off. Therefore God having
decreed in his heart to save some, was pleased to give the other: if he had not
done so, but should have proceeded against all, for the breach of the first,
should he have done any man wrong? nay, who dare say so? And is he now unjust
in publishing his Gospel to all, because he saves not all? or dare thou
say, he alters his purpose, and changes his word; nay, let God be true and
unchangeable, and all men liers and moveable. Men are as backward and
unwilling, and have as little power or strength in themselves to obey the
Gospel, as they had to keep the law; nay, such is yet (naturally) the pride
and loftiness of man's heart (as lamentable experience has long proved,) that
he rather desires to remain under the rule and command of the law, and so
seek life by the works thereof, then to subject his soul to the rule and
commandments of the Gospel, (viz.) to repent of his sins from the bottom
of his heart, and seek life by faith in the free grace of God in Jesus Christ,
and follow Christ in the regeneration. But so it is, I say, that before the
world was, God did purpose and decree in himself, to save (by the Gospel of
his Son Jesus Christ) a seed, a remnant, of the foreseen fallen posterity
of mankind, which seed he reserved from the beginning, and comprehended them in
the promise, which he first made to Adam, Genesis 3. 15.
(saying) The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. Christ being the
principal, and they in him and of him, and seuereth them with him, from the
seed of the Serpent, ver. 15.
in these words, And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed. And afterward again, to Abraham in these
words, Genesis 12. 3.
In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed. Meaning by thy seed,
Christ, and by the nations, those children which God made Abraham the father
of: as he said, Genesis 17. 5.
I have made thee a father of many nations; even they that were to have the
faith of Abraham, the seed that were to believe in that one seed Christ. And
again in these words, Genesis 21. 12.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called. By all which it is evident, that as Christ
was promised, and severed from the seed of the serpent; so all the seed
(between whom, and the seed of the serpent, there was to be enmity) were also
promised, as Gods free people, merely given of him to life, and severed by him
also from them: and as Isaac was borne by promise, so are they. At this time
will I come (says God) and Sara shall have a son. Genesis 18 10.
So Saint Paul says, Gal. 4. 28.
Now we (brethren) as Isaac was, are the children of promise. And that these
children of the promise (only) are the children of God, and counted for the
seed, Romans 9. 8.
the same Apostle also in another place witnesses, in these words, They which
are the children of the flesh, are not the children of God; but the children of
the promise are counted for the seed. And they are called the children of God,
because also they are borne of God, and adopted through the Spirit of his Son:
and therefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, Genesis 17. 7. 8.
(as he said to Abraham, I will he thy God, and the God of thy seed) For be
has prepared for them a city. Heb. 11. 16.


Now this seed, as God foreknew them all, and had chosen them in Christ from
the beginning, and predestined them to be conformed to his image and
likeness, who are therefore said to be written in the Lambs book of life, from
the foundation of the world. And as he severed them by promise from the seed of
the Serpent: so from time to time, he calls them, and whom he calls, he
justifies, and whom he justifies, them also he glorifieth. He has not done
these things to all. The seed of the Serpent never had any of these
privileges, God never chose them in Christ, nor predestined them to be
conformed to his image, neither were they ever written in the Lambs book of
life from the foundation of the world; neither did God ever promise to call,
justify, and glorify them, or any of them: therefore God never altered his
purpose, nor changed his word or promise, as some ignorantly imagine; but there
has been ever enmity between the seed of the serpent and the seed of the
woman, even from the days of Cain and Abel to this present, and shall be to
the end, according to the word of the Lord; though they be enlightened, and
taste as much of the good word of God, as either Cain or the Jews did. God
uses threatenings (often times) to bring that seed (which he promised to call) to
repentance, he gives them repentance, he promises grace to the repentant, in
a special particular manner, he gives them faith also to receive it; he
promises likewise salvation (absolutely) to these believers; he admonishes
them, because they (of themselves) are apt to fall, yea and would fall and
perish, if they stood by their own strength, if God did not sustain them, and
had not ordered and disposed of all things for their safety and well being; he
commands them to watch and to pray, and he gives them his Spirit, which
helps their infirmities, without the which they know not what to ask, and it
makes request unto God for them with sighs and groans which cannot be expressed;
not because they may yet perish, but because they should not perish, and for
that they are weak and apt to fall, and grieve the Spirit. He also chasteneth
them, not for their hurt, nor in his wrath, but that they should not be
condemned with the world. And because God has appointed them to be holy, and
so, to salvation; therefore he has appointed all these things. For as he
(before the world was) purposed to save them, so likewise did he determine of
the way and means whereby to save them, and the means is as certain as his
decree.

And Gods promises concerning life eternal (to speak properly) are not upon
any conditions, though he does seem so to propose them to the world, but they
are absolutely free, without any condition of our parts. It is true, God will
save none, but such as repent and believe his Gospel, bring forth fruit,
endure to the end, etc. yet these are not conditions, for God gives all these
things to his elect, as freely as he gave Christ vnthem, he conformeth them
hereby to the image of Christ; else, grace and salvation were of due debt, by
desert, which to teach, is erroneous and Antichristian.

And although God did elect men in Christ from the foundation of the world, yet
did not the Elect fall from their Election in the fall of Adam, neither did
Adam himself lose his Election by his fall, (as they would infer thereupon*)
for Gods Election was not of man, considered in his innocence, but of men,
(...) foreseen fallen; and therefore they are said to be chosen in Christ, who
was to be a reconciler and mediator for sinners, and not for innocent persons.
So that the objection of them, which say, if the Elect cannot fall out of Gods
favor, then did not all fall in Adam; If the elect cannot fall from their
election, then have not all sinned; is very carnal and wicked, much like unto
that of the Saduces, which said, Whose wife shall she be in the Resurrection,
who like fools, knew not that in the resurrection, they neither marry, nor
give in marraige: So they being ignorant of the wisdom and foreknowledge of
God, give out, If the elect cannot fall from their election, then have not all
sinned: And are as bold, and think themselves as well armed hereby against the
certainty and continuance of Gods election, as the Saduces thought themselves
against the resurrection, when they came in scorn thereof to pose Christ. But
I omit their frivolous objections, as not having any color of reason, because
also we shall have occasion to clear those things hereafter.

Thus as we have said, God first publishes his Gospel, and all do enjoy some
benefit thereby, many are enlightened by it, and are made partakers of some
common gifts of the Spirit, but few are made partakers of those which are
special, and peculiar. And this is the order which God does use for the
calling, sanctifying, and saving of his elect: First, after they are enlightened
to know his truth, he calls them in a special manner to repentance; then in
the second place by a more excellent gift of the Spirit, he justifies the
repentant soul from his sins, and sanctifies his heart; and then thirdly,
they being now ingrafted into Christ their head, Esa. 61. 3.
do bring forth fruit in him, as before we have described. And these are the
plantation of God, the trees of righteousness which the Scriptures speak of. God
is the husbandman, Ioh. 15. 2.
and this is the manner of his husbandry: And thus has he severed and
distinguished his plants, from all carnal unregenerate Christians, under what
name or title soever they pass, or in what outward estate or Church soever
they live. And blessed is that man that has part with them in those special
gifts and treasures of life, for on such the second death shall have no power.

Thus have we proved that whosoever, is borne from above of water and the
Spirit, Justified by faith in Christ, whose names are written in the book of
life from the foundation of the world, shall never fall away, nor have their
names razed out of the book of life again. And that God does never alter his
purpose or promise, but that all his decrees and promises shall surely come to
pass.

Their fifth point. That there is no Original sin, but that all children of
all manner of people in the world, as well heathens, Infidels, Idolaters,
worshippers of Devils, all kind of blasphemers, fornicators, and unclean
persons whatsoever, (as of the faithful) are free from all pollution of sin,
both in the conception and birth; and dying before they commit actual sins,
are saved.
Answ.

THe truth is, (though to our shame and sorrow it may be spoken) that sin has
taken hold of all the whole posterity of mankind, and all are corrupted by a
perpetual seed of generation orignially from Adam, so that every child of man,
that is borne of flesh, as well of the faithful, as of the unfaithful, is by
nature, the child of pollution and wrath, and dying unregenerate, perrisheth
from the glory of God, and from the joy of his presence for evermore.

This we need not now to stand to argue (for besides the manifold testimonies
of Gods word which testify against us, long and lamentable experence has
sufficiently proved it,) and does daily prove it unto us; so that we have more
need to mourn for our selves in regard of the evil that is sown in our
natures thereby, and to weep for our children also, which are bred and borne
of us (as Christ charged the daughters of Jerusalem to do for themselves, and
for their children) then to stand to dispute the points, or once to question,
whether it be so or no. Nevertheless to stop the mouths of such as do deny it,
we say, that when Adam sinned, all sinned together with him, because all
mankind were then in him; and therefore when God cast Adam out of Paridice, he
cast all his posterity out of Paracice with him; and when God cursed the
earth, he cursed it not to his person alone, but all that were to come of him,
as well young as old; which proves, that as the curse and punishment for the
sin; so the sin it self claue unto them, and continues from generation to
generation in them; else the manifold misseries which were upon children (as
well as upon men of years) were unjust. Why should God shut them out of
Paradise, and not restore them thither again, so soon as they were borne,
there to have the same free liberty to eat of the tree of life, as Adam had
before he fell? why should God exact at their hands, first so soon as they
have any capacity, the perfect righteousness of the Law, upon pain of death
(as ye confess) if they had eaten with Adam, of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil? why should that fiery two edged sword be set to keep from them also
the way of the tree of life? and why are they subject to all the calamities
that came upon the earth, by the sin of Adam if they fell not with him? why
should God consume them all with their parents, in the days of Noah, by the
flood, some in the womb, some in the birth, and some newly borne, if they had
been clean from all pollutions of sin? would not God have spared them, and
the world for their sakes? And why did God then destroy the cities of Sodom
and Gomorha, and not spare them as he promised Abraham to do, if he found ten
righteous their? If children be free from all pollution of sin, they are not
unrighteous and wicked; 1. Cor. 7. 14.
and if they may be called holy, they may be called righteous: Else were your
children unclean, (says Paul) but now are they holy. As also, if unclean,
then polluted, as were the children of the Sodomites (doubtless) above all the
cities of the world. And so did God (the Judge of all the world) do right, in
rooting out that wicked generation, as he did also the other of the old world.
When Adam fell, he did not only commit a fault, but by the same his fault, he
not only brought upon himself death and wrath, but fell into a gulf of
pollution and wickedness, both soul and body. Nay, when he received grace,
it did not rid and free him of that natural corruption, whereinto the whole
man was plunged, insomuch as he could not increase and multiply, but all the
increase that came of him, must necessarily be of the same nature that he was,
both bodies and spirits. Genesis 1. 2. 8.
For to what did God say, Increase and multiply, and replemish the earth etc:
was it to a senceles body, not having the breath of life, or was it to the
whole man in whom God had breathed the breath of life, who was thereby made a
living soul? It is true, the Spirit is from heaven, of God that gave it, and
therefore (especially) is Adam called, Act. 17. 26. 29.
The Son of God: and all mankind are said to be the offspring of God; not that
God does breath in every particular child of man, in the womb, the breath of
life immediately from himself, in the same manner as he did unto Adam. Nay he
did it then once for all, insomuch as if God had executed his justice on Adam,
immediately upon his transgression, we all had been hid and had perished in him
both spirits and bodies; whereas he being spared brought forth and replenisht
the earth, else man were inferior to all creatures. We read that God created
every thing to have seed in it self, Genesis 1. 24.
according to his kind, and all creatures do (we see) produce and bring forth
their like, by the word and providence of God, when God said, bring forth, he
gave power by the same his word, to the creatures he had made (through the
means he had ordained) to do their office he had set them in. Every tree has
it seed in it self, the seed being sown in the earth, increases to root,
and then to branches, and afterward brings forth fruit, or seed again,
nothing differing from the seed that was first sown. And as an evil tree
brings forth seed as evil as it self; so does man beget and bring forth as
evil and corrupt as himself. For so says Job, Job 14. 4.
For how can a clean thing come out of that which is unclean? Psalm 51. 5.
And David says of himself, that he was shaped in iniquity, and in sin his
mother conceived him. If the fountain from whence David came, was unclean,
how could he be clean? That which moved David to call this to mind, was not
so much any thing concerning his mother, as himself; the apprehension of his
own present sin he was fallen into, which he was now lamenting and confessing
before God, urged him to call to mind his first beginning, and in his
confession to charge himself with sin, even from the time that his mother
first conceived him, and confesses the same also to his own shame and
confusion, thereby to cut off all good opinion of himself, as touching his
original first estate, which he had by his natural conception and first
birth, the more to confirm unto his soul the necessity of the second
newbirth from above. For he knew that Adam by his sin had not only polluted
himself in soul and body, and was fallen from his first integrity of nature
and blessed estate he was in, but that the same evil seed (which then was
sown in the heart of Adam) has brought forth so great increase, that it has
polluted and made unclean the hearts and natures of all that come of him. As
also another testifies, 4. Esdras.
saying, The grain of evil seed was sown in the heart of Adam from the
beginning, and how much ungodliness has it brought up unto this time? and how
much shall it yet bring forth until the time of threshing come? Ponder now
with thy self, how great fruit of wickedness, the grain of evil seed has
brought forth; and when the ears shall be cut down, how great a floor shall
they fill? In which words this holy Prophet plainly shows, that their first
grain, namely, the sin which was first sown in Adams heart, was, and is, the
original root and first ground of all sin, that has sprung up and shall spring
up in the hearts of all his posterity to the worlds end, and so of all their
misery; and therefore he says again, Oh thou Adam, what have thou done? for
though it was thou that have sinned, thou art not fallen alone, but we all that
come of thee. The very same also does Saint Paul affirm, (having spoken, and
being speaking of the reconciliation, grace, and life eternal, which is by the
death and life of Christ only attainable) wherefore says he, Romans 5. 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men, in whom all men have sinned, and so forward, setting it down,
not as a thing in question, but as well known, showing that as by one, even
Adam, sin entered into the hearts of all men, and death is passed upon them,
for that all (by that means) have sinned: so grace and life, is by one, even
Christ, and none shall live, but by him. And that not any one man whatsoever,
old or young, male or female, shall ever enter into life, except he be changed
from that he is by nature, by a heavenly power of grace through the Spirit;
Christ himself fully ratifieth and confirms, saying, Verily I say unto thee,
Job. 3. 3.
except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And again the
second time, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, ver. 5.
except a man be borne of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Meaning by a man, every child of man, (without exception) of
what age or sex soever, if he be one conceived and borne of flesh, he must be
borne again of water and of the Spirit, or else he cannot be saved. Meaning by
water, a heavenly power, whereby the heart, which is naturally (even from the
birth) hard and stubburne, being seasoned with Adams sin, even from the
conception, is dissolved and made meek and tender as water; and by the spirit,
a heavenly gift of the holy Ghost, which comfort his tender heart, and
brings unto it from God (in and through Christ) peace and joy unspeakable; and
that children are capable of this, in and from the womb, let the babe which
sprang in his mothers womb for joy, give testimony. And if any shall say,
Christ does not call a child (newborn) a man; let him read these words of
Christ: A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow because her hour is nigh; Ioh.
16. 21.
but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
pain, for joy that a man is borne into the world.

If children dying before they commit actual sin are saved, Absurdities.
because they have no original pollution of sin, (as these silly men say;)
then Christ died not for children, neither was he promised unto them, nor yet
are they saved by him, but by their own innocence; and so this promise, Genesis
3. 15.
The Seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head, belonged only to Adam
and Euah, and not to any of their children, because they were to be borne all
innocents, without sin. These, with many other absurdities will follow from
this their doctrine. But it is an error, as their other points are; and
therefore error must needs be the consequence of it. If one should ask these
men, at what age a child may commit an actual sin, whereby it does lose it
innocence and perfection of nature; and then at what age it is capable of the
new birth; and also why the lust or thought of evil in the heart, as well as
an act of evil, may not take their innocence and virtue of nature from them.
It is much to be marvelled, what answers they would make. But to leave them to
better conderations, hoping they will now see their folly, and learn to be
wiser for time to come.

Their sixth point. That none ought to be baptized but such men and women of
years only, as have attained to true repentance and justifying faith, being
both in the account of the Church and in the sight of God regenerate persons:
and that the baptism of children used, is no baptism at all, but is the mark
of the Beast spoken of in Reuelat. 13.
Answ.

THe doctrine of the Church of God, is, that not only such men and women (of
years) as have true repentance and justifying faith, but that all which do
believe Jesus to be the Christ, and acknowledge him, submitting themselves to
be informed and guided by his word and Gospel, may be baptized, though as yet
they neither have true repentance nor justifying faith; and that the children
of all such may be baptized.

That such as have true repentance and justifying faith may be baptized, it is
granted of all men (without any further consideration) to be past all question;
but it is evident there may be such, who yet (notwithstanding) may not lawfully
be baptized. Act. 10. 31. ver. 32.
Cornelius, Lydia, and the Eunuch, were true worshippers of God, as the Spirit
testifies of them, and therefore had both true repentance and justifying faith
before they knew Christ to be come in the flesh, yet these might not be
baptized till they did know and acknowledge Christ to be come in the flesh, and
that Jesus Christ was he: but Christ being manifested unto them, the Scriptures
concerning him being unfolded, and God opening their hearts to attend unto the
same, and they believing the truth thereof, were baptized, being now (of all
other) the meetest persons therefore. For we are to know, that when Christ came
into the world, he found the people in several conditions; some (though but
few) very true Israelites, who had both repentance and justifying faith before
Christ, as touching his personal appearing in the flesh, was known unto them
as Simeon, Nathaniel, those before named and others; For the same way to
salvation that is now, was ever, even from the days of Abell, and shall be to
the end; as repentance from dead works, and faith toward God etc. And some
poor repentant sinners and these were few also; which had not yet Justifying
faith, but only traveling under the burden of their sins, did much desire to
be releiued. Such were those poor, which are spoken of, the bruised and heavy
laden, Sick, lost, dead, etc. And others were they, that had neither
repentance, nor faith, as the multitudes of the Jews, and of the whole world:
and to these several sorts of people, the Gospel was preached in several
manners. Heb. 1. 1.
To the first sort, that Christ was now come, even the messenger of the
covenant, whom they desired in their hearts to see and hear, as one that did
spiritually dwell in their hearts already, these, believing, were baptized. To
the second was preached, that Christ is come, and also that the glad tidings of
peace, and reconciliation with God, in him, did belong to them, in particular,
and therefore Christ calls these, particularly, saying, Come unto me all ye
etc. Again, The Son of man is come to seek and save that which is lost,
etc. The poor have the Gospel preached unto them: and these believing and
acknowledging Christ, were baptized. And to the other third sort, Christ was
not to be preached in any such special peculiar manner, as to the former, but
more generally, as namely, that Christ is come in the flesh etc: and that
repentance and remission of sins is granted in his name; so that whosoever
does repent and believe the Gospel, shall be saved. Now they that did believe,
and accknowledge the truth of these things; as Judas, the many disciples
mentioned in the fourth and sixth of John, the thornie and stony ground, Simon
Magus, with many others, were, and might lawfully be baptized, though they had
not yet true repentance, nor justifying faith. Nay it is manifest that neither
Christ, nor his Apostles, did reject any from the outward baptism, for the
want thereof, so as they did believe, and outwardly submit themselves, to the
doctrine of the Gospel. Yet nevertheless, Christ did not, neither did his holy
Apostles, thereupon Justify them; For then neither he, nor they, would (so
soon after) have made such exceptions, and write so suspitiously as they did
of many of them; saying, Luke 13. 24.
Strive to enter in at the straight gate; for many I say unto you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. Beware of false Prophets, Mat. 7. 15.
which come to you in sheep clothing, 19.
but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Not every one that says
unto me, 21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will
of my Father which is in heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, 22.
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out
devils, and in thy name done many great works; 23.
And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye that
work iniquity. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you. But there are some of you that believe not. Ioh.
6. 64.
All these things Christ spoke unto his Disciples, who though they did believe,
and were baptized, yet they had not (al of them) eaten of his flesh, and drunk
of his blood; all did not believe in him unto justification of life, all
brought not forth good fruit; And therefore he says, No man can come unto me
except it be given him of my Father. And every branch that bears not fruit in
me, he takes away; And every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it
may bring forth more fruit. So that men may believe after a general manner,
and be baptized, and be (in some sort) branches in the vine, in regard of the
outward profession thereof, receive great gifts, do wonderful works, in the
name of Christ, and yet not be come to Christ, not have the faith of Christ,
which justifies, not bear fruit in him. And it will come to pass, that in
the day of judgment, Mat. 7. 23.
he will say unto them, Depart from me ye that work iniquity, I never know
ye. And the Apostles (also) writing to the Churches of their times; where all
were believers, and baptized, (and that lawfully) say, that (such among them)
as had not the Spirit of Christ, were none of his; and do charge some of them
to be carnal and contentious, striving about their outward baptism, 1. Cor.
3. 4.
some will be of Paul, some of Cephas, some of Apollo, and some of Christ. As
if this baptism, and the worthiness of the person, by whom they were
baptized, did make them happy, and some of them, better then other. Some again
there were, that did set light by the Apostles of Christ, and esteemed better
of some other false Apostles; Some were unclean lascivious persons, 1. Cor.
12. 20.
I fear (says Paul to some) that when I come, I shall not find you such as I
would, and that I shall be found unto you such as you would not. 2. Cor. 13. 5.
Examine your selves (says he) whether ye be in the faith, Prove your selves,
know ye not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates. By which it is evident, that men may believe, and be baptized, and
yet not be in the faith of Christ, not know Christ to be in them, which (to
know) is the faith that Christians must have, if they be not reprobates.
Again, some they charged with the want of the knowledge of God; And some that
denied the resurrection of the dead; And some that made their belly their God,
and minded earthly things; some to be false Apostles, false teachers, such as
taught heresies, some false brethren; some covetous persons, some hipocrites;
some that raised needless questions about the Law; some that taught
circumcision necessary to salvation, and that Christians must be circumcised,
or they could not be saved; some were whisperers, Backbiters; some were lovers
of pleasures, more then lovers of God, treacherous, high minded, yea, and what
not; And yet all believers, and Lawfully baptized, and were in the Churches,
even in the Apostles times, but not so approved of them, as some others were;
They did not account of all whom they baptized, to have true repentance, and
Justifying faith, neither before they baptized them, nor after, for they knew,
that it never was, nor could be so, some would prove false in heart, and in
some the grace of God did not yet appear, unto justification; therefore they
sensured none, till they saw just cause, neither did they justify any, till
they saw proof of their faith, but then they did, to both their comforts and
consolations Nay, when they saw great cause of fear and suspicion of many, yet
they used strong arguments and persuasions to bring them to repentance, as we
see how they both spoke, and write. They did not easily reject any, no not an
Heretic, without twice or thrice admonition; And when Simon Magus discovered
himself, to be in the gall of bitterness, and that Peter saw his heart was not
right in the sight of God, yet Peter cast him not off, but said unto him, Act.
8. 22.
Repent thy self therefore of thy wickedness, and pray God, If perhaps the
thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee.

Now if this was the estate of the Church in the days of Christ and his
Apostles, how may we think it can be better now (nay) but when we strive to
make it better we make it worse. As concerning the inward estate, the gifts of
the Spirit, and power, that then were in the Apostles and faithful servants of
Christ, both in the respect of the Administration of the word, grace of life
and peace, and works of righteonsnes, I am sure we all come short of: and
shall we think to outstrip them in the outward? Nay, doubtless, I would we
could (therein) but compare with them, so we did also partake of some of their
inward graces; otherwise the outward can do us small pleasure. It is an
evident sign, that where there is much contending about the outward form,
external washings, and such like, the inward purification of the heart is
little thought of.

So then, as concerning the outward estate of the Church, we conclude, that as
from the beginning there was Cain, a believer and sacrificer, as was Abel,
though Abel had justifying faith, and not Cain; and as Ishmael was circumcised
as well as Isaac, though Ishmael might not inherit the heavenly promises as
well as Isaac; and as in the Church of the Jews from time to time, all that
acknowledge that true God and his word, and did submit themselves to the
outward ordinances of the law, were circumcised, and were Jews outwardly,
though but few were Jews inwardly, and circumcised in heart: so was it in the
days of Christ and his Apostles, so is it now, and so shall it be to the end;
Christ himself went never about to alter this, but both he and his Apostles
baptized those that did believe, and acknowledge him, and submit themselves to
be informed by his word, though they had not yet either true repentance, or
justifying faith. For they knew, that such a belief and profession, as made
men meet for outward baptism, might be, where justifying faith was not; and
that both, that belief, profession, and baptism, did but make a Christian
outwardly, as the outward profession and circumcision of the Jews did but make
a Jew outwardly; and no better did they judge, or conclude of any, but when
they saw better cause.

Now concerning the baptizing of children, (which they say is no baptism at
all, but do call it the mark of the Beast,) we affirm that the children of
all such believers (as may themselves be baptized) may also be baptized, and
that it is not, nor can be the mark of the Beast spoken of, but is true
outward baptism. First, to avoid many of their vain and idle objections, and
that we may come the more cleerer to the point, let us remember that it is
sufficiently proved already, that all have sinned in Adam, and that death is
passed on all, for that all have sinned in him, being polluted from their very
conceptions; and that (therefore) there is a necessity of a new birth from
above, of water and of the Spirit, as well to the youngest man of days or
hours, as to the eldest man of years. So that whosoever is borne of the
flesh, he must be borne again, from above of the Spirit, either sooner or
later, if he be saved; and that, although repentance and faith be the parts of
this new birth, and that repentance has these parts (whereby it is expressed in
men of years,) sorrow for sin, confession of sin, and desire of pardon,
(as we have before defined;) and that justifying faith (which is the other part
of this new birth) be an assurance or full persuasion wrought in the repentant
heart by the Spirit, of the forgiveness of his sins and reconciliation with
God in Jesus Christ, as we have also defined it; I say, in men of years, who
also do confess with the mouth, as it is written, With the heart man believes
unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation; yet
(nevertheless) the true nature of both these parts of the new birth, may be in
another manner defined, and still remain the same in substance, as the first
part is called in Scripture, A heart of flesh, an humble and contrite heart, a
broken heart; and Saint Paul calls it, the fleshly tables of the heart; in
which regard it is called, the baptism of water, and the birth of water; which
we define thus, namely, that it is a special effect or working of the holy
Ghost, whereby the heart (which is naturally hard and stubburne, even from the
birth) is made soft and tender as water, or as flesh is in comparison of a
stone, that so it may receive the impression of the grace and love of God. The
second part, which is called the baptism of the holy Ghost and the birth of
the Spirit, we define, to be a special gift of the Spirit also, but more
excellent, which writes and seals in the soft and tender heart of flesh,
grace and peace from God in Christ, and fills it with heavenly comfort and
joy, like unto that which is said of John (being in his mothers womb) when the
voice of the salutation of Mary sounded in the ears of Elizabeth, The babe
leaped in her womb for joy; which (doubtless) was caused by the Spirit of
Christ, in the soul of the child. Now in this sort, children are capable of
both the parts, and so of the whole new birth, which in them is no other in
nature, but the very same which is in men of years, (though it be not
outwardly so expressed,) as we may perceive by the words of Paul to the faithful
of the Church of Corinth: Forasmuch (says he) as ye are manifestly declared to
be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of
the heart. For as the law of death was written in tables of stone, and all the
hard and stony hearts of the whole posterity of Adam, not only might, but
also did, and do receive, even in their very conceptions, a deep impression
thereof: so on the contrary, the law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ
Jesus, ever was, is, and is to be, written in hearts of flesh, soft and tender
hearts, and in no other. And therefore it was, that God did promise to take
away from his elect the hard and stony heart, and to give them a heart of
flesh, an humble and broken heart, because his pleasure and promise is, to
dwell with such, to revive and comfort them, and no other. And to speak
plainly (howsoever perhaps some do otherwise conceive) it is not our act of
believing that does justify us, but it is the free gift of grace, sealed in
our hearts by the Spirit of Christ, whereby God justifies us; which grace and
Spirit, is the cause of our act of believing, or faith, by which we are so
often said in Scripture, to be justified, where the effect is named for the
cause, by reason it is thereby made apparent unto us; as also (in another
sense) we are said to be justified by works, because works do demonstrate and
make manifest our faith to others, as it is said of the primitive Church of
Rome, that their faith had shined throughout the world, meaning by works, which
are the effects of faith. So that Saint Paul calls the faithful the Epistle
of Christ, not so much for their act of believing, as in respect of the grace
of God, which was written in their hearts by the Spirit of Christ, by which
they did now believe, and cry Abba, Father, as it is written, He has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, which cries Abba, Father. And for
this cause, Romans 8.
the grace of the Gospel is called, The law of the Spirit of life which is in
Christ Jesus.

These things being so, what should now let, that children may not be baptized.
Are they capable (as we see) of regeneration, and are they not capable of the
sign thereof? May their hearts be sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, and may
not the filth of their flesh be washed off with water? for the baptism of
water, is bnt the doing away of the filth of the flesh, as Saint Peter
speaks; even as outward circumcision was but the cutting off the foreskin of
the flesh, representing the cutting off the sins of the flesh, the
circumcision of the heart, as also baptism does. For the circumcision, which
was the cutting off part of the foreskin of the flesh; and that baptism, or
washing away the filth of the flesh; we do not say, that the one was a type of
the other, but were both types of one truth, (namely) the baptism or
purification of the heart by faith. So then, if they both aimed at one thing or
end, (as shall appear they did;) then it will evidently appear also, that by
virtue of what precept the one was practiced, by virtue of the same precept the
other is to be performed and practiced. It is also said, that whosoever did
omit the practice which that precept required, was to be cut off from among the
people, that is to say, that such a person ought not to be acknowledged as one
in the outward estate of the Church then under the law: so proportionably it
will follow, that what person soever, young or old, that is not baptized, he is
also to be cut off, (that is) not to be accounted or numbered, in the outward
estate of Christians, now under the Gospel. May such believers, as are not
sanctified in heart, be baptized, (as before is proved) and may not the
children of believers be baptized? Why are the children of believers said to be
holy? (the children of unbelievers throwout the whole Scriptures are never said
to be holy) doubtless it is because they are in heart holy; or else because
they being the children of the faithful, have some promise (as touching the
inheritance of life belonging to them) as the children of the faithful had
formerly; and so have right to enter into the Congregation, where the ways of
life are taught, as they then by circumcision, so these now by baptism, that
they may be informed in the ways of the Lord; else would there be no
difference, between the children of the faithful, and the children of
infidels. So that, to this end, is the unbelieving husband said, to be
sanctified to the believing wife, and believing wife to the unbelieving
husband; because otherwise, if the unbeliever (in this regard) were not
sanctified to the believer, then were their children unclean (that is to say)
as the children of infidels, Deuteronomy. 28.
that have no promise belonging to them, but rather a curse, and therefore are
unclean, and may not enter. It is therefore meet, seeing God has put
difference between the children of the faithful, and the children of
infidels, that they should be distinguished from them, by some outward sign,
concerning the same. And what can they have less then baptism, which can give
to no man any more, then the outward name of a Christian, as circumcision did
the outward name of a Jew. It does neither confer, nor confirm grace to the
heart of any, no more then circumcision did. It proves that a man is a
Christian outwardly, and it teaches that he should be so inwardly; and so did
circumcision. It prove a man to be a Jew outwardly, and it taught that he
should be a Jew inwardly; Romans 2.
yea a Christian inwardly, to speak fully as the truth is; for every true
inward Jew, was a true inward Christian. And to be circumcised in heart, was to
be baptized or purified in heart, by faith through the Spirit; as also to be
baptized in heart, (by faith through the Spirit) is to be circumcised in heart;
for so does Saint Paul in plain words affirm, writing to those Christians,
whose hearts were sanctified by faith, saying, And ye are complete in him
which is the head of all principalities and powers, In whom also ye are
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in
baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation
of God, who has raised him up from the dead. In which words (I say) he sets
down expressly, that the baptism which saves, the baptism whereby we put on
Christ, the baptism whereby our hearts are purged and sanctified, and the
sins of our flesh done away, whereby we are buried with Christ, and do rise
with him, even that which is through the faith and operation of the Spirit, is
one and the same, with the circumcision of the heart, which he therefore
calls, the circumcision made without hands, the circumcision of Christ,
whereby also it appears clearly, and beyond all contradiction, that the
circumcision, or the cutting off the foreskin of the flesh, was a sign and
true representation of the doing away of their sins, of the clensing of the
heart by faith (as now the doing away of the filth of the flesh with the
baptism of water is;) for which use and end, it was also given to Abraham at
the first, as this Apostle also declares in an other place, saying, And he
received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith
which he had, being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that
believed, though they be not circumcised, Romans 4. 11.
that righteousness might be imputed to them also. Where he (I say) fully
declares, that the circumcision of the flesh was given, not to that end and
purpose, as the carnal corrupt Jews imagined, to teach righteousness to be by
the Law (which was to make the promise void, which is to be attained only by
faith, and not by works) but is taught and directed to the righteousness which
is by faith, through the promise in the circumcision of the heart, which
Abraham had, and which all their seed (of whom God made him the Father) were to
have; and that the circumcision of the flesh was a sign of, and did teach the
circumcision of the heart (if any yet question it) the same Apostles words, (a
little before) proves it, where he says, For he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, Romans 2.
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew
which is one within, and the circumcision is of the heart in the Spirit, not in
letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God. Where we see, that there was a
Jew outwardly, and a Jew inwardly; a circumcision outward in the flesh, and a
circumcision inward of the heart, in the spirit. The outward had but the name,
and did only signify and teach what should be inwardly in the heart; and that
in the heart, was the thing it self.

All these things being now thus clear, we reason thus.

That if children might once receive the sign of circumcision of the heart,
after the old form of the Law, then may they now after the new form of the
Gospel.

But they might once, after the old form of the Law.

Therefore also now, after the new form of the Gospel.

That they might once after the old form, is past all question. And that they
may now after the new form, we prove thus.

That which was once for good ends in the time of the Law appointed, and is not
by the Gospel disanulled, it is lawful still.

But it was appointed for good ends, that children should receive the sign of
the circumcision of the heart; and it is not by the Gospel any way disanulled.

Therefore it is lawful now still.

But these men object and say, that there is no plain commandment, nor
example, in the new testament for baptising of children.

I answer, It says often times, that whole households were baptized, without any
exception of children; and we have small reason to think, that believers
should be barren more then others. The naming of whole households without any
exception, shows plainly, that the Spirit of truth never intended to exclude
children. If he had ever intended any such thing, then (doubtless) would he have
given some little touch, or tittle, to that purpose, which he has never done.
And to set down in plain words (particularly) that children were or might be
baptized, there was then no need, because there were none in those days that
questioned it, as there might well, and would (doubtless) have been, if the
Apostles had not baptized any, but refused them. If it might be concluded that
there were no children in those mentioned Families, as we have small reason to
think, that Christians believers, should be more barren then Infidells, (yet)
no doubt, in all the Apostles times, some children were offered (as we see some
were brought to Christ, and not refused of him) which if the Apostles had once
rejected, the Jews (especially) would have taken exception against them (as
well they might) and have enquired what should be the reason thereof; and also
have demanded, why children might not as well be baptized, as before they were
circumcised. And the Apostles would have given them answer, and so by that
means your question had been dissolved long ago. But because there were not
then, in their days any such questioners, nor any cause of any such question,
by them given: therefore they took no care, either to set down in particular,
that children were, or might be baptized, nor yet to show any one the least
exception against it* for they knew it was not a matter of such consequence, as
you imagine. If they had either seen or foreseen any such dangerous evil, as
you conceive, you see in it, as that it was or would be the mark of the Beast,
which the Spirit speaks of, they would certainly have foretold and forewarned
the Church of it (as they have done of other things, which in your sight is of
less moment,) that so either it might not have taken such great place as it
has, or else (at least) that the people of God might (without so great
difficulty) have seen what a dangerous evil it was, or would come to, and
with constancy and comfort have avoided and withstood it; but they being
guided by the holy Ghost, have done whatsoever was needful. Again, if there
must needs be a plain word, either by some precept or example, expressed, for
the proof of whatsoever may be practiced among Christians; then where find we
any where written, that women (in particular) may partake in the Sacrament of
the Supper, though (doubtless) it may be soundly proved by argument from
Scripture, that women may partake therein, as we have already proved children
may be baptized. Mr. Smith baptized himself first, and then Mr. Helwis, and
John Morton, with the rest.
If I should now demand of you your warrant, for a man to baptize himself; I
much marvel where you would find such a practice in all the new Testament of
Christ; I am sure it would be a task too hard for you to find. Well, to let
pass those things, we will now go on. When the Apostle Peter spoke of the
baptism which saves, lest any should mistake him what baptism he meant, he
says, Not the doing away of the filth of the flesh. So if any of the Apostles
or penmen of the Scriptures* when they did set down that whole households were
baptized, or at any other time, had but said, except young children, it had been
enough. And if they had so said, what occasion might the Jews have taken, to
except and object against it. Might they not have reasoned against it thus:
Does Christ the messenger of the covenant of peace, and Preacher of good
tidings, deal more hardly now (in this time of the plenty of grace) then he
did before in the time of the law? Might children then be admitted by
circumcision into the congregation of the Lord, and may they not now by
baptism? They were formerly called Jews, and counted of the seed of Abraham,
in whom a blessing by promise was to be expected, as namely, that God would
call a seed, out of that stock or seed, which should inherit his covenant,
whereof circumcision was a sign unto them; and may they not now be allowed the
name of a Christian through Baptism? They are the same that they were then,
and why should not Christ (in whom the blessing and promise rests) be the
same?

Thus they might have argued, if it had been so, if the case were now so
altered, as touching children; if Christ were not the same, that he then was:
but it is otherwise, and Christ is the same, yea (and in regard of the large
bounty and plenty of grace, which he has now vouchsafed) he is more then the
same; therefore let not children be denied that which belongs unto them.

Christ was much displeased with those disciples that rebuked them that brought
little children unto him, that he should touch them, and said, Suffer little
children to come unto me, Mark 10. 13, 14, 15.
and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God. Verily I say unto
you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he
shall not enter therein. And (the text says) he took them up in his arms,
and laid his hands upon them, and blessed them. Whence it is evident, that
little children ought by no means to be denied baptism, because they are such
true similitudes of regeneration, of which baptism is a sign; and seeing
(also) Christ makes it an argument against those that would have hindered them
to be brought unto him, saying, for of such is the kingdom of God: so that it
may be as rightly said, Suffer little children to come to baptism, and forbid
them not, for of such is the kingdom of God; of such as be converted and are
become like unto little children, does the Church of God consist.

Whereas they further affirm, that infants baptism is the mark of the Beast,
and so must be cast away, with every part thereof; because whosoever dies with
that mark on them (without repentance) shall certainly drink of the cup of
Gods wrath. Which mark of the Beast, is thus deciphered by them: All manner of
ordinances which are performed by the ministry of the Church of England (being
an Antichristian ministry, whereof infants baptism is one) are none of Gods
ordinances, but a mark of the Beast.

From which observe what will follow against themselves.

Every action which is performed by the ministry of the Church of England, is
a mark of the Beast.

But the marriage of the Anabaptists in the Church of England, is an action
performed by the ministry of the Church of England. A retortion upon
themselves.


Therefore the marriage of the Anabaptists in the Church of England, is a mark
of the Beast.

Whosoever do retain the mark of the Beast, shall certainly drink of the cup
of Gods wrath.

But whatsoever Anabaptist do retain the marriage of the Church of England, do
retain the mark of the Beast.

Therefore whatsoever Anabaptist do retain the marriage of the Church of
England, shall certainly drink of the cup of Gods wrath.

Every marriage which is mark of the Beast, must be made void, to avoid the
wrath of God.

But every marriage of the Anabaptists in the Church of England, before their
schism from it, is a mark of the Beast.

Therefore every marriage of the Anabaptists in the Church of England, before
their schism from it, must be made void, to avoid the wrath of God.

Which being true, then cease they to be married, as children to be baptized.

That the baptism of children, neither is, nor can be the mark of the Beast,
spoken of in Revel. 13. 16. These men might easily perceive (if they were not
altogether ignorant and destitute of understanding) what the nature of that
mark is. For the mark of the Beast there spoken of, is such a thing (indeed)
as young children are not capable of; and therefore they are not set down among
those that are said to receive the same. Reu. 13.
And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their forehead* Meaning by small and
great, such as are so, in regard of. their high and low places and callings in
the world: and by rich and poor, such as are rich or poor, in regard of the
plenty or scarcity of the riches and things of this world and present life:
and by free and bond, they that are at liberty and free, and they that be in
bondage or captivity, in regard of any captivity or servitude to men. He
does not say, young and old, which (if young children had been included amongst
them) he should have said, because they are all so distinctly and severally
named that do receive it. Besides, the mark of the Beast being such a thing
as it is, (namely) a voluntary submission and resolute purpose to do and
subscribe to all the laws and commandments of the Beast, whether secretly or
openly; and to declare and testify themselves to be such as are allied unto
him, both by word and deed. And thus (having also made clear this point) we
end, hoping that the things which are spoken, will give to those that are not
wilful and obstinate, but of a meek and lowly heart, full satisfaction.

Their seventh point. That Church of England is a false Antichristian Church,
and ought to be separated from. That it is false, and Antichristian, we prove
thus. That the Church whose Bishop and Ministers, have had their first
ordination from the false Antichristian Church of Rome, whereof Antichrist is
the head, is false and Antichristian. But the Church of England, her Bishops,
and Ministers, have had their first ordination from the false Antichristian
Church of Rome, whereof Antichrist is the head. Therefore the Church of
England, is a false Antichristian Church. That it ought therefore to be
separated from, we prove thus. If every false Antichristian Church ought to be
separated from, then the Church of England ought to be separated from, because
she is false and Antichristian, as before is proved. But every false and
Antichristian Church, ought to be separated from, as Reu. 18. 4. Come out of
her my people. etc. Therefore the Church of England ought to be separated from.

We Answer.

THe first proposition of this Argument is false. A Church whose Bishops and
Ministers have had their first ordination (outward) from the false
Antichristian Church of Rome, whereof Antichrist is head, may yet
(notwithstanding) be a true Church, and they true Bishops and Ministers, and
not Antichristian.

It is not the outward ordination, which a Bishop or Minister has (before his
conversion) received of a false Antichristan Church, that can either pollute
him (benow converted, and called of God) or make the Church to which he
ministers, false or Antichristian: Neither is it the bare outward ordination
received of the best Church that ever was in the world, and in the best outward
form that is, that can make either him that receives it, a true faithful
Minister of God, or the Church to which he ministers, a true Church of Christ;
But he may be, both a false teacher, an Antichrist, and his Church false and
antichristian, notwithstanding. Those false teachers and Antichrists, that were
in the Apostles times, had (no doubt) their first ordination from the true
Church of God, in as good an outward form, as any is, or can be; and that
Church or people, that were led by them, could not choose but be unsound.

The Scriptures (foretelling of false prophets, false teachers, Antichrists,
and of the great Antichrist which should arise, describes them to rise, not
from among the heathen or Jews (as some imagine the great Antichrist shall)
but in, and out of the Church of God, even of and from among those that should
succeed the Apostles and Elders of the Churches (which the Apostles did plant)
succeed (I say) as touching the outward ordination in the external offices and
places of them.

Saint Paul being near his departure from his labors, to the Lord, calling the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus together, Act. 20. 25, 26. 27. 28. 29. 30* 31
forewarned them, saying, And now behold I know, that ye all amongst whom I
have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more; wherefore I
take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I
have kept nothing back, but have declared unto you all the counsel of God:
take heed therefore unto yourselues, and to the flock, whereof the holy Ghost
has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood. For I know this* that after my departing shall grievous
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Moreover of your own selves
shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw disciples after them.
Therefore watch and remember. These were such as the holy Ghost had made
overseers; so that their outward calling, ordination, and succession, could not
be excepted against; and yet we see what Paul foretells, and forewarnes them
of. Again, Saint John speaking of Antichrists, that rose in his time, 1. Ioh.
2. 19.
says, They went out from us etc. And Christ himself foretelling of the
abomination of desolation, which should be set up by the great Antichrist,
says, that it shall stand in the holy place, where it ought not, When ye
therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, Mat. 24. 15.
spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy place, Meaning by the holy
place, the Church of God, the place where God dwells, and is worshipped, as
Saint Paul declares, saying, Let no man deceive you by any means; 2. These. 2.
3. 4.
for that day shall not come, except there be a departing first, and that the
man of sin be revealed, the Son of perdition, who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as
God, sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. According
as the Prophet had spoken of him long before, prophesying also of his
destruction, saying. How art thou fallen from heaven, Esa. 14. 12. 13. 14.
O Lucifer, son of the morning, how art thou cut down to the ground, thou
that did weaken the nations, and said in thine heart I will ascend into
heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, I will sit also upon
the mount, even the holy mount, of the congregation (of God) in the sides of
the North, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, I will be like the
most high. So that the great Antichrist was to sit, and does sit, even in the
Church, in the Temple of God, in the place where (indeed) he ought not to sit.
If then all these things be so, as these Scriptures do declare. If it be not
the outward calling, ordination, or succession in the offices and places of the
true Elders and Ministers of God, Ioh. 10.
in the outward state of the Church of God, that can either make them true
faithful Ministers of God, such as come by the door, as Christ speaks; Or
the Church, of which they are overseers and ministers, the true holy Church of
Christ: but that these Elders and Ministers may yet nevertheless prove false
Prophets, false teachers, grievous ravening wolves in sheep clothing,
Antichrists etc. And the Churches be corrupted by them, robbed, and devoured,
both outwardly and inwardly, and become even heathenish and Antichristian. And
that these deceivers shall rise in the Church of God, and be such as have had
their outward ordination and succession, from hand to hand (as it were) even
from the Apostles. And that the great Antichrist himself shall sit in the holy
place, in the temple of God, upon the holy mount of the congregation of God,
above and besides the stars of God. What reason have we then to think, I say
(this being so) that the outward calling, or ordination, which the Elders, and
Ministers of the Church of England received (at first) from the Church of Rome,
should make either them, or the Church false and Antichristian? It was not the
outward ordination, or succession in the offices, and place of the Elders, that
did corrupt any of them before mentioned. (Nay) The Bishop of Rome himself,
might have been Bishop of Rome long enough, to this day, to the day of Christ's
coming in the clouds of heaven, and have done his master Christ good service,
If he had kept the first faith, If he had lived the first life, If he had
successed the Apostles and Elders, (in faith, in doctrine, in exhortation, in
patience, in temperance, in meekness, in mortification, in love, in good
works, in feeding the flock of Christ, and giving them their meat in due
season) as he did succeed them in outward place; he had then been a Scribe
well taught in the kingdom of God; A faithful Bishop, an Elder worthy of
double honor, and happy had that flock been of which he had been an
ouerseer, and his master at his coming would have said, Mat. 24. 46.
Blessed be this servant. But seeing he failed in all these things, and did not
succeed his Elders in this way, and order of succession, (as all their true
successors to this day have ever done) seeing his heart was evil and
unfaithful, ambitious, covetous, and loved pleasures and voluptuousness more
then God; and said in his heart, My master will defer his coming, and
therefore take upon him to smite his fellows, Math. 24. 48, 49, 50, 51.
to eat and drink with the drunken; his Lord will come in a day which he
thinks not on, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and will hew him in
pieces, and give him his portion with the hypocrites; and unhappy is the flock
that has him for their shepherd.

The Church of Rome was once a glorious Church, not in regard of any such pomp
and princely state as she that now is, sits in, which (poor virgin) she was
never acquainted with, but in respect of the light and brightness of her
faith, Romans 1. 8.
as Saint Paul testifies, which (by reason of the fruit it did effect and
bring forth in her) shined, and made her face to shine throughout the world.
She was a sister and daughter of that woman which John saw so wonderfully and
heavenly decked and adorned, and which he describes, saying, Revel. 12. 1.
And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun,
and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars:
that is to say, she had put on Christ, he dwelt in her heart by faith, she was
clothed with him, his righteousness covered her nakedness and all her
defects, and made her beautiful within and without; she had the earth, and all
earthly glory, under her feet, as transitory and vain; she was mortified to
sin, and to the pleasures thereof; and her souls delight was with her Lord
in heaven, where he was ascended, and yet remains; and her crown of state,
which she had on her head in those days, was the Lambs twelve Apostles, whose
doctrine and example of walking, were her guide and pattern; and who, as they
had received of the Lamb the word of God, so they left it with her, to be her
light and leader in the desert, when her public guides should fail her, of
which word of truth (not so much the letter, as the spiritual true intent
thereof) she and her children (her true successors) have been the sustainers
and pillars of, to this day.

This was once (of a truth) the estate of the Church of Rome, as also of other
Churches elsewhere, but (alas) it lasted but a while, it fared with her as with
the rest: for by the bloody persecution of the great red Dragon, Revel. 12.
her outward beauty was defaced; she was dispersed, and forced to fly with
them into the wilderness; and then (after a while) when the storm of
persecution was over, and that a calm began to be settled, so as she began to
conceive some hope of recovering her first estate, Arianisme.
heresies sprang up, and were maintained with great force, on the one side, and
carnal security grew on the other; and that iniquity might be increased,
according as the Lord had foretold, Math. 24. 12.
the love of many waxed cold. The mystery of iniquity, which began to work in
the Apostles times (they being departed) took now faster footing, according to
their words, and strove daily to perfection; and at last, he that let, was
taken away, and the man of sin (Antichrist) was revealed, and set up in the
throne of the Dragon; and the Dragons religion was by him and his, so
commanded, and commixt with the external profession of the name and religion of
Christ, as that no man could partake of the better, but he must partake of the
worse. For after that the Bishop of Rome had obtained at the Dragons hands,
that his Church should be the Mother of all other Churches, and that all must
crouch and bend to her, and that he became Lord and master of all; then did he
(among the rest of his requitals) entertain and command such part of the
Dragons religion and Church-seruice, as might give him the best content, and
most advance his own temporal state of glory. So that having once obtained
the Dragons seat, and that all his heads, hills and horns were his, he thought
he might now do what he list, fell to desolating of the true worship of God, 1.
Pet. 2. 5.
and to consuming of the Saints of the most high (the remnant of the true
Spouse, the children of the woman, before described,) and pulled down the
daily and spiritual sacrifice, which they (the spiritual house of God)
offered up acceptable to him by Jesus Christ, Dan. 9. 27.
cast the truth to the ground, as the Prophet had foretold of him, brought in
and set up the abominable and most execrable religion of the heathen,
compounding it, and dignifying the parts, practice, and practisers of it (the
more to delude the world) with the names and titles of God, Christ, holy
Spirit, the word of God, his holy Church, his worship, Service, his holy
Sacraments, and Saints. And that he might have all in obedience, made such
laws, by the advice of his privy council, that whosoever would not worship
the Beast and this image of the Beast (the idols and abominations of the
heathen and pagans) should by the executioners of his will, be taken and
killed. And because he would be sure to know his own, and to find out all that
would not submit, caused all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, Reave. 13. 16, 17
to receive a mark in his right hand or in his forehead; and that no man might
buy or sell, save he that had the mark, etc.

Now when once things were come to this pass, it was no longer time (for any
soul that would be saved) to stay; and for this cause it was, that Christ
commands, saying, Revel. 18. 4, 5.
Come out of her my people, that ye be not partaker of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues: for her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has
remembered her iniquities.

And these were the very reasons, why at the first the Church of England
separated from her, and also why so many of other nations did forsake her. When
Wickliffe, Husse, Tindal, Luther, Cranmer, Latimer, and others, forsook the
Church of Rome, and came out of her, they stood not to make question about
their outward calling or ordination they had received before of the Church of
Rome; but God having called them now, by a more special heavenly calling, to
preach his truth, they staid not for, neither did they look after another; Nay,
if they had, the truth might have lien hid, and we might have sat in darkness
until this day; but they finding the approbation of God and his people, It was
enough.

Let me ask? If God should vouchsafe to call the Bishop of Rome, the Pope that
now is, and that he should forsake all those abominations, which he now lives
in, and become such a Scribe, Bishop, or Elder, as (before) we have described;
who would condemn him, or call him Antichrist, for that he was once the Pope
of Rome, though he had never other outward ordination, more then the
approbation of God and his people, or who would call the people that should
embrace him, Antichristians? doubtless, not any of the children of wisdom.

Agiane, presuppose that the state of all Europe were now as it has been
heretofore, all under Antichrist and his Church; and that God should call one
of the Bishops of that Church out from them, and in due him with the knowledge
of his truth, by his word and Spirit* and that there be a necessity as thou
say, that he must have another outward ordination, before he can Minister the
word of God unto any people, so as to be a Bishop or Elder unto them; whither
would thou have him to go for it, or where will thou find an Eldership to
ordain him? In Europe there be none, all are Antichristians. Will thou have
Apostles again, to lay a new foundation, and must they ordain new Elders
before their can be a true constituted Church with her offices and ordinances,
as thou termest them? Is this thy judgment? It may be, if it be not; Nay, it
must be, if thou hold thee to thy former; It has been the opinion of some of
thy predecessors, that held themselves as wise as thy self whatsoever thou
art, as for instance, there were (among others) three Brethren, ancient
Separatists from the Church of England, living sometimes in the City of
London, their names were Legate, these held it stiffly, that their must be new
Apostles, before their could be a true constituted Church, and they drew it
from this their ground, the one was called Walter Legate, who about twenty
years since was drowned, being with one of his brethren washing himself in a
river, called the Old Foord; Another of them called Thomas Legate, died in
Newgate about sixteen years since, being laid there for the Heresy of Arius;
The third called Bartholomew Legate, was burnt in Smithfield about ten years
since, being condemned for the same Heresy of Arius, for they all held, and
stood stoutly for the same also. These Legates had a conceit, that their name
did (as it were) foreshew and entitle them, to be the new Apostles, that must
do this new work; but you see what became of them. There was also one John
Wilkinson, another ancient stout Separatist, who with diverse that followed him,
held the same likewise, drawing it from the same ground, as a necessary
consequence thereof, who also came to naught. But if there be any yet that will
needs have new Apostles, as no doubt there be; for their carnal contentions
work still to that point; then let me ask thee, whence must they come? who
shall send them? Christ is ascended, and he does not now appear to call, and
send any, as he did the Apostle Paul; and Apostles must be such as come from
the presence of the Lord* and have seen him; For which cause Saint Paul says
in the defense of his Apostleship, 1. Cor. 9. 1.
Have not I seen the Lord? etc. And he that was to be in Judas his room, Act.
1. 21. 22.
must be one that had bin conversant with the Apostles the time of Christ's
being then on earth, an eye witness to publish that which he saw and believed.
So that Apostles thou can not upon any good ground expect.

If thou say, the Church may ordain n^^ Elders.

I ask, whence came that Church? who plant (...) first? can there be an
Orchard of fruitful trees, and was there not a husbandman that planted it? Can
faith be without preaching? or can there be a Church without faith? If thou
have found a true Church, find but out him that planted it, that first preached
the word of God unto it, whereby it believed, and became his Church, thou have
found an Elder, fear it not; thou need not make further enquiry from whence
he came, or who ordained him; he could not do such a work, except God sent
him, though he came from Rome. If thou say, Evangelists may preach the
Gospel to the people, and ordain Elders, as Timothy and Titus did. It is
true; but where be they who shall ordain such, and send them to do this?
Apostles we have none. If thou say, disciples may preach, Luke 10. 1.
as the seventy did etc. I ask still, who made those disciples? Did thou
ever know a field bear good wheat, that was never sown? If thou have found
good disciples, doubtless, there was one or other that did first inform them.
So that thou may see, thou art still in the same case thou were in, and that
of necessity it will follow, that if there can be no true Church, till there
be a new outward ordination, then there will never be a true Church. Wherefore
we conclude, against thee, and against all that are of thy judgment; that as
you err greatly in all your former points, so in this: and as many of the
former do agree with the ancient errors of the Antichristian Church of Rome; so
does this; for they deny Gods predestination, and election of some particular
persons in Christ, to grace and life, from the foundation of the world, and so
do you; They teach free will, and falling away from the best grace, and that
the certainty of man's salvation does depend upon his acts of faith, obedience,
and continuing therein, and so do you; They teach that outward ordination and
succession does make, constitute, and prove a true Church, and so say you in
part, if not in the whole. That whereas you charge others to be of Antichrist
and his Church, it is evident, you are more nearly allied to her, by these
deceitful doctrines of hers, then they can be, with the things ye charge them
with; Nay, they may notwithstanding be free from her, when you shall by this
means be found children of her.

If outward ordination and succession in that kind, do make, constitute, or be
an Argument sufficient to to prove a true Church, a Church wherein Christ
dwells, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, to which Christ
has given the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 16. 19.
and power to bind and to loose, to remit and to retain sins, which is the
pillar and ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 25.
which has the spirit of truth, which Christ promised to be with unto the end
of the world; and that wheresoever two or three of them should be gathered
together in my name, Mat. 18. 19.
he would be in the midst; (for all these treasures, and many more do belong
to the true Church, which is the body and spouse of Christ;) then the Chuch of
Rome has as good ground for the proof, and confirmation of her self, to be
the same true Church, as any Church else whatsoever; nay, better ground then
any other can show. And therefore her children (which stands for her, and do
plead her cause) take this to be, and do use it as the strongest and most
inuinciblest argument they have to prove their Church to be the only true
Church, this day extant; and that all Churches and Christians, ought therefore
to come under her government, to be taught and nurtured by her, to submit to
her counsels, ordinances, canons, decrees, doctrines of faith, rules for
manners, ceremonies, censures, and whatsoever she shall impose, because what
such a Church (which has those forenamed privileges) shall agree upon, teach
or command, is truth, and may not be questioned or opposed, Act. 15. 28.
and therefore it is said, For it seemed good unto the holy Ghost and to us.

But we utterly deny any such ordination or succession, to make, constiture, or
to be an argument sufficient to prove such a true Church; and affirm, that a
Church may be false and Antichristian, notwithstanding the same. For although
there be such an ordination and succession, a Church, against which the gates
of hell shall not prevail, as the Lord himself declares, saying, And upon
this rock will I build my Church, Math. 16. 18.
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; to which all those former
privileges do belong, and are to continue with unto the end of the world; yet
we deny that kind of ordination and succession to be it, or to have any of
those privileges belonging thereunto, but that it may be (notwithstanding) an
utter adversary to the true succession, and to all those her treasures; which
we prove thus:

That kind of ordination and succession, which have opposed the word and truth
of God, that have persecuted and murdered his servants (from time to time) for
the preaching and maintaining of the same truth and word of God, is not (nor
can be) that ordination and succession, or church, against which the gates of
hell shall not prevail, nor to which any of those treasures do belong, but may
be an adversary both to it and them. But the outward ordination and succession
in the rooms, public offices and seats of the true Elders and Priests of
God, (which is the best ordination and succession, the Church of Rome that now
is, has, or can plead for her self, and which the separations do contend
for) have opposed the word and truth of God, have persecuted and killed the
servants of God, which preached and maintained the same his word and truth, and
for the same cause. Therefore the outward ordination and succession, in the
rooms, public offices and seats of the true Elders and Priests of God, is
not (nor can be) that ordination and succession, or church, against which the
gates of hell shall not prevail, or to which, any of her privileges do
belong, but may be an utter adversary both to her and them.

And that such an ordination and succession, as the Church of Rome and our
Separatists pleads and contendeth for, have done, and may do all these evils
against the truth and true servants of God, is evident by those Priests, Elders
and Scribes of the Church of the Jews, who had their outward ordination and
succession from the former Elders and Priests, yea from Moses and Aaron, and
sat in their seats, and supplied their places, and yet (nevertheless) were
the great opopposers of Gods word and truth, and the persecuters and murderers
of the Prophets and righteous men of God, which preached the same his word and
truth from time to time, as Christ himself often affirms to their faces,
Math. 21.
and foretells them in a parable, that they would be the betrayers and
murderers of him also, which shortly after came to pass.

And the Church of Rome (for her part) has showed herself in enmity to the
truth, and bloody proceedings against the maintainers thereof, (for above a
thousand years) not only to equal, but to outstrip Jerusalem, and to be
even the perfection and full accomplishment (as it were) of all abominations
and cruelties, against the truth of God and his Church, according as Christ (by
the ministry of his Angel unto his servant John) testifies, Revel. 17. 5.
where he calls he, The Mother of Harlots and the abominations of the earth;
and foresheweth how drunk she would be with the blood of the Saints, and with
the Martyrs of Jesus. And as he laid to the charge of the Scribes and Pharisees
of his time, the blood of the righteous that had been slain, Math. 23. 35.
from Abel to Zecharias; Revel. 18. 24.
so he charge these with the blood of all that ever (for the truth) should be
slain upon the earth, and with his own blood also, because they and those
that crucified him, are all of one house and generation, even from Cain to this
day, being the right and true successors of one another in evil. So that their
maine argument of succession, in the rooms and chaires of the righteous
servants of God, avails them nothing to the purpose they aim at, seeing
this, not only may be, but is their condition notwithstanding. For, as they
were not of Abraham's seed, which came of Abraham after the flesh, nor they
(all) Israel, that came of Israel; and as that was not circumcision, which was
outward in the flesh; nor that baptism, which washes away but the filth of
the flesh: so neither is that the true heavenly and spiritual succession,
which is outward, by an external ordination and succession in the rooms and
seats of the righteous servants of God; but the true and heavenly succession
(which have all those heavenly treasures belonging to it) is that which Christ
has built upon the rock, are they that have the faith of Peter, of John, and
the rest of the Apostles, even those lively stones, which Saint Peter speaks
of, who are by faith built upon Christ the chief corner stone, 1. Pet. 2. 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
like as Peter was, and so are made a spiritual house by this means, and do
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, and are that
chosen generation, that royal priesthood, holy nation, and peculiar people,
which he describes, who have received spiritual gifts from above, Ephesians. 4.
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
as Saint Paul testifies, saying, Wherefore he says when he ascended up on
high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men. According as Saint
James says, Every good and perfect gift is from about; and comes down from
the Father of lights, Iam. 1. 17.
with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of turning. That as they only
are the seed and children of Abraham, that have the faith and works of Abraham;
and as the circumcision of the heart, is the true circumcision; and as to have
the heart sanctified by faith through the Spirit, is to be baptized with the
baptism which saves, to put on Christ by baptism, and to be a true
Christian: so likewise, to be a true Pastor or Elder, is to enter^^in by the
door first, even through Christ, by faith; for he is the door and the way,
whereby every true Pastor must enter, and to be called and ordained of God, by
those heavenly gifts of Christ, whereby they are made able Ministers of the new
Testament; and then in the second place, to be approved and justified of his
Church and children of wisdom. For the calling of a true Minister of God, and
that which makes him so to be, is as heavenly and spiritual as that which
makes a true Christian; else every true Christian had a greater privilege
then every true Minister of Christ, which (doubtless) is not so, but rather
every true Minister has a greater; yea such are the gifts of the Spirit, which
Christ since his ascension has given to his Church, for the administration of
the Gospel of peace, that whereas he gave this testimony of John, that in
regard of the gifts of the Spirit, which were given him for the administration
of repentance, a greater Prophet then John, was never (before him) borne of
women, Luke 7. 28.
yet nevertheless he says, that he which is least in the kingdom of heaven,
is greater then he; meaning the least true Minister of the Gospel, the word of
reconciliation.

And if yet they allege for their separation, as their manner is to do, That
in the Church of England there be many very superstitiously minded, many
ungodly, proud, covetous and unclean persons, both in the public office of
the ministry, as also of the people, who do partake as well in the Sacrament
of the Supper, as in the administration of the word: let them remember what
has been manifested before, as touching the estate of the Churches in the
Apostles times, how that there were then in the Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 13.
false Apostles, false teachers, Philip. 1. 15.
deceivers, some that preached Christ through envy, 2. Pet. 2. 14.
some that had eyes full of adultery, and that could not cease from sin;
some that made merchandise of the people; 1. Cor. 6. 6.
some who went to law one with annother, and that amongst the infidels;
covetous, wicked, proud, lascivious persons, which had not repented of their
wickedness; Phil. 3. 18. 19.
some that made their belly their God, whose glory was their shame, who minded
earthly things; 1. Cor. 11. ^^.
and some, that at the Sacrament of the Supper were drunken, and despised the
poor; these and diverse other evils were in the Churches, and yet no
separation to be made from any of them, only the Apostles, sharply reproved
those deceivers, as evil doers, and warned the people with tears to take heed
of them, and of their evils, and to shun them.

Again, there were some that with conscience of the very Idols of the heathen,
did eat things in sacrifice to the Idol, 1. Cor. 8. 7.
as Saint Paul affirms, saying, For some with conscience unto the Idol unto
this hour, eat it as a thing offered unto an Idol. Declaring unto them, that
the things which the Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrificed to Devils, and not
to God, 1. Cor. 10. 20. 21. 22.
and said, I will not that you should have fellowship with Devils, ye cannot
drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of the devils; ye cannot be
partaker of the Lords table, and the table of devils. Do ye provoke the Lord,
etc. And by this it appears, they came also to the Lords table, though as
Saint Paul told them, they could not truly and spiritually partake thereof, so
long as they did partake of the other. Yea it is evident, that these
corinthians were much adicted to their old heathenish superstitions; For Saint
Paul in his next Epistle does again call upon them, saying, Be not unequally
yoked with Infidels, 2. Cor. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness and what communion
has light with darkness, and what concord has Christ with Beliall, and what
part has he that believes with an Infidel, and what agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of the living God, as God
has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them* and will be their God, and
they shall be my people; wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate
from them, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty.

Here we see by the plain commandment of God, and exhortation of Saint Paul,
that a separation ought to be made from all kind of Idolatry and unrighteousness
of the heathen, and from all fellowship with them in their unclean things. But
here is no separation from the Church, though these superstitious Christians
were in it. Nay, it is evident, there was never any separation admitted, Such
as were carnal, having not the Spirit.
either by word, or by example, (except by those that separated themselves to
make sects, which are reproved by the Apostles) until such time as by the
malice and subtlety of the Devil, Iud. 19.
and through the pride and wickedness of the Bishop and Church of Rome, after
they had gotten Jurisdiction over all, that they had brought into the Church
the Idolatries and abominations of the Pagans, and so cunningly compounded
them, with the name and religion of Christ, that no man could partake of any
good among them, but he must partake of the evil also. Then, and not till
then, Reu. 18. 4.
I say, the Lord commanded saying, Go out of her my people, that ye be not
pertaker of her sins, and that you receive not of her plagues. This was not,
because there were many offenders in the Church of Rome, nor because of their
personal presence in the Assemblies, but because the Lord would not have his
people partake, (in their own persons) of their sins; which if they
continued with them, could not be avoided.

Neither was there a separation to be made from the Church of the Jews, as bad
and as cruel as it was, but Christ and his Apostles did always both by word
and example, teach the contrary; only the false doctrine and hypocrisy, and
wickedness of the Jews, they warned the faithful to take heed of.

And as concerning the Church of England, which thou so much contemnest,
although there be many evil workers, ungodly, and unregenerate persons*
superstitiously minded, as well of the Ministry, as of the people, as out of
all doubt there are. For if, of but twelve Apostles, Note, how that there were
ever in the purest Churches, such as were bitter one to another, full of
strife, seditions, and all manner of evil works, which are condemned by the
Apostle to be earthly, sensiuall, and devilish.
one was a Devil; and that there were false Apostles, and false teachers,
proud, and covetous, in the primitive Churches, and false brethren, belly gods,
and such like, when Christians were but few in number; How should it be, but
there must now be many; yet this is not sufficient ground for thy separation.
Nay, suppose (as the truth is) that the faithful be but few in number, and
rare, as the dust or oar that gold comes of, and the ungodly as common as
the clay that men make pots of, as the Prophet speaks; For doubtless, if God
said of the Israelites, that though their number were as the sand of the sea,
yet but a remnant of them should be saved; Esa. 10. 22.
we have no reason to think it should be otherwise with us; Nay, Saint Paul
shows plainly, that God will finish the work, and cut it short in
righteousness, Romans 9. 27. 28.
because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth. Yet what of this,
thou have no ground from hence to prove a separation. Nay, unless thou can
prove that the Church of England, has set up, and does command the
Abominations of the heathen, as does the Church or Rome, and so mix them and
Christian religion together, as thou could not partake of the good, but thou
must partake of the evil, and so sin against God in thine own person, thou
have no ground at all for thy separation. Art thou offended because God has
been so gracious to this kingdom, above all other nations, in causing the
Princes and Kings thereof (now in these latter days) to set their helping
hands to the repairing and building up again of the decayed walls of
Jerusalem, and to the restoring of the morning and evening sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving, as it was in former time, and in the days of old. Do thou
not know it was the word of truth, the sword which proceeds out of the mouth
of the Lord, ministered by his faithful servants, whom he raised up in these
latter times, which has been the cause of the revolt of the Church and
Kingdom of England from the abominations and tyranny of the Church of Rome,
and that God has done it for his chosen sake, according to his word, art thou
not bound to be thankful unto God for the same, and with gladness of heart
to embrace all the good he has vouchsafed, yet so as not therewithal to
justify any of the present evils, nor yet to rest thy self secure in that
good which is in being, as if all things were already come to their full
measure, and so exclude thy self from all future grace and truth, which God
has decreed (in and by his word) to bring to light. For as the truth and daily
sacrifice (which Christ and his Apostles did erect) were not all wholly (in a
moment) cast to the ground, nor the abomination of desolation set up at full
in one day, but that the one increased by degrees, and the other wasted
accordingly: so must it now be in the restoration; as then iniquity and
falsehood increased, and truth and love faded and waxed cold, so now (on the
contrary) iniquity and falsehood must consume and be expelled, and truth and
the love thereof must increase and come to their place again; Judgment was to
begin at the house of God, but it must end in the house of iniquity.

Learn therefore now to be a wise, let the confusions which the heady extremes
of those carnal contentious times have brought forth, admonish thee to take
better heed; embrace thankfully, and make right use of the present good thou
see in place; shun the evils, and labor to increase in the wisdom which is
from above; doubtless, there are great riches and treasures with God to be
attained, such as the carnal mind shall never see nor know; converse with the
wise and holy in heart, such as are spiritual and heavenly minded, have
special fellowship with them, pray, weep, and rejoice (daily together) with
them; call often to mind the hope of the joy and glory ye shall receive in the
world to come, in the day when Christ your Lord shall appear; hope, love, and
long for his appearing, and edify your selves with these things; pray unto
God, and use all good means (according to your measure and place) to redress
what is amiss in others; labor (thorough patience and meekness) to win
them to the truth, and love thereof; so shall ye be profitable members of the
Church of God, diligent and faithful servants of Christ.

You are not ignorant (I suppose) of the manifold mischieues that men have
fallen into, by reason of the fleshly wranglings which have been in these late
times, what confusion, division and distraction there is among the people; what
and how many sundry opinions and several sects there are, yea sects upon
sects, division upon division, error upon error, has been bred and brought
forth. Many have risen (in these latter times) speaking perverse things, to
draw disciples after them, to get themselves a name, the devil deluding them
through pride, under pretense of some excellent way of truth, which he makes
them believe is revealed unto them. As first, for the Church of Rome, all the
world sees what confusion, what fearful delusions are therein, what
multitudes of sects of new devised orders of Priests, Note, that these
striuings are (only) about forms and outward ordinatio^s, which lead to
nothing but contentions.
of Friars, each drawing a train after him; and now (since the light of the
truth has broken forth) what strange contentions have been raised in the
Church of God about things of no moment (when great and weighty matters have
been neglected,) and what emulations, divisions and separations have bred
thereupon; and then, how after this, people being in distraction, have run
from one sect and error to another, from separation to separation, dividing
themselves into many several sects, to Anabaptistry, wherein (aagaine) are
divided into five or six sundry sects, each hatefully condemning other, holding
(also) many dangerous errors, some to expect new Apostles, some to the heresy
of Arius; and some others (who being, as it were, distracted with these things)
have fallen to another (the most blasphemous and erroneous sect this day in the
world) commonly called by the name of the Family of love, whose author was one
Henry Nicolas, or H. N. for so they will have him called, that is (as they
expound it) Homo Nouus, the new man, or the holy nature, or holiness, which
they make to be Christ, and sin they will have to be Antichrist, because it is
opposite to Christ. They say, that when Adam sinned, then Christ was killed,
and Antichrist came to live. They teach, that the same perfection of holiness
which Adam before he fell, is to be attained here in this life; and affirm,
that all their Family of love are as perfect and innocent as he. And that the
resurrection of the dead, spoken of by Saint Paul in the 1. Cor. 15. and this
prophecy, Then shall be fulfilled the saying which is written, O death, where
is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? is fulfilled in them, and deny
all other resurrection of the body to be after this life. They will have this
blasphemer H. N. to be the son of God, Christ, which was to come in the end
of the world to judge the world; and say, that the day of judgment is already
come; and that H. N. judges the world now by his doctrine; so that whosoever
does not obey his Gospel, shall (in time) be rooted out of the world; and that
his Family of love shall inherit and inhabit the earth for ever, world
without end; only (they say) they shall die in the body, as now men do, and
their souls go to heaven, but their posterities shall continue for ever. This
deceiuer describes eight through breakings of the light (as he terms them)
to have been in eight several times from Adam to the time that now is, which
(as he says) have each exceeded other; the seventh he allows Jesus Christ to
be the publisher of, and his light to be the greatest of all that ever were
before him; and he makes his own to be the eighth, and last, and greatest,
and the perfection of all, in and by which Christ is perfected, meaning
holiness. He makes every one of his Family of love to be Christ, yea and God,
and himself God and Christ in a more excellent manner, saying, that he is
Godded with God, and codeified with him, and that God is hominified with him.

These horrible blasphemies, with diverse others, does this H. N. and his Family
teach to be the everlasting Gospel, which the Angel is said to preach in
Revelation 14. 6. and himself to be the Angel, yea and the Archangell which
is said to sound the great and last trump, Revel. 11. 15. They profess greater
love to the Church of Rome, and to all her idolatries and superstitions, then
they do to any Church else (whatsoever) except themselves. They wickedly abuse
these words of Christ, Luke 13. 32.
I must walk to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected; and
say, that by to day is meant the time of Jesus Christ and his Apostles; and by
to morrow, all the time of the religion of the Church of Rome; and by the third
day, this their day of H. N. and his Family, wherein they will have Christ to be
perfected. And they do compare all the whole religion of the Church of Rome,
to the law of Moses; affirming, that as God did teach his people by those
shadows and types till Jesus Christ came, so he has taught the world (ever
since) by the images, sacrifices, and filthy heathenisme of the Church of Rome,
till this wretch H. N. came, and now he must be the only chief teacher, Gods
obedient man, yea his son, as they blasphemously call him; he (by his
Gospel) must make all perfect. They will outwardly submit to any kind of
religion, and to any idolatrous service whatsoever, pretending it is not the
body that can sin, but the soul. They will be Priests in the Church of
Rome, and act their Service after their manner of devotion; and as Satan can
transform himself into an Angel or light, so they can thrust themselves
(likewise) ^o be public Ministers and Preachers in the Church of England; yea
into the Kings Chapel, and to be of his officers and messengers, so bold they
are, even at this present; and so close and cunningly they can carry themselves
(being directed thereto by their Master H. N.) that ye shall hardly (ever)
find them out. They will profess to agree in all points with the Church of
England, as also with the Church of Rome, if they should be examined by them,
only this, they will not (lightly) deny their Master H. N. nor speak evil of
him or his writings, Notes how to discover a Familest.
if they should be put to it: and there is no way but this whereby to discover
them, I say, to put them to the denial and abiuring of him and his writings,
and to pronounce him a blasphemer, and his doctrine blasphemous; this they will
hardly do, unless they be not yet his full disciples.

These horrible blasphemies, and wicked actions (which I hate to describe) but
that I desire Christians should take notice of them, and beware) does this
blasphemer and his blasphemous sect, teach and practice. But I cease, sighing
and sorowing in my heart, (God does know) to see that the devil should work
such mischeife now in this last time, wherein (I know) God will have his truth
to prosper, and most of all, because many silly souls are taken in their
snares like poor unwary birds (in time of winter, when food is scarce)
seeking for releife. Alas, what may be the cause of this? Is there not some
great fault in those that should give light to the world, who sit in the places
of the stars of God. Does not their negligence and coldness drive the people
into these extremes? or are the violent courses, and carnal contentions of
some other the cause thereof, or is it both? doubtless, they are both great
causes thereof, the devil being the chief Author, for there is nothing that
he does envy more, then the power of truth and godliness; if he cannot work
all men asleep, by cold carnal security, as he does the most, he will (if it
be possible) deceive the rest by some pretended strict way of truth, for his
aim is to deceive all, he spares none. O that the watchmen (therefore) would
lay these things to heart, and examine themselves, by the examples of the holy
Apostles, and rules which they have set down, to prove them by? What will it
avail you (in the day of account) that ye have bin called the Ministers of
God, the Shepherds of his flock, when ye have not done the office of
faithful Ministers and Sheepheards to his flock, what will your pleasure, your
profit, your praise and estimation of men (in that day) do ye good Ah dear
Sirs, take heed, it concerns your selves much, as it does the people also. To
be called the Ministers of God, is a high and honorable title, but a thousand
times more honor it is, to be a faithful Minister of God, in deed, and in
truth; what though you be not esteemed of the world; nay? what if ye be
despised and hated thereof? what though you should be destitude and afflicted,
and undergo hunger, thirst, cold, labors, watchings, weepings, perils,
prisonments, sword, etc. Christ says, I was an hungry, I was athirst, I was
naked, sick in prison, etc, he means you, if ye be his servants; if ye
partake not with him in his sufferings, how can ye look to reign with him, if
ye follow him not in the regeneration, ye shall not sit on throanes with him.
What will these words of the Lord avail or concern you, where he says, And
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more death
nor sorrow, neither shall there be any more pain. If ye never knew what any of
these things meant, it is better to sow here in tears, that we may hereafter
reap with joy, then to laugh here, and weep for ever; Let not therefore (I
humble beseech you) the fear of the loss and favor of friends, of your
pleasures, profits, praise, or estimation with men, or whatsoever this world
can afford, keep you from following the Lord, in whom there is great reward,
oh happy is the soul that can forsake all these things for the love of Christ,
and his Gospells sake, for he shall receive an hundred fould more (such
treasures as cannot be uttered) even here in this present time, and in the
world to come life everlasting, fear not, (if ye can cast your care on him)
certainly he will not see you left destitute: Never shall any man know what the
treasures of wisdom, and riches of his grace, in the Gospel are, except he
can prefer them in his heart, above all carnal things whatsoever, nay,
except he can truly forsake them all, and himself also, for love thereof,
neither will God (else) ever take pleasure in him, or impart unto him his
secrets, let him be how skillful, how learned, how esteemed of men soever. But
he that can like the Merchant, sell all he has, and purchase the field wherein
the true treasure lies, he shall not only be rich himself, but be able to
make others rich thereby, according also as Christ says, Whoseeuer believes
in me, as the Scriptures has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water
of life. He shall not only himself (being entered in by the door) go in and
out and find pasture, but shall guide others also in by the same door to the
same pastures of life, and so having turned many to righteousness, by the
faithful administration of the word of truth, shall possess peace, comfort,
and a good conscience here, and when the Lord shall come in his glory to reward
every one according as his works and labors have been, he shall shine, not
only like the brightness of the firmament, (as every wise holy Christian shall
do) but as the stars for ever and ever, as the Prophet Daniel testifies,
saying, And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,
Dan. 12.
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

An eight point, held at this present by the ancient Anabaptists. That a King
or Maiestrate cannot be a true Christian, except he give over his kingly office
or Maiestracie.
Answer.

THis, although it be not fully the opinion of these our English Anabaptists,
yet because it is a point so generally held among the other sects of them, and
for that these (with others) are not yet rightly informed as touching the
authority of kings and governors, what it is, how far it does extend, nor yet
how far forth Christians are bound to obey and submit unto them; we will
therefore first disprove that error of the elder Anabaptists, then show what
the authority of kings and governors is, how far it does extend, and how
farforth every true Christian is bound by the word of God (as he is a subject
or Citizen) to obey and submit unto them, and then, that all kingdoms,
peoples, powers, and authorities whatsoever, shall serve and obey the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords for evermore. They that have served and obeyed him
according to his Gospel here in this life, shall serve, honor, and praise him
freely and with joy for ever hereafter, and they that would not by the voice of
the Gospel be brought to serve and obey him here in this life, shall be made
(by force of torments) to serve and obey him for ever in the world to come;
this will we briefly do if God permit.

That kings and rulers, governors and magistrates, may be true Christians, and
retain their kingly places, rule, authority, and magistracy, is evident by
the examples of David, of Solomon, and others, who were true Christians by
faith according to the promise in the Spirit, though Christ was not yet come in
the flesh, they lived and dyed kings of this world, and true Christians also:
and the case is not now altered by the coming of Christ in the flesh, the
Gospel has not made any alteration in that respect, but does rather confirm
it, where Christ says unto his disciples, (who striued among themselves, which
of them should be the greatest) Luke 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. (a place which these
Anabaptists do chiefly allege for their purpose,) The Kings of the Gentiles
exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon the^, Luke
22.
are called gracious Lords, but ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest
among you, let him be as the least, and he that is chief, as he that does
serve. He does not here forbid a Christian to be an earthly or temporal King,
nor such a King to be a Christian; nay, his words do allow both; only he
forbids that Christians should aspire in their minds, or seek to be great,
or to rule over one another, as they are Christians, children of one God and
Father, and servants of one Lord Jesus Christ. And that if any of them be great
Kings and Rulers in the world, they should not exercise authority over their
brethren, as do the Kings of the Gentiles, or as now the Lords of Rome do, as
if they were Lords over Gods heritage; nay, but though they be Kings, and (as
touching their temporal state and dominion) do and may lawfully reign and
rule over all, and are chief and head of all persons, as well Ecclesiastical
as civil, true Christians as others, considered (also) as they are subjects or
citizens; yet as Kings are Christians, and as their subjects are Christians,
and of the same body of Christ with them, they may not take Lordship upon
them, nor exercise dominion over them, neither ought they (in that respect) to
yield it unto them, because that title of honor and dominion spiritual, does
belong to their Lord and Master Jesus Christ only; and therefore he says,
Math. 23.
Call no man Lord on earth, for one is your Lord; call no man Master, for one
is your Master: as Saint Paul likewise says, For although there be on earth
many that be called Gods and Lords, (as there be many Gods, 1. Cor. 8. 5. 6.
and many Lords) yet unto us there is but one God, even the Father of all, and
one Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Christ is the Lord, the Prince and head of
Christians, as they are Christians; but the King is the Lord and Prince and
head of Christians, as they are citizens or subjects. So that these words of
Christ, But he that is greatest among you, let him be as the least, and him
that is chiefest, as him that serves, have this meaning: That that Christian
which is the greatest of Christians, in regard of his temporal honor and
dignity of place in this world, should be in heart and affection, yea and in
outward actions of love, meekness and humility, (I say) as he is a true
Christian even as the least true Christian; and he that is chiefest in any
external office or place, should (as he is a Christian) be even as that true
Christian whose place is to serve (I say) in mercy, humility, charitable
actions, etc.

Now, that Kings and Rulers have lawful authority from God over all persons,
and that all ought to be obedient unto them and their laws, Romans 13.
Saint Paul declares at large, saying, Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers: for there is no power but of God; the powers that be, are
ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation:
for rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; will thou not be
afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall hane praise of the
same; for he is the minister of God to thee for good: but if thou do that which
is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain, for he is the
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. For, for this cause pay you tribute also, for they are Gods
ministers, attending upon this very thing. Render therefore (says he) to all
their due, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to
whom fear, honor to whom honor, etc. By all which (I say) it is evident,
that the power and authority of Kings is of God, and ordained by him, yea
though they be infidels; and that it does extend over all, as well true
Christians as others, Ecclesiastical persons as civil, and that every soul
ought to be subject unto them and to their laws and ordinances, even for
conscience sake, (always provided that they be not opposite to the laws and
ordinances of God, and rules of the Gospel, though they be not the same, but
their own, even the ordinances of man, as Saint Peter terms them, saying,
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14.
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as superior, or unto gouerners,
as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well, etc. If then Kings and gouerners (being
infidels) have authority from God to make laws and ordinances, such as God
commands not, but are their own, and indifferent in respect of conscience
toward God (some of them) and might be left undone, if they were not by
authority commanded; and that this is to be done of every soul, even for
conscience sake, and for the Lords sake, as the Apostles speak; not for
conscience as touching religion, as if there were any religious use or
conscience that way to be made of them, but in respect of duty to Kings and
gouerners. As touching the things that God commands, and they also require,
we ought to obey them, not because the King commands them, but because God
commands them, and not as man's ordinances, but as Gods. If (I say) Christians
ought to be thus obedient unto infidels, (for such were the Kings where
Christians in those days lived,) much more ought we to be obedient to Christian
kings in the like respects, and much more authority have they to constitute
and require the laws and ordinances of God according to his word: for their
office and duty is, not only to see their people governed and provided for, as
touching their temporal states, to place officers (under him) over them for
the same purpose, but also and chiefly to see them provided for as touching
their eternal estates, to plant over them faithful shepherds to feed their
souls with the bread of life, and to root out and suppress such as spoil
and devour the flock, and sow heresies among the people, as have done and do
the popish priests and Jesuits, these Anabaptists, Familists and others. And
as the duty of a Christian King is to place over his people faithful
shepherds: so it belongs to him also to see them provided for, Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
according to the commandment of the Lord, which says, 1. Cor. 9. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14.
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox which treads out the corn. For,
to Princes and Rulers, and such as have power to muzzle their mouths and to
see them provided for, does the Lord speak.

Thus much briefly touching the authority of Kings and Rulers, how far their
power does extend, and how far forth Christians are bound to obey and submit
unto them; and thus it must be during the time of this world, Kings must rule
(by Gods appointment) over all people, all are bound to obey them in all their
laws and ordinances which are not opposite to the laws of God; but if they
shall command any thing that God forbids, or forbid anything that God
requires (as the Antichrist of Rome, and many heathenish Kings and gouerners,
Jews, and some professed Christian Kings have done) they may not be obeyed, but
Christians ought rather to suffer (with patience and meekness) whatsoever they
shall inflict upon them, for they are here called to suffer. And that there
will come a day, in which all Kings, Princes and powers must lay down their
Crowns and Scepters at the feet of Christ, and resign all their power and
authority to him the King of kings and Lord of Lords, whose right all the
kingdoms of this world are, and that all powers and principalities, peoples
and nations shall serve and obey him (the most high Lord and King of all) for
ever and ever, the Scriptures do evidently and often declare, so often as would
be too long for me now to recite, only some few I will mention for proof
thereof. The Prophet Daniel having described the four great Monarchs which
were to reign in the earth over the inhabitants thereof, from that time to the
end of the world, and having also foreseen the end and destruction of them,
Dan. 7. 13, 14.
says, I saw in the night visions, and behold, one like the Son of man, came
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought
him near before him, and there was given him dominion and glory, and a
kingdom, that all people, nations and languages should serve him, his dominion
is an everlasting dominion which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed. This does he further explane in the 27 verse of
this Chapter, saying, And the kingdom, Dan. 7. 27.
and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall
be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him. As also in
the interpretation of the dream of Nebucadnezzar (the first of the f^ure
Monarchs, Dan. 2. 44.
) after he had described the last, he says, And in the days of these kings
shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and
the kingdom shall not be left for other people, but it shall break in pieces
and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. And again,
speaking of the reign of the same Monarch, Dan. 7. 18.
he says, But the Saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess
the kingdom even for ever and ever. By all which the Prophet shows plainly,
that the Stone which was cut out of the mountain without hands, Christ which
was to come of the house of David, should (by the power of the most high,
through the word which was to proceed out of his mouth) break in pieces,
consume and destroy all those Monarchs which were to reign in the world; and
that he (the Lord and owner of all) should possess the kingdom, and reign on
the earth for ever and ever, world without end. And that the Saints of the most
High (not the carnal Jews yet remaining, as some imagine, but all his
redeemed, from the beginning of the world to the end) shall possess the
kingdom, and reign with him, not in a carnal earthly manner, but in a
heavenly estate of glory; not for a time, but for ever and ever, beyond all
time; and that then and from thenceforth all powers and dominions, people and
nations whatsoever, shall serve and obey him. This in brief (is that) which
the Prophet intends, which (also) the rest of the holy Prophets foresaw and
foretold of, as Saint Peter testifies, saying, And he shall send Jesus Christ,
which before was preached unto you, whom the heavens must receive, until the
time of restitution of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of all his
holy Prophets since the world began, meaning this great restitution, which is
to be fulfilled at the second coming of Christ in the clouds of heaven, when
the seventh Angel shall sound the last Trump, as Saint John witnesses,
saying, And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven,
saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Esa. 27. 13
And that this shall not be till the great Trump shall sound, Mat 24. 31.
mentioned by Esaias the Prophet, by Christ in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 15. 52.
by Saint Paul to the Corinthians and Thesfalonians, by Saint John in the
Revelation, 1. These. 4. 16.
till Christ shall come in the clouds of heaven, Reu. 10. 7.
and that every eye shall see him, Reu. 11. 15.
even they that pierced him, and that all the kindreds of the earth shall
mourn and wail before him, Mat. 24. 30.
is manifest (I say) by all those several Scriptures, as also by the
testimony of the holy Author to the Hebrews, Reu. 1. 7.
where he says, Heb. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8
For unto the Angels has he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof
we speak, but one in a certain place testified saying, What is man, that thou
art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? thou crownedst
him with glory and honor, and did set him over the works of thy hands,
thou have put all things in subjection under his feet, etc. In which place the
Apostle shows clearly, that it is the world to come, in which all powers and
things shall be actually and visibly seen to be under his feet, and all the
kingdoms of this world shall be the Fathers and his; then (I say) in that
world, not in this, Ioh. 18. 39.
as Christ says, My kingdom is not of this world, then when the last enemy is
destroyed, when this world shall be made another world, according to his
promise, then shall all powers and principalities, Esa. 45. 23.
all people and nations serve and obey him; he will no longer be dishonored by
them, they shall not use their tongues and powers then as they list, and as
they had wont to do, but all tongues shall confess, and every knee shall bow
to him; they that in their life times would not be brought by the fair means
of his Gospel to serve and obey him, shall be brought to do it (after death) by
pain; yea Satan himself (the author of wickedness, who never intended to
give praise and honor to God or to Christ) even he with all his angels and
spirits of wickedness (under their torments, and by force of the rod of iron,
which Christ the King of the whole earth shall exercise over them in that
world) shall be compelled, with all powers, people and kings whatsoever, to
confess and bow before him, serve and obey him, praise and magnify him, his
justice and mercy for ever. For if at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow,
Phil. 2. 10, 11.
both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and
that all tongues shall confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of
God the Father, as the Apostle speaks; then (doubtless) Satan and his
followers are not exempted, yet evermore under torments (as we have said.) If
Satan and his Angels, or any of the cursed children of men, which shall be
condemned and tormented for ever with them, should after judgment rail
against God, and blaspheme him, as some do teach they shall; or if they should
do the least mischief (any kind of way) either against Christ, or against any
of his brethren, the children of God, which shall then reign for ever with
him; how is it then said, that al powers shall serve and obey the most High? how
are all things then subdued to Christ, and put under his feet? how has he
loosed the works of the devil? as the Scriptures speak. If the last enemy be
death, Hos. 13. 14.
and that death be once swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15. 55.
and it be fulfilled which is written, O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? what is the thing then left, that can do the least evil
against God, against Christ, against Sion, or against any of her children which
are now redeemed from all those former captiuities? nay, none shall ever hurt
or destroy in all that holy mountain; and for that old Serpent, upon his belly
shall he go, and dust shall be his meat. When Satan (that Serpent) went first
about to seduce mankind, by sowing sin (the sting of death) in his heart, he
aimed not at his own perpetual torments, neither did he intend to come to
praise and glorify God for ever and ever, (as he shall one day be compelled to
do) these were no part of his thoughts; nay, but his aim and purpose was to
bring all men in subjection to himself, to do him homage and service, and so to
deprive God of all his honor on earth for ever, that he and his wickedness
might have the rule; this was his plot; he little thought of a seed to come, to
bruise his head; nay, after the Seed was promised, he ceased not for all this,
but strove still to effect his purpose, and he prevailed much therein, chiefly
by presenting riches, honor, and the glory of this world unto men: so that
when the Seed himself (in person) came, he spared not to tempt him with the
like baits; but he overcame him, and has in part, and shall ere long, fully
undo his whole plot, and cast him where he shall receive that which he aimed
not at, and force him to do that which he never intended: and Sion which had
been so long desolate and waste, shall be set up the praise of the whole earth,
and be established in righteousness and safety for ever, according to the
Prophets. She shall be far from oppression, Esa. 54. 13, 14.
for she shall not fear; and from terror, for it shall not come near to her;
violence shall be no more heard within her land, nor wasting and destruction
within her borders; Esa. 60. 14.
she shall call her walls salvation, and her gates praise, her government shall
be peace, and her exacters righteousness; all those that formerly despised
her, and the sons of them that did afflict her, shall come bending unto her,
Reu. 3. 9.
and worship at the soles of her feet, and shall call her, the City of the
Lord, Sion of the holy one of Israel; her Sun shall no more go down, neither
shall her Moon withdraw it self, for the Lord shall be her everlasting light,
and the days of her mourning shall be ended.

Reuelat. 15 4. Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for
thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee, for
thy judgments are made manifest.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 9 lin. 13. 14. just upon, read just upon them. p. 24. l. 23. principal,
read principle. p. 33. l. 34. braken, read broken. p. 34. l. 3 consideration,
read considence. and l. 30. perfection, read protection. p. 47. l. 5. points,
r. point. and l. 10. read Paradise. and l. 24. had eaten, read had not eaten.
and l 37. they, r. there. p. 51. l. 33. read considerations. p. 53. l. 37.
prove, read proves. p 69. l. 2. that Church, read that the Church, and l. 5.
put out the. and l. 32. be, read being. p. 71. l. 33. read such as come in by
the door. page 72. l. 23. successed, read succeeded. p. 81 l. 26. he, read
her. p. 86. l. 21. or, read of. p. 87. l. 24. leave out a. and l. 25 those,
read these.


