CHRIST ON HIS THRONE.

OR, Christ's Church Government briefly laid down; and how it ought to be set
up in all Christian Congregations.

Resolved in sundry Cases of Conscience.

IER. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord; Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for
the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest
for your souls. LVKE 19. 27. But those mine Enemies, which would not that I
should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me. Printed in
the year 1640.

THE PREFACE To the Reader.
IT is an observation as true as ancient, that such works of God as are done
immediately by himself alone, though for their excellent greatness far
surpassing not only man's apprehension, but even admiration it self, yet are
done by him without any rub or difficulty at all. Such was that glorious and
magnificall work of Creation. But such works as God does by isntrumental
means, as by man, the greater they be, the greater difficulties they are
attended with, and meet with many impediments. And this is most seen in great
and general Reformations of Churches or States. Even Christ himself, The
only Potentate, Acts 15. 16.
the Mighty God, when he came to restore and re-erect the Tabernacle of David,
which was fallen down, to wit, his spiritual Temple or Church, what
opposition did he meet withal? what sweat did it cost him, before he could
finish this glorious and wondrous work? In which respect the Ancients were
wont to say, That God with his word alone created the world; but it cost the
life of his only begotten son to redeem the world for this was opposed by
Devils and men. And so it was with the type of Redemption, Isreal's deliverance
from Egypt, where Gods mighty wonders and plagues upon Egypt, found a proud and
hard hearted Pharaoh, with his blind Egyptians obstinately resisting to the
very last. So in the reparation of the Temple in Jerusalem, there wanted not
most malignant spirits, Ezra 5. 6.
envious men, is Tatnai, Shether Boznai, Nehem. 4.
Tobiah, and Sanballat, who mocked and accused the Jews to the King, and by
force sought to hinder the work. And therefore can we wonder, when in the
proceeding of so great a work of reformation as we see begun in our days
(nothing inferior (all circumstances considered) to that deliverance from
Egypt, or to the restoration of religion after Babylons captivity)
difficulties and impediments both great and many have and do interpose
themselves? which when we see we should not be discouraged; Cum reflavit
affligimur. Cic.
for discouragement in such cases is an argument and consequent of a mind too
much relying upon outward means, which while they prosper, they are as a good
gale filling the sails of our hope to attain the wished Port. But when an
adverse wind begins but to whistle a little up, we are afflicted, and are
ready to cast away our hope, being left as a ship without an Anchor floating,
and without a rudder driven with every wind, ready to be split on every rock
or shelfe. But in such a case, we must, as in the first place look up unto God
the great master of the winds, yea and mover of the minds of the violent men:
So herein behold and observe the beaten ways of the Lord, how he is pleased
in all such great works to suffer himself and his people to be opposed. And
this he does for special reasons, as to show forth the deep wisdom of his
providence, in circumventing his adversaries, to cross and thwart them even in
those great and good works which himself will have to be done, and certainly
purposes to accomplish, and which he calls them unto, and commands them to
do, that so he may take them off from trusting in the outward means, though
never so fair, and might teach them still and steadfastly to trust in his
help, in his strength, in his faithfulness, and not to cease to call upon him
and depend on his promise, who will certainly save, and fully answer the
prayers of his people, and in the happy issue of the work, that his glory may
in all shine forth the more clearly, when nothing shall be left in man to
glory in, but that we may give all the honor and praise of the work to him
alone.

Again, in all such great works of general Reformation, especially of
Religion, the difficulties prove to be the greater, by how much the vices and
corruptions to be purged out (as we see in natural bodies) are and have been
of longer continuance, and such also as have received strength (under pretense
at least) even from the Laws themselves, and by universal consent of the
whole State. Nor only this, but there is also in our natures a kind of
Antipathy against that purity and power of Religion, which ought to be the
maine end that all true Reformations should aim at. And besides all this,
although the corruptions be so gross, and of so high a nature, as they
proclaim themselves intolerable grievances, no longer to be borne, but do
by a kind of necessity press to a Reformation: yet there stands so great a
gulf in the way, as until it be removed, or so made up, as to be made
passable, it will be found no easy matter to compass so great a work. Now
this gulf is ignorance, and that of a long standing, contracted partly through
a general security and sloth, and partly through the want of means, while
through the subtilty of the Prelates, and cowardice of their inferiors, the
Light has been put under a Bushel. So as though the sense of our Egyptian
burdens has at length let us see in a great measure our misery, yea, and
though God in his great mercy has put into our hands such an opportunity of
Reformation, even armed with a kind of necessity to work it: Yet how
unresolved are many men of the manner and measure of this Reformation, and what
God requires at our hands herein? Yet can we not be otherwise persuaded, but
that all good men would join together, quickly to go through with this great
work, did they but apprehend it to be as well a matter of Conscience, as of
grievance. For which cause, I have in these straits of time, thought it one
part of my duty which I owe unto Christ, and to his Church, to propound, and
briefly to resolve (as God has enabled me) some important Cases of Conscience,
which (hoping they may conduce to the furthering of the great business now in
agitation concerning Religion) I have adventured most humbly to recommend unto
the serious consideration of this most just, sage and grave Senate, as to which
not only I, but all the people of the Land do owe our best service, and for
whose happy success of all their grave Counsels, we are all bound daily, and
that in a more than ordinary manner to solicit (as we still do) the throne of
Grace, that the Spirit of Christ may be abundantly poured forth upon this most
Noble Assembly, in all wisdom, and understanding, and in all judgment, zeal,
courage, constancy, unity, unamity in the love of the Truth, that such a
perfect Reformation may be wrought as Christ at this time calls for, as his
word appoints, as all Gods people every where thirst after, and as the whole
Antichristian faction is afraid of, that so, when Christ alone shall be set
upon his Throne over our souls, to rule us according to his word, and to dwell
among us by his Spirit, the Kings throne may be for ever established in justice
and judgment, and Gods people in this Land may enjoy both inward and outward
peace unto the day of Christ, and so our posterity after us may bless God, and
for ever call this Parliament, The blessed Parliament.

Let the Reader correct as here he sees cause. Errata.
PAge 4. line 1. read 3. hundred. l. 11. blot out 1. p. 6. l. 12. r. possibly
be. l. 20. r. as is usual. p. 7. l. 10. r. may be proved. p. 11. l. 19. r.
truly ancient. p. 16. l. 8. r. order sake. l. ult. r. of false. p. 20. l. 10.
r. of Prelates. p. 16. l. 11. r. form of Liturgy. p. 24. r. in the Test. l.
26. r. Commandments of men. p. 28. l. 23. r. grievances. p. 31. l. 18. r.
accommodate. p. 34. l. 11. r. and is surest. p. 38. l. 9. r. out of the way. p.
50. l. 16. r. said Articles. p. 66. l. 4. r. and lay. p. 67. l. 14. r. (...).

CASES OF CONCIENCE.
CASE I.
Whether Diocesan Bishops (as they are commonly called) be by Divine right.
THe answer is negative, They are not. The reasons are:

First, Because the Scripture knows no such creatures as Diocesan Bishops;
for the Bishops mentioned in Scripture, are none other than Presbyters, whereof
one or more were set over their several congregations respectively, as we
clearly read, Tit. 1. 5, 7. Act. 20. 17, ^8. So Act. 14. 23. compared with
Philip. 1. 1. So as Presbyters and Bishops in Scripture are convertible terms;
every Presbyter a Bishop, and every Bishop a Presbyter.

Secondly, Because all such prelaticall jurisdiction and domination as our
Diocesans usurp and exercise, is expressly forbidden by Christ himself, as
Mat. 20, 25, 26. Mark. 10. 42, 43. Luke 22. 25, 26.

Thirdly, Because the Apostles condemned all such jurisdiction and domination
as our Prelates use: As 2 Cor. 1. 24. 2 Cor. 11. 20. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. 1 Pet. 5. 3.
3 John 9. 10.

Fourthly, Because Apostles themselves, whose successors Prelates pretend to be,
never used any such jurisdiction as the Prelates do, neither in Ordination of
Ministers, nor in excommunication, (both which they do most grossly abuse) nor
in making of Canons, or setting up or imposing of Ceremonies, both of mere
humane invention, which the Apostles utterly condemned, Gal. 4. 9. 10. Col. 2.
8, etc.

Fifthly, Because the Prelates are never able to prove by any demonstration from
Scripture, that their jurisdiction is of Divine authority: their allegations
are mere pervertings of scripture; So D. Hall in his Book of Episcopacie.
as they allege first, Christ's ordaining twelve Apostles, and seventy
Disciples; here was an inequality (say they) Ergo a superiority of
jurisdiction. But neither can he prove here any such authority, as they
pretend, or much less any subordination of the seventy, unto the Twelve; for
the Twelve neither ordained nor sent forth the Seventy. Secondly, they allege
the postscripts after the second Epistle to Timothy; and after that to Titus;
which say, That those two were Bishops. But it is clear, that those postscripts
are no part of the Text, as Beza well shows. Nor are they to be found in the
vulgar Latin translation, which was at the least an hundred years after
Christ. Timothy and Titus were both Evangelists, not resident any where, but as
the Apostles called them from Country to country, as we read in Paul's Epistles:
and if they were to be called Bishops, according to the scripture, they must
have been Bishops over one Congregation respectively. Thirdly, they aledge
those seven Angels, 1 Revel 2 and 3. These (say they) were seven Bishops. This
they can never prove. And if Bishops, yet Diocesans they were not, seeing for
some hundreds of years after, there were no such Diocese extant. And our last
Translation, in the contents of the second Chapter of the Revelation calls
those Angels the Ministers of those Churches. And for the Angel to be meant of
one single man, does imply many absurdities, as that God should destroy a whole
Church for one man's sake: for God threatens the Angel of Ephesus, if he
repent not, to remove his Candlestick out of his place; to wit, that whole
Church. But God never does so; there is not in all the whole scripture any one
example, that God ever rooted out a whole State or Church, general or
particular, for one man's sin, be he Magistrate or Governor. And if God for
one pretended Prelates sin, should remove or destroy a whole Church, as that of
Ephesus; as there he threatens the Angel, who alone is charged with one only
sin, which was a declination from his first love: Then what security or
safety can the whole Church or State of England long promise to it self, so
long as it harboreth in the bosom and bowels thereof such a crew and
confederacy of most notorious and apostatised Prelates, who have not now
declined in some degrees from the faith formerly professed, but have openly
oppressed and persecuted the Preachers and preaching of the Gospel, and that
even unto blood? And again, to go about to prove the lawfulness of Prelacy
by the Word of God, from a word of a dark and figurative signification,
against clear and express testimonies of Scripture to the contrary, is most
absurd and too presumptuous. For, for Angel here to signify a Prelate, cannot
possibly, because the Scripture elsewhere (as before) damneth all Prelacy in
the Church of Christ. And there be many other reasons to confute them, that
these Angels were no such Bishops, other than Scripture Bishops, as aforesaid:
and that which was spoken to one, was by a Senechdochae spoken to all, as is
usually in Scripture, and clear in all those seven Epistles.

Sixthly, The wisest and learnedest of the Prelates at this day among us, do
warily decline the Scripture in this point, and dare not stand to their
authority, as being point blanke against them: but they fly to Custom and
antiquity, as the Papists do for all their unwritten Traditions.

CASE II.
Whether the next Age immediately succeeding the Apostles, be not a sufficient
warrant for Prelaticall jurisdiction, seeing it may be moved (say they) that
there were then Bishops.
THe Answer is negative: first, because it is not a sufficient warrant to build
the government of the Church upon any Human example, which has not express
warrant from Gods Word. Secondly, Because those who were there called Bishops,
cannot be proved to have been Diocesan Bishops, or to have had or exercised
such a jurisdiction as our Prelates usurp. Thirdly, could that be proved, yet
being not according unto, but directly against the Scripture, we ought not to
regard it. Fourthly, the very next age after the Apostles, produced many gross
errors and superstitions, as Eusebius tells us, and as the Apostles
premonished, Act. 20. 29. yea, they complained of it in their own times, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
while they yet lived: For the mystery of Iniquity (says Paul) does already
work, etc. which mystery was, that of Prelacy, as appears clearly from that
Text, where the Man of sin who exalts himself over the Church, is set forth as
the head and top of that mystery, namely of the Hierarchy, which is and has
been the L^rna or source of all iniquity. And Jerome who lived in the fourth
Century said, That Prelation over the rest of the Ministers, was a thing of
humane presumption, and not of Divine Ordination: and though it was first
devised for a remedy against schism, yet it proved in time the greatest
schism that ever was, namely the schism of Antichrist, and all his crew of
Prelates from Christ; the Hierarchy being a mere enmity against Christ's
kingdom, between which two there is as great a Chasma or gulf as between
Paradise and Hell.

CASE III.
But seeing Episcopacy is of very great and reverend antiquity (as they say) is
it not best to reduce the present Prelacy to the ancient condition of Bishops
in the Primitive Church.
NO; unless they can prove these Bishops to be such as Gods Word allows.
We reverence that antiquity which is joined with verity: But antiquity
without verity is oldnesse of error, as said old Tertullian. When one asked
Christ, Mat. 19. 3.
If it were lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? Christ gave
no indulgence at all, but reduced that ancient abuse among the Jews, to the
primitive institution of God in Paradise.

Secondly, The matter in hand is of higher moment, than to be regulated by any
humane ordinance, or reduced to any antiquity, other than the Scripture it
self. For the thing here in question concerns no less than the honor of
Christ's Kingdom, and his royal prerogative in the government of his kingdom,
as we shall further see.

Thirdly, that which is originally vicious, cannot by tract of time be made
good. Custom, we see, has not made Prelates better, but worse and worse in
all ages. An evil egg brings forth an evil Bird. And Christ says, Mat. 7. 17.
An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. And, Every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. And Every plant
which my heavenly Father has not planted, Mat. 15. 13.
shall be plucked up by the roots. Mat. 12. 33.
And, Either make the tree good, and the fruit good; or make the tree evil,
and the fruit evil. If therefore the tree of Prelacie be originally, and in
its own nature evil, as having no foundation in Scripture, as being none of
Gods planting, it ought to be so far from being a pattern for its antiquity,
as it ought utterly to be rooted up, as being a novelty, and not antiquity: for
that only is truly current, which is anciently true.

CASE IV.
But if the Prelacy be plucked up and quite taken away, what government shall
be left for the Church of God?
FOr resolution whereof we are to consider these necessary things: First, That
that Government alone be set forth, which Christ himself has left us in his
Word. For who but the King and Lawgiver of his Church and kingdom of Grace,
should give Laws, and appoint how it shall be governed? Secondly, we are not
to think that Christ who was the Lawgiver of the Old Testament, was not also
the Lawgiver of the New, and has left us sufficient direction therein for the
government of his people both for faith and manners. Now in the Old Testament
all must be done according to the Pattterne showed to Moses in the Mount, even
to the least pin in the Tabernacle. So also for the Temple and the form
thereof, David received all in writing by the Spirit of God, 1 Chr. 28. 12. 19.
No place is left, nor power given to men to invent any thing, or impose the
least ceremony in the worship of God. So in the New Testament is laid down a
perfect platform of wholesome words, which is profitable for doctrine, 2 Ti. 1.
13. and 3. 16.
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the Man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work.

CASE V.
But we see great difference in men's opinions concerning that form of
Government which Christ has left in his Word; What then shall we do in this
case, or what is tbat form of Government which we shall pitch upon?
FOr answer hereunto: first, however all such government as is contrary unto,
and expressly condemned in the Word of God, such as the Hierarchy is, ought in
no case to be admitted or maintained. Secondly, as we cannnot doubt but that
Christ has left an exact prescript form of government in his Word, for the
Church of the New Testament; so we ought diligently, in the use of all good
means, to enquire after that good old way, and to find as much of it as we
can, and to follow what we know.

Thirdly, if after all our search, there be not a full agreement in all godly
men's judgments, in some things which seem somewhat more difficult or doubtful;
we must not therefore either reject so much as is clear, or yet break
Communion and fellowship with those Churches which differ from us in judgment
or practice, so long as they maintain not any government which cannot be
warranted by the Word of God: holding that rule of the Apostle, Phil. 3. 15, 16
Let us (says he) as many as be perfect, be thus minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us
walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

CASE VI.
How can the Church be without prelates, in these respects especially: 1. For
ordaining of Ministers. 2. For inflicting of Censures. 3. For calling of
Synods. 4. For determining of doubts arising in matters of Faith. 5. In
appointing of Ceremonies. 6. For Orders sake. 7. For Confirmation of children,
8. For dedication of Churches. 9 For the form of Doctrine.
FOr answer hereunto, First in Ier. 23. 32.
I have not sent them, therefore they shall not profit this people at all.

Secondly and particularly, First, Take thou authority to preach the Word of
God; yet for all this he may not; must not preach at all, till he have
obtained the Prelates License, which he must purchase for a good fee. Again,
they make such Priests as are dumb dogs and cannot bark, being mere
Ignoramuses and Sir John-Lacke-Latines; abusing those words, Receive thou the
holy Ghost: And, Take thou authority to preach the Word of God. And lastly,
They make no true Ministers of Christ, seeing they bind all with the Oath of
Canonical obedience, to be subject to their lawless laws, in the execution of
their Ministry.

Secondly, There is no use nor need of Prelates for inflicting of Censures.
Their power and practice of Excommunication is altogether unlawful, a mere
usurpation, and contrary to Gods Ordinance; and that in many respects. First,
because the Prelate is not the Pastor of that Congregation whose member is cut
off by Excommunication. Because the Prelate does it alone, he or his
Surrogate; and this perhaps either a Layman, or a dumb priest, without any
consent of the people. Thirdly, he excommunicates a man for every trivial
cause, and that without due summons, and rashly, and for his fee absolves him
without any repentance or reformation, and without satisfaction to the people
offended. Whereas excommunication is the highest censure, and is to be done by
the Minister and congregation jointly, Mat. 18. 17. and 1 Cor. 5.
after much means used to reclaim the offe^dor, and for grievous scandals; and
not to be restored without hearty repentance, in a sad, serious and solemn
manner. Lastly, if Prelates for the causes here alleged be of no use for the
high censure of excommunication, how much less need is there of the^ for
inflicting corporal or criminal punishment upon reputed Delinquents, as
deprivation of liberty by imprisonment, of the ministry by deprivation,
degradation, suspe^sion, deprivation of means and livelihood, by imposing of
intolerable fines, and restraining men from the exercise of their particular
Calling, to the undoing of them and theirs.

Thirdly, for calling of Synods, cannot this be without a Prelate? may not
this be by a Law dormant, giving liberty when occasion shall be, to have a
Synod, for the better ordering whereof, a Moderator for the time being is by
votes elected?

Fourthly, For determining of doubts arising in matters of Faith, what need is
there for Prelates? Are they fit or competent Judges in such things? Yea, are
they not herein egregious usurpers, presumptuous and arrogant men? Yea
Antichrists, in sitting thus in the Temple of God, over men's consciences, as
Lords over men's faith? Is not this a mere evacuating of the authority and
sufficiency of the Scripture, which is the sole judge and rule of Faith? Yet
this Prelates presume to do, and challenge as their proper right: so as in the
twentieth Article, which is of the Authority of the Church, these words have
been of later days foisted in, namely, that the Church has authority in
Controversies of faith.

Fifthly, Neither in appointing of Ceremonies are Prelates needful: Yea, for
prelates or Church, or any humane power to ordain and impose Ceremonies to
bind the consciences in the worship of God, this is expressly condemned and
forbidden both by Christ himself, Mat. 15. 9.
and by the Prophets, Ecc. 29. 13.
and by the Apostles. Col. 2. 8. 18.
Man may not impose the least Ceremony in Gods worship: if he do, he therein
denies Christ, Col. 2. 19. he holds not the Head. And yet the aforesaid Article
boldly affirms saying, The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies.
So as this Article, whether meaning by Church the Prelates (as they mean it)
or any other humane power, ought to be to Christians no article of Faith, or
binding any man's Conscience.

Sixthly, For orders sake: for what order-sake are Prelates necessary, or any
way requisite? what order they keep all men know: and what order can there be in
a Babylonish government, as the prelatical altogether is?

7. For confirmation of children: This also is a Babylonish Sacrament; as if it
did confer some grace ex opere operato, or some virtue dropping out of the
Bishops Lawn sleeve. Indeed this confirmation is a pretty knack to win credit
to the Prelacy from the blind Vulgar, which to every well taught Christian is
both superstitious and ridiculous.

8 For dedication of Churches; this is a most notorious Romish, Popish
superstition, and is rather a mere profanation, than any dedication, except it
be to superstition and idolatry, as they at Rome do use their Temples: and they
would make the world believe, that by their many superstitious ceremonies, in
crossings, censings, adorations, and the like, which they use in their
dedication, there goes forth a virtue, by which holiness is infused into the
walls and pews, especially into their sacred chancel.

Ninthly, for the form of Liturgy, if we go no farther than our Service book,
which is an extract out of Romes Latin service, Missall, or Masse-booke, as it
is confessed in the Book of Martyrs, Vol. 2. p. 667. print. ed. 1631
the Roman Latin being turned into English: if there were no more in it than
this, that it is the form of Romes Worship, and so (as King James once called
it) an ill said Mass, it might a little startle such Christians, as hold that
Christianity to be the purest, which has least conformity with Antichrist and
his superstitions. For if we be commanded to come out of Rome, and to have no
communion with her idolatrous service; let it then be well considered, whether
Christians may with a good conscience be present at the English Liturgy, which
is for the maine, the Mass turned into English. For although it be objected,
that it is purged from the Popish dross, yet if it should be brought to the
Touchstone, or tried in the Text, let the wisest then judge how free from
Popish dross it is, when therein they shall find Romish superstitious
Ceremonies maintained and pressed upon men's consciences, as the Surplice, Cross
in Baptism, kneeling at the Sacrament, standing at the Creed, attended with
their several significations, as if man had a power to set up any significant
Ceremonies in Gods worship, Gal. 4. 9, 10.
when as we find all kind of signs and ceremonies in Gods service under the
Old Testament, Col. 2. 16.
though ordained by God himself, to be utterly abolished by Christ, and
forbidden to Christians under the New Testament: and much more all such as are
of humane invention: all which are of that nature, Gal. 5. 1.
as the Apostle calls them, the Yoke of Bondage, to such as are entangled
therein; exhorting all Christians to stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free. And Col. 2. he plainly shows all such ordinances to
be an evacuation of Christ's death, and so an apostacy from Christ. And no
Christian, I hope, will plead for the use of humane ordinances in Gods worship,
when Christ has abrogated all ceremonies of divine institution, and has left
no footstep for any one Ceremony in the New Testament, and flatly condemns all
commandments of men in Gods Service: It being also a strange presumption for
any man to think, that either he has authority to prescribe how God should be
worshipped, or that God should be pleased with any such will worship; when in
stead of being pleased, he says, In vain they worship me, teaching for
Doctrine the Comments of men. For surely with vain worship God is neither
pleased nor honored.

Again, seeing we are here fallen upon the consideration or examination of the
Service book, let all wise hearted and well instructed scholars in Christ's
school, that have learned the art of separating the precious from the vile:
but tell me what they think of Apocryphal books, publicly read in Churches,
as if they were the holy Scriptures? What of the whole Letanie, so stuffed with
Tautologies or vain repetitions? What of the prayer in the Letanie and of the
Collect, wherein Bishops or Prelates are prayed for, being Antichristian and
false Bishops; and all other Ministers are prayed for, as being the Curates of
those Bishops: than which what can be a greater reproach and shame to the
Ministers of the Church of England? What of so many carvings of Scriptures into
Epistles and Gospels, with their several Collects, for the maintenance and
celebration of Saints days, called Holidays? What of the lame and incongruous,
yea senseles translations of those sundry Scriptures with the Psalms? What of
prayers at the burial of the Dead? What of Churching of women, alias, Their
Purification, as some call it, and which answers to that under the Law? What of
Priestly absolution? with many more particulars, too long here to rehearse. And
in a word, What of so many prayers enjoined to be read, enough to blunt the
edge of any true devotion, and so to tire out the strongest sided Minister, as
he has neither strength nor time left for Gods Ordinance, namely the
preaching of the Word. And (to say the very truth) this kind of long Service
was devised by the Popes successively, to that very end, namely to entertain
the people with a blind devotion, and to retain them in ignorance, when now
no room was left for preaching, which was by this means thrust by the head
and sholders out of their Churches. And thus what a deal of precious time is
taken up with a long, dull, and dead form of prayer, which might and ought to
be spent to edification of Gods people on the Lords own Day, which should be
sanctified not in humane devises, but in Gods own Ordinances, to the glory of
Him who is the Lord of the day. I say again (for I speak nothing
definitively, as passing mine own private judgment of these things) let this
wise and grave Senate (now assembled for a thorow-reformation, and removal of
all abuses and grievanand primarily in the matters of God and of Christ,
maturely judge.

CASE VII.
Whether any set form of a Liturgy or public Prayer be necessary to be
used in the public Worship of God?
FOr answer: Indeed if it be necessary to have unpreaching Ministers, and dumb
dogs over the people of the Lord, who can nor preach nor pray, then it will be
no less necessary to have some form of Book prayers or Liturgy for such to
officiate by. And for this cause the Prelates have had some reason to hold up
their Liturgy to the full, as without which there had been nothing for their
Mutes to do in the Church. Now though dumb Priests have need of such a
Liturgy, yet it does not follow, that therefore able godly Ministers, that know
how to fit their prayers to all such several occasions as do continually
present themselves (which a set prayer in a book cannot do) should be tied to
any such precise set form. For otherwise, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
this were to quench the spirit of prayer, and to muzzle the mouth of prayer,
and to stop the course of Gods spirit, which does wonderfully improve it self
in all those both Ministers and people, on whom God has powered the spirit of
grace and supplication, and who do by daily exercise grow unto such a habit of
prayer, and which does power it self forth in such a life and power, as is not
possible for any set read prayer to exercise or have. For true, fervent,
effectual prayer is that which is the hearts expression by the Spirit of God.
As the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14. 15
I will pray with my Spirit. and (Phil. 19.) Prayer is supplied by the Spirit
of Jesus Christ. This is that prayer which is first in the heart, before it
come to the mouth, and is dictated by Gods spirit, before it be uttered with
the lips: whereas a read prayer is in the mouth before it can come unto the
heart, which in prayer is a speaking unadvifedly with the lips, before the
heart has first digested and suggested the matter. This is an abortive birth
which never had a right conception, But a godly Minister that is best
acquainted with the state of his flock, and of the church of God, can
accordingly so enlarge and apply his prayer, by the supply of Gods spirit, as
may be most useful to the Congregation, as being most occmmodate to their
spirits, when they find the matter of the prayer to be that, the want whereof
they are most sencible of: so as there is here a concurrence of the spirits
both of the Minister and people, which causes a prayer to be so much the more
effectual, lively, powerful, and operative, and that not only with God, but
in the hearts of all those whose joint prayer it is. Whereas a read prayer is
in comparison, a dead and dull formal prayer, without any life or power either
to prevail with God, or to profit the people: as being such a prayer as suits
only such Readers as are destitute of the spirit of Grace, and supplication,
and of faith and sanctification, and therefore such as God regards not. So as
a true Minister of Christ ought not to be tied with the bonds and lines of a
written form of prayer that must be read, forasmuch as hereby the spirit of
prayer in him is bound up, and both he and the people of God deprived both of
the benefit of such a gift, and of that profit also which the prevailing prayer
of Christ's spirit procures of God. Yea, not even a set written prayer which the
Minister makes, and says by heart, though he read it not, and though it be
better to say it by heart, than to read it out of a book, yet is* or can be so
lively and powerful as that prayer which is not tied to a set form of words.
From such a prayer as is uttered by heart (as we say) the memory is more
exercised, than the understanding and affections within him; there being now a
suspension of that work of the spirit of supplication and grace, which
breaths forth with a lively power in a conceived prayer, wherein not the
memory so much, as the whole mind, soul, spirit, and affections, have their
joint operation.

But it may be objected, That the Reformed Protestant Churches beyond the seas
have their set forms of public prayer and sacraments 'Ts true: but I take it
that the Ministers are not tied to those forms, further than they will
themselves. As we see the Ministers of the Kirk of Scotland now in England,
use no set forms of prayer, but do discharge the duty of prayer with an
excellent freedom of spirit, and with such an apt accommodation thereof to the
present condition of the hearers, and of the state of Gods church, as that it
serves greatly to the edification and raising up of the spirits of Gods people
sympathising with it, and is first (of all other kinds of prayer) to speed
with the Prayer-hearing God, who best knows the meaning and language of that
spirit of his, by which such prayers are poured forth. And surely were this
well exercised by our Ministers in England, in public, as I know it is by
many both Ministers and people in private, it would no doubt much facilitate
and hasten the accomplishment of that great work of a thorow-reformation, so
happily begun, and hopefully proceeded in, if flesh and blood be not too much
consulted with, and humane policy (which should have no hand in setting out or
authorizing any devised form of Gods worship, imposed on the conscience) too
much relied upon.

CASE VIII.
What is the most ready and easy way or Method, of finding out or obtaining
Christ's government?
FOr resolution: It is usual with those that stand for the Hierarchy, to stop
all ways of finding this out, by laying many stumbling blocks in our way. But
if we will go roundly to work, first of all, of necessity all false
government, as that of the Hierarchy, must be quite taken out of the way, as
the maine stumbling block. As he that intends to build a new house in the
place where the old stands, must first pull down the old, and raze it from
the very foundation, that he may lay a new foundation to bear up the new
fabric. But because he that thus intends to build, does usually make a
draught or model of his house before named: so it is thought necessary by some,
that a model of Christ's government be first drawn up, according to which the
new fabric may be in a readiness to be erected presently upon the removal of
the old.

This indeed stands with good reason, especially for the satisfaction of all
doubts, and for the better accommodation of the Church, and as a preparation of
the materials to the more speedy setting forward of the work of Reformation
And yet this I dare say, That if in the first place the Hierarchy, with all the
trumpery and baggage of their Ceremonies and will worship in Gods service, were
quite abandoned and taken away, so as the ground where these degenerate plants
do grow, were cleared and purged, that not a root of them were left, the work
of Reformation were more than half done; so as Christ's government would even
sponte sua, of its own accord come in, and be set up without the noise of so
much as a hammer; especially in all such Congregations where godly and discreet
Ministers are. Yet not so, as that we can expect such a perfection at the
first, specially in this land, which has been so long pestered and corrupted
with the tyrannous and licentious profane government of the Prelates, and
where godly Ministers are so scarce, and most men through long custom, and
want of means (as before) are not, by reason of ignorance (though perhaps too
quick sighted in worldly matters) so well fitted to apprehend, and to
entertain such an exact government as God requires, and his Word prescribes.

CASE IX.
Whether, though the Prelacy with its usurped jurisdiction, Lordships,
Tempralties, Power, Pomp, etc. be quite removed out of the ways, yet it be
not expedient at least, if not necessary, to retain the name of Bishops, as a
title appointed to those who are to be the principal among, and above other
Ecclesiastical persons in the government of the Church?
FOr answer: First, we ought not to abuse those titles which the Scripture
appropriates and ties to the persons and office of the true Pastors of the
Church, by impropriating them from the true owners, and transferring them to
such, as at the best (being considered as Pastors over their several
Congregations respectively) have but a common right with other Pastors, and no
peculiar title as proper to themselves alone* And wherefore shall such only be
still called Bishops more than others? As having the only oversight over all
other Churches, and their Ministers, and that by being invested in a perpetuity
of such a dignity? What is this, but a clipping of those wings, and a payring
of those claws, which will in time grow again. Ier.
Can the Aethyopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? Can we so
quickly forget, what spirit the spiritual ambition of these men is of? Or can
we imagine that they will leave their old haunt, in frequenting the Court, and
in courting the favor of great ones? and from whose corrupt flatteries not the
ears of the best Princes can plead an exemption? And may we not justly fear,
that if but the stump of this banefull tree be left unstubd up by the roots, so
as not so much as the bare long usurped name thereof do remain, may not the
root still spread it self under ground insencibly? and the stem through the
sent of water put forth such sprouts and fruits, Heb. 12.
as by the bitterness thereof thereof the whole land may be troubled? And may
it not be just with God, yet again to bring more plagues upon this State, by
its suffering of such miscreant remainders, when he had given so fair an
opportunity to cut them off, root and branch? 1 Samuel
Did not Saul for sparing one Agag lose his kingdom? And did not Ahab for
sparing the life of his false brother Benhadad lose his own life? 1 King.
And were not those Canaanites thorns and pricks in the Israelites eyes and
sides? Nor is it so small a matter to alienate the property of a name or title
from the right owners, to whom alone God has made it peculiar and proper: For
such an alienation is an alteration not only of the true property of the name,
but also of the nature of that office to which it was first given of God. For
(as is showed before) the name of Bishop is proper quarto modo, to every Pastor
over that Congregation to which he is lawfully called: and the name Episcopus,
or in English, Bishop or Over-seer, sets forth the office of such a Pastor over
his flock. So as to take away this name from the Pastor, and to appropriate it
to one single man set over other Ministers, to wit, one that is by man styled
and denominated a Diocesan Bishop; What is this but utterly to pervert and
overthrow Christ's ordinance, and the nature of his true Church, and the office
of a true Pastor, who being stripped of his proper title, is withal stripped of
his office, and so of his flock, whereof another now is made the Overseer or
Bishop, and the title and Office of a Curate only is left him, according to
the Collect for Bishops and Curates. Or if there be a mental reservation to
every Minister of a congregation, of the office of Pastorship; yet when the
title of Bishop is given to one above him, even thus also is an invasion made
upon Christ's own title and prerogative, 1 pet. 5. 4.
who is the only (...) the chief Shepherd or chief Bishop of his Church,
besides whom and above whom all the Pastors acknowledge none. And if of
Pastors, some only be called Bishops, and the rest not, here also Christ's
sheepehooke is wrung out of his hand, as where he is called the Shepherd and
Bishop of our souls. 1 Pet. 2. 25.
So easy a thing it is by the alienation or impropriation of a name, to set up
such an office and government in the Church, as whereby Christ's government and
the proper office of his true Ministers, are cast to the ground and trampled
under foot.

Moreover, if ever this government of Bishops, falsely so called, shall be set
up or continued in manner aforesaid, yet far be it from those Worthies of the
land, whose justice is so clear and unpartiall in other things, and namely in
the cutting off of all Monopolies in the civil State, to erect or ratify, or
any way to countenance such a Monopoly in Christ's kingdom, so derogatory to
his incommunicable prerogative, and to that style and office wherein he has so
highly dignified and entrusted all faithful Ministers. For what a Monopoly is
this, to take away the title wherein the Office of all true Pastors is
comprehended, and to transfer it to one alone among many?

Ob. But here it may be objected, That the Reformed Churches beyond the seas,
as even Geneva it self, have their Overseers, which is a title and office
equivalent to our Diocesan Bishops, Episcopus signifying an Overseer: why then
is it not as lawful to have the like in England?

I answer: The case is far different; for such Overseers or Moderators, as in
other reformed Churches they are called (as in the Kirk of Scotland) are
chosen by the Ministers and Elders, and that but for one year, and whose
office is to call the Synods at certain fixed times, and to collect the votes,
and the like. But some say, that our usurping Bishops shall be perpetual for
their lives; and how far the power of their place and dignity may be
extended, especially when they have their election from the Court, either
immediate and absolute per se, or by the means of a Conge de lier, as whom so
designed above, the Ministers of the Diocese (in stead of the Deane and
Chapter) are bound to elect. Or if they be but Triennial, and so to come under
the visitation of a Trienniall Parliament; yet who knows but such spirits may
so work as in time to make Parliaments as geason as heretofore? when some of
them have confessed, that they never dreamed to see a Parliament again. Or if
they shall be continued from three year to three year, yet this is also more
than is used in foreign Reformed Churches* And however, for them to retain
the name of Bishop still (as before) is against Gods Word, and not only
derogatory to Christ's true Ministers for the present, but also very
prejudicial to their liberty, when such Bishops holding their favor in Court,
and their neerenesse to the Chair of State, may by that means grow awful to
those their Curates, among whom some, and perhaps too many, may be found ready
to prostitute their officiousness unto their Bishop, in stead of Christ, out
of a hope to be made the heirs apparent of the Bishopric; which though it be
now cropped and deplumed, yet will be still a bait for ambition, which must be
doing, and will rather play small game than sit out. All which considered, I
leave it to the Wise to judge what may be the consequents thereof, and whether
by this means either we or our children may come to see as great corruption
both in doctrine and manners, as now we do. For (as I said before) the time
may come, when God in his justice may deny this State the like opportunity (so
armed with a necessity of reformation, as we neither could have wished, nor any
more can hope for) to reform Episcopal insolency. Or suppose a possibility
of Prelates to become no worse than as the Parliament shall leave them, yet the
least rag of Prelacie making a rent in Christ's coat, (as it being the head of
such a Government as is condemned by the Word of God) ought no more to be
pieced to Christ's livery, seeing it destroys Christian liberty, both in
Ministers and people. And all this (I say) arises from the very name of Bishop
so misplaced; for which cause it ought to be with the whole Bishopric utterly
extirped; and that no less, than the heathen Romans rooted out the very name
of the Tarquins, for the tyranny which they had exercised.

CASE X.
Whether the whole Hierarchy being abolished, the 39 Articles which were agreed
upon in 62, by the Archbishops and Bishops, etc. in both Provinces, do any
longer bind? or that Ministers are bound to subscribe unto them?
I Answer: First, That these 39 articles taken conjunctim together, no man can
with a good conscience, rightly informed, subscribe unto them. For secondly,
There be some of those articles which are very false; as Article 20, which
says, The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in
Controversies of faith. Both which are false (as before is noted) and were
added since the same article was first made in King Edward the sixth his days.
Again the 36 Article is no less false, which says, The book of ordination
of Archbishops and Bishops; and ordering of Priests, etc. does contain all
things necessary to such consecration and ordering. Neither has it anything
that of it self is superstious and ungodly. And therefore all so consecrated
and ordered according to the Rites prescribed, etc. we decree to be rightly
orderly, and lawfully consecrated and ordered. Now to this article all
Ministers subscribe, although they be false Bishops consecrated after the order
of Rome; and false Priests that are by false bishops so ordered.

Thirdly, Art. 3. it is said, As Christ died for us, and was buried; so is it
to be believed that he went down into hell. Which going down into hell,
imports a local going down into the place of hell; which has no proof in
Scripture, nor holds any proportion or analogy of faith, but crosses the
truth of Scripture, and the current of all sound interpreters, and therefore
not to be believed as Christ's death and burial.

Fourthly, some Articles are made of late by the enemies of grace, the
Prelates, of so doubtful and double a sense (as those especially about Grace
and Freewill) that they have procured a Declaration prefixed before the
Articles, in the Kings name, prohibiting the free preaching of those points
according to the Scriptures. So as Ministers cannot resolve what it is they
subscribe unto in the said Article. And therefore it is necessary that the said
false Articles be wholly expunged, and the doubtful (as they pretend) more
fully explained; and so the said Declaration prefixed, taken away.

CASE XI.
Now all this done, and the whole Antichristian yoke in the Prelacy, with the
burden of all their Rites and Ceremonies removed from Christians necks: what
is that particular form of government which is to be set up?
FOr answer: First we premised something hereof in general, namely, That
Christ's government alone is to be set up in all true Christian congregations,
and so his yoke to be borne, as our glory, upon our necks. But secondly, for
further, and a more particular unfolding of this government of Christ over
every true Church or congregation: First, we are to enquire what the true
Church of Christ is. And secondly, what is that government which Christ has
appointed over every such Church.

For the first: A true Church of Christ is a congregation of true believers men
and women, who by the Word of God preached, are separated from the world, and
the reigning lusts thereof, and declared to be such by the open profession of
the true and right faith, and by the conversation of Christian life conformable
thereunto. Such is a particular visible true Church or Congregation, and so is
(as far as we can judge) a true branch of the holy Catholic Church, which
is invisible, comprehending the number of Gods Elect, and is apprehended only
by faith, and not by sight. Now every such particular Congregation as
aforesaid, consisting of professed believers of the known truth of God,
according to which they frame the course of their life and conversation, is in
it self an absolute Church, whose only Governor for matters of faith, and the
true worship of God, is Jesus Christ. He it is that as King reigns in this
congregation, and in all the members thereof, they acknowledge none other
Governor for matters of Religion, but Christ only. For herein stands his
kingly Office: and the Laws by which this King reigns, and governs his
Church, is his written Word. And his Vicegerent, by whom Christ is always
present with every one of his several Congregations, is the holy Ghost, which
who so has not is none of Christ's. Romans 8.


Now having thus defined what a true Church of Christ is, namely a congregation
professing the known true faith, every member thereof being able in some
measure to give a reason of the maine points of faith, and to make proof of
their profession by walking in a holy course of life: hence it appears who
they be that are not admitted to be members of this congregation or church of
Christ, therein to participate of the holy Sacrament, until their repentance
and reformation; namely all ignorant and profane persons, which neither
believe a right, nor live accordingly. For the congregation of Christ is called
the Communion of Saints, Act. 26.
being sanctified by faith in Christ, and by his word and Spirit.

The second thing is, to enquire and consider how this Church of Christ is to
be governed. To find this out is no difficulty. First, sure it is, that none
but Christ is supreme and immediate Lord, King, and Governor of his Church,
whether of the Catholic, or of every particular church or congregation
rightly constituted (as aforesaid) so as no power on earth has any authority
to prescribe Laws for the government of this Church, whether for doctrine or
discipline, whether for faith or worship, but only Christ, whose written Word
and Law is the only rule of this government; which Law all Princes (who are
therefore called Custodes utriusque Tabulae) are bound by him, whose
Vicegerents they are, to see well observed both by Ministers and people. Here
then we will speak of the Officers which Christ has appointed over every
Christian congregation: and those are either Ministers or other officers of the
people. First for the Ministers, they are called by sundry titles, as Act. 20.
Tit. 1. 5. 7.
Bishops or Presbyters, Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastors and Teachers, Luke. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 11. 23.
Ministers, Luke 10. 7. 1 Cor. 3. 9. Act. 6. 4. Mat. 28. 20. Act. 20. 7. Mat.
20. 25, 26.
Laborers, and the like. Their principal office is to * pray to preach the
word to administer the Sacraments. And these Ministers, however styled in
Scripture, are all of equal authority, not one over another, nor one over
many, nor many over one, each being in his place and peculiar congregation
under Christ alone, as the King of his Church, to whom he is accountable: Heb.
13. 17.
and under Christ, to the civil Magistrate, as being a subject.

But here a question may be moved, Quest.
whether a Synod of Ministers, or of the churches, have not power over any one
Minister, and so over all the Congregations, either to censure particular
persons or congregations, or to prescribe and impose orders, Rites, Canons, or
the like?

For answer: Answ.
Some are of opinion that a Synod has authority to bind particular churches
to such rites as they shall prescribe and impose. And they allege that Synod
or assembly of the Apostles, Act. 15.
wherein were determined certain observances which they sent and imposed on
the churches of the new convert Gentiles, as necessary for them to observe,
some whereof were Jewish ceremonies. Hence they conclude, That a Synod collected
of the churches, has power over particular churches, to ordain and impose
ceremonies as necessary to be observed. But this act of the Apostles is no
president or pattern for succeeding ages. The reason is first, because the
Apostles were inspired with the holy Ghost, which wholly guided them in all
matters of the Church; so as in that their determination they say expressly,
Act. 15. 28.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater
burden. Now what Synod in any age after the Apostles could ever say, that they
were infallibly inspired and assisted by the holy Ghost? If any can infallibly
assure me hereof, that a Synod after the Apostles cannot err, but that they
can truly say, It pleased the holy Ghost and us: then I will obey all their
Decrees.

Secondly, That injunction of the holy Ghost and of the Apostles was but (...),
for that present time, for the avoiding of offenses between Jews and
Gentiles, who in every city conversed together: Which James the Apostle
alleges for the only reason of that determination. Act. 15. 21.
But we read not in all the writings of the Apostles afterward, that they
either ordained or imposed the least rite or ceremony to be observed in any
of the Churches of God; yea, they expressly condemned all such ordinances, as
before is showed.

But here another question arises: If particular congregations be not subject
to be ruled by Synods, or the like jurisdiction, what order can be expected,
or what means is left for ordaining of Ministers over every congregation?

For answer, briefly: First for order; What better or surer order can be, than
that which Christ's Word has set down? And if in any thing doubts arise in a
Congregation, they have other congregations with the Ministers to consult with.
For although every particular congregation be an absolute church, having no
jurisdiction over it but Christ's alone, and that immediately; yet it is not
separated or divided from the neighbor churches, so as that it should not hold
communion with them, or a consociation, communicating together in all mutual
offices of help, counsel, comfort, resolution in doubts, advice in
difficulties, and the like: this being the privilege and benefit of the
communion of Saints, which is not limited to one particular congregation only
within it self, but comprehends all the Members of the Catholic church,
wheresoever they are visible in any assemblies: so as if any one congregation
fall into an error, it is by others to be admonished and convinced, that it
may be reformed. If it fall into any foul heresy (which yet is not easy in a
well constituted Church) it must be dealt withal accordingly as the case shall
require: the churches assembled must labor to reduce it, and if after all
means it prove incorrigible, when there is no remedy they must renounce
communion with that congregation. And if that congregation shall be further
troublesome, in breaking the peace of the Churches, or of the civil state, it
is liable to such punishments as by the good laws of the land are allotted to
such and such offenses. For although no power on earth has power over men's
consciences in matters of religion, yet God has in his ordinance set up civil
powers and Magistrates, Romans 13.
whom he has armed with authority to punish such as do openly transgress
either the Laws of God, or the just Laws of the civil state. For the
Magistrate is Gods Minister, 1 Pet. 2. 14.
both for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise and protection of
them that do well. And for the better and more easy way for the civil Power
to take cognizance of things of that nature, it will become the duty of all the
churches, in a Synod or otherwise to convince the parties offending, and if
obstinate, to complain of them to the civil Magistrate. Thus it is with a
congregation as it stands in relation to other Churches, and in a subjection to
the civil power.

Now for a congregation considered in it self, if a member thereof do offend in
any kind, what is to be done, or who shall censure it? I answer: If the
offense be against the Law of Christ, or his government over that
congregation, then the same congregation has power given from Christ to
censure the Delinquent; when after all due means he remains obstinate and
incorrigible; as 1 Cor. 5. But if the offense be against the law of the civil
State, he is then punishable according to that law, by the civil Magistrate.

But here another question arises, Whether the Minister or Pastor of the
congregation alone have power of censure committed unto him, or together with
the congregation?

I answer: Together with the congregation; which therefore electeth certain
officers, such as are most eminent for integrity, gravity, holiness,
knowledge, and judgment in matters of the congregation, to represent the
congregation, and to assist the Minister in government and correction of
manners: And who fitter to take knowledge of home-delinquents, than such as
best know them? And who are likeliest to use mercy, compassion, and moderation
in such censures, and better means of the delinquents amendment, than such as
are their godly neighbors?

And these officers, either for the gravity of their years or manners, are
called Elders. The D. Hall, in his Episcopacy by Divine right.
Prelates cannot endure the name of lay Elders; but in Scripture we find them.
For (...), an Elder, is taken both for a Minister of the Word, and for a Lay
Elder, as they call it: as, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be
accounted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the Word and
doctrine. Where Elders plainly signify both such as rule, and such as preach,
distinct one from the other. So Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. He that rules is a distinct
officer from him that teaches and prophecieth. And so, 1 Cor. 12. 28. After
Prophets or Teachers, are set Helps, governments, or helps in government, as
our Translation has it. These Governors then simply considered, were not
Ministers of the Word, but Lay men, as they call them. We could produce some
Ancients that speak of these lay governors or Seniors; but at present for
brevities sake we omit them. The ancient Church of the Jews had such Elders,
as we read, called Masters of the Synagogue, Act. 13. 15. And if anciently; in
and after the Apostles time, there were not such Elders, how came it to pass
afterward under Antichrist, that the government of every particular
congregation was delivered unto those of the Laity, whom we call churchwardens
and Side men, who are to assist the Minister in matters of the Church, though
not in matter of censure, which the Prelacy has wholly usurped and monopolized
to it self, having thrust out and utterly exterminated, as much as in them
lies, the very name and memory of Lay Elders, had we not some records thereof
in the lasting monuments of the Scripture? Yea, let the Prelates tell us, how
all that Lay Eldership (as I may call it) of Chancellors, Commissaries, and the
rest, came to be set up, but to supply (in some sort) those ancient Lay Elders,
whom the Apostles had set up, and whom Antichrist pulled down, as being the main
hinderance of the setting up of his Hierarchy? For how had the Prelacie mounted
to that height of power over the whole Church, had the Lay Elders still
continued in governing, with godly Ministers, the several congregations
respectively? So as the removing of the Lay Elders, and the bringing in of
Churchwardens and other Lay Officers into the church, all subject to the
Prelates jurisdiction, and made their sworn vassals, was the very up-setting
of the Antichristian Throne in the Temple of God. And this is that order of
government, without which the Prelates cry out, There is no order. Whereas that
order which the Apostles left, in governing the Church by Ministers ann Lay
officers, is the only true Order. Those words of Christ, Go tell it to the
Church, do show, That censure of incorrigible faults was in the power of every
Congregation. So 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. etc.

In the second place, to the former question concerning the ordaining of
Ministers in every congregation, in case there be neither Diocesan Bishops, nor
Synods to perform it: I answer, first, That most men do greatly mistake that
here which they call Ordination of Ministers. The Romanists have scrued it up
to one of their seven Sacraments, making the Imposition of hands upon the
Priests head by the Prelate, to be the outward sign of that inward grace,
which ex opere operato (as they say) is conferred upon the Priest. And even
many Protestants are of opinion, that Ordination cannot be performed but by a
Prelate, or at least by Ministers only, as without whose imposition of hands
it were no Ordination, or as if it did confer such an order. Whereas the prime
and proper conferring of this Order is by Christ himself, inwardly calling and
gifting a man for the work of the Ministry.

Secondly then, what is that (...), ordaining and appointing of Ministers? and
(...), the Imposition of hands, which the Scripture speaks of?

I answer: (...), signifying properly a stretching out of the hand, it was used
either in lifting up of the hands in token of sufferage in election of
officers, or in stretching out of the hand upon the head of the man chosen, for
confirmation. Also when it was used by the Apostles, it pleased God to bestow
therewith the gifts of the holy Ghost, Act. 8. 17.
and on some recovery of health. Mar. 16. 18.
This was very frequent in the Apostles times: But afterward in successive
ages there was no such gift annexed to the laying on of hands. Secondly,
Therefore it was of use according to its ancient and ordinary custom in
sufferages in elections of officers, to declare assent and approbation of those
for such and such places, when after prayer hands were laid on them.

But by whom was this Imposition of hands used at the choice of Ministers? I
answer, By those who gave their sufferages or votes to the election; and those
were sometimes the congregation it self, and sometime others at their request
joining with them: as we read, Act. cap. 6. 5, 6. And all Ecclesiastical
stories tell us, that anciently the election of Ministers was by every
congregation respectively. So as to them also of right belonged the laying of
their hands, as a token of their approbation and confirmation of him that was
so chosen to that office. And though we read in one place, That the Apostle
laid his hands upon Timothy, as 2 Timothy 1. 6. yet in another we read, (as 1 Timothy 4. 14.) that the Presbytery laid their hands upon him. Which Presbytery
comprehends as well the Elders of the people, as those of the Ministry.
Accordingly, we exclude not the Elders or Ministers of other neighboring
congregations from joining in that work, for assistance especially in prayer,
for a blessing upon the new chosen Minister. For so far must we be from
excluding any in this kind, that we highly commend consociation and
communication of gifts for assistance, where it may be conveniently had. Only
reserving to each congregation that peculiar interest and right, which every
true Church of Christ has in choosing their own Ministers, and other Church
officers.

And this stands with good reason: for not only antiquity both in and from the
Apostles times pleads for this, but even natural reason and equity. For
reason wills that such as choose should ratify.

Secondly, Those who give the maintenance should choose the Officer.

Thirdly, Who have commonly better Ministers than those Congregations, that
upon good advice and counsel choose them themselves.

Fourthly, Where is greater love between Minister and people, than where the
liberty of such a choice is enjoyed.

Fifthly, What virtue at any time does a Prelates imposition of hands add to
Ministers so ordained by him? Or what be those Ministers whom Prelates usually
place over the people? And I would ask any reasonable Christian, whether he
would not rather have the approbation, prayer, and imposition of hands, of the
poorest godly man, than of the most glorious Prelate? Yea, though he were
styled even Grace it self? For as James says, The effectual fervent prayer
of a righteous man prevails much. Iam. 5. 16.
It is not said, The prayer of a great or learned man.

CASE XII.
How far may and ought true reformed Christian Congregations to hold communion
among themselves; and with other Reformed Churches?
FOr answer in general: First in general, it is agreeable to good and
approved examples in Scripture, to make firm leagues and faithful Covenants
for the maintenance of the true faith and religion of Christ. See for this, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13. and Chapter 34. 31, 32, 33. Ezra 10. 3, Nehem. cap. 9. 38.

Severally, in particular: It stands both with Christian piety and prudence,
for all the members of a particular Church or congregation, to enter into a
firm covenant among themselves, to maintain a holy communion together in the
profession of the truth, and practice of a holy life, as becomes the
communion of Saints.

Thirdly, It stands with the like Christian piety and prudence, to hold a sweet
and inviolable bond and communion with all other churches or congregations
rightly constituted, as we conceive, according to Christ's ordinance, and
walking according unto it.

Fourthly, If there be any Christian Churches that do in some small
circumstances differ from us, in that form of government which we conceive
and believe Christ has set up in his Word, so as therein they may seem to come
short of that exactness that is required, nor yet are able to attain unto it,
either in regard of some outward difficulty or human imperfection and frailty,
the judgment being as yet not fully enlightened and persuaded (concerning which
the Apostles rule is, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind) we
do notwithstanding not withold from them the right hand of fellowship; but
hold communion with them as the churches of Christ, they holding the Orthodox
Truth, and the substance of the government, which is suitable to the Church of
Christ, and joining with us against the Common Adversaries of the Gospel:
concluding with that excellent saying of our Savior Christ, Mark. 9. 40.
They that are not against us, are on our part.

The EPILOGVE, or Conclusion.
HAving thus freely and faithfully (though briefly, as the present straits of
time would permit) declared what I have and do conceive and believe concerning
Christ's kingdom, and that form and frame of the government thereof in his
Church, as I find it recorded in the Scripture, whereof I am in my conscience
fully persuaded: as my earnest prayer and trust is, That Christ by his spirit
and Word will lead his into all truth necessary to salvation; so my hope is,
that however perhaps those things which I have here delivered according to the
simplicity of my conscience, will not so be relished of all, but that they will
seem bitter, especially to the ignorant and carnal minded, who savor not the
things of Christ: yet my confidence is, that all the wise hearted and well
affected to Jesus Christ (For, 1 Cor. 16. 22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, (that is, love not to have Jesus
Christ set up as Lord over their souls) let him be Anathema Maranatha) will
embrace Christ's yoke, and to the uttermost of their power labor to advance his
throne in all Churches; or if that, through Satan's malice cannot be effected,
yet that they will set him up as sole Lord and King over their own souls, and
so will join in communion with all those that do or shall desire here to
serve Jesus Christ according to that purity of conscience which is required in
every true Christian (as the Apostle professed of himself) 2 Timothy 1. 3.
and in that way wherein the name of Christ shall be most magnified, and his
kingdom exalted here on earth.

And this shall the better be done, if a Law be made this present Parliament,
that as Antichrists kingdom in the Prelacy shall and must be cast out, so
Christ's kingdom may be freely set up in this kingdom, while his people (even
as many as will) are suffered freely to enjoy Christ's Ordinances in their
purity, and so may at length recover that Christian liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and for which his precious blood was poured forth, and
whereof this Land by the Hierarchy has been till now deprived: it being our
hearts desire, rather to live under Christ's government in this our own native
Country, than for want thereof, be forced to fly into foreign parts; where
how can we so sweetly enjoy Christ, without the bitter remembrance of our
Native Soil, which we shall never cease to wish worse unto, than to our own
Souls.

FINIS.

