A BRIEF RELATION OF THE PERSECVTION LATELY MADE Against the Catholic
Christians, in the Kingdom of IAPONIA, Divided into two Books.

Taken out of the Annual Letters of the Fathers of the Society of JESUS, and
other Authentical Informations. Written in Spanish, and printed first at
Mexico in the West Indies, the year of Christ M.DC.XVI.

AND Newly translated into English by W. W. Gent.

THE FIRST PART.

IHS

seal of Society of Jesus

Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XIX.

The Contents.
IN this first Part is set down what happened in Iaponia, before the
banishment thence of the Fathers of the Society of JESUS, and other Religious
Persons, that there preached the Christian Faith. IN the second, is declared
what succeeded after their departure.
TO ALL THAT SVFFER PERSECVTION IN ENGLAND FOR CATHOLIC RELIGION.
THIS ensuing Relation being sent out of the West Indies where it was first
printed to a friend of mine in Spain, and from thence by him to me, after I
had read and perused the same, it seemed unto me, and others also whose
judgments I fatre prefer before mine own, to be worthy the public view.
Whereupon I resolved (though my necessary occasions would scarce affoard me
leisure) to steal so much time from them as was necessary for the translating
it out of Spanish into our English tongue. More pains and labor it cost me
then at the first I thought it would have done: and I found therein that true
by experience which I had often heard of others, to wit, that it is not so easy
to translate out of one language into another, as is commonly imagined.

Having at length finished the same, I knew not to whom I might better direct
it, then to You the poor afflicted Catholics of this our Country, for whose
comfort and encouragement I did indeed principally from the beginning intend
it. For although I do presume it will be grateful to all Christians of what
nation or nature soever they be, to understand of the propagation, increase,
and augmentation of Christian Religion in those Countries where before there
was never any notice thereof, and of the constant perseverance of those therein
that have so lately received and embraced it: yet am I certainly persuaded,
that it will be to you much more welcome, then to any other; not only because
these most worthy Christians of Iaponia whereof this relation does entreat be
of the same Christian and Catholic Faith and Religon that you be, and not of
any other private or particular sect or faction, of which God knows there is
to great a multitude in the Christian world in these miserable days of ours:
but also by reason of the great likeness and similitude betwixt their case and
yours.

If it be an axiom in Philosophy, that Omne simile gaudet sibi^ s^mili, Every
thing does take a particular delight in such things as be like unto it self;
well may it be supposed that it will be at least some kind of contentment unto
you (amongst so many occasions of discomfort as are daily offered) to
understand of the estate of those that in many things do more symbolize with
you, then any other persons in the world. For (omitting that they be
Inhabitants of an Island as we be, and of the greatest Island in those parts of
the world as we in these, of the like Climate also that we be, all things
considered, they in a manner Antipodes to us, and we to them) first of all they
be but lately converted to the true faith of Christ from Infidelity, and so be
most of you from Schism or Heresy, which is a kind of infidelity: to them it
is granted according to the saying S. Paul, to suffer for their faith; and so
it is to you: they be falsely slaundered and calumniated in many things by the
Devils ministers, and so be you: they be persecuted for their Religion, many of
them to death and more to loss of goods by the enemies of Christ and his holy
Church; and so be you, very many amongst you having lost their lives, and more
their goods and liuinges for no other cause but only the constant confession of
the Catholic Religion. Finally they for their valor and constancy in Gods
cause be famous in all those parts of the world, yea, and in Europe also; and
you for yours be no less glorious, both in all Europe, and in the rest of the
Christian world: so that I may well say both of you and them, that which the
Apostle said to the Romans (whose religion both they and you embrace) fides
vestra annuntiatur in vniuerso mundo, your constancy in faith is published and
famous throughout the whole world.

These then be the reasons for which I thought it most expedient to dedicate
this short Relation unto You; although there wants not also another, which
truly I must needs confess was of great force to move me thereunto: the which
is that I hoped thereby you would both be more careful to commend in your
prayers to Almighty God the necessities of those poor afflicted Christians,
your Brethren, as also more willing to imitate their admirable examples of
valor and courage in the cause of Christ, and of patience and constancy in
enduring crosses and persecutions, troubles and tribulations for the same. Many
of you I know have oftentimes occasions ministered of suffering wrongs and
injuries, losses and disgraces for the same cause, the same Faith and Religion
for which they do endure all these cruel persecutions. If then you do imitate
their patience, their courage and constancy, their ioyfulnes and alacrity
therein, you shall obtain thereby the like honor and renown in earth that
they have done, and afterward in their company everlasting crowns of glory
in heaven: for as the holy Apostle testifyeth, Si socij passionum estis, eritis
and consolationis; if you be partakers of their sufferinges, ye shall also be
companions of their comfortes, joys, and consolations.

And because there be some things in the discourse of this relation which
proceeding from an extraordinary fervor, are rather to be admired of all, then
imitated of any that is not after an especial manner moved by Almighty God, as
we may prude^tly judge those persons were that did them; I doubt not but that
you guided by discretion (reuerencing such like actions as issuing from the
particular motion and inspiration of the holy Ghost) will apply your
endeauours, only or principally, to imitate those other things that are more
conformable to the common course of virtuous and pious persons 'assisted with
the grace of Christ; knowing that thereby you shall both avoid the damage that
is incident to those that rashly thrust themselves into eminent dangers; and
also gain withal no small merit to you souls

It shall not be needful for me to advertise you how this persecution of the
poor Christians of Iapone was partly, if not principally, occasioned by
persons of the same profession in religion, as those be that persecute you: nor
yet to note how like the Devil is unto himself in all places, causing the
Gentiles there to hate and exterminate the pictures and images of our Blessed
Savior and his Saints, together with all other things appertayning to the
promotion of Christian piety, as he has moved your Persecutors here utterly to
abandon and abolish them: It shall not I say be needful for me, to signify
these things unto you, for that I do assure myself that your selves in the
reading thereof will easily observe these and many other things greatly worth
the marking; as the great fear and care of the gentiles least any relics of
the holy Martyrs should remain to be reverenced by the deuouter sort of
Christians? their extraordinary diligence to make those that were constant in
their faith, to dissemble at least a little while in the exterior profession
thereof: their false and slanderous calumniations of the Catholic religion:
their fears, suspicions, and iealosies of priests and religious persons
concerning matters of State, all of them things common to them, and to the
Gentiles of former times that persecuted Gods Church, as also to the Heritikes
of all ages, and in especial to these of ours.

That which I would wish you to reflect upon, is only the bad success even in
temporal affairs which in the end befell to such persons that for worldly
respects, either forsook their religion, or without care of their conscience
behaved themselves to the discredit thereof: and how on the contrary those that
were constant therein, and careful to frame their lives according thereunto,
besides their happiness in heaven, and honor upon earth, through the Paternall
providence of Almighty God, were ever in the end after some suffering
sufficiently provided for.

And now because I do imagine that many of you hitherto have not had much notice
of the Kingdom of Iapone, and less of the affairs thereof, it being a country
so far distant and remote from ours, as perhaps few or none in the world more
(at least, as it is accessible) and by reason thereof you will not so easily
understand some things that will occur in the reading of this relation: I
have therefore thought it not amiss preifly by way of a Preface or
Introduction to set down some few things concerning the same that may help to
give you some little light therein. If therewith or by the reading the relation
it self you shall receive but so much contentment as I took pains in the
translating thereof, yea or but any confort or other good at all, I shall
think any labors very well bestowed, desiring no other thing in requital
thereof but only to be remembered in your best devotions, and made partaker of
those afflictions that it shall please our Blessed Savior to give you grace to
suffer for his sake: and so humbly beseeching Almighty God to send you either a
speedy end of them, or else much patience to endure them as long as it shall be
his holy will and pleasure to permit them, with all dutiful respect I take my
leave, ever remaining

Your servant in Christ Jesus, W. W.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AMONGST other cou^tryes which were unknown to us of Europe until in this
later age they were discovered by the Spaniardes and Por^ugalls, one is Iapone,
under which name be contained diverse Islands lying in the east Ocean of the
great Kingdom of China, chief province of Asia, from whence the ^earest of
them is distant some ninescore ^nglish miles, and about four hundred and fifty
from Nona Espan^a a principal part if the West Indies, conquered and inhabited
by the Spainish Nation. These Islands are divided one from the other by little
crikes (...) arms of the sea; and amongst them there be three which do far
exceed the rest, unto the which the others are subject, and in (...) manner do
adhere. The greatest of these three, which is called Niphon, does lie from East
to West, and is 700 m les in length an^ 180. in breadth, and it divided into
three (...) fifty little Kingdoms or Provinces, an^ therein is the noble City
of Meaco the chief and head of all Iapone. The second called Ximo extends it
self from Nort to South, and has in it nine Kingdoms (...) The third
Scicoco, is deiuded into four^ Provinces, and lies Eastward from the second.
All these Islands be for the most part full of hills and mountains, much
subie^^ unto could and rain, whereupon it proce^deth that for the most part
they be nothing fertile, rather subject unto barrennes. The^ yield no wheat
nor rye, nor any such li^^ grain, at least but very small: the chief thing
they bear is rice, which they brin^ forth in great abundance: they have the
same kind of birds and beasts that we of Europe, both wild and tame, though
the ^habitantes seldom eat the flesh of any ^^lesse at sometimes it be of
Venison. Their ^^mmon fare is herbs, and fish, and ryce, (...) the which they
also make a kind of wine, ^^though their ordinary drink be warm ^^ater into
the which in feasts and banquets ^^ey put a certain ponder much esteemed of
^^em, the which is called Cha. Their building^s for the most part be of wood,
partly because they have but little store of stone, and ^ood in great
abundance, especially Cedar; ^^d partly by reason the country is much subject
unto earthquakes, yet be there many ^oodly houses and stately palaces of
excellent ^orkemanshippe and rare Architecture.

The people are more swarty of complexion then the Spaniardes be, almost like
the tawny Mores, and something less of stature commonly then those of our
nation be. They are for the most part of pregnant siuely ^ittes, of exceeding
memory, of stout ^ouragious minds, and wonderful patience in occasions of
adversity. Commonly they be ^aughty and high minded, very desirous of honor
and estimation. They do contemn all other Nations in the world in comparison
of themselves, from whence proceeds the small account they make of any
strangers that come into their country. Poverty does not with them diminish
Nobility, nor Gentility nor wealth gain or increase it. The better sort do use
great ceremonies of honor and courtesy one toward another: yea the common
people as tradesmen and artificers must be used with respect, or else you shall
obtain nothing at their hands: neither will they put up intury at any man
without complete revenge. They are very careful not to show fear or cowardice
in any case: they stand much upon their gravity, and therefore they carry
themselves always very soberly and after a stayed manner: in so much that it
is held a wondrous inciuility for any to make any great noise, as shouting,
hollowing, or the like, whether it be in public or private, at home or abroad.
To bring up their children to hardness, as soon as they be newborn they wash
them in some river, and when they be weaned from the nurse, they take them from
their mothers, and bring them up most commonly in exercise of hunting and the
like: when they come to a certain age they change the form and fashion of
their apparel, using therein very many ceremonies.

They have diverse fashions very different from ours: with us men wear hattes
and women ever something on their heads: they both men and women go
bareheaded at all times, and in all occasions, both in the heat and could, in
sun and wind, in hail, in snow and rain: they mourn in white as we do in
black, and black with them is worn in sign of joy: we hold it good to have
white teeth, they think it otherwise, and therefore dye them black: we get on
horse black on the right side, they on the left: we when in meeting we salute
put of our hattes, they put of their shoes. When they visit one another, he
that is visited must not go out to meet the other that comes to visit him,
nor rise up if he be set in any place, but rather contrary, if he be standing
he sittes down to receive him. Our manner of musi^ke is not grateful unto
them, our meats distasteful, our sweet odoriferous smells odious and
abominable. They cure their sick quite contrary to us, giving them raw meats,
and salt and sower things to eat. In steed of knives and spoones they use two
wooden sticks exceeding curiously, and after a far neater fashion then we
they use to eat their meat. Whereas we write from one side of the paper to
the other, they write from the ^oppe to the bottom of the leaf, making their
lives downward.

In all Iapone there is but one only language, the which yet is so exceeding
copious, and of that variety, that it may seem to be many, by reason that for
almost every thing they have very many words, whereof some do signify it when
mention is made thereof in contemptible manner, others when in honorable
sashion; some are to be used only by the common people, others only by those
of Nobility or Gentry: some are only for men, others only for women: their
manner of writing is very different also from their speech; and their writing
letters from their writing books: their characters or letters are of a fashion
far different from ours, and of that nature that with one only letter they
signify sometimes a whole word, sometimes many words.

In times past there was but one only King in all Iapone who was Monarch
thereof, and obeyed and reverenced exceedingly of all, and lived with wondrous
state and majesty, and him they called the Dayri or Vo: but these Dayries
giving themselves at length by occasion of the great peace and quietness they
enjoyed to sloth and idleness, and to all kind of voluptuous pleasures and
delights, about 500. years ago were by two principal captains that rebelled
against them, dispossessed of a great part of the Kingdom, they making
themselves kings of all they could get and maintain by force of arms, and
afterward others moved by their example did the like: so that within short
time the Dayri, although he still remained with the title of universal Lord of
all Iapone, yet had he small or no jurisdiction at all, only a power to give
titles of honor and dignity according unto men's desires or deserts, the which
he enjoys to thy day without any government at all, scarce having means to
maintain himself in honorable fashion.

Since those times to these, he has ever been accounted King our Empe or of
Iapone that could by any means make himself Lord of the Tenca, that is, of
some few Kingdoms or Provinces near adjoining to Meaco, which is the
principal City of all those countries, as London is in ours; and so in our
days there have been three who have had the name and authority of Emperor
one after the other, not by any right or title of election or inheritance, but
obtained by maine force, or other wrongful means. The first of them was
called Nobunanga who conquered six and thirty Kingdoms. The second Taycosama,
or Quambacu, who being a man very meanly borne, brought under his dominion
fifty Kingdoms or Provinces. The third is the Xogun who re^gneth at the
present, and has raised the persecution (whereof this book entreats)
against the Christians, and he as it seems is acknowledged as Lord of all the
threescore and six Kingdoms of Iaponia.

These Emperors as absolute Lords and owners of all the country, do dispose of
al things as their pleasure, and therefore for their own greater security as
soon as they have gotten the government by force or other means into their
hands, they divide the kingdoms or provinces unto diverse of their friends,
with obligation that they shall serve them in time of war with a certain
number of men, at their own charges and expenses: and these again do divide
their provinces amongst their freindes with the like obligation to be ready to
serve them in all occasions, reserving to themselves sufficient for the
maintenance of their house and family: so that all the whole country does in
such manner depend of the Emperor, that he gives and takes, rayseth and pulls
down, enricheth and impouerisheth whom, and when, and how he pleases. And it
is the custom amongst them when they take from any one their Province or
Estate, or change them to another, that all the gentlemen and soldiers that did
depend upon that person, do leave that province together with him, and either
go with him, or else seek means to live in some other place, the trade semen,
artificers, husbandmen, and laborers only remaining therein.

Those that be the Lords or petty kings of particular provinces or kingdoms,
as also all other principal personages, as governors of towns and Cities,
besides the obligation above mentioned, are bound at the beginning of every
year, betwixt the ninth and twentieth day of the first moon (for their acount
is by Moons, and after a different manner far from ours) to go unto the
Emperors Court to do him homage, and acknowledge their obedience toward him,
and together therewith they must always offer him some thing of good value by
way of present, whereby he draws to himself the greatest part of all the
wealth of the contry, and by means thereof, together with his own reuenews
(which amount to two millio^s or more every year) be grows in short time to
be exceeding rich potent, strong, and so powerful that none almost dare
withstand or contradict him in any thing, no though he make himself a God, as
diverse of them have procured to be accounted and esteemed.

And indeed most of these that be adored amongst them as Gods, were either
kings famous for their valor in war, and feats of arms, or else Bonzos
singularly noted for their learning and eloquence, or strict rigorous course of
life. These last they call Totoques, the other Camis, of whom they ask only
earthly goods, te^porall blessings and benefittes, as of the Totoques they do
only the selicity of the future life. The principal or chief of all these be
two, the one named Xaca, the other Amida, whom they worship and inuoke with
great reverence and devotion. Their Bonzos which be those that teach and preach
unto them, as our preistes to us, be divided into ten or eleven diverse Sects,
very contrary amongst themselves, though the most of them do agree in denying
the providence of God, and immortality of the soul, the which they do to the
end they may live with more liberty, and more freely give themselves to al kind
of lewd licentiousnes. Besides these Gods some do adore the Heavens the Sun
and Stares, others Oxen, Stags and other baser creatures. Not far from Meaco
they have a sumptuous Temple dedicated to the Lisard, which they reverence as
the God of learning, wisdom and eloquence. Many there be that do adore the
Devil who does appear unto them in sundry forms and likenesses, and makes
them considently believe that all things do depend of him, and that they
prosper or have ill success according to the devotion they bear and show to
him.

And in this miserable blindness was all that whole contry until the year of our
Lord 1549. in which the Blessed Father Francis Xauier, a Priest of the Society
of Jesus, and one of the ten Companions of the holy Father Ignatius Loyola of
happy memory who was the first Founder of that worthy Religious Order, did
enter thereinto to preach unto them the Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ; the
which he did upon this occasion.

There was in a certain port town of Iapone called Cangoxima in the kingdom
of Saxuma a wealthy substantial man named Angier, who in his youth had
committed some enormous crime, and finding afterward his conscience much
burdened and tormented therewith, used all means possible he could invent, or
that the Bonzos could imagine to advise him, to obtain some remedy therefore,
and procure the peace and quiet of his mind: but having after experience made
of all the remedies that any of the Sects of his country could affoard, found
that his affliction did still endure, he was even almost out of hope of ever
obteyning ease or remedy; until it happening afterward that the Portugalls
coming with some ships unto Cangoxima to traffic about merchandise, were an
occasion of raising a new hope in him; for he falling into familiar
acquaintance with some of them, and after much other talk having had by their
means some notice of Christian religion, as also of the great Sanctity and
holiness of life of Father Francis Xauier, who at that time was famous in all
the East Indies, thought with himself, that perhaps by his means he might
find some salve for the soar of is wounded and afflicted conscience. And
thereupon resolving to go and seek him out, he left his house, wife and family,
friends kinsfolks and country, and taking with him only a servant or two he
went with the Portugals, and after many dangers past at sea of storms,
tem^estes, soul weather, and the like, he arrived at length at Malaca, a town
of great trade and traffic in the East Indies, and there by good fortune to
his great content he found the Father whom he sought, and from thence went with
him to Goa, the chief City that the Portugalls possessed in all those
countries; where having found by following his direction as much ease and
comfort of his mind as he did wish for and desire, and being sufficiently
instructed in all the mysteries of Christian Religion, he was baptized by him,
and named Pablo de la santa Fe that is, Paul of the holy Faith.

Having thus obtained his desire, and being after some time to retourn again
into his country, the Blessed Father Xauier, whose whole desire was to
propagate the faith of Christ to the honor and glory of Almigty God, and for
the salvation of men's souls, would needs accompany him, carrying with him
other two of the Society, the one a Priest called Father Cosmo de Torres, the
other a lay brother whose name was John Fernandez both of them Spaniardes
borne: and so they all departed from Goa in the month of April 1549. and at
the end of May they came to Malaca, from whence they arrived at Cangoxima in
Iapone about the midst of August: where being welcomed and well received of
the freindes, kindred, and acquaintance of Paul the new converted Christian, and
having with much labor and iudustry learned a little of the Iaponian language,
they began to preach the Christian faith publicly to all with the good leave
and liking of the Lord or Prince of the country, who hoping to have some
benefit by the coming of the Portugalls into his country was content to give
way to the Fathers, and let them preach: but afterward perceiving that some
of the Portugells leaving his Port went unto another not far off called
Tirando in the Kingdom of Tigen, he withdrew his favor from them, and by
instigation of the Bonzos made a Proclamation, that under pain of death none
of his subjects should leave their former Sects to embrace the Christian
religion. Whereupon Father Xauier after he had in vain used all possible
diligence to mollify the King, and suffered diverse incommodities and injuries
with exceeding patience, taking his leave of those Christians that were already
made, which amounted to the number of an hundred or there aboutes, he went unto
Tirando together with his two companions, where being now somewhat more expert
in the Iaponian tongue then they were before, setting themselves to preach,
partly thereby and partly by the rare example of their lives, they moved more
in a few days to embrace the says of Christ, and to receive the holy
Sacrament of baptism, then they had done in a year before at Cangoxima.

Father Xauier did persuade himself that if he could get unto Meaco, which was
the chief City of Iapon, and the place where the Cubosama, who was then the
chief King of all the country, did keep his Court, that there he might do
more good, and sooner come to give notice of Christ and his religion to the
principal persons of the Kingdom, then in any other place: and therefore
having commended the care of the new converted Christians in Cangoxima to Paul
the Iaponian, and those of Tirando to Father Cosmo de Torres, he and brother
John Fernandez took their journey toward Meaco, and about the beginning of
October they got unto Amanguchi a goodly City at that time, for since it has
been burned, sacked, and destroyed, even in the heart of all Iapone, almost
three hundred miles distant from Tirando, whither being come, they were carried
unto the king or Prince thereof, unto whom they declared in the best manner
they could the principal mysteries of Christian religion, he neither showing
liking nor dislike of any thing they said: and afterward they did the like in
the public streets and market places of the City, wherein by reason they were
but meanly apparreled according to the custom of religious men, and spoke the
Iaponian language but very brokenly, they were not only derided and mocked of
all, but also injured and handled very hardly by some of the ruder sort. From
thence they went unto Meaco, and in their journey which endured well nigh two
months, they suffered exceeding many miseries. First they went barefoote all
the way, and then because the ways were very dangerous and full of thieves who
murdered all they robbed, they were enforced to keep company with horsemen, to
run though the hard stony ways, as fast as the others did ride, towade also
over many great rivers and other deep waters in the way, having afterward no
means almost to dry, rest, or ease themselves, no where finding any that would
help or succor them, take pity, or compassion on them, but many almost every
where that egregiously abused and injured them: so that had they not carried
some little rice in sachels on their backs for their sustenance, it is very
likely they had perished by the way for very want, and necessity.

Being now arrived at Meaco, they found all the City in uproar and arms, no
disposition at all for them to manifest the Christian faith: whereupon they
were enforced almost immediately to return again to Amanguchi the same way,
and after the same fashion that they came from thence before. And there Father
Xauier did resolve, notwithstanding all difficulties, to set and settle
himself to the preaching and planting of religion: and because he had learned
by experience that the Iaponians did neither esteem of men nor of their
words, unless they were in exterior good fashion, and well apparreled,
therefore to accommodate himself unto them for their greater good, he went
unto Tirando, and there at they charge of the king of Portugal he put himself
in good apparel, and taking with him letters of favor from the viceroy of the
Indies, and of the Bishop of Goa, which he had procured unto the Princes of
Iapon, and certain small things brought out of Europe, as clockes, and such
like curiosities, the which were given him by the Governor of Malaca to bestow
in such occasions, he returned back again to Amanguchi with Brother John
Fernandez, and two or three Iaponians in his company, where he made means to
have access unto the King to whom by way of present he gave those things
which he had brought with him thither to that purpose. The king accepted of
them willingly, and though he wondered at them as being rare and never seen
before in those countries, yet much more did he admire at the greatness of the
giuers mind, who did refuse a great quantity of gold and silver, and other
things which he offered him in requital thereof, and only required that he
would give him license to preach the faith of Christ to whom, and where he
would: the which he granted easily, and assigned him besides a certain house
of good capacity, where he and his companions might remain.

This license being thus obtained, the which was all the holy Father did
desire, he and the Brother his Companion did set themselves immediately to
work, preaching all the day time in the streets and midst of the market
place, an innumerable number of people flocking about them, some to see and
hear what they said, others to laugh at their manner of speech, others to
mark their actions, and mock at their behavior: and in the night they did
the same in the house where they lodged to those that came thither to visit
them, as many did, some of courtesy, but most of curiosity. And in this manner
they spent diverse months without seeing any fruit at all of all their labors,
until at length one was converted upon this occasion. Brother John Fernandez
preaching one day in the street according to his wonted manner, a Iaponian that
passed by in a scornful manner, did spit at him; and the filthy fleame
falling just upon his face, he wiping it of, without making any show of the
least impatience in the world, with great serenity of mind went forward in his
speech: the which being well marked and observed by one of the standers by,
caused him within himself to frame this conceit: doubtless this doctrine
must needs be very good that causes in the professors thereof so great
humility patience and constancy of mind, in suffering injuries and indignities:
and thereupon the Sermon being ended, he followed the brother to their house,
where having learned the Creed, the ten Commandments, our Lords prayer, the
Salutation of our B Lady, and diverse other prayers, and being sufficiently
instructed in all the mysteries of Christian religion, and sorry for the sins
of his former life, he was the first in all that City that did receive the
holy Sacrament of baptism, and thereby was made a member of Christ's holy
Church and Congregation. Soon after him diverse others also were baptized, and
within a short time the number of Christians there amounted to five hundred or
there abouts, and all of them (as they well showed in many occasions that
happened afterward) exceeding constant, virtuous, and perseuerant.

Matters being come to this good pass, letters were brought unto Father Xamer,
in which wa^ signified that it was precisely necessary for him to return in
person to the Indies upon urgent business: leaving therefore behind him Father
Cosmo de Torres, and Brother John Fernandez to conserve and increase the best
they could that little flock of Christ, which he had there begun and
gathered, he went back to Malaca, and afterward to Goa, from whence he sent
some more of the Society unto them to help toward the conversion of Iapone^
the which they and others that succeeded them did with such diligent care and
industry (God Almighty blessing their labors and concuring thereunto with many
miracles wrought by them) that within the space of twenty years or
thereaboutes, there were in that country by their means and good endeavors
more then an hundred and forty thousand Christians, and amongst them many
persons of great worth and estimation, as the King of Bungo a very potent
Prince, who for the devotion and veneration he bare to Father Francis Xauier,
when he was baptized, which was some years after the holy Fathers death, would
neede^ be called Francis by his name. The King of Arima also named Don
Protasio, and his brother Don Bartholomew Prince of Omura, a most pious and
valerous Gentleman, and diverse other Noble men; who all agreeing amongst
themselves to the end the whole world might understand how sincerely they did
believe and embrace the faith of Christ, in the year 1583. they sent from
thence to Rome, which is well near ten thousand miles, four young Gentlemen,
some of them very near of kindred unto the kings before named, to render
obedience in their names unto the most pious Pope Gregory the thirteenth, who
then lived, as unto the vicar of our Blessed Savior here on earth and chief
head and pastor of all the Christians in the world.

After Father Xauier his death, which was in the year 1552. the Superiors of
the Society of JESUS still continued sending some of their subjects to Iapone,
to procure the increase of Christianity therein, and some years ago others of
other holy Religious, Orders, as of S. Dominicke, S. Frauncis and S. Augustine,
have gone thither also to the same in^ent, whereby their holy endeauours many
thousands of souls have been delivered out of the darkne: of superstition
and Idolatry, and brought unto the light of Christ's only true and Catholic
Religion. And in such prosperous manner did they go on assisted by the help of
God, and all of them in concord of heart, and unity of faith, that there was no
small hope that the whole country would within a short time have been either all
or the most part thereof conuer^ed to the Christian faith, until now of late
the raising of the persecution (whereof this ensuing relation does entreat)
has been a great hinderance and impediment thereunto, as you will easily
perceive by perusing thereof, from the which I will now no longer detayne you.

THE FIRST PART OF THE RELATION OF THE PERSECVTION RAISED IN THE YEAR OF OUR
LORD, M.DC.XIIII.
Against the Christians of Iaponia. Wherein all the Priests and Religious
persons were banished thence, together with diverse other Christian Iaponians:
with the Martyrdom of some for their constant perseverance in the profession
of their Faith.
Of the beginning, causes, and occasion of the Persecution. CHAP. I.
THE Church and Christiany of Iapon which now 66. years ago was first founded
by the Blessed Father Frauncis Xauier of the Society of Jesus (and ever since
then has beeue principally conserved next after God by the labors and good
endeauours of the Fathers of the same Society) has suffered many great and
grievous persecutions, even as the Primitive Church did in the first beginning
thereof. Some of these Persecutions have been particular only in some Countries
or Provinces subject to certain Lords or petty Kings: and these have been
so many and so continual, that scarce ever the Christians have been without
some molestation in one part or other, as may appear by the history of that
Country written at large by Father Luis de Guzman of the Society of JESUS.
Others have been general, caused by the Lords of the Tenca, who were the
Monarchs of al Iapone, not only banishinge the Fathers of the Society,
destroying their Churches and houses, and taking away from them all that they
had, but also banishing likewise the Christians of the country, together with
their kindred, friends, and familiars, confiscating their lands and goods, and
sinally bereauing the also of their lives.

2. But never hitherto has any been either so general, or so rigorous, as
that which Minamoto Iyeyasu, who at this present is the Xogun or Cubosama, King
and Lord of al Iapon, did raise now two years ago in the year 1614. For that
if heretofore the Fathers were banished out of some one country or province
they still found refuge in some other part or place of the kingdom: and
although Taycosama the predecessor in government to him that now reigns did
twice cast down and destroy all their Churches, and commanded them to depart
his kingdom; yet always had they a Church standinge on foot in Nangasaqui (a
port town in Iapon) for the use of the Portugal merchants who traffic
thither; and under color of that, they not only remained there, but also from
thence went secretly into many other provinces of the kingdom, and did great
good amongst the Christians; who likewise were never before used so hardly as
at this time they be. For that the Xogun in this persecution has not only
caused all the Churches to be burned and razed to the ground, and given
express charge that no Priest nor preacher of the Christian religion whether
he be a stranger or free-denizen should remain therein, but also has
commanded, that all the Christians do leave their faith and religion under
pain of banishment out of the kingdom, or being put after many torments to
some cruel kind of death Upon this occasion there have happened many accidents
worthy of memory, to the great honor and glory of Almighty God, and very like
to those of the primitive Church, as in the discourse of this Relation will
appear.

3. The causes and reasons of this so rigorous sentence and proceeding of the
Xogun, and of the execution thereof, be diverse, some of old, and some of new.
Of old is the hatred of the Devil, who having had peaceable possession more
then a 1000. years of all that kingdom, and seeing that now of late by reason
of the preaching, teaching, holy life and instruction of the Fathers, many
thousands of souls were daily drawn from Idolatry and superstition to the
knowledge and service of the true and everliving God, their only Lord, maker,
creator, and redeemer, and that very probably within small time if they were
permitted he should be altogether dispossessed of the tyrannical dominion he
had so long exercised upon them, did therefore al his endeauours to hinder
their prosperous proceedings; especially for that already (besides many
thousands that were departed this world) there were then living more then two
hundred and fifty thousand Christians, so zealous and feruorous in the service
of their Lord and Savior, that besides their diligence to learn and know all
the duties of good Christians, and their care in keeping and observing gods
precepts and commandments, many of them did animate themselves to attain to a
higher perfection, and to follow the Evangelical Counsels of Virginity,
Chastity, voluntary poverty, recollection and religious life.

4. This I say made him bestir himself, and move the Bonzos his Ministers, to
hate the Fathers bitterly, and to procure their disgrace by all means possible:
the which was not very had to do, because themselves did see that their credits
with the people was much decreased since their coming into the country, as
also their gains greatly diminished. For which cause within short time after
the entrance of the Fathers, to auert the minds of the people from them, they
published that they were Devils in humane shape sent from hell to hinder the
happy success of the Iaponian Sects; that the kingdoms wheresoever they
entered went presently to wrack; that they did eat man's flesh, and the like.
But all these reports being found out in short time to be wholly false and
untrue, reproachful slanders, and forged calumniations, they changed their
note and begun another tune, protesting in their Sermons that it ought not to
be endured, that a few poor strangers (as the Fathers were) should be
permitted to procure with so great diligence and endeavor as they did, the
destruction of their Idols, Temples and Sects, that had been always so
highely esteemed of all their ancestors; and to bring into their country
another new law and religion, and customs wholly opposite and contrary unto
those which so long time had been professed and practiced therein: complaining
moreover, that those that were made Christians in many things were more
obedient unto the Fathers then unto their own Princes and natural Lords, and
that for their religion they would by their persuasion loose both their
liuinges, honors, and their lives. Moreover they said, that it was not
probable, nor possible, but that the Fathers under color of preaching the
religion and faith of Christ, had some pretense of matter of state: nor that
any wise man could persuade himself, that men of judgment and discretion (as
the Fathers seemed to them to be) would ever come from so far countries, with
so great cost and charges, through so many and so evident perils and dangers,
both by se^ and land as they did, only for the salvation of the souls of other
men, as they pretend to do, especially of such as they never saw before, nor
do any ways belong or apperteine unto them: and that therefore doubtless there
was some other temporal respect that moved them thereunto.

5. And to give a greater color of likelihood and show of reason for what they
did affirm, they added thereunto diverse things which were most true, as that
the Spaniardes (of which Nation most of the Fathers be) be very warlike people,
and how they have conquered the East and West Indies, the Islands of Molucas,
and the Philippines; that all the Christians converted by the Fathers are very
obedient unto them, ready to do in ^ll things what they shall advise, and that
they are al very much united among themselves.

6. With these and the like reasons ^hey easily persuaded diverse Princes of ^he
Country, who commonly are very ^ealous of their states, to have the Fathers ^n
suspicion, seeing especially before their ^yes what a revolution had been made
^ little before in their own country by a Bonzo of Ozaca, who under color of
^efending certain Sects, had troubled and molested both Taycosama, Nobunanga,
and all the princes of Iapon. Many of these reasons were alleged by Taycosama
both ^n the year 1587. when he first banished the Fathers, as also when he
renowed the persecution in the year 1596. wherein he made exceeding havoc
among the Christians. For although he were moved thereunto principally by
reason of the desire he had to have taken the great Spanish galeon, called S.
Philip, which passed by that way unto Noua Espana from the Philipines; yet was
he also not a little provoked by the foolish words of a certain Pilot, who
being asked how the Spaniardes had gained so many kingdoms, he answered that
they went first to traffic into them, and that if therein they either
received injury of any, or were not well used, or not received by the people of
the co^try, that then they made war against them, and ouercomming them, took
possession of their kingdom and estats. And being asked if they did not also
for that cause send religious men before them, he answered, yes: the which
although it were most false and fabulous, yet did Taycosama take it as a
sufficient occasion to raise a cruel persecution against all the Christians of
Iapone.

7. This suspicion was confirmed in them, yea and much increased by certain
Englishmen, and Hollanders, who in the time of this Xogun do not only
traffic but also some of them reside and dwell within Iapone: for they partly
through the hare they have and bear to religious men and Catholics, and
partly for fear least the Spaniardes should be a means to hinder their
traffic thither, have made many malicious and most vile reports, even the
very worst they could imagine or invent, both of the one and other. As for
example that the religious men are dangerous persons, both wicked and
rebellious: that they do not preach Christ's true Religion, but only their own
fancies and imaginations, and that for that cause they have been often times
banished by Christian princes in Europe out of their kingdoms and dominions;
that the Spaniardes have no other end nor intention in coming thither, but
only to bereave them of their kingdom and government, alleging to that
purpose, and as it were in proof thereof many particular examples to make some
show of truth.

8. That they were the authors of these false reports, came to be known from
the Xogun himself, who one day in speech used these words: That if the Kings
and Princes of Europe do banish the Fathers out of their countries, I shall do
them no injury to send them out of mine. These and such like malicious rumors
and reports were in themselves sufficient to have been causes of greater
harms and mischeifes then they were for a long time, had not Almighty God in
a manner bound and held the Gentiles hands, who with the desire of continuinge
traffic with the Spaniardes and Portugalls, either would not hear, or when
they heard would never give credit unto such wicked and malicious untruths.

9. The Devil perceiving this, and knowinge well how that by occasion of the
traffic from the Indies and Macan, Christian religion found first entrance
into Iapone, and how by means thereof it has hitherto also been there
conserved, and that if it should cease, religion could not probably be of long
continuance there, he did therefore his utmost endeavor to hinder it, and for
that cause it is most likely, that first of all he moved the Heretics to go
thither, to the end that by their false reports they might bring into
discredit with the Gentiles the Catholic religion: and offer to bring them the
same merchandise that the Spaniardes and Portugals have done hitherto.
Secondly, that the Xogun, through the false informations of a Governor called
Safioyedono, and other his adherentes should most iniustly command that the
ship of traffic of Macan should be set upon, and taken most injuriously, the
which in the year 1610. by that occasion was set on fire and burnt to the
damage of diverse Christians, and little less in all then a million of loss.

10. And finally that some Iaponians did wrongfully take and usurp at the same
time, almost all the goods of the ship called S. Frauncis of the Philippines
which did ariue at the port town of Quanto, where they offered so many and so
gross injuries unto the Spaniardes and Portugals as were scarce to be endured:
and matters came thereby to that pass, that it was thought it would have been
an occasion of the total ruin and destruction of all the Christianity of
Iapone, had it not pleased Almighty God by the good endeauours, diligence and
intercession of some friends, and especially of Don John Arimadono, who at that
time was in great favor with the Xogun, to have pacified matters, and so
calmed the tempest that was then rising against them.

Of the beginning of the Persecution in the Province of Arima. CHAP. II.
DON John Arimadono aforesaid was Lord and Prince of all the Province of Arima.
He was an Ancient Christian, a great benefactor, and as it were the very prop
and pillar of the whole Church of Iapone, as well for that he had caused the
conversion of all his subjects to the Christian faith, by means of the
Fathers of the Society, whom he always favored very much, not only
permitting them to preach freely to all in his dominions, but also giving them
succor and harbor therein even in the time of the greatest fury of Taycosama
his persecution, exposing himself thereby to the danger of loosing his honor,
estate, and life, and that not once but oftentimes, although he were therefore
much molested both by some friends of his own, as also by the Lords of the
Tenca.

2. There was close by his country of Arima another Province which indeed of
right belonged unto him, and had been sometime possessed by his ancestors, but
now was usurped by another man. This province Don John did much desire to
obtain by means and favor of the Xogun, and to that end he used some means
not so conformable either to reason, or to the law of God as might have been
wished and desired. One was to marry his son and heir, who was already
married to another wife, unto a young lady that was grandchild to the Xogun.
Another was in having a hand by the appointment of the Xogun in the burning of
the ship of Macan, whereof we spoke before, under pretense of certain injuries
done unto some Iaponians, it being indeed nothing so, but only a devise and
deceit of Safioyedono.

3. It seemed unto him that by making the people of that province which he
pretended Christians, by destroying Idolatry in it, and building Churches to
God therein, that these sins which he committed, to condescend with the Xogun
and get his favor, would be thereby well satisfied, and the scandal given unto
the Christians either wholly taken away or else much qualefied: but it happened
much otherwise (and indeed things though they be good and holy, if they be
brought to pass and compassed by evil means, can have no good end, and
commonly have bad success.) For first of all Almighty God permitted him to be
deluded by a false fellow, a counterfeit and feigned Christian called Dayfachy
Paulo, who receiving of him many bribs both for himself and for other
favorites of the Xogun, did persuade him that the Xogun had made him a grant
of that Province, and that the Letters patentes thereof were already drawn, but
afterward it was found out all to be a mere cosenage and decept. Whereupon
Dayfachy was put in prison for it, and being convinced of Forgery, was
condemned to death, and finally burned for falsifiyng the Kings Letters. Then
Don John his own son called Saiemon Nosuque, by the persuasion of his new
married wife the grand child of the Xogun, and also carried away with ambition
and desire of comaund, joining and uniting himself with some of his Fathers
mortal enemies, made such complaints? and framed such articles against him
upon this occasion, that they caused-him to be banished by the Xogun, and his
estate to be assigned to his son. And finally by procurement of his own said
son, and his wife whom he had caused to marry against all right and reason,
hoping by her means more easily to compass his desires, to honor and streng
then his house and family: by their means, I say, and others, who feared least
coming to answer for himself he would discover their false dealinges, and
accusations laid against him, he was at length deprived of his life. And in
this ended the unlawful and evil grounded worldly policy of Don John,
although he dyed very penitent for that he had done, with great signs of true
sorrow and contrition for his sins, and of good preparation for his death,
forgiving al injuries had been offered him, and asking pardon of all whom he
had offended. And in him the whole new planted Church of all Iapone did loose
exceeding much, for he, as I said before, was a great defender, supporter, and
a stay thereof.

4. By reason of the bad procedings of Don John in the things aforementioned,
and his evil success therein, the Gentills took occasion to speak their
pleasure of the Catholic religion, and to calumniate it as though the sins
and imperfections of some particular persons that profess it, were to be
imputed to their faith, it being in it self most perfect, pure, and holy. The
Xogun also thereupon begun the persecution of the Christians of the Province of
Arima, who were all Don John his subjects, and most loving toward him. For
being as he was even from the very beginning of his government so great an enemy
to Christian religion, that he commanded that none of his house should be
Christians under pain of loosing both their liuinges and their lives,
protesting publicly that all the princes of Iapone should do the like with
their subjects, and earnestly entreating Don John oftentimes that he would
renounce his religion, as being unworthy to be professed of so principal a
person as he was, and that he would permit Temples to be built to the Idols in
his Countries; upon this occasion of the banishment of Don John he sent word
unto his some Sayemon Nosuque, that seeing he did him the favor to place him in
his Fathers estate and government, as also to admit him to marry with his own
Grandchild, that in recompense thereof he would have him leave to be a
Christian, and not only himself, but all his servants and subjects also, and
that he should banish the Fathers out of his Countries. And for the execution
thereof he sent unto him for his director and chief cou^sayler in the
business Safioye the Governor of Nangasaqui a great enemy to Christians.
Sayemon durst do no other then obey him in all he commanded, for fear of
loosing his estate, and so hereupon immediately through the counsel of his new
Herodias, his pretended wife, and the policies of Safioyedono, he begun the
persecution of Arima, and of that was occasioned afterward the general
persecution in all Iapon, as after shall appear.

5. The Xogun moreover did command enquiry to be made amongst his own
Servants, Soldiers, and Captains, to see if any of them were Christians; and
having found that fourteen of them were so, all of them persons of note and
quality, and five or six of them noble, rich, and his great faubrites, he was
exceedingly offended therewith: and having understood that after diligence used
with them, there was no means to make them change their minds, he banished
them all together with their wives and families, in such rigorous manner, that
he commanded all the Princes of Iapone under greiuous pains and punishments,
that none should give them any succor or entertainment whatsoever.

6. Great was the courage and constancy which these good Christians showed in
this extremity in loosing their lands and liuinges for our Saviors sake,
rather then they would leave his holy faith whereof they made profession, being
ready also to loose their lives for the same cause, if occasion had been
offered. They suffered exceeding much, themselves, their wives, and children
wandering up and down, and going secretly here and there, not finding any place
where to abide. Iulia also a principal Lady of the Court who was banished for
the same cause to a little Island scarce inhabited, did suffer there exceeding
much in this occasion.

7. Many noble personages in the Courts of Yendo and Suruga did imitate the
Xoguns proceedinges in this kind, but above all the Prince of Toxogun did show
himself most cruel and rigorous, moved partly by the Xoguns example, but
principally incited by the words of an English Pilot who spoke most bitterly
against religious men and Spaniardes, making their persons odious unto him, and
all that they did suspicious. Whereupon many Christians of great worth and
quality were sent into banishment. And this affliction had been much more
grievous and more general, had not Itacuradono the Governor of Meaco, an
honorable, moderate and moral man, and a friend unto the Fathers, signified
unto the Xogun, that it was no reason that all the Christians, being as they
are, people that live in the Kingdom well and quietly, and do hurt and injury
to none, should be punished for the fault of some one, or a few particular
persons of their Religion: neither do I hold it (said he) for good policy, now
that the Kingdom is in peace and quietness, to strike a string that may make to
great a noise, and perhaps put matters more out of tune, then is by us imagined.

8. Upon this good advise the Xogun did for a while somewhat temper himself,
and gave license again that the Fathers of the Society might remain, and have
one Church within the City of Meaco: and thereupon, and by reason that the
Governor did command to proclaim that the Xoguns former order was not to be
understood of merchantes, tradesmen, or common people, but only of Soldiers
and Gentlemen, many of their Churches did remain untouched, and the Christians
in some good quietness, for that many other Princes winked at them, as at the
Fathers also. So that this persecution first of all begun as it see meth in
Suruga and Yendo, although the principal blow did fall upon the province of
Taccacu, or Arima, which is all one.

9. For when notice was given in the Country of Ar^ma, with what determination
the new Arimadono was coming from the Court, great was the grief and
affliction generally of all the Christians thereof, but above all unto the good
Fathers of the Society the news was most heavy, seeing the evident danger of
those whom with so great pains, care, labor and travail they had connerted
to the Christian faith, and for so many years instructed therein: and that the
Churches which with so great costs and charges they had builded for the
serving and honoring of Almighty God, should now ey^her be destroyed, or else
turned into ^ emples of Idols for the service of the Devil. And sinally that,
that flock of Christ whereof they had had so great care, should be now
delivered to the custody of cruel wolves the Bonzos, without having any Pastor
that might feed it, keep it, and defend it. Like good sheepheardes therefore
they began to animate their sheep, and arm them by means of the holy
Sacraments, which they ministered unto them, making also many spiritual
exhortations unto them and pyous sermons, persuading them therein to patience,
constancy and perseverance, to fasting, prayer, and true penance for their
sins.

10. As soon as Arimadono was arrived at Ximauara which is the first town of
that Province, together with Sasiove and another favorite of the Xogun, who
were his wicked counsaylers, which was upon the ninth of July, they published
an edict or Proclamation, in which was commanded that all his subjects and
servants should leave the faith of Christ, and send for the Bonzos to instruct
them in the sects of Iapone, appointing withal three Judges unto who^ they
gave order to procure by all means possible, that all the Gentlemen of quality
that had any rentes, revenues or pensions from the Xogun, should immediately
Ieaue to be Christians under pain of loosing both them, and the rest of their
goods and liuinges, and thereby be reduced to extreme poverty and most
miserable estate. And upon the 13. day of the same month he sent word unto the
Fathers of the Society, that seeing the Xogun had forbidden the profession of
Christian religion, his pleasure was they should immediately depart out of his
Country, leaving their Churches and houses as they stood. The ornaments of the
Church, the pictures, and their books they had caused before to be conuaied to
Nangasaqui, and so they dispatched now the sooner obeying to his command,
though not without great grief and affliction, for they had in that country a
College the best and biggest in all Iapone, a Seminary also where they did
bring up many young youths and children of the Iaponians, teaching them
learning and virtue, latin, music, and the characters of the Religions and
sects of Iapone, and the manner how to confute them, which has been one of
the best and most efficacious means for the conversion of those Gentiles. They
had also in that Country of Arima six other places of ordinary reside^ce,
besides other Churches and houses, which now and then they visited to the number
of three score and ten: and all these in one day were confiscated, and they
cast out of them. Some of the Fathers remained in the contry secretly and
disguised, together with some of the Brothers also and youths of the Seminary,
for the better helping of the poor afflicted Christians thereof. And although
they did it not without great labor and pains, and exceeding danger of their
lives; yet was it well recompensed with the great good they did thereby among
the Christians, who with great care, love, and charity did hide them, keep
them, and maintain them.

11. The Judges appointed by young Arimadono for the examining and proceeding
against the Christians, sent for some of them one after another, and did their
best endeavors to persuade them to do some exterior act whereby at least they
might make show to have obeyed to the Xoguns command in leaving of their
faith. Some although very few did easily condescend to their requests, hopinge
thereby to gain the favor of their Prince; and these all of them were such as
either were not well grounded in their faith, or else were men of evil life,
and bad corrupted consciences. Others moved and overcome with the entreaties,
importunities, and tears of of their kindred, friends and acquaintaine, showed
some weakness and fraylty at the first, it seeming to them either no sin at
all, or else not very great exteriorly to dissemble for a time, so that
inwardly in their hearts they did not leave their faith, thereby to give
contentment to their Prince, and save their own estates. But being afterward
advised of their fault, and told how great a sin it was, they were so
seriously sorrowful and penitent therefore, and did recompense their fall with
so great courage, seruour and constancy, that some of them afterward endured
most cruel martyrdom, and others suffered incredible afflictions want, misery,
and poverty for their faith after they had publicly revoked that which before
they had of frailty done: and this they did before the Judges, and Arimadono
himself, asking pardon of all for the offense and scandal they had committed
through fear, and in a manner unawares. All the rest answered so courageously
and constantly, that they not only remained conquerors, but also so confounded
the Judges, that they durst not pass any further in examining and questioning
them: and in this occasion there happened many things very notable and worthy
of memory, not only of men and women, but of young Virgins also and tender
children, which would be to long and tedious to rehearse.

12. Thomas Ondafeibioye a principal and most valerous soldier, and one of
the best Christians of that country, who had two several times before been
banished for his faith, once in the year 1587. with Don Iusto Veondono, whose
subject then he was, and the second time in the year 1602. loosing then
likewise all the living that he had for the same occasion, was one of the first
that was called by the Judges: but he not going in person unto them upon some
occasion, sent them his answer in writing in this manner following: Neither I,
nor my brother Matthias, nor any person of my house shall show himself
disloyal to Almigh^y God, nor deny the holy Religion in the which from
children we have been brought up, nor will we change our minds for all that the
world can offer or affoard. I and my brother, my mother, my wife and children
are ready to do any thing that Arimadono shall command us, so that it be not
against the law of God, and holy faith which we profess. Presently as soon as
he had sent this message, he sent for a Father of the Society, of whom they
all received the holy Sacraments, thereby the better to prepare themselves to
Martyrdom: and although at that time it did not take effect, yet afterward
it did, as shall appear in the sequel of this Narration. Many others did
answer to the Judges with like constancy and resolution; the which being
perceived by Arimadono, because he was loath to loose so many true and trusty
faithful and noble Captains, he therefore dissembled the matter at that time
with Thomas and diverse others, giving them secretly leave to be Christians so
that exteriourly they made no great show thereof: but they were all resolved,
and he certified, that they would not make any show of the contrary in
prejudice of their conscience and religion.

Of so ne that were banished, and others put to death for the faith of Christ
in the Province of Arima. CHAP. III.
ARIMADONO fearing he might disgust the Xogun, and so perhaps loose his Estate,
if he did show himself remiss in persecuting the Christians (although on the
other side he saw the courage they showed) commanded upon the twentieth day of
June, that the lands and goods of five rich Gentlemen should be confiscated,
and that they, their wives, children, and families should be put out of their
houses, taking no other thing with them, but only the apparel on their
backs: charging withal that none should intertaine them in their houses, nor
give them any food, relief, or sustenance under pain of severe and grievous
punishment. He caused moreover officers to be set in the high ways, port
towns, and passages to the end they should not escape out of his country, but
perish there for hunger, want, and misery, even in they eyes of their dearest
friends and kinsfolks. Much they suffered by this means for livers days,
living only upon herbs and such wild fruits as they found growing in the
woods, being perpetually exposed to the cold, the wind and rain which at that
time happened to be very much, until at length the Christians of Arima, and
other places found means to help and succor them, and by the order and
direction of one of the Society they made themselves little cabbins of straw,
among the mountains for their abode, therein spending their time in fasting,
prayer, and reading of good and holy books, and so they led their lives a
great while, not only with great patience, but with much joy also, comfort and
content.

2. Arimadono perceiving by this that what hitherto he had done against the
Christians did little or nothing prevail, he resolved with himself to put to
death some of them, to wit, such as had showed themselves more forward and
feruorous: by which means the happy lot of martyrdom befelvnto two brethren
the one called Michael Soday of fifty years old or therabouts, the other
Matthias Coychi of one and thirty. They were both of them borne in a town of
that Province called Ariye, their parents were persons of good quality and
very worthy Christians. Michael was always accounted very devout and
feruorous, and from his very childhood he was of so great virtue, purity and
integrity, that none ever noted in him any thing that might be a mortal sin.
He was but weak and sickly, by reason of the hard usage of his body with
fasting, hayrecloth, disciplines, and other penances. All his delight was in
hearing sermons, and reading good and pious books, in so much that he seemed
rather a religious man then secular. He was very charitable and desirous
always to help others all he could, for which cause he was generally beloved
of all, and respected and esteemed as a father. By the appointment of the
Fathers of the Society he had for the space of fifteen years the care and
direction of thirteen Congregations or Confraternities into which the deuouter
sort of Christians for their exercise of virtue had put and placed themselves.
And in this employment did his brother Matthias help him, being as like unto
him in good qualities and virtuous inclination, as he was in blood and natural
condition. When the Fathers were banished from Arima (as before is mentioned)
Michael called together all the Prefectes and Officers of the thirteen
Congregations, and told them that the time was now come in which they must all
show their faith; and the desire they had of the salvation of their souls: Let
every one therefore (said he) as ke those of his Confraternity what disposition
and courage they feel and find within themselves. Whereupon amongst themselves
they made a catalogue or role, in which within short time more then fifteen
hundred with great spirit and resolution did write their names in sight that
they were ready and prepared to give their lives and suffer al kind of
torments, rather then leave and forsake the Christian religion.

3. Michael, and his brother were the two first whose names were written in the
Catalogue, and he said, he did desire it should be so, because he hoped by that
means he might animate others to do the like. And the reason why he wished the
rest would imitate him and his brother therein, was to the end, that if the
Judges should offer any more to call the Christians to examination, seeing
their names written in the ^atalogue they should have no cause to ^^oubt of
their resolution and conformity ^^n desire to dye for Christ. They had a Father
of the Society hidden amongst them, who with great care and secresy went from
one place to another, said ^^asse, preached and administered the holy Sacraments
unto them. But the devil not being able to endure that those two good brethren
should do so good service unto God, nor that the Christians should ^iue with
such love and feruor as they did, did so dispose that Arimadono and his Judges
came to have notice and intelligence of all that passed: which being known to
them, and they easily perceauing that whilst those two holy brethren lived,
they should not be able to do any thing with the Christians of Ariye, they
therefore condemned them to death, committing the execution thereof unto two
principal men whom they willed to do it secretly, because the Xogun had not
commanded that they should put to death any of the Christians but only that
they should moleste them in such manner, that they of their own accord for the
avoiding of those troubles should leave their Faith and Religion.

4. Upon the Eve of S. James of the year 1612. the Father of the Society went
to Michels house, and there said mass the two days following, heard their
confessions, gave them the Blessed Sacrament, and then returned to a little
Cottage where he did lie hidden. In the afternoon, which was upon the day of
the glorious Saint S. Anne, did God Almighty choose to crown these two happy
brethren with the crown of martyrdom. Michael was taken and carried to a
place where sometimes had stood a Church of the Misericordia; and for that
those that were to execute the Sentence were his friends they notifyed it unto
him, and wished him to prepare himself to dye. Presently he lifted up his eyes
and hands to heaven giving first thanks unto Almighty God for so great a
benefit, and afterward he said unto those that brought him the news: This is
a favor which a long time I have desired at God Almighty his hands, and being
so weak and sickly as I am, it seemed to me that I should have dyed of some
ordina^y sickness and disease, and therefore now I am exceedingly rejoiced
with such happy ^ewes and so glorious a lotte. Then he kneeled down upon the
ground and prayed a little space when as the executioner came to him and said,
Brother Michael I beseech you, that seeing you are ^o dye for the love of God,
that you would entreat him to pardon me this sin, for I am also a Christian
and do this office God knows of force and much against my will. He answered
with great ^^ildnesse; that he would do it very willingly, and so his head was
presently ^troken of whilst he was inuoking the holy name of Jesus. His
Brother Matthias they took at the same time in his own house, as he was
foulding up the ornaments, which the Father that day had used in the holy
Sacrifice of the mass, and carrying him aside, they gave him three or four
wounds, with which he fell down and dyed, saying with a loud voice, Jesus,
Maria.

5. The executioner that cut of Michaels head did great reverence to their two
holy bodies, and taking some of their holy relics, he gave notice to the
Christians of their death and cause thereof. So many came thither to reverence
their bodies, and to get some of their relics, that they could scarce get
them burried all that night: at length they buried them, though afterward
they were taken up again and carried to the Church of Nangasaqui, where they
were likewise much reverenced of all, some taking pieces of their apparel
some parcels of their hair, others some of their blood: many therewith made
the sign of the cross on their own foreheades desiring much to imitate and
follow them in dying for their faith. An old man of threescore and ten years
called Ioachim, as soon as he had notice of their death, went running to the
place where their bodies lay, and embracing Matthias his body by the seete, he
most earnestly desired the executioners who yet remained there, that they would
do the like to him, seeing he also was a Christian, and had promised Michael to
dye in his company.

6. Some months before this matter happened, Lucy the mother to these two
holy martivs, a very devout and virtuous Christian, did see in a vision a most
beautiful child, who having two precious stones in his hands, showed them
unto her, and she desiring to take them in her hands, he vanished away. The
next day following he did appear again with two nosegayes made of many goodly
followers, and when she desired to have taken them as before, he vanished away
again: likewise the third day he appeared again with two beautiful red roses
in his hands, at which she wondering, told her son Michael of it, and he
afterward related it to another brother of his who is of the Society: not
long after she dyed, and as seems that Almighty God thereby would let her
understand how grateful and beautiful the souls of her two sons were in
his heavenly eyes.

7. The same sentence of death was executed upon Leon Quita Quinzayemon, on the
two and twenty day of August 1612. He was a Gentleman of a good house, and a
very valerous soldier of fifty years of age or thereaboutes he was borne at a
town called Chinxina, and from his youth very virtuous and of exemplar life.
When Arimadono came first to Ximauara, Leon sent him word that if he meant to
make use of his service, it could not be but upon condition that he would give
him leave to live a Christian, for that otherwise he would not serve him. He
went up and down two months and more without his sword, expecting an answer
from Arimadono, animating with great feruor all to constancy, and to that end
visiting the neighbor towns and villages. And some wondering to see him go
without his sword, he told them: Seeing that I am not to defend myself when
they come to kill me for Christ's cause, I have no need at all to wear my
weapon. Going up and down in this manner he, found that the Christians of one
town durst not bury publicly one that was dead; and reprehending them for
their cowardice therein, they told him they feared some hurt and damage would
befall him for the great boldness which he showed. To which he answered: What
can they do to me more then kill me, and for that I am very ready whenever
they will, for there is nothing that I more desire then to die for Christ: and
saying so, with his own hands he buried the dead body of the Christian.

8. The Judges did procure by all means possible to persuade him to
accommodate himself unto the time, and so he might enjoy his living and be in
favor with his Prince: and a certain Noble man that loved him very well,
called Camon, who was Uncle to Arimadono, after diverse persuasions said unto
him: What matter is it man, if our Prince will go to hell, let us make no
moreado but go with him thither too. To whom he answered: My Lord the
obligation which the servant has to his master, and the subject to his Prince
does end together with this life, for in the next life they have no power nor
authority at all: and if your Lordshippe will not believe me make try all if
you please, and call any of those captains that have dyed in your service, or
in the service of your ancestor, and see if they do now answer to your call.
In such things therefore that do concern this present life, I will very
willingly serve my Prince, but in those that do pertain unto the next and
whereon my salvation does depend, he must pardon me, I cannot nor I will not do
it. And unto a brotherinlaw of Arimadono that did entreat him concerning the
same matter he answered: Although I confess it will be something a^ffu ult
unto me to serve now one that has left to be a Christian, I having before
served in the war two so good Christian Princes, as were Don John and his
brother Don Stephen, yet notwithstanding obtain you that I may live freely in
my religion, and I will do willingly that which you desire me. In many other
occasions likewise he sufficiently showed his great zeal and feruor which for
breuines sake I do not here rehearse.

9. In conclusion Arimadono, because with his example and speeches he did much
animate the rest, gave command unto two strong soldiers that they should kill
him secretly, for the reason before expressed. They therefore sent for him one
day unto the castle, and he imagining the cause to be that which indeed it was,
went thither with great alacrity; and the soldiers going out to meet him,
asked him whither he went? He a^swered that he went to the Castle called by the
Prince: wherefore said they? to have my head out of said he, because I will not
leave to be a Christian: and in this manner they went talking with him, and he
wished them they would have care to look to the salvation of their souls, all
other businesses whatsoever in comparison thereof being of small account and
consequence. He made the sign of the Cross upon himself many times as he
went alonge the way, and coming to a place where there had been a Church of
the Society, he kneeled down upon the ground, and prayed for a while: which
done he rising up and going forward in the way one of the soldiers with his
sword gave him so great a blow upon one of his shoulders, that he cut him down
into the breast: he then pronouncing the holy name of Jesus three times aloud,
unbuckled his rapier, and casting it away from him did his endeavor to bless
himself with making the sign of the Cross, and so fell down and dyed. The
Christians came thither presently, and because the sentence that Arimadono had
given against him was publicly known, as also the cause thereof, together
with the disposition and preparation he made for martyrdom, they therefore
took his holy body, and sent it secretly to the house of the Society of Jesus
in Nangasaqui, where it was buried with all due respect and reverence.

10. The happy deaths of the three foresaid martyrs caused so great fervor
and courage in all the Christians of that Country and Estate, that now they did
not think nor talk of any other thing, but only how to prepare themselves to
imitate and follow them: to that end by the counsel and advise of one of the
Society, they began in the City of Arima to renew their Confraternities, not
admitting into them any one, but only such as were fully resolved to give
their lives, and all they had, yea and to suffer all kind of torments rather
then to deny the faith of Christ. They made amongst themselves certain laws
and rules, and set down the fastes, the disciplines, and other pennanes they
were to do. Then they did divide themselves into Decuria's (Companies of ten)
to the end that meeting so in diverse places they might the better help one
another. And the like was done by the Christians in all the towns of that whole
country of Arima with a kind of holy emulation: but before any one could be
admitted into any Confraternity, they did many pennances and other things of
piety to dispose themselves thereto. The like was done by the women, and by the
children also; the women thinking that in matters of devotion they ought not to
be inferior unto men, and the children desiring and endeavoring to imitate
their parents piety.

11. And this was the preparation which the common people made, although they
were not comprehended in the Proclamation: and we may with reason think that,
that which the gentlemen and other of better sort did make, was not inferior
unto this, Those who, as I said before, at the entreaty and importunity of
their freindes had in the beginning exteriourly condescended to do some things
not so convenient, being now exceeding sorry and repentant for their fault,
desired no other thing so much, as some good occasion wherein publicly to
acknowledge their error, and to make profession of their faith. For which
causes it being a custom among the Bonzos in their festiual days, in sign
that one is of their sect, to take a book made by Xaca, which is called
Foquequio, and to put it upon the heads of their parishioners or sectaries,
saying there withal a certain prayer: and one of them having in treated
Arimadono that upon a certain solemn day, he and his Courtiers would do this
ceremony, they conspired amongst themselves not only not to do it, but also to
disgrace the Bonzo if he did persist therein. The day appointed came, but
notice being had of their determination, and both Arimadono, and the Bonzo
being afraid, that if the ceremony were done, it would redound more to their
disgrace and to the encorageme^t of the Christians, they thought it therefore
more convenient to omit the ceremony, and so it was done, Arimadono himself
alone going to visit the Bonzo without any more ado. Wherewith the Gentlemen
were not a little grieved because they had lost that good occasion of
publishing their minds, which yet they determined to manifest, and did that
very day, going all together unto the Judges, unto whom they spoke in this
manner: We be all Christians, and are willing and desirous to suffer
banishment, and death rather then for sake our faith and religion: and seeing
that we have not had means to signify so much to Arimadono in public, we
desire you to do it for us. So many they were that went thither with that
protestation, that although Arimadono were so much offended therewith that he
commanded they should be all put to death, yet could it not be put in
execution, unless he would have left himself without servants to attend upon
him, or at least been deprived of the more and better sort of them.

12. One among the rest named Leon having showed himself so constant that he
was condemned to death therefore by Arimadono's special order, because he
understood that a friend of his thinking to do him a pleasure had
counterfayted his hand, and going to the Judges therewith, assured them thereby
that he had revolted from his faith, he took four witnesses with him and went
unto the Judges, telling them he was a Christian, and that the subscription
which had been showed unto them as his, was not his, but counterfayte and
false. The Judges having heard him gave order he should be sent immediately into
banishment. His wife thinking that for this action of her husband both he and
she should have been put to death, put on the best apparel she had, expecting
therein the sentence and execution: but as soon as she understood that the
punishment of death was changed into banishment, leaving of her gay attire, and
her husband laying aside his weapons, and loosing all his wealth, they departed
from their house in poor apparel, desirous to loose and leave much more then
they had done, for our Blessed Saviors sake.

13. Arimadono at the beginning of the first month of the year 1613 went unto
the Court according to the custom of Iapone to visit the Xogun for that new
year, and being on the way his Judges wrote unto him of the great feruor of
the Christians, and how that every day some came before them to make
potestation of their faith: and therefore they desired him he would consider
what they ought to do therein. He answered that for a warning and example to
the rest they should thrust out of Arima Don John Tacry n, who was his own
great Uncle, a grave and aged Gentlemen of great esteem, and a father to the
Christians, taking from him the greatest part of his revenues. And that they
should deprive George Tefengi (who was a very worthy Christian, and had been a
famous Captain about Meaco, and banished also from the kingdom of Fingo, and
lost his castle for his consciencesake) of al his living, and banish him out of
the country of Arima, and finally that they should put to death Thomas Onda
Feibioye together with his brother mother and children.

14. This Thomas was he that answered the Judges so resolutly as we related in
the end of the precedent Chapter: and Arimadono because he was a man of notable
courage and valor had given him once leave to live a Christian, but not many
months afterward he begun again to entreat and urge him very much that he
would accommodate himself unto the time, assuring him that therein he should
give him great content: Whereto he answered, that neither in honesty nor
Christianity he could, nor would show himself disloyal unto God: but yet for
all that he still persisted, urging him even till a little before his departure
toward the Court, and was much grieved to see he could not prevail against
his constant resolution; the which Thomas well perceiving, grew more careful of
himself: and to be in better disposition for whatsoever might succeed, he made
a general confession of all his life unto the Father that went secretly and
disguised amongst them, of whom always when he came to his house to celebrate
the holy sacrifice of the mass, he received the Sacraments with particular
devotion: and all his discourse with him commonly was what a happy thing it was
to give ones life for the love of God. He usually did much penance, and gave
himself to prayer, grieuing oftentimes that he had lost so many good occasions
to dye for Christ's holy faith, and true religion.

15. Upon the 21. of January one of Arimadono his Governors sent for him to his
house, and another of them sent for his brother Matthias, and there secretly
they caused them to be slain, cutting of both their heads, they calling at
that time upon our Blessed Savior with great devotion and content, commending
their souls into his holy hands. Thomas was one and forty years old when he
was put to death, and his brother Matthias was one and thirty, both of them
very well beloved of all sorts of people, for their good nature and rare
qualities but much more for their virtue and Christianity. The Judges sent word
forthwith unto their mother Martha of the death of her two somes, signifying
withal that she and her grandchildren must bear them company. The which news
although to some it might seem heavy, yet did she receive it with signs of
great joy and contentment, and as though it had been a message sent from
heaven unto her: and giving thanks to Almighty God, and to those that brought
it her, she sent immediately for her two grandchildren whose names were Iustus
and James, the one of eleven, the other of nine years old. Their mother Iusta
was pardoned her life at the entreaty and intercession of some of her
kinsfolks, although she nothing at all desired it, it being to her worse then
death not to die in that occasion.

16. When her children took their last leave of her, they spoke these words
unto her: God be with you dear Mother, for we be sent for to accompany our
Father unto heaven; both he and we will expect you there. She kissing and
blessing them, gave them great charge they should not be afraid of death, nor
show any sign of fear or cowardice at all. Then she and her good
mother-in-law took their leave of one another with many tears, each giving the
other good counsel and advise: which being done, the two little children with
their good grandmother were carried to a place by the sea side which was
appointed for their execution; whither being come, James the younger of the two
remembering the good counsel that his mother had given him, did himself
uncover his own neck and laid down his little head upon the block in
readiness for the hangman to cut it of, and then devoutly saying Jesus Maria
three several times the Executioner bereaved him of his life. His brother
Iustus with like constancy and more then manly fortitude did follow him. Then
their holy Grandmother Martha a grave matrone of three score years and one,
and the example of all that country of Arima, glad to have seen the Sacrifice
of her sons and grandchildren for so good a cause, deteyned her self a good
while in her prayers, and then giving to some present certain holy relics
which she had about her, and to others her beads which she wore about her
neck, and some part also of her apparel, she desired them al very earnestly
to pray for her to Almighty God, and so falling again to her prayers she had
her head cut of by the same executioner that before had beheaded her two
grandchildren. Her head together with her blood was carefully taken up by the
Christians that were there present, notwithstanding the presence of the
officers, who either durst not or would not contradict their devotion therein.
Afterward both hers, as also the bodies of the children were carried to
Nangasaqui, and there buried withal respect convenient, in the Church of the
Fathers of the Socyety of Jesus. The sentence pronunced against Don John
Tacuyen, Arimadono his great Uncle, as also against the worthy Captain George
Yefengi of banishment and loss of their goods whereof I spoke before, was
also with all rigor put in execution.

Of eight Christian Iaponians that were burned alive for the faith of Christ.
CHAP. IIII.
SAFIOYE, seeing that with his violent manner of proceeding, putting some to
death and banishing others, he was so far from obteyning of his purpose and
desire, that rather matters were worse now then they were before: for those
that were but somewhat bold before, were now much more encouraged by the
examples they had seen, and with the hope of victory and heavenly reward, and
those that had showed some weakness and frailty at the first, by the same
examples were moved to be very sorry and repentant for their fall, and rose up
again with courageous resolution: he now determined to change his rigor into
another kind of crafty cunning persecution. He sought out therefore a certain
Bonzo, an ancient preacher of the Iaponian Sects, that was very famous in the
Courts of Suruga and Yendo, and brought him to Arimadono, telling him that if
he could get the Christianes of his country to hear his Sermons, without all
doubt they would very quickly little esteem, wholly give over, and lean the
Christian Faith. He wished him therefore to carry him to Arima with him, and to
make him preach therein. Arimadono to give content unto Safioyedono and the
Xogun, was very willing therewithal, and Banzui (for so was the Bonzo his
name) was not backward but rather exceeding glad to go, thinking doubtless he
should do some great exploite and gain immortal Fame in conuincing and
converting of the Christians: the Bonzos of Mea^o who by experience knew of how
small effect their Sermons are against the Christian Faith, in the mean time
laughing in their sleues to think how wholly his hopes would be frustrated.

2. As Soon as the Christianes of Arima had intelligence of the Bonzo his
coming toward them, they begane forthwith to prepare themselves: And sent
unto the Bishop and unto Father Provincial of the Society, to know of them
what they might do, neither to prejudice their Consciences, nor to be wanting
in their duty to their Prince. And it was resolved that they should neither go
out to meet the Bonzo, nor afterward to visit him. The which although some of
them did not observe, going at the petition of the chief Governor to visit
him, yet when they went they carried their beads in their hands, and Agnus
Deies at their necks, in sign that they were Christians.

3. It was appointed by Arimadono that there should be a Temple or Chapel,
and an Altar made for the Bonzo his use: and because the Christians neither for
love nor money, neither by threats nor entreaties could be brought to put their
hands thereunto, they were forced to fetch from other places Carpenters and
other workmen who were Gentills, for the framing and making thereof. When the
Temple was finished and all in readiness, Banzui would needs now have them come
to hear him preach. Some went of curiosity to hear what he would say, but
before the end of his Sermon they did so laugh, so mock and deride him both in
the Temple and after in the streets, that the poor Bonzo almost besides
himself did grievously complain to Safioye, that instead of honoring him as
he expected they had brought him thither, as it seemed, wholly do disgrace him,
and make him loose his credit: Telling him withal, that if Arimadono would
show some exemplar punishment upon some of the principal Christians, the rest
would be terrified therewith. Whereupon the matter was proposed to Arimadono,
and by him, and them it was determined, that eight or ten of them should be put
to death publicly, together with their wives and Children.

4. Great was the fervor that was at that time among the Christians,
continual their prayer and frequent their doing of pe^nances. In many places
they made the prayer of Forty hours continually without intermission,
carefully following the counsels, direction and exhortation of the Fathers of
the Society, that in disguised habits lived amongst them. Innumerable daily
entered into the Confraternities, writing their names in the Cataloges, even
with their own blood which to that end they let out of their bodies, and
making protestation, that assisted by the grace of God, they would remain
firm and constant in the confession of their Faith. As soon as it was known
that some of them should be put torments, and afterward to death, a wondrous
great joy arose amongst them all, each one congratulating the good news with
his neighbor, friends, and kindred; every one also desirning that it might be
his happy lot to be one of those that should die for the Christian Cause in that
occasion.

5. Out of all the towns of the country there was six or seven of every
Confraternity sent to the City of Arima to give Intelligence when, and where
the sentence should be put in Execution before mentioned, with intention all of
them to be present there to make public protestation of their faith, and to
show how desirous they were to die therefore. And this was in such manner that
almost al tradsmen and artificers did leave their work and occupations, and
merchantes did suspend their traffic until they saw what would be the issue
and conclusion thereof.

6. But Safioye having understood of all that passed amongst them, fearing some
uproar, and doubting that he should be blamed for it at the Court: seeing also
that their resolution was such, that to use rigor toward them, should be but
to cast oil into the fire, rather augment their constancy then otherwise, he
commanded no more should be done in that business: and thereupon the Christians
returned all unto their houses with intention there to prepare themselves
against another time for Martyrdom. Notwithstanding this command of Safioye,
Banzui the Bonzo at the petition of Arimadono his wife, who was an eager enemy
unto the Christians, would needs urge some Gentlewomen and pages that waited
in the palace, to take of him certain scroles and grains which the Bonzos
use to give, and which they call Iuzus, and Maburi; but it was his misfortune
and hard hap to gain as little honor in this matter as he had done before by
his Sermons; for some of the younger sort upon that occasion not only refused to
take his Iuzus with devotion, but also made him and them an object of their
mirth; and some of them being to much urged by him in that business cast his
trumperio in his face, for which he did reueng himself even to the full,
causing some of of them to be put in prison for it, and others to be banished.

7. A little after this, there came news from the Court, that by occasion of a
little Chapel that was built by the Christians, for certain poor leprous
persons of Yendo, the Xogun was so much offended therewith, that after many
examinations and other diligences used he commanded and caused 28. of them to be
put to death at three several times, they all suffering most constantly so
glorious a Martyrdom because they would not deny the Faith of Christ. Eight of
them were put to death upon the 16. day of August, and fourteen upon the 17.
the rest in the next month following. Moreover he commanded that all the
Christians, whose names were written down in the Catalogue (whereof upon some
other occasion perhaps hereafter we may speak) should be compelled to leave
their faith. This news made great impression in Safioyedono, and thereupon he
took occasion to cause the Martyrdom of those whereof I purpose now to speak
to be put to execution Safioyedono when he departed from Nangasaqui unto the
Court at Suruga, sent word to Arimadono, that it was reported in the Court that
he was a Christian, and that therefore he did not only not endeavor that his
subjects should be otherwise, but rather procured that the faith of Christ
should daily flourish more and more in his dominions: and that doubtless the
Xogun now at his going to the Court would ask him how the matter stood, and
that he must needs certify the truth although much against his will, which being
known, it seemed to him very likely that he would be sharply rebuked for
permtting matters to be in that manner that they were. He wished him therefore
as a friend to consider well what he did, by reason he perceived that his Estate
upon this respect was in great hazard and ieopardy.

8. With this message Arimadono was at his wits end and almost besides
himself, seeing that it seemed to him he had already done almost all he could
against the Christians, and for that cause had deprived himself, by putting
some to death and sending others into banishment, of the best, most faithful
and ancient servants of his house. And thinking with himself that he should be
utterly undone, if Safioye did make such a Relation to the Xogun of him as he
said he would, he publicly protested, that he had now no Christians in his
house and that he therefore wondered very much any such reports should be made
of him. When he made this protestation he imagined that none would have
contradicted that which he had said, and so thereby he should sufficiently have
complied with Safioye. But some that thinking perhapps, that they had
obligation in that occasion to manifest themselves, answered him aloud and
said; yea, and if it please your Excellency there be ma^y Christians in your
house and those also that are very desirous to spend their blood for their
faith and religion: and there withal eight Gentlemen of the best note and
quality in all Arima did manifest themselves for Christians.

9. Arimadono was now much more grieved and afflicted then before, and caused
Safioye his letter to be showed them, desiring them for the love they bare unto
him, that they would accommodate themselves unto the time. They answered him
with courageous resolution, that in no case, and for no respect they could
condescend to his request therein. The day following which was upon the first
of October he called them all unto him, one by one and very earnestly, tears
accompaning his words, spoke unto them in this manner. My estate and honor
wholly stands at this present in your hands for as you cannot choose but know
I have many enemies who by this means do seek my utter overthrow. For the
love therefore that you bear me, I beseech you make but only some kind of show
before the Bonzo for one day, nay but for one hours space that you be no
Christians, and afterward do even as you please. To the rest of the Christians
you shall do a great good turn in doing so, for I with this will rest
satiffied and trouble no one man more, and if you do it not I shall be
compelled to proceed with rigor against the^ all. And although perhaps it be a
sin, you are not ignorant that S. Peter being an Apostle, yea the Chief of
them all, denied Christ, and yet afterward obtained pardon for it: much more
may you who do not deny him in your hearts nor yet for fear, but only make a
show to deny him, and that for a very little time, to conserve thereby a whole
Province and the Christians thereof in peace and quietness.

10. With these reasons and the like, five of the eight did yeald themselves
unto his will, and afterward he gave assault unto the other three, reducing
to their memory the many benefits they had received of his house and family: he
told them he meant to do them more, and that it was no reason for a thing that
might so easily be remedied to put in hazard his honor and estate. But they
answered him with such courageous constancy, grounded upon solid and
substantial reasons, that being out of hope to bring them to his beck, he
went presently to Nangasaqui to take his leave of Safioye, to tell him what he
had done, and take his further advise what afterward to do.

11. The three glorious Confessors of Christ returned very joyfully home,
confessed themselves immediately with one of the Society, and procured to
prepare themselves for martyrdom which now it seemed they were almost assured
of. And upon the fifth day of October came the sentence from Nangasaqui, that
they their wives and Children should be burned alive. The same day in the
afternoon it was notified unto them, and a certain house appointed them for
their prison, unto the which they went most willingly without any officer or
other person to carry or conduct them thither. The names of those that went in
this manner were these, Adrian Tacafati Mondo and Ioanna his wife, Leon
Fayaxida Lugutyemon and his wife Martha, with two children, James of eleauen
years of age and Magdalen of eighteen, a very virtuous virgin, who with the
license of her ghostly Father and good liking of her parents had made a vow of
her virginity some years before, Leon Taquendomi Canyemon, and Paul Canyemon
his son.

12. And together with these did two other valorous soldiers of Christ enter
into the prison to bear them company in dying for their faith, although
afterward they were put out from thence with no small grief unto their
hearts, because their names were not in the Catalogue. Only there was wanting
Monica the wife of Leon Taquendomi, with a daughter of hers of nine years old.
The reason of their absence was, because it was reported credibly to her that
the women should not be put to death, whereupon she and her daughter not
without many tears had before taken their leaves of her husband and son, and
they of them: but afterward Leon understanding the truth, he used means to
give her notice thereof, which when she knew, presently leaving her house, her
goods, and all she had, she came with her daughter running after him, but she
was stayed in the way, and carried by force unto the house of an ancient
Gentleman Uncle unto Arimadono, who because he had brought her up of a child,
would needs save her and her daughter from the fire. And although they were
both of them much afflicted therewith, and used many entreaties, that they
might be sent unto the prison with the rest, yet could they not by any means
obtain it. For which cause Monica that night leaped over a wall and so got out
of the house to go unto the prison, but being found by the watch, she was
hindered and carried back again.

13. Of those five which yealded to the entreaty of Arimadono, as I said
before, four of them falling soon after into consideration with themselves,
were exceeding sorry for their fault, and used all means possible to amend the
same. First therefore, they sought out (...) Father of the Society with whom
they ^id confess their sins; after their confession, they made a Catalogue
of the ^entes and goods they had, the which they gave unto the Governors,
saying that they from their childhood had been Christians, and how being
seduced by the intreatres of their Lord, they had showed frailty only for one
day, for the which they were exceeding sorrowful, and did repent themselves,
and so delivering unto them their goods, they went unto the prison, and would
have entered in, but were not permitted by the Officers. Agreeing therefore
among themselves they went all together into a house thereby, and from thence
they wrote a letter to the Bonzo Banzui, in which they did protest how they
were Christians, and did desire to dye for Christ, and that the frailty they
had showed proceeded of deceit, and that they were very sorry for it. Arimadono
returning from Nangasaqui and having knowledge of their repentance, commanded
they should be set free, and that they might live Christians. But they with
wondrous grief and sorrow not to have obtained their desire, causing their
head to be al shaven, in token that they meant to forsake the world, leaving
their houses, goods, and liuinges, did voluntarily banish themselves, to
expect some other where a better occasion to suffer for their faith.

14. As soon as the sentence was known and published that the three above
named with their wives and children should be burned, there was so great a
concourse of Christians to see that spectacle from all the towns and villages
therabout, that all the ways and streets were filled with men and women of all
ages, sorts, and qualities: and which is worthy to be noted amongst them all,
they being more then twenty thousand in number, there was not so much as one
only sword or other weapon whatsoever, it being an usual thing there for almost
every one to go with his weapons; but instead thereof every one had their
rosary or beads in their hands to pray upon, and nothing else; and many of them
came in such have, that they forgot their very meat, leaving also their houses
open, and not one to keep them or look unto them. Banzui the Bonzo for very
fear retired himself into the castle, and a certain disciple of his went in
all have to Nangasaqui, and there reported that the Christians were up in
rebellion, and that they had killed his Master. Safioye was much troubled with
this news, but the Governors did assure him that there was none there that had
any Arms, and that they did not so much as offer to make the least resistance
in the world. In so much that it being told them, that Arimadono had commanded
they should be driven from thence with musket shot, there was not one that
fled, or stirred, but with great silence and devotion there they stood all that
night praying on their beads, which every one held in his hands, setting
forth so many lights in every place, that the city of Arima seemed to be
another starry firmament.

15. So great was the joy of the holy prisoners and the thanks they gave unto
Almighty God to see themselves in that estate, that they could scarce contain
themselves through the great content they felt. That night they spent all in
prayer, disciplining themselves also all of them together. It was imagined
most convenient by some in authority, that they should be put to death
secretly, and their bodies to be hidden, partly for fear some violence would
be offered by the Christians, and partly because their Relics should not be
reverenced. But the Prefectes or Stewardes of the Confraternities hearing
thereof, came unto them and did assure both them and all the officers there
should be no disorder at all committed, and desiring them that supposing they
would not let them be companions to the other in their Martyrdo^e, yet at least
they might accompany them unto their death, the which was granted, And so
presently they caused to be made upon the Sea shore, a mile or thereaboutes
from the Castle, a little house with eight pillars of wood, putting in the
midest thereof and round about many boughs, and straw, and dry canes: and to
the end none might come near the said house they made a great pale round about
it.

16. The day following, which was upon the 7. of October, the Governors did
signify unto the designed Martyrs that, that very day the sentence should be
put in execution: and there with their joys were much increased, they giving
thousands of thanks unto Almighty God for so great a benefit. Those of the
Confraternity casting themselves down before their feet, did congratulate their
great happiness, and desired something of them for a relic and memory: But
they in all humble manner answered they feared they should not be worthy of so
great a good, entreating them to pray to God for their perseverance:
particulerly James the little child of nine years old, when any came to him to
congrarulate his happy lot, that he should be a martyr of Christ, he would run
away from them saying: I am not yet a Martyr. Me thinks I see the crown and
do desire it much, but as yet I have it not, and therefore it is yet to soon
to give me that honor and that name. They all of them put on their best
apparel therein to go unto their Martyrdom, and over them they had long white
garments like to surplices such as those of the Confraternity of Cochinotzu did
ordinarily use in their solemn feasts.

17. Now all of them being ready, those of the Confraternity to accompany them
unto the place of execution framed a procession, and such a one as the like
perhapps was never seen before: For that in the midst of a Nation and
country of Gentills and Infidells, there went more them twenty thousand
Christians every one with his beads in his hands, all desirous to be partaker
of the Martyrdom of those that then were to die. First of all there went many
of them before by six and six in a rank: then came the Martyrs, the hands of
the men being fast bound behind them, the women's loose. The little James
entreated very hard that they would tie his hands as they did the rest, and
scarce could they quiet him with telling him that there was never a cord to tie
them withal. They went one by one betwixt the Stewardes or Prefectes of the
Confraternity, with lighed candles in their hands in signification of the light
of faith in their minds and burning love of God in their hearts, and after them
a whole army of Christians, singing aloud the Letanies of our Blessed Lady. A
virtuous man one of those that went in the company, did offer to take up James
the little boy and to carry him in his arms, but he humbly refusing his
courtesy, said: I pray you let me go on foot, for our Blessed Savior Jesus
Christ I take it, neither went on horsbacke nor in a litter to be crucified,
and after this little labor I hope I shall have certain and eternal rest.
These words moved many that heard them unto tears, and made the good man take
up the holy Child by force, and so he carried him until he came unto the place
of Martyrdom.

18. Being come thither, whilst the Officers were busy in binding them to the
pillars of wood, at the which they were to be burned, many came to take their
leaves of them, and to get some parcells of their garments to keep as
Relics: In the mean while one of the Martyrs whose name was Leon Canyemo^
stood up, and spoke aloud in this manner: We be come hither, good people, to
dye in the manner you see for the honor and glory of Almighty God, and because
we know there is no other means, nor way unto salvation but only by the holy
Faith of Jesus Christ, and for it we ought not to make any reckoninge of this
present life. All you Christians that are come hither with so great fervor do
know this well enough, only therefore we desire you for a farewell that you
persevere in the confession of this faith, without making any account in respect
thereof of all that is in this world, no nor of your very lives. The rest which
he speak could not be well heard.

. After they were all bound to their pillars, the Christians lifted up aloft,
for the Martyrs and all the rest to look and meditate upon, a very devout
picture of our Blessed Savior as he was bound to the pillar. Then the
soldiers putting fire unto the wood and straw, the Holy Martyrs in the midst
thereof withal devotion called upon the help and favor of our Blessed Savior
oftentimes, to that end naming the most holy name of Jesus, and all the
Christians upon their knees did sing the Creed, the Pater noster, Aue Maria,
and other prayers until the Martyrs had given their Holy Souls into the
hands of God.

. James the little Child when the ropes were burned with which he was bound
unto his pillar, went treading upon the Coals toward his holy Mother,
without ever offering to go out of the fire as he might have done. As he went
he said three times aloud Jesus Maria, Jesus Maria, and his Mother said unto
him, look up my Child, look up into heaven; and so he did, and then fell
down and dyed. The Devotion also of his holy sister the Virgin Magdalen was
much noted of some, and very worthily, for when her hands were loosed, the
cords wherewith they had been bound being burned, she took the hoate burning
coals, and put them on her head (for it is the custom of the Iaponians when
they like any thing which is given them, to put it on their heads) in token
that she did esteem them as a Gatland of flowers, and as precious pearls,
wherewith being crowned and adorned, she desired, and meant to meet her
heavenly spouse, whom she loved above all other things, and therewithal she
gave her soul into his holy hands. Leon Canyemon making the sign of the
Cross, gave up the Ghost, and all of them made happy ends, their souls being
as it seemed more inflamed with the fire of the love of God, then their bodies
scorched with the heat of the material fire.

. The Christians who from the beginning, as I said before, were al upon their
knees in prayer, seeing that the holy Martyrs were now all dead, reverenced
their holy ashes, and without regard of the officers leaped into the fire, and
took out thereof the Blessed bodies, although thereby some of them received no
small hurt and damage by the fire. A man of worth got the hands of the holy
Virgin and Martyr Magdalen, and the Christians of Conzara got her body: the
other seaue^ were carried in Coffins to Nangasaqui, and there delivered to the
Father Prouincial of the Society of Jesus, and withal possible solemnity,
although not public, they were placed in their Church, the Bishop of Iapon,
Don Luis Cerquyera being there present at that time, and a little after the
body of the holy Virgin Magdalen was brought thither also, and laid with the
rest. So great was the devotion of the Christians, that they neither left
pillar, nor coals that they did not take away for Relics of them.

23. The Lord Bishop made an authentical information of all this history,
according to the custom of the Church, and out of it was drawn that which is
here related. A little after upon the 29. of October another man named Thomas
was put to death for the same cause. He had been banished eight years before
out of the Kingdom of Fingo for the faith of Christ, and at the present he had
care of the Christians of a certain town, and he did it with such care,
diligence, and fruit, that many at his persuasion did confess their faith
before the Judges, and for that cause Arimadono commanded him to be put to
death, the which he endured very willingly, and calling continually upon the
Blessed name of Jesus, made an happy end.

How this last persecution of all did begin: and of the causes thereof. CHAP. V.
MATTERS passing in the country of Arima in the manner before related, there
was all this while no change at all in the Cities of Meaco, Fuximi, and Ozaca,
nor in the Kingdom of Canga and Noto of Bungo and Fixen, nor in Aqui a City
of Firoxima, nor in Nangasaqui, and diverse other towns, nor in the Islands of
Xiqui, and Cozura: The Churches there stood open unto all, and Gods Word was
freely preached therein, although they were not without some fear and care to
see what that tempest which threatened some greater storm to come, would prove
at length. They celebrated in the year 1613. the Night of our Blessed Savior
his Nativity in all the places before mentioned, with great solemnity, concourse
and devotion of the Christians. And upon the 27. of December begone in Meaco the
first Thunder-clappe and sign of the future tempestuous storms; Itacuradono
the Governor of the City comanding that the names of all the Christians
should be taken and written down in a Catalogue, and the same was done in
Fuximi and Ozaca: the which caused no small trouble among the Christians,
especially they not knowing the cause and reason why it was so done, until at
length there came two letters, the one from Safioye, the other from Xozamburo
both of them great favorites of the Xogun. The first was directed to the Father
Rector of the Society of Jesus in Meaco, the second to another Christian a very
friend of his, both of them dated from the Court upon the eleauenth Moon: and
the contents were, that it had been signified unto the Xogun, that the
Christian Religion was such, that those that did profess it, did neither obey
nor esteem of their Masters, Lords, nor Princes, and that they did adore men
put to death for Malefactors, took their flesh and bones for Relics (as they
termed them) and wore them at their necks. And for proof thereof they related
all that had passed about those Christians which had been burnt at Arima,
signifying that it had so been told unto him. And that moreover very many
Christians did of late publicly adore a man that for his rust deserts was
crucified in Meace. For all which he being much offended said, that, that
Religion which teaches such doctrine, is doubtless of the Druell, and
therefore could not be tolerated in Iapone. In the end they said that they were
very sorry to send them so bad news, but yet could not choose but let them
understand thereof.

2. This blow did grieve the Christians very much, and to the end they might
better understand how the matter went, and procure some remedy thereof, after
they had consulted amongst themselves, they sent unto the Court a Brother of
the Society, a man very expext and intelligent, with intention that Father
Rector should also go thither to that end soon after him, Safioye had notice
thereof, and meeting with the Brother reprehended him exceedingly, telling him
moreover, that now there was no remedy, for that the Xogun had given express
Command that not one of all those that taught the religion of Christ, whether
they were strangers or borne in the Country, should remain in all Iapone, and
that therefore he should return immediately unto Meaco from whence he came.

3. The truth of the matter was, that when Safioye came unto the Court he found
that many there talked very much of the 28. Martyrs that had been there put to
death in the Month of August last past, as also of the great constancy of
those that in Arima chose rather to be burned alive, then for one only hour
deny their faith: of the courage likewise of those Christians that went thither
to see that spectacle, offering to dye with them, and how they reverenced their
Relics. Some said it was too great a cruelty, and that it had been enough at
the most to have banished them and consiscated their goods: whereupon Safioye
and others partly through the hatred they bare unto the faith of Christ, and
principally for the excusing of their own cruelties, did defame the Christians
unto the Xogun, as disobedient, stubborn and rebellious people, that they did
not fear death, but rather did desire to be put to death as Malefactors, and
that they do esteem and adore such like persons; and a brother of Safioye did
give this reason thereof, because said he, Christ whom they hold for their
Lord and Savior did dye upon a Cross as a Malefactor.

4. But this proceeded from the late death of a Christian that was crucified in
this manner. Seven persons were condemned to death in Meaca, for having bought
uncoined silver, as it seems, against some law of the country to that effect.
Six of them were Gentills and the seventh was a Christian. The Gentills were
beheaded, the Christian was crucified. Many people according to the custom of
all places went to see the execution, and when the Christian gave up the Ghost,
the Christians that were present kneeled down upon their knees to commend his
soul unto God; and thereupon some of the Gentills, malicious persons, took
occasion to give out that they did adore him that was crucified. And to excuse
their cruelty toward those of the Province of Arima, they exagerated the
matter, saying that if one only Province was so obstinate, that there was no
remedy to make them obey neither their Prince nor the Xogun, what would it be
if the greater part of Iapone were Christians, as already they were very many
in Meaco? adding withal that as long as the Fathers were permitted in Iapone,
it was not possible there should be any remedy therein.

5. These and the like things they did paint out, and exaggerate in such
manner to the Xogun and the Prince his son, who before were nothing well
affected, but rather auerted from the Christians by reason of the false
reports of the Gentills and Heretics; that they resolved to banish all the
Fathers out of Iapone, and cruelly to persecute the Christians thereof: saying,
that the Fathers as being strangers and religious persons were not much to be
blamed for preaching of their religion, seeing it was their office and
profession so to do; but that every Prince and Lord were worthy to be blamed
that did permit the^ to live and preach in their Countries; and much more the
Christians there, that gave ear unto them, and did more esteem of the
doctrine that was taught them by a few strangers, then of that with their
ancestors had professed, and their Princes did embrace and command to be
believed and followed, and that therefore they did only banish the Fathers
without doing them any other hurt, or harm, but only depriving them of their
Churches and Houses: whereas those that were free Denizens should be secretly
punished if they did not obey. And so the Catalogue was first to know how many
Christians there were in those places, and then by that to procure that they
should all of them leave their faith: which was the self same manner they had
used before with those of Yendo.

6. All possible diligence was used by the Christians to see if they could by
any means make the Xogun capable of the truth of matters falsely feigned
against them, and to give him a true Information of the Catholic faith. But
the Princes of Iapone are of that nature and disposition that if once in any
thing they be resolved, they scarce ever afterward do change their minds;
neither is there almost any that will, or dare make intercession unto them for
another, although it be in a matter the most just that may be, especially if
the enemies of that person be in favor with the Prince, and themselves be not
to receive some benefit by the business. Whereupon it came to pass upon the 12.
of February 1614. that notwithstanding all the means that could be wrought,
there was an express order made that all the Fathers in Iapone, with all those
that did belong unto them should be sent to Nangasaqui, and there delivered
unto their Superiors, and unto the Governors of the City, and that their
Churches, and houses should be cast down.

7. Upon the 14 of the same month this order was notified unto the Fathers of
the Society of Meaco, for that there was no other Church but theirs in that
City, and they were required to give up a Catalogue of the names of all the
Fathers, Brethren, and Doxucos, or Seminaristes, as also of the servants they
had, to the end that none of them should remain behind. But because it was
very necessary that some should stay secretly there for the help of the
Christians of that City, and of other towns and villages there about, of
eight Fathers they put only three in the Catalogue, and of seven Brethren
other three, and of 20. Seminaristes only six.

8. Those three Fathers and their company were banished out of Meaco upon the
21. of February, and there was an infinite concourse of Gentills to see them
(for the Christians were not permitted by the officers to go;) some mocked at
them, others took compassion of them, considering the innocence wherewith they
had lived amongst them so many years. When they were come into Fuximi they
found the Fathers of the holy Order of S. Francis that did dwell there already
put in baotes ready to depart, and there they were all delivered to a servant
of the Governor of Meaco, that was appointed to carry them to Nangasaqui. Down
the river they went and came to Ozaca before the break of day, and there were
joined unto them others of the Society, and of S. Francis his order that did
dwell in that City, as also another Father with others of the Society that
were brought from the Kingdoms of Canga and Noto: so that upon the 25. of that
month there departed from Ozaca a reasonable fleet of banished persons for the
faith of Christ.

9. Before their departure Father Rector did offer unto the Governors of Meaco
and Ozaca a memorial in which he answered to the false calumniations which
were raised against the Christian faith and Religion, desiring them they would
show it unto the Xogun, and inform him of their innocenty. Both of them did
read it, and said that which was therein contained stood with very great reason,
and that they thought that if the Xogun did se it he would desist from
persecuting the Christians. By the same order that those already mentioned,
were also banished the Fathers of the Society that dwelt in Firoxima, and in
the Kingdoms of Aqui, Bingo, Bungo, and Figen, of the country of Omura, the
Islands of Xiqui, and Conzura, as also before had been in the years 1612. and
1613. those of Bugen Chicugo, Chicugen, together with the Fathers of S.
Augustins order of Vsuqui, and the Fathers of S. Dominicke of the Kingdom of
Fijcn. Finally in all Iapone there did not remain so much as one Church which
was not cast down and destroyed, all the Religious men being brought to the
port of Nangasaqui, except some few that lay hidden and went secretly disguised
in diverse parts.

10. The Society had at that time in Nangasaqui four several Residences, the
College and Seminary all in one, the Misericordia, the Hospital, and the
house of All Saints, and other two they had not far from thence: there were
also three Couentes there, one of S. Augustine his order, another of S.
Dominicke, and the third of S. Francis. There were moreover four parish
Churches of secular Priests that were Iaponians borne, besides other lesser
Chappells. The number of the Churches that were destroyed in all parts of
Iapone, may be gathered by that which the Society alone did loose in the year
1612. when the persecution did but begin in Arima (although it were not
universal) which were fourscore and seven Residences, Churches, and
Chappells. It would be to tedious a matter to write in particular all the
molestations and vexations which the Christians received upon this occasion,
together with their valor, courage, patience and constancy therein, the which
is nothing diminished by the frailty which some exteriourly did show, seeing
that it is no nouelty that some in all places be not so constant in religion as
they should: even in Europe it self where Christian Religion most florisheth,
and is of most continuance we have to many examples thereof, yea and which is
more in the very primitive Church of Christ, there never wanted some, that were
unconstant, cowardly, to too fearful, and faint hearted.

Of that which happened in Meaco and Ozaca. CHAP. VI.
MEACO is the most populous and ancient City of Iapone, and the ordinary Court
of the Dayri, who by right is the true Lord of all those Kingdoms. It is the
very well spring and fountain of all the Idolatry of that country, and has in
it many Temples and Bonzoes. Fuximi is another City distant six miles from
Meaco, although it be now almost joined with the suburbs thereof. It was
builded by Taycosama the predecessor of the Xogun that now reigns, who has
there a goodly great fortress, and it is his Garrison town for the parts of
Camy. There he has continually 6000. soldiers under the charge of 4.
Captains, and the General of them all is Oquindono who is his own brother.
Ozaca is 20. miles lower down the river toward the West, and is also a very
populous City, has many goodly Palaces in it, and one of the best fortresses
if not the best of all Iapone. Taycosama did build it, and his son Fideyor
does dwell in it to this day, Sacay is six miles more toward the South, and the
Inhabitants thereof be all Merchantes and Tradesmen.

2. In every one of these Cittyes there were good store of Christians, and all
of them, especially those of Meaco and Ozaca, where were the greater number,
hearing of this news did endeavor to move themselves to fervor and devotion.
The two Governors Itacuradono and Ichinocami did desire to put as few
Christians into the Catalogue as might be, partly because they saw it was a
manifest miustice that was intended toward them, and partly least they
themselves should be blamed and rebuked for that there were so many. But all
the Christians, even the very Children, would needs have their names written
in the Catalogue; for that in Meaco alone there were at that time more then
four thousand, whose names were taken. Some there were that were then but only
disposing of themselves in Catechizing to be Christians, and were not yet
baptized, that did put in their names among the rest, and more then threescore
at that very time were baptized, notwithstanding all the troubles likely to
ensew, affirming that they should hold themselves for very happy to die in so
holy a religion: and among the rest an ancient woman of threescore and ten
years old, that had very often resisted unto Gods calling and holy
inspirations given her to be a Christian, a very little before the departure of
the Fathers was baptized, to the great contentment of her self, and all her
Christian freindes.

3. There was a little Child in Sacay who saying to his parents that he would
be a Martyr with them, and they telling him, that if he could not suffer a
little spark of fire on his hand, how would he suffer greater torments, he
took a hot burning iron to try it in his hand if he could endure it: his
parents detayned him, but could not quiet him until they promised him they
would carry him with them when they went to die.

4. There was another young youth nephew to a certain Bonzo whose Temple and
Benefice he was to have inherited, and because he made himself a Christian,
his own Father hung him by the feet and whipped him cruelly, but for all that*
he would never leave insisting that they should put his name down in the
Catalogue of Christians, because he was he said a Christian, and so would live
and die. For which cause his Father did disinherite him, and violently thrust
him out of his house, and he went imediatly to the Fathers of the Society,
making earnest suite to go away with them.

5. All this time there was an extraordinary concourse of the Christians unto
the Churches, notwithstanding all the floutes and mockes, and reprehensions of
the Gentills: much frequenting of the Sacraments and prayer, and the prayer of
forty hours was almost continually kept in many places: and it was the
general care of al by means of these holy exercises and diverse penances they
did, to prepare themselves to dye. They were much grieved to depart from their
spiritual Fathers and masters, not knowing whether they should ever see them
again or no, and so great and griuous was their lamentation for this respect,
that the very Gentills took great pity and compassion both of them and the
Fathers also, saying publicly, that the officers that hindered them, did them
great wrong and injury not to let them go in their company, seeing they did so
much desire it.

6. Upon the 16 of February Sangamidono one of the principal Captains and
Tutor to the Prince of Yendo came to Meaco with a hundred and fifty horsemen,
and many more on foot under pretense to pull down the Churches, and destroy
the Christians, although as we shall see hereafter the Xogun had another
intention therein. The next day following, he commanded to cast down the Church
and House of the Society, and to carry the wood thereof to the river side,
making a Proclamation that all that would not deny their faith should be burned
with that wood, and that every one should prepare his pillar of wood whereunto
to be tied when they should be burned. Many immediately got them pillars and set
them ready at their doors, others that had no money to buy them withal, sold
some of their househould stuff, because when the time came they would not be
without them.

7. And they in this manner expecting the happy day of Martyrdom, the foresaid
wood was commanded to be burned publicly, together with the wood of two other
Chappells, and of the Churches of Ozaca, Fuximi, and Sacay to the great grief
and affliction of all the Christians, and thereby they came to understand, that
all that had been done was only to terrify and put them into a fear. For
Sangamidono and the Governors of Meaco and Ozaca seeing their invincible
courage, determined first of all to assault them by means of their freindes,
neighbors and kindred, and if that did not prevail, then to disgrace some of
them publicly, and to blot out of the Catalogue the names of others either by
force, or by deceit, to comply in that manner with the Xogun; thinking to give
him notice only of those that were in their judgments most rebellious and
obstinate.

8. Presently hereupon the neighbors, friends, and kinsfolks of the Christians
begone to enter in troops into their houses, some breaking down and tearing
in pieces the pictures of our Savior and his Saints, some taking away their
beads and Agnus Deis, and all other signs of Christianity they found: others
partly with threats, partly with entreaties and importunities, insisting that
at the least they would consent that their names might be blotted out of the
Catalogue. This Combat did endure a good while and diverse were the euentes
thereof. Few were overcome: a great number either by force or by decept had
their names blotted out of the Catalogue: and the most constant were miserably
vexed and afflicted.

9. There was in Meaco a certain street called the street of the Christians,
because all that dwelt therein (except one only family) were so, with these they
used extraordinary diligence to make them leave their faith, and because they
could not prevail with them, they banished two families as heads of all the
rest, and then in the sight of their husbands and fathers they put 27. persons,
women and Children, into certain sackes of straw into the which they use to
put their rice, and tying them with cords round about from top to toe, they
cast them one upon another, as though they had been sackes of corn, and
afterward, because they should not be smothered, they laid them in the
streets upon the ground, leaving them so for all men to behold a whole day and
a night, in exceeding cold weather and snow, with men to keep them, who
continually did importune them that they would yeald at least in something or
other. But for all this, and all they could do, they could not overcome them.
Yea other children there were that wept and cried very seriously, because they
were not put and tied in sackes as their mothers and their sisters were; and to
quiet them there was no other way but to put them in, where withal the
Gentills did remain astonished.

10. The day following the Judges did return, and affirming that the husbands
of those women were not men, seeing they were not moved with the disgrace and
punishment of their wives and children, they commanded they women to be loosed,
and the men to be tied in the sackes, and put to the same torment that their
wives were put unto the day before, threatening them that if they did not deny
their faith they would cause them to be carried in that manner upon a staff
through all the streets of the city, to their public shame ignominy and
disgrace. But by the grace of God they made small reckoning of their threats.
Then came there thither a great troop of Gentills, who first, giving them many
reproachful words and speeches, did afterward entreat the Judges that they
would deliver the^ into their custody, and that they in their houses would give
the^ such counsel, as should be convenient for them. And so it was agreed,
because indeed they were loath to fill the prisons full of Christians; whose
words in all this time were nothing but protestations, that they would so
remain (by the assistance of the holy Chost) until their dying day.

11. Near unto the Church of Meaco there lived in a house all together very
recollectedly diverse Gentlewomen that had made vows of Chastity in the company
of a noble Lady called Iulia, sister unto Don John Naytodono, of whom shortly
we shall make mention. This Lady remaining widow after the death of her husband
who was a principal Lord of the Kingdom of Tamba, left the world being yet a
Gentile to be a Bicuni, which is a kind of religious life among the Gentills,
and so she remained for the space of fourteen years, living in great poverty
and penance, spending her time in doing many heathenish rites and ceremonies,
for the which she was greatly esteemed of many of the most noble Ladies of all
the Land, and of all of that sect which she professed, although the longer she
lived in that fashion the less quietness she found in her Conscience. It
pleased Almighty God to open her eyes as another Lydia in the acts of the
Apostles by hearing the sermons of the Catechism which were preached by a
Brother of the Society who was a Iapenian borne: and allthough her ancient
custom and the speech of the world weighed very much, and were great
impediments to hinder her conversion, yet the grace and calling of Almighty God
being more potent and powerful, within a short time she came to see the error
of the Iaponian Sects wherein she had been very conversant, and to know the
truth of our holy Christian and Catholic Religion, and was baptized by F.
Organtino of the Society of Jesus in the year 1596. after which diverse
persecutions were raised against her by the Bonzos for leaving of their sect;
and because she had burned certain Idols which they esteemed very much, they
procured the Xogu^ to made enquiry after her, to punish her therefore; and upon
that occasion she was forced to live secretly diverse years. She gave herself
wholly to devotion and became thereby to be so good a Christian and so
spiritual, that she together with her company did exceeding much good among
the Gentills, teaching the Christian Religion to diverse Ladies and Gentlewomen
whom they visited, to whom no man could possibly have any entrance or access,
and by her means many souls were delivered from the Devils power, and her
house was as it were a place of refuge for the Christian women, such was her
virtue, such her wisdom, such the good example she gave to all.

12. The Judges together with the Governors Nephews were five days in
endeavoring to make these good Gentlewomen leave faith, sometimes by fair
means somtymes by foul; and finally for a conclusion they told them that
having understood that the Christians did desire to dye for their religion,
they were resolved not to fulfill their desires therein, but otherwise to
afflict them by all means possible, and afterward cause then to be carried
naked through the streets of Meaco to their public shame, and then to banish
them into diverse parts, so that they should never see one another more, and to
such places where they could not live as Christians, and that all this they
might easily remedy with dissembling a little exteriourly, and consenting that
their names might be blotted out of the Catalogue. They answered they would
not, and that if they did blot out their names by force, they would publicly
proclayme that they were Christians.

13. The Judges went away, and the good Gentlewomen afterward did expect
every moment when the officers would come: at length there came a whole troup
of them, and the holy women went out to meet with them, each carrying a sack
in her hand, into which presently the officers did thrust them, and bynd them
so hard that they could neither move hand nor foot, and then they tied them to
staves and so carried them upon their shoulders through the streets accompanied
with many armed men. The people came all out of their houses to see them, some
mocking at them and abusing them, others admiring at their constancy. They put
them in a public place without the City, where they use to execute Justice
upon malefactors, and their they remained all that day and the next, exposed to
the could and snowy weather. Great abundance of people went thither to see
them, and among the rest a certain Bonzo, who coming full of pride and
presumption said unto them, that they were ignorant women, that they should
rely upon him who was a learned man, and that he would take upon him their
salvation: they laughing at his folly gave him no other answer, that being
sufficient to confound his proud presumption. Certain Gentills did procure to
deliver one of them, and by force did carry her from thence unto her Fathers
house, but she went all the way crying out aloud, I am a Christian, I am a
Christian, and when they let her go she took up the sack and the ropes
wherewith she had been tied in her hands, and never ceased (running through
more then ten streets, till she came again to the place where her companions
were, and there she made her self to be bound again as they were, to both her
own and their great joy, confort and content. The next day the Judges sent
word to loose and let them go, but they understanding that it was a devise
thereby to give out to the world that they had now yealded, they said, We are
Christians, and will not go from hence, unless you go proclaiming that we will
not leave our holy faith and Religion, and if you will not do so, let us
remain here until we die. As they required so was it done, for they took,
and tied them, and carried them back again through the same streets they
brought them, proclayming that they still remained Christians, and themselves
likewise did proclaim the same saying all the way, we are Christians, we are
Christians. They brought them to a house of a certain Christian, and there
they left them giving them back again their beads, and Agnus Deis.

14. Others were in other streets likewise put into sackes, and among the rest
one that was named Benet showed particular fervor in that action: for being
put into a sack within his own house, and so tied that he could not move, he
cried out unto them, that they should put him in the street for all to see him
so, and at length he obtained his request, but it was in such sort that his
face was covered: he was much grieved thereat, for his desire was to be mocked
and reproached for Christ's cause: and because they would not discover him,
having oftentimes entreated them, he himself with his head and teeth by force
made means to discover his face, which when the officers perceived they
carried him in again, and put him into a strong prison of wood, so strait
that they could scarce put any meat in to hin. There he remained until he was
banished. This torment of tying in the sackes was so great, that most of them,
or all did fall sick thereof.

15. In Ozaca was the same affliction and persecution as in Meaco, and the
constancy of the Christians there no less then in the other place. Those that
went abroad about any business left at home in writing how they were Christians,
and that if there were any torments to be inflicted for being so, they would
return presently to suffer them. Others that were abroad when the news was
told them of the persecution, left presently their business for the same end.
Some young youths were most cruelly whipped by their parents for being
Christians, and shut up without any meat at all for a long time. Then arose a
report that upon a certain day, at such an hour, the Christians should be put
to death, in such a market place. Whereupon diverse of them did begin to give
all that they had unto the poor: and upon the day appointed before the hour
came, there were more then three hundred come and expected in the place, and
many more there would have been, had they not been then by force deteyned by
their freindes and kinsfolks. Fifty and eight were put in sacks in the manner
before rehearsed and so carried through the streets, unto a great bridge upon
the river, where they were left fast bound and diverse persons appointed to
keep them; the rest were beaten away with cudgells, yet as they went, they did
not cease to make public profession of their faith, saying, We are Christians.

16. Amongst those that were put in sackes there were some Gentlemen of good
worth who had thrust themselves into the thronge among the common people,
because they would not be favored nor exempted: and a Nephew of the chief
Lord of the Kingdom of Aua, whose name was John Xirey mon and his wife
Magdalen no less noble then he, she being then very great with child and
ha^ing been banished a year and a half before thither for then faith, were
both of them there also in the market place among the other Christians.

17. That very night certain Gentills came and asked that those that were put
in sackes might be given unto them, and that they would be their suerties, but
the Christians refused their courtesy, because it might be thereupon suspected
that they had yealded to something that they ought not to have done: at length
they let go the ordinary people and put 24. of the better sort into diverse
prisons.

18. In a town near unto Ozaca the Gentills did take a Christian, and because
he would not deny his faith, they first pulled of all his clothes, bound him to
a pillar, and for two days together they burned him by little and little with
dry reeds and straw (the which they use instead of torches) so that he could
not die of it, because they would not do him the favor to make him dye for
Christ as he desired: and being not able to overcome him with all they could do
to him, they banished him together with other of his kindred that were
Christians.

19. The fury of this persecution did endure for ten days space, and at the
end thereof, there came from the Court letters in which the Xogun did declare
Sangamidono for a Traitor, and commanded that he should imediatly be banished
into the Kingdom of Omi, and that he spared his life in regard he had been
his Captain so long time. And this was the reward of all his malice against
the Christians. And it was afterward proved, that, that very day in which he
pulled down the Churches, that very day was his Castle of Ondauara seized on
and all his lands and liuinges which were very great, confiscated. The
Gentills themselves some of them did note how soon he was punished for his
cruelty.

. For conclusion of this Chapter I think it will not be amiss, to relate a
witty and pleasant prognostication which as they say was made in Meaco at this
time, by a Gentill, one of their Southsayers. For he casting a figure upon this
manner of proceeding, never seen before of putting the Christians into sackes,
said these words: The sackes be of Rice, and Rice is a seed that multiplyeth
very much: asigne, that though they press the Christian never so much, they
will greatly multiply. The Gentills made a lest at it: but some Christians
thought that perhaps there was a greater mystery therein then was imagined.

Of some in Meaco, Ozaca, and Fuximi that were banished for Christian religion,
and others imprisoned. CHAP. VII.
THE Christians of Meaco and Ozaca remained prisoners, a month. But how great
their valor courage and deuption was therein may well be gathered out of a
letter which one of them wrote unto a Father of the Society in this form: Upon
the eight day of this Moon they brought me unto this prison, with my wife and
three Children: I beseech you remember me in your holy Sacrifices, and obtain
for me by your prayers of Almighty God, perseverance. We are not unmindful of
those good consideratio^s which you taught us: and although we be miserable
sinners, yet we do our endeavor every day to communicate spiritually,
remembering our selves of the holy Sacrifice of the Mass. We do also give
thanks daily unto Almighty God for his exceeding benefitts. We fear no
persecution, nor esteem our lives in any thing at all; and this strength which
we find and feel within our selue, we acknowledge it for Gods favor, and the
fruit of your care in teaching us, and we give you than^kes for all. I
understand that all our companions stand very steadfast in their faith, of the
which we are exceeding glad: we are not forgetful of them neither day nor
night. And so once more desiring you would comend us to Almighty God, and give
us your, blessing, I end.

2. After this came the Xoguns sentence in which he commanded that all the
prisoners with their wives and Children should be banished to Taugaru, which is
at the end of al Iapone, a very cold Country, over against Tartaria, and
scarce inhabited, and that those Gentlewomen which lived all together in one
house in Meaco, should be sent with other seven or eight to Nangasaqui to be
banished from thence out of Iapone, and that those whose names were blotted out
of the Catalogue should be compelled to follow some of the Sects of Iapone.
There were joined together from Meaco and Ozaca upon the 13. of April
threescore and thirteen, who were delivered unto two Captains to be carried
into banishment: but they seeing them to be so many, and that some of them were
known to be worthy and noble Captains, were afraid to take the charge of them
so long away: and therefore they entreated Itacuradono, that either he would
command irons and fetters to be put upon them, or else some mark with fire to be
made in their for heads whereby they might be known, and taken again in case
they fled away from them. Itacuradono laughing at them, said: It seems you do
not know them, nor the willingness and contentment with which they go into
banishment. I should be very glad I could deteyn the^ for the compassion I have
of them. Go with security, for those that go in the manner that they do, will
not run away I warrant you. Take my word, for I know them very well.

3. It so happened, that the Officers bringing threescore and thirteen horses
for them to ride upon unto a place where they were to take shipping, one horse
was overplus by reason that a little boy that was one of the forsaid number
being hidden by his kinsfolks, was wanting: and the Officers reflecting upon
it and saying that one of them was wanting, a young youth that was come thither
to take his leave of some of those that were to go into banishment, hearing
them, stepped out and said; Here I am, take no care there is none wanting, and
saying so, he leaped upon the spare horse, and with great content went along
with the rest into banishment.

4. They went all in a row one after another, most of them very richly
apparelled, and exceedingly content. Whereat many of the Gentills wondered not a
little, seeing that in their conceit they had reason rather to show grief
then any contentment at all in that occasion. Diverse Christians accompanied
them to Otzu, with tears and a kind of holy envy, emulating their happiness in
suffering that which they did for Christ. And they all that way went aminating
those that were to return and remain there behind, not to show any weakness,
frailty or cowardice in Gods cause, nor to fear neither loss of goods nor
life, seeing that all in comparison of everlasting life is but of small, or of
no account.

5. The Fathers of the Society that lived at that time secretly and disguised
in Meaco, the better thereby to help the Christians, did very much desire to
have accompanied these their Ghostly children, but it being both necessary for
the greater good of others not to discover themselves, and dangerous to do it,
they therefore sent a good Christian, a Iaponian borne, unto them in their
names, a man of much virtue and great confidence to help and animate them in
their journey, who willingly with all his heart did undertake that care, being
indeed himself desirous to dye with them. They stayed in the port until the
midst of May, expecting wind to sail the Northern Seas. Thither in that time
many Christians went to visit them, and by a letter which one of them wrote
unto a Father of the Society of Ozaca may be gathered the manner of their
going, and how they did behave themselves: thus he wrote.

6. Upon the 22. of the third Moon (which was upon the 30. of April) I went
to visit the banished persons which then were in Tzurunga: and I remained so
edified by them, that I do assure you I felt in myself extraordinary shame and
confusion, accompanied together with devotion. All of them both men and women
had caused the hair of their heads to be shaven of: every day three several
times they made their prayer altogether, and at every time they spent an hour
therein: they had so distributed matters among themselves, that every one did
some office or other to help and serve the rest. When they came to Tzurunga,
they were all put in a great warehouse, the doors fast locked upon them, and
there they passed all that night upon the cold bare ground: and exceeding glad
they were that therein they did in some manner imitate the martyrs, of whose
afflictions and torments they did discourse amongst themselves. The night
following they had given them two matts to lie and sleep upon: their meat
whilst they remained there, was a little rice with pottage made of certain
herbs, that were (God knows) of an unpleasant taste. The Captains that
conducted them said once unto them: Because you were many and most of you
skillfull in matters of arms, we made some difficulty at the first to
undertake your conductio^, but now seeing your manner of proceeding, we see we
had no reason at all to fear. And verily with this resolution you have showed
in choosing rather to be banished then leave your faith, you have given an
evident testimony that it is the truth, and the right way unto salvation: and
if you had not done so, you had put a great blot upon your religion, and given
testimony that all which it teaches were false and untrue: and doubtless if
the prohibition of the Prince were not so strict as it is, we would he are the
sermons of so good and holy a doctrine. This and much more I might write unto
you, of that which the Captains said, moved with their good example. Hitherto
the letter.

7. They departed afterward from that port, and arrived safey at the place
whereunto they were banished, and there as was after signified, they were well
received and also helped by the Prince thereof. The Gentlewomen whereof I spoke
before, together with others were sent in banishment to Nangasaqui, where they
were relieved by the charity of the Confraternities, especially by that of the
Misericordia. Some also were banished at this time from Fuximi. There was also
one Peter a were grave man and an ancient soldier much respected by Oquindono
the Xoguns Brother, who had endeauored much to make him leave his faith, and
not obteyning it, he sent him word that it was the Xoguns pleasure, that there
should not remain one Christian in all Iapone; that the Fathers were now
banished and the Churches destroyed; and that he could do no less but banish
him if he did not leave to be a Christian: to which he answered: I did not make
my self a Christian because there be Fathers or Christians in Iapone, but
because I knew there was no other way to save my soul. I am very sorry that
they are banished, and that the Churches be destroyed: but yet I know that he
that brought the from the furthest parts of the world hither, can more easily
bring the^ again from Macan and Iuson which is nearer. The Xogun can do no
more but put them out of his Country for his own time: and if he will banish
me also, I shall find God I am sure wheresoever I go, for he is I know in all
places wheresoever. And for conclusion he desired him not to speak any more
unto him about that business, but either banish him, or command him to be put to
death: and so both he and other soldiers of worth that gave like answers were
banished with their families, their goods, and livings being all consiscated.

8. Amongst the Citizens of Fuximi was most persecuted one Mark Mangobioye a
man of good account and much esteemed of the Governors, and other of the Xoguns
favorites; they used extraordinary diligence to make him relent, but not being
possible they banished him withal his family unto Nangasaqui. He told them he
did accept of it, but yet that was no banishment seeing they sent him thither
where the Fathers were. Some friends of his that were Gentiles did secretly
entreat the Governors that they they would dissemble with him for a while, and
that they would be his suerties that he should conform himself. The Governors
were very well content withal, but he having notice thereof went unto them
saying, That he was a Christian, and that he would not leave to be so for all
the world, and that therefore they might resolve either to kill him, or banishe
him as they pleased.

9. They were much griued thereat but there being no other remedy they sent him
to Nangasaqui, doing him the favor not to confiscate his goods. Scarce was he
arrived there, it being 200. leagues from whence he went, but there came
letters unto him from Meaco that Marina his wife and her little daughter should
presently return to Fuximi, but not signifiyng wherefore, nor for what cause
it was. They were all much troubled therewith, and very loath to part one from
the other, but yet for all that they returned according to the command both of
them with great resolution first cutting off their hair. The Governors did
intend either by threats or flatteries to make Marina yeald at least a little,
and then by her means win her husband to their will, but she answered very
constantly, that although they should kill her, or make her a slave to be a
drudge all the days of her life in a kitchen, she would not change her mind.
The Governors with this so unexpected answer remained as it were astonished,
for they thought infallibly that she would easily yeald, seeing her self
alone, without her husband, and forsaken of her friends, and thereupon they
let her go: and she and her daughter returned both very joyful to Nangasaqui
having now made three iorneyes each of them 200. leagues a piece.

10. In Meaco the officers had blotted out the names of diverse Christians in
the Catalogue, of some by force, of others by fraudulent, and deceiptfull
means, the parties themselves some of them openly repugning thereunto; others
being content to wink thereat, but having afterward great scruple of
Conscience, they went unto two public Officers, called Choday, protesting
unto them that they were, and are still Christians, and that it was contrary to
their wills that their names were put out of the Catalogue, leaving with them
in writing their names and the streets wherein they dwelt. One of the Choday
dissembled the matter with them, and bad them, if they were Christians, they
should be wary for fear of the Xogun. The other was more rigorous, and caused
thereupon Peter Chobieye, Gyroyemon, Riyem^n, and others to the number of 13.
to be put in prison Peter and his mother were banished to Tz^gara for their
faith; the rest after many assaults were carried together with their wives and
children before the Gouerner, where a principal person stepping forth and
asking them why they naming once left their faith, did not perform their
words and keep their promise, but returned again to profess that which once
they had forsaken: This is the cause (said they) why we come hither to let you
and all the world know, that we never left to be Christians, and that for our
religion we are ready to suffer torments, yea and death it self. Thereupon
they laid hold on them al, and bound them with such cruelty that their hands,
their neekes, and arms did swell exceedingly: and Itacuradono, fearing that
all the Christians would do the same that they had done, did reuyle them
bitterly and told them, that if they did not obey he would command that the men
should be carried about the streets to public shame, and the women to the
stews: and they all answering that they would never obey in that matter,
presently they took the women and carried them to the foresaid place, and the
men through the principal streets with a great and strange tumultuous noise,
and upon a little board, in a paper, their sentence written thus: For being
Christians having once left their faith; the which was false. But so they left
them tied all that day in a certain little market place for all to laugh and
mock at them, and within few hours after John Yos^yemon and James Mangaxichi
were taken and carried in the same manner.

11. Three of the Seminary of the Fathers of the Society went to them imediatly
to animate and encourage them, and another went to the street called the
Christians street, to warn all to make the prayer of Forty Hours to God for
their perseverance. That night they were carried back again to prison, and
there they lay with irons at their necks. The next day they were carried to
the bridge of their street, there to be tied to the posts of it, and because
the officers should use no mercy toward them, the Judge said unto them: Look
that you do as I command you, for the Governor is exceeding angry that you tied
them so gently this last night, that two or three of them has not the skin
rubbed of from their necks with the ropts. Tie them hard enough, and if they
dye of it, it makes no matter, I will bear you harmless. With this the
officers used them most cruelly, and tied them up so high that they did scarce
touch the ground with the tipps of their toes, bynding moreover their necks so
strait that they were almost strangled. Three days they used them in this
fashion, the Gentills and the Bonzos coming thither continually to persuade
them to accommodate themselves unto the time: but they little regarding their
persuasions said unto them: Look upon us, and understand that to suffer that
which we do willingly, and with the joy you see is a sufficient sign, that in
our religion there is means of salvation. After they had done all this with
them, they carried them back again to prison, in which from July of the year
1614. until March 1615. when this Relation was written they did remain
suffering with great constancy in their faith, and joy in their afflictions.

12. The valor of their wives and daughters in that infamous place whereto
they were sent, was in my mind worthy eternal memory, for to the end that no
man that looked upon them should lust after or desire them, many of them did
disfigure their own faces, making them all on a gore blood, with little
wounds they made in them. For which cause their hands were after tied; but
the Christians used a good devise to get them out of that place to be kept in
the house of an honest Christian, where they did hitherto remain firm in
faith and constant in their good purposes. With these and the like examples
those Christians that had showed some weakness before, were moved to do penance
for their fraylty and inconstancy, and afterward to be more constant and
courageous, as in particular it shall appear of one Paul Fioxayemo^, of whose
Martyrdom we shall make mention in the 14. Chapter of the second part of this
relation.

Of the banishment of Don Iusto Tacayama and of other Gentlemen of Focoru. and
of the Christians of Firoxima. CHAP. VIII.
SOME five or six days journey Northward from Meaco, do stand the Kingdoms
of Canga, Noto, and Yetehu, the prince whereof Figeuaono was very much affected
to the Chistian religion, and used the Fathers with great respect and curtesy.

2. He had in his Kingdom diverse noble Christians Captains and in particular
Don Iusto Tacayama Minaminobo, whose memory is famous in the histories of the
Society of Jesus of the East Indies and Iapone, and Nayto Don John Toruan who
was Lord of almost all the Kingdom of Tamha: and Nayto Don Thomas Vacmodono his
son, and Oquinada Thomas Quicuan a principal Gentleman of Bigen. Don Iusto
had always with him some Father of the Society, and a Brother, and others of
the Seminary that was in the City of Canazoua.

3. When the news of the persecution came first into those parts, Don Iusto
did determine to keep the Father secretly, to the end he might help the
Christians there in case they came to dye for their faith, as all did hope and
desire they should. But presently there came a command from the Xogun, that the
Father and those that were with him should be carried by officers unto
Nangasaqui, and so it was of necessity put in execution: but before his
departure so great was the concourse of the Christians to confess themselves,
to receive the Blessed Sacrament, and to take their leaves of him, that the
Church was scarce ever empty either day or night. Three days after his
departure together with the rest of his company, Figendono did by order from
the Xogun command (though much against his will) that Don Iusto, Don John and
Don Thomas with their Wives, Children and Grandchildren should be carried to
Meaco, and delivered to Itacuradono, and that all their servants should be
banished if they did not leave to be Christians. Great was the assault that was
given them there to accommodate themselves unto the time, least otherwise they
should undo themselves, and utterly ruinate their Families, which were of so
great name, fame, and nobility. But they as men experienced in such like
Combats, having lost before at other times, and ventured for their faith, more
then they could do now, were nothing moved therewith: saying that to honest men,
and such as know what it is to be Christians, no man ought to mention any such
matter, no not in way of jest or merriment.

4. One only day was given them to prepare themselves toward their journey,
and so leaving their lands, livings, wealth, weapons, howses and estates,
without any more then their only apparel on their backs, and some things
necessary for the way, they took their journey to Canozaua upon the 15. day of
February. So Don Iusto like another Abraham left his Country, together with
his wife Iusta and five Grandchildren, (the eldest whereof was 16. years old
and the youngest 8.) and his daughter who was married unto the son and heir
of the Governor of those three kingdoms, a man worth forty thousand ducats by
the year. This Lady for diverse reasons, and principally because she desired to
die in this occasion with her Father, went with him, her husband being very
willing therewith. He was also a Christian, and desired much to have
accompanied his Father-in-law, but for just occasions he would not permit him.
And so having made a general confession of all his life with a Father of the
Society before his departure, he remained there expecting what would be the
event of these troubles, with intention if God gave him life to send after for
his wife: and both of them to die together for the faith of Christ.

5. When they went out of the City the Gentills did fear there would have
been made some uproar, by reason Don Iusto had so many servants, freindes,
and wellwillers there, and that all the world saw evidently the manifest wrong
and injustice that was done to him, and the rest, and therefore they did arm
themselves to prevent whatsoever might happen. But he sent them word, they
needed not to fear, saying: That now he was not to fight with weapons as at
other times they had seen him do, but with patience and humility, as the Law
of God does teach. Many people did accompany them a little on their way, some
weeping to see such men that were a little before so rich and so esteemed in
the Kingdom, to go now out of it in banishment, in poverty and with officers
to guard, them, not having done the least offense or committed any fault at
all. Others admyring to see such courage and constancy in them, said:
Doubtless the Christian religion must needs be very good, seeing that men of
so good Judgment and understanding as these be, so wise, noble and valiant do
for it so little esteem, and so lightly regard their lives, and make so small
account of their goods, honors and estates.

6. At the end of the first days journey it was told them, that some were
coming toward them with order to put them all to death, the which when they
heard, with great joy and gladness they al settled themselves to their prayers,
without making the least sign of sadness, or show of resistance in the world:
but rather when afterward they understood it was a false all-arme, they were
very sorry, and grieved that it proved not so as it was reported.

7. After ten days journey they arrived at Sacamoto, three leagues from Meaco,
having endured much misery in the way passing over many high hills and craggy
mountains full of snow, which they could not go over but on foot: and Don
Iusto being so old as he was, and sick withal, was yet still the first,
ammating so much the rest that even the children and young damsells which never
before knew what hardness meant, went with as great contentement over those
mountains, dabling in the wet, and trampling in the snow, as if they had been
walking in stately Palaces, and pleasant galleries.

8. Itacuradono understood of their coming, and fearing that if they should
come into the City, the Christians thereof would be to much e^couraged, he
wrote unto the two Captains that guarded them that they should stay in Sacamoto
until they had further order from the Xogun. It seemed unto Don Iusto that
their sentence would be one of these three things: either that they should be
put to death there, or else carried to Yendo and Suruga, and there made an end
of with torments and disgrace, or finally banished unto diverse Kingdoms, that
so being separated one from the other, they would assault them every one by
themselves to make them leave their faith, telling them that the rest had
conformed themselves and condescended to their will. And this last he feared
most of all by reason of the children and women that were among them, least
they thereby might be circumuented, and for that cause he did prevent them with
instructions, bidding them they should not give any credit to such like false
reports: and wishing the^ also that thought they should hear that their own
parents, and all other Christians had denied their faith, they should remanyne
yet constant and perseuerant, seeing that, that was the only and secure way to
salvation.

9. At the end of thirty days, there came a sentence from the Xogun, that the
men should be banished to Nangasaqui, and that the women if they would might
remain in Meaco, but that they should not carry any servants at all with
them. The women would not part from the men, but went with them; and in the
journey, which did endure 20. days, for want of servants, and upon other
occasions, they passed much misery and incomodity, yet at length they arrived
all at Nangasaqui, and were there very well received.

10. There were besides these diverse other principal Gentlemen banished from
Canozaua, and sent to Tzugarum, and in particular Thomas Quiucan with his three
sons who were men grown and also of good estates. This Thomas was one of the
principal Captains of the prince of Bigen, and of two other Kingdoms. He had
been of the sect of Toequexus, and so obstinate therein, that although his
sonns and friends were most of them Christians, yet was it not possible to make
him leave his Sect, until it pleased Almighty God to open his eyes in the
year 1600. by means of a Father of the Society. But afterward he became so
feruorous and devout a Christian, that he was an example to them all. He had a
certain fair Grange whereto he often retired to recollect himself, to give
himself to prayer, to read good books, and do diverse kind of pennances.
Figendono did esteem of him so-much that he made him one of the four Judges
of all his Estate, and for this cause greater were the assaults that were
given unto him, and his Sons: but they defended themselves so manfully, that
they with three other Gentlemen rather chose to loose their goods, rentes, and
revenues, and to be banished out of their natural soil, then to yeald in any
the least thing against their faith.

11. In the same City there was a chiese Noble man, who having diverse
servants that were Christians, did use many persuasions to one of them that he
would leave it. But he answered: If it please your Lordship, I am so convinced
with the force of the truth of our religion, that it is impossible for me to
leave it: neither in being of it do I you any injury at all, but rather thereby
an bound and obliged to serve you with more sidelity. His Lord was so offended
with this answer that he stroke him with his dagger, and wounded him, and
meant to have killed him with another blow, and had done so, had not some there
held his hand, and others taken away the valerous Champion of Christ, who there
upon his knees stayed expecting and desiring it.

12. In the City of Firoxima matters were carried after a calmer sort, by
reason that Fucuxima Tayudono Lord thereof, and of the Kingdoms of Aqui and
Bingo was a friend unto the Christians, and favored the Fathers of the Society
very much, not only giving them ample license to make Christians in his
Country, but also (being a Gentill himself) gave them a house and place wherein
to dwell, and part also of their maintenance: and so by that means there were
many worthy Christians in his Countries. But letting pass the fruit which
those of the Society did in those and other neighbor Countries at that time. I
will now only speak of that which passed there in the time of this persecution.

13. In the beginning of February of the year 1614. Tayudono. being at the
Court of Yendo, he wrote a very courteous letter unto the Father that was
superior at Firoxima, saying that he was very sorry for their banishment, but
now it could not be remedied being so ordained by the Xogun, and that he would
be mindful of them. He also wrote unto his Governors that they should send the
Fathers withal courtesy to Nangasaqui; and that as touching the Christians
they should not meddle with any but of the common sort, and with those only for
complement and fashion sake. The Gentills there when they heard first the news
of the Fathers departure were very sorry for it, and came unto the^ to signify
how much it grieved them, for indeed they all did love and esteem them very
much: but therebeing no remedy, one of the Fathers with others of their house
remained there secretly, and the rest departed to Nangasaqui. The Governors
took from the Christians their beads, pictures and Agnus Dei, and put some of
them into sackes as those of Meaco had been, and afterward making relation
to Tayudono of what they had done, and carring unto him some of the Christians
beads, he said that they had done to much, and commanded the beads, Agnus
Dei, and other things to be kept with reverence as holy things.

13. This Tayudono is one of the Princes of most Fame in all Iapone, a notable
warrior and a man of great resolution and courage in his businesses: and
because he had emulatours in the Court, he wrote unto four of his Captains
that to give contentment to the Xogun, he desired them they would leave their
religion, and that therein they should do him great service. They answered,
that they desired much to dye in his service, and that they were very sorry
that in that matter which he demanded they could not give him contentment. For
that setting a side that which was the principal (to wit their faith to God,
their Religion and Salvation) even in moral honesty and worldly honor, being
so known for Christians as they were, they could not now pull back their
feet, but that it would be a base and dishonorable thing, and a sign of a
false heart and cowardly mind, neither would any men of worth, if they should
go from their faith, ever afterward put any trust or confidence in them. That
which they could and would do, was to be careful whilst they remained with
him in the Court not to make any exterior show of their being Christians, by
which any hurt or damage might come unto him: and that if this were not
sufficient, they, their wives and children were prepared rather to die then to do
any thing against the profession of their Faith. It was thought that Tayudono
would have been much offended with this answer: but he did dissemble the
matter, rather esteeming them the more for it.

14. This Prince had a Christian page, who was much molested by other pages to
make some sign that he was no Christian, and to this end they feigned that his
Lord did send unto him for his beads and Agnus Dei, but he would not deliver
them by any means, wherewith they being much vexed to bring him into discredit
with his Lord, they told him how they had now drawn him to deny his faith.
Within a few days after his Lord asked him if he were a Christian, because it
had been told him that now he was none: and the page answered: My Lord I am a
Christian as you know, and have been all ways from a child, and for all the
world I will not leave to be so. I do desire to serve your Lordship in all you
shall command me, but to deny Christ that way not be: and if for this cause
your Lordship will cut of my head, here I offer it very willingly; and with
that he did uncover his neck. All that were present thought assuredly his Lord
would have cut of his head, for that in such occasions many times he is not
Master of himself: but yet at that time he did bridle his passion, and
praised his pages resolution, who by that means remained with victory over the
Devil, and his other enemies, and was in more favor with his Lord, and more
esteemed of then before.

Of the Christians of Bungo: and of four therein that gave their lives for the
faith of Christ. CHAP. IX.
CHRISTIAN relion did flourish very much in the Kingdom of Bungo in the time of
King Francis, both in the number of many noble Christians, and also in the many
Churches which the Society of Jesus had there. But after his godly death his
son Yoximune being banished by Taycosama, all that noble company was
dispersed into diverse places, although they perseuering in their faith were
occasion that others where they were did the same. The Society in this Kingdom
had three Residences, in Facata, Notzu and Xinga, whither the Christians of
other places did resort. These also tasted of the same cup that those of other
places did, the Fathers being banished, and their Churches overthrown. But
before they went many came to confess themselves from many leagnes off, and to
ask advise concerning their souls business: diverse there were also (although
there wanted not some that were not so constant) that notwithstanding all
threats and entreaties, remained very strong; and many things there happened
of no small edification, and worthy to be remembered.

2. The Officers ordained that seven persons, two men with their wives, and
three Children should be carried to their public shame through the streets
round about the Castle, the space of a league almost. And one of them called
Benet went all the way disoiplining himself, and at the going up of a steepy
hill he said to another Christian: O how wearisome would this affliction be if
we did suffer it for our own wills, or for worldly respects. But our B.
Savior for whose sake we undergo it, does make that we fcele it not. To him
be given infinite thanks for his mercy showed us heerin.

3. There was made near the way side a little yard or court, and after their
passing through the streets they were put therein, and then sackes and cords
and all other things being ready prepared, they were put into them, and bound
therein as those of Meaco before had been, and so cast one upon another, and
Benet put under them all. And with a thick cane (in which he had used to keep
holy water) they did bynd and press his hands so hard before his breast; that
for a whole day and a night, in which they held him in that fashion, it was a
most cruel torment unto him, and he was so much weakened therewith that the
officers for fear he should have dyed, carried him (he being not able to go
himself) to the house of a certain Christian: where when they had unloosed
him, they began to persuade him to leave his faith, and because he would not,
they carried him back again to the place from whence they had brought him,
bound and tied him as he was before, and there he remained in that manner till
the next day: and then seeing that he was ready to give up the Ghost, they
carried him again to the same house as before, where he calling upon the holy
name of Jesus gave up his happy soul into our B. Saviors hands the 7. of
April 1614. And because the Christians should not reverence his holy body, they
drew and dragged it to the river side, there burned it, and cast the ashes into
the water. But a Christian making as though he fished, took out some of his
bones that were not consumed with the fire and carried them to Nangasaqui, where
the Fathers of the Society that had connerted and baptized him did bury them
with all reverence and decency convenient.

4. This Benet was borne in the Kingdom of Izuno, in his youth he had been a
Bonzo, and living in Don Iusto his Country he was converted to the faith of
Christ, together with his Master and diverse of his Schoolefellowes: his wife
children and companions remaining so constant that the officers seeing that in
all that time and withal their torments they could not overcome them, they
let them loose and cast them out of the country, and so they went to Nangasaqui.

5. At the same time three other Christians called Clement, Michael, and Linus
(the two last being sons to the former) all substantial men, were much urged
that they should leave their faith; and not preuayling with them, the officers
let them alone: but soon after there came order from the Court from Inabadono,
Lord of that town, that in any case they should compel the Christians to
fulfill the Xoguns command: whereupon Clement gave a note under his hand unto
the Officers, that he and his sons wholly renounced Christianity. His sons
when they understood thereof were much afflicted, and went imediatly unto the
Governor, saying, That they were Christians, and that the note made by their
Father was altogether without their consentes: and that if he would give them
leave to live as Christians, they would not make any exterior demonstration of
it: but if not, that then they were there ready to suffer any torments, yea and
death also for their faith. The Governor answered that he had sworn neither
to favor, nor to dissemble in any sort with the Christians, yet for all that,
he would take counsel and advise in this business.

6. Not long after the Officers came armed to their house and took them al
three, and Maxentia Michaels wife also, and his two children, and they carried
them al to the Castle, and there put the^ in prison every one by themselves
alone sparated from the rest, thinking thereby the more easily to conquer the^
and make yeald but all in vain: for they could not overcome any of them no not
even the little Children. Linus, Maxentia, and her son Peter were put in
sackes, and there being pieces of sharp pricking strawes left or put in the
sackes as it seems to torment them the more, one present would have shaked
them out of that sack in which Maxentia was to be bound; but she would not
permit him saying, That, that torment was but very small, and that she wished
she had many bodies and lives to give for her God and Saviors sake.

7. Peter first animating his mother and his uncle Linus, then spoke unto the
Gentills in this manner: I warn you all that no body do give false
subscriptions in our names that we leave our faith: for if you do, I will go
presently to Meaco to give notice thereof unto the Governor, and he will hold
you for falsifiers when I shall tell him that we always have been and are
Christians-Linus being in his sack and saying his prayers something aloude,
some of the Gentills did put a gag in his mouth of cloven canes, and tied it
like a bridle about his chinne, and although afterward moved with compassion
they took it away, yet he earnestly entreating them to let him have it still,
they easily agreed thereto, and let him so remain for two whole days
together. One that was there present did much desire to make him relent, and to
that end he carried him to his house, and there both he and his wife did
entreat him eue^ with tears that he would leave his religion, for two or three
days only, promising if he would do so not only to procure him life and
liberty, but that they would also give him good store of mo^ey besides: but he
little regarding their offers, told them they labored in vain and so they
returned him again to the prison with his brother Michael, where they both of
them remained preparing themselves to die for Christ: and from thence they wrote
some letters to their friends abroad full of humility and resignation into our
Saviors hands. By this one of Linus his writing, we may gather the manner of
the rest.

8. This I write from the prison when at this present I do remain through the
grace of the holy Ghost: and although a wretched and miserable sinner, yet
having my hope and confidence placed in the mercy of Almighty God, I do most
earnestly entreat you would pray for me unto him, our Blessed Lady, all the
Saints, and happy souls of heaven, that I may persevere unto the end.
Although unworthy yet was I put into a sack and so remained one day and a
night because I would not deny my faith, and after that they put me in prison
with my Brother Micael. I am determined and resolved by the grace of God and
the help of your good prayers to persevere even unto death in the service of my
Savior. Once more I beseech you to pray for me unto God to give me
perseverance, for I am a great sinner, and have no other confidence but only in
his divine goodness. This sixth of the sixth moon.

9. After 7. days upon the 13. of July these two holy brethren were adjudged
to be burnt alive, which was very joyful news to them, in so much that when
they were taken out of prison, Michael said to Linus: Is it possible that only
we two be so happy as to die for Christ? desiring much that his Father wife and
Children might be companio^s with them in their crown. And in part Almighty
God did satisfy his desire: for that Officers taking his wife Maxentia ^ut of
the sack in which she yet remained, they carried her to the place were he and
his brother were to be burned, to see if with the sight of their torments he
would any thing relent: she seeing her husband was exceeding glad hoping he
should accompany him in that happy ^eath. In the way diverse Christians went ^o
meet them, and saluted them with ^reat reverence, desiring they would ^ray for
them unto God. As they passed ^y the place where Benets body was bur^ed,
Michaell made a low reverence ^her to as to a holy place. They went all ^he way
(which was about a league) are foot, and one of their servants offering them
shoes, they would not accept of them, saying: they rather desired that for that
little space their feet might be cut and mangled with stones, that so they
might suffer something for the love of God. And Maxentia although she was a
heavy woman not accustomed to go on foot, and having been four days
together bound up in a sack, yet she went barefoot all that way with so great
contentment, that the very Gentills did admire her.

10. Coming to the place of execution, they found three pillars of wood set
up, whereat they were to be burned the which they embraced, and then prayed for
the space of half an hour: then the two brethren giving their beads and
reliquiaries unto a Christian that was present, because they would not have
them burned, put of their upper garments and each of them betook himself unto
his pillar, where unto being tied, and fire put unto the straw and boughs and
other dry wood about them, Linus saying Jesus Maria, and Michael reciting of
his Creed, both their eyes being lifted up and fixed fast on heaven, they gave
their happy souls unto Almighty God.

11. Whilst this was in doing there were some that earnestly importuned
Maxentia, that at least exteriourly she would make some show or sign to have
left the faith of Christ. But she would not, rather much desiring to die for
confessing it, making offer three several times to go into the fire, but they
still deteyned her with a rope which they had in their hands fast tied unto her
neck: and being not yet altogether out of hope to make her yeald, they carried
her to a house thereby, where they persuaded her most vehemently. But she still
answering that she was resolved, and that to use persuasions to her in that
matter was but labor lost, they carried her back again to the place of
Execution, where a soldier putting his sword twice unto her throat fiersly
threatened to kill her if she did not yeald, whereat she said: This is a goodly
threat inaed, seeing there is nothing that I do so much desire as to give my
life for the love of God. If you should tell me that you would deliver me, and
set me fre, that were the greatest thing that you could threaten me, for I
having seen my husband die with such valor and courage for his Lord and God,
how can I enjoy life but with great sorrow, grief and affliction.

12. Which being said she took her hair that hung down upon her shoulders and
back, and cast it before to the end it should not hinder the blow of the axe,
and then with an invincible courage bidding the executioner do his office,
calling often upon the B. Names Jesus and Maria, she held out her head whilst
he did cut it of. They burned her body presently, which being done they took
the ashes together with those of her husband and his Brother Linus, and put
them into sackes as also the earth of the place of their Martyrdom, and cast
them into the deepest place of all the river, because the Christians should
have nothing at all of them, no not of the earth where they suffered, to
reverence as relics, although there wanted not some that afterward found
means to get some of them which they carried to Nangasaqui, and delivered unto
the Fathers of the Society.

13. A sister of these glorious Martyrs of Christ that was present at their
death gave notice unto their Father Clement of all that had passed therein,
desiring both him and her Nephew Peter to persevere constant in their faith
imitating so worthy an example, telling them withal, that if they did show
fear and cowardice, that besides the falling thereby into disgrace with God,
they could never after show their faces even before men. Peter was always very
constant, and although his Grandfather Clement had showed fraylty as we
signified before, now he was very sorry for it, and asked pardon both of God and
men: telling withal the Judges, that he was a Christian, and desired to give
his life for Christ, as his sons and daughter-in-law had done: but they being
satissied with what he had already done, gave him leave to go at liberty, and
live as he listed himself.

14. I will conclude this Chapter with two other things by which al may
perceive the constancy and fervor of the Christians of this Kingdom of Bungo.
There was a worthy Soldier much importuned by his Lord, by means of other
persons, that he would accomodate himself unto the time for the present, and
because he loved him very well and was loath to loose so faithful a servant;
seeing others could not prevail, he went himself in person to persuade him.
The soldier understood thereof, and leaving behind him his sword and dagger
(which otherwise they always use to wear) he went out of his house to meet
him, and said: My Lord, I am resolved not to leave to be a Christian, because I
hope in this religion to be saved. If your Lordship come to persuade me the
contrary, it will be but lost labor, and if you please you may cut off my head
for it: and therewith all he held out his neck for him to cut it off. And he
remaining in that manner, a little son of his of no more then nine years
old, came out of the house and did the same that he saw his Father do, and
after him his Mother and Grandmother, with the self same resolution:
wherewith the Noble man was so astonished that although he were a Gentill and
noted for his cruelty, yet did he fall a weeping, and being overcome with so
great co^stancy, returned back unto his house, though after some few days for
fear of the Xogun he commanded the valorous Soldier to depart out of his
Country: to the which he willingly obeyed (sorry he had not obtained the crown
of Martyrdom) going himself and all his family to Nangasaqui.

15. Another good Christian called Titus, a substantial man, was in like
manner persecuted by his Lord, who seeing his great constancy commanded him to
send him his son, a child of nine years old called Matthew. He sent him
presently: and within two days after feigning as though he had killed the
child with torments, because he would not leave to be a Christian, he sent
unto him for his daughter Martina, who was of 14 years: and imediatly he sent
her. Within a while there came another message unto him from his Lord, that
Martina was also put to a most cruel death, and that if he were yet so
insensible that with all this he would not be moved to obey, he should send his
other son called Simon who was 16. years old, and after that he sent for his
wife called Marina: and the valorous Christian sent them all most willingly,
saying that he had rather loose wife, children, life and all then the grace of
God, or leave his religion: and his wife and children al of them went with
great content to offer themselves in sacrifice. The Lord put every one of them
by themselves a part, and then set upon them, both with entreaties and with
threats, but being not able to prevail any thing at all with them, first they
powered very could water all over Marinas, body: to her daughter Martina they
gave no meat at all in three days together, and Simon the elder son they
beat most cruelly, and wrong his hands behynd him; all of them notwithstanding
this perseuering very constant still. The Lord seeing himself so overcome,
sent word to Marina, that seeing her Children knew not what religion nor
salvation meant, she should make them leave the Christian faith, and with that
he would hold himself content, and pardon both her and her husband. She
answered, that she had offered to God both her own and her childrens lives,
and so she could not give them any such counsel. They had consiscated Titus
his goods before all this happened, and for the final resolution, his Lord
sent him word by a Brother of his own, with armed men, that if he did not
desist from his obstinate pertinacy, it should cost him his life, and one of
his sons also at least: the which was no ill news to them, but rather being
much ioyed at the Message, they all offered themselves most willingly to loose
their lives for Christ: but the Lord seeing their valor, courage, and
constancy changed his determination, pardoned them, and gave them liberty to
live as Christians.

Of other three that were put to death for the faith of Christ in Facata, and
Aquizuqui. CHAP. X.
THE Fathers of the Society had two Churches and houses in the Kingdom of
Chicuyen, besides others which they visited now and then, and one in Facata,
which Simeon Condera Lord of that Kingdom, and one of the most valerous
Captains of Taycosama, did buyld for his burial place; and another in
Aquizuqui built by his brother Michael Sayemon douo, both of them great
favorers and patrons of Christianity in Iapone.

2. After the death of Simcon Condera, Chicuyendono his son succeeded in the
possession of that Kingdom, and favored the Fathers and Christians much, who
were many, and some of them of noble parentage. And although he were much
molested and solicited by the favorites of the Xogun, and especially by
Sasioye that he should not permit Churches nor Fathers in his country, yet did
he still wink at them during his uncle Sayemondono his life, who was always a
valerous defendour of the Fathers and Christians. But after his death when the
Xogun and his son put the Christians out of their houses and service in the
year 1612. he being much more importuned then before, because he would seem
to comply with them, and withal conserve the Churches from being ruinated, he
sent word unto the Fathers by four Gentlemen of his house, that he had been a
long time solicited from the Court not to permit them in his Kingdom, and
that he did always excuse himself in that his Father was a Christian, and had
builded that Church: and because he bore them good will, by reason he saw they
came from the furthest parts of the world, for no other respect or interest
but only to preach their religion, he had always hitherto resisted: but now
that the Xogun had forbidden al Gentlemen and soldiers to be Christians, he
could do no less then what was requested: yet was he content that Tradesmen
and common people should be so still, and that he therefore desired them to
send him a note of all the Gentlemen's names that were Christians.

3. The Fathers gave him thanks for the favor he showed them, but as
concerning the note of the Gentlemen's names, they desired he would pardon them,
being so that they could not do it because it was a sin, and that they
coming thither only with intention to make Christians, if they should give any
such note as he required of the^, it would be to pull down with one hand what
they set up with the other, and not to be true and faithful to those that put
confidence in them. He sent another time to urge them, that they would give it,
but they answering with good and courteous speeches, resolved in no case to give
it, although it should cost them all their lives. Whereupon Chicuyendono
desisting from his enterprise, meddled only with some that were publicly known
Christians.

4. The year following 1613. he went to the Court to visit the Xogun,
according to their custom every new year, and there understanding that the
Xogun was disgusted with him for favoring the Fathers, he wrote unto Father
Provincial of the Society, that the Fathers should depart to Nangasaqui, and
that the Churches must be pulled down to give satisfaction to the Xogun: but
yet that he would be content, that they should visit the Christians of his
country secretly: and so they did, and no otherwise. For although these Lords
or Princes of Iapone be great and potent Personages, and well affected to
religion, yet the Xogun being opposite and contrary, they cannot, nor dare not
resist him, and so the best way was secretly to do what good they could. Within
a short time after arose the persecution at Facata. It was there proclaimed
that all the Christians should come together to a certain place before a
Temple; whither being come they urged them very much, and to terrify the
Multitude with the example of a few, and show themselves punctual and exact in
performing the Xoguns command, they determined to use some rigor with Thomas
Xozayemon and Ioachim Xinden, who were more forward then the rest.

5. This Thomas was very feruorous in animating the Christians with his
exhortations and example of penance and mortification to perseverance in their
faith, and Ioachim for his virtue and good life was much known and beloved of
all the principal persons of the Country. He was a Father unto the poor, and
being a Physician he cured them of alms. No diligence was left undone to move
and make them accomodate themselves unto the time, but they answering that in
no case they could do it, were presently sent to prison, and there bound with
cords very strait unto two posts, but seeing that therewith they were not
overcome, Chicuyendono commanded that they should be both of them hanged upon a
certain tree near unto Facata, and so left there until they did deny their
faith.

6. Upon the 13. of March they did hang Ioachim upon the tree, which was a
very high Pyne, his feet upward and his head hanging toward the ground. And in
the same tree they did also hang Thomas in the same manner, but something
below Ioachim; and being in that terrible torment they did animate one the
other with great joy and alacrity. Remember Brother Thomas (said Ioachim) that
which our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ did suffer for us upon the
Cross, and let us give him thanks for this favor that he shows us, in
suffering something to his imitation on a tree. And although we unworthy: yet
in some respect we do resemble S. Peter, who was crucified with his head
downward. I was even thinking so (said Thomas) and the consideration thereof
does ease my pain which is nothing to that which I do desire to suffer for
Christ.

7. The day following there was great concourse of people to see them: and some
of the Gentills saying to Ioachim, that they wondered he would be so obstinate
as to suffer so great a torment for a thing so uncertain as salvation is,
after a while he a^swered. I held my peace a while as being busied with God,
not much regarding men: but not to seem discourteous, and because they may not
think that we do repent our selves; I pray you tell me one thing: Those that
have received so many benefits, honors and favors of Chicuyendono, as many of
you that be present have done, if they should be brought to such extremity,
that either they must loose their lives, or else be disloyal unto him; would
they not choose death and whatsoever affliction else, rather then to be traitors
unto their Lord? How then can we being Gods creatures, and having received so
many benefitts of him as he has bestowed upon us, deny him now for all the
torments that be, or can be inslicted upon us? With this answer the auditors
were al convinced, and both Christians and Pagans did commend it much.

8. Three days well nigh did those two holy men remain in that manner,
hanging by the heels, not having so much as one bit of meat or drop of water
given them all that time. At the end thereof the Officers still seeing them
remain so constant as they were, did let them down, and caused them to be
fast bound imediatly to a ladder, which had a piece of wood put through it in
form of a Cross. A Christian asked them how they did: Ioachim answered: I
suffered much when I was a soldier, but such pains as at this time I never
felt before, for it seemed to me that I was sawed through all my body, but I
conforted my self considering that al my torments were nothing compared to
those which Christ suffered for me: and I did apply my pains to his in
satisfaction of my sins. Chicuyendono seeing their constancy, and that with
so prolonged and cruel a torment they could not be made to change their
minds, gave order that they should be beheaded: which sentence being given
they were imediately taken and carried to execution, to a place that was
something distant thence. Ioachim could not move himself, and so he was
carried thither upon soldiers backs: and Thomas went on foot, both of them
replenished with joy and gladness. When they were come unto the place, having
prayed a little space, the executioner out of their heads, they in the mean
time often repeating the holy name of Jesus. Their bodies and heads were
conveyed to Nangasaqui and given to Father Prouincial of the Society of Jesus.
Their holy death was a great encoragement to the Christians, as their lives had
also been an example always unto the^. A Bonzo preaching in that City soon
after their death said in his Sermon to those of his sect: Those men question
less were of great valor, and there can be no doubt but that they are saved,
seeing they suffered so much, and with so great quiet and contentment, for
their faith.

9. When Michael Saymoendono was Lord of Aquizuqui, through his great zeal and
fervor he was the occasion that more then five thousand of his servants,
soldiers, and tenantes were baptized in the space of two years, by means of
the Fathers of the Society. After his death the Estate was wholly changed, only
the husbandmen and common people remaining therein, who were committed to the
charge of an old Bonzo a great enemy of the Christians. He called them all unto
him, and commanded them to write their names in a paper whether they would be
Christians or no, and finding that the most of them did subscribe that they
were Christians, and would so continue, he was much troubled thereat, and
publicly gave out that they meant to rise in rebellion. Whereupon there came
thither from the Castle of Fucuoca five Captains with 300. soldiers, who
although they saw evidently that the report was false, yet did they enter into
their howses, took away their beads, pictures, and other such like things,
which bare any show of things belonging any way to Christian profession; and
not content therewith, some they punished with tortures, others they banished,
and therein though some showed weakness, fear and frailty, yet others, and the
greatest part, stood steadfast with notable co^stancy; of which the Gentills
would take no notice, but without all reason and examination of particulers did
publish that they had all denied their faith, and so they exercised their fury
only upon Matthias Xichirobioye, who was one of the formest in subscribing that
he was a Christian, and as it seems soreseeing that which would ensue, did
therefore as soon as he returned home begin to prepare himself to die for the
same.

10. Upon the 14. of March the Governor sent some unto him to persuade him not
to be so obstinate, nor to animate others to be disobedient to their
Superiors: and they entered into his house very violently, and by force took
away his beads from him, the which grieved him very much for the present, he
reputing it as great a disgrace, as if they had taken his weapons from him: but
after a little consideration he said unto them: The Faith of a Christian does
not consist in his beads nor pictures, but in the mind, and in the constant
profession thereof which by the grace and help of God, I mean to do before the
Governor and Captains, and in part I have done, as may be seen by my
subscription which already I have given. They seeing that they were not able to
prevail with him, went unto the Governors Leiftenant, who presently sent for
him, and he being set down to dinner when the messenger came for him, rose up
imediately without eating any thing with great joy, saying. Let us go, for with
the help of God I shall go now where I shall not need to eat any more.

11. The Leiftenant asked him if he had given his name that he was a Christian,
and that he would not obey the Xogun? To which he answered resolutely yes, and
that he was in that mind still: and that they needed not to proceed further
with him in more questions and demandes, for that he would not change from
that for all the goods of the world. There they made him expect a while till
they had examined some others, and then they carried him to Aquizuqui, where
the Governor and Captains were: and in the way passing by an Idol called
Fachima which is the Idol of War, they threw him down upon the ground and
beat him cruelly, perhapps because he would not worship it, putting a rope
about his neck, and pulling it so hard that he was almost strangled therewith,
and could scarcely speak, yet as well as he could he desired them they would
flacke it a little, that with better quiet and attention he might commend
himself to God in that little time he thought he had to live: they answered
him that seeing he had wilfully put himself therein, he must now have
patience: You say very well said he, for since I suffer this for the love of
God, it is great reason I should endure it patiently. Afterward they offered
him to loose the rope a little, but he would not, saying: Let me alone, for I
desire to suffer something for Christ in this little remaynder of my life.

12. Being brought before the Judges they asked him why he was so stiff and
obstinate in his opinion. He answered because there is means of Salvation in
the faith of Christ, and none at all in any of the Sects of Iapone: and
because I do believe (said he) this to be the truth, I will suffer for it
willingly this and whatsoever else: If it be so (said they) why did you deliver
your beads, and subscribe your name that you left to be a Christian? My beads
said he, were taken away from me by force, and although therein does not consist
the being of a Christian, yet was I grieved so much therewith that it cost me
good store of tears. I gave my name unto the Governor, that I am and always
will be a Christian, and if there be any other contrary to this, it is not mine
but falsely forged. For that I have neither said nor written any thing contrary
to it, nor ever will de by the grace of God. Hereupon they thrust him out of
the room with great disgrace, and reuyled him exceedingly, saying among other
things, that a man so perverse and obstinate as he, could not be a good
subject to his Prince, and so they adjudged him to death: and imediatly he was
carried to the place of execution, whither he went praying all the way, and
being come thither, he said aloud that all might hear: I dye most willingly
with great content and joy for the faith of Christ. Then he made a short
prayer, which being ended they cut off his head. It was proved in the
Authentical process which was made of his death, that he pronounced the holy
Name of Jesus three several times after his head was cut off, and the third
time it was heard more distinctly then the rest, the which caused great
admiration in the standers by. His holy head and body were carried afterward to
Nangasaqui, and there laid in the Church of the Society of Jesus of
All-Saintes, where likewise be the bodies of many other holy Martyrs.

Of the great Constancy of the Christians of Arima: and how they prepared
themselves to Martyrdom. CHAP. XI.
ARIMADONO perceauing that with the torments, banishmentes and martyrdomes
before rehearsed the Christians were rather more and more encouraged then
otherwise, and that the fire wherewith some of them had been burned did seem
to inflame the rest in fervor, and devotion, fearing least for that cause he
should loose his Estate, and being deluded by some that desired to succeed him
in it, he sent unto the Xogun to entreat he might be changed to another
Kingdom, where he might have no meddling with the Christians, because the more
he did torment them, the more constant did they show themselves, so that now he
knew not what to do with them. Before an answer to his Letter came, he heard
the news of what had passed against the Christians in Meaco and thereaboutes,
and thereupon he caused those Churches which as yet remained standing to be
overthrown.

2. Some Gentills did persuade him that the best means to make them yeald was
to cause their wives and daughters to be carried naked through the streets to
their public shame. And so it was determined, wherewith the Christians were
exceedingly troubled, and afflicted. Some of them were of opinion that the best
course in that occasion was to shut up all the women into houses, and that the
men should keep them there and defend their honors with their lives, rather
then expose them to so vile and dangerous a punishment: but after taking more
mature advice they sent the principal persons of the Confraternities unto to
Prince to desire him they might be punished with the ordinary torments of
banishment, beheading, crucifying, burning, frying, and the like, and that they
hoped they should take all with patience being suffered for the love of God,
and for the obteyning of their souls Salvation: but that to use so unusual
and indecent manner of punishment, as that which was determined, would not be
well thought of at the Court.

3. Upon this the execution was differred, and instead thereof it was commanded
that all those that would persevere Christians should leave the rentes they
had. Whereupon imediately Fifty noble Gentlemen did leave all that they had
with great courage and alacrity, remaining poor without house, lands, or
rents, or any revenues in the world. Wherewith Arimadono for that time was
satisfied, expecting the Xoguns answer and Safioyes return, who was the
Chief author of all this wickedness; and in the mean time the Christians
prepared themselves more and more for Martyrdom, those of the Confraternities
renewing the oath which they had made to be firm and constant in their faith:
doubling also their prayers and penances, and making the prayer of sorty hours
in diverse places. They also sent for a Father of the Society to come unto
Arima, who there in a very few days didheare the Confessions of more then 800.
persons secretly: and which is worthy of noting, the very Children (the eldest
amongst them not being fifteen years of age) had there made amongst
themselves a Confraternity in the honor of S. Joseph, wherein they made their
determination, which in this manner they set down in writing: Although the
persecutors do pull out our tecth and pluck of our nails, give us the torment
of the water, and burn us alive, we will never leave the faith of Christ which
we profess.

4. After that Safioye was come to Arima, he sent for the 12. Stewardes or
Prefectes of the Confraternities. They all went very joyfully, thinking
doubtless that they were sent for to be put to death for their religion; many
also besides went with them, to see if they could be partakers of their
crowns, the rest remained at home preparing themselves for the same. Being
come, Safioye made this speech unto them: Through your obstinacy in not obeying
to your Lord and Prince, he is now in danger to loose his estate, whereas if
you would leave to be Christians as the Xogun commands, both he and you might
remain in peace and quietness in your Country. Consider well of it, and know
for most certain, that if you do not conform your selves, he will loose his
estate and you shall be persecuted exceedingly. To this speech of Safioye one of
the Christians there present answered in the name of all the rest: My Lord, we
need not consider nor consult concerning this Matter, seeing that long ago we
have been resolved therein. As concerning the conservation of Arimadono his
estate, it depends not upon our being, or not being Christians, for that
being so, we shall be both more faithful and more obedient unto him then
otherwise. And as we awayes have been to his Father Don John, so will we be to
him, ready to serve him both with our goods and lives. But as concerning those
things which touch the salvation and good of our own souls, there is no
reason that any force or violence should be offered unto us. If it be the
pleasure of Superior powers to take away Arimadono his estate from him because
we be Christians, we shall be very sorry for it, but have no fault at all
therein, for we cannot put in hazard the salvation of our souls, which is for
ever to endure, for an estate or life that is so short and brittle, and so
soon to have an end as this.

5. Notwithstanding this answer Safioye commanded them they should go and
consult better upon the matter among themselves, and after they had well
considered, they should resolve what best they thought to do, and declare
plainly whether they would obey unto the Xogun or no, and leave this obstinate
cleaving unto this new religion which the Fathers teach and preach.

6. In Cuchinotzu which is not far from thence, the Christians (who (...) very
ancient ever since the time of Father Cosmo de Torres companion of the Blessed
Father Xauier) made the same preparation, and oaths among themselves that the
others had done. Safioye understanding thereof, sent for five of the chiefes^
and made unto them a speech like to that which he made unto the others although
something more vehement and with greater promises: and they gate him the same
answer that the Christians of Arima before had done, and that many years ago
they had made their resolution.

7. Safioye was much offended with their constancy and said, that seeing they
were so obstinate in their opinion that he would give notice thereof unto the
Xogun, and that without all doubt if they did not obey, Arimadono would loose
his estate, they be tormented cruelly, and their wives and children made
slaves. For the Xogun would have his will whatsoever came of it. We should be
glad (said they) we could conserve Arimadono his estate with our goods and
lives, but if it cannot be otherwise done but by de^ying of our Faith, we
cannot do it, and willing we shall be to loose all we have for Christ, and
for the salvation of our souls. As for obeyng the Xogun, we will do it
willingly in things that do not concern ^ur Faith.

8. These five being returned to Cuchinotzu, the fervor of the Christians
there increased so much, that whereas before there were but an 100. in the
Co^^raternity, now there entered therein 400. more, all of them making
protestation tody for their religion, yea some Gentills also moved with their
example were baptized with the same purpose and desire: and many Christians
which before had showed themselves but frail and weak, were thereby confirmed
and reduced to the faith.

9. Safioye went soon after to Nangasaqui, and from thence he wrote unto the
Xogun how things passed in Arima: whereupon not long after there came order
from him, that Arimadono should go unto the Kingdom of Fiunga, which was but
bad news for him. For whereas he hoped with the foresaid devises to have gotten
a better Estate then that which he had before, now he found that it fell out
clean otherwise (and it was Gods punishment upon him for his cruelty against
the Christians) for he lost his old estate which was very good, and the
subjects thereof very trusty and faithful unto him, and that which was given
him was nothing so but very dangerous, and even in the midst of all his
enemies.

10. This change and the many misfortunes which happened unto him in his journey
both by sea and land, loosing some ships with a great quantity of his goods,
and some of his servants also (those only that were Gentills perishing, and
those that were Christians escaping) encouraged them very much, seeing how
manifestly God Almighty began to punish his Infidelity, and that the means
which he took to conserve his estate, was the principal to overthrow it: and
that he by whose counsel he had done so great mischief and wickedness (to wit
Safioyedono) should be the man that wrought his utter undoing and perdition.

11. The Kingdom of Biyen and a good part of that of Bungo does at the present
belong to Nangaou Yetchudono one of the most noble and wise Princes of Iapone,
who although a Gentill, yet was very well affected to the Fathers of the
Society, to whom he and his son Naiquidono gave a house and situation many
years ago in their Cities of Conzura and Nagatzu, and also leave to preach
and make as many Christians as they could, by which means there were many
noble Christians in his Kingdo^s. He was many times himself very near being a
Christian at the persuasion of Don Iusto whose most inward friend he was. And
although he was not so happy as to obtain it, yet his wife Do^na Gratia did,
as may be seen in the 9. Chap. of the second book of the History of Iapone.
This Lady who was the daughter of Coreco Aquehi, a great Lord that killed the
famous Nobunanga, was very wise and of an excellent wit, and desired very much
to hear the reasons and grounds of Christian Religion, much moved thereto with
that which her husband Yetchudono had related unto her thereof; but it was
impossible that any man should get into her palace, nor for her to go out to
that effect, by reason that the noble Ladies of Iapone be very closely kept in,
and her husband was more rigorous in this point then any other.

12. Yet so it happened afterward that Taycosama together with her husband and
all the Princes of Iapone being in the wars of Satzuma, in the year 1587.
she found means to go out of her house to see the Temples of the Gentills of
Ozaca, and from thence she went secretly and disguised with many of her women
to the Church of the Fathers of the Society that was in that City. She took
great pleasure, and particular contentment to see it: and asking many doubts
and questions by means of her servants (because she would not discover her
self) about the Sects of Iapone, and concerning Christian religion, she not
only remained very well satisfied, but also exceeding desirous to hear the
sermons of the Catechism: and because she had no other means, she sent every
day some of the best intelligent and more ancient of her women unto the Church,
who hearing the Sermons did relate the^ unto her in the best manner that they
could. All the doubts, difficulties, and arguments that offered themselves
unto her against those things of Christian religion she heard, she put down
still in writing to know the solution thereof, and being fully satisfied at
length in all matters, God Almighty giving her an extraordinary light in the
mysteries of our faith, she was baptized by a Christian Gentlewoman (because it
could not possibly be done otherwise) that attended upon her, with wondrous
contentment to her soul, great abundance of devotion, and extraordinary
plenty of comfortable tears. And although she never had any Priest or other
religious person to give her instructions, yet did God Almighty together with
her Name communicate special grace unto her: Her devotion, patience, and
humylity, was extraordinary, evidently appearing in all her actions, and seen
in her letter; and messages.

13. To the end she might write upon occasion unto the Fathers about her souls
affairs, and understand their letters, she secretly learned without the
teaching of any both to read and writ after our manner of Europe, much
differing from theirs. She caused some of her Children also to be baptized, and
fifteen or more of her women and maids, for which she received some unkindness
ather husbands hands: who yet when after her death he came to know that she
both lived and dyed a Christian (although he never knew the manner of her
conversion) he showed therefore great favor always unto the Fathers, and
every year did cause her aniuersary funerals to be celebrated. And although
he were much molested by the Xogun and his Favorites, and of the Bonzi, who
never left entreating him to have no Churches nor the Fathers in his Country:
yet never was he moved, nor would give any ear unto them, until the year
1611. in which Father Gregory Cespules whom he loved and esteemed very much
departed out of this life. For then upon his death he took occasion to deliver
himself from the importunities of the Xogun and his favorites, and so he then
wished the Fathers that they would go unto Nangasaqui, whither he sent unto
the^ the wood of their Houses and Churches, not doing the least hurt or damage
in the world unto any of the Christians.

14. When in the year 1614. he understood how Don Iusto his great friend had
left and lost his estate for his faith and religion he commended him very much
for it, and said: If Don Iusto had not done in this occasion as he has done,
he should have blemished all the noble actions of his life. For a magnanimous
man both in prosperity and adversity ought still to be the same without any
chang or mutation at all.

15. He sent diverse times unto Nangasaqui to visit him: and unto a Father of
the Society with whom he was acquainted, he signified that he was very sorry
for the Xoguns manner of proceedinges: and that Father sending unto him a
treatise in which were answered the false calumniatio^s made against the
Christian religion by the enemies thereof, he answered that he was well
satisfied of all those things, but that it was necessary to have patience for
a time. Notwithstanding all this to give contentment to the Xogun, he commanded
that in his Country the common people should be examined as they were in other
places, among which there were some that showed not such constancy as they
ought to have done. Amongst the Gentlemen also there were diverse whom he
tempted and proved oftentimes to see if they were truly firm and constant in
their faith, or no, and they were of the very principal about him, and such as
were in greatest favor with him, for he took great content to be served and
accompanied with men of valor and constancy, as indeed they were: for they did
plainly signify unto his greatest favorite, to the end that it might come to
his notice, that the first time their Lord did send a Message unto them to
leave their faith and religion, he should jointly therewithal send some that
might cut off their heads, or put them to some other death, for that they were
not willing to show themselves discourteous unto him, as it might be they might
seem, if they came to be questioned about their religion, for the which they
were resolved to suffer any thing, yea and finally to spend their blood and
give up their lives.

Of the Glorious Death of Adam Aracaua, and of the Christians of Xiqui, and
Conzura. CHAP. XII.
THE Islands of Xiqui, or Amacusa and Conzura, are part of the Kingdom of
Fingo. They did first belong unto Don Augustino Tzun^ Camidono, in whose time
all the Inhabitants thereof were Christians, baptized by the Fathers of the
Society: but after his death which was in the year 1600. they were given unto
Ximadono, who put therein certain Governors, who although Gentills, yet did
they show much favor unto the Fathers, who used to visit them now and then,
for the keeping and conseruing thereof.

2. When the news of this persecution came unto Ximadono, he being then in the
Kingdom of Fixen, where commonly he makes his abode, he wrote presently unto
the Fathers, that he was very sorry to hear of that new order made by the
Xogun, but that he could not choose but be obedient thereunto, and that
therefore he desired they would depart his country until they saw what would
be the end thereof.

3. Hereupon they al departed soon after to the grief of the Christians, yea
and of the Gentills also who did love them very much. But because the
Christians should not remain without all comfort, although none of the Fathers
could remain amongst them, yet did they leave with them a good old man called
Adam, who was the Porter of their house, and because he had a son that dwelt
there in the town of Xiqui, could with better color stay. In Conzura also
there stayed another whose name was Soter, of whose glorious Martyrdom mention
shall be made in the 9. Chapter of the second part of this relation.

4. Ximadono sent word unto his Governors that he went unto the Court, and
that from thence he would write what should be done with the Christians: but
being in the way advertised how rigorously they were dealt withal in Meaco, he
wrote again unto Xiroyemondone his principal governor of those Islands, and
to the rest, that they should not leave one Christian in them under pain of
loosing their estates, yea and their lives also, for that the Xogun had so
commanded it. The Governor used great diligence in the business, and after some
time signified unto Ximadono, that there were now no Christians in the Islands,
which he did (it being most false) because he bare no hatred but rather good
affection toward them, and thought thereby to co^ply sufficiently with the
Xogun, to whose command they would seem to have obeyed for fear of incurring
his disgrace.

5. Adam the good old man in the mean time went up and down visiting the
Christians in their howses, and animating them. The Governor having
intelligence thereof, gave command he should be taken, and that diligence
should be used to persuade him to forsake his Faith. He hearing of it, lifted
up his hands to heaven, gave many thanks to God, and would not absent
himself as some advised him, but went directly to his sons house, there to
expect the combat, hoping for it afterward to have a crown in heaven. Thither
came many Ge^tills that were his friends, to persuade him al they could, but he
with courage of mind did a^swere them in this manner. Are you not ashamed to
persuade me to so base a thing for a man of my age, and that have been so
many years a Christian? Although it were only for worldly respect, I cannot
now go back, having served the Fathers so many years, and received so many
benefitts at their hands: and I do remain here to do my lest endeavor that
the rest of the Christians remain constant in their faith, how ca^ I leave it
my self? Tell them that sent you, and set you on work, that in this only
business I must neither regard the Governor, nor Ximadono, nor the Xogun
himself, but only God Almighty, who is my Lord and Savior.

6. The same persuasions were made him by all the officers, but he being
nothing at all moved there with, nor seeming much to regard them, they took
and carried him prisoner unto the Castle upon the Thursday before the holy
Week, wherewith he seemed exceeding glad, because he said it was so near the
time of the passion of his Savior and Redeemer. The Governor commanded that
they should put him all that night in the prison, and in some pain, to see if
therewithal he would be brought to change his determination: but seeing in the
morning no change at all in him, he sent for him, and in presence of other
Gentills he said unto him: Adam, you know well enough the great love that I
always did bear unto the Fathers, and that I bear no evil will unto your
religion: but it is the Xoguns command, and Ximadono has signified unto me,
that he will make me be put to death, if I suffer so much as one only Christian
to remain in his Country: let me entreat you therefore you would dissemble a
little for the present, and not to go animating the rest.

7. Of your love to the Fathers (said Adam) I am a good witness, and they I
know will never cease to be thankful for it. But in this matter, seeing it is
a thing that does concern the salvation of my soul, I cannot be obedient to
you therein. Your worship says, that you persecute the Christians against your
will, only because you would not loose your estate and life; and I because I
would not loose the estate of everlasting life am determined to persevere unto
death in the faith of Christ. If I for obeying you should be damned to the
eternal torments of hell fire, neither your Worship, nor the Xogun with all his
power could deliver me from them; and although ye could, yet have I received
so many benefits of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that I cannot without
most base ingratitude commit so vile an act, as to leave his faith. Your
Worship therefore may do with me as you please, for neither will I my self
leave my religion, nor yet persuade any other to do it.

8. The Governor being much offended with this answer, commanded him to be
stripped naked: and the good old man glad to see so good a beginning, and
giving thanks to Almighty God for it, did help himself to pull of his clothes,
which being done they bound him with cords, and carried him in that manner
through the streets to his public shame commanding that all should come out
of their houses to look and gaze upon him, which being done they left him
bound in the street until such time as they had set up two thick posts each of
them of a fadom high distant four or five handbreadths one from the other, and
put another piece of wood through them both, and above it a rope. To these two
posts they tied his hands and feet in form of a Cross with so great rigor
that the tops of his toes did scarce touch the ground. In this manner he
remained from Friday before Palm sunday until holy Saturday with was Easter
Eve, although least he should die with the torment thereof, and the Christians
reverence him as a Martyr, they took him thence in the night time, as also
when it rayned or snowed more the^ ordinary. It was a strange thing that he
being 63. years old and newly recovered of a great sickness though he stood
there naked all that time exposed to the cold which was exceeding great, yet
did he never make any show or sign of feeling any greise at all.

9. A Father of the Society that had been banished from thence, and was now
returned again secretly, to visit the Christians, sent unto him to animate
him in his torments, and he answered. Tell the Father that I am of very good
courage, desire him to commend me unto God in his prayers, and that since I
have been put here in this torment I felt nothing at all of my sickness and
infirmity. Many and great persuasions were used unto him all this time. One
said unto him: Adam, verily I cannot imagine in what you put your hope to be so
obstinate, for it is reported as most certain that neither any Church shall
stand, nor Father stay in all Iapone. If my hope said he were placed in these
things your news would trouble me, suppose they were certain, as I think
they be not: but it is not placed in them, but in Almighty God who is in all
places, and not subject to mutation: and I hope in him that if they do cast
down the Churches, and banish the Fathers; yet will he when it pleases him,
build them up a new, and bring the Fathers back again to Iapone. Of this good
Lord I hope to have strength to endure my toments, and to persevere unto the
end, and afterward to be bountifully rewarded by him for it.

10. When they were most busy with him to persuade him, he looked still to
heaven, and offered up his prayers: and it seemed that sometimes he was as it
were in ecstasy, the very position of his body much moving those that beheld him
to devotion. He was bound in the manner of a S. Andrews Cross, and his arms
being tied by the elbowes, he fifted up his hands (together with his eyes)
to heaven, but could not make the^ to meet. He spoke unto the Christians still
with great love and affection, animating them, and desiring them to pray for
him unto God. If they asked of him that he would pray for them in heaven, he
did humble himself saying, that he was a sinner and not worthy of so great a
good. After this they carried him unto another place that was both more
public and more cold, with intention to disgrace and torment him more. But he
still remained the same man, without any change at all. Upon holy Saturday or
Easter eve, because they feared the Christians would be to much encouraged with
his example, they loosed him from the tormenting place, and put him in the
house of a Christian, a friend of his, who did enter into band to deliver him
whenever they should ask for him, and so he stayed in that house two months
without any keeper at all.

11. Three other Christians were tied at the same time, and in the same place
with Adam, but they were not stripped naked as he was, nor yet stayed so long
in the torment as he did, for that their kindred and friends did promise the
Governor that they would make them deny their faith, although unto them they
said nothing else, but only that they had obtained license for them to live as
Christians. The Governor was much delighted with this deceitful devise, and
greatly desired the same trick, might be put upon Adam: but he was so careful
of himself that they could not possibly do it.

12. The two months he remained in his freindes house after he was taken from
the torment, he lived a most holy life, spending all his time in a little
Chamber there about a fadome square, either talking with the Christians, that
came thither, of spiritual matters, or else in prayer or reading the book of
the imitation of Christ. He never went out from thence unless it were in the
night to bury some dead body. With the Gentills that came with purpose to
pervert him he used such kind of speeches and behavior that they did not long
molest and trouble him. The Governor sent him word that he was determined to
cause his fingers and his toes to be cut off, not in that manner that the pain
thereof should make him dye, as he desired to do, but one by one, at several
times and days, to torment him therewith the more: to which he answered, I am
ready, willing, and prepared to suffer those torments you speak of and
greater to, and I hope in God that he will give me strength for all. If I die in
them, my lot shall be the happier, and my joy the greater: and if not, yet to
have suffered them will be some satisfaction for my sins. Only this I desire,
that if it be resolved on as you say it is, that they would begin to execute it
presently, for being an old man as I am, I do desire before I dye to have some
part of the merit.

13. The Governor with this answer was astonished, and in a rage commanded
that they should begin the execution of it presently. But his man fearing some
punishment from heaven if so cruel a torment should have been inflicted upon
the innocent and holy man, he caused it to be differred until another time.
After that Adam had given this answer unto the Governor he felt in himself
extraordinary joy, with many heavenly comfortes and celestial consolations.
And as he told a certain friend of his in great secrecy, he saw one time our
Blessed Lady the most happy mother of our Savior Christ with a Cross in her
hand, by which he understood that he should obtain the glorious Crown of
Martyrdom. And whereas before this time he could not endure to hear others
say that he should be a Martyr, holding himself for unworthy thereof: ever
after this he delighted very much to hear and speak of it. That he had other
heavenly visions besides this, might be also gathered by his words, though
through humility he never would declare them unto any.

14. The Governor afterward used means that Adam might secretly escape, and
go unto Nangasaqui, and he having notice thereof said: What fly? in no case I.
If they will banish me, giving me a note under their hands, that having so
long time persuaded me that I should leave the faith of Christ, yet I would
not, and that therefore they do hanish me, then will I go, and not otherwise.

15. The Governor durst not give him such a note, but differred the sentence
which was given of cutting of his toes and fingers by little and little,
carrying him naked through all the Islands for an example to all Chrastians
until he had consulted the matter with the rest of Ximadono his Governors:
which when he had done, and had related unto them the whole discourse, they all
answered, that it would be a great discredit both unto him and Ximadon^ also,
if so rebellious and obstinate a fellow as they termed him, were not severely
punished: that the sentence of death should be notified unto him, and if he did
not change his mind, also executed. Hereupon immediately they notified unto
Adam the sentence, wherewith he received no small comfort. And it being
published in the Country thereaboutes, there came thither so great a multitude
of Christians to be present at his martyrdom, that they durst not put him to
death publicly, least they should take his body for relics. They carried him
therefore bound unto the Castle, giving out that this death should be very
public after some four or five days.

16. The Christians used all means possible, for some of them at the least, to
have been present at his death: but it could not be, for one night very
secretly they took him out of the Castle and carried him to the place of
Martyrdom, whither he went with great joy and alacrity, although the way was
very rugged, and the night exceeding dark, and they had no torches nor other
light at all, because of going with more secrecy: and whereas some of the
company stumbled almost at every step, yet did he go with such agility and
nimblenes, that he was ever the foremost of them all. Being come unto the place
he kneeled down upon his knees, prayed most devoutly, and at two blows had
his head stricken off. For it being so dark a night that the executioner could
not see, he gave the first blow upon his shoulders, at the which he never so
much as moved, but quietly expected the second, twice inuoking aloud the
blessed name of Jesus. And the Gentills themselves did testify that after his
head was fallen down upon the ground, he named twice more that most holy Name,
so loud, that it might have been heard through all the valley, whereat they
wondering said: That only to have seen the constancy and joy wherewithal Adam
dyed, were motive enough to move any man to be a Christian: and that it was not
possible, but that one dying so as he did should be saved.

17. They took his holy body and trayled it unto the Sea shore, and there
wrapping it together with his head in a net, tying stones unto it to make it
sink, they cast it into the Sea, because the Christians should not find it,
and so reverence any of his relics.

18. Though this Martyrdom were done so secretly, as I have said, yet did the
Christians suspect it, and thereupon some of them went unto the place where it
was done, but they found there only some little quantity of his fresh blood,
the which with part of his apparel they took with great devotion, and returned
with all speed possible, because the Gentills were now coming back again
thither to cover the blood, to the end to sign at all should remain of his
Martyrdom. The Christians of Xiqui, and other places used great diligence with
nets and hooks, and other instruments to have found and taken up his holy
body: and there was a Spaniard that offered 500. Ducates to any one that could
bring it him, but it could not possibly be found.

19. Diverse Christians did affirm, that for many days together there was
seen a great brightness over the place where this holy servant of God was put
to death, as also over that place of the Sea wherein his body was cast, the
which is so certain, so many Christians seeing it altogether, sometimes
forty, so^etymes fifty, sometimes more, notonce nor twice but often times,
that there can be made no doubt thereof. Some there were that would not believe
it because themselves did not see it with the rest, which yet afterward
having disposed themselves by prayer to that end, did most clearly and
evidently see and perceive it.

. Many notable things might be related of this holy man, but omitting all the
rest I will only set down two which in my opinion seem very worthy of memory.
An ancient Christian thinking in his heart within himself what torments might
be given him which might make him waver in the profession of his faith, and all
seeming very easy to him to endure, only the thought that seven young
Children which he had should be tormented before his face, and that his wife
should be carried through the streets to public shame, did terrify him
exceeding much, and make him somewhat waver in his mind. All this passed in his
heart within himself, not speaking of it one word at all to any one alive. This
man afterward went to visit Adam when he was in prison, who seeing him said:
What an impression did the imagination of your wives public shame, and your
Childrens tormenting make in you? O what a deceit is this! Be not afraid, for
he that gives courage for one thing will give also for the rest. The man was
astonished when he perceived that Adam had seen and understood that which he
only thought within himself, and was encouraged thereby to confess his faith,
and suffer for it all that should be offered.

. Another man being overcome by fair words and entreaties, did show some
frailty in the confession of his faith, who going afterward to visit Adam, he
reprehended him very sharply for it, but after he was gone from thence Adam
said unto those that were present: This man being importunated did show some
frailty, but he will stoutly stand here after for the honor of God. And so it
happened indeed, for he repenting himself of his fault, and very sorry for it,
went to one of the Officers who had been the occasion of his sin, and in his
house in the presence of diverse Gentills said unto him: Sir you remember well
the means you used with me to make me leave the faith of Christ, and I moved
with your entreaties did show my self unconstant and cowardly: But in very
truth did not leave to be a Christian, nor to say my beads: and now every
night I do discipline my self for the sin I then committed. I do desire you
very earnestly you would hold me for a Christian, and to signify the same to
all that have had notice of my fall.

. The Gentill was much oftended to hear him speak in that manner, as also the
rest that were present, saying, that, that which he desired could neither be
granted nor permitted being contrary to the Xoguns command. To which he
replying, that at least they would let him have his beads and pictures
publicly: they being very angry thrust him out of the room disgracfully,
with many threatening speeches. But he to show that he neither was afraid of
them, nor ashamed to be accounted a Christan, went imediatly into the Kitchen
of the house, and taking up a hot burning Iron that was there, he made
therewith a great Cross in his forehead, burning his flesh exceedingly, and so
returning to the place where the Gentills were, he said unto the^: My Masters
now that I have made this sign of the holy Cross in my forehead, no man can
doubt but that I am a Christian: well may you give me all the torments that you
please, for I hope in God since he has given me strength to do this, he will
also give me courage to suffer whatsoever else.

23. The Governor afterward had notice of this action, and determined to have
punished him severely for it, but others dissuaded him saying, that with the
example of Adam and of this man there would be many more that would offer
themselves to martyrdom, if he did deal any further therein. Whereupon he
dissembled the matter, and the good Christian who remained marked for all his
life, did say that after he heard Adams words he could never be quiet in mind
until he had made this Confession of his Faith, and with his example animated
all the other Chistians to be constant and courageous.

24. The Fathers of the Society were also banished out of the Country of
Conzura, although the Governor there was not so rigorous in his proceedings as
in some other places, for that he did not imediatly set upon the Christians,
but after some time, and that only to make a show that he had some respect unto
the Xoguns order. He commanded first of all, six good Christians who had the
care and custody of six Churches committed unto them, as also to animate the
rest of the Christians in the Fathers absence to depart the Country: then he
banished eleven or twelve over Christians that had been banished out of other
kingdoms for their faith, and were retired thither to have means to live
near to the Church: so that one with another there were banished out of that
Country some two hundred and fifty Christians, all very joyful and content to
see themselves so often banished, so tossed and turmoyled for the faith of
Christ.

25. After this they gave out that they would carry all the women, that would
not leave to be Christians, through all the towns naked to their public
shame; the which did cause in them all great fear and trouble. But one among
the rest, a woman of good estate, did animate them all, saying: That it were
not much for them to pass that shame for Christ, seeing he had suffered the
same for them, and that she was ready and prepared to be carried so through all
the towns and Cities of Iapone, rather then once to offend Almighty God. With
this the rest were much encouraged, and so they seeing the Governor coming a
little after into the streets with armed men, all of them that could did go
together to one place animating one another to dye for their Religion. But the
gentills meaning only to make a demonstration that they did obey the Xoguns
Command, and to have some color afterward to give out that now there were no
Christians in the Country, they went only unto some few poor persons that were
without the town, and persuading them to subscribe according to their
pleasure, they returned with great triumph, publishing abroad that now all had
left the profession of the Christian faith. Whereupon they cast down the
Churches, and cut down all the Crosses; but the Christians set up one again on
a mountain not far of from the town, whither they went to pray at sundry
times, and do their disciplines. The like happened to the Christians of Oyano,
which is another Island near adjoining thereto, some of them being very much
abused, others banished for their faith.

Of that which passed in other places: And of the glorious death of Minalius in
Fucofoti. CHAP. XIII.
HAVINGE related that which happened in other Kingdoms, it remains now that
we speak a little of such things as passed at this time in the City of
Nangasaqui, and in other towns near adjoining thereto. The Fathers of the
Society had five or six Houses in the Kingdom of Fixen, besides those which
they had in Nangasaqui, and besides diverse other Chappells which they often
visited. The first was in Isafay, where the Lord or Prince although a Gentill
being a friend unto the^, did desire to conserve the Churches and Christians in
peace and quietness: yet for fear of the Xogun, he commanded first that the
Church of Isafay should be taken down, leaving the other houses standing as
they were, and that the Churches of the villages should be so disguised that
they should not seem to be that which they were: yet he permitted a Father to
come and visit the Christians secretly. A little after this he made a
Proclamation, in which he did command that all should leave to be Christians,
as the Xogun had ordained, but yet under hand he gave order that in the
execution, no rigor should be used, although some Noble men his subjects
moved either with hatred toward the Christian faith, or with that they saw
practiced in other places, did very much persecute their servants, who thereby
manifested their Constancy, and defire to die for their Religion, some of them
suffering banishment, and loosing thereby all that which they had, others being
ready to do the same, were permitted for a time and winked at.

2. The Fathers had another house in Fudoyama, from whence they did use to
visit part of the estate of Omura and other Territories thereabout. The Bonzi
of Omura did make earnest suite unto the Prince, that he would compel his
subjects to embrace their sect, and leave the faith of Christ: but he made
answer unto them, that for religion sake he would not deprive himself of his
ancient subjects; telling them moreover, that if they were so certain that
their sect was good and true, they should convince the Christians with their
reasons, and not compel them by force. Yet notwithstanding to give them some
content, he made a law that whosoever did receive any of the Fathers into his
house should incur the forfeyture of a certain some of money, but they for
all that neither left to intertaine them, nor yet to seek and make inquiry
after them. Ximadono used more extremity, for that he seized upon the goods
and lands of the Christians of Caratzu, banishing them out of his Countries.
And one among the rest who in that occasion left all he had with great courage
and content was George Acasioye, of whose notable fervor and glorious death we
shall make mention in the 10. Chapter of the second Part of this narration.
Nabeximadono, who was the Prince of that country, gave command, that the Church
of Fundayama should be pulled down, but toward the Christians no rigor at
all was used, and so one of the Fathers did remain there secretly and visited
the^ al ofte^tyms, with no less labor then content.

3. In this Country there was a Christian to whose care the keeping was
committed of a Church and the things therein, and certain Gentills intending
by force to take a picture out of it, he told them courageously, that he would
sooner loose his head, then let it go. They durst not kill him without order
from the Prince, who at that time was fart off, and on the other side they
feared least he would fly away before the answer came. The which when he
understood he bouldly went unto them, and said. Go ask the Prince what his
pleasure is to have done with me, and I will stay here till you return. If I
fly you shall understand thereby that I leave to be a Christian, which is that
which you desire. There he remained expecting a good while; at length the
sentence came that they should take all he had from him, and put him out of the
Country, and so it was put in execution, and he taking with him the picture
went to Nangasaqui more contented in his own mind, then if he had carried with
him all his wealth, and much more then that he had before.

4. The third and fourth houses which the Fathers had in this Kingdom were in
Vracami, and Mongui, in which places because they were so near to Nangasaqui
there was no other thing done, but only preparations made for the general
assault which all did expect would soon after follow. Their fifth House was in
Fucafori, where there was more copious and glorious fruit. This town is
subject to the Lord of Fixen, and stands at the entrance of the Port or Haven
of Nangasaqui. When Safioyedono was made Governor of Nangasaqui, he being very
zealous in the superstitious religion of the Gentills, and having no place
within the City where to use his Heathenish rites (all being there Christians)
he caused a little temple (which they call Mia) to be made in Fucafori, whither
he went to that purpose as often as occasion was required. It grieved him very
much, to see a Church of the Christians there, and he so contrived the matter
that the year last past it was cast down without any other damage done unto
the Christians: but now upon this occasion he caused a Proclamation to be made
that all should leave their faith under great pains and forfeytures: to the
which the Christians all with one accord answered, that although it cost them
their lives they would not do it. Whereupon the Governor sending for the
Chief of them, gave them very bad speeches, calling them fools and Asses,
that whereas following the Sects of Iapone, they might save their souls and
jointly live in pleasure, prosperity, and content: yet they would rather follow
a hard Religion, taught only by a few strangers, and that with danger to loose
their goods and lives, and the liberty of their wives and Children.

5. To the which one of the Christians in name of the rest answered in this
manner: My Lord, the reason why we embrace and follow the faith of Christ, is
because it is manifest unto us, that in it only we can be saved and not in any
of the sects of Iapone, which be both very different and disagreeing among
themselves, and all of them without any solid ground and true foundation. And
in matters concerning the gayning or loosing of eternal life, it were no
wisdom, but plain folloy, to have too much regard to the loss of temporal
goods, as all things in this world be. The Governor replied, asking him, If
he had ever seen or spoken with any post, or other messenger that came from the
other world, and brought news of another life. The reasons my Lord (said he)
are so evident, that there is another life, and the testimonies and arguments
that our religion is the only truth, are so strong, that they be of much more
force and officacy then the words of any Messenger in the world. If it please
your Lordship to hear the Sermons, you shall easily see the truth of the
Christian faith, and evidently perceive the falsity of all the Sects of
Iapone. With this the Governor growing into great choler, commanded them
imediatly to deliver up to him their Rosaries, to who^ one named Peter answered
very stoutly. There is none here will leave his faith or deliver up his Rosary,
and it for this cause you will deprive us of our lives, we are all ready and
prepared to give them willingly. And with that he went away. Peter his Father
in law, who was a Gentill, fearing lest some hurt would come unto him, for that
which he had spoken, entreated the Governor to pardon him for that he was but
a young man, and had spoken rashly without mature consideration, and that he
would enter into bonds to make him leave his faith.

6. Peter understanding what his Father in law had done and said, presently
sent unto him his wife and children with this ^^essage. The love of your
daughter and grandchildren have made you promise (...), that which you ought
not to have done there therefore I send you them, and I without them shall die
more freely, and with more content. And unto the Governor he sent word, that
he would not stand to that which his Father in law had promised in his behalf:
and that moreover he was not sorry for the words which he had spoken in his
presence; and because he did expect no less then to be put to death for them,
he therefore for that effect sent him there is sword. But the Governor
dissembling the matter, would not proceed any further against him, contenting
himself with his Father in law his word and promise, whereby Peter escaped
death at that time, gayning notwithstanding doubtless for his worthy
resolution great merit at God Almighty his hands.

7. At the same time, and upon the same occasion there were two brethren named
Mine Cosmo, and Min^ Luis, who answered very constantly that in no case they
would leave the faith of Christ, the which for so many years they had
professed. And although the Governor used all means possible to make them
condescend unto his will, at least in outward show, yet could he not move them
any thing at all, they still resisting most courageously. He told them he was
very sorry that they being of his name, and something also of kindred unto him,
would cause him instead of favor to proceed with rigor against them. They
answered, that they, their wives and children were Christians, and by Gods
holy grace would so remain, and that for their holy religion they were ready
to give their lives. Whereupon the Governor commanded them to keep their own
house as a prison until he had consulted with the Prince what should be done.
Upon this it seemed unto them that they were now in great liklihood to obtain
the crown of Martirdo^e which they so much desired: the better therefore to
prepare themselves thereto they went one night to Nangasaqui, and there
confessed themselves, desiring the Fathers to pray for them, that for their
sins and own unworthiness they might not loose their crown which they
expected. The same night they returned home again, made themselves now
apparel, and bought candles to carry in their hands when they should be
carried to Martyrdom, expecting every hour with great desire their judgment,
sentence and condemnation.

8. Upon Corpus Christi day in the morning the Governor sent word unto Luis,
that he meant that day to go to recreate himself, and see some filhing in the
Sea, and that he desired to have him go with him to keep him company. Luis at
the first thought to have excused himself by reason it was so great a holy
day, but afterward upon further consideration, surmysing what the matter might
be, taking his leave of all his family, he went with much alacrity, and the
boat in which they went being now almost a league in the sea from the land, the
Governor said unto him: Luis do you remain still settled in the opinion you
were of three days past in being and continuing still a Christian? Yes indeed
do I (said Luis) and am very well content and desirous to dye for it. Thereupon
all those that were in the boat mocked and scoffed at him, as if he had been a
fool or a madman: but he little regarded their words, and seemed to be
nothing moved with their injurious speeches: the which the Governor perceiving
commanded that his head should be cut of imediatly, the which was done at two
blows, he being upon his knees and most devoutly inuoking the holy name of
Jesus. His head being cut off they tied stones thereunto as also unto his holy
body, and cast them both into the sea, because no relics of him should
remain: returning home they confiscated his goods and house making his wife a
slave. The same they did with the wife children and goods of Cosmo his elder
brother, whom they banished out of the country, the which he accepted
willingly being no less joyful to loose that which he had for Christ, the
full of sorrow that he was not companion to his brother in the Crown of
Martyrdom.

9. The manner of Luis his Martyrdom being once known in Nangasaqui, no
diligence was left undone to find his holy body, being sought for by diverse
persons with all care and diligence for five days together, but could not
find so much as the least sign thereof, although they knew the place where it
was cast into the sea. Upon the fifth day, they saw a kind of clear brightness
over a certain place, as those that found it did affirm, and taking that for
a sign thereof, they sought there, and so found it presently, and carried it
unto the Fathers of the Society who did with alreuerence place it in the Church
of the Miscricordia with intention, heareafter when this storm is past, to
build a Church in Fucafori to the glory of God, in memory of him.

Of such things, as passed in Nangasaqui, before the banishment. CHAP. XIIII.
THERE were in Nangasaqui, as I said in the 5. Chapter, four Churchs of the
Society of Jesus, three Monasteries, of S. Austin, S. Deminicke, and S.
Francis, four Parish Churches and three or four Chappells. All the
inhabitants thereof and of the country round about were Christians. There at
this time were all the Fathers gathered together expecting either the execution
of the sentence, given by the Xogun before mentioned of their final
banishment, or else perhaps some mitigation thereof, by means and mediation of
the Portugall^, whose ships were shortly expected to come thither. In the same
expectation were Don Iusto, Don John, and the rest of those that were banished
from the Caini. exceeding was the concourse of Christians from all parts of
Iapone thither, some to take their leave, others to receive the Sacraments
thereby to arm themselves for the future fight, all lamenting the loss they
were to sustain by the departure of their spiritual masters, pastors,
guides, and ghostly Fathers, and so great was their fervor, that until the end
of October they scarce ever let the Fathers rest neither by day nor night,
coming to them continually for icounsaile, comfort, direction and adu se.

2. At the beginning of this year the Bishop of Iapone, Don Luis Cerqueira of
the Society of Jesus departed out of this life. He was a man of great wisdom
and learning, and of no less virtue, piety, and sanctity of life, and very
zealous of the good of his Church, which by his death at that time sustained a
wondrous loss. Greatly was he grieved to see so cruel a persecution raised
against his flock, and that he could not by any means remedy it, nor defend
his sheep from the cruel wolves. Some months before the persecution did begin
he fell sick, and after with the news thereof and grief there at his
sickness daily did increase, and so within a few days no physic being of
force to prolonge or sane his life, he gave his soul unto Alm. God, unto whose
paternall providence he did commend his poor afflicted Church, desiring him
either to defend and succor it, or else to give force and strength to the
Christians to suffer and endure the violent and tyranicall proceedinges of the
Gentills their enemies against them. His death was upon the 16. of February
1614.

3. Sixetene years had he governed that new planted Church with great
rectitude and rare examplar life, and in that time he had feene many different
successes, sometimes great prosperity in the connersion of many souls and men
of worth, unto the faith of Christ: at other times great aduersicies,
afflictions and persecutions, in all which he always showed a great quietness
and serenity of mind, and a firm trust and confidence in God. He was much
respected and beloved of his flock and of all the religious persons that were
in Iapone: yea the Xogun himself, his Courtiers and Favorites when some years
ago he did visit them, did commend and esteem him very much; so did likewise
all the Lords and Princes, though they were otherwise as Gentills, not
affected to religion: for which reason at this time there was great want of
him, and his death was much lamented generally of all.

4. After his death Father Provincial of the Society remained with the care of
the government of the Bishopric, until such time as another Pastor should be
appointed, and for that respect, as also for the obligation of the common good
of all the Christians of Iapone, he determined with the advice and counsel of
the rest of the religious, to send unto the Court Father James Mesquita of the
Society, who had been a long time Rector of the College of Nangasaqui, and was
well acquainted with the Safioye, to deal with the Xogun, and to give him
information of the truth of all matters. The Father went and did his best
endeauours, but the Safioye himself being the Chief sticler in the business,
gave him answer, that it was not possible to have audience in that matter,
because the Xogun was already fully resolved that not so much as one of all the
Fathers should remain in all the Country, and therewith he commanded him
imediatly to return to Nangasaqui, where all did prepare themselves to the
conflict no less then in other places, using to that end al spiritual means
they could, now that there was no hope in humane diligence.

5. In the College of the Society commonly there were wont to be before this
persecution began four thousand Co^municants, and more in every of the
principal feasts of the year: but now there was much greater concourse both
of those that dwelt within the City, as also of those that came from abroad
and lived in other places. Scarce were there any that did not make in this
occasion a general confession of al their life, thereby to prepare themselves
the better to Martyrdom: many both men and women made themselves new clothes,
therein to signify the gladness and willingness of their minds to suffer death,
or any torments for their faith, as also to receive them therein with more
decency. To the end that al might be helped and sufficiently instructed in this
occasion, and this do^e with the least note possible, was appointed in every
street one house where the people commonly met together to make the prayer of
Fortie-howres, six or seven Preachers going out of the College every day
thither to make them exhortations, and instruct them how they ought to behave
themselves in the confession of their faith, in their torments, and in
Martyrdom it self: and in these places inumerable were the prayers, fastes,
disciplines, and other pennances which were done to that end.

6. Whilst they were thus busied and employed, there came letters from the
Xogun that all the religious persons and those that were banished for their
religion should find ships at their own charges, to go out of the Country the
October following, the which news did increase both the grief, and the
fervor of the Christians, who were all distributed into diverse
Confraternities, thereby the better and with greater union to help one the
other, as indeed by that means they did exceedingly. But because it is an easy
matter through zeal and fervor to grow to some, excess therefore the Fathers
took great care to counsel them they should behave themselves in such sort,
that they did not exasperate the Gentills, nor give them occasion to report,
that the cause of the persecution was some mutiny or rebellion on their parts,
and not only because they would not deny the faith of Christ: and particulerly
they did procure that certain writings which they made amongst themselves and
subscribed with their names, what they would do in case that the Fathers were
put out of Iapone, and themselves forced to deny their faith, should be done in
that manner that the Gentills should have no color to calumniate them: the
which was a matter of very great importance and confequence.

7. The fervor of the Christians increasing daily more and more, came at
le^gthto that pass that not contented with their secret penances, they began
(without ever consulting the Fathers therein) to make open processions in the
streets, doing therein many public penances. About the beginning of May they
made one or two, all of them disciplining themselves therein: and upon the
twelfe day of the same month there went one out of the Church of All-Saintes
with diverse kinds of penances in which there were about a thousand penitentes,
some carryng heavy crosses on their backs, others being laden with chains of
Iron, others fiercely disciplining of themselves and the like, in this manner
visiting all the Churches of the town, asking with weeping eyes mercy at God
Almighty his hands: and diverse children went in their company singing the
letanies with such devotion, as moved even the hardest hearts to melt with
sorrow, and their eyes to sheed abundant tears. In this manner they went
continuing their procession until there were neither street nor Confraternity
in all the town that did not make one or two at the least.

8. Within the Octaues of Pentecost there were made two very solemn
processions; the first was ordered by the Fathers of S. Dominickes Order, and
therein were an exceeding number that did discipline themselves, and diverse
with ropes tied to their necks and crowns of pricking thorns upon their
heads. The second was directed by the Fathers of S. Auguflines Order, in which
there were some 500. persons all clothed in purple weeds carriyng heavy
crosses on their backs, besides diverse others that went disciplining of
themselves: so that there was not scarce any one person in all the City, man,
woman, nor Child that did not, some once, some twice, some thrice go in these
processions, doing some penance or other therein, all with intention to move
Almighty God to mercy toward them, and to show the desire they had by this
means to prepare themselves to suffer some thing for the love of Christ. For
conclusion of all, Father Provincial of the Society did appoint that a solemn
procession of the blessed Sacrament should be made in the College upon Corpus
Christi day, the which was accordingly performed with very great solemnity,
co^course of people and denotion, and after it the prayor of 40. hours was
kept publicly, there being Sermons made both in the morning and afternoon:
wherein the people were so moved to devotion, to sighs, and tears, that the
Preacher at length could scarce be heard for them: all which put many in good
hope that God would hear their cries and prayers, and either tie the hands of
those that were their enemies, or give them force and strength to get the
victory.

9. This feruorous manner of proceeding, and to see moreover that the
Christians made so small account of temporal things, did cause such an amaze
in the servants of Safioye, who were Gentills, that they wrote forthwith unto
their Lord (who was now coming from the Court) signifiiyng unto him that the
City was all in an uproar, all united together and resolved not to obey the
Xogun, nor to let the Fathers depart the country, paynting out the matter in
the worst manner that they could, and aduising him he should be careful and
consider how he came. If these letters had come to Safioye his own hands it
had been an easy matter to have informed him of the truth and pacified all:
but the Messenger missing of him in the way, went directly unto the Court of
Surunga, and gave them to a sister of his who was in great league with the
Xogun, and she being a wicked woman, a Gentill and an enemy to the Christian
faith, went weeping with them unto the Xogun, and related the matter in such
manner, as though doubtless her brethren were both of them slain already at
Nangasaqui. Wherewithal the Xogun was so moved to anger and indignation, that
laying his hand upon his sword, he swore, that if Nangasaqui were near hand he
would go thither himself in person, and put it all to sword and fire. And
fearing least Safioye alone could not be able to rule the Christians and bring
them to due order and obedience, he commanded that Surungadone one of the
principal Captains which he had in Fushimi should go thither with all his
soldiers, and gathering together all the rest thereabout that were needful
should execute that there which should be thought most fitting and expedient.

How the Fathers of the Society of Jesus were banished, and the Churches of
Nangasaqui destroyed. CHAP. XV.
SAFIOYDONO at his arrinall at Nangasaqui upon the 23. of June, having by the
way done that in Arima which we mentioned in the 9. Chapter, saw that all was
quiet without any mutiny or rebellion at all, and that the fervor which the
Christians had showed was only to ask mercy at Gods hands, and show that they
were ready to suffer and give their lives for Christ. Within two days after
his coming he sent word unto Father Provincial of the Society, to the
Superiors of the other Religious Orders, and unto the Secular Priests, that
they should all make provision for ships in time, for that not one of them,
whether he were stranger or free-Denizen, should stay in the Country, no not so
much as any of the youths of the Seminary: the which caused a general sorrow
in all the Christians: although the news which imediately came upon it, that
the ship of traffic of the Portugals was safely arrived from China thither,
did not only joy the Gentills, but also gave some comfort unto them, for they
hoped that upon this occasion the Gentills through the great desire they have
to traffic with the Portugalls, would wincke at them, at least for a time:
especially it being most certain that the Xogun himself had showed great
contentment when he heard thereof, and commanded that all favor and kind usage
should be showed both to the Captain, and his Company.

2. Hereupon Father Provincial dealt with the Captain, and he very willingly
offered himself to go unto the Court to entreat of the Xogun, that at the
least he would permit one Church in Nangasaqui, as the Portugalls and
Spaniardes, that live there, and go and come with their ships, had ever had,
and it was thought the best course to entreat Sasioyedono to join with the
Captain in this petition to the Xogun, because otherwise infallibly it would
be crossed and never take effect. Whilst they were busy in this consultations
Surungadono came with his soldiers from the Court to Nangasqui, and thinking
to have found all the Country in Rebellion as it was reported there, he found
no sign at all of any such thing, wherewithal he showed himself much
disgusted, and Safioyedono was no less with his coming thither. Whereupon
they sent new information unto the Court, but neither true nor favorable
toward the Christians, both because they knew the Xogun could not endure the^
and was resolved to destroy the Christianity of al his Countries, and also
because they would not contradict one the other, nor raise any disgust or
discontent among themselves, for of this and their own interest the Gentills
of Iapone have allwaies ^hore regard, then either of reason, or justice,
equity, or Conscience.

3. Both Safioye and Surungadono were unwilling that the Captain of the
Portugal ship should go unto the Court, ^aying that it would be an occasion of
a greater breach if the Xogun should not grant (as they thought he would not)
that which the Captain in person should ask of him, and that it were far
better ^o send an embassage unto him with a present, the which although for
this year perhapps it would not do much good, yet would it be a disposition
for the year following, when his anger was once past, to get a grant of what
they desired. There was no remedy but to follow their counsay le, because it
was impossible that any thing could have success which was against their good
liking: so thereupon four or five Portugalls of good estimation were sent unto
the Court, and hear caster we shall signify what effect their journey had.

4. In the mean while Safioy (...) not only solicit the departure of (...)
Fathers by means of his own message^ but also forced the Governors of th^^
City, and the most substantial men (...) every street to enter into
obligation, (...) to consent that any of the Fathers should remain secretly
hidden, under pain (...) their lives, confiscation of their goods and bondage
of their wives and children. The hope that the Fathers had that they might
remain at least some of them in Nangasaqui, and from thence by little and
little go recovering that which they had lost, did something mitigate the
sorrow which they conceived for the^^ Churches lost, and for the evil usage of
the Christians. But now seeing themselves frustrate of that hope, and that ^^
force they must forsake. and leave desolate so many souls which for so long
time they had guyded toward heaven, and instructed in the knowledge and true
service of Almighty God, with so great labor, care, travail and pains, did
wound their very hearts with grief: which was also much increased seeing he
tears, and hearing the lamentations ^f those good Christians which continually
came unto them whilst they remained there, the which was now to ^e but a very
little while: for at that very time there came from the Court the ^nall
resolution of all, which was, that although the Xogun had received the
Embassage of the Portugalls, and promi^ed them all favor in such things as
concerned their trade and traffic, yet ^^ for other matters concerning the
stay ^f some of the Fathers in Nangasaqui, ^here was no remedy; saying that by
^nly granting or permitting them one Church thereon other occasions heretofore,
they had by that means entered a^aine into all the Countries of Iapone, and
that therefore now he would see ^^ he could put them out for good and all.

5. There were in all Iapone 22. Priests, and five lay brethren of the holy
order of S. Dominicke, S. Franci, and S. Austine, seven secular Priests
Iapoman borne, and four or five of other infen^^ our Orders Of the Society
there were 117. Fathers and Brothers, besides that in their Seminary they had
commonly (...) young youths, which they brought up in learning and virtue to
help toward the conversion of their Country; and almost as many more of good
parter and sufficiency which did help to the same end were dispersed in diverse
of the Fathers howses and Residences. The most of these by reason of the
necessity and want whereunto they were brought by the persecution, they were
forced to dismiss, and some of those of the Seminary they left behind with
persons of trust and confidence, because it was not possible to carry them all
with them. All the Fathers did desire to remain had and disguised in Iapone to
help the Christians and be partakers of their sufferinges, but it could not be,
by reason of the strict order that was taken against their stay, and the
extreme difficulty in fynding means to keep them secret.

6. The secular Priests and the other religious persons consulted the matter
amongst themselves, and as many of them remained as could conveniently, and
Father Provincial of the Society did send of his subjects with all secrecy
into diverse places 18. Fathers, and with them nine brethren, and some
Seminaristes, who with more security might visit the Christians in the Fathers
names then they could themselves. Others of the Fathers should have returned
as soon as the were out of the haven, and so remained, but it could not
possibly be effectuated, by reason of the many spies and others that were set
to watch of purpose to hinder their designement therein.

7. For all those persons that were to go into banishment, there were but three
ships, and those little ones, and very ill provided. Upon Saturday being the
25. of October, Safioye sent word, comanding them that upon the 27. in any case
they should imbarke themselves, and if those ships were not ready then, they
should all go unto Fucunda which is another port town thereby. They had
already taken all the pictures out of the Churches: and after they had
comunicated all that were desirous to receive the B. Sacrament and consummated
that which did remain thereof, they made their last Sermons unto the
Christians whom they were to leave behind them there, how they should behave
themselves in the confession of their faith encouraging them to constancy, with
assurance that by the grace of God that tempest would quietly cease and could
not long endure. The bodies of diverse holy Martyrs that had been buried in
their Churches, they took vo and secretly laid them in diverse places where
they might remain secure, and be kept with reverent respect until some better
time. The same they did with the bodies of diverse of the Fathers and brethren
there buried who had with great cure and zeal labored in the cultiuating that
parcel of Christ's vineyard, because they should not be abused and profaned by
the Gentills, enemies of Christ's true religion. Finally these things being al
concluded, upon the 27. of October in the year 1614. the Gentills took
possession of all their Churches. The greater part of the religious men, and
the rest that were appointed to banishement, were carried to Fucunda, and there
put in little Cottages of fishermen, and kept by Officers that watched them
both by sea and land. Others, together with Father Provincial remained in a
place near Nangasaqui five or six days until such time as the ships were
all prepared.

8. And in this place dyed Father James Mesquita a man of great virtue wisdom
and industry in the conversion of the Gentills of that country of Iapone where
he had lived well nigh forty years. He came from thence into Europe diverse
years ago for tutor and conductor of those tower Gentlemen that came in the
name of the Christian Princes of Bungo, Arima, and Omura to kiss Pope Gregory
the 13. his feet, and King Philip the second his hands, and after that so long
journey he spent many years in the conversion and instruction of the people of
those countries of whom he was exceedingly beloved. His sickness was occasioned
as was thought by the grief he took to see the present injuries and
calamities of those poor afflicted Christians. Means was made to Safioye that
he might be carried into the City to be cured there, but he would not permit
it by any means, and so being carried to a little straw cabin of a poor
Fisherman there he dyed with wounderous joy and comfort of his soul upon the
first day of November, having suffered in his life time very much for the
propagation of the faith, and glory of our blessed Savior.

9. The Gentills soon after they had taken the Christians Churches into their
hands with great contempt began to pull them down and burn the wood thereof,
as they had done in Meaco and Ozaca: but this joy did not endure long, for that
not long after there came news that the Kingdom was all in an uproar by
reason of a falling out betwixt the old Xogun and Fideyori the son of
Taycosama, who was last Emperor, as shall be showed at the end of the second
part of this Relation.

10. Upon the 7. and 8. of November did set to sail the glorious fleet of
Religious persons, and Iaponian Gentlemen sent in banishment for the faith of
Christ, and they went in this manner. In one ship that went unto the Philipine
Islands there were the Fathers of S. Dominicke, S. Frauncis, and S. Augustines
Orders, 8. Fathers of the Society, 15. Brethren, and 15. Seminaristes, and with
them Don Iusto, and Don John with their Families, and other Gentlemen banished
from Meaco. In the other two which went for Macan a Port town of China there
went more then threescor Fathers and Brethren of the Society, and more then
sifty Seminaristes. And this was the success of the persecution and banishment
of the Fathers, until the 8. of November 1614. That which happened afterward
shall be related in the second Part: although it seems convenient first in one
or two Chapters more to ad to this a breife narration of the Heroical acts
and virtues of Don Iusto, and of his arrival at the Philippines.

Of the arrival of the Fathers of the Society at Macan, and Manilla; and of
the notable virtues of Don Iusto. CHAP. XVI.
IT is not hard to conjecture in what affliction the poor Christians of Ipone
remained, seeing themselves now without Priests and Pastors, then Churches
cast down and burned, and all the Country swarming with Soldiers, not knowing
what would be the end and event of so tempestuous a storm, yet much more was
the grief of the Fathers, who were by violence separated from their spiritual
Children, whom by the Gospel of Christ Jesus they had begotten unto God, and
whom therefore they most entirely loved, and whose good they most earnestly
desired. This only comforted them, that they hoped to return unto them shortly
disguised, if they could not otherwise; and also to see them with such courage
to suffer for their faith when they departed from them.

2. The two ships that went for Macan arrived safely there within few days, as
both the way being shorter, and the ships much better then that which went unto
the Philipines, which being but an old vessel not well provided, and so laden
with passengers that they could scarce stand one by another, was therefore much
feared would miscary by the way. And this fear was much augmented by means of
two ships of Hollanders which being in Firando meant to have set out after
them and taken them, the which infallibly they would have done, had not the
Lord of that City, though a Gentil, hindered them. The Fathers of the Society
did not think to have sent more then eight or ten unto the Philippines, and
scarce had they taken room for so many in the ship, and therefore when
afterward it fell out to be precisely necessary that eight and thirty should
go therein, they were so straightned and pestered, that therewithal and by
reason of other incommodities there dyed two of the Fathers, and two of the
brethren: two of them whilst they were at sea, and the other two imediatly
after their coming to land.

3. Fa. Antony Francis de Critant was the first of them that dyed at sea, a man
of threescore and eight years old whereof he had spent thirty in Iapone with
great example of sanctity, holiness of life and zeal of souls. He was Minister
of the College of Nangasaqui, and took such pains at the time of their
departure thence that with very wearines, and the foresaid striatnes, without
any other infirmity, he dyed: and because he was of notorious virtue, and dyed
in banishment for the faith of Christ, he was reverenced of all the religious
men that went in the ship, as a worthy Confessor of Christ. He dyed within
sight of land, and therefore the Captain of the ship with diverse of the
religious persons carried his body unto an Hermitage by the shore side, from
whence afterward it was conveyed to the City and College of Manilla, where
within a few days they arrived after a months navigations, wherein they had
had much foul weather and diverse cruel storms.

4. Before I relate the manner of inter, taynment which was made in Manilla to
Don Iusto, Don John and their Company, it will not be amiss to show briefly
who they where, and set down some part of that which they did and suffered for
the faith of Christ, and for his holy Church. This Don Iusto was borne in the
Kingdom of Tzunocuni, not far off from the City of Meaco: his Fathers name
was Darius Findadono, his Mothers Mary: he was of the noble and ancient house
and lineage of Tacayama which does signify a High mountain, and it agreed well
unto them, for both the Father and the Son were men of great virtue,
excellent example, and singular defenders of all the Christianity of Cami, a
great part of the Country so called. Findadono Don Iusto his Father was always
held and esteemed for a very worthy Captain and exceeding wise, much given
whilst he was a Gentil to the study of the Iapoman Sects and superstitious
worship of their Idolles, from which he was brought by this means.

5. Father Gaspar Vilela, and one Laurence a Brother of the Society had
preached the Christian faith in Meaco, for the space of sieve or six years,
with such opposition of the Bonzi and Gentills, that the fruit of their labors
was but very small: many times they went about to have killed them, or banished
them, holding and reputing them as barbarous and ignorant persons, as enomies
of the Caymies and Fotoques, and of the peace and quiet of the Kingdom. At the
petition of the Bonzi, the examination of their cause was committed unto two
Gentlemen very earnest in the superstitions of the Gentills, who one day
meaning to make a mockery of a certain Christian, aked him certain questions
about the Christian faith. He at the first modestly excused himself alleging
his ignorance, as being no scholar, and a simple man, but afterward he
answered the best he could. They urged him with difficultyes more and more, and
he so well behaved himself in answering, that their jesting and mockery turned
to good earnest in the end: for that they seeing themselves convinced with the
reasons which he did allege, desired him in any case he would bring them a
preacher because they meant purposely to heareal that could be said. It was
feared that this was only a trappe laid the better thereby to take the Father,
yet did he send Brother Laurence aforsaid unto the^, who through the help and
grace of God, did so work with the^ that when the Father himself came unto
them as he did soon after, he found wolves turned into lambs, and the men
wholly changed from that they were before, so that after they were instructed
sufficiently he did baptize them, and diverse other who were moved by their
example, and by that means the storm for that time did cease, to the great
grief and discredit of the Bonzi.

6. There was great speech in the Court of the strange mutation of these two
Gentlemen, and Findadono among the rest did use to jest at them very much, it
seeming to him an easy thing to convince the Brother in favor of their Sects.
Inquiring therefore where he was, he went unto him, heard his Sermons, argued,
questioned, disputed with him diverse times, but such was the light and evidence
of the truth of the Catholic religion, that he found himself (though
meruailing at himself) wholly convinced therewith, and so was not only
himself baptized, but carrying the Father to his Castle of Saua, he caused him
also to instruct and baptize his wife, Children, and kindred, and some 100.
Gentlemen of his house. He desired his own name should be Darius, his wifes
Mary, and his eldest son Iustus who was then 15. years old; this happened
the year 1565. in which year also was converted and baptized Don John
Naytodono of fourteen years of age, Lord of almost all the Kingdom of Tamba,
a young Gentlemen of great expectation. By Darius his means and example, he
was moved to be a Christian, and was companion then unto Don Iustus in
baptism, as he was now in banishment.

7. This therefore may be the first comendation of these two noble soldiers of
Christ to have perseuered so firm and constant so many years in the faith
they once received, against all the power of the devil, neither being moved
with the command of three most potent Emperors Nobunanga, Taycesama and the
Xogun that now reigns, nor mollified with the continual persuasions and
example of the Princes, Lords and noble Men of Iapone, nor terrified with
persecutions, losses of their estates liuinges, goods, and honor, nor with the
continual dangers of their lives to do any thing in prejudice of the
profession of their faith, nor (which is yet more) carried away with the
strong stream of licentious life, which in that country is of mighty force,
all liberty in that kind being granted to men of their years and quality to do
any thing indecent or ill beseeming Christian Gentlemen; and all this having
no example at all, nor any other thing besides their faith and religion that
might oblige or move the^ thereu^to, but only the speeches sermons, and
persuasions of a few poor religious men, that were mere strangers unto them,
of no authority, command, or power in the Country, but rather much hated,
disgraced, and abased by the Bonzi, and most of those that did profess the
Religion of Iapone.

8. Their second comendation may be, for the great zeal they always showed in
defending of the Church, and ministers thereof in the great combats and
contradictions which it had in the beginning thereof. Immediately almost after
they were baptized Miyoridono, and Daniedono Don John's uncle, killed the
Cubosama, who was then the Lord of all Iapone, the Bonzi who were then great
with the Dayri (who was the true owner of the Empire) took that opportunity to
get the Fathers banished by public proclamation from the Dayri, consilcating
their House and Church, and very hardly letting them pass with life. In this
occasion these worthy Gentlemen were the principal defense, and almost only
refuge the Fathers had in almost three years that their banishment endured.
And when Nobunanga entered Meaco by force of arms, Darius and Don Iusto by
Vatadono his means who was Governor of Meaco, got the^ restored in honorable
sort, with ample Patentes from the new Cubosama, and Nobunanga to preach the
Gospel freely where they pleased, in despite of all the Bonzi and of the
Dayri himself. And all the time that Nobunanga lived, who favored Don Iusto
very much, they were perpetual defenders and vpholders of the Fathers in many
great and grievous persecutions, raised against them by the Bonzi, exposing
many times to danger for their sakes their estates, their honors and their
lives.

9. Exceeding great likewise was the zeal they had of the conversion of souls
unto the Christian faith. In the time Don John was Lord of the Kingdom of
Tamba (for afterward he lost it in the time of Nobunanga his wars) he was
the cause of great good therein in that kind. The Country of Tucacuqui whereof
Darius and Don Iusto were Lords was full of Bonzi, having many ancient Temples
therein, and very much inhabited by a sort of Gentills that were most obstinate
yet such was their zeal, their care and industry, that partly by entreaties,
partly by benefittes, partly by disputations they moved and persuaded many to
embrace the Christian faith; so that within few years there remained not so
much as one Gentill in all the Country, nor any Temple that either was not
destroyed, or turned into a Church, nor a Bonzo that was not either converted,
or else went willingly away unto some other place. The like they did in another
Country that was given by Nobunanga: and in Acaxi they begone to do the same. By
which may well be gathered the exceeding great number of Gentills, that by
their industry and means received the Christian faith. They builded many
Churches in all the towns, set up many crosses in high ways and upon
montaines, helping in all things the Fathers of the Society that had care
there of the conversion and instruction of the people; and being still the
first in prayer, penance, and all other pious works as Fathers and Masters
of their subjects, to the great admiration of all the Gentills that lived
theraboutes.

10. The same pious offices did they likewise exercise being at the Court among
other Lords and Noble men. For Don Iusto in particular being so wise and
prudent, and so esteemed as he was generally of them all, would never let
occasion pass, but by one means or other he would procure to give notice to
them all; of the truth and solidity of Christian belief, and of the falsehood
and errors of their sects, and that with such efficacity, that all the most
principal Christians of the Court were converted by his persuasion or example,
and the Gentills that were the Fathers friends were al gained by his means.
Inso much that for diverse years the Gentills called the Christian religion the
religion of Tacayama, not knowing other name for it but this of Don Iusto, who
was so zealous a professor thereof.

11. Their integrity and examplar life was also very notable. Darius being now
old, gave over his estate and government to spend his time in the chief business
of the salvation of his soul and the conversion of his subjects to the faith
of Christ, and so dyed a very holy and a happy death in the year 1595. And Don
Iusto his integrity and purity of life was so great he being a most noble and
courageous gentleman, in the very flower of his age, and in the midst of
manifold evil occasions, that Taycosama the Emperor himself did highly
commend him for the same, not without great wondeing thereat. And many noble
men that were convinced in their understanding of the truth and verity of
Christian religion by the sermons which they heard said, that the reasons why
they were not baptized, was because they could not live a continent life, in
that manner as Don Iusto did, it being a thing unworthy to a noble man, or to
an honest mind to profess a religion, and not live accordingly thereto.

12. They were all also most devout unto the holy Sacraments, continually
frequenting the same, and all other actions of religious piety: and so great
was the respect they bare unto the Fathers, who were their spiritual guydes
and Masters, that it was noted in Don Iusto, that in the space of fifty years
in which he daily conuersed with them, he was never heard, nor known to speak
so much as one only vnreuerent word to any one of them all, for whatsoever
cause or occasion that was offered. And which is more, notwithstanding all the
good he did unto them, and for the Church and general cause of all the
Christians, or evils that he suffered for the same; it seemed unto him to have
^eene very small, and not more but that which he was bound to do in honor: and
yet three several times had he for ^^em, and for his faith and religion left
^^s living and estate, lost his honor and ^eputation, and his life also, as far
as lay (...) him to do.

13. The first time was soon after (...) was a Christian upon this occasion.
^raqui the Lord of the Kingdom of ^zunocuni a great friend and benefactor
(...) his, did determine to rise against No^^nanga and join with his enemies,
^^n Iusto was afflicted therewithal, and ^^d all his endeavor possible to
make ^^em friends: and to oblige Araqui the ^^re unto him, he did renew an
oath of ^^elity and freindship which before he ^^d made unto him, and gave unto
him, ^^hostages and pledges of his faith his ^^ly Son, and a sister of his
own, ^^o was then but a child. Hereupon ^^aqui put the matter into his hands,
^^d being in his journey toward the Court about that business, an enemy of Don
Iusto persuaded Araqui that he was betrayed: and that if he went he would loose
both his estate and life. It was a false report, yet Araqui giving credit
thereunto, retired back, and declared himself for an enemy to Nobunanga, and
Don Iusto for many reasons could not choose but follow him, and take hi^ part.

14. Nobunanga had notice thereof, raised a great power, and came again them,
using first many means to dra^ Don Iusto to his part, because he knew him to
be a very great Captain, that (...) had a troup of gallant men, and a
Fortress that was almost invincible: (...) seeing it was not possible, he
took f^^ the last means this, which was to se^ him word, that seeing the
Christian ^^ligion does teach right and justice to (...) done, that he should
leave the friendsh^^ of Anaqui, who without cause and (...) against all right,
reason, justice and equity had made himself an enemy vn^^ him: and that if he
did not, he would destroy the Churches and Christians in his Kingdoms, and
crucify the Fathers even before his eyes: that he should therefore consider
well what he meant to do.

15. This message was more terrible to Don Iusto then death it self would have
been: for on the one side the friendship and great obligations he had to
Araqui, the oath he had made unto him, the pledges which he had given him, his
only Son and Sister, who were innocents, and should be doubtless ^laine if
he yealded unto Nobunanga, the speech of the world that he was not loyal to
his friend; and above all that his Father Darius and his Captains, whereof the
greater part were Gentills, in no ^^se would consent thereto: these reasons I
say did move him very much not ^o leave, but still to stand to Araqui. And on
the other side the destruction of ^he Christians and Churches, and the ^eath of
the Fathers who were already prisoners in Nobunangas Camp, did greatly urge
the contrary. He confulted with one of the Fathers whom Nobunanga sent unto
him, and by him he understood that the oath which he had made to Araqui, did
not bynd him, by reason it was only made with intention to make him and
Nobunanga friends: but yet the reasons before mentioned, together with the
tears of his mother, and his wife, would not permit him yet to make any
resolution: and so the Father returned to the camp to dye with the rest of his
companions, Darius and his Captains all this while knowing nothing of the
business. Don Iusto the^ replenished with grief, full of doub^ and perplexity
which way to turn himself, entered into his Oratory, and the^ casting himself
down before a Crucifix, he did at length resolve himself, not without
abundant tears, to sacrifice to God, as another Abraham, his only Son, his
sister, his honor, and estate, and all he had. Which being done be wrote a
brief letter, and very secretly only with two pages attending on him, went
forthwith after the Father, and kneeling down upon his knees, he cut of his
own hair in sign of leaving off the world: his two pages he sent back unto
his Father and his Captains with the letter he had written, wherein he said,
that seeing himself in that occasion in wondrous perplexity he found no other
remedy but only death, and seeing that it was not lawful to kill himself (as
the Iaponians often do in such occasions) he had determined to dye unto the
world: that they should defend the Fortress and the Country from Araqui, and
he would go to dye, or be banished with the Fathers, whose disciple now he had
made himself, by dying to the world.

16. Darius, and the rest remained astonished with this news: and fearing
least they might come by other means to Araqui his ears, and thereupon his
Daughter and Grandchild be put to some cruel and untimely death, he took post
presently, and went to Araqui himself, protesting that he did not know of his
Sons resolution, and that he came to dye instead of those two innocents
which he had as hostages. Diverse there were that counseled Araqui to crucify
both him and the two Children for an example to all others: but he did not
consent thereto, wondering much both at Iusto and Darius act, and only caused
them to be put in prison for a time. Nohumanga and all with him did highly
commend Don Iusto his deed, and sending for him to come unto his Palace, he
answered that he came not thither to serve him but to die or be banished with
the Fathers: but God Almighty who meant only to prove and try him, did so
dispose, that Araqui was overcome, his wife, children, kinsfolks, and freindes
all killed and crucified. Darius and the two Children set free and safe
delivered, and that he was both more honored then before, and his c^tate
increased, and the Fathers and Christians by his means, more favored. And
this was the first occasion in which he showed his love to his Religion, to the
Fathers, and the common Cause.

17. The second was in the time of Quambacu or Taycosama. A certain Captain
called Aquechi killed Nobunanga in the year 1582. and Don Iusto was one of the
priucipall that did revenge his death and brake the army of the enemies, and
thereby was a great occasion that Quambacu did succeed in the Empire, for which
cause he was very much esteemed of him, and the Christians greatly favored in
that manner, and that he was not held for a man of discretion that had not
heard the Sermons of the Catechism at Don Iustos persuasion. By which means
many noble personages were made Christians and baptized. This prosperity did
endure until the year 1587. in which Quambacu did set upon the conquest of
the Kingdoms of Ximo, in which wars his principal Captains were all
Christians, Don Iusto, Don Augustine., Condera, Simeon, the Lords of Bungo,
Arima, and Omura, and others: so great fervor being in the Camp that all was
hearing of Sermons, and making Crosses in their banners: but all this was
turned vpside down, by the accusation of an old Bonzo called Yacuin upon this
occasion.

18. Quambacu had given unto Don Iusto the estate of Acaxi, and the Bonzi
thereof thinking doubtless they should be thereby utterly undone, before he
came to take possession, they all of them went with their Idols unto Quambacu
his mother, to ask mercy and favor by means of this Yacuin, who was very
great with her, alleging that Don Iusto was a destroyer of Idols and Temples,
and therefore they entreated she would be a means that they, their Temples
with their revenues might be freed and favored. But Don Iusto held himself
for much abused by them, that they would accuse him in the Court, he having
done no injury at all unto them, for which cause he would give no ear unto
them. They departed with many Complaints against him, and Yacuin rested very
desirous to revenge himself of this which he esteemed a disgrace, and of the
destruction of his Idols.

19. Coming therefore from the Country of Arima, he complained unto Quambacu,
that the Fathers had persuaded Arimadono to take from him certain Christian
Gentlewomen which he meant to have brought to him for bad intents and purposes.
He extolled very much their beauty, comelines of person, and the like,
protesting that the Fathers were much more obeyed in that Country then his
Highness, and that it was intolerable that a strange religion should be
permitted to flourish so much within the Kingdom of Iapone, and that Don Iusto
went up and down soliciting all the could, that the Temples and Idols might
be utterly destroyed, the Bonzi banished, and the people made Christians by
maine force, alleging also what he had seen and known done in Tacazuqui,
Acaxi Bungo, Arima, and other parts. Quambacu with this complaint was much
moved unto wrath, and commanded the Fathers to be banished, the Churches
ouerthrown and that all the Lords should either leave their Faith, or loose
their lands, liuinges, and estates.

. The principal Combat was now against Don Iusto, to whom some friends of his
carried the message, and used many persuasions unto him to accomodate himself
unto the time. He answered constantly that he was ready to give his life and
living for Quambacu, but much more for the faith of Christ, and that therefore
if they loved him, they should not so much as mention any such matter any more.
There was none there that durst carry this answer back to Quambacu: whereupon
he rising up said: I will my self tell him so much unto his face, and I will
carry my sword also with me, that his Majesty may with it cut off my head for
this cause if he please. Whereupon Quambacu commanded that he should be
banished, and he accepted it with outward signs of great internal joy. This
only was a grief unto him, to see so many gallant men as he had attending on
him, al unprovided and reduced to poverty upon this occasion: for it is the
custom in Iapone, that the Lord or master being banished, all that hold
liuinges or lands of him do imediatly loofe them all. But neither this nor the
tears of his friends, nor the persuasions of many Princes and Lords could move
him any thing at all. So did he now depart from the Court alone and with
disgrace, where a little before he had entered with great honor and triumph, and
lived in great esteem and reputation. His parents, wife, children and kindred
left upon this news the Fortress and Estate of Acaxi, and did retire
themselves unto a poor village of the mountain Country, where his Father
Darius made an holy end of this miserable and mortal life, and he himself
went secretly to seek the Fathers of the Society, who because they would not
leave the Country and Christians desolate, lay hidden privately in the Island of
Amacasa, where when he came he made the spiritual Exercise with very great
devotion, and therein, a General Confession of all his life since his first
being a Christian, joyful to see himself now freed from the world, and
greatly desirous to begin a new religious life. And Almighty God did so
ordain, that the Lords and Nobles of the Court did even strive among
themselves to receive and give intertainement to the Captains and Gentlemen
that had been his followers, who afterward were occasion of exceeding great
good, and of the spreading of the Christian faith in many Kingdoms.

. More then a year did Don Iusto live in poverty and obscurity, and Quambacu
then seeing that he could not overcome his constancy, nor with honor restore
him to his former place and dignity, he commanded the Lord of the Kingdoms of
Canga, Noto, and Yetehu, who had been Don Iusto his equal a small time before,
that he should keep him in his Country, and give him necessary allowance for
his maintenance. Six and twenty years he lived in those Kingdoms with an
invincible courage and constancy of mind, and rare exemplar life, always
prepared to give his life for Christ. And that which deserves admiration is,
that being so stout of mind and full of metal as he was, and seeing that
other persons that were nothing in respect of him did rise to great estates and
dignities, and that only because he was a Christian did live in perpetual
disgrace and continual danger also; yet did he never give so much as once a
sign of any sadness, nor ever made complaint thereof, but being ever merry,
laughed at the world: although Figendone gave him sieve and twenty thousand
Gocus of rent every year, which do equal almost our Ducates of Europe,
wherewith he lived in good and honorable fashion. After Quam^acu his death, he
builded three or four Churches in those Kingdoms, having always with him
some of the Fathers of the Society, with Figendono his leave, who was the Lord
of those Countries, whose love and affection he had gained in such sort, that
publicly he would not stick to say, that there was no means to obtain
salvation but in the Christian Religion, the which in short time increased so
much in those Kingdoms, that it seemed to flourish there the most of any place
in all Iapone, many of the inhabitants being newly converted and baptized, and
very many that were banished from other places, for their faith, being called
thither by Don Iusto his means, and honorably provided for and maynteyned
there by Figendonoes order and appointment.

. And one of these was Don John Naytodono, together with his son Don Thomas,
for that after he had lost the Kingdom of Tamba, and wandered through many
Kingdoms, he was at length intertayned and much esteemed by Don Augustine, who
gave unto them both very great rentes and revenues in his country, and they
with their great zeal and exemplar life did much help and further the
Christians thereof, until at length in the year 1601. Canzuyedono Lord of
Fingo, after Don Augustines death and overthrow, did raise a cruel persecution
against the Church, in which they both of them suffered exceeding much. For
after many entreaties and persuasions to make them leave their faith, he
confiscated their lands, houses and liuinges, commanding them upon pain of
their lives not to go out of the Country, and that no body should receive them
into their houses, nor sell them any meat, nor buy any thing for them: taking
away also their Children from them, comanding and threating to keep them until
they paid a great su^me of money, so that they were compelled to make
themselves little houses or Cabbines of straw, wherein they and their wives and
family lived for the space of sit months: at the end whereof seeing their
constancy, he took from them all he pleased, and then expelled them out of the
Country almost naked. In this time they both of them wrote most feruorous
letters, worthy to be read, unto the rest of the Christians, animating them to
constancy and perseverance, manifesting therein also their own desires, to dye
for Christ. Don Iusto having intelligence of their miseries, and afflictions,
dealt with Figendono who knew them very well, to send for them, and give them
entertainment: Almighty God so disposing it, to the end that as they had been
companions in their faith, in baptism, zeal and examplar life, so they should
also be in banishment, which is a kind of prolonged martyrdom.

Of their receiving at Manilla, and of the death of Don Iusto. CHAP. XVII.
THIS was their estate when the third and last tempest was raised against them
(as I mentioned in the VIII. Chapter, wherein they were by the Xoguns order
sent to Nangasaqui: there they lived with marvelous example until the end of
October, spending their time in pyous actions and works of Charity. Don Thomas
and others made the spiritual exercise there ( Don John could not by reason of
his sickness) with such devotion as they seemed rather religious persons, then
such as they were. After Don Iusto his death there was found a paper written
with his hand of the good motions, heavenly comfortes and consolations which
God had bestowed upon him at diverse times. At his being in Nangasaqui: diverse
Gentill Lords did send to visit him, desiring to deal with the Xogun to send
for him to the Court: and Fideyori Taycosamaes Son desired much to have him
for his Captain General of Ozaca: but he made small account of all these
offers, saying he would not change his banishment for all the world. It is
certain that before he took shipping he kwew he should die very soon, so that
in the 150 days which passed betwixt the sentence of his banishment, and the
time of his taking ship, he always was expecting death, and that with such
quietness and joy, as if he had been then in his chief prosperity: in so much
that Yetchuydom Lord of the Kingdom of Bugen his great friend, having
understood thereof although he were a Gentil said: Yea marry Sir, with this Don
Iusto does seal (...) the rest of his worthy deeds and excellent exploites;
and if he had not done so, he should have disgraced himself and obscured them.

2. Their Journey by sea was not (...) little troublesome unto them, they never
having been acquainted with Sea voyages before, and carrying with them besides
so many women and Children. But letting this pass: as soon as in Manilla
notice was given of their arrival, there was a general joy in all desiring to
give them all intertainement possible, and in particular the Governor thereof
Don John de Silua, who had heard much of Don Iusto, sent a Galley well
appointed and therein some persons of account to give him the welcome, and to
offer him all courtesy. The wynd being contrary it was three or four days ere
they could come to land. When they landed all the great Artillery was shot off
to welcome them, and all the whole City, and the religious persons thereof
went unto the Sea shore the meet and receive them, as holy Confessors of
Christ, acco^panying them unto the Palace, where the Governor and Judges did
embrace them with all kindness, congratulating their coming thither, and the
courage they had showed in suffering so much for their faith as they had done,
offering unto them both in their own behalfes and in the kings, whatsoever
should be necessary or convenient for them. Don Iusto in most courteous manner
gave them thanks for the great favor and honor they had done to them, they
being altogether unworthy thereof, as not having been so happy to give their
lives for Christ: and so taking their leaves of them, they were accompanied by
the Citizens unto the College of the Society of Jesus, passing in the way by
the great Church, and by the Monastery of S. Augustine at the entreaty of the
Clergy, and Religious persons, who came out of their gats to receive them with
music and solemnity. The like was done the day following, by the Fathers of
the orders of S. Dominicke, and S. Francis, all kind of persons desiring to
show their forwardnes in honoring and entertayning them.

3. Don Iusto lived only forty days after his arrival at Manilla, and in
that time he was often visited by the Governor, by the Archbishop, by the
Religious men, and all the principal persons of the City, all of them
conceiving a great love and affection toward him, and making no less esteem
of him then his worthiness deserved. But he taking small delight in any thing
of this world, desired nothing so much as a house a part, where freed from
visitation and complementes, he might without distraction attend to the chief
business of his soul, saying he feared very much least God would pay him in
this life, for that small service some did imagine he had done him. It seems
that Almighty God did mean to prove this his worthy soldier as he did his
servant Job, and that he would honor him both in life and death in sign of the
great crown he would give him in heaven, for his great courage and constancy
in his faith. For that either through the chang of air and clymates or
differences of meats, or through the incomodities he had endured in his
banishment and navigations (very contrary both to his nature, years, and
complexion) he fell sick of a continual fever, accompanied with a bloody
flux, the which in small time brought him to his end.

4. He knew presently that this disease was mortal, and so he began to prepare
himself for death, and said unto his Confessor: Father, I perceive that I
grow toward my end, although I make no show of it, because of not
discomforting my family. I am very well content, and comforted therewithal, it
being Gods holy will and pleasure, especially among so many religious persons,
and in so Christian a country as this is. I pray you render many thanks in my
behalf unto the Lord Governor, the Archbishop, Judges, Religious men, and all the rest, for the courtesy, favor, and honor they have done me. As for my
Wife, Daughter and Grandchildren take no care, for I take none at all: they and
I am banished for Christ's cause. I do much esteem the love they have always
borne me, and that they would accompany me hither; I hope that Almighty God for
whose sake they are now in a strange country, will be a true Father unto them,
and so they shall have no want of me. He made a Testament, such another as holy
Tobias did, comending unto them perseverance in their faith, and obedience unto
the Fathers, and that if any of them did not well, the rest should advise and
counsel them, and tell the Fathers of them: and if they did not obey, they
should be deprived of their inheritance, and of the name of his house and
Family. This done he received the holy Sacraments with great devotion: and
after he was annealed, he said often times: I desire now to go to enjoy my Lord
and Savior, and so he gave his soul unto his Creator, about midnight upon the
first of February 1615. In all the time of his sickness although it were very
paynfull, he never showed the least sign of impatience in the world nor any
fear at all, nor grief to leave his Wife, and Children altogether unprovided
for, and in a strange country, but great quietness of mind, and conformity with
God Almighty his holy will.

5. Exceeding great was the grief which generally all did show when this news
of his death was published, lamenting on the one side the loss of so worthy a
person whom they entirely loved, and whose example if God had given him longer
life, might have been a potent means for the conversion of his Country,
whenever he had returned thereunto again: and on the other side comforting
themselves, having notice of his holy and happy death, all holding and
esteeming him as a most noble and worthy Confessor of Christ. He was buried in
the Church of the Society of Jesus, whose Ghostly child he had always been.
There were present at his funerals all the Magistrates of the City both
Ecclesiastical and secular; all the religious men and the whole City, many
kissing his hands in sign of great respect and reverence. At the taking of
his body out of the house where it lay, there arose a pyous contention who
should carry his Coffin, every one being desirous to do that office, thereby to
honor him. At length it was agreed, that the Lord Governor and Judges should
carry it unto the street that then the City together with the Confraternity
of the Misericordia (whereof he was a Brother) should from thence carry it unto
the Church, and that there the Superiors of the religious Orders should take it
and convey it to the place where it was to remain, during the time of the
office of the dead.

6. The Clergy of the Cathedral Church did celebrate the office both this
day, and the day of his solemn funeral with great devotion: the like was done
by the religious of the holy orders of S. Dominicke, and S. Francis in their
Monasteries, and by the Fathers of S. Augustines Order in the College of the
Society, they bringing thither to that end such costly ornaments, and doing
all in that fushion, as might well have beseemed the funerals of a King. Upon
the nynth day after his death all that had been present at his burial
returned to his funerals, wherein after the holy sacrifice of the Mass ended
was preached a notable sermon of the heroical virtues of Don Iusto, whose
Exequies they then solemnized, to the great comfort and edification of all
there present, but more in particular of the Iaponians, whereof there were in
Manilla more then a thousand persons at that time, who much rejoiced to see
those so honored in a strange country, who for the faith of Christ were so
afflicted and persecuted in their own.

7. After the death of Don Iusto, his wife Daughter, and Grandchildren remained
with a new sorrow and affliction, and Don John Naytodono old and sickly with
many Children and Grandchildren. Don Thomas in like manner, as also the Lady
Iulia with her Gentlewomen (whereof we spoke in the 6. Chapter) all of them in
a strange country, not having any thing wherewithal to help themselves.
Whereupon the Governor Don John de Silua with the counsel and advise of the
Judges and others of the Kings officers, at the petition of the City and
religious persons thereof, did in the name of his Majesty provide them of all
things necessary for their sustenance with great liberality, during the time
they were to remain in that City: the which in all those Eastern parts will
be a great praise of the Christian piety, as also of the liberality of his
Catholic Majesty, who does so bountifully provide and carefully defend those
that suffer for the only true and Catholic Religion.

The end of the first Part.
TO THE READER.
I Suppose (good Reader) now that thou have read the first Part of this
Relation, that thou do desire or expect the second. But indeed as yet I have
not seen it myself. I have written for it into Spain, unto my friend which
sent me this, and I hope ere long to have it. If I shall understand that by
the reading of this thou have received any contentment, it will greatly animate
me to take the pains to translate the other when it comes. In the mean time
accept of my good will, and so farewell.

THE TABLE of the Chapters
OF the beginning, causes and occasion of the Persecution. Chap. 1. Page 45. Of
the beginning of the Persecution in the Province of Arima. Chap. 2. page 58. Of
some that were banished, and others put to death for the faith of Christ, in
the Province of Arima. Chap. 3 page 76. Of eight Christians Iaponians that were
burned alive for the says of Christ. Chap. 4. page 102. How this last
persecution of all did begin, and of the causes thereof. Chap. 5. page 130. Of
that which happened in Meaco and Ozaca. Chap. 6. page 143. Of some in Meaco,
Ozaca, and Fuximi that were banished for Christian religion, and others
imprisoned. Chap. 7. page 164. Of the banishment of Don Iusto Tacayama, and of
other Gentlemen of Focoru, and of the Christians of Firoxima. Chap. 8. page
181. Of the Christians of Bungo, and of four therein that gave their lives for
the faith of Christ. Chap. 9. page 196. Of other three that were put to death
for the faith of Christ in Facata, and Aquizuqui. Chap. 10. page 214. Of the
great constancy of the Christians of Arima, and how they prepared themselves to
Martyrdom. Chap. 11. page 230. Of the Glorious death of Adam Aracaua, and of
the Christians of Xiqui, and Conzura. Cap. 12. page 246. Of that which passed
in other places: and of the glorious death of Minalius in Fucofori. Chap. 13.
page 270. Of such things as passed in Nangasaqui, before the banisbment. Chap.
14. page 284. How the Fathers of the Society of Jesus were bamshed, and the
Churches of Nangasaqui destroyed. Chap. 15. page 296. Of the arrival of the
Fathers of the Society at Macan, and Manilla; and of the notable virtues of Don
Iusto. Chap. 16. page 308. Of their receiving at Manilla, and of the death of
John Iusto. Chap. 17. page 339.
FINIS

