THE SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES Cross, the tenth day of November, being the
next Sunday after the Discovery of this late Horrible TREASON.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, by Gods permission, Lord Bishop
of Rochester.

ESAIAS 59.5. They hatch Cockatrice eggs: but weaue the Spiders Web.

LONDON Printed by I.VV. for Matthew Law. 1606.

The Preachers friend to the READER.
GEntle Reader, if thou think the Preacher of this Sermon, was upon purpose
appointed to relate the discovery of this late Tragi-comical treason, (
Tragical, in the dreadeful intention: Comicall in the happy and timely
Detection thereof) thou art drceiued: but being three weeks before requested,
to supply the room amongst other Bishops for the Parliament, if it had
continued: this occurrent happened in the interim some four or five days
before the Sabbath, wherein he was to Preach, whereby he thought it fit,
(though he had purposed a Scripture of that day for his Text) to change a
Gospel into a Psalm: which notwithstanding, albeit out of the Psalms, may
well bear the name of Euangelium, not only in respect of David the Author
(who writ more like an Evangelist then a Prophet, and therefore the Fathers
conclude him to be* Homo in veteri, non de veteri Testamento, a man that lived
in the Time, but not after the Manner of the old Law, more like a Christian
than a Jew) but also the Matter, which the Scripture (suitable to this Accident)
will afford: which truly may be called Euangelium Regni, the Gospel or
Tydinges of this Kingdom, and could not but be acceptable to the Hearer, if
the Messenger thereof were accepted (for multum interest quid a quoque dicatur)
and herin Reason and Religion should be, because [Beautifull are those feet (
says Paul) which bring glad tidings of good things:] Now what News so good,
as that in the Prophecy of Esaias, to tell Sion, Regnauit Deus tuus, Thy God
has showed himself a King; and what message more gladsome, than with Nahum to
tell Judah, that the man of Belial is taken, and that the sons of wickedness
shall be utterly cut off. How grateful, or distastefull it was to the Auditorie,
the present Hearers can best report: but whether to tbe censorious reader (who
uses to examine every Periode and sentence with a curious touch in an exact
balance) it will be either current or refuse, is a question, which none but
he, which bringes the assay and scales can assoile, and yet if he will withal,
remember the shortness of the time for the gratulation, the dreadfulnes of the
danger, the fresh escape whereof could not but leave an impression of horror in
the Preachers mind (able to have confounded his Memory,) who should have bin
one of the hoisted number, the late receiving of the Instructions which in that
short space could not be many: he will perhaps not be so rigide in his
Censure, as either prejudice to the person, or opinion of his own ability to
have performed it better, would cause him to be. And, as I heard, the Preacher
himself frankely confess, that unless the Kings Majesty his most excellent
Speech, with the right honorable Lord Chancellor his grave Oration (both of
them in the Parliament house the day before,) and diverse circumstances sensibly
conceived and imparted to him over night, by the Earl of Salisbury, his
Majesty's principal Secretary, had not succored him, he had failed even in
that slender performance, which was then offered to the Ear, and here is
presented to thy View.

Farewell
PSALM. 18.50. Great Deliverances gives he unto his King, and shows mercy to
his anointed David, and to his seed for ever.


THE whole Psalm, as the title shows, 2. Sam. 22. 1. is David's (...), or
Triumphing Song, after his many rescues and victories: and is one of those,
which Psalm 32.7. he calls Cantica liberationis, the Songs of Deliverance:
for it seems that God and David had entered a covenant each with other, Psalm
89.2. ratified on each part with an oath, God for his part took his oath,
Psalm 89.35. I have sworn by my Holiness, that I will never fail David: David
again for his part swear unto the Lord, Psalm* 32.2. and vowed a vow unto
the Almighty, not to cease day and night, to perform all means for the
setting forth of Gods praises, and of that vow, this book of Psalms is an
everlasting witness. wherein he generaly verifieth, what in one place he spoke
de te Canticum meum semper* Psalm 71.8. My song shall always be of thee. In
this, above the rest, he inlargeth himself in that kind, which he begins
with love, I will love thee most dearly O Lord my strength, verse 1. (for
praises not issuing from a loving affection, are either Flatteries or
Hypocrisies) and ends verse 49. I will praise thee O Lord among the Nations:
(for benefits acknowledged, not ending with praises to God, argue either a
profane ingratitude, or an arrogant presumption.) Of both these, namely, his
affection and acknowledgement, this verse is the Epiphonema, or the closing
blast of this triumphing Trumpet, wherein, as if he wanted wind to sound out,
by particular enumeration, all his several Deliverances, (for so himself
confesses, Psalm 40.5. Thy mercies exceed all account, I would declare them,
and speak of them, but I am not able to express them:) therefore, as if this
verse were the etc. or total sum of all the particular Items he would have
you take this for all, Great deliverances, etc.

Which he sets out, first intensiue, showing what they are in their own
nature ( magnificasti salutes) because petty benefices become not GOD to give
for Psalm 2.8. Ask of me, says he, and I will give thee no less then the
Heathen to possess, and thiue enemies to crush.

Secondly, extensiue, how these are diffused or communicated (to David and his
seed) for GOD hoardeth not up his blessings but distributes them abroad,
James 1.17. Every good gift comes down from the Father.

In the part intensiue, concur two parts; First, the double quantity, both
that which they call discreta, the plurality of the number [ Deliuerances] as
also that which they call continua, the magnitude thereof [ great*] Secondly,
the double quality, as well internal and essential [ salutes, healthes,
wholesome Deliverances:] as outward and accidental, [ magnificasti]
deliverances, beseeming a Great God whom Saint Basil calls (...), a most
magnificent King.

The part extensiue, is personal and successiue, the Person [ Dauid] First, as
an eminent person [ a King.] Secondly, as a sacred person [ Annointed] Thirdly,
as a person appropriate unto God, [his King, his Annointed] The sucession
indefinite and infinite, [ unto his seed] the number not defined [ for
euermore] the time not limited.

And both these general parts, he deriueth from these two qualities which
God, by a reiterated speech challenges unto himself above all other
attributes. Psalm 62.11. Power unto God, and unto thee, O Lord, mercy, In
the part Intensiue [ great Deliuerances] there is Gods power, both Potentia
virtutis, Ephesians. 6.10. The power of his might (for weakness cannot make many
rescues) then Potentia claritatis, Coloss. 1.11. The power of his glory, [
Magnificasti] for Gods Deliverances cannot be obscured.

In the part Extensiue, there is Gods mercy [ shows mercyes] First, that
which is called, Luke, 1.78. Misericordia viscerum, his emboweled mercy,
wherewith he tenderly and specially affected David: For which cause, in the
title of this Psalm, (as the Latins read it) he is called Puer Domini, the
Lords Darling, or tenderling, and so much himself confesses 22. verse,
Saluum me fecit quoniam voluit me, Because he had a favor unto me. Secondly,
that which Divines call, Misericordia facta, not only affecting David, but
also acting and perfourming mercies unto him (for so it is here, [
Misericordiam faciens] doing mercy unto David) Thirdly, that which the
Scripture calls Misericordia custodita, Exodus 34.7. His treasured mercy,
Reserving mercy for thousands, etc. Not only to David, but lineally and
laterally, [ to his seed] and that [ for euer] for many generations.

These are the parts of this Scripture, the sum whereof is, that admiration
of David, Psalm 31.19. Quam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae? There is the part
Intensiue which thou have done to them that fear thee, etc. There is the part
extensiue. Of these in their order.

The first part.
THe first part we observed, is the Plurality and the Quality of these
Deliverances: they be plures, and they be salutes: both which with the Fathers,
ye may call the two hands of God, vz. Latitude and Fortitude: the first in the
plurality, Giving to all men, (...), abundantly, 1. Tim. 6.19. that is, Manus
expansa: The second in the quality, defending what he gives powerfully, there
is Manus extensa. Or in Saint Paul's Metaphor, The fullness of Gods riches.
First, Diuitiae gratiae, Ephesians. 1.17. Giving frankely and liberally. Secondly,
Diuitiae bonitatis, Roman. 2.4 In that the things which he gives, be [
Salutes] For so it is, Mat. 7.11. Your heavenly Father shall give unto you
bona, good things* and this comes nearer to David's sense, who, when he
meditates of his Deliverances from God, still attributes them to Gods right
hand. Psalm 73. 23. I was always with thee, and thou vpheldest me with thy
right hand: but herein he observes two things: First, Plenitudo dextrae,
Psalm 16.11. the plenty of that hand. Secondly, salutare dextrae, Psalm. 20.6.
the wholesomnesse of that hand. For the first vz. the plurality: it is not
with God as Esau spoke of his Father Isaac, Genes. 2^.38. Have thou but ONE
blessing my Father? As if God had but one way to save, or as he said, 1. Kings
20.23. that he were a God of the Mountains only, that is, could rid us
from high and eminent dangers and not a God of the Valleis: (yes, and of the
vaultes too we may say,) for with him, says David, there is copiosa
redemptio, Psalm 131.7. all manner of ways to redeem. And therefore as there
being diverse kinds of sins, and for every of them he has mercies answerable
and proportionable* an ability to redeem Israel from all his sins. Psalm.
131 8. as for great sins* he has magnam misericordiam, and for many sins,
multitudinem miseria um. psalm. 51.1 so proportionable to every man's dangers, or
miseries, are Gods deliverances: Be they great as Psalm 71.20. great
adversities have thou showed unto me, etc. Behold here Great deliverances, Are
they Many? as Psalm 25* 17. Tribulationes multiplicasti, my sorrows are
multiplied, there is with him, Multitudo salutum, Ps. 94 19. In the Multitude
of the sorrows which I had in my heart, thy comfortes have refreshed me:
Particularly, to fore-prise a danger, he has Salutem praeuenientem, Psalm
21.3. Thou did prevent me with thy goodness, to meet with a danger when
it comes, he has Salutem praeparantem, Psalm 18, 43. Thou did Girde
me with strength unto the battle, to assist at a pinch in the danger, he
has salutem suscipientem, Psalm 118.13. I was thrust at sore that I might
fall sed Dominus suscepit me, but the Lord vphelde me, to stay a relapse after
an escaped danger, he has salutem confortantem, Psalm 89.21. My hand shall
hold him up, and my arm shall stablish him. And this plurality might David
above all others acknowledge, and so he did, when Psalm 118.14. he confessed,
that God had so many ways delivered him, Vt totus factus esset in salutem, as
if he intended nothing else but to deliver him: For Salus being either
Redimens rescewing from danger, or Redimiens, Dignifying or Crowning with
Honor: the first, 1. Samuel 13.41. shall Jonathan die, qui salutem tam magnam
fecit, which has given us so great Deliverance, that is, salus redimens, For
the second, Psalm 21.5. His Glory is great in tua salute, Why? Glory and
Honor have thou laid upon him, There is Salus Redimiens, in both these,
David had his share from God more then any other. For the first, his Rescew
from the Bears pawe, the Lions iawe, Saules iaueline, Goliahs spear,
Achitophels counsel, Doegs slander, Schemi his reuiling, the mouth of the
sword, the murren of his people, the multiplicitie of his sin, the rebellion
of his son, (no mean nor ordinary dangers) is an evident demonstration, and
accordingly he confessed it, when Psalm 54.7. he says, he has delivered
me from all my fear: For the second, his Honors were as many as his
dangers, the favor with his Prince, the love of the people, the designed
heritage of a Kingdom, the glorious wearing of a Crown, the triumphant
victories over his enemies, the secure establishing of his Kingdom in his
son while he lived: these Salutes it pleased GOD to affoorde him, and with an
oath to assure him; I will make him my first borne higher than the Kings of
the earth: himself puts them both together, Psalm 10.1. verse 4. Praise
the Lord, O my soul, which saves thy life from destruction, there is the
first Salus, his acquitall from danger: which crowns thee with mercy and
loving kindness; there is the second, his requital with Honor. And so much
for the plurality [ Deliverances,] the sum whereof, is that of our Prophet
in Psalm 34, verse 19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers them out of all, this is Plenitudo dextrae.

The second part.
NOw we come to the Quality, that is, salutare dextrae, For as GODS
Deliverances are many, so they be Salutes, they have health in them, they be
as David says, Psalm 21. Verse 3. Benedictiones dulcedinis sweet
blessings: Vsque in delicias amamur, says Seneca: this is GODS Syntaxis, (as
the vulgar English reads, Psalm 28. verse 8. The wholesome Deliverance of his
anointed. It is not so with the sons of men, in whom there may be help* sed
non est salus in eis: Psalm 146.3. there is no health in their help: trust
them not. Munera quae putas, insidiae sunt, their Deliverances are not without
some annoyance, Even the very Saluere of the tongue, like the Saliva thereof,
has some venom in it, Psalm 28. 3. They speak friendly to their
neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts, But their real
Deliverances, much more noxious: For as it is in the Apologue (to which the
Poet alludeth) of the Combat between the Stagge and the Horse, viz. That, the
Horse being too weak for the Stagge, required the help of the man, which he
easily obtained; who getting upon the Horse back, driued the Stagge to flight,
but after that, non equitem dorso, non fraenum depulit oze, he could never
since quit his back of the rider, nor his mouth from the bit: so is it with
the helps of worldly Potentates, beneficia viscata: as the bird having escaped
the snare, percheth upon the tree for refuge, and there she finds bird-lime
to entangle her, from whence she cannot fly, but with loss of her feathers,
if not of her members: so is it with the helps of States and Nations, ask
their help in distress they will grant it; but withal, either they exact a
tribute, which exhausteth the Treasury, or impose conditions, which infringe
the Liberty, or require a future aid, which weakeneth the Power, or betray
upon advantage, which redoubles the Misery, or vpbraide the benefit, which
exulcerates the mind. This is Saluatio ab Optimatibus, (as the Latins read)
Jeremy, 25.35. which as the Usurers loan (to speak for the capacity of the
City) freeth a man from the prison for the time, but inuellops him in bonds
more miserable, more durable than the prison. Herein differing from God, for
his blessing, says Solomon, gives riches, yea and Deliverances; nec addit
molestiam, and joins no sorrows with them. For if it be salutare ex Sion,
Ps. 53.6. Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Ifrael shall be glad.

And thus much for the word Salutes; the sum whereof is, Psalm 85.9. that if
it be Salutare Domini, there concur with it, omnes salutes Glory, Mercy,
Righteousness, Peace, as the Prophet there notes. The conclusion that in
psalm 3.8. Domini est salus, it is the Lord only that gives true Deliverance,
and withal a blessing upon his people. And this for the Plurality and
Quality of the Deliverances.

Now we come to the Quantity, [ Great] wherein we will not go further than
this Psalm, nor there speak of his Salus coronans, either the Celsitude of
his honor, verse 35. He has set me up on high places: nor of the Amplitude of
his honor, verse 45. Thou have made me the head of the heathen, a people
remote and unknown nor of his Triumphs over his enemeies, verse 42. Driving
them, as the wind the dust before him trampling them as the clay in the
streets under him: (though this be also the Salus coronans of our dread
Sovereign and glorious King) but only show the greatness of the dangers
which David escaped, as more suitable to this late horrible occurrent, both in
respect of the dangers themselves as first, Dolores mortis, verse 4. the pangs
of death which the imminent expectation put him unto (for the expectation of
death, is more bitter then death it self. Secondly, Laquei mortis, funes
inferni, verse 6. dangers in the dark, treasons in secret, treacheries of the
Vault. Thirdly, aquae multae, one danger in the neck of another, verse 16. And
also of the Authors, as verse 4. Torrentes iniquitatis, streams of
wickedness, a concurrence of Conspirators. Secondly, (which is our late case)
verse. 48. Vir iniuriarum, or rapinae, a cruel blood-thirstie wretch, like our
Vault-enginer. All these of David's were great indeed, but compared to this of
our gracious King: (the last, I trust, for a worse there cannot be) is but as a
minium to a large, whether we consider therein, either the Plot it self, or
the Con-comitance with it, or the Consequences of it.

Plot.
FIrst in the Plot, observe I pray you a cruel Execution, an inhumane
cruelty, a brutish immanitie, a devilish brutishnes, and an Hyperbolicall, yea
an hyperdiabolicall diuelishnes.

First, Cruelty in the effusio^ of blood, cursed both of God and man: for
Cursed art thou from the earth says God to Cain, Genes. 4.11. for one man's
blood spilt* Cursed be the rage, for it was cruel, says Jacob of his sons,
Genesis 49.7. in the slaughter of the Shechemites.

Secondly, Immane cruelty, in the multitude of the slain, to make himself
drunk with the blood of so many Worthies, and so innocent: (for by the report
of military men) his provision was so large, that if fire had been given,
(beside the place it self at the which he aimed) the Hall of Judgment, the
Courts of Records, the Collegiate Church, the City of Westminster, yea,
White Hall the Kings house, had been trushed and overthrown, such heaps he
had laid in, of Billets, Fagots, huge stones, Iron-crowes, Pike-axes, great
Hammer-heades, besides so many barrels of Gunpowder, five and thirty in
number small and great, as I am credebly informed.

Thirdly, his brutish immanity* in the manner of the death, not man-like to
kill, but beast-like to discerpe, and tear parcel meal, the bodies of such
personages, Ferina rabies est, says Seneca, dilaniare non occidere.

Fourthly, his devilish feritie; first, for the materials of the death intended
( Gunpowder) which they say none but the devil, the King of the sulphurious
pit did invent: secondly, for the fiery massacre it should have made, not from
heaven, as the fire that came down from above upon Jobs substance, Job. 1.16.
For which cause it is there called Ignis Dei, but under the earth, out of a
Cave, as kindled and sent from the infernal pit: The Apostle says, That the
member which sets on fire, Rotam generationis, James, 3.6. The whole course of
generation (as this should have done) it self is set on fire by Hell.

Fifthly, But this more then devilish, for this Devil of the Vault, contented
not himself with the death of the body, but reached in his Project at the
second death, of the soul; by taking away many, so suddenly in their sins
unrepented, with their minds vn-prepared: I trust that this escape will make
many to like the better of the prayer against sudden death, for though I
doubt not, but if it had been effected, that this whirling blast would have
been unto our sacred King, (so Religious in his profession, so innocent from
wrong, so clear in his conscience) as the Whirlwind and fiery chariot of
Elias, to have carried up his soul to heaven, and that God in his mercy,
would have made this Deluge of Blood, as Baptismum sanguinis, a Baptism of
Martyrdom, to have washed away our sinners; and as a Holocaust, an whole burnt
sacrifice, to propitiate his wrath for our Transgressions, yet as much as in
this Fury it lay, he would have sent us all to hell.

Secondly, And still I say, a Rage more then devilish: for the Devil when he
is described to have (...). Apoc. 12.12. to be in his extremest rage, yet
then he is said, verse 4. to have drawn with his tail, but the third part
of the stars, and that from heaven to earth, but this Devil, with his train
would at once have pulled down all the glorious Stars, both fixed, and
erraticall (those that are fastened to the Court, and those which come and go
as they are called and dismissed) yea even the Sun and the Moon themselves,
not from heaven to earth, but to the bottomless pit, as much as in him lay.

Thirdly, and still I say, more then devilish: For as the Fathers (alluding
unto that speech of the King of Sodom, Da mihi animas, caetera cape tibi
Genes. 14.21.) do well observe, that the devil is contented with the souls
of men, for if Job would have cursed God to his face, Job. 1.11. he would not
have cared, though his substance and honor had been increased, and his life
continued, but this Satanicall miscreant, must have body and goods, and life,
and soul, and all.

Lastly, mark in this Plot, a prodition without a match (and yet it should
have been effected with a match) but I mean, a Treason without Parallel; a
slaughter beyond comparison. For the Treason, the nearest that I find to it,
is that in the Roman History of the schoolmaister among the Falerians, whose
City Camillus besieged, who having the sons and youth of all the Nobility,
and the Chief of that City in his tuition, drawing them into the fields a
little without the Walls, under pretense for their recreation, betraide them
all at once into the hands of Camillus: and yet herein there is a great
disparison, for they were but children, but in this case old and young,
parents and progeny, all at once, should have been betrayed, they were alive,
and so might be either raunsomed or recovered, or if slain yet they should
have seen their death: but here without ransom or recovery; or seeing who had
hurt them (for so the letter boasts) a death sudden and invisible: there but
the sprowtes of one Cities Nobility, a small territory: here the stem and
seed Royal, with the Honor and Hope of this whole Islands Gentry and Nobility.

But Slaughter none can I think of matchable therewith. Pharao slew the Males
of Israel, but that was by Edict, and they were Children, and of his Vassalles.
Herod massacred the infantes, but that was to secure him of his State, shaken
(as he thought) by a prediction, Math. 2. Abimelech and Athaliah, killed all
the allies of the blood, but their fury was stanched in the issue Royal. Of
Achilles his fury, it is said by the Poet, (...), that he sent many worthy
men to the grave: but that was in open war, and in the compass of many
years.

And all these were Kings and Tyrants, and so their mind the same with
Polynices in the Tragaedy, Imperia precio quonis constant been, that Kingdoms
are to be bought at any rate: but what should move this, (...), a vermin of
the basest sort, a very Tenebrio, the slave of darkness, like a Mole under
the ground, to subuerte at one push as the Prophet speaks, Esaias. 9.14. head
and tail, branch and root, all in one day? Caligula, was but a shadow; for
he wished that all the Citizens of Rome, had but one neck, that at one blow
he might cut it off: but this Blood-sucker, not only wished it, but contrived
it, prepared for it, and was ready to execute it. There was but one famous
Nero, which for his Cruelty got the name of Nero from all the rest, him has
he matched in Affection: for when one of Nero his dissolute company, had said
Me mortuo, when I am dead, let heaven and earth go together* Nay said Nero,
Me viuo, while I am alive. So meant Guy Faulkes (the true name of a false
traitor) to have beheld as (he said) the houses and bodies flying up; he
living and laughing at it If he had sold us for bond-slaues and hand-maides,
says Hester of Haman, yet there had been life, and so hope of return, but to
make an utter dissolution of the whole State, had been a misery incurable, was
a project most damnable.

Here was read the parties confession, so much as concerned the Plot.
ANd so much of the Plot.

Now for the Con-comitance, what would have come to pass, even with that blow.
The old Greek Proverb is, (...), that no great exploit can suddenly be
effected, especially, alteration of States, do ask a long time and must be
wrought by degrees: for omnis subita mutatio est periculosa, even to the
Conquerors themselves, and therefore in their purpose to change a State, they
will begin with one thing at once, as with weakening the force, or exhausting
the wealth, or altering the Religion, or removing their Governors, but in this
design, Vno flatu, vno ictu, vno nictu, with one blast at one blow, in one
twinkling of an eye, should have bin crushed together, the Government, the
Council, the wisdom, the Religion, the Learning, the strength, the Justice*
of the whole land. The want of one of these is a blemish to a State, and
bringes a misery with it. A Realm without a Monarch as the Sky without the
Sun is a cloud of darkness, a darkness of confusion.

A Monarch without counsel, as a head without eyes, obnoxious of it self to
danger, and a burden to the members.

Counsel without Wisdom, as an arrow out of a childs bow, accidentally
fortunate, but originally weak.

Wisdom without Religion, like Tullies Offices, politic but profane.

Religion without Learning, like the Athenian Altar. Act. 17 superstitiously
devout, but fundamentally unsound.

Learning not guarded with strength, as a rich City without walls, naked and
unfenced.

Strength without Justice, as a Lion broke from his Cage, furious and
insatiable. And yet this darkness, this blindenes, this prophanes, this
superstition, this weakness, this lawles fury, had with this blowing up, bin
blown in and over this whole nation, a thing which neither the greatest
Potentate of the world, with his strongest invasion, nor the most dangerous
rebel, though most popular and powerful, could have brought to pass after
many repulses, and in many years, namely, to take away at once, the hope of
succession, the Oracles of wisdom, the Chariots of Israel, the Beau-peeres of
Learning, the buttresses of strength, the guardians of justice; the glory of
the Nobility, and in one word, the Flower of the whole Kingdom, not, as
Tarquinius, the poppy heads, one after one, but with Sampsons crush, al in a
moment: And which makes the fact more odious, in the sanctuary of the Kingdom.
These would have gone with the blow, but what should the Issue have been?

If the light which is within thee be darkness, says our Savior, Mat. 6.23.
how great is that darkness? and yet such had been ours, when all the lights
together were extinguished* Begin first with the chiefest and brightest,
Lucerna Israel, so is the King called, 2. Sam. 21. It is a woe to a la^d says
the Preacher, where the king is a child Eccle. 10.16. But Write this man
childles, Ier. 22.30. is a more dreadful case: For vbi nullus gubernator,
neither in act, nor hope, populus corruit says Solomon, Pro. 11.14. there
follows a general dissolution. Then come we to the inferior lights, 1. the
lights politic, In the multitude of Counselors there is health, Pro. 24.6.
Sed dissipantur cogitationes vbi non est consilium. Pro. 15.22. The joints of
the whole State are loosened where there is no Counsel. 2. The Lights
Ecclesiastical: The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and at his mouth
the Law must be learned, Mal. 2.7. for they are Lux mundi. Mat 5* both for
inlightning the minds of men with knowledge, and directing their lives by good
example. Now these Priests to be slain by the sword, Psa. 78.64. is a
miserable calamity, but to have no Priest, no Teraphim, no Ephod, no
Church-gouernor (as our case had bin*) is that horrible desolation threatened by
the prophet, Ose. 3.4. Then the Lights Civil, Magistrates inferior, who being
sub-ordinate to the greater, these being quenched, what light can the less
give? what obedience could they have? their authority (at the best) is but
derived: when the fountain therefore is stopped, the rivers are dried, the
Chieftaine removed, the Lieue-tenancie cease. Lastly, Lux morum, Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine, etc. These lights of good manners where had they bin?
in such a Cyclopicall Confusion, wherein as the Poet says, Judge. 17.6,
(...), Nobody hears nothing of Nobody. As the Scripture speaks, wherein
every man does what seems good in his own eyes, be it never so bad, what
Rapes, what Rapines, what riflings, what slaughters had insued? A thing more
miserable to the suruiuors the^ to them which were slain? wherein, what could
be any man's? and yet what might not be every man's? wherein optimu^
misericordiae genus esset occidere, the best kind of pity had bin to slay, and
the happiest news, to hear of death. The hedge lying open for the wild boar
of the forest to enter, a Forrener to invade, or the sly Fox of the wood to
clime, a domestical usurper to intrude, this had bin the Cimmerian darkness
of our nation, when these lights had bin extinguished. And blown out should
they have bin, unless the father of lights had caused light to shine out of
darkness by discovering and revealing this work of darkness: so that we
may truly now conclude with David, Psalm. 97.11. Lux orta est iusto, Light is
sprung up for the Righteous, and joy unto them that are true hearted.

Now do as Assuerus did, cause the Records to be read, Hest, 6.1.
and Chronicles to be searched, ancient, modern, divine, profane, Greek,
Latin among the Turks, in Paganism, yea if Hell keep any Records, search
there, and look if ye can pattern this conspiracy, or match this danger,
so desperate, so cruel, so inevitable, and judge, whether this Conclusion of
David's, do not well sort with this escape of ours. [ Great deliverances gives
he unto his king] but this, perhaps you will say, was but one great indeed,
even a riddance as the Prophet speaks, from the nethermost pit. Psalm. 30.
What is this to the plural in the Text, [ deliuera^ces?] yes, because in this
one there were many; for had our gracious Sovereign only escaped, the
deliverances had bin many, for that even in the very person of the King, there
are many lives, Thou art worth ten thousand of us said the people to David. ^^
Sam. 18.3. So many lives preserved by the kings safety, so many deliverances,
but that speech, 1. Reg. 22.^^. I saw all Israel scattered as sheep wanting a
shephearde, argues that the lives of the whole Nation, are contained in the
Kings person. But this was not all, for withal was delivered both his
fruitful vine, and his Olive branches, as David calls them. Psalm. 128. his
Queen, and Children, the Crown of his Table, the Diadem of his Crown; the
glory of his Diadem, the hope of his glory, the assurance of his hope, and the
pledges of his assurance. The slaughter of Zedekiah his sons, did more grieve
him. Jeremy 52.9. then the loss of his Kingdom, or the Captivity of his own
person, and such being the affection of our loving King unto his dear
Children, he accountes their escape, no mean part of his Deliverances:
Neither was this all, because the best part of his people were withal
delivered, besides the number which was very great. In the multitude of the
people, is the Honor of the King, says Solomon; but a Realm dispeopled is
presently ruined. Proverb. 14.28. Therefore it pleased his Majesty to profess
(in his Royal, judicious, grave, and learned speech uttered yesterday in the
Parliament) that the deliverance of the Estates and Commons, (which were aimed
at) whose lives and welfare, he vowed, were more dear unto him then his own
safety, did more Comfort him then his Personal escape. But in this point of
the Plurality If I would be curious in an other Realm (as then it was) I
might fill up the number of the King his Deliverances, and match them with
David's.

It seems by his Majesty's speech yesterday; that his case and race has bin
the same with the Prophet, being preserved in Vtero, Psalm. 139.13. Ab Vtero,
Psalm. 22.10. Ex vtero, Psalm. 71.6. For no sooner was he conceived in the
womb, but presently he was hazarded, no sooner delivered from the womb, but
environed with danger, and what perils he has passed ever since he was borne,
need not be related, they are so manifest: dismissed from those parts with a
dreadful farewell of a desperate Treachery, and entertained among us with a
Conspiracy unnatural and as dangerous: here Crowned with Thorns, before he
could get on the Crown of Gold. Now therefore, as for these rescues he and
we may truly say with David [ Magnificasti salutes, thou have showed great
deliuerances]: so, for the discovery of the danger; we must needs add with the
same Prophet, Psalm. 17.7. Mirificasti misericordias, thy mercies thou have made
marvelous* mendax odit luce^) to a Noble Gentleman (affected that way in
Religion) who has therein discharged the part both of a loyal and honorable
Subject: his duty he showed, in revealing what was written Here was the
Letter read, and varied upon with some notes.
fearing some danger might be intended, his honor appeared in the detestation
of such a horrible intention.

2 By his Majesty's apprehension, who though he walks securely, in the
sincerity of his Conscience, and innocence of his carriage (which makes him
less jealous and suspicious of danger) yet his heart gave him (by some words
in that letter) that there might be some fiery Engine, perhaps remembering his
Fathers Case, who was blown up with powder.

Here were such Papers read, as concerned the confession which was then known,
and notes given upon them by the Preacher.
THis solertia and ingeniositie of spirit (which in his Majesty I have before
observed) makes me to think that speech of the heathen man to be true, Nullus
vir magnus sine afflatu diuino, and that in Kings there is a divine
inspiration. 3. In God almighty his judgment, both upon the Caitiffe of the
Cave, who being not many hours before in the Celler (when some of the Lords
came thither for some other occasions, as was thought) had not the power to
suspect, or the grace to fly: but when the Privy watch came in the night, he
was the first man that appeared at the door, as if God himself had presented
him unto their hands, and also upon the rest of the Co^spirators. In who^ he
verefied that speech of his son, Mat. 7 In qua mensura, etc. retaliating
their purpose with the effect of their own project, as if he would not suffer
them to be taken, till they were fired out of the house, who would have fired
us within a house: striking some of their eyes out with Gunne-powder, (the
instrument of our death) and some slain with Musket. there also is Fire and
Powder, the Engines of their own Conspiracy* Now surely, Mirificasti
Misericordias, O Lord thou have made thy mercies wonderful* And thus much
shall serve for the first general, the intensiue part. The Conclusion and use
whereof shall be, that since GOD, has been good to us in a double
quantity of Number and Dimention, for Many, for Great Deliverances, we again
answer him in the like proportion, quantity for quantity, as David
prescribes, Psalm 150.2. In multitudine magnitudinis. Has GOD done great
things for us, Psalm, 126.3? Let us with the Prophet answer him in the same
kind, and say; We will give great thanks unto the Lord. Does he fundere
beneficia, power out his benefits upon us, Psalm. 68.19? Let us again
fundere Corda, power out our hearts before him, for GOD is our hope, psalm
62.8. Does he give us cause to triumph, it is our parts as David here to
answer him with an (...), and that in all sorts as the word has been used,
1. (...), to declare this deliverance in triumphant speeches, 2. (...), to give
Triumphantly our Alms to the poor, our dole to the needy; for all should
have been taken from us, therefore we the better may part with some to so y
good uses, 3. (...), to sacrifice in triumph the Calves of our lips, the
prayers of our hearts, the praises of our tongues, and (...), to eat
triumphingly, to feast extraordinarily, For so did the people of GOD among the
Jews upon any strange deliverance. The Father at the return of his Son,
Luke 15. did so, and why not we? Since that is verified of our most gracious
King, which he there spoke of his recovered Son, Mortuus est, and reuixit,
he was dead and is alive again. Dead in the Cabinet of the Conspirators, dead
in the intention of the Villain in the Vault, dead in the preparation of
false-hearted rebels, but reuixit, he is alive again, 1. vixit, escaping
many dangers, He lived, vt induceretur ad nos, to be brought in unto us,
from Hebron unto Jerusalem, from the Northern climat to these Southern
parts, now reuixit, he is alive afresh, vt reduceretur ad nos, to be brought
again unto us, Acherontis faucibus, as his Ma: yesterday said, from the very
gates of death, from the Jaws of the deuourer, from the lowest pit. And long
may he live with us, and reign over us, to the comfort of himself, to the joy
of his Realms, to the confusion of his enemies, to the maintenance of the
Gospel, to the glory of the highest.

And now (but that the time is so far spent) I should come to the second
part, which is the Extensiue, vz. to whom God has showed these deliverances,
namely, [ to his King and his annointed] wherein I might truly have taken
occasion, to have showed how these titles do agree to our dread Sovereign,
both that he is a King, and that he is Gods King, as having in him all the
parts that may concur either in a king, or in a good King, to whom that title,
first attributed to David, (which once before I named) the light of Israel,
principally appertains, as one from whose resplendent brightness, all the
kingdoms of Christendom may receive their light. Whether we look unto the
light of nature; of pregnant wit, of ready apprehension, of sound judgment, of
present dispatch, of impregnable memory.

Or the light of Art, being an universal Scholar, acute in arguing, subtle in
distinguishing, Logiclal in discussing, plentiful in inuenting* powerful in
persuading, admirable in discoursing,

Or the light of grace, whether intellectual, for speculatiue Theology, a
perfect Textuar, a sound Expositor, a faithful Christian, and a constant
Professor, or affectuall, for Regeneration, an assiduous prayer, a chaste
husband, of sweet carriage, of humble deportment, of mortified lusts, of
sanctified life.

Or the light of government, an upright arbitrator in cases of Justice, a
loving father to his subjects, a careful guardian of his kingdoms, a wise
manager of his State, an especial favorer of this City, an absolute Monarch
both for Regiment and judgment: And yet these lights thus gloriously shining
in this golden candlestick, this Nocturnus Ambulo, this diurnus Nebulo, this
nights gadder, this days Pioner, would have at once blown out.

So would I also have handled this word Anointed, which makes a King a sacred
person and therein I purposed, to have showed unto you, that this practice of
murdering princes, is made an Axiom of Theology among the Romanists: who so
reads Parsons, Dolman, Allen and Parsons their cases of conscience, Stapleton
his quod libeticall Oration at Doway, Rossaeus, Reynoldes, Gyfford, or the
bitter expostulation of Ludouicus of Orleance, in the case of the Guyses
faction against Henry of Nauar, now King of France; and lastly, the positions
of the Jesuits of Salamanca, shall find it a conclusion of positive
Divinity: Whereof, were there no other, this word Annointeed, is an
unanswerable confutation. Touch not mine anointed, says the Prophet, Psalm.
105.15. For this David took as an inviolable restraint, both when Saul was
given into his hands, How should I lay hands upon the Lords anointed, 1.
Sam. 24. and as a sufficient reason to execute Saules murderer at least the
messenger of his death, 2. Sam. 1. How durst thou touch the Lords anointed?
Honorauit viuum, Vindicauit mortuum, says Saint Augustine, only for this
reason, because he was anointed: and yet, those which make Religion the
stawking-horse for Treasons, pretend the Catholic Cause, (as these
Conspirators now did) to murder the lords Anointed. Against whom, I would
(if the time had served) in this case have been more bitter, but that I
remember there are some amongst us, who challenge unto themselves the
quintessence of Anointing as He, Esaias 65. Come not near me for I am Holier
then thou, yet come very near to the same dangerous position: not to speak of
Knox and Buchanan, the two fiery spirits of that Church and Nation where they
lived, what means that speech of some of our own Country, extant in Print, in
the late Queens time of blessed memory? that if their reformation should not
be yielded unto there would be shortly a bloody day in England But the time
being so far gone, I will cut off that whole part (being forced thereunto. In
the mean time I shall desire you to ioyn with me in hearty prayer unto
Almighty God for the continuance of our good King, our State, and our Religion
amongst us, giving him thanks for his wonderful mercy, in preserving us from
this terrible blow (as they called it) from this desperate, dreadful and
damnable attempt, saying, O Eternal God and our most mighty Protector, etc.


As it follows in that prayer, beginning with those words, printed in the
book of Thanksgiving for this discovery and delivery: But made by the Preacher.

And let all true Subjects say Amen.

FINIS.

