An Apology or answer in defense of the Church of England, with a brief
and plain declaration of the true Religion professed and used in the same.

Londini, Anno Domini M. D. LXIIII.

To the right honorable learned and virtuous Lady A. B, M. C. wishes from God
grace, honor, and felicity.
MADAME, ACCORDING to your request I have p^rused your studious labor of
tra^slatio^ profitably employed in a right commendable work. Whereof for that
it liked you to make me a Judge, and for that the thing it self has
singularly pleased my judgment, and delighted my mind in reading it, I have
right heartely to thank your Ladi^ship, both for your own well thinking of
me, and for the comfort that it has wrought me. But far above these private
respects, I am by greater causes enforced, not only to show my rejoice of
this your doing, but also to testify the same by this my writing prefixed
before the work, to the commodity of others, and good encouragement of your
self. You have used your accustomed modesty in submittinge it to judgment,
but therein is your praise doubled, since it has passed judgment without
reproach. And whereas both the chief author of the Latin work and I,
seuerallye perusinge and conferringe your whole translation, have without
alteration allowed of it, I must both desire your Ladyship, and advertise the
readers, to think that we have not therein given any thing to any
dissemblinge affection toward you, as being contented to wink at faults to
please you, or to make you without cause to please your self: for there be
sundry respects to draw us from so doing, although we were so evil minded,
as there is no cause why we should be so thought of. Your own judgment in
discerning flattery, your modesty in mislikinge it, the layenge open of our
opinion to the world, the truth of our friendship toward you, the
unwillingness of us both (in respect of our vocations) to have this public
work not truly and well translated, are good causes to persuade, that our
allowance is of sincere truth and understanding: By which your trauail (Madame)
you have expressed an acceptable duty to the glory of GOD, deserved well of
this Church of Christ, honorably defended the good fame and estimation of
your own native tongue, showing it so able to contend with a work originally
written in the most praised speech: and besides the honor ye have done to the
kind of women and to the degree of Ladies, ye have done pleasure to the Author
of the Latin book, in deliueringe him by your clear translation from the
perrils of ambiguous and doubtful constructions: and in making his good work
more publicly beneficial: whereby ye have raised up great comfort to your
friends, and have furnished your own conscience joyfully with the fruit of
your labor, in so occupienge your time: which must needs redounde to the
encoragemente of noble youth in their good educatio^, and to spend their time
and knowledge in godly exercise, having delivered them by you so singular a
president. Which your doing good Madame, as God (I am sure) does accept and
will bless with increase, so your and ours most virtuous and learned
sovereign Lady and Mastres shall see good cause to commend: and all noble
gentlewomen shall (I trust) hereby be alured from vain delights to doings of
more perfect glory. And I for my part (as occasion may serve) shall exhort other
to take profit by your work, and follow your example: whose success I
beseech our heavenly father to bless and prospere. And now to the end both to
acknowledge my good approbatio^, and to spread the benefit more largely, where
you Ladishippe has sent me your book written, I have with most hearty thanks
returned it to you (as you see) printed: knowing that I have therein done the
best, and in this point used a reasonable pollicye: that is, to prevent such
excuses as your modestic would have made in stay of publishinge it. And thus
at this time I leave further to trouble your good Ladishippe.

An Apology or answer in defense of the Church of England, with a brief and
plain declaration of the true Religion professed and used in the same.
IT HAS BEEN AN old complaint, even from ye first time of ye Patriarks and
Prophets, and confirmed by the writings and testimonies of every age,
Tertull. in Apologetico.
that ye Truth wandereth here and there as a stranger in the world, and does
redily find enemies and slaunderers amongst those that know her not. Albeit
perchance this may seem unto some a thing hard to be believed, I mean to
such as have scante well and narowly taken heed thereunto, specially seeing all
mankind of natures very motion without a teacher does coueite the truth of
their own accord: and saying our Savior Christ him self, when he was on
earth would be called the Truth, as by a name most fytte to express all
his divine power: yet we, which have been exercised in the holy scriptures,
and which have both read and seen what has happened to all godly men
commonly at all times, what to the Prophets, to the Apostles, to the holy
Martyrs, and what to Christ him self, with what rebukes, reuilings and
dispightes they were continually vexed whiles they here lived, and that only
for the truths sake: we (I say) do see, yt this is not only no new thing
or hard to be believed, but that it is a thing already received and commonly
used from age to age. Nay truly, this might seem much rather a marvel and
beyond all belief, if the Devil, who is the Father of lies and enemy to
all truth, John. 8.
would now upon a sudden change his nature, and hope that truth might
otherwise be suppressed, then by belyenge yt: Or that he would begin to
establishe his own kingdom by using now any other practices, then the same
which he has ever used from the beginning. For since any man's remembrance,
we cen^e skante find one time, either when Religion did first grow, or when
it was settled, or when it did a fresh spring up again, wherein truth and
innocencye were not by all unworthy means and most despit^ully entreated.
Doubtless the Dyuell well sees, that so long as truth is in good sauery, him
self cannot be safe, nor yet maintain his own estate.

For lettinge pass the ancient patriarchs and Prophets, who, as we said, had
no part of their life free from contumelies and slanders. We know there
were certain in times past, which said and commonly preached, that the old
ancient Jews (of whom we make no doubt but they were the worshippers of the
only and true God) did worshipp either a sow or an ass in Gods steed,
Cornel. Tacitus.
and that all the same Religion was nothing else, but a sacrilege and a plain
contempt of all godlynes. We know also that the son of God, our Savior Jesus
Christ, Mar. 11.
when he taught the truth, was coumpted a Iugler and an enchanter, a
Samaritan, Beelzebub, a deceiuer of the people, a dronkard, and a Glutton.
Again, who wotteth no^ what words were spoken against Saint Paul the most
earnest and vehement preacher and maintainour of ye truth? Sometime that he was
a sedi^^ous and busy man, a raiser of tumultes, a causer of rebellion: sometime
again that he was an heretic, sometime yt he was mad: Sometime that only
upon strife and stomach he was both a blasphemer of Gods law, and a
despiser of the Fathers ordinances. Further who knows not how Saint Stephan
after he had thoroughly and sincerely embraced the truth, and began franklye
and stoutly to preach and set forth the same as he ought to do, was
immediatlye called to answer for his life, as one that had wickedly vtered
disdain^ul and heinous words against the law, against Moses, against the
Temple, and against God? Or who is ignorant that in times past there werre some
which reproved the holy Scriptures of falsehood, saying they contained things
both contrary and quite one against an other: Marcion ex Tertul. Aelius e
Lactantio.
and how that the Apostles of Christ did seuerallye disagree betwixt them
selves, and that S. Paul did vary from them all? And not to make rehearsal of
al, for that were an endless labor: who knows not after what sort our
Fathers were railed upon in times past, which first began to acknowledge and
profess the name of Christ, Eusib. li. 5. cap 11. Tertull. in Apologe. 3.
Idem. 1.2.3. and 7.8.9.
how they made private conspiracies, devised secret councels against the
commonwealth, and to that end made earelie and privy meetinges in the dark,
killed young babes, fedd themselves with men's flesh, and like savage and brute
beasts, did drink their blood? In conclusion, how that after they had put
out the candels, they committed adulterye between themselves, and without
regard wrought incest one with an other, that Brethren lay with their
sisters, sons with their Mothers, without any reverence of nature or kynne,
without shame, without difference: and that they were wicked men without all
care of Religion, and without any opinion of God, being the very ennemies of
mankind, unworthy to be suffered in the world, and unworthy of life?

All these things were spoken in those days against the people of God, against
Christ Jesus, against Paul, against Stephan, and against all them whosoever they
were, which at the first beginning embraced the truth of the Gospel, and
were contented to be called by the name of Christians; which was then an
hateful name among the common people. And although the things which they
said, were not true, Tertull. in Apolo. cap. 3.
yet the Devil thought it should be sufficient for him, if at the least he
could bring i^ so to pass, as they might be believed for true: and that the
Christians might be brought into a common hatred of every body, and have their
death and destruction sought of all sorts. Hereupon Kings and Princes being
led then by such persuasions, killed all the Prophets of God, lettinge none
escape: Esai with a saw, Jeremy with stones, Daniell with Lions, Amos with an
iron bar, Paul with the sword, and Christ upon ye cross, and condemned all
Christians to imprisonmentes, to torments to the pikes, to be thrwone down
headlong from rocks and stepe places, to be cast to wild beasts and to be
burnt, Suctoni in Tranquil. in Nerone.
and made great syres of their quick bodies, for ye only purpose to give light
by night, and for a very scorn and mockinge stock: and did count them no
better then the vilest fylth, thofscouringes and laughing games of ye whole
world. Thus (as ye see) have the Authors and professors of the truth ever
ben entreated.

Wherefore we ought to bear yt the more quyetlye, which have taken upon us
to profess the Gospel of Christ, if we for the same cause be handled after
the same sort: and if we, as our forefathers wear long ago, be likewise at
this day tormented and bayted with raylings, with spiteful dealinges and with
lies, and that for no desert of our own, but only because we teach and
acknowledge the truth.

They cry out upon us at this present every wheare, that we are all
heretics, and have forsaken the faith, and have with new persuasions and
wicked learning utterly dyssolued the concord of the Church, that we renew,
and as it wear, fetch again from hell, the old and many a day condemned
heresies: that we sow abroad new sects, and such broils as never yearst
wear heard of: also that we are already divided into contrary parts and
opinions, and could yet by no means agree well among our selves: that we
be cursed creatures, and like ye Gyauntes do war against God him self, and
live clean without any regard or worshippinge of God: that we despise all
good deeds: that we use noe discipline of virtue, no laws, no customs: that
we esteem neither right, nor order, nor equity, nor justice: that we give ye
brydell to al naugh tines, and provoke the people to all lycenciousnes and
lust: that we labor and seek to overthrow the state of Monarchies and
Kingdoms, and to bring al things under the rule of the rash inco^stante
people and unlearned multitude: that we have seditiously fallen from ye
Catholic Church, and by a wicked schism and division have shaken the whole
world, and trobled the common peace and universal quiet of the church: and
that as Dathan and Abyron conspired in times past against Moises and Aaron,
even so we at this day have renounced the Bishop of Rome without any cause
reasonable: yt we set naught by the authority of thauncient fathers and
Councels of oulde time: that we have rashly and presumptuously disanulled the
old ceremonies, which have been well allowed by our fathers and forefathers
many hundredth year past, both by good customs and also in ages of more
purity: and that we have by our own private head, without the authority of
any sacred and general Council brought new traditions into ye Church, and have
don all these things not for Religions sake, but only upon a desire of
contention and strife.

But that they for their part have changed no manner of thing, but have held
and kept still such a number of years to this very day all things as they
were delivered from the Apostles, and well approved by the most ancient
Fathers.

And that this matter should not seem to be don but upon privy slander,
and to be tossed to and fro in a corner, only to spyte us, there have been
besides wy^ely procured by the Bishop of Rome, certain parsons of eloquence
yenough, and not unlearned neither, which should put their help to this
cause now almost despaired of, and should polyshe and set forth the same, both
in books and with long tales, to the end, that when the matter was trymlye and
eloquently handled, ignorant and unskillful persons might suspecte there was
some great thing in it. In deed they perceived that their own cause did every
where go to wrack, that their sleightes were now espied and less esteemed,
and that their helps did daily fail them, and that their matter stood
altogether in great need of a conninge spokesman. Now as for those things
which by the^ have been laid against us, in part they be manifestly false and
condemned so by their own judgments which spoke the^, partly again, though
they be as false to in deed, yet bear they a certain show and color of
truth, so as the Reader (if he take not good head) may easily be tripped and
brought into error by them, specially when their fine and cunninge tale is
added thereunto: and part of them be of such sort, as we ought not to
shun them as crimes or faults, but to acknowledge and profess them as
things well done, and upon very good reason.

For shortly to say the truth, these folk falsely accuse and slander all
our doings: yea the same things which they themselves can not deny but to
be rightly and orderly don, and for malice do so misconstre and deprave al our
sayings and doings, as though it were impossible, yt any thing could be
rightly spoken or don by us. They should more plainly and sincerely have gone to
work if they would have dealt truly, but now they neither truly nor
sincerelye: nor yet Christianly, but darklye and craftily charge and batter us
with lies, and do abuse the blindenes and fondness of the people, together
with the ignorance of Princes, to cause us to be hated, and the truth to be
suppressed.

This, lo ye, is the power of darkness, and of men which lean more to the
amassed wondering of the rude multitude and to darkness, then they do to ye
truth and light: and as S. Hierome says, which do openly gain say the truth,
closing up their eyes, and will not se for the nonce. But we give thanks to
the most good and mighty God, yt such is our cause, where against (when they
would faynest) they were able to utter no dispite, but the same which might
as well be wrested against the holy Fathers, against the Prophets, against
the Apostles, against Peter, against Paul, and against Christ himself.

Now therefore, if it be lee^ull for these folks to be eloquent and fine
tonged in speaking evil, surely it becomes not us in our cause, being so very
good, to be dumme in answering truly. For men to be careless what is spoken
by them and their own matter be it never so falselye and slaunderouselye
spoken, (especially when it is such, yt the Majesty of God and the cause of
religion may thereby be dammaged) is the part doubtless of dissolute and
retcheles persons, and of them which wickedlye wink at the injuries don unto
the name of God. For although other wro^ges, yea oftentimes great, may be borne
and dissembled of a mild and Christian man, yet he that goes smothelye away
and dissembleth the matter when he is noted of heresy, Ruffinus was wont to deny
that man to be a Christian. We therefore will do the same thing which all
laws, which natures own voice does command to be don, and which Christ him
self did in like case when he was checked and reviled, to the intent we may
put of from us these men's slanderous accusations, and may defend soberly and
truly our own cause and innoncencie.

For Christ verelye when the Pharysies charged him with sorcery as one yt had
some familiar Spirits, and wrought many things by their help, I said he,
have not the Dyuell, but do ^e glorify my Father: but it is you, that have
dishonored me, and put me to rebuke and shame. And S. Paul when Festus the
Lieutenau^t scorned him as a mad man: I (said he) most dear Festus, am not
mad as thou think, but I speak the words of truth and sobrenes. And the
ancient Christians when they were slaundered to the people for mankillers, for
adulterors, for committers of incest, for disturbers of commonweals, and did
perceive that by such slanderous accusations ye Religion which they
professed, might be brought in question, namely if they should seem to hold
their peace, and in manner to confess the fault: lest this might hinder the
free course of the Gospel, they made Orations, they put up supplications, and
made means to Emperors and Princes, that they might defend them selves and
their fellows in open audience.

But we truly, seeing that so many thowsandes of our brethren in these last
twenty years have borne witness unto the truth, in the midst of most painful
torments that could be devised: and when Princes desirous to restrain the
Gospel sought many ways but prevailed nothing, and that now almost the whole
world does begin to open their eyes to behold the light: we take it that
our cause has already ben sufficiently declared and defended, and think it
not needful to make many words, since ye very matter says enough for yt
self. For if the Popes would, or else if they could weigh with their own
selves the whole matter, and also the beginning and procedinges of our
Religion, how in a manner al their trauail has com to naught, no body driving
it forward, and without any wordely help: and how on the other side, our
cause, against the will of Emperoures, from ye beginning against the wills of
so many Kings, in spite of the Popes, and almost maugre the head of all men,
has taken increase, and by little and little spredde over into all countries,
and is com at length even into Kings courts and Palaices. These same things
me thinks might be tokens great enough to them, that God him self does
strongly fight in our quarrel, and does from heaven laugh at their enterprises:
and that the force of the truth is such, as neither man's power, nor yet hell
gates are able to root it out. For they be not all mad at this day, so many
free Cities, so many Kings, so many Princes which have fallen away from the
Seat of Room, and have rather joined themselves to the Gospel of Christ.

And although the Popes had never hetherunto ^ea^our to consider diligentely
and earnestly of these matters, or though some other cares do now let them
and diverse ways pull them, or though they cou^pt these to be but common and
trieflinge studies, and nothing to appertain to the Popes worthiness, this
makes not why our ma^ter ought to seem ye worse. Or if they perchance will
not see that which they se in deed, but rather will withstand the known
truth, ought we therefore by and by to be coumpted heret^kes, because we obey
not their will and pleasure? If so be that Pope Pius were the man (we say not
which he would so gladly be called) but i^ he were in deed a man that either
would accoumpte us for his brethrene, or at least would take us to be men, he
would first diligently have examined our reasons, and would have seen what
might be said with us, what against us, and would not in his Bull whereby he
lately pretended a Counsel, so rashely have condemned so great a part of the
world, so many learned and godly men, so many common wealths, so many kings,
and so many Princes, only upon his own blind preiudices and
foredeterminations, and yt without hearing of them speak, or without showing
cause why.

But because he has already so noted us openly, least by holding our peace
we should seem to grant a fault, and specially because we can by no mean have
audience in ye publik assembly of the general Council, wherein he would no
creature should have power to give his voice or declare his opinion, except he
were sworn and straightly bound to maintain his authority.

For we have had good experience hereof in his last conference at the council
at Trident, where the ambassadors and divines of the Princes of Germany and of
the free Cities were quite shut out from their company: another can we yet
forget, how Julius the third, above ten years past, provided warely by his
writ, that none of our sort should be suffered to speak in the Council
(except there were some paraduenture yt would recante and change his opinion).
For this cause chieflye we thought it good to yield up an accoumpte of our
faith in writing, and truly and openly to make answer to those things
wherewith we have been openly charged, to the end the world may see the parts
and foundacions of that doctrine, in the behalf whereof so many good men have
little regarded their oune lives. And yt al men may understand what manner of
people they be, and what opinion they have of God and of Religion, whom the
Bishop of Rome before they were called to tell their tale, has condemned for
heretics, without any good consideration, without any exaumple, and utterly
without law or right, only because he heard tell that they did dissente
from him and his in some point of Religion.

And although S. Hierome would have no body to be patient when he is suspected
of heresy, yet we will deal herein nether bitterly nor brablingly, nor yet be
carried away with anger and heat, though he ought to be reckned neither bitter
nor brabler yt speaks ye truth. We willingly leave this kind of eloquence to
our adversaries, who whatsoever they say against us, be it never so shrewdly
or dipitefully said, yet think it is said modestely and comely enough, and
care nothing whether it be true or false. We need none of these shyftes which
do maintain the truth.

Further, if we do show it plain that Gods holy Gospel, the aunciente
Bishops and the primative Church do make on our side, and that we have not
without just cause left these men, and rather have returned to the Apostles
and oulde catholic Fathers. And if we shall be found to do the same not
coulorably or craftily, but in good faith, before God, truly, honestly,
clearly and plainly: and if they themselves which ^ye our doctrine and would
be called Catholics, shall manifestly see how al those titles of antiquity
whereof they boste so much, ar quite shaken out of their hands, and that there
is more pith in this our cause then they thought for, we then hope and trust
that none of them will be so negligent and careless of his own salvation, but he
will at length study and bethink him self, to whether part he were best to
join him. Undoubtedly, except one will altogether harden his heart and
refuse to hear, he shall not repent him to give good heed to this out defense
and to mark well what we say, and how truly and justly it agrees with
Christian Religion.

For where they call us Heretics, it is a crime so heinous, yt onles it may be
seen, unless it may be felt, and in manner may be holde^ with hands and
fingers, it ought not lightly to be judged or believed when it is ^aide to the
charge of any Christian man. For heresy is a ^orsaking of salvation, a
renouncing of Gods grace, a departing from the body and spirit of Christ. But
this was ever an old and solemn propretye with them and their forefathers,
if any did complain of their errors and faults, and desired to have true
Religion restored, streighte way to condemn such one for heretics, as men
new fangled and factious. Christ for no another cause was called a Samaritan,
but only for yt he was thought to have fallen to a certain new Religion,
and to be the Aucthor of a new sect. And Paul thapostle of CHRIST was called
before the Judges to make answer to a matter of heresy, and therefore he
said: Act. ^4.
Acordinge to this way which they call Heresye, I do worship the God of my
Fathers, beleeuinge all things which be written in the law and in the Prophets.

Shortly to speak. This universal Religion which Christen men profess at
this day, Tertull in Apologe ^^ico.
was called first of the heathen people a Sect and Heresy. With these terms
did they always fill princes ears, to the intent when they had once hated us
with a foredetermined opinion, and had coumpted all that we said to be
faction and heresy, they might be so ledd away from ye truth and right
understanding of the cause. But the more sore and outrageous a crime heresye
is, the more it ought to be proved by plain and strong arguments, especially
in this time, when men begin to give less credit to their words, and to make
more diligent search of their doctrine then they were wont to do. For ye
people of God ar otherwise instructed now then they were in times past, when
all the Bysshopps of Romes sayenges were allowed for Gospel, and when all
Religion did depend only upon their authority. Now a days the holy
scripture is abroad, the writings of the Apostles and Prophets ar in printe,
whereby all truth and Catholyke doctrine may be proved, and all heresy may be
disproued and confuted.

Since then they bring forth none of these for them selves, and call us
nevertheless Heretics, which have nether fallen from Christ nor from ye
Apostles, nor yet from the Prophets, this is an injurious and a very spiteful
dealinge. With this sword did Christ put of the Dyuel when he was tempted of
him: wc these weapons ought all presumption which does auau^ce it self
against God, to be overthrown and conquered. For all Scripture, 2. Tim. ^.
says S. Paul, that comes by the inspiration of God, is profitable to
teach, to confute, to instruct, and to reprove, that the man of God may be
perfect and thoroughly framed to every good work. Thus did the holy Fathers
always fight against the heretics with none other force then with ye holy
scriptures. (...). cap. 3. ^ontra ^^iminu^ ^anorum ^op ^i. 3.^.14.
S. Augustine when he disputed against Petilian an heretic of ^ Donatistes: Let
not these words, quod he, be heard between us: I say, or, you say: let us
rather speak in this wise: Thus says the Lord: there let us seek the
Church, there let us boult out our cause. Likewise S. H^erome: ^rimum. (...) Agg^
All those things (says he) which without the testimony of the scriptures are
holden as delivered from ye Apostles, be thoroughly smitten down by the sword of
Gods word. S. Ambrose also to Gratianus ye Emperor: Let the scripture (says
he) be asked the question, let the Apostles be asked, let ye Prophets be
asked, and let Christ be asked. For at that time made the Catholic Fathers and
Bishops no doubt, but that our Religion might be proved out of ye holy
scriptures. Neither were they ever so hardy to take any for an he^itike, whose
error they could not evidently and apparently reprove by the self same
scripturs. And we verily to make answer on this wise as S. Paul did:
According to this way which they call heresy, we do worship God and the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and do allow all things which have been written
either in ye Law or in the Prophet^, or in ye Apostles works.

Wherefore if we be heretics, and they (as they would feign be called) be
Catholics, why do they not, as they see the fathers which were Catholic men,
have always don? why do they not convince and master us by the divine
scriptures* why do they not call us again to be tried by them? why do they not
lay before us how we have gone away from Christ, from the Prophets, from the
Apostels, and from the holy fathers? why stick they to do it? why are they
afraid of it? It is Gods cause: why are they doubtful to commit it to ye
trial of gods word? if we be heretkes which refer all our controversies
unto the holy scriptures, and report us to ye self same words, which we know
were sealed by God him self, and in comparison of them set little by all other
things whatsoever may be devised by men, how shall we say to these folk I
pray you, what manner of men be they, and how is it meet to call them, which
fear the judgment of the holy scriptures, that is to say, ye judgment of God
him self, and do prefer before them their own Dreams, and full cold
Inventions: and to maintain their own traditions, have defaced and corrupted
now these many hundred years the ordinances of Christ and of the Apostles?

Men say that Sophocles the tragical Poet, when in his oulde days he was by
his own sons accused before the Judges for a dotinge and sottishe man, as one
that fondelye wasted his own substance, and seemed to need a Governor to
see unto him: to the intent he might clear him self of the fault, he came into
the place of Judgment, and when he had rehearsed before them his Tragedye
called Oedipus Coloneus, which he had written at the very time of his
accusation, marvelous exactly and conningly, did of him self ask the Judges,
whether they thought any sottish or doting man could do the like piece of work.

In like manner, because these men take us to be mad, and appeache us for
heretics, as men which have nothing to do neither with CHRIST, nor with the
Church of GOD, we have judged yt should be to good purpose and not
unprofitable, yt we do openly and frankely set forth our faith wherein we
stand, and show all that confidence which we have in CHRIST IHESV, to the
intent al men may se what is our judgment of every pa^te of Christian
religion, and may resolve with them selves, whether ye faith which they shall see
confirmed by the words of Christ, by the writings of the Apostles, by the
testimonies of the catholic Fathers, and by the exaumples of many ages, be
but a certain rage of furious and mad men, and a compicacie of heretics. This
therefore is our Beli^ffe.

WE BELIEVE that there is one certain nature and divine power, which we call
GOD: and that the same is divided into three equal persons, into ye Father,
into the Son, and into the holy Ghost, and that they all be of own power, of
one Majesty, of one eternity, of one Godhed, and of one substance. And
although these three persons be so divided, that neither the Father is the
son, nor the son is the holy Ghost or the Father, yet nevertheless we
believe ye there is but one very God. And that the same one God has created
heaven and earth, and al things contained under heaven.

We believe that JESUS Christ ye only Son of the eternal Father (as long
before it was determined before all beginninges) when the fullnes of time was
com, did take of that blessed and pure Virgin, both ^^eshe and all the nature
of man, that he might declare to the world the secret and hid will of his
father: which will had been laid up from before all ages and generacio^s. And
that he might full finishe in his human body the mystery of our redemption,
and might fasten to the cross our sins, and also that handwritinge which was
made against^ us.

We believe that ^or our sake he dyed, and was buried, descen^y^ into hel^, the
third day by the power of his Godhed returned to ^yfe and rose again, and that
ye fourtyth day after his resurrection* whiles his Disciples beheld and looked
upon him, he ascendid into heaven, to fulfill all things, and did place in
majesty and glory the self same body wherewith he was borne, Augustine.
tracta, (...) in (...).
wherein he lived on earth, wherein he was ^ested at, where in he had suffered
most painful torments and cruel kind of death, wherein he rose again, and
wherein be ascendid to the right hand of the Father, above all rule, above all
power, all force, all Dominion, and above every name which is named not only
in this world, but also in the world to com. And that there he now sits,
and shall sit, Act. ^.3.
till all things be full perfetted. And although the Majesty and Godhed of
Christ be every wheare habundauntly dispersed, In Epist, ad Dard^^^m.
yet we believe ye his body, as S. Augustine sa^eth, must needs be still in
one place: and that Christ has given majesty unto his body, but yet has not
taken away from it ye nature of a body: and that we must not so affirm Christ
to be God, that we deny him to be man: (...). lib. 1.
and, as the Martyr Vigilius says, that Christ has left us as touching his
human nature, but has not left us as touching his divine nature. And that
the same Christ, though he be absent from us concerning his ma^hood, ^^lgo^^,
ad Thraf^^ (...).
yet is ever present with us concerning his Godhed.

From that place also we believe that Christ shall com again to execute that
general judgment, as well of them whom he shall then synde alive in the body,
as of them that be already dead.

We believe that the holy Ghost, who is, the third person in the holy
Trinity; is very God: not made, not ^reat, not begotten, but proceeding from
both the Father and the Son, by a certain mean unknown unto men and
unspeakable, and that it is his propretie to mollify and soften ye hardness of
man's heart, when he is once received thereunto, either by ye holsom preaching
of the Gospel, or by any other way: that he does give men light, and guide
them unto the knowledge of God, to al way of truth, to newnes of the whole
liefe, and to everlasting hope of salvation.

We believe that there is one Church of God, and that the same is not shut
up (as in times past among the Jews) into some one corner or kingdom, but
that it is catholic and universal, and dispersed throughout the whole
world. So that there is now no nation which can truly complain that they be
shutt forth. and may not be one of ye Church and people of God: And that this
Church is the Kingedome, the body and the spouse of Christ: and that Christ
alone is the Prince of this Kyngedome, that Christ alone is the head of this
body, and that Christ alone is the brydgrome of this spouse.

Furthermore that there be diverse degrees of ministers in the church, where of
some be deacons, some priests, some Bishops, to whom is committed the office
to instruct the people, and the whole charge and settinge forth of Religion:
yet not withstanding we say that there neither is nor can be any one man, which
may have the whole superiority in this universal state, for that Christ is
ever present to assist his Church, and needs not any man to supply his room,
as his only heir to all his substance: and y^ there can be noe one mortal
creature, which is able to comprehe^d or conceive in his mind the universal
Church, y^ is to wit, all the parts of the world, much les able to put
them in order and to govern them rightly and duly. For all the Apostles, as
Cyprian says, De Simpli, praelat.
were of like power among themselves, and y^ rest were the same that Peter was,
and that it was said indifferently to them al, Feed ye^indifferentlye to them
all, Go into the whole world: indifferently to the^ al, Teach ye the gospel:
Ad Euagri^
And as Hierom says, all Bishops wheresoever they be, be they at Rome, be
they at Eugubium, be they at Constantinople, be they at Rhegium, be all of like
preeminence, and of like preesthood. De Simpli. praelatorum.
And as Cyprian says, there is but one Byshoprike, and yt a piece thereof is
perfitely and wholly holde^ of every particular Bishop: and according to the
judgment of the Nicene Counsel we say that the Bishop of Rome-hath no more
jurisdiction over the church o^ God, then the rest of ye Patriarchs either of
Alexandria or Antiochia have. And as for the Bishop of Rome, who now calls
all matters before him self alone, except he do his deuty as he ought to do,
except he administer the sacraments, except he instruct the people, except
he waxue them and teach them, we say yt he ought not of right once to be
called a Bishop, or so much as an elder. For a Bishop, as says Augustine, is
a name of labor and not of honor: because he would have that man to
understand him self to be no Bishop, which will seek to have preeminence, and
not to profyt others: And that neither the Pope nor any other worldly creature,
can no more be head of the whole Church or a Bishop over all, then he can be the
brydegrome, the light, the salvation, and life of the Church. For these
privileges and names belong only to Christ, and be proprely and only fyt for
him alone. And that no Bishop of Rome did ever suffer himself to be called by
such a proud name and ^u^e before Phoras thempetoures ^ime, who as we know,
by killing his own souerain Morice the Emperor, did by a traitorous vyllanie
aspire to Thempere* which was about ye sixth hundredth and thirtenth year after
Christ was borne. Ca. 47.
Also the Council of Charthage did circumspectly provide, that no Bishop
should be called either the highest Bishop or chief preeste. And therefore
^thens the Bishop of Rome will now a days so be called, and chale^geth unto
him self an au^thoritie, yt is none of his: besides yt he does plainly contrary
to ye au^cie^t Councils and contrary to ye old Fathers. We believe that he does
give unto himself* as it is written by his own companyon Gregory, Gregor.
epistola. li, 4. epist. 76.78.80. Et lib. 7 epist. 6.6.
a presu^ptuous, a profane, a sacrilegious and Antichristian name: that he is
also the king of pride, that he is Lucifer, which prefers himself before
his brethren: that he has forsaken the faith, and is the foreronner of
Antichriste.

Further we say, that the Minister ought laufully, duly, and orderly to be
preferred to that Office of the church of God, and yt no man has power to
wrest himself into ye holy ministry at his own pleasure and list. Wherefore
these persons do us ye greater wrong, which have nothing so common in their
mouth, as ye we do nothing ordrely and comely, but al things troublesomly
and without order: and that we allow every man to be a priest, to be a teacher,
and to be an Interpretour of the Scriptures.

Moreover we say, yt Christ has given to his ministers power to bind, to
loose, to open, to shutt, and yt the office of loosing consists in this
point, that ye Minister should either offer by ye preaching of the gospel the
merits of Christ and full pardon, to such as have lowly and contrite hearts,
and do vnfa^nedly repent the^, pronou^cing unto ye same a sure and undoubted
forgeuenes of their sins, and hope of everlasting salvation. Or else yt the
minister, when any have offended their brothers minds with a great offense,
and with a notable and open tault, whereby they have as it were bannyshed and
made themselves strangers from the common fellowship, and from the body of
Christ, then after perfitte amendment of such persons, does reconcile them,
and bring them home again, and restore them to the company and unity of the
faithful. We say also that the minister does execute the authority of
binding and shutting, as often as he shuts up the gate of the kingedome of
heaven against the unbelieving and stubborn persons, denouncing unto them Gods
vengaunce and everlasting punishmente. Or else when he does quite shut them out
from the bosom of the Church by open ex-communicatio^. Out of doubt, what
sentence so ever the Minister of God shall give in this sort, God him self
does so well allow of it, that what soever here in earth by their means is
loosed and bound, God him self will loose and bind, and confirm the same in
heaven.

And touching the kayes wherewith they may either shut or open the kingdom
of heaven, we with Chryso^^om say, they be the knowledge of the Scriptures:
with Tertullian we say, they be the interpretation of the law: and with
Eusebius we call the^ the word of God.

Moreover that Christ's Disciples did receive this authority, not that they
should hear private confessions of the people, and lysten to their
whisperinges, as the common Massing priests do every where now a days, and
do it so, as though in that one poinct lay all the virtue and use of the
kayes: but to thend they should goo, they should teach, they should publishe
abroad the Gospel, and be unto the believing a sweet savor of life unto life,
and unto the unbelieving and unfaithful, a savor of death unto death: and that
the minds of godly persons being brought low by the remorce of their former
life and errors, after they once begone to look up unto the light of the
Gospel, and believe in Christ, might be opened with ye word of God, eue^ as a
door is opened with a keye. Contrary wise, that the wicked and wilful folk,
and such as would not believe nor return into the right way, should be left
still as fast locked and shut up, and as S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 1.
wax worse and worse. This take we to be the meaning of the keys: and that
after this fashion men's consciences either to be opened or shut. We say that
the priest in deed is Judge in this case, but yet has no manner of right to
challenge an authority or power, De poenite^^ did. 1. cap. Verbum (...)
as says Ambrose. And therefore our Savior Jesus Christ to reprove ye
negligence of the Scribes and Phariseis in teaching, did with these words
rebuke them sayng: Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Luke ^^. Math. 2^.
which have taken away the keys of knowledge, and have shut up the kingdom
of heaven before men. Seeing then the keye whereby the way and entery to yt
kingdom of God is opened unto us, is the word of the Gospel and thexpounding
of the Law and Scriptures, we say plainly, where the same word is not,
there is not the keye. And seeing one manner of word is given to al, and one
only keye belongs to al, we say there is but one only power of all ministers,
as concerning opening and shutting. And as touching the Bishop of Rome, for
all his Parasites state^ ringlie singe in his ears those words, To the will I
give ye keys of the kingdom of heaven, (as though those keys were fyt for
him alone and for no body else) except he go so to work as men's consciences
may be made pliaunte, and be subdued to the word of God, we deny yt he does
either open or shut, or has ye keys at all. And although he tought and
instructed the people (as would to God he might once truly do, and persuade
him self it were at the least so^me piece of his duty) yet we think his
keye to be never a whit better or of greater force then other men's. For who
has severed him from the rest? who has taught him more co^ningly to open, or
better to absolve then his brethren?

We say yt matrimony is holy and honorable in all sorts and states of persons,
in ye patriarchs, in the prophets, in the apostles, in holy martyrs, in ye
ministers of ye Church, Chrystost. in epist. ad Tit^m Hom. 11.
and in Byshopps, and that it is an honest and laufull thing (as Chrysostom
says) for a man living in matrimony, to take upon him therewith the dignity
of a Bishop. Eusebius li^ Cap. 5. Nazianzin mono^ de Basilie
And as Sozomenus says of Spiridion: and as Nazianzen says of his own
father, that a good and diligent Bysshopp does serve in the ministry never
the worse for that he is married, but rather the better, and with more ablenes
to do good. Further we say, that the same law which by constrainte takes
away this liberty from men, and compels them against their wills to live
single, is the doctrine of Dyuells, ^. Tim. 4.
as Paul says: and that ever since the time of this law, a wonderful
uncleanness of life and manners in gods ministers, and sundry horrible
enormities have followed, as the Bishop of Augusta, as Faber, as Abbas
Panormi^anus, as Latomus, as the Tripartite work which is annexed to the
second Tome of ye Councelles, and other cha^pious of the Popes band, yea and
as the matter it self and al histories do confess. For it was rightly said by
Pius the second a Bishop of Rome, ^^^ina in (...).
that he saw many causes why wives should be taken away from Preistes, but
that he saw many more, and more weightye causes why they ought to be restored
them again.

We receive and embrace all the Canonical Scriptures, both of the oulde and
new Testament, giving thanks to our God, who has raised up unto us that light
which we might ever have before our eyes, ^^aste either by the sutteltie of
man, or by the snares of the Dyuell we should be carried away to errors and
lies. Also that these be the heavenly voices, whereby God has opened unto us
his will, and that only in them man's heart can have settled rest: that in
them be habundantly and fullye comprehended all things what soever be needful
for our salvation, as Origene, Augustine, Chrysostom and Cyrillus have taught:
That they be ye very might and strength of God to attain to salvation: That
they be the fou^dations of the Prophets and Apostles, whereupon is buylte the
Church of God: That they be ye very sure and infallible rule, wherbe may be
tried whether ye Church does stagger or err, and whereunto all ecclesiastical
Doctrine ought to be called to account: and that against these scriptures
neither law nor ordinance, nor any custom ought to be hard, no though Paul
his own self or an Angel from heaven should come and teach the contrary.

Moreover we allow the sacraments of the Church, that is to say certain holy
signs and ceremonies which Christ would we should use, that by them he
might set before our eyes the mysteries of our salvation, and might more
strongely confirm our faith which we have in his blood, and might seal his
grace in our hearts. And those sacraments together with Tertullian, Origene,
Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, Basil, Dionysius, and other
Catholic Fathers do we call figures, signs, marks or badges, printes,
copies, forms, seals, signettes, similitudes, patterns, representations,
remembraunces, and memories. And we make no doubt together with the same
Doctors to say, that those be certain visible words, seals of righteousness,
tokens of grace: and do expressly pronounce, that in the Lords supper, there is
truly given unto the believing, the body and blood of the Lord, the flesh of
the son of God, which quickens our souls, the meat that comes from
above, the food of inmortalitie, grace, truth, and life. And y^ supper to be
the communion of ye body and blood of Christ, by the partaking whereof we be
revived, we be strengthened, and be fed unto immortality, and whereby we are
joined, united, and incorporate unto Christ, that we may abide in him and he in
us.

Besides we acknowledge there be two sacraments, which we judge proprely
ought to be called by this name, that is to say Baptism, and the sacraments
of thanks giving. For thus many we see were delivered and sanctified by
Christ, and well allowed of the oulde fathers Ambrose and Augustine. We say yt
Babtisme is a sacrament of the remission of sins, and of that washing which
we have in the blood of Christ, and that no person which will profess Christ's
name, ought to be restraigned or kept back therefrom: no not the very babes
of Christians, forsomuche as they be borne in sin, and do pertain unto the
people of God. We say that Eucharistia, the supper of the lord, is a
sacrament, that is to wit, an evident token of the body and blood of
Christ: wherein is set as it were before our eyes, the death of Christ and his
resurrection, and what act so ever he did whilst he was in his mortal body,
to the end we may give him thanks for his death, and for our deliverance. And
yt by the often receauinge of this sacrament, we may daily renew the
remembrance of that matter, to the intent we being fedd with the body and blood
of Christ, may be brought into the hope of the resurrection and of everlasting
life, and may most assuredly believe, that the body and blood of Christ does
in like manner feed our souls, as bread and wine does feed our bodies. To
this ba^kett we think the people of God ought to be earnestly bidden, that
they may all communicate among them selves, and openly declare and testify
both the godly society which is among them, and also the hope which they
have in Christ Ihesu. For this cause if there had been any which would be but a
looker on, and abstain from the holy Communion, him did the old fathers and
Bishops of Rome in the primative Church, Chrysostom. ^^ Ephe. hom.
before Private mass came up, excommunicate as a wicked person and as a Pagan.
Neither was there any Christian at that time which did communicate alone whyls
other looked on. Dis. 2. Ca. Seculares.
For so did Calixtus in times past decree, that after the consecration was
finished, all should communicate, except they had rather stand without the
Church doors: De Consec. did. 2. cap, Perasta.
because thus (says he) did the Apostles apoincte, and the same the holy
Church of Rome keeps still.

Moreover when the people comes to the holy communion, the Sacrament ought to
be given them in both kinds, for so both Christ has commanded, and the
apostles in every place have ordained, and all the ancient Fathers and
Catholic Bishops have followed the same. Conse. (...). 2. Ca. ^mperi.
And whosoever does contrary to this, he (as Gelasius says) commits sacrilege.
And therefore we say, that our Adversaries at this day, who having
violentlye thruste out and quite forbidden the holy Communion, do without
the word of God, without the authority of any ancient Council, without any
catholic Father, without any example of ye primative Church, yea and without
reason also, defend and maintain their private Masses and the manglinge of the
Sacraments, and do this not only against the plain express commandment and
bidding of Christ, but also against al antiquity do wickedly therein, and are
very Church robbers.

We affirm that bread and wine are holy and heavenly mysteries of the body
and blood of Christ, and that by them Christ himself being ye true bread of
eternal life, ^s so presently given unto us, as that by faith we verily receive
his body and his blood. Yet say we not this so, as though we thought that the
nature of bread and wine is clearly changed and goes to nothing, as many have
dreamed in these later times, which yet could never agree among themself of
this their dream. For yt was not Christ's meaning yt the whea^en bread should
lay apart his own nature, and receive a certain new divinity, but yt he
might rather change us (and to use Theophilactus words) might transform us
into his body. Johan. cap. 6.
For what can he said more plainly then yt which Ambrose says, De Sacra. lib.
4. cap. 4.
Bread and wine remain still the same they were before, and yet are changed unto
an other thing: or yt which Gelasius says, ye substance of ye bread, or ye
nature of ye wine, cease not so to be: or yt which Theodorete says, After
the consecration, the mystical signs do not cast of their own propre nature:
Dialogis and 2.
for they remain still in their former substance, form and kind. sermon
infantes. ^e consecrat. ^^st. 2. Cap. ^^ mandu.
Or that which Augustine says, That which ye see is the bread and Cup, and
so our eyes tell us, but that which your faith requires to be taught is this,
The bread is the body of Christ, and the Cup is his blood. Or yt which
Origene says: Origene in ^at. Hom. 15.
Bread which is sanctified by the word of God, as touching ye material
substance thereof, goes into ye belly and is cast out into the priuey. Or that
which Christ him self said, not only after ye blessing of the cup, but after
he had ministered the Comunion: I will drink no more of this fruit of the vine.
It is well known that the fruit of the vine is wine, and not blood.

And in spaekyng thus, we mean not to abase the Lords supper, or to teach
that yt is but a could ceremony only, and nothing to be wrought therein: (as
many falsely slander us we the ache) For we (...) that Christ does truly and
presently give his own self in his Sacraments: In baptism, that we may put
him on: and in his supper, that we may eat him by faith and spirit, and may
have everlasting life by his cross and blood. And we say not this is done
slightly and couldely, but effectually and truly. For although we do not
touch the body of Christ with tee^he and mouth, yet we hold him fast and eat
him by faith, by understanding, and by the spirit. And this is no vain faith
which does comprehend Christ: and that is not received with cold devotion,
which is received with understanding, with faith, and with (...) For Christ
him self altogether is so offered and given us in these mysteries, that we may
certainly know we be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: and that
Christ continues in us, and we in (...). And therefore in celebrating these
mysteries, ye people are to good purpose exhorted before they come to receive
the holy communion, con did. 1. Quando.
to lift up their hearts, and to direct their minds to heaven ward, because he
is there, by whom we must be full fed and live. ^^ Obiecti. ^eodoreti.
Cyrill says, when we come to receive these mysteries, al gross ymaginations
must quite be bannished* The council of Nice, as is alleged by some in
greek, plainly forbids us to be basely affectioned, or bent toward the
bread and wine which are set before us. And as Chrysostom very aptly writes:
^ysost. in 10 Corinth.
We say that the body of Christ is the dead carcas, and we our selves must be
the Egles* meaning thereby, that we must fly hye if we will come unto the
body of Christ. For this table as Chrysostom says, is a table of Egles and
not of Ieyes. ^ Co^. ^ ^^mini.
Cyprian also, This bread says he, is the food of the soul, and not the
meat of the belly. And Augustine, Johan, ^^acta. 50.
How shall I hold him, says he, which is absent? how shall I reach my hand
up to heaven to lay hold upon him that sits there? He answers, Reach
thither thy faith, and then thou have laid hold on him.

We can not also away in our churches with ye shows and sales, and byeng and
selling of Masses, nor the carrieng about and worshipping of bread, nor such
other ydolatrous and blasphemous fo^dnes, which none of them can prove yt
Christ or his Apostles did ever ordain, or left unto us: and we justly blame
ye Bishops of Rome, who without ye word of God, without ye authority of the holy
fathers, without any example of antiquity, after a new guise do not only set
before ye people yt sacrame^tal bread to be worshipped as God, but do also carry
ye same about upon an ambling horse, In libro de Ceremonij^ Romanae Ecclesiae.
whyther soever themselves journey, as in old time ye Persia^s fire and ye
relics of ye goddess Isis were solemly carried about in processio^, and have
brought ye sacraments of Christ to be used now as a stage play, and a solemn
sight, to the end that men's eyes should be fed with nothing else but with mad
gasinges and foolish gaudes, in the self same matter wherein the death of
Christ ought diligently to be beaten into our hearts, and wherein also the
mysteries of our redemption ought with all holiness and reverence to be executed.

Besides, where they say and sometime do persuade fools, that they are able by
their Masses to distribute and apply unto men's commodity all the merits of
Christ's death, yea although many times ye parties thinck nothing of ye matter,
and understand full little what is don, this is a mockery, a Hethenyshe fancy,
and a very toye. For it is our faith that applies the death and cross of
Christ to our benefit, and not the Act of the Massing priest. Faith had in
the Sacraments (says Augustine) does justify, and not the sacraments. And
Origene says: Christ is the priest; ^rigen. ad (...) cap. 3.
the propitiation and sacrifice, which propitiatio^ comes to every one by
mean of faith. So that by this reconing we say, that the sacraments of
Christ without faith, do not once profit those that be alive, a great deal
less do they profit those that be dead.

And as for their bragges they are wo^t to make of their Purgatory, though we
know it is not a thing so very late risen amongst them, yet is it no better
then a blockyshe and an old wives devise. Augustine in deed sometime says
there is such a certain place: Augustine psalm. 85. ^ Enchiri^ cap. 67. De
C^^it 21. Cap. 2 Hypog^^*
sometime he denies not but there may be such a one: sometime he doubts,
sometime again he vttrely denies it to be, and thinks that men are therein
deceived by a certain natural good will they bear their friends departed. But
yet of this one error has there grown up such a harvest of these
Massemongers, ye Masses being sold abrod commonly in every corner, the Temples
of God became shoppes to get money, and selie souls were persuaded that
nothing was more necessary to be bought. In ded there was nothing more
gainefull for these men to selle.

As touching the multitude of vain and superfluous ceremonies, we know that
Augustine did grievously complain of the^ in his own time: (...). ^^a. 119.
and therefore have we cut of a great number of them, because we know that men's
consciences were cumbred about the^, and the Churches of God ouerladen with
them. Nevertheless we keep still and esteem not only those ceremonies which
we are sure were delivered us from the Apostls, but some others too besides,
which we thought might be suffered without hurt to the church of God, because
we had a desire that all things in the holy congregation might (as Paul
commands) be don with comelines and in good order: but as for all those
things which we saw were either very superstitious or unprofitable, or
noisome, or mockeries, or contrary to the holy Scriptures, or else unseemly
for honest or discrete folks, as there be an infinite number now a days where
Papistery is used, these I say we have vterly refused without all manner
exception, because we would not have the right worshypping of God any longer
defiled with such folies.

We make our prayers in that tongue which all our people, as meet is, may
understand, to thend they may (as Paul counseleth us) take common commodity by
common prayer: even as all the holy Fathers and catholic Bishops both in the
old and new Testament did use to pray them selves, and taught the people to
pray to; least as Augustine says like parrottes and ousells we should seem
to speak that we understand not.

Neither have we any other Mediator and Intercessour, by whom we may have
access to God the Father, the^ Jesus Christ, in whose only name all things are
obtained at his Fathers hand. But it is a shameful part and full of
infidelity that we see every where used in the Churches of our adversaries,
not only in that they will have innumerable sorts of mediators, and that
vterly without the authority of Gods word. So that, ^e* ca. 2 ^.
as Jeremy says, the Saints be now as many in number, or rather above the
number of the Cities: and poor men cannot tell to which Saint it were best to
turn the^ first. And though there be so many as they cannot be told, yet
every one of the^ ^hath his peculiar deuty and office assigned unto him of
these folks, what thing they ought to ask, what to give* and what to bring to
pass: but besides this also, in that they do not only wickedly, but also
shamelesly call upon the blessed virgin Christ's mother, ^^dus.
to have her remember that she is a mother, and to command her son, and to
use a mothers authority over him.

We say also, that every person is borne in sin, and leads his life in
sin: that no body is able truly to say, his heart is clean. That ye most
rightuous person is but an unprofitable servant: That the law of God is
perfect, and requires of us perfect and full obedience: That we are able by no
means to fulfill that law in this worldly life: That there is no one mortal
creature which can be justified by his own deserts in gods sight, and
therefore that our only succor and refuge is to fly to the mercy of our Father
by Jesus Christ, and assuredly to persuade our minds, that he is the obtayner
of forgiveness for our sins. And that by his blood al our spots of sin be
washed clean: That he has pacified and set at one all things by the blood of
his Cross: That he by the same one only Sacrifice which he once offered
upon the Cross, has brought to effect and fulfilled al things, and that for
that cause he said when he gave up the Ghost, It is finished* as though he
would signify that the price and ransom was now full paid for the sin of
all mankind. If there be any then that think this sacrifice not sufficient,
let them go in Gods name and seek an other that is better. We verily, because
we know this to be the only sacrifice, are well content with it alone, and
look for none other: and forasmuch as it was to be offered but once, we
command it not to be renewed again. And because it was full and perfect in
all points and parts, we do not ordain in place thereof any continual
succession of offeringes.

Besides, though we say we have no meede at all by our own works and
deeds, but apoint all the mean of our salvation to be in Christ alone, yet
say we not that for this cause men ought to live looslie and dissolutely: nor
that it is enough for a Christian to be Baptized only and to believe, as
though there were nothing else required at his hand, for true faith is lively,
and can in no wise be idell. Thus therefore ^ea^he we the people, that God
has called us not to follow ry^t and wantonness, but as Paul says, unto good
works, to walk in them. That God has plucked us out from the power of
darkness to serve the living God: to cut away all the remnauntes of sin,
and to work our salvation in fear and tremblinge, that it may apere how that
ye Spirit of sa^ctification is in our bodies, and that Christ himself does
dwell in our hearts.

To conclude, we believe that this our self same flesh wherein we live, although
it dye and come to dust, yet at the last day it shall return again to life
by the means of Christ's spirit which dweleth in us, and that then verily
whatsoever we suffer here in the mean while for his sake, Christ will wipe
from of our eyes all tears and lamentation, and that we through him shall
enjoy everlasting life, and shall for ever be with him in glory. So be it.

Behold these are the horrible heresies for the which a good part of the
world is at this day condemned by the Bishop of Rome, and yet were never heard
to plead their cause. He should have commenced his suit rather against
Christ, against the Apostles, and against the holy fathers. For these things
did not only proceed from them, but were also appointed by them: except perhaps
these men will say (as I think they will in deed) that Christ has not
instituted the holy Communion to be divided amongst the faithful: Or that
Christ's apostles and the ancient fathers have said Private masses in every
corner of the Temples, now ten, now twenty togithers in one day: Or that
Christ and his Apostls bannished all the common people from the Sacrament of
his blood: or that the thing which them selves do at this day every wheare,
and do it so as they condemn him for an heritike which does otherwise, is
not called of Gelasius their own doctor plain sacrilege: or (...) these be
not ye very words of Ambrose, Augustine, Gelasius, Theodorete, Chrysostom, and
Origene, The bread and wine in the Sacraments remain still the same they were
before: The thing which is seen upon the holy table, is bread: there cease
not to be still the substance of bread and nature of wine: the substance and
nature of bread are not changed: the self same bread as touching the
material substance, go^th into the belly, and is cast out into the pryuei:
Or that Christ, the Apostles, and holy fathers prayed not in that tongue
which the people might understand: Or that Christ has not performed all
things by that one offering which he once offered: or that the same Sacrifice
was imperfect, and so now we have need of an other. All these things must
they of ne^cessitie say, unless perchance they had rather lay thus, that all
law and right is locked up in the treasury of the Popes breaste, and that as
once one of his southinge pages and clawbackes did not stick to say, the Pope
is able to dispense against the Apostles, against a council, and against ye
Canons and rules of ye Apostls, ^^st. 36, lect. in Gl^s^.
and yt he is not bound to stand neither to ye examples, nor to the
ordinu^aces, ^istinct. 82. Presbyter.
nor to ye laws of Christ. We for our parts have learned these things of
Christ, of the Apostles, of the devout fathers, and do sincerely and with
good faith teach the people of God the same. Which thing is the only cause
why we at this day ar called heretics of the chief prelates (no doubt) of
Religion. O immortal God, has Christ him self then, ye Apostles and so many
Fathers, al at once gone a stray? were then Origene, Ambrose Augustine,
Chrysostom, Gelasius, Theodoret, forsakers of the catholic faith? was so
notable a consent of so many ancient Bishops and learned men nothing else,
but a conspiracye of heretics? Or is that now condemned in us, which was
then commended in them? Or is the thing now by alteration only of men's
affection suddenly beco^me shismatique, which in them was compted catholic?
Or shall that which in times past was true, now by and by, because it likes
not these men, be judged false? Let them then bring forth another Gospel, and
let them show the causes why these things which so long have openly ben
observed, and well allowed in the Church of God, ought now in thend be called
in again. We know well enough, that the same word which was opened by
Christ, and spread abroad by the Apostles is sufficient, both our salvation and
al truth to up hold and mayntein, and also to confound all manner of heresy.
By that Wo^d only do we condemn all sorts of the old heretics, whom these
men say we have called out of hell again* As for the Arrians, the Eutychians,
the Marcionites, ye Ebionites, the Valentinians, the Carpocratians; the
Tatians, the Nouatians, and shortelie all them which have had a wicked opinion
either of God the Father or of Christ, or of the holy Ghost, or of any other
poinct of Christian Religion* for somuche as they be confuted by the Gospel of
Christ, we plainly pronun^^ them for detestable and cast away persons, and
defye them even unto the dyuell. Neither do we leave them so, but we also
severely and straitely hold them in by lawful and politic punisheme^tes, if
they fortune to break out any where and bewraye themselves.

In deed we grant that certain new and very strange sects, as the
Anabaptists, Libertines, Menenia^s, and Zuenkfeldians have been stirring in the
world euersence the Gospel did first spring. But the world sees now right
well, thanks be given to our God, that we neither have bredd nor taught, nor
kept up these Monstres. In good fellowship I pray the whosoever thou be, read
our books, they are to be sold in every place^ What has there ever ben
written by any of our company, which might plainly bear with the madness of
any of those heretics? Nay I say unto you, there is no country at this day
so free from their pestilent infections, as they be wherein the gospel is
freely and commonly taught. So that if they wey the very matter with earnest and
upright aduisement, this thing is a great argument, yt this same is the very
truth of the Gospel which we do teach. For lightly neither is cockell wont
to grow without the wheat, nor yet the chafe without the corn. For from the
very Apostles times, who knows not how many heresies did rise up even
together, so soon as the Gospel was first spread abroad? Who ever had heard
tell of Simon, Menander, Saturninus, Basilides, Carpocrates, Cherinthus, Ebion,
Valentinus, Secundus, Marcos^us, Colorbasius, Heracleo, Lucianus, and Seuerus,
before the Apostles were sent abroad? But why stand we reackoninge up these?
Epiphanius rehearses up four score sundry heresies, and Augustine many more,
which did spring up even together with the Gospel. What then? was the
Gospel therefore not the Gospel, because heresies sprang up withal? or was
Christ therefore not Christ? And yet as we said, does not this great crop and
heap of heresies grow up amongst us, which do openly a broad and frankely
teach the Gospel? These poysones take their begininge^, their encreasinges and
strengh amongst our Adversaries, in blindenes and in darkness, amongst whom
truth is with tyranny and cruelty kept under, and cannot be heard but in
corners and secret meetinges. But let them make a proof, let them give the
Gospel free passage, let the truth of Jesus Christ give his clear light and
stretche sorth his bright beams into all parts, and then shall they furthwith
see how all these shadows straight will vanyshe and pass (...) at the light
of the Gospel, even as the thi^h myste of the night consumith at the light of
ye sun. For whilst these men sit still and make merry, and do nothing, we
continually repress and put back all those heresies, which they falselye
charge us to noryshe and maintain.

Where they say that we have fallen into sundry sects, and would be called
some of us Lutherians, some of us Zuinglia^s, and cannot yet well agree among
our selfs touching ye whole substance of doctrine, what would these men
have said, if they had been in the first times of the Apostles and holy
Fathers, when one said: I hold of Paul, an other I hold of Cephas, an other I
hold of Apollo: when Paul did so sharpelye rebucke Peter: when upon a
falling out Barnabas departed from Paul: when as Origene mentions, the
Christians were divided into so many (...), as that they kept no more but the
name of Christians in common among them, being in no manner of thing else like to
Christians, when as Socrates says, for their dissensions and sun dry sects
they were laughed and iested at openly of the people in the common gameplayes,
when as Constantine the Emperor affirms, there were such a number of
variaunces and braulinges in the church, that it might justly seem a misery
far passing all the former miseries? when also Theophilus, Epiphanius,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Rufine, Hierome, being all Christians, being all
Fathers, being all catholics, did strive one against an other, with most
bitter and remediles contentions without end? When as says Nazianzene, the
parts of one body were consumed and wasted one of an other? when the East part
was divided from the West, only for leuened bread, and only for keeping of
Easter day, which were in did no great matters to be striued for? And when in all Councels (...) Credes and new decrees continually were devised? what would
these men (from ye) have said in those days? which side would they specially
the^ have taken, and which would they then have forsaken? which Gospel would
they have believed? whom would they have accoumpted for heretics, and whom
for Catholics? And yet what a stir and revel keep they at this time upon
two poor names only Luther and Zwinglius, because these two men do not yet
fully agree upon some one poinct, therefore would they needs have us think,
that both of them were deceived, that neither of them had the Gospel, and that
neither of the^ taught the truth aright. But good God, what manner of fellows
be these, which blame us for disagreing, and do all they themselves, ween you,
agree well together? Is every one of the^ fully resolved what to follow? has
there ben no strifes, no debates amongst the^ at no time and why then do the
Scotistes and Thomistes about that they call meritum congrui, and meritu^
condigni, no better agree together? Why agree they no better among themselves
concerning original sin in ye blessed virgin: concerning a solemn vow, and a
single vow? Why say the Canonistes that auricular confession is appoineted
by the positive law of man, and the Scholemen contrary wise, that it is
appoincted by the law of God? Why does Albertus Pius dissente from Caietanus?
why does Thomas dissent from Lomb^rdus, Scotus from Thomas, Occanus from
Scotus, Allie^sis from Occanus: And why do the Nominalis disagree from the
Realles? And yet say I nothing of so many diversities of friars and monks,
how some of them put a great holiness in eating of Fyshe, and some in eating of
herbs: some in wearing of shows, and some in wearing of Sandalles: some in
going in a lynnen garment, and some in a woollen: some of the^ called whit, some
black: some being shaven broad, and some narowe: some stalkinge abroad upon
patens, some barefooted: some girte, and some vngert? They ought Iwys to
remember how there be some of their own company which say, that the body of
Christ is in his supper naturally: Stepha. (...) in Di^ol^^ Sophisti^ (...)
Richard (...) Smith.
Contrary other some of the self same company deny it to be so: Again that
there be other of them which say, the body of Christ in the holy Communion
is rent and torn with our teach, De consec Reca^t. Pe^ Scholae, and Gloss.
(...).
and some again that deny the same. Some also of them there be, which write
that ye body of Christ is quantum in Eucharistia, That is to say, has his
perfect quantity in the Sacrament: Some other again say nay. That there be
others of them which say, Christ did consecrate with a certain divine power,
Thomas Aquinas
some that he did the same with his blessing, some again that say he did it
with vtteringe five solemn those words, and some with rehearsing the same
words afterward again. Some will have it that when Christ did speak those
five words, the material wheaten bread was pointed by this demonstratiue
Pronoune, Stephanus ^ardiner
hoc: Some had rather have that a certain vagum indiuiduum, as they term yt,
was meant there by. Again, others there be that say, (...). did. Glosa.
dogs and myce may truly and in very deed eat the body of Christ: (...).
Sent. ^hol^.
and others again there be that steadfastly deny it. There be others which
say, that the very accidents of bread and wine may nuryshe: others again
there be which say, how that the substance of the bread does return
again. What need I say more? yt were over long and tedious to reckon up all
things, so very uncertain and full of controversies is yet the whole form of
these men's religion and doctrine, eue^ amongst themselves, from whence it did
first spring and begin. For hardly at any time do they well agree between
themselves, except it be peraduentur as in times past the Pharisees and
Saducees or as Herod and Pylate did accord against Christ. They were best
therefore to go and set peace at home rather among theeir own selves. Of a
truth, unity and concord does best become Religion, yet is not unity the
sure and certain mark whereby to know the Church of God. For there was the
greatest consent that might be amongst them that worshipped the Golden
calfe, and among them which with one voice jointly cried against our Savior
Jesus Christ, Crucify him. Another because the Corinthians were unquieted with
private dissensions, or because Paul did square with Peter, or Barnabas with
Paul: or because the Christians upon the very beginning of the Gospel were at
mutual discord, touching some one matter, may we therefore think there was
no church of God amongst them* And as for those persons whom they upon spite
call Zwinglians and Lutherians, in very deed they of both sides be Christians,
good friends and brethern. They vary not betwixt themselves upon the
principles and foundacions of our religion, nor as touching God nor Christ nor
the holy Ghost, nor of the means to justification; nor yet everlasting life,
but upon one only question, which is neither weighty nor great: neither
mistrust we or make doubt at all, but they will shortly be agreed. And if
there be any of them which have other opinion than is meet, we doubt not but
or it be long, they will put apart all affections and names of parties, and
that God will reveal it unto them: so that by better considering and searching
out of the matter, as once it came to pass in the Council of Calcedone, al
causes and seeds of dissension shall be thoroughly pluct up by the root, and
be buried and quite forgotten for ever. which God grant.

But this is the most grievous and heuye case that they call us wicked and
ungodly men, and say we have thrown away all care of religion. Though this
ought not to trouble us much, whiles they themselves yt thus have charged us,
know full well how spiteful and false a saying it is: for Iustine the martyr
is a witness how that all Christians were called (...), Euseb^^ lib. 4*
that is Godless, as soon as the Gospel first began to be published, and
the name of Christ to be openly declared. And when Polycarpus stood to be
judged, the people stirred up the President to sleye and murder all them which
professed the Gospel, with these words, (...), That is to say, Rid out of
the way these wicked and Godles creatures. And this was not because it was
true that the Christians were Godless, but because they would not worship
stones and stocks, which were then honored as God. The whole world sees
plainelye enough already, what we and ours have endured at these men's hands
for religion and our only Gods cause. They have thrown us into prison, into
water, into fire, and ha^^ embrued themselves in our blood, no^ because we
were either adulterers or robbers, or murderers, but only for tha^ we
confessed the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and put our confidence in the living
God. And for that we complained to justly and truly (Lord thou know) that
they did break the law of God for their own most vain traditions: And that
our Adversaries were the very foes to the Gsopel, and ennemies to Christ's
cross, who so wittingly and willingly did obstinately despise Gods
commandments. Wherefore when these men saw they could not rightly find
fault with our doctrine, they would needs pick a quarrel, and inuey and
rail against our manners, surmisinge how that we do condemn all well doings,
how we set open the door to all licenciousnes and just, and lead away the
people from all love of virtue. And in very deed the life of all men, even of
the deuoutest and most Christian, both is and evermore has been such, as
one may always had some lack, even in the very best and purest conversation.
And such is the (...) of all creatures unto evil, and the readiness of al men
to suspect, that the things which neither have been done, nor once meant to be
done, yet may be easily both heard and credited for true. And like as a
small spotte is soon spyed in the neatest and whytest garment, even so the
least stain of dishonestie is easelye found out in the purest and sincerest
life. Neither take we all them which have at this day embraced the doctrine of
the Gospel to be Angels, and to live clearly without any mote or wrinkle: nor
yet think we these men either so blind, that if any thing may be noted in us,
they are not able to perceive ye same even through the least ereuie, nor so
friendly that they will construe ought to the best: nor yet so honest of nature
nor courteous, that they will look back upon themselves, and wey our fashions
by their own. If so be we list to search this matter from the bottom: we
know in the very Apostle times there were Christians, through whom the name
of the Lord was blasphemed and evil spoken of among the Gentiles. Constantius
the Emperour^ be waileth, as it is written in Sos^menus, how that many waxed
worse after the^ had fallen to the religion of Christ. And Cyprian in a
lamentable Oration sets out the corrupt manners in his time* The wholesome
discipline, Cyprian de ^apsis.
says he, which the Apostles left unto us, has idleness and long rest now
utterly marred, every one studied to increase his liuelyhode, and clean
forgettinge either what they had done before, whiles they were under the
Apostles, or what they ought continually to do having received the faith: they
earnestly labored to make great their own wealth with an insatiable desire of
covetousness. There is no devout religion, says he, in Priests, no sound
faith in ministers, no charity showed in good works, no form of Godliness
in their conditions, men are become effeminate, and women's bewty is
counterfeited. And before his days, said Tertullian, O how wreatched be we
which are called Christians at this time? For we live as Heathens, under the
name of Christ. And without reciting of many mo writers, Gregory Nazianzene
speaks this of the pitiful state of his own time: We says he, are in
hatred among ye Heathen for our own vices sake, we are also becomme now a
wonder not alone to Angels and men, but even to all the ungodly. In this
case was the Church of Godd when the Gospel first began to shine, and when
the fury of Tyrauntes was not as yet cooled, nor the sword taken of from the
Christians necks. Surely it is no new thing that men be butte men,
although they be called by the name of Christians.

But will these men I pray you think nothing at all of the selves, whiles
they accuse us so maliciously? and whiles they have leisure to behold so far
of, and see both what is done in Germanye and in England? Have they either
forgotten, or can they not see what is done at Rome? Or be they our accusers,
whose life is such, as no man is able to make mention thereof but with shame
and vncomelines? Our purpose here is not to take in hand at this present to
bring to light and open to the world those things which were meet rather to
be hyd and buried with the workers of them, It besemyth neither our Religion,
nor our modesty, nor our shamefastenes. But yet he which gives commandment
that he should be called the vicar of Christ and the head of the Church, who
also hearith that such things be don at Rome, who sees them, who suffers
them (for we will go no further) he can easily consider with him self what
manner of things they be. Let him on Gods name call to mind, let him remember
that they be of his own Canonistes, which have taught the people that
fornication between single folk is not sin (as though they had fet that
doctrine from Mitio in Terence) whose words be: Johan. de magist. D^ tempera^^
It is no sin (believe me) for a young man to haunte harlottes. Let him
remember they be of his own which have decreed, yt a preiste ought not to be
put out of his cure for fornication. 3.4.7 la^^ Extra. de bigamis Quia, circ
Let him remember also how Cardinal Campegius, Albertus Pighius and others
many more of his own, have taught yt the priest which keeps a Concubine,
does live more holily and chastelye, then he which has a wife in matrimony. I
trust he has not yet forgoten, that there be many thousands of common
harlottes in Rome: and that him self does gather yearly of ye same harlottes
upon a thirty thousa^de Duckettes by ^he way of an annual pension. Neither can
he forgette how himself does maintein openly brothels houses, and by a most
filthye lucre does filthelye and lewdelye serve his own lust. Were all things
then pure and holy in Rome, when Iohane a woman rather of parfe^t age the^ of
parfect life, was Pope there, and bare her self as the head of the Church? And
after that for two whole years in that holy Sea, ^he image this woman Pope
^ng in tra^l, ^s yet be seen Rome.
she had plaide the naughty Pack, at last going in procession about the
City, in the sight of all the Cardinals and Byshopps fell in travail openly in
the streets?

But what need one rehearse Concubines and Bawds, as for that is now an
ordinary, and a gainefull sin at Rome. For harlottes sit there now a days,
Genesis 38.
not as they did in times past without the City walls, and with their faces
hid and covered, but they dwell in palaces and fair houses: they strey about in
Court and market, (...) concilio. ^lect. Card. (...). 1.
and that with bare and open face: as who say they, may not only laufully do
it, but ought also to be praised for so doing. What should we say any more of
this? their vicious and abominable life is now thoroughlye known to the whole
world. Bernarde writes roundely and truly of the Bishop of Romes house, De
co^sid. ad Eugeni^
yea and of the Bishop of Rome him self. Thy Palaice sayethe he, takes in
good men, but it makes none: naughtye persons thrive there, and the good
appayre and decay. And who soever he were which wrote the Tripartite work
annexed to the Council Lateranense, says thus, So excessive at this day is
the ryote as well in the Prelates and Bishops, as in the Clerks and Preistes,
that it is horrible to be told. But these things be not only grown in ure
and so by custom and continual time well allowed, as all the rest of their
doings in manner be, but they are now waxen old and rotten ripe. For who has
not heard what a heinous act Peter A^oisius, Pope Paul the thirdes son
committed against C^^mus Cherius the Bishop of Fauense^ what John Casus
Archbishop of Beneuentanus the Popes Legate at Venyce wrote in the
commendation of a most abominable fylthynes, and how he set forth with most
lothesom words and wicked eloquence, ye matter which ought not once to proceed
out of any bodies mouth. To whose ears has it not come, that N. Diasius a
Spaniard, being purposely sent from Rome into Germany, did shamefulie and
diuilishlie murder his own brother John Diasius, a most innocent and a most
godly man, only because he had embraced ye Gospel of Jesus Christ, and would
not return again to Rome?

But it may chance, to this they will say: These things may sometime happen in
the best governed commonwealth, yea and against the Magistrates wills: and
besides, there be good laws made to punyshe such. I grant it be so: but by
what good laws (I would know) have ^hese great myscheues benne punyshed
amongst them? Petrus Aloisius after he had don that notorious Act that I
spoke of, was always cherished in his fathers bosom Pope Paul the third, and
made his very derling. Diasius after he had murdered his own brother, was
delivered by the Popes means, to thend he might not be punyshed by good laws.
John Casus Archiepu^s Beneuentarius is yet alive, yea and lives at Rome, even
in the eyes and sight of the most holy Father. They have put to death
infinite numbres of our brethren, only because they believed truly and
sincere^ie in Jesus Christ. But of that great and foul number of harlottes,
fornicatours, Adulterers, what one have they at any time (I say not killed) but
either excommunicat, or once attached? Why? volunteousnesse, adultery,
rybaudrie, whoredom, murdering of kinn, incest, and others more abominable
parts, are not these coumpted sin at Rome? Or if they be sin, ought
Christ's vycar, Peter's successor, the most holy Father, so lightly and
^lytely bear them as though they were no sin, and that in the City of Rome,
and in that principal tower of all holiness?

O holy Scribes and Pharisees, which knew not this kind of holiness. O what
holiness, what a Catholic faith is this? Peter did not this teach at Rome, Paul
did not so live at Rome: they did not practice brothelry which these do openly:
they made not a yearly reuenewe and profit of harlottes: they suffered no
common Adulterours and wicked Murderers to go unpunished. They did not receive
them into their intier familiarity, into their Council, into their house
houlde, nor yet into ye company of Christen men. These men ought not therefore
so vnresonablie to triumph against our living. It had been more wysedom for
the^, either first to have proved good their own life before the world, or
at least to have ^^^ked it a little more conningly. For we do use still the old
and ancient laws (and as much as men may do in the ma^ers used at these
days, when al things are so wholly corrupt) we diligently and earnestlye put
in execution thecclesiasticall discipline: we have not commen brothell houses
of strumpettes, nor yet flocks of Concubynes, nor heardes of harlot haunters.
Neither do we prefer adultery before matrimony, neither do we exercise
beastly sensuality. Neither do we gather ordinary rentes and stipendes of
stews, nor do suffer to escape unpunished incest and abominable naughtines,
nor yet such manquellers as the Aloisrans, Casia^s, and Diasia^s were. For if
these things would have pleased us, we neded not to have departed from these
men's fellowship, amongst whom such enormities be in their chief pride and
price. Another* neded we for leaving them to run into ye hatred of men, and
into most wilful dangers. Paul the fourth not many months since, had
at Rome in prison certain Augustine friars, many Bishops, and a great
number of other devout men, for Religion sake, he racked them and tormented
them: to make them confess, he left no means unassayed. But in thend how
many brothels, how many whoremo^gers, how many adulterers, how many incestuous
persons could he find of all those? Our God be thanked, although we be not yt
me^ we ought and profess to be, yet whosoever we be, compare us with these men,
and eue^ our own life and innocence will sone prove untrue, and condemn their
malicious surmises. For we exhort the people to all virtue and well doing,
not only by books and preachinges, but also with our examples and behavior.
We also teach that the Gospel is not a boasting or bragging of knowledge, but
yt it is ye law of life, (...) Apoll (...)
and yt a Christian man (as Tertullia^ says) ought not to speak honorably, but
ought to live honorably: nor that they be the hearers of the law, but the
doers of the law, which are justified before God.

Besides all these matters wherewith they charge us, they are wo^t also to add
this one thing, which they enlarge with all kind of spitefulnes: that is,
that we be men of trouble, yt we pluck ye sword and Scepter out of Kings
hands: that we ar^^e the people, that we overthrow judgment places, destroy
the laws, make havoc of possessions, seek to make the people Princes, turn
all things vpsyde down: and to be short, yt we would have nothing in good
frame in a commonwealth. Good lord, how often have they set on fire Princes
hearts with these words, (...). ho Apollo^ ca. 1.2.3.
to thend they might que^che the light of the Gospel in the very first
apperinge of it, and might begin to hate the same or ever they were able to
know it, and to the end that every magistrate might think he saw his deadly
ennemy, as often as he saw any of us. Surely it should excedingly grieve us to
be so malitiouslie accused of most heinous treason, unless we knew that
Christ himself, the Apostles, and a number of good and Christian men were in
time past blamed and envied in manner for the same faults. For although Christ
taught they should give unto Caesar that which was Cesars, yet was he charged
with sedition in that he was accused to devise some conspiracy and to couete
the kingdom. And hereupon they cried out with open mouth against him in the
place of judgment, saying: If thou let this man escape, thou art not Cesars
friend.

And though ye Apostles did likewise evermore and steadfastly teach, ye
Magistrates ought to be obeyed, ye every soul ought to be subject to the higher
powers, not only for scare of wrath and punishment, but even for conscience
sake, yet bear they the name to disquiet the people, and to stir up the
multitud to rebel. After this sort did Haman specially bring the nation of the
Jews into the hatred of the king Assuerus, In the book of Hes^^
because, said he, they were a rebellious and stubborn people, and despised
the ordinances and commaundimentes of princes. Wicked king Achab said to Elie
the Prophet of God, 3.0 Reg. 1 ^^
It is thou that troublest Israel. Amasias ye priest at Bethell laid a
conspiracy to the prophet Amos charge before king Ieroddam saying, See,
Amos. ^.
Amos has made a conspiracy against thee in the midst of the house of
Israel. To be brief: Tertullian says, this was the general accusation of
all Christians whiles he lived, In Apol^ cap. 37.
that they were traitors, they were rebels, and the ennemies of mankind.
Wherefore if now a days the truth be likewise evil spoken of, and being the
same truth it was then, if it be now like dispitefully used as it was in times
past, though it be a grievous and unkind dealinge, yet can it not seem unto us
a new or an unwonted matter. Forty years agone and upward, was it an easy
thing for them to devise aginst us these accursed speeches and other sorer the^
these, when in the midst of the darkness of that age first began to
spring and to give shine, some one glimmeringe beam of truth unknown at
that time and unheard of, when also Martin Luther and Hulderike Zwinglius
being most excellent men, even sent of God to give light to the whole
world, first came unto the knowledge and preachinge of the Gospel, whereas yet
the thing was but new, and the success thereof uncertain: and when men's
minds stood doubtful and amassed, and their ears open to all slanderous
tales: and when there could be imagined against us no fact so dete^^able, but
the people then would soon believe it for the nouelty and strangenes of the
matter. For so did Syminachus, so did Celsus, so did Iulianus, so did
Porphirius the old foes to the Gospel attempt in times past to accuse all
Christians of sedition and treason, before (...) ^epute or People were able to
(...) who those Christians were, what (...) professed, what they believed, or
what was their meaning.

But now since our very ennemies do see and cannot deny, but we ever in all
our words and writings have dilige^tlie put the people in mind of their
dewtie, to obey their Princes and Magistrates, ye though they be wicked: For
this does very trial and experience sufficiently teach, and all men's eyes,
whosoever and wheresoever they be, do well enough see and wytnes for us, yt was
a soul part of them to charge us with these things: and seeing they could
find no n^w and late faults, therefore to seek to procure us envy only with
stale and out worn lies. We give our lord God thanks, whose only cause this
is, there has yet at no time been any such example in all the Realms,
Dominions and commonweals which have recciued the Gospel. For we have
overthrown no kingedome, we have decayed n^ man's power or right, we have
disordered no common wealth. There continuin their own accustomed state and
ancient dignity the Kings of our country of England, the Kings of
Denmark, the Kings of Souetia, the Dukes of Saxony, the Counties Palatine,
the Marquesies of Brandeburgh, the Lansgraues of Hessia, the common wealths of
the Heluetians and Rhe^ians, and the free cities, as Argentine, Basil,
Frankforde, Vline, August and Nor^enberge, do all I say abide in the same
authority and estate wherein they have been heretofore, or rather in a much
better, for that by means of the Gospel they have their people more obedient
unto them. Let them go I pray you into those places where at this present
through Gods goodness the Gospel is taught, where is there more majesty's
where is there less arrogancy and tirrannye? where is the Prince more
honored? where be the people less (...) has there at any time the (...)
wealth or the Church been (...)? Perhaps ye will say, (...) the first
beginning of this (...) the common sort every wheare (...) to rage and to
rise throughout (...). Allow it were so, yet Martin Luther the publisher and
setter (...) of this doctrine, did write (...) behementlye and sharply
against them, and reclamed them home to (...) and obedience.

But whereas it is wont sometime to be objected, by persons wantinge skill,
(...) the Heluetians change of (...) and killinge of Leopoldus the duke of
Austria, and restoringe by force their Country to liberty, that was done as
(...) playtielye by all stories, for (...) hundredth and threescore years past
or above, under Boniface the ^ight, when the authority of the Bishop of Rome
was in greatest solitie, about two hundredth years before Hulderike Zuinglius
either began to teach the Gospel, or yet was borne. And ever sen^e that
time, they have had all things still and quiet, not only from foreign
ennemies, but also from ciuell dissension. And of it were a sin in the
Heluetians to deliver their own country from foreine gouernemente, specially
when they were so proudelye and tyrannoullye oppressed, yet to burden us with
other men's faults, or them with the faults of their forefathers, is against
all right and reasone.

But O immortal God, and will the Bishop of Rome accuse us of treason? will
he teach the people to obey and follow their Magistrates? or has he any
regard at all of the Majesty of Princes? why doothe he then as none of the
old Bysshoppes of Rome heretofore ever did, suffer him self to be called
of his flaterers, August. ^teuehu^, Antonius (...) Rosellio
Lord of Lords, as though he would have all (...) and Princes, who and
what (...) they are, to be his underlings? (...) doothe he vaunte him self
to be (...) al kings, and to have kyngelye (...) over his Subjects? why
(...) he al emperors and princes to swear (...) and true obedience? Why (...)
that the Emperors (...) is a thowsandfould inferior to him and for this
reason, De Mayor and obedi, Solite.
specially because God has made two lyghtes in the heaven, De mayor* and obed
en Vnam sact^
and because heaven and (...) were created not at two beginninges, but at on.
Why has he and his comp^tes (like Anabaptists and (...), to the end they might
run on more licenciouslye and careleslye) shaken of the yoke, and exempted
themselves from being under all ^iuell power? why has he his Legates (as much
to say as most s^^tle spies) lieng in wait in all (...) Courts, Counsels,
and priuey (...)? why does he, when he ly^^, (...) Christian Princes one
against an other, and at his own pleasure trouble the whole world with debate
and discord? why does he excommunicat^ and command to be taken as a heathen
and a Pagan any Christian prince that renounceth his authority? and why
promises he his Indulgences and his pardons largely to any that will (what way
soever it be) kill any of his ennemies? Does he maintain Empires and
kingdoms? Or does he once desire that common quiet should be provided for?
You must pardonne us good Reader, though we seem to utter these things more
bitterlye and bitingly then it becomes Divines to do. For both the
shamfulnes of the matter, and the desire of rule in the Bishop of Rome is so
exceeding and outrageous, that it could not well be uttered with other words,
or more mildly. For he is not ashamed to say in open assembly, men^. 5.
Concilio. enmensi.
that all jurisdiction of al kings does depend upon himself. And to feed his
ambition and greedines of rule, (...)
has he pulled in pieces the Empire of Rome, and hered and rent whole
Christendom (...) falsely and trenterouslie also did he release ye Romans, ye
Italians, and him (...) to, of the oath whereby they and he (...) straightly
bound to be true to the Emperor of Grecia, and stirred up the Emperors
subjects to forsake him, and taking Carolus Martellus out of France into
Italy, made him Emperor: such a thing as never was seen before. He put
Ch^perieus the French king, Zacharia papa.
being no euel prince, beside his realm, only because he fansied him not, and
wrongfullie placed Pipin in his room. Again, after he had cast out king
Philip, if he could have brought it so to pass, he had determined and appointed
ye kingdom of France to Albertus king of Romans. He utterly de^^oied the
state of ye most flourishing cyty and commonweal of Florence his own native
country, Clemens papa. 7.
and brought it out of a free and peasable state, to be governed at ye pleasure
of on man: Ide^ Cl^
he brought to pass by his procurement ye whole Sauoy on the one side was
miserably spoiled by The Emperor Charles the fifth, and on the other side by the
French king, so as the unfortunate duke had scant one City left him to hyde
his head in. We are cloyed with exaumples in this behalf, and it should be
very tedious to reckon up all the notorious deeds of the Bishops of Rome. Of
which side were they, I beseech you, which poisoned Henry The Emperor, even in
the receauinge of the sacrament? which poisoned Victor the Pope, even in ye
receiving of ye Chalice? which poisoned our king John king of England in a
drinkinge cup? whosoever at least they were, and of what sect soever, I am
sure they were neither Lutherians, nor Zwinglians. What is he at this day,
which allows the mightiest Kings and Monarchs of the world to kiss his
blessed feet? What is he that commands the Emperor to go by him at his
horse bridell, and the French king to hold his stirrup? Who hurled under his
table Fraunces Dandalus the duke of ^enice King of Creta and Cypres, S^hellie^^
fast bound with chains, to feed of bones among his dogs? Who set the
Imperial crown upon the Emperor Henry the sixthys head, not with his hand
but with his foot, Coelestin ^d papa.
and with the same foot again cast the same crown of, saying withal: he
had power to make Emperors, and to unmake them again at his pleasure? Who put
in arms Henry the son against The Emperor his father Henry the fourth,
Hildebram papa.
and wrought so that the Father was taken prisoner of his own son, and
being shorn and shamfullye handeled, was thruste into a monastery, where
with hunger and sorrow he diued away to death? Who so ilfauoredlye and
monstrouslye put the Emperor Frederikes neck under his feet, Innocenti^ papa.
3.
and as though that were not sufficient, added further this text out of the
Psalms: Thou shall go upon the Adder and corkatrice, and shall tread the Lion
and Dragon under thy feet? Such an example of scorninge and contemninge ^
Princes majesty, as never before this was heard tell of in any remembruance,
except I ween, either of Tamerlanes the king of Scithia a wild and barbarous
creature, or else of Sapor king of ye Persians. All these notwithstanding were
Popes, all Peter's successors, all most holy fathers, whose several words we
must take to be as good as several Gospels. If we be compted traitors which
do honor our Princes, which give them all obedience as much as is due to
them by Godds word, and which do pray for them, what kind of men then be
these, which have not only done all the things before said, but also allow
the same for specially well don? Do they then either this way instruct ye
people as we do, to reverence their magistrate: or can they with honesty
appeache us as seditious persons, breakers of the common quiet, and
despisers of princes majesty?

Truly we neither put of the yoke of (...) from us, neither do we (...)
realms, neither do we set up or pull down Kings, nor translate
go^ernementes, nor give our Kings poysonne to drink, nor yet hold to them
(...) feet to be kissed, nor opprobriously triumphinge over them, leap into
their necks with our feet. This rather is our profession, this is our
doctrine, that merye soul of what calling soever he be, be he Monk, be he
preacher, be he prophet, be he Apostle, Chrysostom. ^. cap. ^^. Roman^
ought to be subject to kings and magistrates: yea and that the Bishop of Rome
himself, unless he will seem greater then the Evangelists, then the
Prophets, or the Apostles, ought both to acknowledge and to call the Emperor
his Lord and master: which ye old bishops of Rome, Gregori^ papae* say in
epist.
who lived in times of more grace, ever did. Our common teaching also is, yt we
ought so to obey princes as me^ sent of God, and yt whosoever wtsta^deth the^,
wtstandeth Gods ordinance, This is our scholinge, and this is well to be seen
both in our books and in our preachinges, and also in the manners and modest
behavior of our people.

But where they say, we have gone away from the unity of the catholic
Church, this is not only a matter of malice, but besides, though it be
most untrue, yet has it some show and appearance of troth. For the common
people and ignorant multitude give not credit alone to things true and of
certainty, butte even to such things also, if any chance, which may seem
to have but a resemblaunce of troth. Therefore we see that subtle and crafty
persons, when they had no truth on their side, have ever conte^ded and horely
argued with things likely to be true, to the intent they which were not able to
epsy the very ground of the matter, might be carried a way at least with some
pretense and probability thereof. In times past where the first Christians,
our forefathers, in making their prayers to God, didd turn themselves
toward the East, there were (...) said, they worshipped the sunn, (...) it
as God. Tertull. in Apol. (...)
Again, where our forefathers said, that as touching (...) fall and
everlasting life, they lived by no other means but by the flesh and blood of
that lamb who was without s^o^t, that is to say, of our savior Jesus Christ,
ye envious creatures and ^oes of Christ's Cross, whose only care was to bring
Christian religion into slander by all manner of ways, made people believe,
that they were wicked persons, that they sacrificed men's flesh, Tertull in
Apologe^ ca. (...)
and dr^nke men's blood. Also where our forefathers said, that before God
there ^^ neither man nor woman, nor for atteininge to the true righteousness
there is no distinction at all of persons, and that they did call one an
other indifferentlye by the name of Sisters and Brothers, there wanted not
men which forged false tales upon the same, saying that the Christians made
noe difference among them selves, Tertull. (...)
either of age or of kind, but like brute beasts without regard had to do
one with an other. And where for to pray and hear the Gospel, they met
often together in secret and byeplaces, because Rebels sometime were wont to
do the like. Rumors were every where spredd abroad how they made privy
confederacies, and counseled together either to kill the magistrates, or to
subvert the common wealth. And where in celebratinge the holy mysteries, after
Christ's institution, they took bread and wine, they were thought of many not
to worship Christ, (...)
but Bacchus and Ceres, forsomuche as those vain Gods were woorshipped of
the Heathen in like sort, after a profane superstition, with bread and wine.
These things were believed of many, not because they were true in deed (for
what could be more untrue?) but because they were like to be true, and
through a certain shadow of truth might the more easilye deceive the (...). On
this fashion likewise do these men slander us as Heretics, and say that
we have left the Church and fellowship of Christ: not because they think
it is true, for they do not much force of that, but because to ignoraunte
folk it might perhaps somwaye appear true. We have in deed putt our
selves aparte, not as heretics are woon^e, from the Church of Christ, but as
all good men ought to do, from the infection of naughtye persons and
hypocrites.

Nevertheless in this point they triumph maruelouslye that they be the
Church, that their Church is Christ's spowse, the pillar of truth, the ark of Noah, and that without it there is no hope of salvation. Contrariwise, they
say that we be ronnegates, that we have torn Christ's seat: that we are
plucked quyte of from the body of Christ, and have forsaken the catholic
faith. And when they leave nothing unspoken that may never so falselie and
malitioslie be said against us, yet this one thing are they never hable
truly to say, that we have swarued either from the word of God, or from the
Apostles of Christ, or from the primative Church. Surely we have ever judged
the primative Church of Christ's time, of the Appostles, and of the holy
Fathers to be the catholic Church: neither make we doubt to name it Noah's ark, Christ's spouse, the pillar and vpholder of al truth: nor yet to fire
therein the whole mean of our salvation. It is doubtless an odiouse matter for
one to leave the fellowshipp whereunto he has been accustomed, and specially of
those men, who though they be not, yet at least seem and be called Christians.
And to say truly, we do not despise the Church of these men (how soever it
be ordered by the^ now a days) partly for the name sake yt self, and partly
for that the Gospel of Jesus Christ has once ben therein truly and purelye set
forth. Neither had we departed therfrom, but of very necessity, and much
against our wills. But I put case, an Idol be set up in the Church of God, and
the same desolation which Christ prophesied to comme, stoude openly in the
holy place? what if some thief or pirat invade and possess Noah's ark? These
folks as often as they tell us of the Church, mean thereby themselves alone,
and attribute all these titles to their own selves, boasting as they did in
times past which cried The temple of the Lord, The temple of the lord: or as
the Phariseis and Scribes did, which craked they were Abraham's children. Thus
with a gay and iolie show deceive they the simple, and seek to choke us with
the very name of the church. Much like as if a thief, when he has gotten
into an other man's house, and by violence either has thrust out or slain the
owner, should afterward assign the same house to him self, casting furthe of
possession the right inheritour: Or y^ Antichrist after he has once entered
into the Temple of God, should afterward say, This house is mine own, and
Christ has nothing to do withal* For these men now after they have left
nothing remaining in ye church of God yt has any liknes of this Church, yet
will they seem the Patrones and the valiaunte maynteners of the Church, very
like as Grachus amongst the Romans stood in defense of the treasury, not
withstanding with his prodigality and fond expenses he had utterly wasted the
whole stock of the treasury. And yet was there never any thing so wicked or
so far out of reason, but lightelye yt might be covered and defended by the
name of the church. For the waspes also make honyecombes as well as Bees, and
wicked men have companyes like to the Church of God, yet for all that they be
not straight w^y the people of God which are called ye people of God: neither be
they al Israelits of many as ar com of Israel ye father. The Arrians
notwitstanding they were heretics, yet bragged they that they alone were
Catholics, calling all the test now Ambrosia^s, Augustin^s in epist. 41 ad
vincent
now Athanasia^s, now Iohannites. And Nestorius, as says Theodorete, for all
he was an Heretic, yet covered he him self (...), that is to weete, with a
certain cloak and color of the true and right faith. Ebion though he agreed
in opinion with ye Samaritanes, yet as says Epiphanius, he would be called a
Christian. The Mahomytes at this day, for all ye al histories make plain
mention, and themselves also cannot deny, but they took their first beginning
of Agar the bond woman, yet for the very name and stocks sake, choose they
rather to be caled Saracenes, as though they came of Sara the free woman and
Abraham's wife. So likewise the false Prophets of all ages which stood up
against the Prophets of God, which resisted E^ayas, Ieremye, Christ, and the
Appostles, at no time craked of any thing somuche, as they did of the name of
the Church. And for no another cause did they so fearcely vex them and call
the^ Ronneawayes and Apostatas, then for that they forsook their fellowshipp,
and kept no: thordinaunces of the Elders: wherefore if we would follow the
judgments of those men only, who then governed the Church, and would
respect nothing else neither God nor his word, yt must needs be confessed,
that the Apostles were rightly and by just law condemned of the^ to death,
because they fell from the Bishops and preistes, that is you must think, from
the Catholic Church: and because they made many new alterations in Religion
contrary to the Bishops and Preistes wills, yea and for all their spurninge
so ernestlye against it: wherefore like as it is written that Hercules in old
time was forced in striving with Antaeus that huge giaunt, to ^y^te him quite up
from the earth that was his Mother ^re he could conqueere him, even so must our
Adversaries be heaued from their Mother, that is from this vain color and
shadow of ye church, wherewith they so disguise and defend themselves,
otherwise they cannot be brought to yield unto the word of God. And therefore
says Ieremye the Prophet, Make not such, ^reat boaste that the Temple of the
Lord is with you, this is but a vain confidence, for these are lies. The
Angel also says in the Apocalypse. They say theybe Jews but they be ye
Synagoge of Satan. And Christ said to the Pharisees when they vaunted them
self of the kynred and blood of Abraham: Ye are of your father the Devel,
Ioban. 8.
for you resemble not your father Abraham* as much to say, ye are not the men
ye would so feign be called, ye (...) the people with vain titles, and abuse
the name of the Church, to the overthrowing of the Church.

So that these men's part had been first to have clearly and truly proved that
the Romish church is the true and right instructed Church of God, and that
the same, as they do order it at this day, does agree with ye primative church
of Christ, of the Apostles, and of the holy Fathers, which we doubt not but
was in deed ye true catholic Church. For our parts if we, could have judged
ignorance, error, superstition, Idolatry, men's Inventions, and the same
co^mo^lie disagreinge with ye holy Scriptures, either pleased God, or to be
sufficient for thobtainige everlasting salvation, or if we could assertaine our
selves that the word of God was written but for a time only, and afterward
again ought to be abrogated and put away, or else that the sayings and
commandments of God ought to be subject to man's will, that whatsoever God
says and commands, except the Bishop of Rome wills and commands the
same, it must be taken as void an unspoken. If we could have brought our
selves to believe these things, we grant there had been no cause at all why we
should have left these men's company. As touching that we have now den, to
depart from that Church, whose errors were proved and made manifest to ye
world, which Church also had already evidently departed from Gods word, and yet
not to depart somuche from it self, as from therrours thereof, and not to do
this disorderlye or wickedly, but quietly and sobrelye, we have don nothing
herein against the doctrine either of Christ or of his Apostles. For neither is
the Church of God such as it may not be dusked with some spot, or asks not
sometime reparation: else what nedith there so many assembles and Councelles,
without the which, as says Egidius, the Christian says is not hable to stand?
For look says he, (...) Council. ^^teran^se (...) Iulio. 2.
how often Councelles are discontinued, so often is the Church destitute of
Christ. Or if there be no peryle that harm may come to the church, what need
is there to reteyne to no purpose ye names of Bishops, as is now commenlye used
among them? For if there be no sheep that may strey, why be they called
shepardes? if there be no City that may be betrayed, why be they called
watchemen? if there be nothing that may run to ruin, why be they called
Pillars? Anon after the first creation of the world the church of God began
to spread abroad, and the same was instructed with the heavenly word, which
God him self pronounced with his own mouth. It was also furnished with divine
ceremonies. It was taught by ye spirit of God, by the Patriarchs and
Prophets, and continued so even till the time yt Christ showed himself to us
in the flesh. This notwithstanding, how often o good God, in the mean while,
and how horribly was the same Church darkened and decayed? where was that
Church then, when all flesh upon earth had defiled their own way? where was
it when amongst the nombre of the whole world there were only eight persons
(and they neither all chaste and good) whom Gods will was should be saved alive
from that universal destruction and mortality* When Ely the Prophet so
lamenta^^^e and byterly made moan, 3. Regum^^^
that only himself was left of all the whole world which did truly and
dewly worshipp God? And when Esaias said, Esai. 1.
The silver of Gods people (that is of the Church) was become Dross: and
that the same City which a foretime had been faithful, was now become an
harlot, and that in ye same was no part sound thoroughout the whole body from
the head to the foot? Or else when Christ him self said, that the house of God
was made by ye Pharasies and Preistes a Den of thieves? Math. ^^
Of a troth, the Church even as a cornefyld except it be ared, manured, tilled
and trimmed instead of wheat, it will bring furthe thystles, darnell and
nettilles. For this cause did God send ever among both Prophettes and Apostles,
and last of al his own Son, who might bring home the people into the right
way, and repair a new, the tottering Church after she had erred.

But least some manne should say that the forsaid things happened in ye time
of the law only, of shadows, and of infancy, when truth lay hid under
figures and ceremonies, when nothing as yet was brought to perfection, when the
law was not graue^ in men's hearts but in stone (and yet is that but a
foolish saying,) for even at those days was there the very same God that is
now, the same spirit, the same Christ, the same faith, the same doctrine, the
same hope, the same inheritance, the same league, and the same efficacy and
virtue of Gods word* (...). cap. ^^
Eusebius also says, all the faithful even from Adam until Christ, were in
very deed Christians, though they were not so termed. But as I said, least men
should thus speak still, Paul the apostle found the like faults and falls
even then in the prime and chief of the Gospel, in chief perfection, and in
light, so that he was compelled to write in this sort to the Galatians, whom
he had well before that instructed: I fear me (quod he) least I have labored
amongst you in vain, and least ye have heard ye Gospel in vain, O my little
Children, of whom I travail a new, til Christ be fashioned again in you: And
as for the Church of the Corinthians, how foully it was defiled, is nothing
needeful to rehearce. Now tell me, might the Churches of the Galathians and
Corinthians go amiss, and the church of Rome alone may it not fail ner go
amysse? Surely Christ prophesied long before of his church, that ye time
should come, when dessolation should stand in the holy place. ^. Tess. 2.
And Paul says, that Antichrist should once set up his own tabernacle and
stately seath in the temple of God: 2. Tim. 4.
and that the time should be, when men should not away with wholesome doctrine,
but he turned back unto fables and lies, and that within the very Church. Peter
likewise tellyth, ^. Pe^ri. 2.
how there should be teachers of lies in ye church of Christ: Daniell the
Prophet speaking of the later times of Antichrist, Daniel. 8.
Truth says he, in that seasone shall be thrown under foot, and trodden upon
in the world. And Christ says, ^ath 24.
how the calamity and confusion of things shall be so exceeding great, that even
the chosen, if it were possible, shall be brought into error: and how all these
things shall come to pass not amongst Gentiles and Turks, but that they
should be in the holy place, in the Temple of God* in the church, and in the
company an fellowship of those which profess the name of Christ.

Albeit these same warnynges alone may suffice a wyseman to take heed he do
not suffer him self rashelye to be deserved with the name of the Church, and
not to stay to make further inquisition thereof by Gods word, yet bysyde all this, many Fathers also, many learned and godly men, have often and carefully
complained, how all these things have chanced in their life time. For eue^ in
the midst of that thick mist of darkness, God would yet there should be some,
who though they gave not a clear and bright light, yet should they kyndle,
were it but some spark, which men might espy being in the darkness.

Hylarius, Con^^^ Aur^^^. (...).
when things as yet were almost vncorrupt, and in good case to, ye are ill
deceived, says he, with y^e love of walls, ye do ill worship the Church, in
that ye worship it in houses and buildinges: ye do ill bring in the name of
peace under roofes. Is there any doubt but Antichrist will have his seat
under the same? I rather reckon hills, wodes, pools, maryshes, prisons, and
quauemires, to be places of more safety: for in these the Prophets either
abiding of their accord, or drowned by violence, did prophecy by the
spirit of God.

In Registro. ^b. 4. epist. ad Ma^ri.
Gregory, as one which perceived and forsaw in his mind ye wrack of al things
wrote thus to John Bishop of Constantinople, who was the first of all others
that commanded himself to be called by this new name, the universal Bishop
of whole Christ's Church. If ye Church says he, shall depend upon one manne,
it will at once fall down to the grownd. Who is he ye sees not how this is
come to pass long since? for long a^ gone has the Bishop of Rome willed
to have the whole Church depend upon himself alone. Wherefore it is no
meruail, though it be clean fallen down long agone.

^.
Bernard ye Abbot above four hundred years past writes thus: Nothing is now
of sincerity and pureness amongst the Clergy, wherefore it rests that the
man of sin should be revealed. The same Bernarde in his work of the conversion
of Paul, It seems now says he, tha^ persecution has ceased: ^
no no, persecution seems but now to begin, even from them which have
chie^e preeminence in the Church. Thy friends and neighbors have drawn
near* and stood up against thee: from the sole of thy foot to the crown of
thy head, there is no part whole. Iniquity is proceeded from the Elders, the
Judges and deputies which pretend ^o rule thy people. We cannot say now,
Look how the people be, so is the priest. For the people be not so ill as the
priest is. Alas, alas o Lord God, the self same persons be the chief in
persecutinge thee, which seem to love the highest place, and bear most rule
in thy church. The same Bernard again upon ye Canticles writes thus. All they
are thy friends, yet are they all thy foes* all thy kinsefolke, yet are they
all thy adversaries, being Christ's servants, they serve Antichrist, Behold in
my rest, my bitterness is most bitter.

(...) libello de (...).
Roger Bacon also a man of great fame, after he had in a vehement Oration
touched to the quick the woeful state of his own time, These so many errors
says he, require and look for Antichrist. Gerso^ co^plaineth how in his days
al ye substance and efficacy of sacred divinity was brought into a glorious
contention and oste^tatio^ of wits, and to very sophistry. The Friars of
Lions, me^ as touchi^g ye manner of their life, not to be misliked, were wo^t
boldly to affirm, yt the Romish church (from whence alone al counsel and ordres
was the^ sought was the very same harlot of Babylon, and rowt of Devils, whereof
is prophesied so plainly in ye Apocalypse. I know well enough ye authority of
ye forsaid persons is but lightly regarded amongst these men. How the^ if I
call forth those for witnesses who^ themselves have used to honor? what if I say
ye Adryan the Bishop of Rome did franklye confess, that all these mischieues
brast out first from the high ^hrone of the Poper Pighius acknowlegeth herein
to be a fault, that many abuses are brought in, even into the very Mass,
which Mass otherwise he would have seem to be a reverend matter. Gerson
says, that through the number of most fond ceremonies, all the virtue of
the holy Ghost, which ought to have full operation in us, and all true
Godliness is utterly quenched and dead. Whole Grecia and Asia, complain how
the Bysshoppes of Rome with the martes of their Purgatories and Pardons, have
both tormented men's consciences, and picked their purses.

As touching ye tyranny of the Bishops of Rome and their barbarous Persian-like
pride, to leave out others whom perchance they recke^ for enemes, because they
freely and liberally find fault with their vices, the self same men which
have ledd their life at Rome in the holy City, in the face of the most holy
Father, who also were able to see all their secrets, and at no time departed
from ye Catholic faith: As for example Laurentius Valla, Marsilius Patauinus,
Fraunces Petrarke, Hierome Sauanocola, Abbott Ioakim, Baptist of Mantua, and
before all these, Bernarde the Abbotte, have many a time and much complained
of yt, geuinge the world also sometime to understand, that the Bishop of
Rome himself (by your leave) is very Antichriste. Whether they spoke yt
truly or falselye, let that goe^ sure I am they spoke it plainelye. Neither
can any manne allege that those authors were Luthers or Zwinglius
scholars, for they were not only certain years, but also certain ages or
ever Luther or Zwinglius names were heard of. They well saw that even in
their days errors had crept into the Church, and wished earnestly they might
be amended.

And what marvel if the Church (...) then carried a way with errors in that
time, specially when neither the Bishop of Rome who the^ only ruled ye to (...)
nor almost any other; either did his (...), or once understood what was his
duty. For it is hard to be believed, whiles they were idle and fast a
^^e^ne, that the Devil also all that while either fell a sleep, or else
continually lay idle. For how they were occupied in the mean time, and with
what faithfulness they took care of Gods house, though we hold our
peace, yet ^ play you let them hear Bernarde their own friend. Bernarde.
ad Eugnium.
The Bishops (says he) who now have the charge of Gods church, are not
teachers but deceauers, they are not feeders butte begylers, they are not
Prelates butte Pylates. These words spoke Bernarde of that Bishop, who
named himself the highest Bishop of all, and of the other Bysshoppes like
wise which then had the place of government. Bernard was no Lutherian,
Bernard was no heretic, he had not forsaken the Catholic church, yet
nevertheless he did not let to call the Bishops that then were, deceivers,
begilers, and Pylates. Now when the people was openly deceived, and Christian
men's eyes were craftily bleared, and when Pilat satte in judgment place and
condemned Christ and Christ's members to the swoorde and fire, Oh good Lord, in
what case was Christ's church then? But yet tell me, of so many and gross
errors, what one have these men at any time reformed, or what fault have
they once acknowleged and confessed?

But for so much as these men auouche the universal possession of the
catholic Church to be their own, and call us Heretics, bicaucause we
agree not in judgment with them, let us know I beseech you, what propre
mark and badge has that Church of theyrs, whereby it may be known to be
the Church of God. I wys it is not so hard a matter to find out Gods
Church, of a mantle will seek it earnestlye and (...). For the Church of
Godde is let upon a high and glisteringe place in the top of an hill, and
buylte upon the foundation of the Apostles and prophettes: There says
Augustine, August. de Vnitate E^ cap. 3.
^ette ^^ seek the Church, there let us ^^ye our^ matter. And as he says
again in an other place, I them. c^. 4.
The Church must be showed out of the holy and canonical scriptures: and that
which can not be showed out of them, is not the Church. Yet for all this I
wot not how, whether it be for fear or for conscience, or despearing of
victory, these me^ always abhor and fly the word of God, even as the thief
flees the gallows. And no wonder truly, for like as men say the Cantharus
by and by perishes and dies, as soon as it is laid in balm, notwithstanding
balm be otherwise a most sweet smelling ointment: even so these men well see
their own matter is dampped and destroyed in the word of God, as if it were
in poison. Therefore the holy scriptures which our Savior Jesus Christ didd
not only use for authority in all his speech, butte did also at last seal
up the same with his own blood: these men to the intent they might with
less business drive the people from the same, as from a thing dangerous and
deadlye, have used to call them A bare letter, uncertain, unprofitable,
domme, killing, and dead: which seems to us all one, as if they should say,
The scriptures are to no purpose or as good as none. Hereunto they add also a
similitude not very agreeable, how the scriptures be like to a nose of war, or
a shipmans hose: how they may be fashioned and plied al manner of ways, and
serve al men's turns. ^lberius ^bius. Ii^ra^.
Wotteth not the Bishop of Rome that these things are spoken by his own
minions? or understands he not, he has such champions to fight him? Let him
harken then how (...) and how godly one Hosius writes of (...) matter, a
Bishop in Polonia as he testifies of himself: a man doubtless were spoken and
not unlearned, and a very sharp and (...) mainteinour of that side. One will
marvel. I suppose, how a good manne could either conceive so wickedlye, or
write so dispytefullye of those words which he knew proceeded (...) Gods
mouth, and specially in (...) sort, as he would not have it (...) own
private opinion alone, (...) the common opinion of all that ^and. He
dissembleth I grant you in deed, and hydeth what he is, and sets fourth
the matter so, as though it were n^^ he and his side, butte the Zwenkfeldian
heretics that so didd speak. We faith he, Hosius (...) expresso verbo D^
will bid away with the same scriptures, whereof we see brought not only
diverse, butte also contrary interpretations: and we will hear God speak,
rather then we will resort to these naked elements, and appoint our
salvation to rest in them. It behooves not a man to be expert in the law
and scripture, butte to be taught of God. It is butte lost labor that a man bestows in the scriptures, for the scripture is a creature, and a
certain bare letter. This is Hosius saying, uttered altogether with the same
spirit and the same mind, wherewith in times past Montane and Martion were
moved, who as men report, used to say when with a contempt they rejected the
holy scriptures, that themselves knew many mo and better things then either
Christ or the Apostles ever knew;

What then shall I say here, O ye principal posts of Religion, O ye
Archegouernours of CHRIST'S Church, is this that your reverence which ye give
to Gods word? The holy Scriptures which S. Paul says came by the
inspiration of Godde, which God did commend by so many miracles, wherein are
the most perfect (...) of Christ's own steps, which all the holy Fathers,
Apostles, and Aun^^les* which Christ him self the son of God, as often as
was needful did allege for testimony and proof: will ye, as though they
were unworthy for you to hear, had them Auau^t away? that is, will ye inioyne
God to keep silence, who speakith to you mostclearely by his own mouth in ye
Scriptures? Or that word, whereby alone, as Paul says, we are reconciled to
God, and which the Prophet David says, is holy and pure and shall last
forever, will ye call that but a bare and dead lettre? Or will ye say that all
our labor is lost, which is bestoued in that thing which Christ has
commanded us diligently to search and to have evermore before our eyes? And
will ye faye that Christ and the Apostl^ meant with subtelty to deceive the
people, when they exhorted them to read the holy Scriptures, that thereby they
might s^ow in all wisdom and knowledge? No marvel at al, though these men
despise us and all our doings, which set so little by God himself and his
infallible saiengs. Yet was it but want of wit in them to the intent they might
hurt us, to do so extreme injury to the word of God.

But Hosius will here make exclamation saying, we do him wrong, and that these
be not his own words, but the words of the heretic Zwenkfeldius. But how
than, if Zwenkfeldius make exclamation on the other side, and say that the
same very words be not his but Hosius own words? For tell me where has
Zwenkfeldius ever written thee Or if he have written them, and Hosius have
judged the same to be wicked, why has not Hosius spoken so much as one word to
confute them? Howsoever the matter goes, although Hosius paradue^ture will not
allow of those words, yet he does not disallow the meaning of the words. For
well nere in all controversies, and namely touching the use of the holy
communion under both kinds, although the words of Christ be plain and
evident, yet does Hosius disdainefully reject them, as no better then cold and
dead elements: and commands to give faith to certain new lessons appointed
by the Church, and to I wot not what revelations of the holy Ghost. And
Pighius says, men ought not to believe, no not ye most clear and manifest
words of the scriptures, onles the same be allowed for good by the
interpretation and authority of the church.

And yet as though this were to little, they also burn the holy scriptures, as
in times paste wicked king Aza did, or as Antiochus, or Maximinus did, and are
wont to name the^ Heretics boks. And out of doubt to see to, they would
feign do as Herod in oulde time did in Iewrie, Ensebius.
that he might with more surety keep still his dominion. Who being an Idumean
borne, and a stranger to the stock and kindred of the Jews, and yet coveting
much to be taken for a Jew, so the end he might establish to him and his
posterity ye kingdom of that country which he had gotten of Augustus Caesar,
he commanded all the Genealogies and Petigrees to be burnte and made out of
the way, so as there should remain no record, whereby he might be known to
them that came after, that he was an Aliaunt in blood: whereas even from
Abraham's time these monume^tes had been safelye kept amongeste the Jews and
laid up in their thresury, because in them it might easily and most
assuredly be found of what lineage every one did descend. So (in good faith)
do these men when they would have all their own doings in estimation, as
though they had been delivered to us eue^ from the Apostles or from Christ
himself, to the end there might be found no where any thing able to convince
such their dreams and lies, either they burn the holy Scriptures, or else
they crastely conueye them from the people surely.

Very rightlye and aptly does Chrysostom writ against these men. Chrysostom.
^ opere (...)
Heretics, says he, shutt up the doors against the truth: for they know
full well, if the door were open, the Church should be none of theirs.
Theophylact also: Gods word says he, is the Candle whereby the thief is
espied: and Tertullian says, the holy Scripture manifestlye finds out the
fraud and theafte of Heretics. For why do they hyde, why do they keep under
the Gospel, which Christ would have preched alowde from the house top? Why
whealine they that light under a Bushel, which ought to stand on a
Candlestick? why trust they more to the blyndenes of the unskillful multitude
and to ignorance, then to the goodness of their cause? think they their
slightes are not already perceived, and yt they ca^ walk now unespied, as
though they had Giges tyng to go invisible by, upon their finger? No no: all
men see now well and well again, what good stuff is in that Chest of the
Bishop of Romes bosom. This thing alone of it self may be an argument
sufficient, that they work not uprightly and truly. Worthily ought that
matter seem suspicious which flees trial, and is afraid of the light: for he
that does evil, as Christ says, seekith darkness, and hates light. A
conscience yt knowith it self clear, comes willingly into open show, that
the works which proceed of God may be seen. Neither be they so very blind,
but they se this well ynogh how their own kyngedome straight way is at a
point, if the scripture once have the upper hand: and that like as men say,
the Idolles of devils in times past, of whom men in doubtful matters were
then wont to receive au^swers, were sod^nly stricken domme at the sight of
Christ, when he was borne and came into the world: even so they see that now al
their subtle practices will sone fall down hedlong upon the sight of the Gospel.
For Antichrist is not overthrown but with the brightness of Christ's coming.

As for us, we run not for succor to the fire as these men's guyse is, but
we run to the scriptures: neither do we reason with the sword, but with ye
word of God: and therewith as says Tertullian, do we feed our faith: by it
do we styr up our hope, and strengthen our confidence. For we know that the
Gospel of IESV CHRIST is the power of God unto salvation, and that therein
consists eternal life. And as Paul warns us, we do not hear, no not an
Aungel of God coming from heaven, if he go about to pull us from any part of
this doctrine. Yea more then this, as the holy martyr Iustine spekith of him
self, we would give no credence to God him self, if he should teach us any
other Gospel.

For where these men bid the holy Scriptures away, as domme and frutles, and
procure us to come to God him self rather, who speaks in the Church and in
Councelles: which is to say, to believe their fancies and opinions. This way
of fynding out the truth is very uncertain and exceeding dangerous, and in
manner a Fantastical and a mad way, and by no means allowed of the holy
Fathers. Chrysostom says, there be many oftentimes which boast themselves of
the holy Ghost: but truly who so speak of their own head, do falselye
boast they have the spirit of God. For like as, says he, Christ denied he
spoke of him self when he spoke out of the law and Prophets, even so now, if
any thing be preassed upon us in the name of the holy Ghost save the Gospel,
we ought not to believe it. For as Christ is the fulfilling of the law and the
Prophets, so is the holy Ghost the fulfyllinge of the Gospel. Thus far
goes Chrysostom.

But here I look they will say, though they have not the Scriptures, yet may
chance they have the Ancient Doctors, and the holy Fathers with them. For
this is a high brag they have ever made, how that al antiquity and a
continual consent of all ages does make on their side: and that all our cases
be but new and yester days work, and until these few last years never
heard of. Questionless there can nothing be more spitfully spoken against the
religion of God the^ to acuse it of novelty, as a new come^ up matter. For as
there can be no change in God him self, no more ought there to be in his
religion.

Yet nevertheless we wot not by what means, but we have ever seen it come so
to pass from the first beginning of al, that as often as God did give but some
light, and did open his truth unto men, though ye truth were not only of
greatest antiquity, but also from everlasting, yet of wicked men and of the
adversaries was it called Newfa^gled and of late devised. That ungracious and
blood thrist^ Haman, when he sought to procure the king Assueruses displeasure
against ye Jews, this was his accusation to him: Thou have here (says he) a
kind of people that uses certain new laws of their own, but stifnecked and
rebellious against al thy laws. When Paul also began first to preach and
expound ye Gospel at Athenes, he was called A tidinges bringer of new Gods: as
much to say, as of new religion. for (said the Athenians) may we not know
of thee what new doctrine this is? Celsus likewise when he of set purpose
wrote against Christ, to the end he might more scornefully scoff out the Gospel
by the name of noueltye, What says he, has God after so many ages now at
last, and so late bethought himself? Eusebius also writes, that Christian
religion from the beginning for very spite was called (...), that is to say New
and strange. After like sort, these men condemn all our matters as strange
and new, but they will have their own, whatsoever they are to be praised as
things of long co^tinua^ce. Doing much like to y^e enchau^ters and sorcerers
now a days, which working with devils use, to say, they have their books and al
their holy and hidd mysteries from Athanasius, Cyprian, Moses, Abell, Adam, and
from the Archaungell Raphael, because yt their connig coming from such
patrones and founders, might be judged the more high and holy. After the same
fasshion these men, because they would have their own religion which they
themselves, and that not long since, have brought forth into the world to be
the ea^^lier and rather accepted of foolish persons, or of such as cast
little whereabouts they or other do go, they are wont to say, they had it from
Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, from the Apostles, and from Christ himself.
Full well know they, yt nothing is more in the peoples favor, or better likes
the common sort then these names.

But how if the things which these men are so desirous to have seem new, be
found of greatest antiquity? Contrariwise, how if all the things well nigh,
which they so greatly set out with the name of antiquity, having been well and
thoroughly examined, be at length found to be but new, and devised of very
late? Southly to say, no man that had a true and right co^sideracion, would
think the Jews laws and ceremonies to be new for all Hammans accusation: for
they were graven in very ancient Tables of most antiquity. And although many
did take Christ to have swarued from Abraham and the old fathers, and to have
brought in a certain new religion in his own name, yet answered he them
directly: If ye believed Moses, ye would believe me also, for my doctrine is
not so new as you make yt. For Moses an author of greatest antiquity, and one
to whom ye give al honor, has spoken of me. Paul likewise, though the
Gospel of Jesus Christ be of many counted to be but new, yet has it (says
he) the testimony most old, both of the law and prophets. As for our doctrine
which we may rightlier call Christ's catholic doctrine, it is so far of from
new, that God who is above all most ancient, and the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, has left the same unto us in ye Gospel, in ye prophets and
Apostles works, being monuments of greatest age. So that no man can now
think our doctrine to be new, unless the same think either the prophets
faith, or the Gospel, or else Christ himself to be new.

And as for their religion, if it be of so long continuance as they would
have men ween it is, why do they not prove it so by the exaumples of the
Primative Church, and by the Fathers and Counsels of old times? Why lies
so ancient a cause thus long in the duste, destitute of an Advocate? Fire and
sword they have had always ready at hand, but as for the old Councels and
the fathers, al Mum, not a word. They did surely against all reason to begin
first with these so bloody and extreme means if they could have found other
more easy and gentle ways. And if they trust so fully to antiquity, and use
no dissimulation, why did John Clement a country manne of owres, but few
years past, in the presence of certain honest men and of good credit,
tear and cast into the fire certain leaves of Theodorete the most aunciente
Father and a greek Bishop, wherein he plainelye and euidentlye taught,
that the nature of bread in the Communion was not changed, abolished or
brought to nothing And this did he of purpose, because he thought there was no
other copy thereof to be found. ^in^t. 27. ^daem.
Why says Albertus Pighius yt the ancient father Augustine had a wrong
opinion of original sin? And that he erred and lied, August. ^ bono uide
cap. 10.27. Nuptiar^^ bonum.
and used false logique as touching the case of matrimony, concluded after a
vow made which Augustine affirms to be perfect matrimony in deed, and cannot
be undone again. Also when they did of late put in printe the ancient father
Origenes work upon the Gospel of John, Liber hod^ extat and circumfer^ ^ur
(...)
why left they quyte out ye whole sixth Capirre, wherein it is likely, yea
rather of very suerty, that the said Origene had written many things
concerning the Sacrament of the holy Communion, contrary to these men's
minds, and would put furthe that book mangled rather then full and perfect,
for fear it should reprove them and their parteners of their error. Call ye
this trusting to antiquity, when ye rent in pieces, keep back, mayme and burn
the ancient Fathers works?

It is a world to see, how well fauouredlye and how towardlye, touching
Religion, these men agree with the Fathers, of whom they use to vaunte that
they be their own good. The old Council Eliberine made a decree, that nothing
that is honored of the people, should be painted in the Churches. The old
father Epiphanius says, it is an horrible wickedness, and a sin not to be
suffered for any man, to set up any picture in the Churches of the Christians,
yea though it were the picture of Christ himself. Yet these men store all
their temples and each corner of them with painted and carved images, as though
without them, religion were nothing worth.

The old fathers Origene and Chrysostom exhort the people to read the
scriptures, ^rigen in ^it. ^a 16. ^^^sost, in ^tha.
to buy them books, to reason at home betwixt themselves of divine matters:
(...)
wives with their husbands, and parents with their children: These men
condemn the scriptures as dead elements and as much as ever they may bar
the people from them. (...) epist. (...). 1. (...).
The Ancient fathers Cyprian, (...) ^^stolicas. ^si. 6^
Epiphanius and Hierome say, it is better for one who perchance has made a
vow to lead a sole life, Hieronym ad Demet them.
and afterward lives vnchastely, and cannot quench the flames of lust, to
marye a wife, and to live honestlye in wedlock. And the old Father Augustine
judges the self same marriage to be good and perfect, and ought not to be
broken again: These men if a man have once bound him self by a vome, though
afterward he burn, keep queanes, and defile him self with never so sinful
and desperate a life, yet they suffer not that person to marye a wife: or if
he chance to mary, they allow it not for marriage. And they comonlye, teach it
is much better and more godly to keep a Concubine and (...) harlot, then to
live that kind of marriage.

The old Father Augustine complained of the multitude of vain ceremonies, Ad
Ianuarium.
wherewt he eue^ the^ saw men's minds and consciences ouercharged: These men
as though God regarded nothing else but their ceremonies, have so out of measure
increased them, yt there is now almost none other thing left in their
Churches and places of prayer.

(...). de (...)
Again, that old father Augustine denies it to be leefull for a Monk to spend
his time slouthfully and ydleye, and under a pretensed and counterfeite holiness
to live all upon others. And who so thus lives, an old father Apollonius
likeneth him to a thief. These men have (I wot not whither to name them)
droues or heardes of monks) who for all they do nothing, nor yet once intend
bear any show of holiness, yet live they not only upon others, but also riot
lauyshly of other folks labors.

^. Romans ^.
The old Council at Rome decreed, that no man should come to the service said
by a Priest well known to keep a Concubine. These men let to fearme
Concubines to their preistes, and yet co^streigne men by force against their
will to hear their cursed paltrie service.

(...) 8.
The oulde Canons of the Appostles command, that Bishop to be removed from his
Office, which will both supply the place of a civil Magistrate, and also of
an ecclesiastical person: These men for all that, both do and will needs
serve both places. Nay rather ye one Office which they ought chiefly to
execute, they once touch not, and yet no body commands them to be displaced.

The old Council Gangrense commands, that none should make such
difference between an unmarried Priest and a married priest, as he ought to think
the one more holy then the other for single life sake. These men put such a
difference between them, that they straight way think al their holy service
to be defiled, if it be done by a good and honest man that has a wife. The
ancient Emperor Justinian commanded, In None Condition, and 146.
that in the holy administration all things should be pronounced with a
clear, loud, and tretable voice, that ye people might receive some fruit
thereby. These menn least the people should understand them, mumble up all
their service, not only with a drowned and hollow voice, but also in a
strange and Barbarous tongue.

^eil. Cart. ^. cap. 47.
The old Council at Carthage commanded nothing to be read in Christ's
congregation, but the canonical Scriptures: These men read such things in
their Churches as themselves know for a truth to be stark lies, and fond
fables.

But if there be any that think, that these above rehearsed auctorities be but
weak and slender, because they were decreed by Emperors, and certain petie
Byshopps, and not by so full and perfect Councelles, taking pleasure rather in
ye authority and name of ye Pope: ^^os. did. (...).
let such a one know, that Pope Julius does evidently forbid, that a priest in
ministering the Communion, should dippe ye bread in the Cup. These men
contrary to Pope Julius decree, divide ye bread, and dip it in the wine.

Pope Clement says, it is not laufull for a Bishop to deal with both swords:
for if thou will have both says he, thou shall deceive both thy self, and
those that obey the. Now a days the Pope chalengeth to him self both swords,
and v^eth both, wherefore it ought to seem less marvel, if y^ have followed
which Clement says, that is, that he has deceived both his own self, and
those which have given eat unto him.

Pope Leo says, upon one day it is laufull to say but one mass in one
Church: These men say daily in one Church commonly ten Masses, twenty,
thirty, yea often times more. So yt the poor gaser on, can scant tell which
way he were best to turn him.

Pope Gelasius says, it is a wicked deed and sibb to sacrilege in any man to
divide the Communion, and when he received one kind, to abstain from the
other. These men contrary to Gods word and contrary to Pope Gelasius^
command that one kind only of the holy Communion be given to the people,
and by so doing, they make their preistes gilty of sacrilege.

But if they will say that all these things are worn now out of ure, and nigh
dead, and pertain nothing to these present times, yet to thend all folk may
understand what faith is to be given to these men, and upon what hope they
call togithers their general Councelles, let us see in few words what good
heed they take to the self same things, which they them selves these very last
years (and the remembrance thereof is yet new and fresh) in their own
general Council that they had by order called, decreed and commanded to be
deuoutely kept. In the last Council at Trident, scant fourtene years paste,
it was ordained by the common consent of all degrees, that one man should not
have two benefices at one time. What is become now of that ordinance? is ye
same to so sone worn but of mind and clean consumed? For these men ye se
give to one man not two benefices only, but sundry Abbaies many times,
sometime also two Bishoprykes, sometime three, sometime four, and that not
only to an unlearned man, but often times eue^ to a man of war.

In the said Council a decree was made, that all Bishops should preach ye
Gospel. These men neither preach nor once go up into the Pulpet, neither
think they it any part of their Office. What great pomp and crake then is
this they make of antiquity? Why brag they so of the names of the ancient
Fathers, and of the new and old Councelles? Why will they seem to trust to
their authority, whom when they lift, they despise at their own pleasure?

But I have a special fansy to common a word or two rather with the Popes good
holiness, and to say these things to his own face. Tell us I pray you,
good holy Father, seeing ye do crake so much of all antiquity, and boast your
self that all men are bound to you alone, which of all the Fathers have at
any time called you by the name of the highest Prelate, the universal Bishop,
or the head of the Church? Which of them ever said, ^^ Mayor, and ^ob^
dientia. (...)
that both ye swords were committed to you? which of them ever said, that you
have authority and a right to call Councelles? which of them ever said, that
the whole world is but your diocese? which of them, (...)
that al Bishops have received of your fulness? which of them, (...).
atera^^^se.
that al power is given to you as well in heaven as in earth? ^ub Iulio. 2.
^istinct. 9. (...)
which of them, that neither kings nor the whole Clergy, nor yet all people
together, are able to be judges over you? which of them, ye kings and
Emperors by Christ's commandment and will, do receive authority at your
hand? which of them with so precyse and mathematical limitacion has surueied
and determined you to be seventy and seven times greater then (...) mightiest
kings? Which of them, De Mayor et obediens Solite.
(...) more ample authority is given to you, then to ye residew of ye
Patriarchs? ^^ich of the^, yt you are ye Lord God? Extr^. Joan 22. Cu^ inter In
glosa. in ed^tione imperssa parisies, et Lug^um.
or that you are not a mere natural man, but a certain substance made and
grown together of God and man? Which of them, that you are the only
headespringe of all law? Which of them, that you have power over purgatories?
Which of them that you are able to command the Angels of God as you list
your self? Antonine de Roselli^.
Which of them that ever said that you are Lord of Lords, and the King of
Kings? We can also go further with you in like sort. What one amongst the
whole number of the old Bishops and fathers, ever taught you either to say
private Mass whiles the people stared on, or to list up the sacrament over
your head, in which point consists now all your religion? or else to mangle
Christ's sacraments, and to bereave the people of the one part, contrary to
Christ's institution and plain expressed words. But that we may once come to
an end: What one is there of all the Fathers, which has taught you to
distribute Christ's blood and the holy martyrs merits, and to sell openly as
marchandizes your pardons, and all the rooms and lodginges of purgatory?
These men are wont to speak much of a certain secreat doctrine of theires,
and manifold and sundry readings. Then let them bring furthe somewhat now if
they can, that it may apeare they have at least read or do know somewhat. They
have often stoutly noysed in all corners where they went, how all the parts of
their religion be very old, and have been approved not only by ye multitude,
but also by the consent and continual observation of al nations and times: let
them therefore once in their life show this their antiquity: let them make
appear at eye, that the things whereof they make such a door, have taken so
long and large increase: let them declare that all Christi^^^^ nations have
agreed by consent to ^his their religion.

Nay nay, they turn their backs, ^s we have said already, and flee from
their own decrees, and have cut of and ^bolished again within a short space,
^he same things which but a few years before themselves had established, for
evermore forsoothe to continewe. How should one then trust them in the
Fathers, in ye old Councels, and in the words ^poke^ by God? They have not
good Lord ^hei have not (I say) those things which ^hey boast they have: they
have not ye an^iquitie, they have not that universality, ^hey have not that
consent of all places, ^or of all times. And though they have a ^esire rather
to dissemble, yet they themselves are not ignorant hereof: ye and sum also
they let not to confess it openly. And for this cause they say, that the
ordi^^u^ces of the old Councels and Fathers be such as may now and then be
altered and that sundry and diverse Decrees seru^^ for sundry and diverse times
of the church. Thus lurk they under the name of the Church, and begile seely
creatures with their vain glosinge. Yt is to be meruailed, that either men be
so blind as they can not see this, or if they see it, to be so pacient, as
they can so lightly and quietly bear it.

But where as they have commanded that those Decrees should be void as
things now waxen to old, and yt have lost their grace, perhaps they have
provided in their steed certain other better things, and more profitable for
the people. For it is a common saying with them, that if Christ himself or
the Apostles were alive again, they could not better nor godlyer govern
Gods Church, then it is at this present governed by them. They have put in
their steed in deed, butte it is chaste in steed of wheat, as Hieremie
says, and such things as according to Esayes words, God never required at
^^eir hands. They have stopped up says he, all the veins of clear springing
water, and have dug up for the people ^^ceiuable and puddlelike pyttes full
of ^yre and filth, which neither have nor (...) able to hold pure water. They
have plucked away from the people the holy Communion, the word of God,
fromwhence all comfort should be taken, the true worshippinge of God also,
and the right use of sacraments and prayer, and have given us of their own to
play withal in the mean while, salt, water, oil boxes, spittle, palms,
bulls, iubilies, pardons, crosses, sensinges, and an indelesse rabble of
ceremonies (and as a man might term with Plautus) pretty games to make sport
withal. In these things have they set al their religion, teachinge ye people
that by these God may be duly pacified, spirits be driven away and men's
consciences well quieted. For these ^o, be the orient colors and precious
savors of Christian religion: these things does God look upon, and accepts
them thankfully: these must come in place to be honored and put quite away, the
institutio^s of Christ and of his Apostls. And like as in times past when
wicked king Jeroboam had taken from the people ye right serving of God, and
brought them to worship golden calves, least perchance they might afterward
change their mind and slip away, gettinge them again to Jerusalem to the
Temple of God there, he exhorted them with a long tale to be steadfast, saying
thus unto them: O Israel, these Calves be thy Gods. In this sort commanded
your God you should worship him. For it should be wearisome and troublous
for you to take upon you a journey so far of, and yearly to go up to
Jerusalem, there to serve and honor your God. Even after the same sort every
whit, when these men had once made the law of God of none effect through their
own traditions, fearing that the people should afterward open their eyes and
fall an other way, and should somwhence else seek a suret mean of their
salvation, Jesus, how often have they cried out: This is the same worshippinge
that pleases God, and which he straightly requires of us, and wherewith he will
be turned from his wrath, that by these things is conserved the unity of the
Church, by these al sins cleansed and consciences quieted: and who so
departs from these, has left unto himself no hope of everlasting salvation.
For it were wearisome and troublous (say they) for the people to resort to
Christ, to the Apostles, and to ye ancient fathers, and to observe continually
what their will and commandment should be. This ye may se* is to wtdraw the
people of God from ye weak elements of the world, from ye leaven of the
Scribes and Pharisees, and from the traditions of me^. It were reason no doubt
yt Christ's commandments and the Apostls were removed, that these their
devises might come in place. O just cause I promise you, why that ancient and
so long allowed doctrine should be now abolished, and a new form of religion
be brought into the Church of God.

And yet whatsoever it be, these men cry still that nothing ought to be
changed, that men's minds are well satisfied here withal, that the Church of
Rome ye church which cannot err, has decreed these things. For Siluester
Prierias says yt the Romish church is the squire and rule of truth, and that
ye holy scripture has received from thence both authority and credit. The
doctrine says he, of the Romish church, is the rule of most infallible faith,
from the which the holy scripture takes his force. And Indulgences and
pardons (says he) are not made known to us by ye authority of the
scriptures, but they are known to us by the authority of the Romyshe Church,
and of the Bishops of Rome, which is greater. Pighius also lets not to say,
that without the license or the Romyshe Church, we ought not to believe the very
plain scriptures: much like as if any of those that cannot speak pure and
clean Latin, and yet can babble out quickly and redily a little some such law
Latin as seruith the Court, would needs hold that all others ought also to
speak after the same way which Mametrectus and Catholico^ spoke many year
ago, and which them selves do yet use in pleadyng in Court, for so may it be
understand sufficiently what is said, and men's desires be sati^fyed, and that
it is a fondness now in the later end to trouble ye world with a new kind of
speaking, and to call again the old fynesse and eloquence that Cicero and Caesar
used in their days in the Latin tongue. So much ar these men beholden to the
folly and darkness of the former times. Many things as one writes, are had
in estimation often times, because they have been once dedicate to the temples
of the Heathen gods: even so see we at this day many things allowed and
highlye set by of these men, not because they judge them so much worth, but
only because they have been received into a custom, and after a sort dedicate
to the Temple of God.

Our Church say they cannot err: they speak that (I think) as the Lac^^
demonians long since used to say, that yt was not possible to find any
Adulterer in all their commonwealth: whereas in deed they were rather all
Adulterers, and had no certeintie in their marriages, but had their wives common
amongst them all. Or as the Canonistes at this day, for their bellies sake
use to say of the Pope, that forsomuche as he is Lord of all benefices, though
he sell for money Byshoprickes, monasteries, preiste hod, spiritual
promotions, and partith with nothing freely, (...) Augel^^^ (...) papa.
yet because he counts at his own he cannot committ Simony, though he would
never so feign. But how stronglye and agreablye to reason these things be
spoken, Theodor de Schil
we are not as yet able to perceue, except perchance these me^ have plucked of
the wings from the truth, Plutarch
as the Romans in old time did proine and pinion their goddess Victory,
after they had once gotten her home, to the end that with the same wings she
should never more be able to flee away from them again. But what if Ieremye
tell them, as is before rehearsed, that these be lies? what if ye same Prophet
say in an other place, that the self same men who ought to be kepers of the
vineyarde, have brought to naught and destroyed the Lords vynearde? How if
Christ say, that the same persons who chiefly ought to have a care over the
Temple, have made of ye Lords Temple a den of Thieves? If it be so that the
Church of Rome cannot err, it must needs follow, that the good luck thereof
is far greater then al these men's policy. For such is their life, their
doctrine and their diligence, that for all them the Church may not only err,
but also utterly be spoiled and peryshe. No doubt, if that Church may err
which has departed from Godds word, from Christ's commandments, from the
Apostls ordinances, from the primative Churches examples, from the old Fathers
and Councelles orders, and from their own Decrees, and which will be bound with in
the compass of none neither oulde nor new, nor their own, nor other folks,
nor man's law, nor Gods law, then yt is out of all question, that the
Ro^yshe Church has not only had power to err, but that it has shamefully
and most wickedly erred in very deed.

But say they, ye have been once of our fellowship, but now ye are become
forsakers of your profession, and have departed from us. It is true we have
departed from them, and for so doing we both give thanks to almighty God, and
great lie rejoice on our own behalf. But yet for all this, from the primative
Church, from the Apostles, and from Christ we have not departed, true it is.
We were brought up with these men in darkness, and in ye lack of knowledge of
God, as Moses was taught up in the learning and the bosom of the Egyptians. We
have been of your company says Tertullian, I confess it, and no marvel at
all, for says he, men be made and not borne Christians. But wherefore I pray
you have they them self, the citizens and dweliers of Rome removed, and come
down from those seven hills, whereupon Rome sometime stood, to dwell rather in
the plain called Mars his field? They will say peradventure, by cause the
conductes of water, where with out men cannot commodiouslye live, have now
failed and ar dried up in those hills. Well then, let them give us like leave
inseeking the water of eternal life, that they give them selfs in seeking the
water of the well, for the water verily failed amongst them. Thelders of the
Jews says Ieremye, sent their little ones to the waterings, and they finding
no water, being in a miserable case and utterly marred for thurst, brought home
again their vessels empty. The nedye and poor folk says Esaye, sought
about for water, but no wheare found they any, their tongue was eue^ withered
with thirst. Even so these men have broken in pieces all the pypes and
co^duites, they have stopped up all the springs, and choked up the fountain of
living water with durte and mire. And as Caligula many years past locked fast
up all the storehouses of corn in Rome, and thereby brought a general derth
and famyne amongst the people, eue^ so these men by damming up all the
fountains of Gods word, have brought the people into a peetiful thirst. They
have brought into ye world as says the Prophet Amos, a hungre and a thurst,
not the hunger of bread, nor the thurst of water, but of hearing the word of
God. With great distress went they scattering about, seeking some spark of
heavenly light to refresh their consciences withal, but that light was already
thoroughly quenched out, so that they could find none. This was a rueful
state. This was a lamentable form of Gods Church. It was a misery to live
therein without the Gospel, without light, and without all comfort.

Wherefore though our departing were a trouble to them, yet ought they to
consider withal, how just cause we had of our departure. For if they will
say, it is in no wise lawful for one to leave the fellowship wherein he has
be^ brought up, they may as well in our names or upon our heads condemn both
the Prophets, the Apostles, and Christ him self. For why complain they not
also of this, that Lot went quitte his way out of Sodom, Abraham out of Calde,
the Israelites out of Egypt, Christ from the Jews, and Paul from the
Pharisees? For except it be possible there may be a lawful cause of departing,
we see no reasone why Lot, Abraham, the Israelites, Christ and Paul may not
be accused of sects and sedition, as well as others. And yf^ these men will
needs condemn us for Heretics, because we do not all things at their
commandment, whom (in gods name) or what kind of men ought they them
selves to be taken for, which despise the commandment of Christ, and of the
Apostles? If we be scismatiques because we have left them, by what name shall
they be called themselves which have forsaken the Greeks, from whom they first
received their faith, forsaken the primative Church, forsaken Christ himself
and the Apostls, even as Children should forsake their parents? For though
those Greeks, who at this day profess religion and Christ's name, have many
things corrupted amongst them, yet houlde they still a great number of those
things which they received from the Apostles. They have neither private
Masses, nor mangled Sacraments, nor Purgatories, nor Pardons. And as for the
titles of high Bishops, and those glorious names, they estime them so, as
whosoever he were that would take upon him the same, and would be called
either Universal bishop, or the Head of the universal church, they make no
doubt to call such a one, both a passing proud man, a man that works
despite against all y^ other Bysshoppes his brethren, and a plain Heretic.

Now then since it is manifest and out of all peradventure, that these men are
fallen from y^ Greeks, of whom they received the Gospel, of whom they
received the faith, the true Religion and ye Church, what is ye matter why they
will not now be called home again to ye same men, as it were to their originals
and first founders? And why be they afraid to take a pattern of the Apostles
and old Fathers times, as though they all had been void of understanding? Do
these men, wene ye, see more or set more by the Church of God, then they deed
who first delivered us these things?

We truly have renounced that church wherein we could neither have ye word of
God sincerely taught, nor the Sacraments rightlye administered, nor the name of
God dewly called upon, which Church also themselves confess to be faulty in
many poin^tes: And wherein was nothing able to stay any wise man, or one yt
has consideration of his own lavetie. To conclud, we have forsaken the
Church as it is now, not as it was in old time, and have so gone from it, as
Daniell went out of the Lions den, and ye three Children out of the furnesse:
and to say troth, we have been cast out by these menn (being cursed of them, as
they use to say, with book, bell, and candell) rather then have gone away from
them of our selves.

And we are come to that Church wherein they themselves cannot deny (if they
will say truly and as they think in their own conscience) but all things be
governed purely and reverently, and as much as we possibly could, very near to
the order used in the old time.

Let them compare our Churches and theirs together, and they shall see that
themselves have most shamefully gone from the Apostles, and we most justly
have gone from them. For we folowinge the exaumple of Christ, of the Apostles,
and the holy father^, give the people the holy Communion whole and perfect:
But these men contrary to all ye fathers, to all the Apostles, and contrary to
Christ himself, do sever the sacraments, and pluck away the one part from the
people, and that with most notorious sacrilege, as Gelasius terms yt.

We have brought again the Lords supper unto Christ's institution, and will
have it to be a Communion in very deed, common and indifferent to a great
number, according to the name. But these men have changed al things contrary
to Christ's institution, and have made a private Mass of the holy Communion:
and so it comes to pass, that we give the Lords supper unto the people, and
they give them a vain pagent to gase on.

We affirm together with the ancient fathers, that the body of Christ is not
eaten but of the good and faithful, and of those that are endued with the
spirit of Christ. Their doctrine is, that Christ's very body effectually, and
as they speak, really and substantially, may not only be eaten of the wicked
and unfaithful men, but also (which is monstrous to be spoken) of myse and
dogs.

We use to pray in Churches after that fashion, as according to Paul's
lesson, (...). 14
the people may know what we pray, and may answer Amen, with a general
consent. These men like soundinge metal, yelle out in the churches unknown
and strange words without understanding, without knowledge, and without devotion,
yea and do it of purpose, because ye people should understand nothing at all.

But not to tarry about rehearsing all points wherein we and they differ, for
they have well nigh no end, we turn the scriptures into al tongues, they scant
suffer them to be had abroad in any tongue: we allure ye people to read and to
hear Gods word, they drive the people from it. We desire to have our cause
known to al ye world, they flee to come to any trial. We lean unto knowledge,
they unto ignorance: We trust unto light, they unto darkness: We reverence as
it becomes us, the writings of ye Apostles and Prophets, and they burn
them. Finally, we in Gods cause desire to stand to Gods only judgment,
they will stand only to their own. Wherefore if they will way ^ll these things
with a quiet mind, and fullye bente to hear and to learn, they will not only
allow this determination of ours who have forsaken errors, and followed Christ
and his Apostles, butte themselves also will forsake their own selves, and
join of their own accord to our side.

But peradventure they will say, it was treason to attempt these matters
without a sacred general Council: for in that consists the whole force of
the Church: there CHRIST has promised he will ever be a present assistant.
Yet they themselves without tarrienge for any general Council, have broken
the commandments of Godde, and the decrees of the Apostles: and as we said
a little above, they have spoiled and disanulled almost all, not only
ordinances, but even the doctrine of the primative Church. And where they
say it is not laufull to make a change without a Council, w^a^ was he that
made us these laws, or from whence had they this Iniunction?

King Agesilaus, Plut^^^ chus.
truly, did butte fondelye, who when he had a determinate answer made
him of the opinion and will of mighty Jupiter, would afterward bring the
whole matter before Apollo, to know whether he allowed thereof as his father
Jupiter did or no: But yet should we do much more fondelye, when we
may hear Godde him self plainelye speak to us in the most holy
scriptures, and may understande by them his will and meaning; if we would
afterward (as though this were of none effect) bring our whole cause to be
tried by a Council, which were nothing else but to ask whether men would
allow as God did, and whether me^ would confirm Gods commandment by their
authority. Why I beseech you, except a Council will and command, shall not truth
be truth or God be God? If Christ (...) to do so from ye beginning, as that he
would preach or teach nothing without the Bishops consent, but refer all his
doctrine over to Annas and Caiphas, where should now have been the christian
faith? or who at any time should have heard the Gospel taught? Peter verily,
whom the Pope has oftener in his mouth and more reverently uses to speak
of, then he does of Jesus Christ, did boldly stand against the holy Council,
saying, It is better to obey God, then men. And after Paul had once entirely
embraced the Gospel, and had received it not from men, nor by man, but by the
only will of God, he did not take advise therein of flesh and blood, nor
brought ye case before his kinsemen and brethren, but went forth with into
Arabia to preach Gods divine mysteries, by Gods only authority

Yet truly we do not despise Councelles, assemblies, and conferences of
Bishops and learned men: neither have we done yt we have done altogether
^boue Bishops or without a Council. The matter has been treated in open
Parliament, with long consultation, and before a notable Synod and Convocation.

But touching this Council which is now so^moned by ye Pope Pius, wherein men
so lightly are condemned which have been neither called, heard, nor seen, yt
is easy to guess what we may look for, or hope of yt. In times paste when
Nazianzene saw in his days how men in such assemblies were so blind and
wilful, that they were carried with affections, and labored more to get the
victory then ye truth, he pronounced openly, that he never had seen a good
end of any Council: what would he say now if he were ^ live at this day,
and vnder^^ode the heauing and shoving of these men? For at that time, though
the matter were labored on all sides, yet the controversies were well heard,
and open errors were put clean away by the general voice of all parts: But
these men will neither have the case to be freely disputed, nor yet how many
errors soever there be, suffer they any to be changed. For it is a common
custom of theirs, often and shameleslye to boast that their Church cannot
err, that in it there is no fault, and that they must give place to us in
nothing. Or if there be any fault, yet must it be tried by Byshopes and
Abbo^tes, only because they be ye directers and Rulers of matters, and they be
the Church of God. Aristotle says, that a City cannot consist of Bastardes:
but whether the Church of God may consiste of these men, let their own selves
consider. For doubtless neither be the Abbottes legitimat Abbo^tes, nor the
Byshopes natural right Bishops. But grant they be the Church: let them be
heard speak in Councelles: let the^ alone have authority to give consent: yet
in old time when the Church of God (if ye will compare it with their Church)
was very well governed, both Elders and Deacons as says Cyprian, and certain
also of the common people were called there unto, and made acquainted with
ecclesiastical matters.

But I put case these Abbottes and Bysh^pes have no knowledge: what if they
understand nothing what Religion is, nor how we ought to think of God? I put
case the pronouncyng and ministringe of the law be decayed in priests, and
good counsel fail in the Elders, and as the Prophet Micheas says, the night
be unto them instead of a vision, and darkness in sted of prophesieng. Or as
Esaias says, what if al ye watcheme^ of ye city are become blind? what if ye
salt have lost his propre strength and sauerines, and as Christ says, be good
for no use, scant woorthe the castyng on the doungehyl?

Well yet then, they will bring al matters before the Pope, who cannot err. To
this I say, first it is a madness to think that the holy Ghost takes his
flight from a general Council to run to Rome, to the end if he doubt or stick
in any matter, and cannot expound it of him self, he may take counsel of
some other spirit, I wot not what, that is better learned then him self. For
if this be true, what neded so many Byshopps, with so great charges and so
far iorneyes, have assembled their Conuocatio^ at this present at Trident? Yt
had been more wisdom and better, at least it had been a much nearer way and
handsommer to have brought all things rather before ye Pope, and to have come
streght forth, and have asked counsel at his divine breast. Secondly, it is
also an unlawful dealing to toss our matter from so many Bishops and
Abbottes, and to bring it at last to the trial of one only man, specially of
him who him self is appeached by us of heinous and foul enormities, and has
not yet put in his answer: who has also before hand condemned us without
judgment by order pronounced, and or ever we were called to be judged.

How say ye, do we devise these tales? Is not this the course of the
Councelles in these days? are not all things removed from the whole holy
Council and brought before the Pope alone? that as though nothing had been don
to purpose by the judgments and consentes of such a number, he alone may
add, alter, diminishe, disanull, allow, remytt and qualify what soever he
list? whose words be these then? and why have the Bishops and Abbottes in
the last Council at Trident but of late concluded with sayng thus in the end,
Saving alwyes the authority of the sea Apostolic in all things? Or why
does Pope Pascall write so proudelie of him self as though says he, there
were any general Council able to prescribe a law to the Church of Rome, D^
Elec^^ and Elect potesfla^e. Signif^e^
whereas al cou^celles both have been made and have receued their force and
strength by the Church of Romes authority? and in ordinances made by
Councelles, is ever plainly excepted the authority of the Bishop of Rome. If
they will have these things allowed for good, why be Councels called? but if
they command then to be void, why are they left in their books as things
alowable?

But be it so, Let the Bishop of Rome alone be above all Cou^celles, yt is to
say, let some one part be greater then the whole, let him be of greater
power, let him be of more wisdom then all his, and in spite of Hieromes head,
(...).
let ye authority of one City be greater then the authority of the whole
world. How then if the Pope have seen none of these things, and have never
read either ye scriptures or ye old Fathers, or yet his own cou^celles? How
if he favor ye Arria^s, as once Pope Liberius did? or have a wicked and a
detestable opinion of the life to come, and of the immortality of the soul,
as Pope John had but few years since? or to increase now his own dignity, do
corrupt other Councelles, as Pope Zosimus corrupted the Council holden at Nice
in times past, and do say that those things were devised and appoincted by the
holy Fathers, which never once came into their thought, and to have the full
sway of authority, do wrest the Scriptures, as Camotensis says, is an usual
custom with the Popes? How if he have renounced the faith in Christ, and
become an Apostata, as Liranus says many Popes have been? And yet for all
this, shall the holy Ghost with turning of a hand, knock at his breast, and
eue^ wheter he will or no, yea and wholly against his will, kindle him a light
so as he may not err? shall he streght way be the head spring of al right,
and shall al treasure of wisdom and understanding be found in him, as it were
laid up in store? Or if these things be not in him, can he give a right and
apt judgment of so weighty matters? Or if he be not able to judge, would he
have that al those matters should be brought before him alone?

What will ye say, if the Popes Advocates, Abbottes and Bishops dissemble not
the matter, but show them selves open enemies to the Gospel, and though they
see, yet they will not see, but wrye the Scriptures and wyttingly and knowingly
corrupt and counterfeite the word of God, and foully and wickedlye apply to the
Pope all the same things which evidently and proprely be spoken of the person
of Christ only, nor by no means can be applied to any other? And what though
they say, ^ostism. cap. Quanto
the Pope is all and above all? Or, that he can do as much as Christ can: and
that one judgment place and one Council house serve for ye Pope and for Christ
both together? ^bas Pano. ^ Elect. ea ^enerabil^
Or that the Pope is the same light which should come into the world?
Cornelius Eposcopus ^ Con^il Tridetino
which words Christ spoke of him self alone: and that who so is an evil
doer, hates and flies from that light? Or that all the other Bysshoppes have
received of the Popes fulness? Durandus
Shortly, what though they make Decrees expreslye against Gods word, and that
not in huckermucker or covertly, but openly and in the face of the world:
must it needs yet be Gospel straighte whatsoever these men say? shall these
be Gods holy army? or will Christ be at hand among them there? shall the
holy ghost flow in their tongues, or can they with truth say, We and the holy
Ghost have thought so? In deed Peter Asotus and his companion Hosius stick
not to affirm, Hosius co^ Brentium. Lib. 2.
that the same Council wherein our savior Jesus Christ was condemned to dye,
had both the spirit of prophesieng, and the holy Ghost, and the spirit of
truth in it: and that it was neither a false nor a trifflinge saying, when
those Bishops said, We have a law, and by our law he ought to dye, and ye
they so saying did light upon the very truth of judgment: for so be Hosius
words, and that the same plainelye was a just decree, whereby they pronounced
that Christ was worthy to die. This me thinks is strange, that these men are
not able to speak for themselves and defend their own cause, but they must
also take part with Annas and Caiphas. For if they will call that a laufull
and a good Council, wherein the Son of God was most shamfully condemned to
dye, what Council will they then allow for false and naught? And (yet as all
their Councels, to say truth, commonly be) necessity compelled them to
pronounce these things of the Council holden by Annas and Caiphas.

But will these men (I say) refourme us the church, being themselves both the
persons guilty and the Judges to? Will they abate their own ambition and pride?
Will they overthrow their own matter, and give sentence against them selves,
that they must leave of to be unlearned Bishops, slowbellies, heapers
together of benefices, takers upon them as princes and men of war? Will the
Abbottes the Popes dear darlinges judge that monk for a thief, which
labors not for his living? and that it is against all law, to suffer such
a one to live and to be found either in city or in country, or yet of other
men's charges? Or else that a monk ought to lie on the ground, to live hardly
with herbs and peason, to study earnestly, to argue, to pray, to work with
hand, and fully to bend him self to come to ye ministry of ye church? In
faith, as soon will the Pharisees and Scribes repair agame the Temple of God,
and restore it unto us a house of prayer, in steed of a theeuish den. There
have been, I know, certain of their own selves which have found fault, we many
errors in ye church, as Pope Adrian, Eneas siluius, Cardinal Poole, Pighius
and others, as is before said, they held afterward their Council at Trident in
ye self same place where it is now appointed. There assembled many Bishops
and Abbottes and others whom it behooved. For that matter they were alone by
themselves, whatsoever they did no body gainesaid it: for they had quite shut
out and barred our side from all manner of assemblies, and there they sat six
years feedinge folks with a marvelous expectation of their doings. The first
six months, as though it were greatly nedeful, they made many determinations
of the holy Trinity, of the Father, of ye Son, and of the holy Ghost, which
were godly things in deed, but not so necessary for that time. Let us see in
all that while of so many, so manifest, so often confessed by them and so
evident errors, what one error have they amended? from what kind of
idolatry have they reclaimed the people? What superstition have they taken
away? What piece of their tyranny and pomp have they diminished? as though all
the world may not now see, that this is a Conspiracy and not a Council, and
that these Byshopes whom the Pope has now called to gether, be wholly sworn
and become bound to bear him their faithful allegiaunce, and will do no
manner of thing, but that they perceive pleases him, and helps to advance
his power, and as he will have it: Or that they reckon not of the number of
men's voices, rather then have weight and consideracion of the same: Or that
might does not often times overcome the right.

And therefore we know that diverse times many good men and Catholic Bishops
did tarry at home, and would not come when such Councels were called, wherein
men so apparauntly labored to serve factions and to take parts, because they
knew they should but lose their travail and do no good, seeinge where unto
their enemies minds were so wholye bent. Athanasius denied to come when he
was called by the Emperor to his Council at Cesarea, perceiuinge plain he
should butte come among his ennemies which deadly hated him. The same
Athanasius when he came afterward to the Council at Sirmium, and foresaw what
would be the end by reasone of the outrage and malice of his ennimies, he
packed up his carriage, and went away immediately. ^pa tita ^. lib. 10 ^^.
John Chrysostom, although ye Emperor Constantius commanded him by four
sundry lettres to come to the Arrians Council, yet kept he him self at home
still. ^ib 1.
When Maximus the Bishop of Jerusalem sat in the Council at Palestine, the
old Father Paphnutius took him by the hand and led him out at the doors
saying: It is not ^eeful for us to confer of these matters with wicked
men. The Bysshopes of the East would not comme to the Syrmian Council,
after they knew Athanasius had gotten himself thence again. Cyrill called
men back by letters from the Council of them, which were named
Patropassians. Paulinus Bishop of Tryer, and many others more, refused to
comme to the Council at Millaine, whenne they understood what a stir and
rule Auxentius kept there: for they saw yt was in vain to go thither, where
not reasone but faction should prevayle, and where folk co^tended not for ye
truth and right judgment of the matter, butte for partiality and favor.

And yet for all those fathers had such malicious and stiff necked
ennemies, yet if they had come, they should have had free speech at least
in the Councelles. Butte now since none of us may be suffered so much as
to sit, or once to be seen in these men's meetinges, much less suffered
to speak freelye our mind, and saying the Popes Legates, Patriarchs,
Archebyshops, Bysshoppes, and Abbottes, all being conspyred together, all
linked together, in one kind of fault, and all bound by one oath, sit alone
by themselves, and have power alone to give their consent: and at last when
they have all done, as though they had done nothing, bring all their opinions
to be judged at the will and plasure of ye Pope, being but one man, to thend he
may pronounce his own se^te^ce of himself, who ought rather to have answered
to his complaint, since also ye same ancient and Christian liberty which of
al right should specially be in Christian Councelles, is now utterly taken
away from the Council: for these causes I say wise and good men ought not to
marvel at this day, though we do the like now, that they see was don in
times past in like case of so many Fathers and Catholic Bishops, which as
though we choose rather to sit at home and leave our whole cause to Good, then
to journey thither, whereas we neither shall have place, nor be able to do
any good: whereas we can obtain no audience, whereas Princes Ambassadors be
but used as mockyng stocks, and whereas also all we be condemned already
before trial, as though ye matter were a forha^d dispatched and agreed upon

Nevertheless we can bear patiently and quyetely our own private wrongs: but
wherefore do they shut out Christian kings, and good Princes from their
Convocation? why do they so discourteously, or with such spite leave the^ out,
and as though they were not either Christen men, or else could not judge, will
not have them made acquaynted with the cause of Christian Religion, nor
understand ye state of their own Churches? Or if the said kings and Princes
happen to entermedly in such matters, and take upon them to do that they may
do, that they be commanded to do, and ought of duty to do, and the same
things that we know both David and Solomon and other good Princes have don,
that is, if they whiles the Pope and his Prelates slugge and sleep, or else
mischevouslye withstand them, do bridle the Preistes sensuality, and drive
them to do their dewty, and keep them still to yt: if they do overthrow Idols,
if they take away superstition, and set up again the true worshipping of God,
why do they by and by make an out cry upon them, that such Princes trouble
all, and press by violence into an other bodies office, and do thereby wickedly
and malepartly. What scripture has at any time forbidden a Christian Prince to
be made priuey to such causes? Who but themselves alone made ever any such
law?

They will say to this, I guess, Ciuell Princes have learned to govern a
commonwealth, and to order matters of war, but they understand not the
secret mysteries of Religion. If that be so, what is the Pope I pray you, at
this day, other the^ a Monarche or a Prince? or what ^e the Cardinals, who must
be no another now a days but Princes and kings sons? What else be ye
Patriarchs, and for the most part the Archebysshops, the Bishops, ye Abbots?
what be they else at this present in ye Popes kingdom, but worlikely Princes,
but Dukes and Earls, gorgiously accompanied with bands of men whither soever
they go? Oftentimes also gaylye arrayed with theynes and collers of gold, They
have at times to, certain orname^tes by them selfs, as Crosses, pillars,
hattes, miters and Palles, which pomp the ancient Bishops Chrysostom,
Augustine and Ambrose never had. Setting these things aside, what teach they?
what say they? what do they? how live they? I say not, as may become a
Bishop, but as may become even a Christian man, Is it so great a matter to have
a vain title, and by changing a garment only to have the name of a Bishop?

Surely to have the principal stay and effect of all matters committed wholly
to these men's hands, who neither know nor will know these things, nor yet
set a jot by any poinct of Religion, save yt which concerns their belly and
Riot, and to have them alone sit as Judges, and to be set up as overseers in ye
watch tower being no better then blind spies: of the other side, to have a
Christian Prince of good understanding and of a right judgment, to stand
still like a block or a stake, not to be suffered: another to give his voice,
nor to show his judgment, but only to wayt what these men shall well and
command, as one which had neither ears nor eyes nor wytt, nor heart, and
whatsoever they give in charge, to allow it without exception, blindly
fulfilling their commandments, be they never so blasphemous and wicked, yea
although they command him quite to destroy all Religion, and to crucify
again Christ him self. This surely besides that it is proud and spiteful, is
also beyond all right and reason and not to be endured of Christian and wise
Princes. Why I pray you, may Cayphas and Annas understand these matters, and
may not David and Ezechias do the same? Is it laufull for a Cardinal being a
man of war and delightius in blood, to have place in a Council, and is it
not lauful for a Christian Emperor or a king? we truly grant no further
liberty to our Magistrates, then that we know has both ben given the^ by the
word of God, and also confirmed by the examples of the very best governed
common welthes. For besides that a Christian Prince has the charge of both
Tables co^mited to him by God, to the end he may understand that not temporal
matters only, but also Religious and ecclesiastical causes pertain to his
Office. Besides also that God by his Prophettes often and earnestly commands
the king to cut down the groves, to break down the Images and aultres of
Idols, and to write out the book of ye law for him self: and besides that the
prophet Esaias says, a king ought to be a patron and nurse of the Church: I
say besides all these things, we se by histories and by examples of the best
tunes, that good Princes ever took thadministration of ecclesiastical matters
to partain to their duty. Moses a Civil Magistrate and chief guide of the
people, Exodus ^^*
both received from God, and delivered to ye People all the order for religion
and Sacrifices, and gave Aaron the Bishop a vehement and so are rebuke for
making the golden calfe, and for suffering the corruption of Religion. Joshua
also, Joshua (...).
though he were no another then a Civil Magistrate, yet as soon as he was chosen
by God, and set as a Ruler over the people, he received commandments,
specially touching Religion and the service of God. (...).
King David, when the whole religion was altogethers brought out of frame by
wicked king Saul, brought home again the Ark of God, that is to say, he
restored Religion again, and was not only amongst them him self as a
counselor and furtherer of the work, but he appoincted also hymns and
Psalms, put in order the companies, and was the only doer in setting forth
that whole solemn show, and in effect ruled the preistes. King Salomo^ builte
unto the Lord the Temple, 2. Par^l. ^^
which his Father David had but purposed in his mind to do: and after the
finishing there of, he made a goodly oration to the people, concerning Religion
and the service of God, he afterward displaced Abiathar the Priest, and set
Sadock in his place. 3. Regum. ^^
After this, when the Temple of God was in shameful wise polluted thorough the
uaughtines and negligence of the priests, 2. Parcl. 2^
King Ezechias commanded the same to be cleansed from the ruble and filthe, ye
preistes to light up candelles, to burn Incense, and to do their divine
service, according to the old allowed custom. The same king also commanded
the brazen Serpent, which then the people wickedly worshipped, 4. Regum*
to be taken down and beaten to powder. ^ Parall. 17.
King Iehosaphat overthrew and utterly made away the hill aultres and Groves,
whereby he saw Gods honor hindered, and the people holden back with a
private superstition from the ordinary Temple which was at Jerusalem, whereto
they should by order have resorted yearly from every part of the Realm.
Regum. 23.
King Josias with great diligence put the Priests and Bishops in myde of their
duty: Regum. 12.
King Iohas bridled the Riot and arrogancy of the preistes. Regum* 10.
Iehu put to death the wicked Prophets.

And to rehearse no more exampls out of the old law, let us rather consider
since the birthe of Christ, how the Church has been governed in the Gospels
time. The Christian Emperors in old time, appoincted the Councelles of the
Bishops. Constantine called the Council at Nice, Theodotius the first, called
the Council at Constantinople. Theodotius the second, the council at Ephesus,
Martian the Council at Chalcedone: and when Rufine the heretic had alleged
for authority, a Council which as he thought, should make for him: Hieroin
his aduerrsarie to confute him, Tell us (quod he) what Emperor commanded
that Council to be called? The same Hierome again in his Epitaphe upon Paula,
makes mention of the Emperors letters, which gave commandment to call the
Bysshoppes of Italy and Grecia to Rome to a Council. Continuallye for the
space of five hundredth years, Themperoure alone appointed thecclesiasticall
assemblies, and called the Councelles of the Bishops together.

We now therefore maruail the more at the unreasonable dealinge of the
Bishop of Rome, who knowinge what was the Emperoures right when the Church
was well ordered, knowinge also that it is now a common right to all princes,
for so much as Kings are now fully possessed in the several parts of the
whole Empire, does so without consideration assign that office alone to
himself, and takes it sufficient in summoning a general Council, ^ pius 4.
^^lla sua Imperat. ^dinandu^.
to make a man that is prince of the whole world no otherwise partaker thereof
then he would make his own servant. And although the modesty and mildenes
of the Emperor Ferdinando be so great that he can bear this wrong,
because peradventure he understands not well the Popes packinge, yet ought
not the Pope of his holiness to offer him that wrong, nor to claim as his own
an other man's right.

But hereto some will replye: the Emperor in deed called Councelles at that
time ye speak of, because the Bishop of Rome was not yet grown so great as
he is now, ^ist. ^ ^cli ^^b. 1 cap. 5.
but yet the Emperor did not then sit together with the Bysshoppes in
Council, or once bare any stroke with his authority in their consultation. I
answer nay, that it is not so, for as witnesses Theodorete, The Emperor
Constantine sat not only together with them in the Council at Nice, butte
gave also advice to the Bysshoppes how it was best to try out the matter by
the Apostles and Prophettes writings, as apeereth by these his own words. In
disputation (says he) of matters of divinity, we have set before us to
follow the doctrine of the holy Ghost. For the Evangelists and the Apostles
works, and the Prophettes sayings show us sufficientlye what opinion we
ought to have of the will of God. The Emperor Theodotius (as says Socrates)
did not only sit amongst the Bishops, Socrat. l^^ cap. 5,
but also ordered the whole arguinge of the cause, and tare in pieces the
Heritiques books, and allowed for good the judgment of the Catholics. In
the Counsel at Chalridone a Civil magistrate condemned for heretics by the
sentence of his own mouth, Socrat. (...) cap. 10.
the Bysshoppes Dioseorus, Iuuenall, and Thalasius, and gave judgment to put
them down from that promotion in the Curche. In the third Council at
Constantinople, Constantine a civil Magistrate, (...) 2.
did not only sit amongst the Bishops, but did also subscribe with, them: For
says he, we have both read and subscribed. In the second Council called
Arausicanum, the Princes Ambassadors being noble men borne, not only spoke
their mind touching Religion, but set to their hands also, as well as the
Bishops. For thus is it written in the later end of that Counsel, Petrus,
Marcellinus, Felix and Liberius, being most noble men, and the famous
Lieutenauntes and Capitaines of France, and also Peers of the Realm, have
given their consent, and set to their hands. Further, Syagrius. Opilio,
Pantagattus, Deodatus, Cariattho and Marcellus, men of very great honor have
subscribed. If it be so then, that Lieutenauntes, chyefe Capitaines and Peers
have had authority to subscribe in Council, have not Emperors and kings the
like authority?

Truly there had been no need to handle so plain a matter as this is, with
so many words and so at length, if we had not to do with those men who
for a desire they have to strive and to win the mastery, use of course to
deny all things be they never so clear, yea the very same which they
presentlye see and behold with their own eyes. The Emperor Justinian made a
law to correct the behavior of ye Clergy, and to cut short the insolency
of the priests. And albeit he were a Christian and a Catholic prince, yet
put he down from their Papal Throne, twooe Popes, Syluerius and Vigilius,
not withstandinge they were Peter's successors, and Christ's vicars.

Let us see then, such men as have authority over the Bysshoppes, such
men as receive from God commandments concerning Religion, such as bring
home again the Ark of God, make holy hymns, over see the preistes, build
the Temple, make Orations touching divine service, cleanse the Temples, destroy
the hill Aultres, burn the Idolles groves, teach the preistes their dewtie,
write them out Precepts how they should live, kill the wicked Prophets,
displace the high Preistes, call together the Councelles of Bishops, sit
together which the Bishops, instructing them what they ought to do, condemn
and punysh an Heretical Bishop, be made acquaynted with matters of Religion,
which subscribe and give sentence, and do al these things, not by an other
man's Commission, but in their own name, and that both uprightly and godly.
Shall we say it pertains not to such men to have to do with Religion? or
shall we say, a Christian Magistrate which dealith amongst others in these
matters does either naughtelie, or presumpteouslye, or wickedlye? The most
aunciente and Christian Emperoures and kings that ever were, did busy
themselus with these matters, and yet were they never for this cause noted
either of wickedness or of presumption. And what is he that can find out
either more catholic princes or more notable exaumples?

Wherefore if it were lawful for them to do thus being but Civil
Magistrates, and having the chief rule of commonweals, what offense have
our Princes at this day made, which may not have leave to do the like,
being in the like degree? Or what especial gift of learning or of
judgment, or of holiness, have these men now, that contrary to the custom
of all the aunciente and Catholic Bysshoppes, who used to confer with
princes and peers concerning religion, they do now thus reject and cast of
Christian Princes from knowing of the cause, and from their meetinges?

Well thus doing, they wiselye and warelye provide for them selves and for
their kingedome, which otherwise they see is like shortly to come to naught.
For if so be, they whom God has placed in greatest dignity, did see and
perceive these men's practices, how Christ's commandments be despised by
them, how the light of the Gospel is darkened and quenched out by them, and
how themselves also be subtly begiled and mocked and unawares be deluded by
them, and the way to ye kingedom of heaven stopped up before them, no doubt
they would never so quietlye suffer them selves neither to be disdaigned after
such a proud sort, nor so dispitefully to be scorned and abused by them. But
now through their own lack of understanding, and through their own
blyndenesse, these men have them fast yoked* and in their danger.

We truly for our parts, as we have said, have don nothing in altering
Religion, either upon rashenes or arrogantie, nor nothing but with good leisure
and great consideration. Neither had we ever intended to do it, except both the
manifest and most assured will of God opened to us in his holy scriptures, and
the regard of our own salvation had even constreyned us there unto. For
though we have departed from that Church which these men call catholic,
and by that means get us envy amongst them that want skill to judge, yet is
this enough for us, and it ought to be enough for every wise and good man, and
one that makes accoumpte of everlasting life, that we have gone from that
Church which had power to err, which Christ, who cannot err, told so long
before it should err, and which we our selves did evidently see with our eyes
to have gone both from ye holy Fathers and from the Apostles, and from Christ
his own self and from the primative and catholic church: and we are come
as nere as we possibly could to the Church of the Apostles and of the old
catholic Bishops and Fathers, which Church we know has hetherunto ben
sound and perfect, and as Tertullian terms it, a pure virgin spotted as yet
with no Idolatry, nor with any foul or shameful fault: and have directed
according to their customs and ordinances not only our doctrine, but also
the Sacraments and the form of common prayer.

And as we know both Christ him self and all good men here to fore have don,
we have called home again to the original and first foundation that Religion
which has been fowly forslowed and utterly corrupted by these men. For we
thought it mere thence to take ye pattern of reforminge Religion, from whence
the ground of Religion was first taken, Because this one reasone, as says the
most ancient Father Tertullian, has great force against all Heresies. Look
what soever was first, that is true: and what soever is latter, that is
corrupt. Ireneus oftentimes appealed to ye oldest Churchs, which had been nerest
to Christ's time, and which it was hard to believe had erred. But why at this
day is not the same respect and consideration had? Why return we not to the
pattern of the old Churches? why may not we hear at this time amongst us ye
same saiing which was openly pronounced in times past in the Council at Nice by
so many Byshopes and Catholic Fathers, and nobody once speaking against it.
(...): that is to say, hold still the old customs. When Eldras went about to
repair the ruynes of the Temple of God, he sent not to Ephesus, although the
most beautiful and gorgious Temple of Diana was there, and when he purposed
to restore ye Sacrifices and ceremonies of God, he send not to Rome, although
peradventure he had heard in that place were the solemn Sacrifices called
Hecatombae, and other called Solitauril^a, lectisternia, and Supplicatio^s, and
Numa Pompilius ceremonial books, he thought it enough for him to set before
his eyes, and to follow the pattern of the old Temple which Solomon at the
beginning builded, according as God had appoincted him, and also those old
customs and Ceremonies which God himself had written out by special words for
Moses.

The Prophet Aggeus, after the Temple was repaired again by Esdras, and the
people might think they had a very just cause to rejoice on their own
behalf, for so great a benefit received of almighty God, yet made he them al
burst out in tears, because that they which were yet alive, and had seen the
former building of the Temple before the Babylonians destroyed it, called to
mind how far of it was yet from that beauty and excellency which it had in
the old times past before. For the^ in deed would they have thought ye Temple
worthily repaired, if it had answered to the ancient pattern, and to the
majesty of the first Temple. Paul because he would amend the abuse of the
Lords supper which ye Corinthians even then begone to corrupt, he set
before them Christ's institution to follow, sayng: I have delivered unto you ye
which I first received of the Lord. And when Christ did confute the error of
the Pharisees, Ye must, says he, return to the first beginning, for from the
beginning yt was not thus. And when he found great fault with ye priests for
their uncleanness of life and covetousness, and would cleanse the Temple from al
evil abuses, This house says he, at ye first beginning was a house of prayer,
wherein all the people might deuoutely and sincerely pray together, and so were
your parts to use it now also at this day. For it was not builded to the end
it should be a den of thieves. Likewise all the good and commendable Princes
mentioned of in the Scriptures, were praised, specially by those words that
they had walked in the ways of their Father David. That is because they had
returned to the first and original foundation, and had restored Religion even
to the perfection wherein David left it. And therefore when we likewise saw all
thing es were quite trodden under foot of these men, and that nothing remained
in the Temple of God but piteful spoils and decays, we reckened it the wisest
and the safest way to set before our eyes those Churches which we knew for a
suerty that they never had erred, nor never had private Mass, nor prayers in
straynge and Barbarous language, nor this corrupting of Sacraments and other
toys.

And forsomuche as our desire was to have the Temple of the Lord restored a
new, we would seek no other foundation, then the same which we knew was long
agone laid by the Apostles, that is to wit, our savior Jesus Christ. And
for so much as we heard God him self speaking unto us in his word, and saw also
the notable Examples of the oulde and primative Church: again how uncertain
a matter it was to wait for a general Coucell, and that the success thereof
would be much more uncertain, but specially for so much as we were most
ascerteined of Gods will, and counted it a wickedness to be to careful and
ouercumbred about the judgments of mortal men, we could no longer stand
taking advise with flesh and blood, but rather thought good to do ye same
thing that does might rightlye be don, and has also many a time ben don as well
of good men as of many catholic Byshopes: that is, to remedy our own
Churches by a Provincial Synod. For thus know we the old Fathers used to
putt in experience before they came to the public universal Counsel. There
remain yet all this day Canons written in Cou^celles of free Cities, as of
Carthage under Cypria^, as of Ancyra, of Neocesaria and of Gangra, also which
is in Daphlagonia as some think, before that ye name of the general Council
at Nice was ever heard of. After this fashion in old time did they spedely
meet with, and cut short those Heretics ye Pelagians and the Donatistes at
home with private disputation, without any general Council. Thus also when the
Emperor Constantius evidently and earnestly took part with Auxentius the
Bishop of the Aerians faction, Ambrose the Bishop of the Christians appealed
not unto a general Council, where he save no good could be don^by reason of ye
Emperors might and great labor, but appealed to his own Clergy and people,
that is to say, to a Prouincia^ Synod. And thus it was decreed in the Council
at Nice, that the Byshop^ should assemble twice every year. And in the Council
at Carthage it was decreed, that the Bishops should meet together in each
of their provinces, at least once in the year, which was done as says the
Council at Chal^e^ne, of purpose, that if any errors and abuses had happened
to spring up any where, they might immediatelye at the first enterie be
destroyed where they first begone. So likewise when Se^undus and Palladius
rejected the Counsel at Aquila, because it was not a general and a common
Council, Ambrose Bishop of Millaine made answer, that no man ought to
take it for a new or strange matter that the Bishops of the weste part of
the world did call together Synodes, and make private assemblies in their
Provinces, for that it was a thing before then used by the west Bysshoppes no
few times, and by the Bysshoppes of Grecia used oftentimes and commonly to be
done. And so Charles the great being Emperor, held a provincial Council in
Germany, for puttinge away Images, contrary to the second Council at Nice.
Neither pardy even amongst us is this so very a strange and new a trade: for
we have had ere now in England provincial Synods, and governed our
Churches by home made laws. What should one say more? of a truth even those
greatest Councelles, and where most assembly of people ever was (whereof these
men use to make such an exceedinge reckeninge) compare them with all the
Churches which throughout the world acknoweledge and profess the name of
Christ, and what else I pray you can they seem to be, butte certain private
Councelles of Bysshoppes, and provincial Synodes? For admit peradventure,
Italy, France, Spain, England, Germany, Denmark, and Scotland meet
togithers, if there want Asia, Grecia, Armenia, Persia, Media, Mesopotamia,
Egypt, Ethiopia, India, and Mauritania, in all which places there be both
many Christian men and also Bysshoppes, how can any man, being in his
right mind, think such a Council to be a general Council? or where so
many parts of the world do lack, how can they truly say, they have
the consent of the whole world? Or what manner of Council, ween you, was
the same last at Trident? Or how might it be termed a general Council,
when out of all Christian kyngedomes and Nations, there came unto it butte
only fourtye Bysshoppes, and of those some so cunninge, that they might be
thought meet to be sent home again to learn their Grammar, and so well
learned, that they had never studied Divinity?

What so ever it be, the truth of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST depends not
upon Councelles, nor as S. Pawle says, upon mortal creatures judgments.
And if they which ought to be careful for Gods Church, will not be wise but
slack their duty, and harden their hearts against Godde and his Christ,
goinge on still to pervert the right ways of the Lord, God will stir up the
very stones, and make children and babes cunninge, whereby there may ever be
some to confute these men's lies. For God is able (not only without
Councelles, butt also will the Councelles nill the Councelles) to maintain and
auaunce his own kingedom. Full many be the thoughts of man's heart (says
Solomon) but the counsel of the Lord abides steadfast. There is no wisdom,
there is no knowledge, there is no counsel against the Lord. Things endure
not, says Hilarious, that be set up with men's workmanship: By an other
manner of means must the Church of God be builded and preserved, for that
Church is grounded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and is
holden fast together by one corner stone, which is Christ Jesus.

But merueilous notable and to very good purpose for these days be Niecomes
words: Whosoever (says he) the Devil has deceived and enticed to fall a
sleep as it were with the sweet and deathly enchau^tments of ye marmaids the
Sirenes, Hieron. i Naum. cap. 3.
those persons does Gods word awake up, saying unto them: Arise thou that
sleep, lift up thy self, and Christ shall give the light. Therefore at the
coming of Christ, of Gods word, of the ecclesiastical doctrine, and as
the full destruction of Niniue, and of that most be witfull harlot, then shall
the people which heretofore had been ca^t in a trance under their masters,
be raised up, and shall make haste to go to the Mountains of the Scripture,
(...) shall they find hills, Moses, ^^reey and Joshua the son of Nun: other
^^les also which a^ the Prophets: (...) of the new testament, which (...)
the Apostles and the Evangelists: And when the people shall flee for succor
to such hills, and shall be exercised in the reading of those kind of
mountains, though they find not one to teach them (for the harvest shall be
great, butte the laborers few) yet shall the good desire of the people be
well accepted, in that they have gotten them to such hills, and the
negligence of their masters shall be openly reproved. These be Hieromes
sayenges, and that so plain, as there needs no Interpretour. For they agree
so just with the things we now see with our eyes have already come to
pass, yt we may verelye think he mente to foretell, as it were by the
spirit of prophecy, and to paincte before our face the universal state of
our time, the fall of the most gorgeous harlotte Babylon, the repairinge
again of Gods Church, the blyndenesse and slewthe of the Bysshoppes, and
the good will and forwardenesse of the people. For who is so blind that he
sees not these men be the masters, by whom the people, as says Hierome,
has been led into error, and lulled a sleep? Or who sees not Rome, that
is their Niniue, which sometime was paineted with fairest colors, but now her
vizer being pulled of, is both better seen and less set by? Or who sees not
that good men being a waked as it were out of their dead sleep, at the
light of the Gospel, and at the voice of God, have resorted to the hills of
the Scriptures, waiting not at all for the Councelles of such masters?

Butte by your favor, some will say, These things ought not to have been
attempted without the Bishop of Romes commandment, forsomuche as he only
is the knotte and band of Christian society: he only is that priest of
Leuies order, whom God signified in the Deuteronomy, from whom counsel in
matters of weight and true judgment ought to be fetched, and who so obeys
not his judgment, the same man ought to be killed in the sight of his
brethren: and that no mortal creature has authority to be judge over him
whatsoever he do: that Christ reigns in heaven and he in earth: that
he alone can do as much as Christ, or God him self can do, because
Christ and he have but one Council house: That without him is no faith, no
hope, no church, and who so goes from him, quite casts away and renounceth
his own salvation. Such talk have the Canonistes, the Popes parasites
surely, but with small discretion or sobrenesse: for they could stant say
more, at least they could not speak more highlye of Christ him self.

As for us truly, we have fallen from the Bishop of Rome upon no manner of
worldly respect or commodity, and would to Christ he so behaved himself,
as this falling away neded not: but so the case stood, that oules we left him,
we could not come to Christ. Neither will he now make any other league with us,
then such a one as Nahas the king of the Ammonites would have made in times
past with the^ of the city of Jabes, 1. Reg^^
which was to put out the right eye of each one of the Inhabitants. Even so
will the Pope pluck from us the holy Scripture, the Gospel of our salvation,
and all the confidence which we have in Christ Jesus. And upon other condition
can he not agree upon peace with us.

For whereas some use to make so great a vaunte, that the Pope is only Peter's
Successor, as though thereby he carried the holy Ghost in his bosom and cannot
err, this is but a matter of nothing and a very trieflyng tale. Gods grace is
promised to a good mind, and to one that fearith God, not unto Sees and
Successio^s. Riches says Jerome, may make a Bishop to be of more might then
the rest: but all the Bishops whosoever they be, are the Successors of the
Apostles. If so be, the place and consecrating only be sufficient (why then)
Manasses succeeded David, and Caiphas succeeded Aaron. And it has been often
seen, that an Idol has stand in the Temple of God. In old time Archidamus
the Lacedemonian boasted much of him self, how he came of the blood of
Hercules, but one Nicostratus in this wise abated his prydes Nay, quod he, you
semest not to descend from Hercules, for Hercules destroyed ill men, but thou
make good men evil. And when the Pharisees bragged of their lineage how they
wereof ye kynred and blood of Abraham, Ye says Christ, seek to kill me, a man which have toulde you the troth as I heard it from God: thus Abraham
never did. Ye are of your Father the dyuel, and will needs obey his will.

Yet notwithstanding, because we will grant somewhat to succession, tell us,
has the Pope alone succeeded Peter* and wherein I pray you, in what Religion?
in what Office? in what piece of his life has he succeeded him? What one thing
(tell me) had Peter ever like unto the Pope? or the pope like unto Peter?
except paraduenture they will say thus: that Peter when he was at Rome, never
taught the Gospel, never fed ye flock, took away the keys of the kingedom
of heaven, hyd the treasures of his Lord, satte him down only in his Castle
in S. John Laterane, and poincted out with his finger all the places of
Purgatory, and kinds of punyshementes, co^mittyng some poor souls to be
tormented, and other some again suddenly ^^leasing thence at his own
pleasure, taking money for so doing: or that he gave order to say private
Masses in every cornere or that be mumbled up the holy service with a low
voice and in an unknown language, or that he hanged up ye Sacrament in every
Temple and on every Altar, and carried ye same about before him whether soever
he went, upon an ambling Iennett, with lights and belles: or that he
consecrated with his holy breath, oil, war, wulle, belles, chalices, churches
and aultres: or that he sold Jubilees, graces, liberties, aduousons,
preuentions, first fruits, Palles, the wearing of Palles, bulls, Indulgences
and pardons: or that he called him self by the name of the head of the Church,
The highest Bishop, Bishop of Byshopps, alone Most holy: or that by usurping he
took upon him self the right and authority over other folks Churches: or
that he exempted him self from the power of any civilie government: or that
he maintained warr^, set Princes together at variaunce: or that he sytting in
his Chair with his triple Crown full of labelles, with sumptuous and
Persianlike gorgiousnes, with his Royal scepter, with his Diadem of goulde
and glittering with stones, was carried about not upon Pa^lfr^ie, but upon the
shoulders of noble men. These things no doubt did Peter at Rome in times
past, and left them in charge to his Successors as you would say, from hand to
hand: for these things be now a days done at Rome by the Popes, and be so
done, as though nothing else ought to be don.

Or contrary wise paraduenture they had rather say thus, that the Pope does
now all the same things which we know Peter did many a day a go: that is,
that he rounneth up and down into every Countreye to Preach the Gospel, not
only openly abroad, but also priuatelye from house to house: that he is
diligente, and applies that business in seasone and out of seasone, in dew
time, out of dew time: that he does the part of an Evangelist, that he
fulfilleth the work and ministry of Christ, that he is ye watcheman of the
house of Israel: receaueth answeares and words at Gods mouth: and even as
hereceiueth them, so delivers them over to the people: That he is the salt
of the earth: That he is the light of the world, that he does not feed his own
self but his flock, that he does not entangle him self with the worldly
ears of this life, that he does not use a soueraintye over the Lords people,
that he seeks not to have other men minister to him, but him self rather
to minister unto others, that he takes al Bishops as his felows and equals:
that he is subject to Princes as to persons sent from God, that he gives to
Caesar that which is Cesars: and that he as the old Bishops of Rome did
(without any question) calls the Emperor his Lord: Onles therefore the Popes
do the like now a days, and Peter did the things a foresaid, there is no
cause at all why they should glory so of Peter's name and of his succession.

Much less cause have they to complain of our departing, and to call us
again to be fellows and friends with them, and to believe as they believe. Men
say that one Cobdon a Lacedemonian, when he was sent Ambassador to the king
of the Persians to treat of a legue, and found by chance them of the court
playng at dyce, he returned straight way home again, leaving his message
undone. And when he was asked why he did flacke to do the things which he
had received by public commission to do, he made answer, he thought it
should be a great reproach to his common welthe, to make a legue with Dicers.
But if we should content our selves to return to the Pope and his popyshe
errors, and to make a couenaunte not only with dicers, but also with men farr^
more ungracious and wicked then any dycers be: Besides that this should be a
great blot to our good name, it should also be a very dangerous matter both
to kindle Gods wrath against be, and to clogge and condemn our own souls
forever. For of very truth we have departed from him whom we saw had blinded
the whole world this many an hundred year. From him who to far
presumpteouslye was wont to say, he could not err, and whatsoever he did no
mortal man had power to condemn him, neither kings nor Emperors, nor the
whole Clergy, nor yet all the people in the world together, no and though he
should carry away with hun to Hell a thousand souls. From him who took upon
him power to command not only men but even Gods Angels, to go, to
return, to lead souls into Purgatory, and to bring them back again when he
list him self: whom Gregory said, with out all doubt is the very foreronner
and standerd bearer of Antichrist, and has utterly forsaken the catholic
faith: From whom also those ringeleaders of owers, who now with might and
maine resist ye Gospel, and the troth which they know to be the truth, have
or this departed every one of their own accord and good will, and would even
now also gladly depart fro hyin, if the note of inconstancy and shame and
their own estimacion among the people were not a let unto them. In
conclussion, we have departed from him to whom we were not bound, and who had
nothing to lay for him self, but only I know not what virtue or power of the
place where he d'weleth, and a continuance of seccession.

And as for us, we of all others most justly have left him. For our Kings,
yea even they which with greatest reverence did follow and obey the authority
and faith of the Bishops of Rome, have long since found and felt well enough
the yoke and tyranny of the Popes kingdom. For ye Bishops of Rome took the
Crown of from the head of our King Henrye the second, and compelled him to
put a side all majesty, and like a mere private man to come unto their Legate
with great submission and humility, so as all his subjectes might laugh him to
scorn. More the^ this, they caused Bishops and Monks and some part of the
nobility to be in the feelde against our King John, and set all the people
at liberty from their oath whereby they ought allegeaunce to their king: and at
last, wickedly and most abominably they bereaved the king not only of his
kingdom, but also of his life. Besides this, they excommunicated and cursed
King Henry theight, the most famous Prince, and stirred up against him sometime
the Emperor, sometime the French King, and as much as in them was, put in
adventure our Realm to have been a very pray and spoil. Yet were they but
fowls and mad, to think that either so mighty a Prince could be scared with
bugges and rattles: or else ye so noble and great a kingdom might so easily,
even at one morsel be devoured and swalowed up.

And yet as though all this were to little, they would needs make all the Realm
tributarie to them, and exacted there yearly most unjust and wrongful taxes.
So dear cost us the freendeshyp of the City of Rome. Wherefore if they have
gotten these things of us by extortion thorough their fraud and subtle
sleightes, we see no reason why we may not pluck away the same from them
again by laufull ways and just means. And if out kings in that darkness and
blindenes of former times gave them these things of their own accord and
liberality for Religion sake, being moved with a certain opinion of their
fained holiness, now when ignorance and error is spied out, may the Kings
their successors take them away again, seeing they have the same authority,
the Kings their ancestors had before. For the gift is void, except it be
allowed by the will of the giver: and that cannot seem a perfect will, which is
dymmed and hindered by error.

Thus ye see good Christian Reader, how it is no new thing, though at this day
the religion of Christ be enterteined with dispites and checkes, being but
lately restored and as it were coming up again a new, for somuche as the like
has chanced both to Christ him self and to his Apostles: yet nevertheless
for fear ye may suffer your self to be led amysse and seduced with those
exclamations of our Adversaries, we have declared at large unto you ye very
whole manner of our Religion, what our opinion is of God the Father, of his
only son Jesus Christ, of the holy Ghost, of the Church, of the Sacraments,
of the ministry, of ye Scriptures, of ceremonies, and of every part of
Christian believe. We have said that we abandon and detest as plagues and
poisons all those oide? Heresies, which either the sacred Scriptures or the
ancient Councelles have utterly condemned: that we call home again as much
as ever we can, the right Discipline of ye Church, which our Adversaries have
quite brought into a poor and weak case: That we punnishe all licentiousnes
of life and vnrulynes of manners by the old and long continued laws, and with
as much sharpenes as is convenient and lies in our power: That we maintain
still the state of kingdoms, in the same condition and plight wherein we have
found the^, without any diminishing or alteration, reseruinge unto our Princes
their majesty and worldly preeminence safe and without empayring, to our
possible power: That we have so gotten our selves away from that Church which
they had made a den of Thieves, and wherein nothing was in good frame or once
like to the Church of God, and which them selfs confessed had erred many
weies, eue^ as Lot in times paste gat him out of Sodom, or Abraham out of
Caldie, not upon a desire of contention, but by ye warninge of God him self:
And yt we have searched out of ye holy Bible which we are sure cannot deceive,
one sure form of Religion, and have returned again unto the Primative
Church of the ancient Fathers and Apostles, that is to say, to the first
ground and beginning of things, as unto the very foundations and head springes
of Christ's church. And in very troth we have not carried for in this matter
the authority or consent of the Trident Council, wherein we saw nothing don
uprightly nor by good order: where also every body was sworn to the
maintenance of one man: where our Princes Ambassadors were contemned: where
not one of our divines could be heard, and where parts taking and ambition
was openly and earnestlye procured and wrought, but as the holy Fathers in
former time, and as our predecessors have commonly don, we have restored our
Churches by a Provincial Convocation, and have clean shaken of as our dewtie
was, the yoke and tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, to whom we were not bound,
who also had no manner of thying like neither to Christ nor to Peter, nor to an
Apostle, nor yet like to any Bishop at all. Finally, we say that we agree
amongst our selves, touching the whole judgment and chief substance of
Christian Religion, and with one mouth and with one spirit do woorshipp God
and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore O Christian and godly Reader, forsomuche as thou see the reasons
and causes both why we have restored Religion, and why we have forsaken
these men, thou ought not to marvel, though we have chosen to obey our
Master Christ rather then men. Paul has given us warning how we should
not suffer our selves to be carried away with such sundry learninges, and to
fly their companies, in especial which would sow debate and variaunces,
clean contrary to the Doctrine whithe they had received of Christ and the
Apostls. Long since have these men's crafts and treacheries decayed and
vanished and fled away at the sight and light of ye Gospel, even as the owl
does at the sun rising. And albeit their trumperye be builte up and reared as
high as the Sky, yet even in a moment and as yt were of the own selue
fallyth yt down again to the ground, and comes to naught. For you must not
think yt al these things have com to pass rashly or at adventure: It has been
gods pleasure yt against al men's wills well nigh, the Gospel of Jesus Christ
should be spread abroad thorough out the whole world, at these days. And
therefore men following godds biddings, have of their own free will resorted
unto the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. And for our parts truly we have sought
hereby neither glory nor welthe, nor pleasure nor ease. For there is plenty
of all these things with our adversaries. And when we were of their side, we
enjoyed such worldly commodyties much more liberally and bountefullye, then
we do now. Neither do we eschew concord and peace, but to have peace with
man, we will not be at war with God. The name of peace is a sweet and
pleasant thing, says Hilarious: But yet beware, says he, peace is one
thing, and boundage is an other. For if it should so be as they seek to have
it, that Christ should be commanded to keep silence, that the truth of the
Gospel should be betrayed, that horrible errors should be cloked, that
Christian men's eyes should be bleared, and that they might be suffered to
conspire openly against God: this were not a peace, but a most ungodly
covenant of servitude. There is a peace says Nazianzene, that is
unprofitable: again there is a discord says he, that is profitable. For we
must conditionallye desire peace, so far as is laufull before God, and so
far as we may conuenie^tly. For otherwise Christ him self brought not peace
into the world, but a sword. Wherefore if the Pope will have us re^onciled to
him, his dewty is first to be reconciled to God: for from thence says Cyprian,
spring schysmes and sects, because men seek not the head, and have not
their recourse to the Fountain of ye Scriptures, and keep not the Rules given
by the heavenly teacher: for says he, that is not peace but war: neither is
he joined unto the Church which is severed from the Gospel. As for these men
^hey use to make a marchaundize of the name of peace. For that peace which
they so feign would have, is only a rest of idle bellies. They and we might
easily be brought to atonement touching all the^e matters, were it not that
ambition, glutony and excess did let it: Hence comes their whyenyng, their
heart is on their Halfepennye. Out of doubt their claymours and styrres be to
none other end, but to maynte^ne more shamefully and naughtely ill gotten
things.

Now a days the Pardoners complain of us, the Dataries, the Popes
Collectours, the Bawdes, and others which take Gain to be godliness, and
serve not Jesus Christ but their own ^ellyes. Many a day a go and in the old
world, a wonderful great advantage grew hereby to these kind of people, but
now they reckon all is loss unto them that Christ gaigneth. The Pope him self
makes great complaynere at this present, that Charity in people is waxen
could. And why so trow ye? Forsooth because his profittes decay more and
more. And for this cause does he hale us into hatred all that ever he may,
laieng lode upon us with dispitetfull raylings and condemning us for
Heretics, to the end they that understand not the matter, may think there
be no worse men upon earth then we be. Notwithstanding we in the mean
season are never the more ashamed for all this: neither ought we to be ashamed
of ye Gospel: for we set more by the glory of God then we do by the
estimation of men. We are suere all is true that we teach, and we may not
either go against our own conscience, or bear any witness against God. For if
we deny any part of the Gospel of Jesus Christ before men, he on the other
side will deny us before his Father. And if there be any that will still be
offended and cannot endure Christ's doctrine, such say we, be blind and,
leaders of ye blind: the truth nevertheless must be preached and preferred
above all: and we must with patience wait for Gods judgment. Let these
folk in the mean time take good heed what they do, and let them be well
advised of their own Salvation, and cease to hate and persecute the Gospel of
the son of God, for fear least they feel him once a redresser and reue^ger
of his own cause. God will not suffer him self to be mad a mocking stock. The
world espyeth a good while a gone what there is a doing abroad. This flame the
more it is kept down, so much the more with greater force and strengh does it
break out and fly abroad. Their unfaithfulness shall not di^apoincte gods
faithful promise. And if they shall refuse to lay away this their hardenes
of heart and to receive the Gospel of Christ, then shall Publicanes and sinners
go before them into the kingedome of Heaven.

GOD and the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST open the eyes of them all, that
they may be able to see that blessed hope whereunto they have been called, so
as we may altogether in one, glorify him alone, who is the tre^ God, and
also that same Jesus Christ whom he sent down to us from Heaven: unto whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost be given all honor and glory
euerlastinglye. So be it.

The end of the Apology of the Church of England.
The manner how the Church of England is administered and governed.
The Church of England is divided in to two Provinces, Canterbury, and York.


The Province of Canterbury has
Tharchebyshop of the same, who is Primate of all England and Metropolitan.

The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Winchestes. The Bishop of Elye. The Bishop
of Chichestes The Bishop of Hereforde. The Bishop of Salysburie. The Bishop of
Worcetor. The Bishop of Lincoln. The Bishop of Couentrie and Lichefield. The
Bishop of Bathe and Wells. The Bishop of Norwiche. The Bishop of Excetor. The
Bishop of Rochester. The Bishop of Peterborough. The Bishop of S. Dauies. The
Bishop of S. Assaph. The Bishop of Landaffe. The Bishop of Bangor. The Bishop
of Oxforde. The Bishop of Gloucester, and The Bishop of Bristowe.
The Province of York has
Tharthebyshop of the same, who is also Primate of England and Metropolitan.

The Bishop of Durham. The Bishop of Carliell, and The Bishop of Chester.
Amongst us here in England no man is called or preferred to be a Bishop,
except he have first received the orders of Priestho^de, and be well hable to
instruct the people in ye holy scriptures.

Every one of the Archebyshops and Bishops have their several Cathedral
churches. Wherein ye deanes bear chief rule, being men specially chosen both
for their learning and godliness, as near as may be.

These Cathedral Churches have also other dignities and Cano^ries, whereunto
be assigned no idle or unprofitable persons, but such as either be
Preachers, or professors of the Sciences of good learning.

In the said Cathedral Churches, upon Sondayes and festival days, the
Canons make ordinarilye special Sermons, whereunto duly resort the head
Officers of the Cities and the Citizens: and upon the workendayes thryse in the
week, one of the Canons does read and expound some piece of holy Scripture.

Also the said Archebyshops and Bishops have under them their Archedeacons,
some two, some four, some six, according to the largenes of the dioces, the
which Archedeacons keep yearly two visitations, wherein they make diligent
inquisition, and search both of the doctrine and behavior as well of the
ministers as of the people. They punish thoffendors: and if any errors in
religion and heresies fortune to spring, they bring those and other weighty
matters before the Bishops themselves.

There is nothing read in our Churches but the canonical scriptures, which is
done in such order, as that the Psalter is read over every month, the new
Testament four times in the year, and the old Testament once every year.
And if the Curate be judged of ye Bishop to be sufficiently seen in the holy
scripturs, he does withal make some exposition and exhortacion unto godliness.

And for so much a^ our Churches and Universities have been wonderfully marred,
and so souly brought out of al fashion in time of papistrie, as there can not
be had learned pastors for every parysh, there be prescribed unto the Curates
of meaner understanding, certain Homelies devised by learned men, which do
comprehend the principal poinctes of Christian doctrine: as of Original sin,
of Justification, of Faith, of Charity, and such like, for to be read by
them unto the people.

As for Common prayer, The lessons taken out of the Scriptures, thadministringe
of the sacraments, and the residue of service done in the Churches, are every
whitt done in the vulgar tongue which all may understand.

Touching the universities.
Moreover, this Realm of England has two Universities, Cambridge and
Oxforde.


And the manner is not to live in these within houses that be Innes or a
receipt for common geastes, as is the custom of some universities, but they
live in colleges under most grave and severe discipline, even such as the
famous learned man Erasmus of Roterodame, being here amongst us about
forty years past, was bold to prefer before ye very rules of the Monks.

In Cambridge be xiiii Colleges, these by name that follow.
Trinity College founded by king Henry the eight.

The kings College. S. John's College. Christ's College. The Queen's
College. Ihesus College. Bennet College. Pembroke College, or Pembroke
halle, Peter College, or Peter house. Bunwell and Caws college, or halle. One
other Trinity college, or Trinity halle Clare college, or Clare halle. S.
Katherins college, or Katherin halle. Magdalene college.
In Oxford likewise there be Colleges some greater some smaler, to the number
of four and twentye, the names whereof be as follows.
The Cathedral Church of Christ, wherein also is a great company of
students. Magdalene college. New college. Marten college. All sowles
college. Corpus Christi college. Lincoln college. Anriell college. The
Ouenes college. Baptie college, or Bailioll college. S. John's college.
Trinity college. Excetor college. Brazen nose college. Thuniuersitie
college. Glocetor college. Brodega^e halle. ^^aete halle. Ma^^alene halle.
A^borne halle. S. Marie halle. ^hyre halle. ^ewe I^^e Edmonde halle.
And besides these Colleges that be in the Universities, this Realm has also
certain collegiate churches, as Westmynster, Windesour, Eaton, and Wynchester.
The two last whereof do bring up and find a great number of young Scholars,
the which after they be once parfect in the rules of Grammar and of
versifieng, and well entered in the principles of the Greek tongue and of
Rhetorike, are sent from thence unto the universities: as thus. Out of Eaton
college they be sent unto the Kings college at Cambrydge, and out of
Wynchester, unto the New college at Oxford.

The Colleges of both the Universities be not only very fair and goodly
builte thorough thexceding liberality of ye kings in old time and of late
days, of Byshopps and of noble men, but they be also endowed with marvelous
large liuinges and revenues.

In Trinity college at Cambrydge, and in Christ's college at Oxford, both
which were founded by King Henry theight of most famous memory, are at the
least found four hundredth Shollers: and the like number well near is to be
seen in certain other Colleges, as in the Kings College and S. John's
College at Cambrydge: in Magdalene college and New college of Oxford:
besides the rest which we now pass over.

Every one of the Colleges have their Professors of the tongues and of the
liberal Sciences (as they call them) which do trade up youth privately whithin
their Halles, to thend they may afterward be able to go forth thence into the
common schools as to open disputation, as it were into plain battle, there to
try themself.

In the common Schools of both the Universities, there are found at the Kings
charge, and that very largely, five Professors and Readers, that is to say,
The Reader of Divinity. The Reade^ of the Civil law. The Reader of Physike.
The Reader of the Hebrewe tongue. and The Reader of the Greek tongue.


And for the other Professors, as of Phylosophie, of Logique, of Rethorike,
and of the Mathematicalles, the Universities themselves do allow stipendes
unto them. And these Professors have the ruling of the Disputacio^s and other
schole exercises which be daily used in the common Schools: Amongst whom,
they that by the same Disputations and exercises are thought to be come to any
tipenes in knowledge, are wont according to ye use in other universities,
soleniply to take degrees, every one in ye same science and faculty which he
professes.

We thought good to annexe these things, to the end we might confute and
confound those that spread abroad rumors, how yt with us nothing is don in
order and as ought to be don: yt there is no Religion at al, no Ecclesiastical
Discipline observed, no regard had of the salvation of men's souls, but that
all is don quite out of order and seditiouslye, yt all antiquity is despised,
that liberty is given to all sensuality and lewd lusts of folks, that the
livings of the Church be converted to profane and worldly uses, whereas in
very troth we seek nothing else but that, that God above all most good, may
have still his honor truly and purely reserved unto him, that the rule and
way to everlasting Salvation may be taken from out of his very word, and not
from men's fantasies, that the Sacraments may be ministered not like a Maskary
or a stage play, but religiously and reverently according to the rule
prescribed unto us by Christ, and after the example of the holy Fathers which
flourished in the primative Church: that that most holy and godly form of
discipline, which was commonly used amongst them, may be called home again:
that the goods of ye Church may not be lau^ched out amongst worldlinges and
ydel persons, but may be bestowed upon the godly Ministers and Pastors which
take pain both in Preaching and teaching: that there may from time to time
arise up out of the Universities learned and good ministers and others meet to
serve ye common wealth: And finally, that all unclean and wicked life may be
utterly abandoned and banyshed, as unworthy for the name of any Christian. And
albeit we are not as yet able to obtain this yt we have said, fully and
perfitlie, (for this same Stable, as one may rightly call it, of ye Romish
Augias, cannot so soon be thorouglye cleansed and ridd from the long grown
filth and mucke) nevertheless this is it whereunto we have regard: hither do
we tend: to this mark do we direct our pain and travail, and that
hitherto (thorough God his gracious favor) not without good success and
plenteous increase: which thing may easily appear to every body, if either we
be compared with our own selves in what manner of case we have been but few
years since, or else be compared with our false accusers, or rather our
malicious slaunderours.

The Lord defend his Church, govern it with his holy Spirit, and bless
the same with all prosperous felicity.

Amen.
Imprinted at London in Paul's church yard, at the sign of the Brazen
serpent, by Reginalde Wolf.

Anno Domini. M. D. LXIIII,

Faults escaped in the printinge.
Erase. Faults. Correction. B. 4. such one for heretics. such ones F. 5. p.
2. Peter did not this did not thus F. ^. p. 2. yet bear they yet bare they^ F.
8. they were a rebellious they be a rebel. G. 3. p. 2 pardon^ (...) pardons so
large^^. K. 5. p. 2. intend bear intend to bear. N. 1. have thought so*
thought good so.


