A Discovery of the most secret and subtle practices of the IESVITES.

Translated out of French.

AT LONDON Printed for Robert Boulton, and are to be sold at his shop in
Smith-field, near to Long-lane end. 1610.

A RELATION OF the most secret desseings of the Jesuits.
THat which Marcus Cato was wont to say, that it were a wonder if one Magician
looking upon an other should forbear to laugh; may well be verified of the
Jesuits; that it were strange if one Jesuit considering an other, should not
laugh right out. I speak not of simple Jesuits, to whom either for the
weakness of their Judgments, or for the good opinion they have of their
religion, or for the small time they have employed in their company; their most
secret subtilties are unknown. For they hold them under so severe a
discipline, as not any one of them if he have not a very good sent, can smell
them out, and discover the monsters hidden under the cloak of this rigor. I
leave these men to speak of the Arch-Iesuites themselves, of the Regents,
Fathers Prouincials and Generals of their Order, who have such a communion in
all sort of wickedness in general, and particularly in Whordome, Treason, and
Magic Arts, as any man might rightly be amazed, if a Jesuit incountring
his companion, and beholding himself in him, as in a looking glass, should
not laugh extremely. I have therefore resolved to report some-things here,
whereof I my self have seen the greatest part, the rest I have learned from
Jesuits themselves, whom I could name, and doubtless I will name them, if
they do but once open their mouths against that which I write. For this time I
will briefly, and as it were in passing, trace them out, deferring to describe
them, which with the help of God I will more amply at another season, setting
down their circumstances.

First, if thou enterest into any college of the Jesuits, especially of those
which are built in any great and well peopled town: But why say I especially,
seeing there is not any one of them erected in any abject or obscure place? If
I say, thou entrest into any one of these colleges, observe at the first the
Porter diligently, the figure of a Charon or rather of a Cerberus. This man is
commonly of good years, if he be young, they have made very good trial of his
fidelity and silence. He understands the mysteries of their Cabale as well as
any other. In his lodging you shall find all sorts of apparel, as well for men
as women, of what condition soever. By this means the Jesuits attired every
one like unto the personage which they think they can best represent, practice
strange impostures. For sometimes some of them attired like Soldiers, walk in
public places, and haunt Brothell houses, abandoning themselves to all
dissolution and excess. Sometimes in the habit of Burgers, seeming to be
Lutherans or Caluinists, they observe in Innes, marketplaces, and public
assemblies, what is said of them, and the several desseignes of every man.
Sometimes under the habit of Doctors, making show to be good Catholics, when
as they know the lodgings of the richest among the people which have children,
they intrude themselves, faining some other excuse, and by sundry practices
purchase acquaintance with them, This done, they exhort them to cause their
children to be instructed in the Jesuits college: for say they we have
studied in their school, and God be thanked we have not profited ill.
Sometimes under the habit of Gentlemen, having hired their furniture, they
creep into Princes Courts, and pretend to be of their train. Sometimes also
under the habit of poor passengers, they demand a Viaticum or reward,
especially of Divines and Ministers among the Protestants and Caluinists, to
epsy what they write against them. These be the men my masters in my opinion,
which have so villanously affronted you unto this day. But to the end that
here-after ye may beware of such spies, I will tell you what councels-they
have taken, and do even now take.

Some demand of me whereto serve these habits for weomen? Terrence could never
represent a Bawd so properly, to win the love of young strumpets, as these
Jesuits do at this day, especially this Porter of whom I speak. For he by his
flatteries and alurements discouers that easily, which his other companions,
could not learn in the corners of their chapels and temples, by means of their
auriculer confession. To effect this, he acquaints himself with the poorest
widows, and silliest women, as poor Spinsters, or Landresses, which send
their daughters to receive some Alms.

When as this villain has by his enchantments drawn them to his humor, being
before tattered, and torn, he attireth them in goodly apparel, which he has
in keeping, and having thus trimmed them up, he brings them to my masters the
Reverend Fathers, by unknown ways. And least they should be discoured, he
does it not by day, but attends the twy-light. So they pass the night in
feasts and dansings, when as the younger sort amongst them perceive nothing. For
to this end they have vaults, yea they have secret places under ground, in
imitation of those, which in old time did vow themselves to Venus, who gave
themselves so brutishly to Luxury, as Titus Liuius reports, that the Senate
fearing the wrath of the Gods, did quite ruin this Stues, and Brothel-house.
And thus much you may observe of the Jesuits Porter. Whereunto I will add,
that if happily any one seeming amazed, at this great abundance of apparel,
shall demand of them to what use it serves, they presently answer him, that
they keep it to play Comedies. But this is not their chief end.

If thou be come to enter into their Temple, be assured that thou art under
a heaven of Iron. For thou have over thy head a bloody Mars, and not the God
and Prince of Peace. Under thy feet thou have as it were a hideous Gulf of
hell, and a shop of Tormentours. I will represent here faithfully what I my
self have seen.

At Prague above the vault of their Temple, thou shall find thousands of
Chains, and scourges of Iron, according to the use of Bohemia. On the one side
are Canons placed, and a number of Muskets, and betwixt both many Lances, and
Battle-axes. In the midst of the vault thou shall see great heaps of
Bullets. The like is seen in Cracouta in their temples; I doubt not but the
like is to be found in other coledges. But will you know where to all this
serves. Truly I confess that at the beginning I found it very strange and
prodigious. But behold their desseigne. The Jesuits know well that by reason of
the troubles which they have stirred up, and of their nottable villenies, they
are in a manner generally hated of all the world, even of the honestest men
among the Papists. For they esteem not any one, no not them of their own
relligion, so as they may gratify the Pope, were it with the ruin and
confusion of all the world, and the betraying of their own countries. And
therefore for that they are in continual fears, by means of this warlike
furniture they provide in time for their safeties, for I have heard themselves
say, they fear the like accident should fall upon them, as did upon the
Templers, who although they were good Catholics, yet being grown insuportable,
by reason of their great Ambition, and Avarice, were by the consent of all
Christian Princes, and the approbation of the Pope himself, all slain and
massacred almost in an instant throughout the world. They will have their
defense and arms placed in their Temples, to the end if any motive happened,
the Papists which should run to their suckers, might be speedely armed, or else
if happily they of the contrary relligion should come to spoil them, they
might be beaten down with arms, and stones which they would throw from
above, I would gladly know if this be not to make a den of thieves of the
house of prayer. But you shall hear things which you will admire and detest
more: for all that has been said are but Roses and Flowers in regard of that
which follows.

Under the Pauement of the Temple, in the Town of Gratz in Stirria, and in
other places, the have Caves and prisons under ground, whereunto they descend
by secret devises. Thither they carry, (like to Cacus in Virgill) all their
spoils and treasures, and lay up great store of Silver. And thus not only of
their own free will, but even with an incredible delight, these good men make
profession to be poor, supporting this poverty with admirable patience, and
cursing all such as will not make profession of poverty as they do, holdinge
them unworthy of so happy and sweet a cross: they do commonly place their
treasures, directly under the great Altar: by this means in singing Mass,
they do sacrifice to Mars above, and to Mammon underneath.

There is also to be seen in these prisons under ground, a Storehouse full
of coards, swords, hatchets, pincers, fetters, boults, and ladders, which serve
to mannacle, torture, and miserably to torment those which fall into the hands
of such as Maxentius and Phalaris. They have also store of Garments fit for
hangmen, hats, doublets and hose, the sight or description whereof would strike
terror into any one. But alas! to what end do these religious men make such
preparation, who say they imitate the perfect mildenes of our Savior? By these
instruments they make captive the understandings of their poor Shcollers,
under their Jesuitical tirrannie: for if they find any one that they suspect
not to be constant in the resolution which he has taken to be a good Jesuit,
or if they fear that escaping, he will discover their secrets, they presently
clap both on his heels, and after they have made him to endure hunger and
thirst, they put him to death with most cruel torments. I invent nothing I
write the truth.

There was a young Gentleman of an excellent spirit, at Gratz in Stirria, called
I mes Clussans of the Province of Karneten, who having been very miserably
beaten with whippes, and stirrop-leathers, for a very light fault, threatninge
them that he would fly, and complain publicly of their unjust proceeding
against him, was by them put inot one of these prisons which we have
described, from whence it is not said that he was ever released: we other
young Scholars which did study in the College, did not doubt but that they put
him to death by strange torments.

I will publish when time shall serve, this example of tyranny, the like
whereof has not been heard, with all the circumstances, in the place of this
poor Gentleman, the which he himself had done if he had lived: moreover I
will set forth to the view of all the world, another notable villainy committed
by the Jesuits of Fulda, upon the person of one named Martin, whose father and
mother, are yet living in the town of Miltemberg, or Millberg in Franconia.
And how many women think you that these wretches have murdered, in these
Caves? how many little infants have they slain? How many young children of
very rich-houses have they stolen away? For my part I hold it most certain:
how often have we poor nouices, heard the lamentations and shrikes of little
Infants, their sighs and cries, which did so move us to pity, as our hair
stood right up. The most simple thought they were the souls of the departed,
and for my part I knew they were of those that were newly borne, or that were
newly slain.

Finally the Jesuits to attain unto the sovereign degree of their deuilish
malice, are accustomed in these places underground to make sightes pleasing
unto the Devil, for they disguise themselves with maskes and fearful
Attires, and causing the nouices to come to see such Tragedies, they present
themselves unto them, casting forth horrible cries, to try their constancy
and resolution, for they do not admit to the Study of the Magike Art, such as
be Tymerous and fearful: But as incapable of great matters, they leave them
to the exercise of inferior Arts, as for the most hardy, they observe them
carefully, and reserve them for the most Serious studies.

But many times such trialls succeed ill for them, as it happened at Prague in
the year one thousand six hundred and two, in the month of September, For as
the five chief Jesuits, were busied to terrify their youth under the form
of Devils, a sixth, a very Devil without doubt, came among them, and did so
embrace one of these five disguised Devils, as he dyed within three days
after. The Children talk openly of it in the City of Prague. These Jesuits
not-with-standing without any amazement of so Tragical an event, comtinew
still obstinately with Sacrilege, in the Study of Magike, In the knowledge
whereof father Coton a French man excells all those of his sect. The French
king did so much esteem him as he did assist always at his Table, and did
commonly intertayne him: we have seen the questions which he propounded in
the year one thousand six hundred and five, to a young Maiden that was possessed
at Paris, whereby his wickedness, and the pleasure he takes to speak with
the Devil appears plainly.

The Jesuits themselves brag that he has a looking glass of Astrology,
wherein he made the King to see plainly what-soeuer his Majesty desirded to
know, and that there is nothing so secret, nor any thing propounded in the
privy counsels of other Monarkes, which may not be seen or discovered by the
means of this celestial or rather diuilish glass. It is by the endeavor of
this coniuring Jesuit that the rest had promised unto themselves to draw unto
their party one of the greatest Princes of the Empire, although he were a
Protestant, for they held him to be much given to the study of Magike. To such
of their nouices as they have sequestered to instruct in these Arts, they first
expound unto them the 900. propositions set up at Rome by the Earl of
Mirandola, Item Tritemius book, with the Treatise of hidden Philosophy made
by Cornelius Agrippa, Item Theophrastus touching the constellation and signs
of Planets, with the Steganographia of a certain Abbot, and lastly the Art of
Paul, for the concilliation of the revelations. They say that Saint John was
very learned in this Art, yea they make no doubt (the which is an
insupportable blaspemy) the which I have heard often from themselves, and
could name my authors, that Jesus Christ was a most perfect Magitian.

Thus we have seen what concerns the Jesuits Temple: whereunto I will add,
that these holes and Caves under ground, whereof we have spoken, are most
commonly under the Quier or the Galleries, and not whereas the people are
accustomed to kneel. Art thou come from their Temple to their Library? (for at
this present I will not speak any thing of their refectorie, where they eat,
nor of their Chambers, nor Court dedicated for their recreation, nor of the
nourishment of other Scholars which are under the Jesuits charge, nor yet of
the method and order which they hold in their studies, for I refer it to an
other time, besides that most of these things are very well known from others.

Art thou come (I say) unto their Liberies? look on the right side, thou shall
find it richely furnished with all sorts of Authors. Their books are bound in
Leather, or velome guilt or siluered. Those whereof the use is ordinary, are
chained to long deskes. As for their secret Library, it is only lawful for
the Fathers to enter, and to make use of the books which they desire.

They younger Jesuits make use of the ordinary, neither is it lawful for them
without leave from the Regent, to extract any one word. Finally, in this
Library, there is not any heretical books: but only the most approved
books, and all Catholics. For as for Heretics, they hold them unworthy to
have any place among the rest, for that it may be they fear they should
infect and poison them. Wherefore look upon the left hand, thou shall find
the books of these poor heretics, all dusty and bound in ill favored
skins and black parchment. Of these books even the Fathers may not take any
one without the permission of the Regent, and the younger sort dare not demand
them: before they have by some Poem or other writing defamed with all sorts of
Injuries the Author which they would see.

In the midst of this Library, there is a study full of seats divided one
from another, the feeling being of a Celestial color. The Fathers set on
the right side, and on the left they place the younger, who notwithstanding have
received some Orders among them.

The other Nouices stand among the ordinary Pentioners, to the end they may
observe them, and that discoursing with them they may make account of the
mildness and excellent order of the Jesuits, especially with the richest, and
such as be sole heirs of some good house.

I will make no mention of their manner of study: But I will briefly describe
the Prouincialls examination, which I suppose has not yet been written.

Every Provincial receives his name of the Province or Realm which he has
in charge to ouersee all that passes. His duty is to visit the Colleges, to
cast up the revenues thereof, and which is more, to observe carefully what
great men do breed up their children in the Jesuits Colleges, and how many
there be. Then he must take an account how their Scholars do multiply, and
if their riches increase; who they be that are turned Lutherans, and how many
they are: If he find not any, or if he perceive that the Popish religion
decays in any sort, and that their goods and revenues diminish, then he
reprocheth the Regents of Colleges of negligence and sloth, inioyning them
severely to recompense the fore-pased loss. If he finds that they have
carried themselves as they ought; that that they have converted many; that they
have spared and gathered much together, then he spares for no praises,
extolling them unto the third Heaven.

More-ouer his charge is to enquire what Heretical Princes lie nearest unto
them; if they do live usually at home or abroad; to whom they are accustomed
to go; of what disposition every one is; wherein he takes delight; if he
have any care of the state; if he be any way religious; or rather if he be
given to drunkenness, women, or Hunting; If he have any Catholics in his
Court, and what they be; what the people say of their Prince, if he favor
the adversaries; If the Pastors of Churches be learned and diligent men, or
slothful and ignorant; If the profession of Divinity does flourish in the
next University; if the Divines dispute often, and against whom principally;
what Books, and of what subject they have lately set forth.

If happily the Principal, and the Fathers answer pertinently to these
questions, and to an infinite number of others, the Principal does wonderfully
commend their travel and vigilancie: But if he finds them not very curious
of all these things, and that they answer not roundly, he does then blame them
very sharply.

What do you (says he) you slothful and idle men? Why do you suffer the
Church of Rome to go to ruin? What account shall we give unto our Holy
Father of his our negligence? Why do you not meddle with affairs? what fear
you? Why do you not set your hands to the work with an assured courage and
resolution? It is long since that ye should have done and ended that which I
say: consider the wonderful vigilancie of Heritikes, and yet ye sleep for
sloth. He blames them, and aminates them by these and such like speeches.

Finally, he enquires touching the Scholars, Pensioners, Nouices, and others,
in what number they are; how every one does profitte, to what study he is
inclined, if whether any one amongst them be no disputer, but is scrupulous:
for they will not set such to the study of divinity, before they be well
practiced in scholasticall disputations, and instructed in the Articles of
their religion.

The Prouincial moreover has charge to enquire if happily there be any one
among them, who if necessity required, would make no difficulty to undertake
some commendable Act, yea to loose his life for the advancement of the Church
of Rome. This examination made and set down in writing is sent by the
provincial to Rome, to their General, by whom it is immediately delivered to
the Pope.

And thus nothing is done, or resolved throughout all Christendom, which comes
not to the Popes knowledge by means of these Traitors of the Empire. The
Jesuits also in a manner every three years, are transported by their
Provincial, from one College to another.

For a conclusion I will add the wonderful subtilties of the Jesuits, framed
of late in their common Council, the which they have sought, and do at this
day seek to put in effect, for the subversion of the church and the state in
the Romain Empire: their only designs is how they should divide the Princes
of the Empire one from another, and put the chief Doctors of the Church to
death, to plant in their place the tyranny of Spain, and the Popes Primacy in
Germany. And hereof I remember I have heard the Provincial Del-Rio discourse,
and these (as near as I can remember) are their councels and practices.

First their aroiect is to see by what means, the mightiest Princes of the
Empire might be estranged one from another. The means to estrange them is,
that there is diversity of religion amongst them, and that the Emperor make a
public declaration, that liberty of Religion cannot be allowed, before that
restitution be made of that which has been usurped since the Treaty of
Passaw: without doubt the Protestants will flatly refuse this, let him leave
the Princes there, and demand the like of the Imperial towns, who will either
obey, or refuse; if they obey, all goes well, if otherwise, let him proscribe
them, and abandon them in prey to the neighbor Princes, and always a Lutheran
to one, and a Caluenist to an other: for the Papists did not think that the
Protestant Princes would have been so discreet in the business of Donawerd,
but that the Prince Palatine, and the Duke of Wertemberg at the least would
have opposed themselves against the Duke of Bauaria, the which if they had
done, they themselves had been subject to proscription, and all means of
pacification, not only with the Papists, but also with the Caluinists, taken
away: But for that they have carried themselves with more consideration then
was expected, the Jesuits have had recourse to these subtilties: for one or
two Imperial Towns being proscribed, there is not any Prince that will be so
stayed, but had rather that in the common Prey, they should respect him before
any other that should desire it. And thus much for the General.

Touching that which concerns particulars, the Jesuits desseigne is to labor
to divide the Princes of Saxony, to the end that their power might decrease.
They have found means to effect it commodiously. First troubling the affairs
in the administration of the Archbishopricke of Magdebourg, whereas the Elector
of Cologne is already received for Prior.

Secondly, if this do not succeed according to their intentions, they must
pretend some reason which shall make the Elector of Saxony to be held unworthy
of the Electorship. For if in old time the Princes of the Empire did reject
Wencestaus from the Imperial Majesty, for that they found him base and
effeminate. Why may not the Emperor by as just a reason deprive the Elector of
Saxony from the Electorall dignity, being every day drunk? Let him give and
restore this dignity to the family of Weinmar, and for that these Princes are
yet very young, let him make Henry of Brunswicke, a learned and vigilant
Prince, Administrator of the Electorship.

Without doubt this would cause great troubles throughout all the country of
Saxony, and by this means they should ruin themselves with their own
forces, and make themselves unable to resist their common enemy if he comes
upon them. As for that which concerns them of Brandebourg, and Pomerania, they
must labor so to reconcile the King of Polland (allied to the Emperor) with
his Uncle the King of Sweden, as they may divide Prussia. Whereunto without
doubt the Electour of Brandebourg will oppose with all his force. As for the
Landgraue of Hesse, he must be forced to divide the inheritance equal with
the Landgraue Lewis his cosen, and to resign the administration of Herffild
to the Bishop of Writzburg: If not, let him be proscribed, and his country
assigned to the said Landgraue. Finally it is easy to set division betwixt the
Duke of Wirtemberg and the Electour Palatine, if they press the Duke to
restore certain Abaies, and for want thereof that he be proscribed, and that
certain near Monestaries, may be assigned unto the Elector, among others one
(which they say) he has long demanded. Behold the fatal desseines of the
Jesuits, which I my self have heard from their own mouths, not without
great admiration and amazement. They have also many others the which at this
present I do not well remember. To this end also tends the peace of the
Netherlands, and that of Hungary: But I believe that GOD has so governed all,
for the good and prescruation of his Church, as they are forced to see the
Hatreds, which they endeavored to sow among the Princes of Germany, to be
kindled betwixt the Emperor and his Brother Mathias, most dear and obedient
children to our Holy Father. Moreover the Jesuits new design is, to send
throughout Christendom, certain murderers and poysoners, to poison the
Principal Doctors of the Churches as well Lutherans as Caluinists.

They hold that they shall be so cunning in this Art, as the very dishes,
Basins, kettles, and other ordinary implements of household, having been once
infected with their poison, shall not loose the force although they be
tenne-times cleansed.

Wherefore I would entreat all good and true Pastors of the Church, to be
wary hereafter how they trust any one that has not been well known unto
them. These things had never come into my thought or imagination, if my self
had not heard them with many others, from the chief companions of that Sect.

I thought it my duty to set them forth for the good of the Church and of my
Country, tracing them only at this present, with hope (if it please God) to
describe them when time shall serve, and to paint them out in there lively
coullers, with all the circumstances both of places and persons.

FINIS.

