A dialoge describing the original ground of these Lutheran faccions, and many
of their abuses, Compyled by sir William Barlowe chanon, late bishop of Bathe.

Anno. 1553.

A preface of this book, to the reader.
IN this present Treatyce following (gentle reder) is not only uttered and
disclosed the beastlye beginning of Luthers furious faction, in Saxony, with
the sedicious Scismes of the sacramentaries, Swynglius, Oecolampadius, and
other of Swycerlande: but also very plainly here is showed their monstrous
manners and mutabilitie, their cankered contencions, and horrible ipocrisy,
their deuely she deuyses, and bitter blasphemye, with infinite like relics of
that raylynge relygion, whereby the christian reader shall right well perceive,
what fylthy fruit buddeth out of this frantike fraternity, and sinful
Synagoge of Satan, infernallye invented, to seduce simple souls. Neither
can there be a more open mark, to publyshe the pestiferous practices of
these perverse preachers, and wicked generation, than here is most lively and
truly set fourth to the world, by the auctor hereof, who had evident
experience of their manners, fashion, and order of all states of them, being
long time by his own confession, in their company, and conuersaunte with
them, even with those which were of the highest reputation both for sobrenes
of life, and fame of literature, whose doings and doctrine to much myslyked
him, that for no hatred to them, nor yet favor to other, but eue^ for the
discharge of his own conscience, instruction, and information of such as be
catholic, he thought it necessary playnelye to show the verity thereof, to
the end that such as now be addict to their horrible and hay nous heresies,
when they shall perceive and se in their life and learning, their crafty and
colorable iugglynge, lewd living, and deuelyshe disagreynge of a muster of
monstrous married monks, and false fleshlye freers, shall by gods grace both
forsake their fashions, deteste their doctrine, and leave their learning,
which book and dyalogue, being for this intent and godly purpose long agoo
set forth and printed, it has been thought good for diverse consideracions (the
prynte being now worn out) yet eftesones at this present to be revived, and
communicate to the catholyke readers, wherefore good reader calling to
remembrance the old wyttie saying: Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula
cautum, Happy is he whom other men's perils or dangers do make circumspect or
ware: Follow thou the counsel of S. John: who in the. iiii chapter of his
canonical epistle says as follows: Nolite credere omni spiritui, sed probate
spiritus siex deo sint. That is to say, Give not credyt to every spirit, but
do you prove if they be of God.

Farewell in God.
A preface of the auctoure to the readers.
Grace from God the father, and from our lord Jesu Christ, with the
assystence of the holy gooste.
WHere as I consider (O Christen readers) the danger of writing in the
peryllous season of these latter days, largelye depaynted by Saint Paul, even
as it proves now in deed, that certain persons depart from the faith, and give
head to desceatefull spyrytes and deuelysh doctrine through simulation of false
words, by whose means it is come so to pass, that a little fault is not
only taken to the worste, but what so ever is well done, spoken, or written,
is oftymes interpreted amysse: no marueyl though I so unlearned greatly abashe
to put my self in ieopardy of these rauyshing wolves, and pytyles soul
murderers, which byte with their teeth, and preach peace with their tongues,
seeing that famous clerks of pregnaunte wits, of excellent erudition, and
singular virtue, have so little auayled in writing against them: not that these
new teachers of auncyente heresies, and late auctors of old inueterate
scysmes, are so profounde in knoweledge of Scriptures, either so inuycte of
reasonable arguments, that they have not ben many times overcome, as they be
daily van quyshed, but because of their shameless pertinacite, where as they be
prostrate and lie grouelynge upon the ground, destitute of reason, void of
good arguments, and without any sense of truth, then strogle they to woorey
men with words of conuycyous maledictions and sedicyous slanders, not afraid
to despyce their souerayns withowte regard of their power, contemnynge all
authority, contrary to the doctrine of Saint Peter, saying: Be ye subject to
every manne for our lords sake, unto ye king as chief, and unto the
governors as to those that are sent by him for the ponyshmente of the evil
and reward of the well doers: for so is the will of God, that doing well ye may
stop the mouths of folyshe and ignorant people, as free and not as a color
having the lybertye of malice, but as ye servants of God. Notwithstanding in
their solemn prefacyes, and painted tytles of their errors, they begin
with dulcet salutations, of glosinge perswasyons, under the pretense of a godly
zeal, oftymes repetynge the word of God, the gospel of Christ, his promyses,
his charity. etc. whereby they would persuade to rude people, that whatsoever
theye write or teach, are the same things be they never so contrary, even as
the comen sort of ungracious wretches do, which in tellyng lies and report of
slau^ders, will call into their record the troth of God, the holy enange
lystes, the blessed sacraments, and all the mysteries of our belief: not for
any faithful reverence toward them, but to the intent that they might be
better believed in their falsehod.

Many things which are put forth under the title of the word of God, is not
his true word in effect, no more tha^ all those which bear the name of
Christen men, be not al christen men in troth and deed. Man lives not only
by bread says scripture, but in every word yt comes out of the mouth of
god. Mark here christian reders the word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God, to y^ which we ought another to add, nor to take any thing away from
it. Arrius, Pelagius, Maniche us, with such other, whom the moore part of
these sects confess to be heretykes, dylygently laid the word of God for
them, but not owte of his mouth: for they applied it by wrong interpretations
to the setting for the of their heresies, and not to the glory of God. Saint
Pauie heled syck folk, and drove the wicked spyryts from them that were
possessed through gods word in the name of Jesu, whose doing the children of
Sceue assayde to counterfete with like words: to whom the spyrit answered: I
know Jesu and Paul, but what are ye? and so grievously assawtynge them, he
prevailed against their presumpsion. The aged Prophet of Bethell, by whose
desceate the manne of God sent out of Juda to Jeroboham was slain: alleged the
word of God. The false Prophet Sedechias with his company.iiii. C. in number,
falselye promised king Achab vyctorye to his destruction, layenge for their
auctorytye the word of God. Ananias resysted the true Prophet Jeremye,
prophesyenge to the captyne Israhelytes liberty and sone delyueraunce of their
bondage, causynge them to trust in his leasing, which he said was the word
of God. And generallye all other false Prophets bosted them selves to be sent
of God, and came to prech his truth, whom he never did send, as he
wytnessethe with his own mouth in diverse places of the bible. Furthermore all
such as occupye inchauntmentes, co^iurers, and wytches, in their busynes with
many ceremonies rehearse the word of God. Also our savior Christ says that
many shall come in his name, saying: I am Christ, and they shall desceaue
many, but how? surely in persuading that their doctrine is Gods word, and
that they be his messengers, his anointed sons and special prophets, So
did Simon Magus delude the people of Samary, affermyng that he was Christ.
Likewise Machomette named him self the great prophet of God. And all other
heretykes commenlye in fortefyenge their abhomynable heresies, allege the
word of God and euangelike veryte, according as Martyn Luther with the whole
rabble of his adherents do daily practyse. But what avails it to resyte the
word of God, if we interpret it by a false perverted sense?

What advantage is it to say Lord Lord, and do not as he commands us? He
that says I know God, and obseruethe not his commandments, is a liar, and
there is no truth in him. The Pharyseys Dyscyples said to Christ: Master, we
know that thou art a true speaker, and thou teach y^ way of God in truth,
yet thought they nothing so in their hearts. What thing is more easy for
these new teachers, than in blasynge their auctorytye, to say that their
doctrine is the true word of God, and that they have his spyryte: where as
they admyt no interpretacion of scripture but their own, in so much that they
reiecte part of the bible because it serves not to their purpose.

Concerning the determination of general councelles, and auctorytye of
ancient doctors of the church, they utterly contemn, except in few
things whereoute they gather sentences, which falselye depraved and
otherwhile changed clean contrary to the auctoures intent, they make to serve
in coulourynge their heresye. How shall we then know whether they be the
right preachers, and their doctryn the word of god or no? Trewlye Christ
gives us a rule infallyble, saying: By their fruytes ye shall know them. A
good tree can bring forth no evil fruit, nor a badde tree can bring
forth no good fruit. And they which here the word of God with an earnest and
good heart, they hold it fast, bringing forth fruit in patience. Also Saint
James descrybyng the expedient condition of christen prechers, and heavenly
learning says: who that among you is wise endued with conning, let him
show his good works out of a good conversation with softenes of wisdom. If
ye have sower hatred and varyaunce among you in your heart, will not ye
rejoice, and be liars against the truth? for this is not the wisdom coming
from above, but earthly, bestial and deuelysh. Where as is enmyte and
contention, there is inconstancy and all noughty doing. The wisdom that
desce^deth from God is first chaste, and so peaseable, mylde, treatable, full
of mercy, and good fruits, without any mysdemynge or dyssymulatyon. Now to
compare these fruits unto the acts of these Lutheran factyons, ye shall find
a far difference. Wherefore seeing that by long experyence I have perceived
the fashion, manner, and order of all states among them, and was no small while
conuersaunt with those which are of highest reputation, both for their sobernes
of life, and fame of lyterature: I have thought it necessary for the dyscharge
of my conscience, and information of other, plainly to show the verytie as I
have known, with out hatred of them or favor of any other persons: which to
perform I have here compiled this little process following, under the form of
a breife dyaloge. Wherein though ye shall read some things so strange for the
enormities of them, that diverse men, namelye the favorers of these sects,
will judge them vnlykelye of truth, and half impossyble to be used among
reasonable people endued with any wysdom or learning: yet are they matter in
deed, according as ye shall see unfeignedly declared. And be ye full assured
that I rehearse not by a great part all the abuses manyfestlye known by the^,
nor so many as I could show: which god wyllyng hereafter in process of time
may be dysclosed more largelye. A great occasion why that many be so fervent
in fauorynge this Lutherane doctrine, is the vain praises of much people
coming from thence, reportyng that there is so good order, such charitable
liberality, and euangelyke conversation, which is all to gether false. And
diverse of such tydyng cariers, lest they might seem ignoraunte in a few
things, they frame them selves without shame, to lie in many. It is hard
for a renagate friar, a faythelesse apostata, a forlorn coopeman, a marchaun
tes pre^tyce, or an embassatours hostler, having little learning, less
dyscresyon, small devotion, and scant a curtesy of wisdom: to make true
report in such matters. And yet are there of them which make the^ selves full
busy, and are as ready to tell that they know not as yt that they know,
according as they feale their affeccions desposed whom they covet to please:
by which means they attain hye co^mendations, made much of, and ar called
pretty wise men and proper persons, with many goods blessings upon their hearts.
Such is the maddenes of the world and folysh appetytes of people, preferring
their corrupt affections before right judgment and testymonye of their
conscience. Truth it is that the Germayns of old antiquite have deserved
special lawde for their playnes in word and deed void of dissimulation, and
for their homelye famylyaryte without acception of persons, in which unto this
day, they excel other nations: whereof the original cause many falslye do
ascrybe to this Lutheran doctrine, being doubtless meru^ lousely decayed
through it, so yt true playnesse was not wont to be so scace there among
scant good livers, as frauds begin now to be plenty among their new
Gospellers. Wherefore (Christen reders) I exhort you all percialite set a
part, to fyxe your self upon the living word of God which may save your
souls, and walk dyrectlye after it, bowynge nether on the one side nor on the
other. I mean not that fleshly word nor their Gospel which say: ye have no
fre will, your good deeds shall not save you, nor your yldedes shall not
dampne you, the sacraments of ye church be nothing of necessite, ye need not
to be confessed to a preeste, ye are not bownde to obey the laws of ye church.
etc. but that true word of god and very gospel of our Savior Christ, of
whose first sermon the antetheme was this: Do ye pennaunce for ye kingdom of
God is at hand. And at his last farewell from his Disciples he affyrmed the
same, saying that in his name it behooved penance to be preached in remyssyon
of sins: which manner of preaching the aposties after his assention
observed, contynuallye exhorting the people unto penance, and to the dread of
God, which is the beginning of wisdom, the inseparable companion of
penance, and necessaty introduction to faith. The word of God brings for
the penance, according as we read in the acts of the apostles.iii. ye at saint
Peter's preaching they were compuncte in heart, and offered them self to
pennaunce. This unfeigned pennaunce leads men to faith, and is the enter to
the gospel, Mar. i. Do ye pennaunce says Christ, and believe the gospel. Which
belief can not be attained without the dread of God. For it is the fulness of
science, whereby we come down first to know our self, and so ascend to ye
knowledge of God by his word, whereoute through hearing faith takes her
effect. The majesty of gods word is of that nature, to prostrate the
presumpcyon of man's wisdom and affyaunce in our selves, exylyng
thaffections of carnal liberte, and moving us with a readynes of mind and
certain trimbling fear to say with saint Paul, Lord what wyllest thou us to
do? This reverent dread had Cornelius Centurio, when the joyful messenger of
God appeared unto him, to who^ with fear abashed he said: Lord who art thou?
in whose commendation it is written there. Acts.x. that he was a devout man
and dreding god. Likewise. Luke iij. y^ sheep herdes, when y^ angel of glad
tidinges appeared to them, and y^ brightues of God shone round about the^:
having this dread, were astonnyed in them selves, to whom the angel spoke: Be
not afraid, ^o I show you great joy that shall be to all people, for there is
borne a Sauyoure which is Christ our lord. In Exodo it is written.xiiii. y^
people feared God, and so believed him and his servant Moses. And they that
dread god, says the wysemanne, shall not be unfaithful to his word. Alsoo
Saint John rehearses in his Apocalypse saying: I saw an angel flyenge by
the mids of heaven, having ye everlasting Gospel, that he should preach to
the dwellers upon yearthe, and to every nation, and trybe, and tongue, and
people, saying with a great voice: Fear ye God But now comes the angel of
Satan with his idle iustifycations and vain promyses, clean contrary
persuading yt we need no works of penance nor satysfaction for our sins.
lyth Christ has satysfyed for us all ready, only to believe is enough,
wythdrawynge people from the godly dread. How be it least his disceate should
be easelye perceived: he transfygureth him self into a true angels lykenes,
sometime tea chynge virtuous manners, brotherlye charyty, the example of
Christ's acts and our needful accomplyshment of the^, wherein he would seem
to profit a few, to the intent he might begyle many. And diverse of his
Disciples counterfeytyng the apostles fashyon: other whiles allege scryptures
in their right senses, with the same devout synceryte that Sathanne him self
did in temptynge Christ when he said to him: God has commanded his
aungelles. etc which was the very scripture truly recyted, all though to a
wrong purpose. But where as he in his own person could not overcome Christ
our head: he ceasseth not to supplante us his Christen members by his false
Disciples, and is like still to prevail (our merytes deserving ye wrath of
god) except he of his infinyte goodness and gracyous pytie, vouchesafe to
reconcyle us again unto his favor, and be our protector: whose mercy is the
only stay that we be not all consumed.

Therefore let us draw nere with confydence to the throne of grace, ye we
may get mercy and find grace to help us at need, contynuallye having in
our remembrance the voice of the aungel saying: Fear ye God, and give him
honor, for the hour of judgment comes. And worship ye him that made heaven
and earth, the sea, and fountaynes of waters, to whom be praise for ever
without end. Amen.

Fare ye well.
Nicholas. Wyllyam.
NOw welcome good brother fro^parties of beyond the sea. We have sore longed
for your safe return, hoping to hear some news from our Euangelyke
brotherne of Germanye, and in what manner the Gospel does prosper there and go
forward.


W. Sir I thank you for your welcommynge. Howbeit concerynge your desire, to
be certyfied of them whom ye call euangelyke brethren: I assure you
vnfaynynglye that I like their manner every day worse and worse.


N. What have ye so suddenly changed your mind, and begin now to fall from
the Gospel forsakyng Gods word?


W. Truly I have changed my mind from exrours and wrong opinions, but
never entendynge to renye Gods word or Christ's gospel: whereof as far as
I can perceive they be destitute and much wide.


N. To prove yt it were impossible, seeing ye can not deny but that they have
Christ's Gospel in their vulgar speech impre^ted, fre for every body to look
upon, with contynuall exercise of euangelyke preaching of Gods word.


W. In very deed they have the exterior letter, with some outward apparaunce
of zeal toward it. But for all that as towchynge an euangelyke life or a
christen conversation, with faithful fruytes behoueable to the same: they be
never a deal nerer in effect than were the Jews, which would have made
Christ their king, not for any sincere love that they had to follow him in
virtuous lyuinge, or for reverence of his godly word, but only in that they
thought he would have satisfied their carnal appetytes, and seditious
affections: whereof to be auctoure he was afterward wrongfully suspect, eue^ as
we see now a days his gospel evil spoken upon through the sclaunderouse be
have our, and wicked demeanor of them, whom in contempt of good people, ye
call euangelike and Christian brethren, auauncynge them selves to be only the
true folowers and obseruers of Christ's gospel, where as their lyuinge
manifestly repugneth. So that after my judgment the chief captains of them
may be lykened to Theudas and Judas. Act. v. which under a color of Messiah
coming the very savior and redemer from all bondage, whose office wrongfully
usurping by false promyses of lybertye, perverted much people of the Jews for
to follow the^, to their utter undoing and final destruction.


N. These sedytious persons to apply unto Martyn Luther, and his folowers,
is both against the treuth and witness of your own conscience if ye duly
examyne it. For it is plain that this Theudas and Judas, of a presumptious
affection and unquietness of mind, without auctorytie of Gods word or
preferremente of his honor, sedycyously moved the people to follow the^ and
not God: where as Martyn Luther with such other euangelike preachers, auaunce
not presumptuouselye them selves but god only, another persuade the people to
follow them but Christ: whose Gospel long season obscured by men's
tradicions, they labor to bring unto light, and to restore the captyued
conscyences of ignoraunte folk unto the fredome of Gods word, whereof much
people now a days are no less desirous than the Jews were of their
delyueraunce of bodily captyuyte.


W. To answer you in this point, I doubt nothing but this Theudas and Judas
pretended to the people (whom they fynallye disceaued) ye auctorite of God, and
that they were specially sent of him for their deliverance, showing some
colored appearance unto ye same: Like as Martyn Luther in y^ beginning
pretended a meruelouse zele and tender affection toward the blind ignorance
of people, for to reduce them unto ye clearenes of knowledge, showing such a
fervent spyrit, that he was judged to be syngulerlye chosen of God now in these
latter days, for a dew reformation of the hole world.

But consider to what open myscheife his secret malignite braste for the at
last, and how many thousands by occasion of his doctrine have peryshed and
daily perish both in body and soul: whereof to have a further declaration, if
ye will here me with patience, I shall so describe unto you the fashion of him
and of his adherentes, that ye may euydently know yt they are no Disciples of
Christ, but of Antychryste, no true doctors but false dysceauers, no Apostles
but apostatas, and patrons of peruersitie,


N. Now I beseech you the^ to proceed on your purpose, declarynge it at
length: and I shall gladly give you the hearing with out interruption,
trusting verily that all parcialitie set aparte, ye will show the very
truth, according as ye have perfitly known by experience. And thus doing ye
may setle many men's hearts at rest in this troubelous season, so sore
encombred with contencions and sondrye opynions of learned men, that they can
not tell what party they may best lean unto.


W. Sir first of al I protest here, that I entend to speak no further thanne
I have perceived among them my self, or else perfytelye informed by credable
persons, of whose certification I ought to have no mystrust. Wherefore for to
god unto my purpose, ye shall understand that this Martyne Luther cheyfe
Captain of new heretics, and bringer forth of old heresies, was a freere
Augustyne in the city of Wittenberge, under ye dominion of Frederike duke of
Saxony. Which duke opteyned a pardon fro Rome for the buylding of a certain
college there within his own palace, whereof Martin Luther was a great setter
forward, until the time that thither came a Jubelye from the Pope,
dysanullyng the dukes pardon among other for a season: wherewith Martyn Luther
not a little offended, endeavored him self to preach against it. And sone after
he put for the in prynt a treatise De indulgentijs, inueynge against the
grant of pardons how be it so closely, that he was supposed not to have
condemned the authority but only the abuse, which to say the truth was to
far out of frame in that prouiuce. And also he took in hand to preach the
plain textes of scripture, dysclosing the blyndnes of the world, and detectyng
the fautes of al estates, both high and low, spyrytuall and temporal, under
such moderation that he was taken for a prophet of God among them, and grew
in estimation of ye people daily more and more. Notwithstanding he pretended
to take no part with any seete other faction of Heretics, as Wicklyf, Hus,
Berengarius, and such other whom he utterly condemned, dyssalowynge the
Boemes, because they separated them selves from the church of Rome, constantly
affyrmyng the pope to be Christ's vicarye. Thus he played the wolf in a lambs
skin a while secretly, till his fruits gave evidence and openly bewrayd what
he was in effect For shortly after he altered his mind, and revoked that he
had spoken before, wysshing all his books that were emprynted to be burned and
utterly destroyed. Then began he stoutly to fortefy his feigned faith void of
good works, perswadynge liberty and assurance of salvation to the defacinge
of charitable deeds and suppression of the dread of God. Then preached he
pleasant things to his audyence, how no man was bound to confess him
unto a priest, nether to observe the prescription of prelates about fastings
and exception of meat and drink, and that no person neded to pain him self
with works of satysfactyon, whiles Christ had paid enough for us all.
Also how constitutions of Popes and Bysshoppes bind us nothing.

Then all his Sermones were against the cleargye, calling the Pope
Antichrist, and his folowers Dysciples of Satan's Synagoge, in whose defiaunce
he made a book intytuled, De captiuitate Babilonica, full of conuycyous furyes,
and ragynge blasphemye against the blessed Sacraments, preferrynge his own
judgment above the holy doctors of the church. And where as he had
wytnessed before, that Micklyfe, Hus, Berengarius, and such other were
heretics: than he said that they were godly men and saints, calling their
condempners Antechristes and limbs of the Devil. Furthermore to bring kings,
princes, and temporal Gouernoures in contempt of their subjects: he spared
another by preaching nor teaching to rail against them, sometime preuely where
he durst not discover his malice for fear of displeasure, and sometime
apartelye there as he thought himself in no danger of the^ on whom he
rayled: as witness the letters of conspyracie which he craftelye forged to
destroy the Duke George of Saxonye.

Also the outrageous treatise that he wrote against the kings hyghenes both in
latin and Duch, so shameless and sedicyouselye, that it is not only condemned
of good men, but also abhorred of his own adheren tes. Yet all this while he
forbear the commons and vplandy she people, and encouraged them to note other
men's vices, rather than to amend their own fawtes, alledgyng oftentimes unto
them, tyranny of princes oppression of the clergy, with other manyfolde
miseries and wretched calamities, which he said they were wrongfully compelled
to suffer. Whereby within small process of time, they took such a stomach,
that the dread of God and man set aside, they arose up with open sedicyon in
diverse parties of Germanye above the noumber of an hundred thousand persannes,
in such a furious fasshion, that every man almooste stood in fear of his
life. Wherefore M. Luther perceiving no small ieoperdye toward him through
their insurrection, because the occasion of it was laid to his charge as it was
in deed: immediately to shyfte him self from suspicion and dangerous
displeasure of the princes and great men he wrote hastelye a book void of all
Christen charity and natural compassion, against the said commons or
vpiandy she people, so extremely yt it would abhor an he then heart to here or
read it, enforcing every man without any respect of pytie, to kill and
slay them as hounds: of whom were myserablye slain in one place and
another, above.iii. score thousand persons, y^ resydue being now a life in
far greater misery and calamytie than ever they were before. After this fell a
dissension between M. Luther and Carolstadius, about the Sacrament of the
altar. For Carolstadius denies in it the bodily presence of Christ,
affyrmynge that when he spoke these words: Hoc est corpus meu^ he meant them of
his own corporal body and not of the Sacrament: where as M. Luther holds
the contrary, all be it he began to fall from it, as his own wrytinge
testyfyeth, had he not ben prevented by this Carolstadius, whom the wicked
arrogauncy of his stomach could not suffer to be auctoure of so hye an heresye,
where of he coueted him self to have been father. This varyaunce endurynge
betwyxte them: diverse forsook M. Luther and leaned to Carolstadius side, and
many malycyous letters fraudule^tly forged, were conveyed from the one to the
other, with calummous prechinges, ye and when they met together, more ready
with fystes than with pacient arguments to try their cause had they not been
sondered. Notwithstanding through favor of the duke and other valiant
friends, M. Luther so prevailed against him that he was excommunicate: and
being a man of ancient age, an old priest newly married, and some time
archedeaken of Myttenberge, was feign to leave his young wife, and avoid the
domynyon of Saxony. After that he had wandered through diverse cities and towns
swadynge his opynion with odyous report, to the minishynge of M. Luthers fame:
at last he came to Scirich in Switzer land, where he found one according to
his execrable appetyte, named Swynglyus, which was there an exceading setter
forth of M. Luthers doctryn. To whom as soon as he had disclosed his detestable
heresye against the blessed sacrament, he gladly accepted him, and in denyinge
the corporal presence of Christ, agreed both in one, saving in this point
they differed: where as Carol stadius said that our saueour Christ spekyng
these words: Hoc est corpus meum, meaned his corporal presence there sitting
with his disciples at the table and not in form of bread: Swinglius affyrmed
that they were not to be understood lytterallye, but by a figure of
interpretation, so that est was taken for significat, and these words of
Christ, this is my body, were as much to say, as this sygnifyeth my body.
Of this matter he wrote sundry epistles to diverse of his famylyar friends,
gloryouslye rejoicing that he had found out the long unknown true the, of
so high a mysterye: not by the occasyon of Carolstadius (as he boasted) but
through his own diligent reading of Scripture, and specially of Saint
Augustyns works, who in very deed is clean contrary to his horrible heresy.
Nevertheless many of M. Luthers adherentes assented unto him, among whom the
chief was Oecolampadius: which being a seculer preiste of.xl. years of age,
entered the religion of saint Brygyttes order in the province of Bauarye, and
for heresies that he had uttered both by preaching and writing, standinge in
danger of the Dukes attachiamente, he ran away pryuylye with a nonne of the
place, whom sone after he forsook, and gat him for refuge to a Lutheran Prince
named Fraunces de Sychken, a noble personnage by birth, but a cruel tyraunte
of behaueoure, a great murderer, a common spoiler of marchaunts and a rouere
of high ways, which maynteyned him and one Hutten a Knight of the new
Gospel, given holy to mischeife, till at the least for fear of displeasure of
other princes, he was driven to put them away. Oecolampadius came then to
Basyl, and there he found many favorers of M. Luthers faction: by whose aid
he was promoted to be curate of a paryshe church. Where he handled his matters
with such cloked hypocrisye, that he wanne many men's hearts, craftily sowynge
sedicious disturbau^ce betwixt the temporalte and the spiritualtye, in such
wise that the hole city was oftentimes in parell of insurrection, and in
danger to be destroyed.

But though he approved the oppynyon of Swinglius with preferrement above
Carolstadius: yet conceived he another pryuate understanding, saying, yt Hoc
est corpus meum, ought thus to be interpreted: this is a figure or a
representacyon of my body, allegyng Tertulliane, Chrysostom and saint Austen
for his auctoritye, whom he understands a mysse, and recyteth falsely,
sometime adding more to their words, sometime taking away from their
sentences. In this space Martyn Luther wrote a conuycyous book against
Carolstadius, and he an answer to the same of like spyryte, and semblable
charity, so y^ Swinglius and his company whiles other men wondered at their
madness, laughed them both to scorn. Carolstadius perceiving that he was not
so highly esteemed as he reckened to have been, alsoo longing very soore for
the company of his young wife: at last he made means to be reconciled again
to Martyn Luther and his church, which was granted him upon condycyon that he
should revoke his opinion of y^ sacrament, whereto he agreed albeit he held
not long touch with them. But as soon as he had recovered his wife again, he
gat him out of y^ way, into a vilage, and there kept a comune tavern, besely
vttryng his old heresies. and daily contryuynge new. Thus in Germany much
unquietness increased and trouble out of measure, with intolerable varyaunce
between seculer people and the clergy: many dyf famed lybelles and slanderous
wrytynges every where disperpled abroad. And where as was but one faction
before, only of the Lutheranes: than sprang there up another, which be called
Oecolampadians or Swynglianes, out of whom issued also the third faction named
Anabaptists, containing above.xl. seetes of diverse heresies and sonderye
opinions


N. In good faith ye tell here a shrewde tale by them. And if it be true as ye
rehearse, I like their manners a great deal worse than I did. But specially I
marvel that they be divided into so many factions and sondrye sects seeing
they pretend to profess the only doctrine of Christ, which nouryssheth no
such co^tencyous dyuersitie: for he is the God of peace and not of dissencio^


W. I ensure you there be in Germany.iii. C. sects above y^ number that I have
named, of whose varyable opinyons, I cowlde partelye make rehersall if I had
conueniente oportunyte.


N. Now I pray you for the satysfyenge of my conscience and of diverse other
which peradventure have been desceaued and brought to errors, by the feigned
report of them, which would dylate their heresies underneath the color of
virtuous living, boldelye affyrmynge in reproach of our catholic believe yt
among them is perfyte peace, concord, true love and charity, freely
admynistred to every one in necessyte without respect of persons. But first I
would that ye declared somewhat of the.iii. principal factions.


W. The first as I have showed you are called Lutherans, because they follow
Luthers doctrine. The second likewise are called Oecolampadyanes or
Swynglyans, and are as one with the Lutheranes in raylynge against the clergy,
and in contempnyng the authorite of the church, but in the sacrament of the
altar they be gretely repugnaunt: and so far at varyaunce, that they have
made large volumes full of outrageous furies one against another, in such
uncharitable manner that it excedeth the blas phemouse contencyons of all
heretykes and infydeles that ever were before our days. ye their hateful
ennemyte is so malycyous, that if any of the Oecolampadyanes resort among
the Lutheranes: they shall be excommunicated as hethen persons, and find very
small charity, which they call love after the new interpretatyon. And in like
manner y^ Lutheranes shall find as little favor among the Oecolampadyanes.
The third faction be called Anabaptysts, because they are twyse Chrystened,
and will admyt none as their faithful brethren except they be rebaptyzed
again. They suffer not their children to be Chrystened until they be of
great age, and have many strange opynyons. They affirm that it is
impossyble for Kings, princes, justices, and other governors of ye common
weal, to be Christian men. They obstynately hold that it is unlawful for a
judge to require any oath of a Christian man. They say that christen men ought
to make no prouysyon nor resistance against their enemies but frelye suffer
the^ to do their will. Also they show holy perfection outwardly, observing
vygyles, fastings, with contynuall reading of scripture, redye to help their
nedy brothren, using their goods in commone. And they disprayse much the
living of the Lutheranes and Oecolampadians, saying as I have hard them my
self report, that they be worse than the cleargye, whom they call Papists,
for because they have the Gospel in their months and frame their lives
nothing thereafter, showing none amendment of their ^ewd conversation, but
continue still in vycyous excesses after the common rate of mysbeleuers. And
therefore they be in grievous hatred and suffer much persecution of the other,
as excommunication, exyle, emprysonment, and oftentimes cruel execution of
death: insomoche that it is enacted throughoute Suytzerland among ye
Oecolampadyanes, and in diverse other places, that whosoever is found of the
Anabaptystes faction, he shall be thrown quycke into the water, and there
drowned.


N. Ise well than saying and doing are not al one. For I am informed that
Martyn Luther has written extremely against the persecution of Prelates,
affyrmynge it to be against the spyryte of God to persecute or to put to death
for unbelief or errors considering that faith (as he does say) is a gift
of god, and no man may have it of him self. Also because Christ never
compelled any man to believe in him, co^maundynge the wedes to be suffered
among the corn, until the heruest comes


W. No fail he wrote so at the beginning, but after ward experience taught
him the contrary. For if so be that he and the Oecolampadians had permitted
their clientes to do what they lusted without any restraynte: they had been
quite out of auctorite ere this time a day. Upon which consideration it was
forfended in all cities and iurisdictiones of the Lutherans, that no man should
bye or sell other receive any book or treatise compyled by the
Oecolampadyanes. And they in like manner made acts to suppress the
Anabaptystes, fearyng least their sects should vaynquysh their faccyon.


N. If the Anabaptists have so many sects as ye recyte, I pray you to declare
some of them.


W. At your instaunce I shall gladly. There be some which hold opinion that
al deuylles and damned souls shall be saved at the day of dome.

Some of them persuade that the Serpent which dysceaued Eve was Christ. Some of
the^ grant to every man and woman two souls. Some affirm lecherye to be no
sin, and y^ one may use another man's wife without offense. Some take upon
them to be sooth say ers and Prophets of wonder full things to come, and have
prophesyed the day of judgment to be at hand: some with in three months,
some with in one monneth, some within vi. days. Some of them both men and
women at their congregatyons for a mysterye* show them selves naked,
affyrmynge that they be in the state of innocencye. Also some hold that no man
ought to be punisshed, or suffer execucyon for any crime or trespace be it
never so horrible, whereof I will show you an example done matter in deed. In
Switzerland a little from saint Gal, at a place named Cella Abbatis, one of
these Anabaptists slew his own brother, and smote of his head. When he was
demanded why he did so, this was his answer: It was the will of the father
that I should do it, and so he escaped without punysshemente. For though they
be gredy in reproving other men's fawtes, making heinous exclamations against
them: yet ponder they full little the correctyon of their own enormityes,
calling them infyrmytyes and weakness of the flesh be they never so
abhomynable


N, Well yet me thinks by your saying here before, that many of them lead
a more co^me^dable life in face of ye world than the common sort of ye
Lutheranes or Oecolampadians,


W. ye verelye unto the outward ostentation. But there comes greater
inconvenience by them which have such a shadow of holy living, than by the
other. And there is nothing more peryllous in sedu cynge the simple, than a
painted pretense of an holy life, where as they swerue ones from the right
faith and catholyke belief. Which is easy to be proved by euydente examples
as well of the old heretics, as of our new Captains of the most hye
heresies. And to show you the truth as I have expertely found, some I have
known so angelyke of conversation, yt I could have found in my heart to
commytte my soul wholly into their dyrection: whom afterward I have perfytelye
perceived to be auctours of such detestable heresies, that it would make a
christian heart to tremble for to here the^ ones named. And to tell you of one
among many. I was aquaynted with a certain person of the Oecolampadians in
ye city of Argentyne, which led a life inculpable among his neighbors, and
was reputed of virtuous conversation, exercysynge him self contynually in
charytable works, and understood freshelye the scryptures in his mother tongue,
for he was ignoraunte of Latyne. Afterward he fell into so abominable
heresy, that he denied openly the new testament saying that Christ was a
false Prophet, and all his apostles disceuers, accepting no part of the old
Testament, but the five books of Moses. The chief preachers and learned me^ of
the city came unto him for to reform him by way of dysputatyon, and to
bring him from his error, requyrynge him to show what ground of Scripture,
or what occasion moved him to take so peryllous opinion. To whom he answered
coldly with soft words and demure countenance, how he would nether dispute
nor argue with them, saying that it was his belief and was assured of God
with witness of his conscience to be true. Upon this incontinent he was
enprysoned and at last brought before the lords of the town, which in like
manner exhorted him to revoke his heresies, manacynge him with fear of
terrible death, if he would not change his erroneous mind. He answered that
he was ready to suffer whatsoever death God had ordained him unto, and would
nether for fear, nor for favor go from his opinion. Wherefore after a
sufficient delyberation, seeing he would turn by no means, sentence was
given that he should be burned.


N. In good faith well worthy: but was he burned in deed?


W. No. For when he should have gone to the place of execution, according to
the vsaunce of the country, he was first brought before the town house, and
there his artycles recyted. He was asked whether they were the very same which
he had affyrmed before them. He answered ye. Howbeit now (he said) God has
opened my ignorance, and I acknowledge me slaunderousely to have erred, asking
you all forgyuenes. I believe perfytely that Jesus Christ is my savior, and am
ready in his faith to suffer this death prepared for me. The lords then where as
they had given sentence that he should have been burned, for a more easy death,
they assigned him to be be hedyd, whereof he thanked the^, and went toward the
place of justice, patiently taking his death with great repentance.


N. This may be a good admonisshment that men should not be so wauerynge in
faith, as to give credence in all things to any person for ye only pretense
of exterioure holiness, in as much as the devil can transfygure him self into
an angels lykenes, and a false peruerter take upon him the office of a true
Apostle. Moreover I consider by your co^municacyon, and plain experyence here
rehearsed, that if the froward sturdynes of unruly people were not restrained
by laws, prohibitions, and sharp punyshmentes, every common weal would be
sone subverted, and the whole world come to naught.


W. As for that ye may take example not far hens at the county of Emdone in
East Fryselande, where the earl, ruler of the county, first receyuyng Martyn
Luthers doctrine, and afterward Oecolampadius opynion? suffered his people to
read all manner of Books, and to be of what so ever sect or opynion they would
without any restraynt. Shortelye after one of their chief preachers which
had been a freer obseruante, a man of subtyle learning, and pleasant
speech, hyghlye esteemed among the people: began to preach in openne
audience against the blessed trinity, saying that there was but one person,
one God, and that our Savior Christ was a creature as we are, a pure man, and
not God, but having gods spyryte. This caused not a little dyscorde between
the preachers and the people, for many of the country leaned unto him taking
his part so stronglye that the earl was feign to banyshe him out of his
domynion, all be it his pestyferous sede remained still. Then came thither
doctor Baltazar, and after him Carolstadius, bringing in the faction of ye
Anabaptists, to y^ augmentinge of greater confusion. For where as some
christened their children their next neighbors would not, one condemnyng
another with dedly hatred. The mean ^eason a certain skynner of Denmark in
the Dukedom of Holsatye, where Martyne Luthers doctrine was only in strength,
preched Oecolampadius opinion with so craftye arguments, that Martynes fame
began to decreace. Wherefore doctoure Pomerane was sent from Wyttenberge to
dyspute against him, and in conclusion obtained the vyctorye through partial
favor (as some reported) of the duke and Lords of the cytyes of Homburghe
and Breame: which immediately commanded that no man should be so hardye to
contrary or swerue from the doctrine of Martyn Luther, under pain of
banysshynge, and other punysshement. The^ two prechers of Breame were sent to
Emdone to dyswade ye earl and his people from Oecolampadius opinion, and from
the confuse dyuersyte of other sects, also to reduce them again unto Martyn
Luthers ways. The earl with his counsel at their perswasyons alienated their
minds from Oecolampadius, streytely charging all those preachers which had
sustained his faction, or any other, saving Martyn Luthers, to depart out
of his country by a certain day appointed. Then was it a wonder to se what
murmuration, grudge, and rumoure of sedycion was among the people, not
without lykelyhed of falling together by the ears, and insurrection against
their prince, had not he sought prouydent means to pacyfy the^. This continued
no long space but letters came from Argentyne, Basyle, zyricke, Bearne, and
from many persons of notable erudition, after their estemynge, also from the
prince of Hesse, aduertisyng the earl with seryous exhortation, to call home
again ye preachers of Oecolampadius faction, and reprehendyng his sodayn
mutabylytie from their institute, so apparente by manifest conjectures to
prevail above the other. At whose importune requests and subtyle
instygacyons, he changed yet again his purpose, and gave the Oecolampadian
preachers license to return into their old places, and liberty to preach as
they were before accustomed: commanding silence unto the other, or else
auoydaunce of his country. Lo thus may ye se what varyable inconstancye and
sundry mutations of condemned heresies has ensued with evident confusion,
where as people be divided from the v^itye of the christen church, and contemn
to walk after the wholesome decrees of catholic fathers, wrestynge the right
sense of scryptures unto their crooked ymaginacyons. And specyallye where the
bridle of sensualite is set at large, to the sturdye frowardnes of sedicyous
subjects, sometime by the effeminat te^dernes of princes, so neglige^tly
regarded, y^ afterward their fearful rygour is scant able to redress it:
which has been ye lamentable dekay of the Boemes, and is now the ruynous
myscheife of the hye Almaynes, not unlikely to be the desolation of
christendom if remedy be not found in season.


N. Saving your pacyence me thought ye declared here y^ the Land grave of
Hesse is a favorer of Swinglius and Oecolampadius, who with his people as I
understand admytteth Martyn Luthers ways and none other.


W. I will not deny but he maynteyneth still Martyn Luthers doctrine, albeit
since the dysputation was before him, he has favored so greatly the opynion
of Oecolampadius and Swinglius, y^ were it not as I deem for fear of
displeasynge his confederate cosyne the duke of Saxony, and frentyke
perturbation of Martyn Luther, he would have sustained it openly ere this
time. Witness the glorious comendation unto their faces whiles they were
present, and synguler preferreme^t of the^ among his famylyer counselors,
also his beneuolent lyberalytie at their departing with letters afterward
betwyxe the^ farsed full of painted praises i^ their absence.


N. I beseech you when and under what manner was this dysputation.


W. In the year of our Lord. 1528. the prince of Hesse in his chief cite of
Marburge caused there to be assembled Martin Luther, Melancton, Oecola^padius,
Swinglius, Capito, Butzer with many other of y^ most famous clerks of the
Lutheranes and Oecolampadianes (the Anabaptists only excluded) where diverse
artycles were doubtfully proponed to y^ number of.xv. which before time had
been discussed and clearly determined in general counselles of the universal
church. And when they had by long process vnfrutefully disputed about the
iustificacion of faith without good works: of baptysme, and other questyons
upon which they had written whole books: yet in y^ end were they driven to the
old determination of the church, save least their wrytynges should seem in
vain, and their assemblynge to be ydie, they found out some contrariety of so
slender importancye, that me^ may plainly judge in them, other inuyncyble
arrogance disdaynynge to be reformed, or else obstynate malice, sekyng for y^
nones to impugn the truth. Concerning the sacrament of the altar wherein
rested ye princypall matter of their disputation, they greatly varyed and
could by no means agree.

How be it they concluded at last, that each part holdyng them content with
their belief, should depart in loving frendshyppe, without any odyous
wrytinge from thence forth one against another.


N. whether of them obtained the vyctory?


W. They divided it between them while they were present. But sone after
their departing, the Lutheranes ascribed it to Martyn Luther, and contrary the
Oecolompadianes unto Oecolampadius and Swynglyus.


N. Use they such crafty conueyaunce in promotyng their Gospel?


W. ye hardely, and that without any shame when they be detected of it,
inforsyng men against their wylles to be fautours of their heresies. Did not
No^iomagus gather certain sentences out of Erasmus works, which falsely
depraved, he coupled unto Martyn Luthers assertions, and caused them to be
imprynted: blasyng abroad that Erasmus and Luther were of one opynion, to the
slanderous hynderaunce of his profitable study? of whom after much other
detraction, he was not ashamed to crave subsedye in his beggarly indygence.
Also Butzer played a like pageante with Pomeran in translating his Psalter out
of latyne into the Almayne tongue. For where he aspyed any occasion to treat of
the blessed Sacrament: he plucked out Pomerans sentences, and graffed in his
own after no compendyous fashyon: which as soon as they were en prynted, the
fame noysed over all yt Pomerane (unknowing to him) was one with the
Oecolampadianes, which afterward he apartely detested in diverse epystles,
dyscoueryng the false hod of Butzer. Such subtle dryftes I may tell you among
them is daily not unpracticed.


N. Well, ye have here rehearsed many things against them, wherein if I and
such other would give crede^ce unto your sayings without surmyse of
percialite, we should sone turn our affection from their learning. But seeing
ye have been a favorer of them, and per adventure both spoken and written as
largely as the rankest of them all whom ye now call heretykes: feign would I
wit what mocioned you to take it in hand so earnestlye, and now to shyft your
self from it so lyghtelye.


W. To show you the truth without dissimulation how I was entyced unto their
faction, the very beginning was this. I had read certain treatyses of Martyn
Luther, of the iustifycacion only by faith without good deeds, how man had
no free will, how our good works auayled us nothing to be saved, another our
ill deeds should cause us to be damned, and many other articles which he
falsely presumed to ground upon scripture. Also I dylygentlye noted how he
descrybed the abuses of Popes, Cardinals, bishops, preistes, and relygious
persons, declarynge how the present dekay of the church, far differed from
the perfectyon of the Apostles and holy fathers, at the first begin nynge:
wherein he made no lie though in other things he spared the truth. Furthermore
geuyng ear to the plesau^t rumoures of his reformations, highly commended
among new fa^gled people: it set mine heart so on fire, y^ I could not rest
until I had been there with the^. After that I had seen Martin Luther,
Pomerane, Melancton, and heard their prechinges, perceyuyng their order there
in Saxonye: I went into hye Almayne, unto the Oecolampadians, and remaining
there among them, was oftentimes conuersaunt with ye Anabaptists. In the
mean space I saw many wonderful alterations, as destroyenge of monasteryes,
pluckynge down of churches, casting out of images, breaking of aultars, and
caryeng the consecrate stones to the building of their bulwarks, also
maryages of prestes, monks, freers, nonnes, contempt of holy days, anullynge
of vygyles, fasting of the lent, and embrynge days clean reiecte with other
laudable ordynaunces instytute by the church. Al places of scripture where
mencyon is made of Antichrist, false prophets, masters of lies, and such
other* they violently applied unto y^ clergy, namynge them self christen
brethren, dyscyples of Christ, and apostles of his Gospel. In denyenge
purgatory and auctorite of y^ pope, if they found in ancient auctours as
much as a corrupt title of a pystle sownynge any thing to their purpose, all
be it the Epistle self made whole against it: yet would they take it as the
word of god and sure revelation of the spyryte. Contrary wise, yfanye
alleged Austen, Hierome, Cypryane, or Chrysostom against them they would
admytte their sentences for none auctoryte, saying they were men, and all men
were liars. In like manner concerning the sacrament of the aultare, where they
read in doctors of the spyrytuall eating and ghostelye being: they only
accepted that, and under the color thereof they would exclude the corporal
eating and bodily presence of Christ, to the establysshinge of their
blasphemous errors: which they shadowed under the couerte of hypocrysye and
persuasions of perverted scriptures, in such wise that openly seeing I could
not perceive them, until it pleased God of his inest^mable goodness to bring
me out of the land of darckenes and region of death, unto the clerenes of his
knowledge and living light of truth. I can not excuse me but among the wicked I
endeavored my self to have done evil: but God so mercyfullye prevented me,
that it came to small effect in doing any harm. If I have been occasion of
any man's fall or cause of slander, I am sorye for it and ask forgeuenes.
Notwythstandynge I never defended any opinion obstinately, nether despised the
admonycyon of any virtuous person: that I have erred was through ignorance,
and of no malicious pertynacite. Where ye be in perplexity of credence geuyng
unto my words, I am sure if that I spoke according to your appetite, ye would
put no dyffydence in me whether I said the verite or lied: for it is a plain
case among the favorers of these new sects. that they will refuse no forged
tales making aught for their side, be they never so falls. And seeing ye believed
me in error: ye ought not to mystruste me now in my faithful reuocacion,
voluntarye, and not coacted.


N. Clearly many men presuppose that other ye be deluded by y^ flatteryng
perswasyon of some worldly persons or else utterly given into a reprobate
mind, through gredye desire of yearthly promotion and appetyte of idle
living.


W. It is not in my power to stop y^ wrong surmyse, or mysse report against
me, now enemy unto their errors whiles they abuse the same to y^ friends of
their heresies: namely where as Satan is loosed at large, and the lyenge ghost
the spyryte of untruth, walks at lyberty vnrestreyned. Would God they were
as pressed to remove y^ balk out of their own eyes, as they be pro^pte to aspye
a little mote in other men's. They cry out sore upon the worldelye wisdom and
carnal prudence of other persons, calling them tyrauntes and mynysters of
Antechrist, where as I ca^ perceive none more gredy of carnal policies and
fleshely aid of tyra^tes than they be. Were he never so cruel a creature, or
myscheuous fend that is turned to their factions, they receive him for an
euangelyke dyscyple, his malycyous mind nothing mynysshed, although percase
his doing of mischeife is restrained by pouertye or some other miserable
impediment against his will. And if any body speak ought against such perverse
penitentes, forth with they alege the vnpitious fiersnes of saint Paul before
his conversion, the sins of Mary Magdalene and her penance, also ye example
of Christ receiving publicanes and sinners, and how the angels of heaven
joy more upon one penitent sinner. etc. Lu. xv. I pray you what a ghostelye
patron was Hutten their furious cha^pyon, a man not only overwhelmed with
heresies, but also stuffed full of all unhappiness, whose horrible end was
according to his myscheuous life. For after that he had been plaged with ye
french pockes, and was healed of them seven sondrye times: he myscrably dyed
of them in an isle of Swicherla^d in extreme pouerte abhorred of all people, his
vile carcas eaten with soores, more stynkynge then any caryon, so that uneath
any body might abide the loathsome staunche of it. Moreover I beseech you with
what christen spyryt did Fraunces of Syckhym defend the^, a subuerter of peace,
a burner of poor men's houses, and a troubler of all Germany, up pon whom the
vengeance of God did light, and was suddenly slain in a Castle beside
Crutzynacke to the infamye of his au^ceters and disheritau^ce of his children.
I pass over the captains of the vplandish people and their insurrection,
partly touched before.


N. Ye wot well enough that Martyn Luther did wryt against them, condemnyng
their sedicious enterprise.


W. So did he indede when it was to late void of remedy. But as long as they
were in any lykly hod to prevail, he rather supported the^. What heavenly
wisdom did the monstruouse fygures sygnify, where M. Luther was portred with a
book in his hand, and by him Hutten his protect our in complete harnes holdyng
a drawn sword, with certain texts underneath provoking sedicion. And as for
ydlenes, I saw no man more fauty in it than them selves: except ye account
that for profitable busynes when they be nether idle nor well occupied. Are
there not a great infinyte number among them, y^ can lay sharply to other
men's charges the commandment of God genen to Adam: In sweet of thy face
thou shall eat thy bread, and dylygently repete y^ labourous workyng of saint
Paul and other Disciples of Christ, which live delycately in ydlenes? And
suppose ye y^ a man may not find many of them which have their sustentation
upon the spoil of churches, robbery of monestaryes, and extorcion of innocent
people.


N. Though some of the^ be of such disposicion: yet ought not ye to condemn
the hole number of the good for a small sum of the evil.


W. Why do ye then despise the vni uersall church, because some of them be
naught.


N. Mary for because the more sum of the evil, su^ mountethe the less
number of the good.


W And think you that it may not be better verefyed among the new gospellers,
of ye which the best is stark naught? Not wythstandynge some I have known of
excellent lyterature, which for their sober conversation and temperate living,
if they had been as seryous in furtherynge the faith as they were in setting
forth of heresies, were worthy to be pillars of Christ's church. But I pon der
not so greatly the outward holiness of hypocrytes, consyderyng that Arrius,
Maniche us, Pellagius, and other execrable here tykes even as they be equal
with them in heresies, so were they not infer yours to them in such hypocrysy.
How many here in England within this.C. year have rid them selves out of
this mortal life, with a desperate death hated both to God and man, some drow
ninge the^ selves, some cuttyng their own throtes, and many hangyng them
selves, which in their life time have been reputed for well dysposed, virtuous,
and charitable folk above the common sort of christen people, and paraduenture
some here in London of our old aquayntaunce. In whom is fulfilled the saying
of Samuel: Man marketh those things that be open to the eye, but God
considers the secretnes of ye heart, to the verefyenge of Christ's word in
the gospel. Luke 17. That which is hyghly auaunced of men, is abominable in
the syghte of God. Nevertheless if ye go to the vttermost^ I could appoint ye
to many of the church, which accomplysh the perfection of living unfeignedly,
where of these men before said have but a barren pretense or a dombe similitude.
And as for the worst multitude of prestes, monks, chanons, freers, and other
relygious persons* I dare compare them with the common sort generally of
these new factions, although ye put a part their faith and obedience to ye
church, which I reken no small matter.


N. So god help me then dare I give the verdyt with out any quest, that they be
stark naught all the many of them. And to begin first of all at the
freers, ye se what a ras^all rabble ronneth about the country with bosomed
sermons, preach ynge fables and old wives tales, instead of the word of God,
which ar ready mates to associate unthriftiness in all myscheif, to the slander
of christen religion. And to speak of monks, chanons, with other religious
possessioners, I pray you what a ghostly life lead they* given holy to
slothful ydlenes, and belyioy, in eating and drynkinge, without study of
Scripture or endeuerment of any virtuous exercise. They sing in their quieres
with as great devotion, as hunters do at the halowynge of a fox, having delight
in yellyng of their voices, and crying of organs, but no swetenes of spyrytuall
melodye. Also seculer preistes even as bad as the best, shall ye not find them
at tauernes and dyshonest houses, drynkyng and gowsynge till they be as dronken
as apes, nothing abashed to swear blasphemous oaths and to use filthy
communication. And such as be curats having charge of men's sowles, are there
not many of the^ blynder than betels, destitute of necessary doctrine with good
living, whereby they might edyfye their parysshons. It were to tedyons a
process to rehearse their wretchedness so far out of order, which all the
world perceyueth and speaks against it, and yet can be none amendment.


W. If their wretchedness of living as ye say be manifest to all the world: it
shall not be so needful for you to declare any further thereof, as it will be
expedyente for me to tell of these new gospellers whose erronyous wyckednes is
known to very few here in this region. And surely to improve the universal
church as evil, because many of them be lewd: it were no less madness then
to set at naught the old testament, because the more part of the children of
Israel were evil, other to dispyse the Gospel because all these new
factions which falsely presume to be folowers of it, are heretics. Among who^
ye shall find ^enegate freers that have cast of their habytes, and forsaken
their relygion, which have married wives, and sone after escape away from them,
leaving them in careful desolatyon, ye some one ma^ieng.ii. or.iii. wives in
diverse countries, whom they have dysceyued by craftye entycementes, making
them believe with their gorgeous apparayle that they be come of noble and rich
fre^des. And of these are there many which walk over so^dry provinces, with
glosinge speech and sweet tales, spienge out unstable people y^ will be
waueryng with every wind, and such as their stomachs serve them to contemn
fastings and prayers, desirous of carnal liberty, and can rail against the
clergy, caring for no jurisdiction, and when such unlawful means fayl, give
themselves to theft, robbyng of churches and sedycyous dysturbaunce, whereby
some of them are promoted to the galows, and shameful marter dome of felons.

Likewise apostata monks and chanons perverted unto their sects, some bring
with the^ as much substance of the spoil of their places, that they purchase
therewith fair lands and yearly rentes. Also priests y^ have made
cheuesau^re of their benefices for.ii. or.iii. C. pounds, at whose coming it
is a world to hear how God is magnyfyed for their delyueraunce from the
tyranny (as they call it) of Antychriste, and what brotherlye chere is made
with fervent rejoice ^ ye suffrau^ce of Christ's cross, namelye if they have
store of monye. And soon after they are provided of fair wives in safegarde
of their chastity, and to augment their perfection, whereby some of them
chance to be so vexed with deuylles, that their Gospel is not able to charm
them, and are feign to run away in liberty of the lord, ere that their
wives be made fast in the bonds of our lady. Beside these how many in
Germany have annual pensions of cities and towns for term of life, bownde
to no manner of service, whose change of state is to no renuyng of spiritual
conversation, but rather an vnsacyat lust of fleshly fredome, evidently tried
by their vycious behaueoure, idle living, and disguysed apparel.


N. Ye may speak many things for your pleasure, but ye know right well y^
christen relygion stands not in outewarde raiment, nor I can not se but as
good a soul may be under a seculer wede, as in a relygious vesture. The
strange diversity of habytes is not commanded of God, another scripture
ascribes any holiness unto the^.


W. In good faith I speak of truth and not of pleasure for it is to me much
displeasure to se the^ such as I se the^, not in their disguised clothing
only, full far unseemly for them, if they were either such as they were
before, or such as they now call them self, but over that in every kind of
all dysordered living: which ye let pass as though I had fou^den no faut but
with their clothing. And against that ye seem to set at naught the habytes
and fashions of religiouse people, calling them strange dyuersities and
things naught worth, because they be not commanded of god, nor that scripture
ascrybeth no holiness in them. But as for strangnes of apparel, relygyouse men
use none. But their apparel was at the first devised by such as they that now
hate religion, do not yet deny for holy blessed men. And now they cannot be
strange, when they continue still every order his old fashion, and that all
the world has looked upon them, and among a thousand freers none go better
appareled then an other.

But now unto the other side, these that run away from the^ unto these
Lutherans, they go I say dysguysed strangelye from that they were before, in
gaye iagged cotes, and cut and scotched hosen, very syghtly forso the, but yet
not very semelye for such folk as they were and should be. And this apparel
change they daily, from fashion to fashion, every day worse the^ other, their
new fangled folly and their wanto^ pride never co^te^t nor satisfied. And where
ye set at naught al strange diuer sytie of habytes, in which ye mean I wot
well not only religiouse men's apparel, but also the garments worn in
divine service, for therein I know your mind of old* I say these gere were
well ordered by good men, and not without the good help of God. And ye can not
find that they be dysalowed of God, but rather approved, in as much as he in
the old testament appointed unto y^ preistes and mynysters a several
dystynction of apparayle from the common people, specially in their
ministracio^s. Also it appears by the storye of the prophet Heliseus, who^e
the children of Bethel mocked and wondered upon, yt he was not clothed after
their comen fashion. And verily I hold it more convenient for relygyouse
persons to were yt habytes by their fore fathers institute, than to be arrayed
after the ruf fyane inuencion, of many Gospellers in Germany.


N. All these are but blind reasons of your own fantasy, nothing to the
purpose. The orygynall in stitution of relygyous habytes began upon certain
consyderations. As thus: when holy fathers lived in wyldernes, they made their
garments after a fashion that might best defend the sharp storms and ill
wethers. And some yt gave themselves to bodily labor, contryued their clothes
to be shapen in a most hansome manner to work in. Also some of them wyllyng to
exchew superfluytie of vesture, devised them habytes most apt for warmth and
sparynge of clothe. But now these consyderatio^s faylyng: to were the habytes
of them, and not to follow their example, me thinks it mere hypocrysy.


W. Then may I say to you again after the same form of argumentation. The
first inuentours of this new dysguysed apparel, were hethen people,
unthrifts, fools, and myslyuynge persons: now ye that be accounted good
Christen people use the same, where as ye ought not follow their lewdenes,
therefore ye be etc. Notwithstanding I demau^ ded ones of a certain companion of
these sects which had been of a strayt religion before, why his garments were
now so ^umptuouse, all to pou^^ed with gardes and iagges like a rutter of the
lance knights. He answered to me that he did it in contempt of hypocrisy. Why
quoth I, does not God hate pride the mother of hypocrisy, as well as hypocrysye
it self* whereto he made no dyrect answer again, but in excusing his faut, he
said yt God pryncypally accepted the mekenes of the heart, and inward christian
manners, which I believe were so inward in him, that seldom he showed any of
the^ outwardly.


N. I granted before that there were some light persons. But what say you to
the provision of pore people there, such as are aged or impotent, and that
beggars be not suffered to crave at men's doors, nor to loyter ydellye as they
do here, but a^ set a work. I tell you some men thynk if our sturdy monks,
chanons, and freers, labored for their living as we lay people do, that it would
be a meryer world tha^ now is.


W. What a merry time it would be here in this land I am uncertain, but I am
sure that in Germany among these new factions is yet but a sorry world and
like to be worse, ye say there be no loytryng beggars, and that is true, for
few or none resorteth thither because they can have none alms nor releife,
except they will do intolerable service for so slender wages, yt if they be
not of sober diet, and long exercysed with labor, it is not possible for
them to away with it. But what is their labor? marye pluckyng down of
churches and monasteryes, and buyldyng of bulwarks and walls to instre^gth
their towns against them which covet to reform them. And here is a doubt to
be moved, when such busynes is ended, how shall they be then set a work,
considering that in other occupacions a fewer number than be al ready were
able to suffyse ye people, and so they find it there already.


N. God will provide otherwise for them than man's ymaginacion can comprehend.


W. If their ways lyked him I wot well he would. But sithe it is no pleasure to
him to se them leave the faith, and fall to heresies, pull down churches, and
build up bulwarks against god in defense of their abominable errors: I
verily thynk that the wrath of God will work them vengeance, and send such
men much misery, and abate their bulwarks to the ground, as he abated the
proud tower of Babylon, when he confounded the buylders into as many to^ges as
ye devil has confounded ye bylders of these bulwarks in to many shameful
sects.


N Well I trust better. And which of us is begyled the end shall show. But this
here I say that as yet hitherto, where as ye spoke of their intolerable
labor: I am certyfied that they come from it as ioyouslye as it were from a
recreation.


W. I blame them never a deal, though they be glad when their task is at
an end.


N Nay I mean when their hands be full of blaynes and blysters, with achynge
arms, their shulders black and blew, by reason of heuye burdens: that then
they rejoice in sufferaunce.


W. They yt so have certified you, I pray you write unto them again, and
pray them to certify you also how many works with an evil will for the
only lack of living, and how many run fro their work and rather choose
to go steal and be hanged to, rather the^ to come to so paynfull work
again. And by that time that they have certyfyed you of these two sorts: they
shall I warrant you certify of the third the other sort that are so glad of
such labor, not fully so many as ye reke^ now. And yet I think verelye that
some such are there to. And I would much marvel else.


N. Why so?


W. For I have known ere this where me^ have be^ sore hurt in frayes, yt they
which have been soreste wounded have most rejoiced, not in his harms but in
the praysings of other.


N. Who be they yt should praise so these labourynge folk.


W. Even such of their own sects as wyi not labor the^ selves, whi cheer
redier to encorage other me^ unto suffraunce of death for their opinions, than
to ieoparde them self the lest typpe of their ear. But now to your objection,
that ye wuld prestes monks, and freers should labor as other temporal men
do: I hold it expediente that many of them should be better occupied than they
are. How beit I have hard in Germanye grievous complayntes and murmurations of
hand crafty me^ and artyfycers against relygyous persons, which have made
them selfs worldly, and learned their occupations. For through their
augmentation, the profitable gaynes of occupations was mynysshed, and the wealth
of their living decade, so that many were compelled to seek adventures in
strange provinces for defaute of work at home. Also I have known in the
city of Colen, and in other places of the low country, that religious
persons in their cloisters fyndyng the^ selves with labor of their hands,
as spynnyng, weyuynge, and making of lynnen cloth, have been haynously
co^playned upon to the lords and rulers, yt they took away the advantage and
living from the pore commons and citezens: wherefore they have been restrained
from taking of temporal peoples work.




N. By this rekeninge, seldom is a change for ye better. But yet how say ye
to their prouysyon for poor impotente people?


W. After my mind they never went about an act that pretended a more Godly
purpose, or a feruenter zele of charytable compassion. which ordinance if it
had a progress of continuance, as it had a lykelyhode at the beginning: were
to be allowed and practysed of all Christen nations.

But every occasion wisely pondered with due circumstau^ces, it will make those
yt be sage to stay at it, and other like matters, taking auysement before,
least they enterprise further the^ they be able to bring unto a lawdable end.
It is ye very properte of common people, namely of these Almaynes, that what so
ever they be persuaded unto, agreeable to their affections, they shall be ready
in a sodeyn gyere to accomplysh: regardyng another danger, nor commodite,
though sone after they repent them. And like as the people of Israhell brought
the iewelles of their wives and chyldern to the making of the golden calfe: so
did they bring their iewelles, beads, rings, outches, with money both gold
and silver, to the common hutches so haboundantly for this provision, yt men
doubted in some place, whether they had poor folk sufficient to consume so
exceeding heaps of riches.

But this dout was sone made a plain case: for within a while after, the
ardente heat of their lyberall devotion waxed cold. And because they continued
not still in bringing in their oblations: the hutches and coffers were emptye
ere men wist it. Then whiles it was compassed what way might be best taken
for the preservation of this ordinance, least it should decay, to their
confusyon that began it: some gave counsel that it should be necessary to
depryue the clergy of their goods, and to dystribute their possessions,
lands, and rentes among lay people. And to throw down all monasteries and
churches, making coin of crosses, chalesses, and other sacred jewels, for y^
suste^tation of the poor as they alleged. This advise with hole assent of
certain princes and comonteys was approved, affyrmynge that if so infynyte
riches were ones in their hands, the revenues of great men should be so
enlarged, that they should need to raise no taxes nor lones of the commons,
but rather cease from all importable exactions.

In like manner by the same polycy the commons might grow unto such welthye
substance: that beggars and nedy people few or none should be found among
them, which ought to be called a golden world, or a time of felicite.


N. And came it not so to pass in conclusion?


W. No, nor never shall I make you assurance, for the goods ar wasted, and no
man can tell how: ye at this hour the princes and lords of y^ cytyes are
more hungry to pyll and pole, then ever they were. The commons also in less
wealth, endutyng more grievous oppression then ever they did, with no fewer
miserable persons then they had before, all things at out of measure scarce,
each complaining to other of their calamities unfortunate without remedy of
redress or hope of a better change.


N. Our lord forbid yt it should chance so here.


W. yet lack there not in England that wyshe full heartily after such a
ruffelyng change, the more part such as hope to win, and have nothing to
lose, and yet some so mad that have of their own, and which happily might
repent it first of all. I let pass my lord cardinals act in pulling down and
suppressi^g of religious places, our lord assoile his soul. I will wrestle
with no souls: he knows by this time whyther he did well or evil. But this
dare I be bold to say, that the countries where they stood, find such lack
of them: that they would he had let them stand. And think you then that there
would be no lack founden, if ye remanaunt were so served to? Iwene men would so
sore mysse them that many which speak against the^, would sone labor his
own hands to set them up again.


N. In good faith your words make me so amassed, that I can not tell what I
may say to the matter: I se the living of the clergy is far wide from the
doctrine of christ, and example of the apostles, and the Lutherans by your
saying be inworse case, both destitute of catholic faith and good christen
manners, without any better lykelyhode except by the means of a general
reformation.


W. Who should be the auctours of this reformation?


N. The pope and other christen princes.


W. I put case that many of them be as wide out of the right way as the
other.


N. That can ye tell partly concerning this Popes holiness, for ye were
latelye at Rome.


W. In very deed I heard pyteously of it by other men's report, but I saw it
not: and peradventure I saw the less, because I tarried so little while there.

Notwithstanding it fortuned me to talk with an Italyan, and in our
communication I spoke as I had hard, that the pope and the emperor intended a
reformation. Why said he they have begone already. I asked himwhere. Se ye
not quod he that they have destroyed Lombardye, Italye, Naples, and also
enpouered France, to the ruynous decay of christendom? Beware said I what ye
speak. Yes quod he, for I mean no dyshonoure to their hyghnes, for they
perform the will and commandment of God, as they of Syrya, and Babylone
did, in destroying y^ evil children of Israhell, to the intent the good might
prospere in their places. Mary quoth I, that is clean contrary here, for the good
be destroyed, and the evil are increased, so that ueuer in Italye were seen
so many vagaboundes, thieves, hores and harlottes, as are in this present time.
Well said he, if the good be rather destroyed, as ye allege, and the evil are
still reserved: it is a token that they have escaped with an easy scorge, the
dredeful vengeance of God, which remains for these yt be left behynd.
Howebeit, ye read in stories of the bible, that the sinful world was first
destroyed before that ryghteous Noe was possessioner of the frutfull yerth,
blessed of God, and the abomynable cities of Sodom and Gomor vterly subverted,
erevertuous Loath ascended the mount of his refuge. Also the reprobate people
of Israhell were wholly extincte, ere ever their elect children entered the land
of promis. Wherefore construe ye as ye please, I fear me that the reformation
of the world shall be with the sword of vengeance upon the people for their
iniquity, consyderyng y^ obduratio^ of their hearts, and hard necked
stubburnes, not moved at the wonderful tokens which daily pronosticate the
wrath of God to be at hand. With this he shranke away, and would tarry no
longer.


N. Peradventure he was afraid to wade further in the truth. But believe me if
ye will, where he spoke of the destroyinge of evil people: I wene if Luthe ranes
be such as ye make them it were the redyeste way for a reformation to kill up
them quyte.


W. I would rather wyssh them amended, if it may be. And as for killing them
in some place, it were no great maistry. But the^ in some other places where
would ye find the people to do the execution?


N. We should lack none in England I warrante you, for there be many of the
cleargye that would be full glad of it, and merchants some, though many be
on their side. Also ye might have a great sort of the commons, and many
courtyers, though some of every sort favor Luthers ways and some great
men's servants bear men in hand that their souereins support such matters
specially in tauerns, marchaunts howses, and other places, where they make the^
selves no small fools, when wise me^ be forth a doors.


W. ye understand not what ye say.


N. How so?


W. For if we will put away all Lutheranes and all such open heresies, we
must first put away many other sins, which have brought those heresies
in. For trow ye that heresies the most terryble plage of God, comes not
through sin of the people, provoking his ire and indignation, whereby he
sends among them false prophets, and erroneous teachers, preaching matters
according to their waywarde appetytes.


N. yet prestes and clerks are the bryngers up of heresies, and the chief
mainteiners of them, by occasyon of Popes, Cardynalles, bishops, and other
prelates of the cleargye.


W. I will neither excuse nor accuse neither them nor other. But I fear me yt
as for other sins the clergy and the lay to, shall not need to strive
therefore, but may well agree together, and part the stake between them. And
as for heresies, though some of the clergy commenly begin them: yet if we
look on old chronicles, with experience of our own time, we shall well find
that there has not lacked some great temporal princes, nor a great number of
lewd lay people, to set them forth, and support them. Was not the origynall
ground and cause of M. Luthers heresy, to do pleasure to his Prince, and to
purchase favor among the people. In like manner, Oecolampadius, zwynglius,
Pharellus, and other mo followed the same trace. When princes and comonties ar
first bent upon affection against ye church, or conceive any strange purpose
contrary to Scripture: then immediately they find at hand such learned persons
that can endeavor their brains in approuynge their lusts, making y^ which
is unlawful, lawful, which say that good is evil, and evil is good,
calling light darcknes, and darkness light.


N. We shall find the^ among which prech such things as ye call heresye for
no such cause, but preach it bold elye before great audience, where they for
their preaching be brought in great danger.


W. Though they do fall in harm, yet have they hope to win their favor, or
else why are they so desirous to have so many ley me^ present at their
examinatio^s?


N. They make of it a reasonable cause for.ii. co^sideratio^s. One is to
the intent they might not be wrongefullye oppressed in corners: another is,
because they would that people should bear witness of their constancy in
confessing the truth for Christ's sake.


W. These co^syderations in them, if they were true as they be false: were yet
of small efficacite, and against the euangelike perfection. As touching the
first, God promyseth if his servants be wronged pryuelye, he will revenge
them openly. And Christ in the gospel exhorting us to suffraunce, byddeth his
discyples to be joyful in persecution, saying y^ happy are ye when ye are
belyed, evil spoken upon, and extremelye dealte withal for my names sake. The
other appearethe to be an excuse of vaynglory, coveting wordly praise, where
as they perceive that people fauourynge their part will interpret to their
commendation, what so ever they say, though it be against scripture, contrary
to all verite. Saint Peter wylleth us to give accounte of our faith to every
body, and that myldely with allowlynes. We have no president of the appostles,
that ever they disdained to answer before the infidele judges, till the vulgar
multitude were by them, or that they required assystence of great men to be
records of their words. Where fore I meruel what conscience these persons
have, which are so importune to be examined in presence of rude seculers, and
ignorant people, when they answer so doubtfully, that the best learned can
not well construe their me anynge. And in Pryncypall articles, whereupon
depends our salvation or dampnation: some answer so nakedly with blind
shyftes, that they be able to bring unlearned people into error of things,
whereof they never douted before, using ever overthwart speech, and quaylynge
sentences of double understanding, with protestations of hypocrysye after this
fashion: In good faith I think there is a purgatory, albeit I can not tell
whether I may believe it or no. I suppose that confession made to a preiste, and
pylgrymages may be well done, but I find them not in Scripture: I believe in
these words of christ, this is my body, but as concerning his bodily presence
in form of bread, to say any thing it is above my capacity, and I dare not
meddle with so dyffuse matters. I reke^ that I may believe y^ doctors of the
church, if they speak not against the word of god. etc. To use such a^vages
in weyghtye causes, and to put in question a fresshe the cases defyned by
general counsels, as though we were uncertain of our belief, and new to
begin again: I repute it no spyryte of truth, seeking gods honor and
edification of their neighbor. Nor I dout not but at the day of judgment,
they shall make a more seryous answer. This consideracio^ is also as I have
said very plainly false. For when these sly shyftes fail the^: they show no
constancy of their unfaithful doctrine, but falsely forswere them self and
say they never said so, the hole audience detesting their perjury all save
only their own sect, which as for perjury pardon each other. To speak of
manifest mysliuers, and open transgressors, whom may we well exempte?
considering how prone and ready ye hole world is from the most to the least,
to declyne and fall unto evil.

Our faith which God has given us to build good works upon, is waxen
barrayne and fruteles. Charity likewise, wherein we should be tried to be the
very disciples of Christ; is waxed cold through the excess of iniquite.
Amiable con^oro^ with christen unite, whereupon all virtue fasteneth her
fundation, is fallen in ruin, to the fre entresse of hateful discenc^o^ and
lyberte of alvyces. In every state and degree, y^ one barketh at the other, one
obiecteth against another his saultes* each of them farynge other to be causes
of their myseries, and yet never a one fashioneth him self toward any
amendment for his own part.


N. By my truth I deem the people would be good enough, if they had good
heads.


W. I deny not yt verily, but the better that the heads be, the better were
the body like to be, and y^ evil y^ is in evil heads descends down into
every part, and makes all the body the worse. And yet surely, if ye people be
evil: the sin of them causes God sometime to send them heads of the same
suit; both popes, emperoures, kings, cardynalles, bysshoppes, preistes, and
curates. For it is the sin of the people as Job testifies, that causes God
to suffer hypocrytes sometime to raygne over them. Hypocrites he calls them
that represente the personages of these estates, whose parts they do play for
a countrnaunce, and do the contrary in deed. And as far as I have read in the
bible, all the while the people of Israel were good, obeying gods laws, and
sought his honor: God gave them gracious gouernoures, virtuous priests, and
true Prophets. But as soon as they swarued, and fell unto ydolatry: he sent
the^ for their punyshmente ungracious princes, vycyous prelates, and false
prophets, so that no difference was between the people, and the prestes, nor
y^ people could not ymagyn so outrageous abominations, but princes and prestes
both were ready to fortefye them in their unhappiness.


N. yet if ye remember well the stories of the bible, ye shall find y^ the
tra^sgressio^ of gods laws among the people, redounded first from y^
heads, by their pernicious occasion. And as towchynge false prophets and ill
prestes: God him self grievously complayneth upon them, showing how the people
are seduced by them, to the pollutynge of his name, and violation of his laws.
Whose enmious wickedness, Ezechiell, Hieremye, with diverse other prophets,
declare at length. Did not the Belial preistes, Ophni and Phines, by their
pestylent example, and le cherours living, corrupt many one, upon whom God
taking vengeance, they lost their lives in battayl, and the ark of God,
whereof they had the cure, taken by the Philisteis, xxx. thousand fyghtyng men
of the Israhelyte people were slain in one day. Likewise y^ children of
Samuel which were judges of y^ people, not en suynge their fathers steps,
but set upon covetousness took rewards, and perverted judgment, by whose
occasyon the people were moved to ask a king unto their desolation.

Moreover the storye of king Saul is plain, for whose pryuate disobedience,
ye hole land of Israel smarted full ^ore.

King David though he was a blessed man, yet brought unto folly for to number
his people, they were feign to suffer most woeful plages for his offense. Many
other like places I could gather out of ye old testament were it not to eschew
tediousnes, specially of Hieroboam, whom ye scripture testyfyeth expressly,
that he caused y^ people of Israel to sin. Beside all this, go to the very
experyence, and ye shall find that wheresoever the head or governor of an
house is good, the hole howsholde comenlye shall be good also. And contrary
wise, if they be badde, the other shall be as evil, so that I may conclude in
verefyenge mine opynion, that the ill conversation of subjects proceeds out
of y^ evil example of their heads.


W. To begin where as ye leave. I grant y^ the virtuous example of ye head
avails much to the good order of the members, and the greater that the
authority is, the more strength it has in example, either to profit or to
noy, considering that among pryuate persons, the goodness of some one,
enduceth many other to virtue, and contrary the lewdnes of another, brings
many to vice and ungraciousness. But yet ca^ not ye conclude upon this, that ye
euylnes of the people comes first by the example of the heads, but rather as
I have spoken before, because y^ people be evil the^ selves, therefore God
fendeth them according, ill heads, and governors. For ye must consider that
god has not made the people for y^ sensual pleasure of Princes, governors,
or prelates, but has ordained them to y^ weal and commodite of the people. Ye
have in Exodus the third chapter, that when the people of Israhell were in
miserable thraldom under king Pharo: they cried to god for remedy, and God
provided them Moses to be their deliverer, to whom in gyuing his office he
said: The clamoure of the children of Israel is come unto me, and I have seen
their af flictions, how they are oppressed of the Egyptians: therefore approach,
and I shall send the to deliver my people ye, god loved the people so
entyerly, that of them he chose Bysshoppes, preistes, and deacons, to offer
special sacrifices for the clensynge of their sins, and to be as means
between him and the^. Note of whom also took the noble and wise men, and made
of the^ princes, captaui^s and governors, for their polytyke conservation.
Agreeable to this, the stories of Judicum make mention, that the people of
Israel, long season after Josues death obseruyng gods laws, and
fulfyllynge his commandments prospered in peace, and had gracious
governors. But when they fell to sin and ydolatry: God gave them into
subjection of their enemies, and were compelled whether they would or not, to
serve he then princes, and miscreaunt idolaters, yet notwith standing, in
mids of their myseryes, where as with a repentau^t heart they cried to god for
socour, and besoughte him of mercy: he raised up among the^ selves certain
captains at sundry times, as Othoniel, Ayoth, Gedeo^, Sampson, and diverse
other, which delivered them from all bondage, restoryng the^ again to their
liberty. And where as ye allege the children of Helye to have been cause of
the taking of the arc and slawghter of the people: I believe verily that y^
people were the^ mischeuously minded, as they be now a days, which
perceiving yt the i^. preistes yt bare y^ arc whereby they hoped of victory,
were slain: they surmysed that the vengeance for the priests sins was
cause why the arc was taken, and so much people destroyed, and under this
blind audacitie, they remained still impenitent, not acknowleging to God their
own offenses and ydolatry: which appears by the return again of the arc,
where above the number of. ^. thousand persons were plaged with sodeyne death.
Also, it may be verefyed by y^ words of Samuel, exhortyng the people to
return unto god with heart unfeigned, and to cast out all strange Gods,
preparynge their hearts to y^ service of god only. For when they had
fasted, and done pe naunce, not imputing the fawt to other but to the^ selfs,
saying all we good lord have sinned against the: god delivered the^ from their
ennemies. In like manner, y^ misorder of Samuels sons, was not so greatly the
occasion why the people were moved to ask a king for to raygn over them, as
was their own diffidence toward gods provision, obstynate disobedience, and
vnquyete appetyte of ydolatrye, coveting to be like other heathen nations:
which is to be perceived by the answer of god unto Samuel thus saying: Hear
y^ peoples voice in all things that they speak unto the, they have not cast
the of, but me, least I should reygne over the^. They do eue^ according to all
their works which they did in the day yt I brought them out of Egypt
hitherto. As they have forsaken me, and served false Gods, thus do they also
to the. When Samuel had showed unto them the dyspleasure of God, with the
manyfolde myseries and calamities which they should suffer by the change:
yet would they not here him, but said, that needs they would have a king over
them, as other people had. Furthermore ye affirm y^ the people of Israel were
punyshed for the disobedient transgression of king Saul. But all things
considered it is to be thought rather that their wylful frowardnes against God
was partly occasion of his fall, to thentent the sentence of God spoken by ye
prophet might be verefied. For if he had been an vpryght prince, and had
observed gods commandment: they should have been in such felycitie that
they would have judged their petition lawefull in demaundyng a king contrary to
gods pleasure. And I doubt not but god gave them a king of disposition like
to their demeanoure, so y^ when he transgressed gods precepte in deed, they did
the same, at the last in will and consent, whereby they de served to be punysshed
with him. For God never takes ve^ geaunce upon any people but only for
their sin, whythe after diverse admonycio^s why les they will not amend,
eue^ as he gives to the good people gracyous heads and princes, furtheryng
them in his favor to their comfort: so sends he to the evil wicked heads
and rulers, provoking his wrath to their desolacio^. And no meruell, though
Saull fared the worse for his people, where as Moses the most faithful
servant of god was partly by their frowardnes debarred from the pleasant
land of behest. As for king dauyd, it is plain that god dyspleased with the
chyldern of Israhell for their sin: permytted Satan to in cite him for to
number his people, wherefore they were both punysshed. And though scripture
expressly say the that Hieroboa^ caused ye people to sin: yet were they as
much fauty as he, save yt because they committed their ydolatry under his
supportacyon, he bare ye name as pryncypall auctor: as we se ye captayns of
hosts in war time, though some of them do sometime as little or less, tha^
many a poor souldyer in his army, whose act is nothing spoken of, yet all
the fame and honor of the vyctory redowndeth ever unto them, which is apartely
proved by the oracyo^ of king Abya Roboams sone, laynge to the people charge
that they forsook god and made them golden calves, expu^syng the prestes and
deakons of gods ordinance, and instytutynge other after the order of hethe^
ydolaters. Whereto agrees in defense of mine opinion, the general confession
of the people with their universal submissio^ in knowledge of their trespaces,
recited in sundry places of scripture after this form: we have sinned with our
forefathers, we have done wickedly, and have committed iniquite, all we have
transgressed thy commandments. And surely as the world is now crokedlye
enclyned to malice: if God sent heads and Princes according to thedeuelyshe
appetites of much people, ye wealth of this region would be sone subverted, and
every state brought to confusion, albeit they other wise color it, and make
as though they meant none harm but rather much devotion, and yt the unlearned
would have the Scripture in their hands, for none other cause but only to
preach secretly to them self for lack of good preachers abroad. But then in
deed it appears that they preach to the^ self and their neighbors to, many
an horrible heresye, and abuse the scripture to the colorable defense of the
same. And then are they also to, all Tyndals books, which for the manyfolde
mortal heresies contained within the same, openly condemned and forbydde^,
they are I say yet unto those books so sore affectionate, that neither the
condempnation of them by the clergy, nor the forbydding of them by the kings
hyghnes, with his open proclamations upon great pains, nor the danger of
open shame, nor parell of paynfull death, can cast the^ out of some fond folks
hands, and that folk of every sort. How think ye then these folk would
have been stomaked, and how many mo would have blustred, out with them, if the
mayntenau^ce of the princes and the states of ye realm (which our lord
defend) had been upon their side. And where about would they then have gone?
about no great good ye may be sure. Se ye not the vyllayne beggars and
valyau^t vagaboundes, whom god plageth with pouer te, and myserye for their
abom ynable living, dysposed to no goodness, how heartily they wysshe for a
ruffelynge day. Behold every state all most in every chryste^ realm, as
husband me^, artyfycers, marchaunts, courtyers, with all other degrees as well
spyrituall as temporal, and I fere me that ye shall say, but if god of his
goodness amend us the sooner, there shall come to pass among us the ferefull
judgment of god spoken by the prophet Osee, to the people of Israhell and
inhabyters of the land: There is no truth, no mercy, nor science of god in
the yerth. Cursynge and lyenge, manslaughter, theft, and aduowtrye has over
flowen, and blood has towched blood: for the which the yerth shall wayle,
and every inhabyter in it shall be feebled. And this as I have said not one
country fawty, and another fawtles, one estate foul and deformed and another
pure and clean, the spyrytualtie synful, and the temporaltie set all on virtue,
the heads and rulers culpable, and the people out of blame, nor yt any estate
may lay the hole weight of Gods wrath unto the other, and thereof discharge
them self, but each of them is cause both of their own harm and other folks
to. And the people are nothing less fawtye, provoking the wrath of God,
than their heads or governors, nor one state partyculerlye cause of another
calamytie. But all we together have sinned, and have deserved the vengeance of
God, which hangs before our eyes, ready to fall ere we be aware.


N. In this point ye have right well satisfied my mind: but what remedy now
of reconciliacion again to God?


W. Forsoothe I know none but only penance, I say not repentyng only as
Luther and Tyndall, and these new folks call it, which would begyle us and
make us wene that we need no more but only repent, and do no penance at all,
telling us that Christ's passion shall stand instead of al our penance,
though we do never so evil and live never so long. With this false doctrine
they drive many a soul to the devil, making them neglygente, and take
little care or sorrow for their sin, and so much the more rechelesse in
falling to sin again. But I speak of pennaunce, as it implies both
repe^tau^ce of our sins past, and the y^ sacrament of penance, with ^are and
sorrow and bodily pain, and afflyccy on taken for our syn, with prayer, almouse,
and other good works to purchase the more grace, and yt we should with recourse
to confession and the sacrament of penance, dylgently prepare our selves in
following the example* of the Nyniuytes: which at the preaching of the
prophet Jonas, repented with ernest purpose of amendynge their lives, and did
penance in deed, in fasting and prayer, humblynge their ^owles from the
most to the least unto the mercy of god.


N. would our lord that we had such a prophet sent among us, to exhort us
unto penance as the prophet Jonas was to them.


W. That were like to the request of the rich glut tone in hell, of whom the
gospel tells, which desired that Lazare might be sent to warn his
brethern: to whom it was answered, that having Moses and the prophets, they
should give credence to them. where fore seeing that we have holy scripture
which expresses the rightwysn^es of god, declaring how our forefathers were
punysshed for their sins: if we refuse to be warned by their admonycyon,
truly we would be as neglygent to amend, if Jonas raised from death to life
should preach unto us. For we have saint John baptist a greater prohete than
Jonas was, crye^g to al sinners: Do ye worthy fruits of penance: of whom
Christ witnesses that there is none greater than he among the children of
women. Also our saueour Christ him self, of whom saint John^ testyfyed that he
was unworthy to lose his shoe latchet: preached penance saying: Do ye
pennaunce, the kyngedome of heaven is at hand. And in another place of the
Gospel, he says: if ye do not penance ye shall all peryshe. And Saint Peter
his vy^ar here in earth, upon whom, and whose faithful confession, he promised
to bylde his church: preached likewise in his first Sermon saying: Do ye
penance, and be converted to God, that your sins may be done away. Also
saint Paul the chose^ vessel of God, preached first of al to them of
Damasco, that they should be penitent and turn to god, perfourming the due
works of penance. Co^fyrmynge the same, when Christ appeared unto the.ii.
disciples iorneinge to Emaus: he said y^ after his death and resurrection, it
behooved penance to be preached in his name, and remission of sins: for why
the cause of his coming was not to call ryghteous folk, but sinners unto
penance. And the aungelles of heaven rejoiced not so greatly in nynty and nine
just persons, as upon one sinner doing penance. As concerning the old
testamente, God him self promyseth in diverse places, that asynner shall be
forgyuen his sins, whenever he will do penance. wherefore seig we have so
evident exhortatio^s of scripture mouynge us to penance* and manyfolde
warnynges to correct our lives through the the pacyent suffraunce of god: happy
are we yet, if now atlast ere that it be to late, we could faithfully say
with Job perfourming y^ deed: lord we have hard y^ with our ears, and therefore
we reprehe^d our selfs and do penance.


N. yet wot I not well what ye call penance.


W. I have ones told you, and yet I tell you again, I call penance a change
of our life in castyng of y^ sinful old man with his deeds, and doing on anew
man of virtuous conuersacyon, which by faith, hope, and charity, and the good
works y^ come of them, as prayer almouse, sorrow for his sin, and pain
gladly taken and sustained for the same, is renewed in to the knowledge and
favor of god, according to his image that made him.


N. how should lay me^ come to this knowledge when y^ gospel is lockyd fro
them.


W. The gospel of Christ which is gods word, is free, and can not be
bound nor kept from any Christen man.


N. By saint Marye for all that lay people may not be suffered to have the
new testament in english, which I call the gospel.


W. O ye mean Tyndals Gospel.


N. In deed though Tyndall was the tra^slatour, it is the word of God and the
very same testament which ye have in latin of the euangelystes putting
forth.


W. yetlerned me^ and good men have founden such fawtes in his corrupt
translation: that it is for the same well and lawfully forbiden.


N. if they be good men as ye say ye have found it fauty: I should reken the^
better a great deal, which would amend it.


W. Though it were amended, and sufficiently corrected: yet will I not say yt
it is expediente for lay people to have it, considering the time as it is
now.


N. Why, ye said yt the gospel may not be kept from christian men.


W. No more it may, though it be restrained from the lay people in their
vulgar tongue. For ye word of God, which is the word of faith, as Scripture
says, is nere the in thy mouth and in thy heart, to the intent thou may do
it.


N. Than I pray you where saint Paul says that faith comes by herynge, and
herynge comes by the word of God: how can we have it without preaching or
information of it, by reading of scripture.


W. Outward preaching, and lyterall redyng of scripture, are necessary means
to attain unto the knowledge of the spyrite.


N. Wherefore then is the Gospel wythholden from the lay people?


W. I said they be two things necessary, but I said not that both twain be
to every man necessary. But it is necessary that every man have the tone or
the the other, and so have they: for they have the word of God preched and
expouned un to them.


N. ye as ye preistes list with false gloses.


W. With the same gloses that the old holy doctors and saints have made,
other manner of me^ tha^ Luther and Tyndale, which now corrupt the truth with
their false gloses.


N. But why should not ye come^ people have the scripture them self in their
own mother tongue?


W Because of their abuse and making of their own gloses, and many also for
their unworthiness, according to Christ's commandment forbiddynge to cast
perles before swyne, or to give holy things to dogs. Did not saint Paul
forbid women to speak the word of god in congregacyons, for the auoydyng of
abuse and dysorder? Also did not he and Bar nabas forsake preaching to the
jews, because of their unworthiness?


N. That is not a like case: for the text is plain yt the jews wylfully
resisted the word of god, and would not receive it. But these people are so
desirous, that they put them selfs in no small ieopardye many times for the
having of it.


W. I grant there be some which of a good mind are desirous to have the
gospel in their mother tongue, for ye erudycio^ and comfort of their souls.
But they that be such good folk may be well and sufficiently fed with ye gospel
punched, and so will they rather chese to be, than to have the scripture run
in every rasshe bodies hand, ye would abuse it to their own harm and other
me^nes to. For well ye wot many there be, and as it appears in Almayne where
they have the scripture translated already, the more part, and far the
greater multitude, are not less unworthy in receyuinge it, then were the
Jews in the wylfull resistaunce of Christ's gospel: which covet it only for
the liberty to be free from the exercise of penance, and doing of good
works, to rail and jest of other men's fawtes, with out any correction of
their own sinful lives, nothing conformable to the virtue of the gospel,
whereof to babble many words they are not dombe.

Mark it there substauncially in cities and towns where ye se the people most
ryfest and most busye to prate of the Gospel whether they be or not, as great
usurers, disceiuers of their neyboures, blasphemous swerers, evil spekers,
and given to all vices as depely as ever they were. This I am sure of and dare
boldly affirm, that sithe the time of this new contencious lernyng, the dread
of God is greatly quenched, and charitable compassion sore abated. Shall ye
not se there a cock brayned courtier yt has no more faith than a Turk, and
less christen manners tha^ a Pagane, with lordelye cou^tenau^ce and knauyshe
conditions, which taking ye name of god i^ vain, shall irreverently allege
the gospel with scoffyng and scornynge in reprehensyon of the clargye: where
as his own ^ewd living is so unthrifty, that ye can not aspy one good pyont
in him, except it be upon his hosen, nor a nynche of honesty beside his
apparayle nor scantly therone neither, being al to hacked and iagged, with
dowble weapen ready to fight, and syngle wit, busy to brawle and chyde, more
like a furious tormentour of Herod, than apacye^t dysciple of Christ. Shall ye
not also se there a merchant peraue^ture made a gentle man by promocion, ere
ever that he had a good yema^s condicyo^s: which getting his chief substance
as many do there by usury, false dysceyte of true people, and other wrongful
ways, will take upon him to preach the Gospel against the auaryce of
relygious persons, how they having their bare necessary food, ought to part
ye resydue of their gooddes with pore people: where as he him self has
thousands lyenge by him in store unoccupied, and will another help his poor
neighbor nor scarcely give a galy halpeny to a nedy creature in extreme
necessyte: And at their belly festig days, among such of their affynyte, which
are not so wise nor well learned as they would be seen, if it chance them to
have in company some simple priest, it is a wonder to here, how heis apposed,
and after that their spyrites be a little kyndled in glotony, how they lasshe
out the Gospel. Than begins one or a another with his poty carye formalyte
and holy day granyte, to move some subtyle questyo^ sayng: master person how
say ye to such a text of Paul? And if the priest be ignorant for lack of
learning, or makes not an answer satysfyenge his mind: he is mocked and
iested upon with scornful derysyon. Then begin they to canuasse the scripture
among them, with fyllynge the cups and ^oly gentyl chere. And by yt time
they have eaten more than enough, and have dronken to much: they be ready to
wade forth in ye deep mysteryes of scripture, willing to be teachers of
things whereof they understand not what they speak, nor what they affirm.
Then are they full armed to talk of abstynence, and sobre diet of the
apostles: their table being furnysshed with sumptuous dysshes, and exquysyte
deyntyes. And where as their cupbordes be reallye garnysshed with costely
plate, and the tables full of cups and pieces of silver and gold: than make
they exclamacyo^s against the rych iewellys of churches, as crosses and
chalyses, saying that better it were to make money of them and to be
dystributed unto pore people, than they should perysshe for lack of socoure.
Likewise when they be served at their solempnityes, with counterfeyted
curtesyes, in bowynge the kne, and valyng the bonette, having sewers and
karuers after a most stately manner of service, wherein if the officers fail
never so little though it be but the setting of a sawcer amysse they shall be
rebukyd: yet their peuysh pacyence can not break the honest ceremonies of the
church to be lawdably done, calling them folysshe fantasyes and inuencions
of ydyotes And though some of these new Gospellers occupy trewelie and justly
with their neighbors in face of the world, behauynge them selfs charitably:
yet are they very few in co^paryson of the other, which be raylers and
gesters, vycyous lyuers and falls hypocrytes with out any conscience.


N. As for hypocrytes I think ye might find sooner among relygyous persons.


W. will ye believe me. I have walked a great part through out all the
prouynces of crystendome, and have seen and marcked the state of relygyous
persons of diverse orders: yet saw I never among them such colored
hypocrisye, so flesshely lybertye abused, under ye pretense of feigned holiness,
as among many of these late invented faccyons. And I certyfye you that ye may
find mo diverse sects of erronyous opynyons among them in one city beyond ye
sea: than be son dry orders of religious people in all England.


N. Suppose ye ye gospel to be in fault of this?


W. Nay, but the abuse of the people having it in their vulgar language: for
whom it were better to receive it by the mynystracyon of faithful preachers,
than unworthily to take it them selfs. we have in the Gospel yt our savior
Christ fedynge the number of.v. thousand men beside women and children, first
gyuyng thanks to his father, he blessed the bread, brake it, and gave it to
his dyscyples, and they dystrybuted it to the company, and so they did eat and
were sacyate.


N. Sir according to this ye people should hold them very well content, if so
be they had faithful prechers to mynyster the word of god unto the^. But I put
cause they have none, or else that their peachers be such as the prophet
co^playneth on, which preach ye vysyo^ of their heart) and not of ye mouth of
god: seking also their own worldly proffyte, and not the gostly confort of
their cures.


W. I believe yt god has not left his church destytute of faithful preachers,
with the which he has promised to be continually present unto the worlds
end. How be it the fewer that they be, the more fawte is to be imputed unto
the people, because they ask not worthily of god true preachers. For the
gospel shows that the people came first to Christ, and he per ceyuyng the^
was moved with compassyon upon them, becawse they were as sheep having no
heard, and so feadynge their sowles spyrytually, afterward he did ^epaste
their bodies with corporal food, wherefore if they in like manner approach
unto Chr^ste (in whose name what so ever is desired of the father shall be
granted) he will also here gracyously their petycyon: for the hand of god is
not abreuyate now, nor his power other wise mynyss^ed than it was at that
time.


N. yet am not I so satysfyed with all the reasons yt ye have made, but I
think still that it were lawful for lay people to have the new testament in
English: and perauenture with alytell leyser I could lay such scripture for
it, that scant ye should be able to obiecte any contradyccyon.


W. ye shall have leyser ynowgh. But in the mean time this ye must consider,
yt our question is not whether it be lawful to let them have it: but whether
it be unlawful to keep them from it, and whether of the twayn is more mete and
more expedyent, specially for the time that now is, the people being dysposed
as they now be, and after such ensample as we see before our eyes, with such
fruit as we find growe^ thereof in Almayne allredy, and in many places even
here at home also. But if ever the time come, as I pray god it may, in which
the people shall be so good and so godly dysposed that an english bible
should do good itheyr hands: yet might Tyndals translacyon in no wise be
suffered.


N. well I shall bethynke me till we mete again, and then will I be so bold
also to take Tyndals part in defense of his translacyon and other books which
he has put forth in english, allegyng the best that I can for their
alowance: to thentent I may see what strong reasons ye can bring to confute
them.


W. There with am I right well pleased, and I trust with gods help to answer
you so effectuously, that ye shall not count the time passed in vain


N. Than fare ye well till another season.


W. Our lord be with you.


FINIS.
Prynted at London in Paul's Churcheyard by John Cawood. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.


