THE SVMME AND SVBSTANCE OF THE CONference, which, it pleased his Excellent
Majesty to have with the Lords, Bishops, and other of his Clergy, (at which
the most of the Lords of the Council were present) in his Majesty's
Priuy-Chamber, at Hampton Court. January 14. 1603.

Contracted by WILLIAM BARLOVV, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Chester.

Whereunto are added, some Copies, (scattered abroad,) unsavory, and untrue.



LONDON

Printed by John Windet, for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyeard, near S. Austens Gate. 1604

To the Reader.
THis Copy of the Conference in January last, has been long expected; and
long since it was finished; impeachments, of the diuulging, were many; too,
main, above Archiep. Can tuar.
the rest: one, his untimely death, who first imposed it upon me; with whom is
buried the famousest glory of our English Church, and the most kind
encouragement to pains and study: A man happy in his life and death; loved of
the best, while he lived; and heard of God for his decease; most earnestly
desiring, not many days before he was stricken, that he might not, yet, live
to see this Parliament, as near as it was.

The other, an expectation of this late Comitiall 2
Conference, much threatened before, and triumphed in by many; as if that Regal
and most honorable preceding, should thereby have received his Counter-blast,
for being too forward: But his Majesty's Constancy having, by the last, added
comfort and strength to this former, which now, at length, comes abroad;
therein, good Reader, thou may both see those huge pretended Scandales (for
which our flourishing Church has, been so long disturbed) objected and
removed; and withal, behold the express and viue image of a most learned and
judicious King: whose manifold gifts of Grace and Nature, my skant measure of
gift is not able to delineate, nor am I willing to enumerate, because, I have
ever accounted the personal commendations of Living Princes. in men of our
sort, a Verbal Symony, Such Flies there are too many, which puff the skin,
but taint the flesh. His Majesty's humble deportment in those sublimities, will
be the eternizing of his memory: the rather, because, (...), to digest so great
Felicity, without surfeit of surquedry is a virtue rare in great personages, and
that, which the K. of Heaven feared, even the King of his own choice would
want. The more eminent he is, in all princely qualities, the happier shall we
be: our duty, as we are Christians, is Prayer for him; as we are Subjects,
Obedience to him; as we are men, acknowledgement of our settled state in him.
Our unthankfulness may remove him as it did, the mirror of Princes, our late
famous Elizabeth. She rests with God, the Phaenix of her ashes reigns over
us; and long may he so do to Gods glory, and the Churches good, which his
excellent knowledge be wtifieth, and good government adjoined will beatifie
it. An hope of this last, we conceive by his written (...): a Specimen of the
other, in this Interlocutory Conference: whereof take this, which is printed,
but as an Extract, wherein is the Substance of the whole; intercourse of
speeches, there occasioned, would cause prolixity without profit: what every
man said, point devise, I neither could, nor cared to observe; the vigor of
every objection, with the sum of each answer, I guess, I miss not: For the
first day, I had no help, beyond mine own; yet some of good place and
understanding, have seen it, and not controled it, except for the breuity: for
the two last, out of diverse Deanes of Ep. Londl. Christchur. VVinchest.
Windsor. Archdeac. Nottingha^. and mine own.
copies, I have selected and ordered what you here see: in them all, next unto
God, the Kings Majesty alone, must have the glory: Yet, to say, that the
present state of our Church, is very much obliged to the Reverend Fathers, my
Lords of London and Winton, their pains and dexterity in this business, were
neither detraction from other, nor flattery of them. His Highness purposed to
compose all quarrels of this kind, hereby, and supposing he had settled all
matters of the Church, it pleased him so to signify by Proclamation after it
was done: but there is a triple generation in the world, of Prou. 30, 1^. 13.
14
whom the wiseman speaks, marry, I say nothing, (for, even, private speeches
cannot, now pass without the smeare of a Black Cole. In one rank whereof,
you may place our Hercules Limbo* mastix, whom it might have pleased, without
his Gnathonical appeal, to have rested his Majesty's determination; and being
a Synopticall Theolog (...); and angry, that he was not, so, (...), have
learned, the difference Divinity, between Viam Regis, and viam gregis.

Many copies, of diverse sorts have been scattered, and sent abroad, some
partial, some untrue, some slanderous; what is here set down, for the truth
thereof, shall be justified: the only wrong, therein, is to his excellent
Majesty, a syllable of whose admirable speeches, it was pity to loose, his
words as they were uttered by him, being as Solomon speaks, Like Apples of
Pro. 25. 11
gold, with pictures of silver; and therefore, I request thee good Reader,
when thou come to any of his Highness speeches, to turn Martial his
Apostrophe upon me;

Tu male iam recitas, incipit esse tuus, and I will take it kindly. If thou be
honest and courteous, thou will rest satisfied, and that is my content: to lay
a pillow for a dog, sorts neither with my leisure, nor purpose. Farevvell.

Thine in Christ Jesus, W. Barlow.

THE FIRST DAYS Conference.
THe day appointed was, as by his Majesty's Proclamation we all know, Thursday
the 12. of January, on which there met at Hampton Court, by 9. of the Clock,
all the Bishops and Deanes, summoned by letters, namely, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Durham, Winchester, Worcester, S. David's,
Chichester, Carlell and Peterborow: the Deanes of the Chapel, Christ-Church,
Worcester, Westminster, Paul's, Chester, Windsor; with Doctor, Field, and
Doctor King, Archdeacon of Nottingham: who, though the night before, they heard
a rumor that it was deferred till the 14. day, yet according to the first
summons, thought it their duty to offer themselves to the Kings presence,
which they did: at which time it pleased his Highness to signify unto the
Bishops, that the day having prevented, or deceived him, he would have them
return on Saturday next following: On which day, all the Deanes and Doctors,
attending my Lords the Bishops into the Presence Chamber, there we found
fitting upon a form, D. Reynoldes, D. Sparks; M. Knewstubs, and M. Chaderton,
Agentes for the Millene Plaintiffes. The Bishops entering the Priuy-Chamber,
stayed there, till commandment came from his Majesty that none of any sort
should be present, but only the Lords of the PriuieCouncell, and the
Bishops with five Deanes, viz. of the Chapel, Westminster, Powles,
Westchester, Salisburie, who being called in, the door was close shut by my
Lord Chamberlain.

After a while, his excellent Majesty came in, and having passed a few
pleasant gratulatio^s with some of the Lords, he sat down in his chair,
removed forward from the cloth of State a pretty distance; where, beginning
with a most grave and princely declaration of his general drift in calling
this assembly, no novel devise, but according to the example of all Christian
Princes, who, in the commencement of their reign, usually take the first
course for the establishing of the Church, both for doctrine and policy, to
which the very Heathens themselves had relation in their proverb, A Jove
Principium, and particularly, in this land King Henry the eight, toward the
end of his reign; after him King Edward the 6 who altered more, after him
Queen Marie, who reuersed all; and the last Queen of famous memory, so his
highness added (for it is worth the noting, that his Majesty never remembers
her, but with some honorable addition) who settled it as now it stands:
wherein, he said, that he was happier then they, in this, because they were
feign to alter all things they found established, but he saw yet, no cause so
much to alter, and change any thing, as to confirm that which he found well
settled already: which state, as it seemed, so affected his royal heart, that it
pleased him both to enter into a gratulation to almighty God, (at which words
he put off his hat) for bringing him into the promised land, where Religion
was purely professed; where he sat among grave, learned and reverend men; not,
as before, else where, a King without state, without honor, without order;
where beardlesse boys would brave him to his face: and to assure us, that he
called not this assembly for any Innovation, acknowledging the government
Ecclesiastical, as now it is, to have been approved by manifold blessings
from God himself, both for the increase of the Gospel, and with a most
happy and glorious peace. Yet, because nothing could be so absolutely ordered,
but something might be added afterward thereunto, and in any state, as in the
body of man, corruptions might insensibly grow, either through time or persons;
and, in that he had received many complaints since his first entrance into
the kingdom, especially, through the dissentions in the Church, of many
disorders, as he heard, and much disobedience to the laws, with a great
falling away to Popery: his purpose therefore was, like a good Physician, to
examine and try the complaints, and fully to remove the occasions thereof, if
they prove scandalous, or to cure them, if they were dangerous, or, if but
frivolous, yet to take knowledge of them, thereby to cast a sop into Cerberus
his mouth, that he may never bark again: his meaning being, as he pleased
to profess, to give factious spirits, no occasion, hereby, of boasting or
glory; for, which cause he had called the Bishops in, severally by themselves,
not to be confronted by the contrary opponents, that if any thing should be
found meet to be redressed, it might be done (which his Majesty twice or
thrice, as occasion served, reiterated) without any visible alteration.

And this was the sum, so far as my dull head could conceive, and carry it,
of his Majesty's general speech. In particular, he signified unto them the
principal matters why he called them alone, with whom he would consult
about some special points, wherein himself desired to be satisfied; these
he reduced to three heads: First, concerning the Book of Common Prayer, and
Divine Service used in this Church. Second, Excommunication in the
Ecclesiastical Courts* Third, the Providing of fit and able Ministers for
Ireland.

In the book he required satisfaction about three things. First, about
Confirmation; first, for the name, if arguing a confirming of Baptism, as if
this Sacrament without it, were of no validity, then were it blasphemous:
Secondly, for the use, first brought upon this occasion; Infants being
baptized, and aunswering by their Patrini, it was necessary they should be
examined, when they came to years of discretion, and after their profession
made by themselves, to be confirmed with a blessing or prayer of the Bishop,
laying his hands upon their heads, abhorring the abuse in Popery, where it
was made a sacrament and a corroboration to Baptism.

The second was for Absolution, which how we used it in our Church he knew
not, he had heard it likened to the Popes pardons, but his Majesty's opinion
was, that, there being only two kinds thereof from God, the one general, the
other particular: for the first, all prayers and preaching do import an
Absolution: for the second, it is to be applied to special parties, who
having committed a scandal, and repenting, are absolved: otherwise, where
there precedes not either excommunication or penance, there needs no
absolution.

The third was Private Baptism: if private for place, his Majesty thought it
agreed with the use of the primitive church: if for persons, that any but a
Lawful Minister might baptize any where, he utterly disliked: and in this
point his Highness grew somewhat earnest against the baptizing by women and
Laikes.

The second head was Excommunication, wherein he offered two things to be
considered of, first, the matter, second the person. In the matter, first,
whether it were executed, (as it is complained) in light causes; second,
whether it were not used too often. In the Persons, first, why Lay men, as
Chancelors and Commissaries should do it? second, why the Bishops themselves,
for the more dignity to so high and weighty a censure, should not take upon
them, for their assistantes, the Deane and Chapter, or other ministers and
Chaplains of gravity and account: and so likewise, in other Censures, and
giving of orders, etc.

The last, for Ireland, his Majesty referred, as you shall in the last days
conference hear, to a consulation. His Highness, (to whom I offer great
wrong, in being, as Phocion to Demosthenes, (...) the hatchet to cut short so
admirable a speech) having ended, the Lord Archbishop, after that, on his knee,
he had signified how much this Whole land was bound to God for setting over
us a King so wise, learned and judicious, addressed himself to inform his
Majesty of all these points in their several order.

And first, as touching Confirmation, he showed at large, the antiquity of
it, as being used in the Catholic Church ever since the Apostles time, till
that, of late some particular Churches had unadvisedly rejected it. Then he
declared the lawful use of it, agreeable to his Majesty's former speech,
affirming it to be a mere calumniation, and a very untrue suggestion, if any
had informed his Highness, that the Church of England did hold or teach,
that, without Confirmation, Baptism was imperfect, or that it did add any
thing to the virtue and strength thereof. And this he made manifest by the
Rubrikes in the Communion book set before Confirmation, which were there read.

My Lord of London succeeded, saying that the authority of Confirmation, did
not depend, only, upon the Antiquity and practice of the Primitive Church,
which out of Cyprian Ep. 73. and Hierom. aduersus Luciferian: he showed, but
that it was an Institution Apostolical, and one of the particular points of
the Apostles Catechism, set down and named in express words, Hebr. 6. 2.
and so did M. Calvin expound that very place, who wished earnestly the
restitution thereof in those reformed Churches, where it had been abolished.
Upon which place the Bishop of Carlell also insisted, and urged it both gravely
and learnedly. His Majesty called for the Bible, read the place of the
Hebrews, and approved the exposition.

Something also the Bishop of Durham noted, out of the Gospel of S. Matthew,
for the imposition of hands upon children. The conclusion was, for the fuller
explanation, (that we make it not a Sacrament or a corroboration to a former
Sacrament,) that it should be considered of by their Lordshippes, whether it
might not, without alteration, whereof his Majesty was still very wary) be
entitled an Examination with a Confirmation.

Next in order, was the point of Absolution, which the Lord Archbishop cleared
from all abuse, or superstition, as it is used in our Church of England:
reading unto his Majesty, both the Confession in the beginning of the
Communion book, and the Absolution following it, wherein, (says he) the
Minister does nothing else but pronounce an Absolution in general. His
Highness perused them both in the book it self, liking and approving them,
finding it to be very true which my Lord Archbishop said: but the Bishop of
London, stepping forward, added; it becomes us to deal plainly with your
Majesty: there is also, in the Communion book, another more particular and
personal form of Absolution, prescribed to be used in the order for the
Visitation of the sick: this the King required to see, and whilst Master
Deane of the Chapel was turning to it, the said Bishop aledged, that not
only the confessions of Augustia, Boheme, Saxon, which he there cited, do
retain and allow it, but that Master Calvin did also approve such a general
kind of Confession, and Absolution, as the Church of England uses; and
withal did very well like of those which are private, for so he terms them:
The said particular Absolution in the Common prayer book being read, his
Majesty exceedingly well approved it, adding, that it was Apostolical, and a
very godly ordinance, in that it was given, in the name of Christ, to one that
desired it, and upon the clearing of his conscience.

The conclusion was, that it should be consulted of by the Bishops, whether
unto the Rubrike of the general Absolution, these words, Remission of sins,
might not be added for explanation sake.

In the third place, the Lord Archbishop proceeded to speak of Private
Baptism, showing his Majesty, that the administration of Baptism, by women,
and Lay-persons, was not allowed in the practice of the Church, but enquired
of, by Bishops, in their Visitations, and censured; neither do the words in
the book infer any such meaning: whereunto the King excepted, urging and
pressing the words of the Book, that they could not but intend a permission,
and suffering of women, and private persons to baptize. Here the Bishop of
Worcester said, that, indeed, the words were doubtful, and might be pressed
to that meaning, but yet it seemed by the contrary practice of our Church,
(censuring women in this case) that the compilers of the Book, did not so
intend them, and yet propounded them ambiguously, because otherwise, perhaps,
the Book would not have then passed in the Parliament, (and for this
conjecture, as I remember, he cited the testimony of my Lord Archbishop of
York:) whereunto the Bishop of London replied, that those learned and reverend
men, who framed the Book of Common Prayer, intended not by ambiguous terms to
deceive any, but did, indeed, by those words entend a permission of private
persons, to baptize in case of necessity, whereof their letters were
witnesses, some parts whereof he then read, and withal declared that the
same was agreeable to the practice of the ancient Church; urging to that
purpose, both Acts 2. where 3000. were baptized in one day, which for the
Apostles alone to do, was impossible, at least improbable; and, besides the
Apostles, there were then no Bishops or Priests: And also thee authority of
Tertullian, and Saint Ambrose in the fourth to the Ephesians, plain in that
point; laying also open the absurdities, and impieties of their opinion, who
think there is no necessity of Baptism; which word, Necessity, he, so,
pressed not, as if God, without Baptism could not save the child; but the case
put, that the state of the Infant, dying unbaptized, being uncertain, and to
God only known; but if it dye baptized, there is an evident assurance, that it
is saved; who is he, that having any Religion in him, would not speedily, by
any means, procure his Child to be baptized, and rather ground his action upon
Christ's promise, then his omission thereof upon Gods secret judgment?

His Majesty replied; first to that place of the Acts, that it was an Act
extraordinary; neither is it sound reasoning from things done before a Church
be settled and grounded, unto those which are to be performed in a Church
stablished and flourishing: That he also maintained the necessity of
Baptism, and always thought that the place of Saint John, Nisi John. 1. 5.
quis renatus fuerit ex aqua etc. was meant of the Sacrament of Baptism; and
that he had so defenced it against some Ministers in Scotland; and it may
seem strange to you, my Lords, says his Majesty, that I, who now think you
in England give too much to Baptism, did 14. months ago in Scotland, argue
with my Divines there, for ascribing too little to that holy Sacrament. In
so much that a pert Minister asked me, if I thought Baptism so necessary, that
if it were omitted, the child should be damned? I answered him no: but if you,
being called to baptize the child, though privately, should refuse to come, I
think you shall be damned.

But this necessity of Baptism his Majesty so expounded, that it was
necessary to be had where it might be lawfully had: id est, ministered by
lawful Ministers, by whom alone, and by no private person, he thought it
might not, in any case be administered: and yet utterly disliked all
rebaptization, although either women or Laikes had baptized.

Here the Bishop of Winchester spoke, very learnedly and earnestly, in that
point, affirming that the denying of private persons in cases of necessity, to
baptize, were to cross all antiquity, seeing that it had been the ancient and
common practice of the Church, When Ministers at such times could not be got:
and that it was also a rule agreed upon among Divines, that the Minister is not
of the Essence of the Sacrament. His Majesty answered, though he be not of
the Essence of the Sacrament, yet is he of the Essence of the right and lawful
ministry of the Sacrament; taking for his ground the commission of Christ to
his Disciples, Mat. 28. 20. Go preach and baptize.

The issue was a consultation whether into the Rubrike of Private Baptism,
which leaves it indifferently to all, Laikes, or Clergy, the words, Curate or
lawful Minister, might not be inserted? which was not so much stuck at by the
Bishops. And so his Majesty proceeded to the next point, about
Excommunication, in causes of lesser moment: first, Whether the name might not
be altered, and yet the same censure be retained or secondly, whether in place
of it, another Coercion equivalent thereunto, might not be invented and
thought of. A thing very easily yielded unto of all sides, because it has
been long and often desired, but could not be obtained from her Majesty, who
resolved to be still, Semper eadem, and to alter nothing which she had once
settled.

And thus the Wednesday succeeding, being appointed for the exhibiting of
their determinations in these points: and the Monday next immediately following
this present day, for the Opponents to bring in their Complaints, we were
dismissed after three hours and more spent: which were soon gone, so
admirably, both for understanding, speech, and judgment, did his Majesty
handle all those points, sending us away not with co^tentment only, but
astonishment; and, which is pitiful, you will say, with shame to us all, that
a King brought up among Puritans, not the learned men in the world, and
schooled by them: swaying a kingdom full of business, and troubles, naturally
given to much exercise and repast, should, in points of Divinity show himself
as expedite and perfect as the greatest Scholars, and most industrious
Students, there present, might not outstrip him. But this one thing I may not
omit, that his Majesty should profess, howsoever he lived among Puritans, and
was kept, for the most part, as a Ward under them, yet, since he was of the
age of his Son, 10. years old, he ever disliked their opinions; as the
Savior of the world said, Though he lived among them, he was not of them.

Finis Primae diei.
THE SECOND DAYS Conference.
ON Monday, January, 16. between 11. and 12. of the Clock, were the four
Plaintiffes called into the Privy Chamber, (the two Bishops, of London, and
Winchester being there before) and after them, all the Deanes and Doctors
present, which had bin summoned: Patr. Galloway, sometimes Minister of Perth in
Scotland, admitted also to be there: The Kings majesty entering the Chamber
presently took his Chair, placed as the day before, (the noble young Prince,
sitting by upon a stool,) where making a short, but a pitthy and sweet
speech, to the same purpose which the first day he made, vz. of the end of the
Conference, mee^e to be had, he said, by every King, at his first entrance to
the Crown; not to innouate the government presently established, which by long
experience he had found accompanied with so singular blessings of God, 45:
years, as that no Church upon the face of the earth more flourished, then this
of England. But first to settle an uniform 1
order through the whole church. Secondly, to plant unity for the suppressing 2
of Papists and enemies to Religion. Thirdly, to amend abuse, as natural to 3
bodies Politic, and to corrupt man as the shadow to the body: which once
being entered, hold on as a wheel, his motion once set going. And because many
grievous complaints had been made to him, since his first entrance into the
land, he thought it best to send for some, whom his Majesty understood to be
the most grave, learned, and modest of the aggreeued sort, whom being there
present, he was now ready to hear, at large, what they could object or say;
and so willed them to begin: whereupon, they 4. kneeling down, D. Reynalds
the Foreman, after a short Preamble gratulatorie, and signifying his Majesty's
Summons, by virtue whereof, they then and there appeared, reduced all matters
disliked, or questioned, to these 4. heads.

1. That the Doctrine of the Church might be preserved in purity, according to
Gods word. 2. That good Pastors might be planted in all Churches, to preach the
same. 3. That the Church government, might be sincerely ministered according to
Gods word. 4. That the Book of Common Prayer, might be fitted to more increase
of piety.
For the first, he moved his Majesty, 1
that the Book of Articles of Religion, concluded, 1562. might be explaned in
places obscure; and enlarged where some things were defective. For example,
whereas Art. 16. the words are these: After we have received the holy Ghost,
we may depart from Grace: Notwithstanding, the meaning be sound, yet he desired
that, because they may seem to be contrary to the doctrine of Gods
Predestination and election in the 17. Article, both those words might be
explaned with this, or the like addition, yet neither totally, nor finally; and
also that the nine assertions Orthodoxall, as he termed them, concluded upon at
Lambeth, might be inserted into that Book of Articles.

Secondly, where it is said in the 23. 2
Article, that it is not lawful, for any man to take upon him the office of
Preaching or administering the Sacraments in the congregation, before he be
lawfully called, D. Rey. took exception to these words, In the Congregation,
as implying a lawfulnes for any man whosoever, out of the Congregation, to
preach and administer the Sacraments, though he had no lawful calling
thereunto.

Thirdly, in the 25. Article, these words 3
touching Confirmation, grown partly of the corrupt following the Apostles,
being opposite to those in the Collect of Confirmation in the Communion Book,
upon whom after the example of the Apostles, argue, says he, a contrariety
each to other; the first, confessing Confirmation, to be a depraved imitation
of the Apostles, the second, grounding it upon their example, Act. 8. and 19.
as if the Bishop in Confirming of Children, did, by imposing his hands, as the
Apostles in those places, give the visible graces of the holy ghost; and
therefore he desired that both the contradiction might be considered, and this
ground of Confirmation examined.

Thus far Doctor Reyn. went on, without any interruption: but, here, as he
was proceeding, the Bishop of London, much moved to hear these men, who,
some of them the Evening before, and the same morning, had made semblance, of
joining with the Bishops, and that they sought for nothing but unity, now
strike to overthrow, (if they could) all at once* cut him off, and kneeling
down* most humbly desired his Majesty first, That the ancient Canon might be
remembered, which says that, Schismatici contra Episcopos, non sunt audiendi.
Secondly, that if any of these parties were in the number of the 1000.
Ministers, who had once subscribed to the Communion Book, and yet had lately
exhibited a Petition to his Majesty, against it, they might be removed and not
heard, according to the Decree of a very ancient Council, providing, that no
man should be admitted to speak against that, whereunto he bad formerly
subscribed* Thirdly, he put D. Reynoldes and his Associates in mind, how much
they were bound to his Maiesties*exceeding great clemency, in that they were
permitted contrary to the Statute, I. Elizab. to speak so freely against the
Leiturgie and Discipline established. Lastly, forasmuch as that he perceived
they took a course tending to the utter overthrow of the orders of the
Church, thus long continued, he desired to know the end which they aimed at,
alleging a place out of M. Cartwright, affirming, that we ought rather to
conform our selves in orders and Ceremonies to the fashion of the Turks, then
to the Papists, which Position he doubted they approved, because, contrary to
the orders of the Universities, they appeared before his Majesty, in Turkey
gowns, not in their Scholasticall habites, sorting to their degrees*

His Majesty, observing my Lord of London, to speak in some passion, said,
that there was in it, something* which he might excuse, something that he did
mislike: excuse his passion he might, thinking he had just cause to be so
moved, both in respect that they did thus traduce the present well settled
Church government; and also, did proceed in so indirect a course contrary to
their own pretense, and the intent of that meeting also* yet he misliked his
sudden interruption of D. Reyn. whom he should have suffered to have taken his
course and liberty, concluding that there is no order, nor can be any
effectual issue of disputation, if each party might not be suffered, without
chopping, to speak at large what he would: And therefore willed that either
the Doctors should proceed, or that the Bishop would frame his answer to
these motions already made; although, says his Majesty, some of them are
very needless. It was thought fitter to answer, least the number of
objections increasing, the aunsweres would prove confused.

Upon the first motion, Concerning falling from Grace: The Bishop of London
took occasion to signify to his Majesty, how very many in these days,
neglecting holiness of life, presumed too much of persisting in Grace, laying
all their Religion upon Predestination, If I shall be saved, I shall be saved,
which he termed a desperate doctrine, showing it to be contrary to good
Divinity, and the true doctrine of Predestination, whereein we should reason
rather ascendendo, then descendendo, thus; I live in obedience to God, in love
with my neighbor; I follow my vocation, etc therefore I trust that God has
elected me, and predestined me to Salvation; not thus, which is the usual
course of argument. God has Predestined and chosen me to life, therefore,
though I sin, never so grievously, yet I shall not be damned, for whom he once
loves, he loves to the end. VVhereupon he showed his Majesty out of the
next article, what was the doctrine of the Church of England touching
Predestination, in the very last Paragraph, scilicet: We must receive Gods
promises in such wise as they be generally set forth to us in holy scripture;
and in our doings, that will of God is to be followed, which we have
expressly declared unto us in the word of God: which part of the said
Article, his Majesty very well approved, and after he had, after his manner,
very singularly discoursed upon that place of Paul, work out your salvation
with fear and trembling; he left it to be considered, whether any thing were
meet to be added, for the clearing of the Doctor his doubt, by putting in the
word often, or the like, as thus; We may often depart from Grace, but, in the
mean time, wished that the doctrine of Predestination might be very tenderly
handled, and with great discretion, least on the one side, Gods omnipotency
might be called in question, by impeaching the doctrine of his eternal
predestination; or on the other, a desperate presumption might be arreared, by
inferring the necessary certainty of standing and persisting in grace.

To the second, it was answered, that it was a vain objection, because, by
the doctrine and practice of the Church of England, none, but a licensed
minister, might preach, nor either publicly or privately administer the
Eucharist, or the Lords Supper. And as for private Baptism,his Majesty
answered, that he had taken order, for that, with the Bishops already.

In the third point) which was about Confirmation) was observed either a
curiosity or malice, because the Article which was there presently read in
those words: These five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say;
Confirmation, Penance, Orders, etc. are not to be accounted for Sacraments of
the Gospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt following the
Apostles, etc. insinuates, that the making of Confirmation, to be a Sacrament,
is a corrupt imitation; but the Communion Book, aiming at the right use, and
proper sourse thereof, makes it to be according to the Apostles example: which
his Majesty observing, and reading both the places, concluded the objection to
be a mere Cauil. And this was for the pretended contradiction.

Now for the ground thereof; the Bishop of London added, that it was not so
much founded upon the places in the Acts of the Apostles, which some of the
Fathers had often showed; but upon Heb 6. 2. where it is made, as the first day
he had said, a part of the Apostles Catechism; which was the opinion,
besides the judgment of the holy Fathers, of M. Calvin and D. Fulke, the one
upon Heb. 6. 2. as upon Saturday he had declared; the other upon Act. 8. verse
27. where with saint Augustine, he says, that we do not, in any wise, mislike
that ancient Ceremony ( of imposition of hands, for strengthening and
confirming such as had been baptized) but use it our selves, being nothing
else but, as S. Austen affirms, Prayer over a man to be strengthened and
confirmed by the holy Ghost: or to receive increase of the gifts of the holy
Ghost, as S. Ambrose says; and a little after alludeth unto Heb. 6. 2. etc.
Neither need there any great proof of this (says my Lord.) For Confirmation
to be unlawful, it was not their opinion, who objected this, as he supposed;
this was it that vexed them, that they had not the use thereof in their own
hands, every Pastor in his Parish to confirm, for then it would be accounted
an Apostolical institution; and willed D. Reyn. to speak, herein, what he
thought: who seemed to yield thereunto replying that some Diocese of a
Bishop, having therein 600. parish Churches, (which number caused the Bishop
of London to think himself personally touched, because in his Diocese there
are 609. or thereabouts) it was a thing very inconvenient to commit
Confirmation unto the Bishop alone, supposing it impossible that he could take
due examination of them all, which came to be confirmed. To the fact, my Lord
of London answered, for his Majesty's information, that the Bishops in their
Visitations, give out notice to them, who are desirous either to be themselves,
or to have their children, confirmed, of the place where they will be; and
appoint either their Chapleines, or some other Ministers to examine them which
are to be confirmed, and lightly confirm none but either by the testimony,
or report of the Parsons or Curates where the children are bred, and brought
up. To the opinion he replied that none of all the Fathers ever admitted any to
confirm but Bishops alone; yea even Saint Jerome himself though otherwise no
friend to Bishops, by reason of a quarrel between the Bishop of Jerusalem
and him, yet confesses that the execution thereof was restrained to Bishops
only, ad honorem potius saaerdotii, quam ad legis necessitatem. Whereof,
namely of this prerogative of Bishops, he gives this reason, Ecclesiae salus
in summi sacerdotis dignitate pendet; cui si non exors quaedam, and ab omnibus
eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficerentur schismata, quot
sacerdotes. My Lord Bishop of Winchester challenged Doctor Reynolds, willing
him, of his learning, to show where ever he had read that confirmation was,
at all, used in ancient times by any other but Bishops; and added with all,
that it was used partly to examine children, and after examination, by
imposition of hands (which was a ceremony of blessing among the Jews) to
bless them and pray over them: and partly to try whether they had been
baptized in the right form or no. For in former ages Baptism was administered
in diverse sorts: some gave it, in nomine patris and filii, etc. others in
nomine patris maioris, et filii minoris as the Arrians did; some in nomine
patris per filium, in spiritu sancto; others, not in the name of the Trinity,
but in the death of Christ, etc. Whereupon Catholic Bishops were
constrained to examine them who were baptized in remotis, far from them,
how they were taught to believe concerning baptism? if it were right to
confirm them; if amiss to instruct them.

His Majesty concluded this point, first, by taxing Saint Jerome for his
assertion that a Bishop was not diuinae ordinationis, (the Bishop of London
thereupon, inserting that unless he could prove his ordination lawful out of
the Scriptures he would not be a Bishop 4. hours) which opinion his Majesty
much distasted, approving their calling and use in the Church, and closed it
up with this short Aphotisme, No Bishop, no King. Secondly, for Confirmation
his Highness thought, that it sorted neither with the authority nor decency
of the same, that every ordinary Pastor should do it: and therefore said,
that for his part, he meant not to take that from the Bishops, which they had
so long retained and enjoyed* seeing, as it pleased him to add, as great
reason, that none should confirm without the Bishops license, as none should
preach with out his license: and so referring, as the day before, the word
Examination, to be added to the Rubrike in the title of Confirmation in the
Communion Book, if it were thought good so to do; he willed D. Reyn. to
proceed.

Who, after that he had deprecated the 4
imputation of Schism, with a protestation, that he meant not to gall any
man; goes on to the 37. Article, wherein, he said, these words, The Bishop
of Rome has no authority in this land, not to be sufficient, unless it were
added, nor ought to have: whereat his Majesty heartily laughed, and so did the
Lords: the King adding an answer, which the Rhetoricions call, (...), what
speak you of the Popes authority here? habemus iure, quod habemus, and
therefore, in as much as it is said, he has not, it is plain enough, that he
ought not to have.

This, and some other motions seeming both to the King, and Lords very idle and
frivolous, occasion was taken, in some by talk, to remember a certain
description, which M. Butler of Cambridge made of a Puritan, viz. A Puritan
is a Protestant frayed out of his wits. But my Lord of London, there, seriously
put his Majesty in mind of the speeches, which the French Embossador Mosr
Rogne gave out concerning our Church of England, both at Canterbury after his
arrival; and after, at the Court, upon the view of our solemn service and
ceremonies, namely, that if the reformed Churches in France had kept the same
orders among them which we have, he was assured that there would have been
many thousands of Protestants more there, then now there are: and yet our men
stumble and strain at these petty quillets, thereby to disturb and disgrace
the whole Church.

After this, the D. moved, that this proposition, 5
the intention of the Minister is not of the essence of the Sacrament, might
be added unto the book of Articles, the rather, because that some in England
had preached it to be essential. And here again he remembered the 9.
Orthodoxall assertions concluded at Lambeth. His Majesty utterly disliked that
first part of the motion, for two reasons: First, thinking it unfit to thrust
into the book every position negative, which would both make the book swell
into a volume as big as the Bible, and also confound the Reader; bringing for
example the course of one M. Craig, in the like case, in Scotland, who with his
Irenounce and abhor, his detestations and abrenunciatio^s he did so amase the
simple people, that they, not able to conceive all those things, utterly gave
over all, falling back to Popery, or remaining still in their former
ignorance. Yea, if I, said his Majesty, should have been bound to his
form, the confession of my faith must have been in my table book, not in my
head. But because you speak of Intention, says his Highness, I will apply
it thus, If you come hither with a good intention, to be informed and
satisfied where you shall find just cause, the whole work will sort to the
better effect; but if your Intention be to go as you came (whatsoever shall
be said) it will prove that the Intention is very material, and essential
to the end of this, present action. To the other part for the nine
Assertions, his Majesty could not, suddenly, answer, because he understood
not what the Doctor meant by those assertions or propositions at Lambeth; but
when it was informed his Majesty, that, by reason of some controversies,
arising in Cambridge, about certain points of Divinity; my Lords Grace
assembled some Divines, of special note, to set down their opinions, which
they drew into nine assertions, and so sent them to the University, for the
appeafing of those quarrels; then his Majesty answered, first, that when such
questions arise among Scholars, the quietest proceeding were, to determine
them in the Universities, and not to stuff the book with all conclusions
Theological. Secondly, the better course would be to punish the broachers of
false doctrine, as occasion should be offered* for were the Articles never so
many and sound, who can prevent the contrary opinions of men till they be
heard?

Upon this the Deane of Powles, kneeling down, humbly desired leave to
speak, signifying unto his Majesty that this matter somewhat more nearly
concerned him, by reason of controversy between him and some other in
Cambridge, upon a proposition which he had delivered there. Namely, that
whosoever (though before justified) did commit any grievous sin, as adultery,
murder, treason, or the like, did become, ipso facto, subject to Gods wrath,
and guilty of damnation, or were in state of damnation ( quoad praesentem
statum) until they did repent; adding hereunto, that those which were called
and justified according to the purpose of Gods election, howsoever they might,
and did, sometime, fall into grievous sins, and thereby into the present state
of wrath and damnation; yet did never fall either totally from all the graces
of God to be utterly destitute of all the parts and seed thereof, nor finally
from justification, but were in time renewed, by Gods spirit, unto a lively
faith, and repentance, and so justified from those sins, and the wrath,
curse, and guilt annexed thereunto, whereinto they were fallen, and wherein
they lay so long as they were without true repentance for the same. Against
which doctrine, he said, that some had opposed, teaching that all such
persons as were once truly instified, though after they fell into never so
grievous sins, yet remained still just, or in the state of justification,
before they actually repented of those sins; yea and though they never
repented of them, through forgetfulness or sudden death, yet they should be
justified and saved without repentance. In utter dislike of this Doctrine his
Majesty entered into a longer speech of predestination, and reprobation, then
before, and of the necessary conioyning repentance and holiness of life with
true faith: concluding that it was hypocrisy, and not true justifying faith,
which was severed from them: for although predestination, and election
depends not upon any qualities, actions, or works of man, which be mutable;
but upon God his eternal and immutable decree and purpose: yet such is the
necessity of repentance, after known sins committed, as that, without it
there could not be either reconciliation with God, or remission of those sins.

Next to this, Doctor Reynalds complained, that the Catechism in the Common
prayer book, was too brief, for which one by Master Nowell, late Deane of
Paul's was added, and that too long for young nouices to learn by heart:
requested therefore, that one uniform Catechism might be made, which, and
none other, might be generally received: it was asked of him, whether if, to
the short Catechism in the Communion Book, something were added for the
doctrine of the Sacraments it would not serve? His Majesty thought the Doctors
request very reasonable: but yet so, that he would have a Catechism in the
fewest and plainest affirmative terms that may be: taxing withal the number
of ignorant Catechismes set out in Scotland, by every one that was the Son
of a Good man: insomuch as, that which was Catechism doctrine in one
congregation, was in another scarsely accepted as sound and Orthodox; wished,
therefore, one to be made and agreed upon; adding this excellent, gnomicall,
and Canon-like Conclusion, that in the reforming of a Church, he would have two
rules observed, first, that old curious, deep and intricate questions might be
avoided in the fundamental instruction of a people. Secondly, that there
should not be any such departure from the Papists in all things, as that,
because we in some points agree with them, therefore we should be accounted
to be in error.

To the former, D. Reynoldes added 6
the profanation of the Sabbath day, and contempt of his Majesty's
Proclamation made for the reforming of that abuse, of which he earnestly
desired a straighter course for reformation thereof, and to this he found a
general and unanimous assent. 7


After that, he moved his Majesty, that there might be a new translation of
the Bible, because, those which were allowed in the reigns of Henry the
eight, and Edward the sixth, were corrupt and not aunswerable to the truth of
the Original. For example, first, Galathians, 4. 25. the Greek word (...),
is not well translated, as now it is, Bordreth, neither expressing the force
of the word, nor the Apostles sense, nor the situation of the place.

Secondly, Psalm, 105. 28. they were not obedient; The Original being, They
were not disobedient.

Thirdly, Psalm, 106. verse 30. Then stood up Phinees and prayed, the Hebrew
has Executed judgment. To which motion, there was, at the present, no
gainsaying, the objections being triuiall and old, and already, in print,
often answered; only, my Lord of London well added, that if every man's humor
should be followed, there would be no end of translating. VVhereupon his
Highness wished, that some especial pains should be taken in that behalf
for one uniform translation (professing that he could never, yet, see a Bible
well translated in English; but the worst of all, his Majesty thought the
Geneua to be) and this to be done by the best learned in both the
Universities, after them to be reuiewed by the Bishops, and the chief learned
of the Church; from them to be presented to the Priuie-Councell; and lastly to
be ratified by his Royal authority; and so this whole Church to be bound
unto it, and none other: Marry, withal, he gave this caveat (upon a word cast
out by my Lord of London) that no marginall notes should be added, having found
in them, which are annexed to the Geneua translation (which he saw in a Bible
given him by an English Lady) some notes very partial, untrue, seditious, and
sauouring too much, of dangerous, and traiterous conceits: As for example,
Exodus 1. 19. where the marginall note allows disobedience to Kings. And 2.
Chron. 15. 16. the note taxes Asa for deposing his mother, only, and not
killing her: And so concludes this point, as all the rest with a grave and
judicious advise. First, that errors in matters of faith might be rectified
and amended. Secondly, that matters indifferent might rather be interrupted,
and a gloss added; alleging from Burtolus de regno, that as better a King
with some weakness, then still a change; so rather a Church with some
faults, then an Innovation. And sure ly, says his Majesty, if these be the
greatest matters you be grieved with, I need not have been troubled with such
importunities and complaints, as have been made unto me; some other more
private course might have been taken for your satisfaction, and withal looking
upon the Lords, he shook his head, smiling.

The last point (noted by D. Reyn.) in 8
this first head, for doctrine, was, that, unlawful and seditious books,
might be suppressed, at least restrained, and imparted to a few: for by the
liberty of publishing such books, so commonly, many young Scholars, and
unsettled minds in both Universities, and through the whole Realm were
corrupted, and perverted; naming for one instance, that Book entitled, De
iure Magistratus in Subditos, published, of late, by Ficlerus a Papist, and
applied against the Queens Majesty that last was, for the Pope: The Bishop of
London supposing, as it seemed, himself to be principally aimed at,
answered, first, to the general, that there was no such licentious divulging
of those books, as he imagined or complained of: and that none, except it
were such as D. Reyn. who were supposed, would confute them, had liberty, by
authority, to buy them: Again, such books, came into the Realm by many
secret conueyances, so that there could not be a perfect notice had of their
importation: Secondly, to the particular instaunce of Ficlerus, he said, that
the author De iure, etc. was a great Disciplinarian; whereby it did appear,
what advantage that sort gave unto the Papists, who mutatis personis, could
apply their own arguments against Princes of the Religion: but for his own
part, he said, he detested both the Author and the Applyer alike. My Lord
Cecill here taxing, also, the unlimited liberty of the dispersing and
diuulging these Popish and seditious Pamphletes, both in Powles Churchyeard,
and the Universities, instanced one lately set forth, and published; namely,
Speculu^ Tragicum, which both his Mtie. and the L. Henry Howard, now Earl of
Northampton, termed a dangerous book, both for matter and intention:) and the
Lord Chauncellor, also dividing all such books into Latin and English,
concluded, that, these last, dispersed, did most harm: yet the Lord Secretary
affirmed, that my Lord of London, had done therein what might be, for the
suppressing of them; and that he knew no man else, had done any thing in that
kind but he. At length, it pleased his excellent Majesty, to tell D. Reyn.
that he was a better College man, then a Statesman; for if his meaning were,
to tax the Bishop of London, for suffering those books, betwixt the Secular
Priests, and Jesuits lately published, so freely to pass abroad; His
Majesty would have him and his Associates to know, and willed them also to
acquaint their adherents, and friends abroad therewith, that the said
Bishop was much injured and slaundered in that behalf, who did nothing
therein, but by warrant from the Lords of the Council, whereby, both a
Schism betwixt them was nourished, and also his Majesty's own cause and Title
handled: the Lord Cecill affirming thereunto, that therefore they were
tolerated, because, in them, was the Title of Spain confuted. The L. Treasurer
added, that D. Reyn. might have observed another use of those Books; viz. that
now by the testimony of the Priests themselves, her late Majesty, and the
State were cleared of that imputation, of putting Papists to death, for their
consciences only, and for their Religion, seeing, in those books, they
themselves confess, that they were executed for treason. D. Reyn. excused
himself, expounding his complaint, not meant of such books, as had been
printed in England, but such as came from beyond the Seas, as Commentaries both
in Philosophy and divinity. And these were the parts of the first head,
concerning purity of Doctrine.

Touching Pastors
Resident Learned.
To the second general point concerning 2
the planting of Ministers learned, in every Parish; it pleased his Majesty to
answer, that he had consulted with his Bishops about that, whom he found
willing and ready, to second him in it: inueighing, herein, against the
negligence and carelessness which he heard of many in this land; but, as
Subita euacuatio was periculosa, so subita mutatio. Therefore this matter was
not for a present resolution, because to appoint to every Parrish, a sufficient
Minister, were impossible, the Universities would not afford them; Again, he
had fouud already, that he had more learned men in this Realm, then he had
sufficient maintenance for; so that maintenance must first be provided, and
then the other to be required: In the mean time, ignorant Ministers, if
young, to be removed, if there were no hope of their amendment; if old, their
death must be expected, that the next course may be better supplied: and so
concluded this point, with a most religious and zealous protestation, of doing
something daily in this case, because Jerusalem could not be built up in a day.
The Bishop of Winchester made known to the King, that this insufficiency of
the Clergy, be it as it is, comes not by the Bishops defaultes; but partly,
by Lay Patrones, who present very mean men to their Cures; whereof, in
himself, he showed an Instance, how that since his being Bishop of
Winchester, very few Masters of Arts were presented to good Benefices:
partly, by the law of the land, which admits of very mean and tolerable
sufficie^cy in any Clearks; so that, if the Bishop should not admit them; then
presently, a Quare impedit is sent out against him.

Here my Lord of London, kneeling, humbly desired his Majesty (because he
saw, as he said, it was a time of moving Petitions) that he might have
leave, to make two or three. First, that there 1
might be amongst us, a Praying Ministry another while; for whereas; there
are, in the Ministry, many excellent duties to be performed, as the absoluing
of the Penitent, Praying for, and blessing of the people, administering of the
Sacraments, and the like; it is come to that pass now, that some sort of men
thought it the only duty required of a Minister, to spend the time in
speaking out of a Pulpit; sometimes, God wot, very indiscreetly and
unlearnedly: and this, with so great injury and prejudice, to the celebratio^
of Divine service, that some Ministers would be content to walk in the
Churchyeard, till Sermon time, rather then to be present at publke Prayer. He
confessed, that in a Church, new to be planted, preaching was most necessary;
but among us, now long established in the faith, he thought it not the only
necessary duty to be performed, and the other to be so profanely neglected
and contemned. Which motion his Majesty liked exceeding well, very acutely
taxing the hypocrisy of our times, which places all Religion in the ear,
through which, there is an easy passage: but Prayer, which expresses the
hearts affection, and is the true devotion of the minds as a matter putting
us to overmuch trouble, (wherein there concur, if prayer be as it ought, an
impartial consideration of our own estates, a due examination to whom we
pray, an humble confession of our sins, with an hearty sorrow for them, and
repentance not severed from faith) is accounted and used as the least part of
Religion.

The second was* that till such time as learned and sufficient men might be
planted in every Congregation, that godly Homilies might be read, and the
number of the^ increased, and that the Opponents would labor to bring them
into credit again, as formerly they brought them into contempt. Every man
(says he) that can pronounce well, cannot indite well.

The Kings Majesty approved this motion, especially, where the living is not
sufficient for maintenance of a learned Preacher; as also in places, where
plenty of Sermons are, as in the City and great Towns. In the Country
villages where Preachers are not near together, he could wish preaching, but
where there are a multitude of Sermons, there he would have Homilies to be
read diverse times: and therein he asked the assent of the Plaintiffes, and
they confess it. A preaching Ministry, says his Majesty, was best, but
where it might not be had, godly prayers and exhortations did much good. That,
that may be done, let it, and let the rest, that cannot, be tolerated.
Somewhat was here spoken by the Lord Chancellor, of liuinges, rather wanting
learned men, then learned men liuinges. Many in the Universities pining,
Masters, Batchelors, and vpwardes: wishing therefore, that some might have
single coats, before other had dublets; and here his L. showed the course,
that he had ever taken, in bestowing the Kings Benefices. My Lord of London
commending his Honorable care that way, withal excepted, that a dublet was
necessary in cold weather; the L. Chancellor replied, that he did it not for
dislike of the liberty of our Church, in granting one man 2. benefices, but
out of his own private purpose and practice grounded upon the foresaid reason.

The last motion by my L. of London, was, that Pulpits might not be made
Pasquilles, wherein every humorous, or discontented fellow might traduce his
superiors. Which the King very graciously accepted, exceedingly reproving
that, as a lewd custom; threatening, that if he should but hear of such a
one in a Pulpit, he would make him an example: concluding with a sage
admonition to the Opponents, that every man should solicit and draw his
friends to make peace, and if anything were amiss in the Church officers, not
to make the Pulpit the place of personal reproof, but to let his Majesty
hear of it: yet by degrees. First, let Complaint be to the Ordinary of the
place; from him to go to the Archbishop; from him, to the Lords of his
Majesty's Council; and from them, if in all these places no remedy is found,
to his own self. Which Caveat his Majesty put in, for that the Bishop of
London had told him, that if he left himself open to admit of all
complaints, neither his Majesty should ever be quiet, nor his under Officers
regarded: seeing, that now already no fault can be censured, but presently
the Delinquent threatens a complaint to the King: and for an instance, he
added, how a Printer, whom he had taken faulty, very lately answered him in
that very kind.

D. Reyn. comes now to Subscription, (which concerns the fourth general
head, as he first propounded it, namely, The Communion book,) taking
occasion to leap into it here, as making the urging of it to be a great
impeachment to a learned Ministry; and therefore entreated, it might not be
exacted as heretofore, for which many good men were kept out, other removed,
and many disquieted. To subscribe according to the statutes of the Realm,
namely, to the Articles of Religion, and the Kings Supremacy, they were not
unwilling. The reason of their backwardness to subscribe otherwise was, first,
the books Apocryphal; which the Common Prayer book enjoined to be read in
the Church albeit, there are, in some of those Chapters appointed, manifest
errors, directly repugnant to the scriptures; the particular instance, which
he then inferred was, Eccles. 48. 10. where he charged the author of that
book, to have held the same opinion with the Jews at this day; namely, that
Elias in person, was to come before Christ, and therefore as yet Christ, by
that reason, not come in the flesh; and so, consequently, it employed a denial
of the chief Article of our redemption: his reason, of thus charging the
Author, was, because that Ecclus. used the very words of Elias in person,
which the Prophet Malachy, Chap. 4. does apply to an Elias in resemblance,
which both an angel, Luke 1. 17. and our Savior Christ Math. 11. did
interpret to be John Baptist. The answer was, as the objection, twofold.
First, general, for Apocrypha books; The Bishop of London showing, first, for
the antiquity of them, that the most of the objections made against those
books, were the old Cauils of the Jews, renewed by S. Hierome in his time,
who was the first that gave them the name of Apocrypha: which opinion, upon
Ruffinus his challenge, he, after a sort disclaimed; the rather, because a
general offense was taken at his speeches in that kind. First, for the
continuance of them in the Church, out of Kimidoncius and Chemnitius, two
modern writers.

The Bishop of Winton remembered the distinction of Saint Jerome, Canonici
sunt ad informandos mores, non ad confirmandam fidem, which distinction he
said, must be held for the justifying of sundry Councels.

His Majesty in the end, said he would take an even order between both,
affirming, that he would not wish all Canonical books to be read in the
Church, unless there were one to interpret; nor any Apocrypha at all, wherein
there was any error; but for the other, which were clear, and correspondent to
the scriptures, he would have them read, for else, says his Majesty, why
were they printed? and therein showed the use of the Books of Machabees, very
good to make up the story of the persecution of the Jews; but, not to teach a
man either to sacrifice for the dead, or to kill himself.

And here his Highness arose from his chair, and withdrew himself into his
inner chamber a little space: in the mean time a great questioning was amongst
the Lords, about that place of Eccles. with which, as if it had been their
rest and vpshot, they began, afresh, at his Majesty's return. Who* seeing
them so to urge it, and stand upon it, calling for a Bible, first, showed the
author of that book, who he was; then the cause, why he wrote that book;
next analyzed the Chapter it self, showing the precedentes and consequentes
thereof; lastly, so exactly and diuinelike, unfolded the sum of that place,
arguing, and demonstrating, that whatsoever Ben Sirach had said, there, of
Elias, Elias had in his own person, while he lived, performed and
accomplished; so that the Susurrus, at the first mention, was not so great, as
the astonishment was now at the King his so sudden and sound, and indeed, so
admirable an interpretation; concluding, first, with a serious check to Doctor
Reynaldes, that it was not good to impose upon a man, that was dead, a sense
never meant by him: secondly, with a pleasant Apostrophe to the Lords; What,
trow ye, makes these men so angry with Ecclesiasticus? by my soul, I think
he was a Bishop, or else they would never use him so. But for the general,
it was appointed by his Majesty, that Doctor Reyn. should note those chapters
in the Apocrypha books, where those offensive places were, and should bring
them unto the Lord Archshop of Canterbury against Wednesday next; and so he
was willed to go on.

The next scruple against Subscription 2
was, that old Crambe bis posita, that in the Common Prayer book, it is twice
set down, Jesus said to his Disciples; when as by the text original it is
plain, that he spoke to the Pharisees. To which it was answered, that for
ought that could appear by the places, he might speak as well to his
Disciples, they being present, as to the Pharisees. But his Majesty keeping
an even hand, willed that the word Disciples should be omitted, and the
words, Jesus said, to be Printed in a different letter, that it might
appear, not to be a part of the text.

The third objection against Subscripti. 3
on, were Interogatories in baptism, propounded to Infantes: which, being a
profound point, was put upon M. Knewstubs to pursue: who, in a long and
perplexed speech, said something out of S. Austen, that baptizare was credere,
but what it was his Majesty plainly confessed, Ego non intelligo; and asked
the Lords what they thought he meant? it seemed that one present, conceived
him; for he standing at his back, bid him urge that punct, urge that punct,
that is, a good point: my Lord of Winton, aiming at his meaning, showed him
the use thereof out of S. Austen; and added the Fathers reason for it, Qui
peccauit in altero, credat in altero: which was seconded by his Majesty (whom
it pleased, for the rest of the matters which followed, him self alone to
answer; and justly, might he appropriate it to himself, for none present
were able, with quicker conceit to understand, with a more singular dexterity
to refute, with a more judicious resolution to determine, then his Majesty;
herein being more admirable, that these points, wherein some thought him
prejudicial to the contrary, all of us supposed him to have been but a
stranger to them, he could so intelligently apprehend and so readily argue
about them,) it was, I say, seconded by his Majesty; by reason, that the
question should be propounded to the party, whom it principally concerned;
secondly by example of himself, to whom interrogatories were propounded, when
he was crowned in his infancy, king of Scotland.

And here his Majesty, (as hereafter, at the end of every objection he did)
asked them whether they had any more to say?

M. Knewstubs took exceptions to the 4
Cross in Baptism, which were in number, two. First, the offense of Weak
brethren, 1
grounded upon the words of Saint Paul, Romans 14. and 1. Cor. 8. viz, the
Consciences of the weak, not to be offended: which places his excellent
Majesty answered most acutely, beginning with that general rule of the
Fathers; Distingue tempora, and concordabunt Scripturae; showing here the
difference of those times and ours; then a Church not fully planted, nor
settled: but ours long stablished and flourishing: then Christians newely
called from Paganism, and not thoroughly grounded; which is not the case of
this Church, seeing that Heathenish doctrine, for many years, has been
hence abandoned. Secondly, with a question unanswerable, asking them how long
they would be weak? whether 45. years were not sufficient for them to grow
strong? 3. Who they were that pretended this weakness; for we, says the
King, require not now Subscription of Laikes and Idiots, but Preachers and
Ministers, who are not still, I trow, to be fed with milk, but are enabled to
feed others. 4. That is was to be doubted, some of them were strong enough,
if not headstrong; and howsoever they in this case pretended weakness; yet
some, in whose behalf they now spoke, thought themselves able to teach him,
and all the Bishops of the land.

His objection against the Cross consisted of three Interrogatories. 1.
Whether 1
the Church had power to institute an external significant sign? to which was
replied, first, that he did mistake the use of the Cross with us, which was
not used in Baptism, any otherwise then only, as a ceremony. Secondly, by
their own example, who make imposition of hands in their ordination of
Pastors, to be a sign significant.

Thirdly, in prayer, says the Bishop of Winton, the kneeling on the
ground; the lifting up of our hands; the knocking of our breasts are
Ceremonics significant: the first, of our humility coming before the mighty
God, the second, of our confidence and hope, the other, of our sorrow and
detestation of our sins, and these are, and may lawfully be used. Lastly, M.
Deane of the Chapel, remembered the practice of the Jews, who unto the
institution of the Passover, prescribed unto them by Moses, had as the
Rabbines witness added both signs and words, eating sour herbs, and
drinking wine, with these words to both, Take, and eat these in remembrance,
etc. Drink this in remembrance, etc. Upon which addition and tradition of
theirs, our Savior instituted the Sacrament of his last Supper, in celebrating
it with the same words, and after the same manner; thereby approving, that
fact of theirs in particular; and generally, that a Church may institute and
retain a sign significant: which satisfied his Majesty exceeding well.

And here the king desired, to have himself made acquainted about the
antiquity of the use of the Cross. Which Doctor Reynaldes confessed, to have
been ever since the Apostles times, but this was the difficulty, to prove it,
of that ancient use in Baptism. For that, at their going abroad, or entering
into the Church, or at their Prayers and benedictions, it was used by the
Ancients, desired no great proof: but whether, in Baptism, Antiquity
approved it, was the doubt cast in, by M. Deane of Sarum, whom his Majesty
singled out, with a special Encomion, that he was a man well traveled in the
Ancients: which doubt was answered, obsignatis tabulis, by the Deane of
Westminster, (whom the Kings Majesty, upon my Lord of London his motion,
willed to speak to that point) out of Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin and others,
that it was used in Immortali lauacro: which words being a little descanted,
it fell from one, I think it was my Lord of Winchester, obiter, to say, that,
in Constantine his time, it was used in Baptism. What, quoth the King, and is
it now come to that pass, that we shall appeach Constantine of Popery and
superstition; if then it were used, says his Majesty, I see no reason, but
that still we may continue it.

M. Knewstubs his second question was, 2
that put case, the Church had such power to add significant signs, whether
it might, there add them, where Christ had already ordained one; which he
said, was no less derogatorie to Christ's institution, as he thought, then if
any Potentate of this land, should presume to add his seal, unto the great
seal of England. To which his Majesty answered, that the case was not alike,
for that no sign or thing was added to the Sacrament, which was fully and
perfectly finished, before any mention of the Cross is made; for confirmation
whereof, he willed the place to be read.

Lastly, if the Church had that power 3
also, yet the greatest scruple to their Conscience was, how far such an
ordinance of the Church, was to bind them, without impeaching their Christian
Liberty? whereat, the King, as it seemed, was much moved, and told him, he
would not argue that point with him, but answer therein, as Kings are wont
to speak in Parliament, Le Roy J'auisera: adding withal, that it smelled very
rankly of Anabaptisme: comparing it unto the usage of a beardlesse boy, (one M.
John Black) who the last Conference his Majesty had with the Ministers in
Scotland, (in December, 1602.) told him, that he would hold conformity
with his Majesty's ordinances, for matters of doctrine: but for matters of
Ceremony, they were to be left in Christian Liberty, unto every man, as he
received more and more light from the illumination of Gods spirit; even till
they go mad, quoth the King, with their own light: but I will none of that, I
will have one Doctrine and one discipline, one Religion in substance, and in
ceremony: and therefore I charge you, never speak more to that point, (how
far you are bound to obey?) when the Church has ordained it. And so asked
them again, if they had anything else to say?

D. Reynaldes objected the example of the Brazen Serpent, demolished and stamped
to powder by Ezechias, because the people abused it to Idolatry: wishing, that,
in like sort, the Cross should be abandoned, because, in the time of Popery,
it had been superstitiously abused. Whereunto the Kings Majesty answered
diverse ways. First, quoth he, though I be sufficiently persuaded of the
Cross in Baptism, and the commendable use thereof in the Church so long: yet,
if there were nothing else to move me, this very argument were an inducement
to me, for the retaining of it, as it is now by order established: For,
inasmuch, as it was abused, so you say, to superstition, in time of popery, it
does plainly imply, that is was well used before Popery. I will tell you, I
have lived among this sort of men, (speaking to the Lords, and Bishops,) ever
since I was ten years old, but I may say of my self, as Christ did of
himself: Though I lived amongst them, yet since I had abilitye to judge, I was
never of them; neither did any thing make me more to condemn, and detest
their courses, then that they did so peremptorily disallow of all things,
which at all had been used in Popery. For my part, I know not how to answer
the objection of the Papists, when they charge us with novelties: but truly
to tell them, that their abuses are new, but the things, which they abused we
retain in their primitive use, and forsake, only, the novel corruption. By
this argument, we might renounce the Trinity, and all that is holy, because
it was abused in Popery: (and speaking to Doctor Reyn. merrily) they used to
wear hose and shoes in Popery, therefore, you shall, now, go barefoote.

Secondly, quoth his Majesty, what resemblance 2
is there, between the Brazen Serpent, a material visible thing, and the
sign of the Cross made in the air?

Thirdly, I am given to understand 3
by the Bishops, and I find it true, that the Papists themselves, did never
ascribe any power or spiritual grace to the Sign of the Cross in baptism.

Fourthly, you see, that the material 4
Crosses, which in time of Popery were made, for men to fall down before them,
as they passed by them, to worship them (as the Idolatrous Jews did the Brazen
Serpent) are demolished, as you desire.

The next thing, which was objected, was, the wearing of the Surplis, a kind
of garment which the Priests of Isis used to wear. Surely, says his
Majesty, till of late, I did not think, that it had been borrowed from the
Heathen, because, it is commonly termed, aragge of Popery, in scorn; but were
it so, yet neither did we now border upon Heathenish nations, neither are any
of them conversant with us, or commorant among us, who, thereby, might take
occasion to be strengthened, or confirmed in Paganism; for, then there were
just cause to suppress the wearing of it: but seeing, it appeared, out of
antiquity, that in the celebration of divine service, a different habit
appertained to the ministry, and principally, of white Linen; he saw no
reason, but that in this Church, as it had been for comeliness and for order
sake, it might be still continued. This being his constant and resolute
opinion, that no Church ought further to separate it self, from the Church of
Rome, either in Doctrine or Ceremony, then she had departed from her self,
when she was in her flourishing and best estate, and from Christ her Lord and
head. And here, again, he asked, what more they had to say?

D. Reyn. took exceptions at those words, in the Common Prayer Book, of
Matrimony, With my body I thee worship. His Majesty looking upon the place;
I was made believe, (says he,) that the Phrase, did import no less then
Divine worship, and adoration: but by examination I find, that it is an usual
English term, as a Gentleman of Worship, etc. and the sense agreeable to
Scriptures; giving honor to the wife, etc. But turning to Doctor Reyn. (with
smiling, says his Majesty,) Many a man speaks of Robin Hood, who never shot
in his bow, if you had a good wife your self, you would think, all the
honor and Worship you could do her, were well bestowed.

The Deane of Sarum, mentioned the Ring in marriage; which Doctor Reyn,
approved, and the King confessed, that he was married withal; and added, that
he thought, they would prove to be scarce well married, who are not married
with a Ring.

He likewise spoke, of the Churching of women, by the name of Purification:
which being read out of the Book, his Majesty very well allowed it, and
pleasantly said, that women were loath enough of themselves, to come to
Church, and therefore, he would have this, or any other occasion, to draw them
thither.

And this was the substance and sum of that third general point. At which
pause, it growing toward night, his Majesty asked again, if they had any more
to say? if they had, because it was late, they should have another day; but
Doctor Reyn. told him, they had but one point more, which was the last
general head: but it pleased his Majesty, first, to ask what they could say
to the Cornerd Cap? they all approved it; well then, says his Majesty,
turning himself to the Bishops, you may now safely wear your Caps, but I
shall tell you, if you should walk in one street in Scotland, with such a Cap
on your head, if I were not with you, you should be stoned to death with your
Cap.

In the fourth general head touching Discipline D. Reyn. first took
exception, to the committing of Ecclesiastical censures, unto Lay-Chancelors;
his reason was, that, in the Statute made in King Henry his time, for their
authority that way, was abrogated in Queen Mary's time, and not revived in
the late Queens days: and abridged by Bishops themselves, 1571. ordering that
the said LayCha^celors should not excommunicate in matters of correction; and
Anno 1584. and 1589* not in matters of Instance, but to be done only by them,
who had power of the Keys: His Majesty answered, that he had already
conferred with his Bishops, about that point, and that such order should be
taken therein, as was convenient; willing him in the mean time, to go to some
other matter, if he had any. Then he desires, that according to certain
Prouincial Constitutions, they of the Clergy might have meetinges once every
three weeks; first in Rural Deanries, and 1. Cor. 14.
therein to have Prophesying, according as the Reverend Father, Archbishop
Grindal, and other Bishops desired of her late Majesty. 2. that such things,
as could not be resolved upon, there, might be referred to the Archdeacons
Uisitation: and so 3. from thence to the Episcopal Synod, where the Bishop
with his Presbyteri, Act. 21.
should determine all such points, as before could not be decided.

At which speech, his Majesty was somewhat stirred; yet, which is admirable in
him, without passion or show thereof: thinking, that they aimed at a Scottish
Presbytery, which says he, as well agrees with a Monarchy, as God, and the
Devil. Then Jack and Tom, and Will, and Dick, shall meet, and at their
pleasures censure me, and my Council, and all our proceedings: Then Will
shall stand up, and say, it must be thus; then Dick shall reply, and say, nay,
mary, but we will have it thus. And therefore, here I must once reiterate my
former speech, Le Roy s'auisera: Stay, I pray you, for one seven years,
before you demand that of me: and if then, you find me purseye and fat,
and my wind pipes stuffed, I will perhaps hearken to you: for let that
government be once up, I am sure, I shall be kept in breath; then shall we
all of us, have work enough, both our hands full. But Doctor Reyn. til you
find that I grow lazy, let that alone.

And here, because D. Reyn. had twice before obtruded the Kings Supremacy, 1.
In the Article, concerning the Pope; 2. in the point of Subscription, his
Majesty at those times said nothing: but now growing to an end, he said, I
shall speak of one matter more; yet, somewhat out of order, but it skilleth
not. Doctor Rein. quoth the K. you have often spoken for my Supremacy, and it
is well: but know you any here, or any elsewhere, who like of the present
Government Ecclesiastical, that find fault, or dislike my Supremacy? D.
Rein. said no; why then, says his Majesty, I will tell you a tale. After
that the Religion restored by King Edward the sixth was soon overthrown, by
the succession of Queen Marie, here in England, we in Scotland felt the
effect of it. Whereupon Mas. Knoxe writes to the Queen Regent (of whom
without flattery, I may say, that she was a virtuous and moderate Lady) telling
her that she was Supreme head of the Church, and charged her, as she would
answer it before Gods Tribunal, to take care of Christ his Euangil, and of
suppressing the Popish Prelates, who vvithstoode the same. But how long, trow
ye, did this continue? even so long, till by her authority, the popish Bishops
were repressed* he, himself, and his adherents were brought in, and well
settled, and by these means, made strong enough, to undertake the matters of
Reformation themselves. Then, lo, they began to make small account of her
Supremacy, nor would longer rest upon her authority, but took the cause into
their own hand, and according to that more light, wherewith they were
illuminated, made a further reformation of Religion. How they used that poor
Lady my mother, is not unknown, and with grief I may remember it: who,
because, she had not been otherwise instructed, did desire, only a private
Chapel, wherein to serve God, after her manner, with some few selected
persons; but her Supremacy was not sufficient to obtain it at their hands. And
how they dealt with me, in my Minority, you all know; it was not done
secretly, and, though I would, I cannot conceal it. I will apply it thus. And
then putting his hand to his hat, his Majesty said; my Lords the Bishops, I
may thank you, that these men do thus plead for my Supremacy; They think
they cannot make their party good against you, but by appealing unto it, as if
you, or some that adhere unto you, were not well affected toward it. But if
once you were out, and they in place, I know what would become of my
Supremacy. No Bishop, no King, as before I said. Neither do I thus speak, at
randon, without ground, for I have observed since my coming into England, that
some Preachers before me, can be content to pray for James, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, defendor of the faith, but as for Supreme
Governor in all causes, and ouerall persons, (as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil) they pass that over with silence; and what out they have been of, I
after learned. After this asking them, if they had any more to object; and D.
Reyn. aunswering, Noe, his Majesty appointed the next Wednesday for both
parties to meet before him, and rising from his Chair, as he was going to
his inner Chamber, If this be all, quoth he, that they have to say, I shall
make the^ conform themselves, or I will harrie them out of the land, or else
do worse.

And this was the Sum of the second days Conference, which raised such an
admiration in the Lords, in respect of the King his singular readiness, and
exact knowledge; that one of them said, he was fully persuaded, his Majesty
spoke by the instinct of the spirit of God. My L. Cecill acknowledged, that
very much we are bound to God, who had given us a King of an understanding
heart. My Lord Chancellor, passing out of the PriuyChamber, said unto the Deane
of Chester, standing by the door; I have often heard and read, that Rex est
mixta persona cum sacerdote, but I never saw the truth thereof, till this day.

Surely, whosoever heard his Majesty, might justly think; that title did more
properly fit him, which Eunapius gave to that famous Rhetoritian, in saying
that he was, (...); a Living Library, and a walking Study.

Finis secundae diei.
THE THIRD DAYS Conference.
Upon Wednesday, January 18. all the Bishops before named, attended at the
Court, and the Deanes: who were all called into the Privy Chamber, and who so
else, my Lord Archbishop appointed, (for such was his Majesty's pleasure)
whereupon the Knights and Doctors of the Arches, viz. Sir Daniel Dunne, Sir
Thomas Crompton, Sir Richard Swale, Sir John Bennet, and D. Drury entered. As
soon as the King was set, the Lord Archbishop presented unto him a note of
those points, which his Majesty had referred to their consideration, upon the
first day, and the alteration, or rather explanation* of them, in our Liturgy.

1. Absolution or Remission of sins, in the Rubrike of Absolution. 2. In
private Baptism, the lawful Minister present: 3. Examination, with
Confirmation of Children. 4. Jesus said to them; twice to be put into the
Dominicall Gospels: in stead of Jesus said to his Disciples.
His Majesty, here taking the Common Prayer Book, and turning to Private
Baptism, willed, that where the words were (in the Rubrike, the second
Paragraph) They Baptize not Children. Now it should be thus read; They cause
not Children to be baptized; and again, in the same paragraph, for those
words, Then they minister it, it should be, The Curate, or lawful Minister
present, shall do it on this fashion. Concluding very gravely, that in this
Conference, he aimed at three things principally, 1. The setting down of
words fit and convenient, 2. Contriuing, how things might be best done,
without appearance of alteration. 3. Practice, that each man may do his duty
in his place.

After this, his Majesty fell into discourse about the High Commission, wherein
he said, that he understood, how the parties named therein, were too many
and too mean; that, the matters they dealt in, were base, and such as
Ordinaries at home in their Courts, might censure; that the branches granted
out to the Bishops, in their several Diocesses, were too frequent and large.
To which my Lords Grace answered severally, 1. for the number, it was
requisite, it should be great, for otherwise, he must be forced, as often times
now it fell out, to sit alone: because, that, albeit all the Lords of the
Privy Council were in, all the Bishops, many of the Judges at law; and some
of the Clearkes of the Council; yet very few or none of the^, sitting with him
at ordinary times, some of meaner place, as Deanes, and Doctors of Divinity,
and Law, must needs be put in; whose attendance his Grace, might with more
authority command, and expect. 2. For the matters handled therein, he said,
that he often times had complained thereof, but saw that it could not be
remedied; because, that the fault may be of that nature, as that the ordinary
jurisdiction might censure it* but eftsoons it falls out, that the party
delinquent is too great, and so the Ordinary dare not proceed against him; or
so mighty in his state, or so wilful in his contumacy, that he will not obey
the summons, or censure; and so the Ordinary is forced to crave help, at the
high Commission. To the third, his Grace said, that it concerned not him to
make answer thereunto, for such Commissions have been granted, against his
will oftentimes, and without his knowledge for the most part. My Lord Chancellor
therefore offered it to his Majesty's wisdom to consider, if such Commissions
should not be granted to any Bishop, but such as have the largest Diocesses;
which his Majesty well approved, and added withal, and those Bishops who have
in their Diocesses, the most troublesome and refractary persons, either
Papists or Puritanes: but of this, as also of the other things found fault
with therein, he willed those to consult, to whom should be appointed the
reuiew of the Commission. And here that point had ended, but that one of the
Lords, (I think verily rather upon misinformation, then set purpose,)
pleased to say, that the proceeding thereby, was like unto the Spanish
Inquisition, wherein, me^ were urged to subscribe more then law required; that
by the oath ex officio, they were enforced to accuse themselves; that they were
examined upon 20. or 24. Articles, upon the sudden, without deliberation, and
for the most part against themselves: for the evidence thereof, a letter was
showed of an ancient Honorable Councelor, written to the Lord Archbishop, Anno
1584. of two ministers in Cambridgeshire, then, or there aboutes, examined upon
many Articles, and in the end deprived. The Lord Archbishop answered, 1. to
the matter, that, in the manner of proceeding, and examining, his Lordship was
deceived: for if any Article did touch the party any way, either for life,
liberty, or scandal, he might refuse to answer, neither was he urged
thereunto. 2. to the letter, being in a cause twenty years since determined,
he could not answer the particulars, but if his answer to that letter were
found out, he doubted not but as it did satisfy that Honorable Councelour,
when he lived, so it would also sufficiently clear this complaint before his
Majesty.

My Lord of London, for the matter of Subscription, showed his Highness the 3.
Articles, which the Churchmen of England are to approve by subscribing,
namely, the Kings Supremacy; the Articles of Religion, and the Book of Common
Prayer. Al which, it pleased his Majesty himself, to read, (and after a little
glaunce given, that the mention of the Oath ex officio, came in before his due
time) he dilated, 1. how necessary Subscription was, in every well governed
Church; that it was to be urged, for the keeping of Peace: for as laws, to
prevent killing, did provide, there should be no quareling; so to prevent
greater tumults in the Church, Subscription was requisite. 2. because, the
Bishop is to answer for every minister, whom he admits into his Diocese,
it were fittest for him, to know the affection of the party, before his
admittance; the best way to know him, and to prevent future factions, was; to
urge his Subscription at his first entrance: for, Turpius eiicitur, qua^ non
admittitur hospes. 3, as Subscription, was a good means to discern the
affection of persons, whether quiet or turbulent, withal, it was the
principal way to avoid confusion: concluding, that if any, after things were
well ordered, would not be quiet, and show his obedience, the Church were
better without him, he were worthy to be hanged. Praestat vt pereat vnus, quam
vnitas.

Touching the Oath Ex officio, the L. Chancellor, and after him the L. Treasurer
spoke, both for the necessity and use thereof, in diverse Courts and cases. But
his excellent Majesty, preventing that old allegation, Nemo cogitur detegere
sua^ turpitudinem, said that the Civil proceedings, only, punished factes;
but in Courts Ecclesiastical, it was requisite that Fame, and Scandales
should be looked unto. That here was necessary, the Oath Compurgatorie, and the
Oath, ex officio too; and yet great moderation should be used, 1. in
grauioribus criminibus: and 2. in such, whereof there is a public fame: 3. in
distinguishing of public Fame, either caused by the inordinate demeanor of the
offender, or raised by the indiscreet proceeding in trial of the fact: as
namely, in Scotland, where the lying with a wench (though done privately; and
known, or scarce suspected by two or three persons before) was made openly
known to the King, to the Queen, to the Prince, to many hundreds in the
Court, by bringing the parties to the stool of Repentance, and yet, perhaps
be, but a suspicion, only. And here his Majesty so soundly described the Oath
ex officio; First, for the ground thereof: Secondly, the Wisdom of the Law
therein; Thirdly, the manner of proceeding thereby and the necessary and
profitable effect thereof; in such a compendious, but absolute order, that all
the Lords and the rest of the present Auditors, stood amazed at it: the
Archbishop of Canterbury said, that undoubtedly his Majesty spoke by the
special assistance of Gods spirit. The Bishop of London upon his knee
protested, that his heart melted within him, (and so he doubted not, did the
hearts of the whole Company) with joy, and made have to acknowledge unto
almighty God, the singular mercy we have received at his hands, in giving us
such a King, as since Christ his time, the like, he thought has not been;
whereunto the Lords, with one voice, did yield a very affectionate
acclamation. The Ciuilians present, confessed, that they could not in many
hours warning, have so iudiciously, plainly, and accurately, in such a brief
described it.

After this, his Majesty committed some weighty matters to be consulted of, by
the Lords and Bishops, 1. for Excommunication, in causes of less moment; the
name or censure to be altered. 2. for the High Commission, the quality of the
persons to be named, and the nature of the causes to be handled therein, 3. for
recusant Communicants; for there are 3. sorts, says his Majesty, of the
Papists, some 1. which come to Sermons, but not to service and prayer, 2. some
which come to both them, but not to the Communion, 3. a number which abstain
from all. That inquiry might be made, of al those, who were of the first,
second or third rank, concluding therein, that the weak were to be informed,
the wilful to be punished.

Here my Lord Chancellor mentioned the writ, de Exco^municato capiendo, which
his Hon. said, did most affright the Papists, of al other punishments,
because, by reason of that, they were many ways disabled in law: therefore, he
would take order, if his Mtie so pleased, to se^d that writ out against them
freely without charge; and if they were not executed, his Lordship would lay
the Undershiriffes in prison; and to this the King assented.

The 4. thing to be consulted of, was, for the sending and appointing of
Preachers into Ireland, whereof, says his Majesty, I am but half a King,
being Lord over their bodies, but their souls seduced by Popery, he much
pitied, affirming, that where there is no true Religion, there can be no
continued obedience: nor for Ireland only, but for some parts of Wales, and
the Northern borders, so once called, though now no borders: the men to be
sent, not to be factious, or scandalous, for weeds will be weeds, wheresoever
they be, and are good for nothing, but to be piked over the wall; therefore
they should single out men of sincerity, of knowledge, of courage.

The last was, for provision of sufficient maintenance for the Clergy, and
withal, for the planting of a learned and painful minister in every parish,
as time shall serve.

To every of those, his Majesty willed, that several Commisioners of his
Council and bishops should be appointed, by the Lords, upon the dissoluing the
assembly present.

And thus having conferred of these points with his Bishops, and referred
othersome of them, as you heard to special Committies, his Majesty willed,
that D. Reyn and his associates, should be called in to whom, he presently
signified, what was done, and caused the alterations, or explications before
named, to be read unto them. A little disputing there was, about the words in
marriage, With my body I thee worship, and arguing no other thing to be meant, by
the word Worship, then that, which S. Paul wills, 1. Cor. 7. 4. the man
thereby acknowledging, that, hereby he worshippeth his wife, in that he
appropriateth his body unto her alone: nor any more, then that which S. Peter
councelleth, 1. Peter. 3. 7. That the man should give Honor to his Wife, as to
the weaker vessel: yet, for their satisfaction, should be put in, With my body
I thee worship, and honor, if it were thought fit; and so his Mtie shut up all
with a most pithy exhortation to both sides for unity persuading diligence in
each man's place, without violence on the one party, or disobedience on the
other, and willed them to deal with their friends abroad to that purpose: for
his Majesty feared, and had some experience, that many of them were ticklish
and humorous; nor that only, but laborers to pervert others to their fancies;
he now saw, that the exceptions against the Communion Book, were matters of
weakness; therefore, if the persons reluctant be discreet they will be won
betimes, and by good persuasions; if indiscreet better they were removed: for
many, by their factious behavior, were driven to be Papists. Now then, of
their fruits, he shall judge them; Obedience and Humility being marks of
honest and good men. Those he expected of them, and by their example and
persuasion of all their sort abroad; for, if hereafter, things being thus
well ordered, they should be unquiet, neither his Majesty, nor the state had
any cause to think well of them. To which, they all gave their unanimous
assent, taking exception against nothing that was said or done, but promised
to perform all duty to the Bishops, as their Reverend fathers, and to join
with them against the common adversaries, and for the quiet of the Church.

Only, M. Chatterton of Emanuel College, kneeling, requested that the wearing
of the Surplis, and the use of the Cross in Baptism, might not be urged upon
some honest, godly, and painful ministers in some parts of Lancashire; who
feared, that if they should be forced unto them, many, whom they had won to
the Gospel, would slide back, and reuolte unto Popery again, and
particularly, instanced the Vicar of Ratesdale: (he could not have light
upon a worse;) for not many years before, he was proved before my Lord
Archbishop, as his Grace there testified, and my L. Chancellor, by his unseemly
and vnreuerent usage of the Eucharist, dealing the bread out of a Basket, every
man putting in his hand, and taking out a piece, to have made many loath the
holy Communion, and wholly refuse to come to Church, his Majesty answered, that
it was not his purpose, and he durst answer for the Bishops, that it was not
their intent, presently, and out of hand to enforce those things, without
fatherly admonitions, conferences, and persuasions premised; but wished, that
it should be examined if those men by their pains and preaching had converted
any from Popery, and were, withal, men quiet of disposition, honest of life,
and diligent in their calling; if so, letters should be written to the Bishop
of Chester, (of whom his Majesty gave a very good testimony) to that purpose:
if not, but that they were of a turbulent and opposite spirit, both they and
others of that unquiet humor should presently be enforced to a conformity, and
so, for that point, it was concluded, that my Lord Archbishop, should write to
the Bishop of Chester, his letters for that matter.

My Lord of London replyeth, that if this were granted, the copy of these
letters (especially, if his Majesty had written, as at first it was purposed)
would fly over al England, and then other, for their confines, would make the
same request, and so no fruit should follow of this Conference, but things
would be worse then they were before. Therefore, he humbly desired his
Majesty, that a time should be limited, within which compass, they should
conform themselves. To which, his Majesty, readily assented, and willed,
that the Bishop of the Diocese, should set them down the time, and in
mean while confer with them, and if they would not yield, whatsoever they
were, to remove them, after their time expired.

No sooner was that motion ended, but down falls M. Knewstubs, and he
requests the like favor of forbearance, for some honest Ministers in
Suffolk, telling the K. it would make much against their Credites in the
Country, to be now forced to the Surplis, and the Cross in Baptism. My Lords
Grace was aunswering; Nay, says his Majesty, let me alone with him. Sir,
says the King, you show your self, an uncharitable man, we have here taken
pains, and in the end have concluded of an unity and uniformity, and, you
forsooth, must prefer the Credites of a few private men, before the general
peace of the Church; this is just the Scottish argument, for when any thing was
there concluded, which disliked some humors, the only reason, why they would
not obey, was, it stood not with their credits, to yield, having so long been
of the contrary opinion; I will none of that, says the King, and therefore,
either let them co^form themselves, and that shortly, or they shall hear of
it. My Lord Cecill put his Majesty in mind, of a word, his Highness had used
the day before, namely, of Ambuling Communions, saying, that the indecency
thereof, was very offensive, and had driven many from the Church: and here M.
Chatterton was told of sitting Communions in Emanuel College; which, he
said, was so, by reason of the seats, so placed as they be; yet, that they
had some kneeling also.

Finally, they jointly promised, to be quiet and obedient, now they knew it to
be the Kings mind, to have it so. His Majesty's gracious conclusion was so
piercing, as that it fetched tears, from some, on both sides. My Lord of
London ended all, in the name of the whole company, with a Thanksgiving unto
God for his Majesty, and a prayer for the health and prosperity of his
Highness, our gracious Queen, the young Prince, and al their Royal Issue.

His Majesty departed into the inner Chamber, all the Lords presently went to
the Council Chamber, to appoint Commissioners, for the several matters before
referred.

FINIS.
The Preface.
MAny Copies were sent me, whereof some were so shamelesly untrue, and I assure
you, so obscaene, that I think his Majesty would have been as much offended
with me for Printing, as with the Authors for dispearsing them: I have chosen
three of the best, and cleanliest, which do here* under follow.

I give no censure, neither know I the Dispearsers, let the Reader confer and
judge. Rectum est iudex sui, and obliqui.

The first Copy. January 15. 1603.
SIr, I cannot conceal from you, the good success, which it has pleased God
to send us, by the Conference, which his Majesty had with the Bishops at the
court. There appeared none but the Bishops, which were with the King above
three hours: Can. Lon. Wint. fell down on their knees, and desired, that all
things might remain, least the Papists should think we have been in an error.
The King replied, that in 42. years corruptions might creep in. He spoke of
confirmation, private Baptism, the Cross, dumb Ministry, non residence,
the Courts; which he promised to amend: especially he spoke bitterly against
private Baptism; saying he had as live an Ape, as a woman should Baptize his
child, and against Courts, which he said he would put down. The Lo. chief
Justice, and the Lo. Cecil, against Excommunications by Laymen. Master Deane
of the Chapel, speaking something to the King in his ear, the Bishop of
London, insolently said unto him, Doctor Mountague Other Copies have the Bishop
of Winchester.
speak out, that we may hear you, and seek not to cross us. At their
departure, they said, that if the King should use the Ministers in such sort as
they were used, they would be too insolent. The King said they were his
subjects, and if he would not hear them, then they had just cause to
complain. The Bishops brought forth many Popish arguments, which the King
very ernestly answered, and learnedly, more then ten times calling them
Popish arguments, and said by those reasons, they might prove Popery. The
Bishop of Winchester said, that if he took away private Baptism, he
overthrew all antiquity. The Bishop of Peterbrough brought a foolish argument,
with much disgrace to himself. The Bishops have taken Wednesday to consider of
the Kings speech. The Ministers came to the King on Monday at nine of the
clock. Honest men about the Court, are comforted. Conformitans hang down their
heads, and the Bishops men curse the Puritanes. sic explicit. 1. dies.

Another Copy.
I Have sent you the declaration of the Conference, which was in this manner:
The first day the Bishops met before his Majesty: Bishops of Canterbury,
London, and Winchester, making earnest suit, that all things might stand as
they did, least the Papists should take offense, who might say, we would
persuade them to come to a Church having errors in it: and the Puritans will
say, they have bin persecuted long: The King answered, that the best state
would gather corruptions, and that it was no argument for them, to say, they
would not be cured of the pox, because they had had it 30. years: he concluded
against absolution, confirmation, private Baptism, the dumb and scandulous
Ministers: pluralities, the Courts and the authority of Bishops by the high
Commissisners, etc. The second day the Ministers were conuented before the
King, who answered fearfully and modestly: the Bishop of Lon. behaved himself
insolently, saying, these are Cartwrightes Scholars Scismatikes, breakers of
your Majesty's laws; you may know the^ by their Turkey gowns, and silk Turkey
Grogorum: The third day they met all: where the King spoke much to unity, that
they might join against the Papists: All the three days the King behaved
himself admirable to the beholders: granting to the Ministers their earnest
request, that the Ceremonies of the Cross in Baptism, and the Surplises,
reverent for antiquity, should not be urged upon the consciences of the
Ministers, so that they were peaceable me^, and that they should have time to
consider of them; many hundreds being resolved rather to have lost their
places, then to have yielded to those superstitions, against which they had
Preached. The last day, the Bishop of Cant. was entreated, to be a means that
the ceremonies might not be pressed: but he answered they had been urged as
necessary, and should be so still. But it pleased God to move his Majesty to a
more peaceable course: the Bishop of Peter-borow came in with his argument
about Baptism, which the King made void to his great reproach: The King said
many times that the Bishops reasons were popish, and that they might
establish Popery by them: it is thought that the King will be shortly in
Huntingtonshire. The Lord Chancellor, the Lord Cecil, the Lord chief Justice,
and the Atturnie General, must set down some course for the high Commission,
and the Spiritual Courts.

A third Copy. Some of the speeches that are bruited, upon Master Doctor
Reynoldes return to Oxen. concerning the late Conference before his Majesty.
1 THat the Kings Majesty did gratify Master Doctor Reynoldes in every
thing which he proposed: or that Doctor Reynoldes obtained, and prevailed in
every thing he did desire. 2 That if any man report the contrary, he does
lie: or that they should give him the lie, from Master Doctor Reynoldes. 3
That these things now obtained by the reformers, were but the beginning of
reformation: the greater matters were yet to come. 4 That my Lord of Winton
stood mute: and said little or nothing. 5 That my Lord of London called Doctor
Reynoldes Schismatic indeed: (he thanks him for it) but otherwise said
little to purpose. 6 That the Kings Majesty used the Bishops with very hard
words: but embraced master Doctor Reynolds, and used most kind speeches to
him. 7 That my Lo. of Canterbury or my Lo. of London, falling on his knees,
besought his Majesty to take their cause into his own hands, and to make
some good end of it: such as might stand with their credit.

