An Apology of private Mass, spread a broad in writing without name of the
author: as it seems, against the offer and protestacion made in certain
Sermons by the reverent father Bishop of Salsburie: with an answer to the same
Apology, set forth for the maintenance and defense of the truth.

Perused and allowed, by the reverent father in God Edmonde Bishop of London,
according to the order appoincted in the Queens maiestes Injunctions.

LONDINI. Men's. Nouemb. 1562.

(...) ence before God and you, to discover certain vanities of yours, that
the catholic church (once your mother) misliketh in you. And so much the
rather, because god of his infinite goodness has called me back again from all
such lewd fancies, by the godly instruction of the learned: in the which I
was ones so fully persuaded by evil books, that all that time I neither
regarded God, nor good religion, nor any good conscience besides. And therefore
trusting to do some good with such as simplicity without malice has
persuaded to stay, conscience pricked me to give the adventure: nothing doubting
but that God will bring that to a good end, the beginnynge whereof had no
evil meaning.

1. Cap. against his refusal in the first Epistle to D^ Cole.
And to make mine entry with you (master Jewel) which are counted the
greatest clarke on your side, I meruell not a little why you, being reputed a
man of such learning, utterly refuse to prove the doctrine you teach. A.
Allegyng very slender causes of your refusal: that serve the contrary side,
rather then yours. Your vocation to so high a rome, the place where you
taught, the honorable estate of the audience, which hard you, the doctrine you
taught auctorised by the realm, as you allege do not unburden you from the
proof of your doctrine, but rather bourden you more to prove the same: because
your estate is now such, that is bound to render account of that you teach.
Nor it is any dishonor to the realm, if you be able to certiu^e that by
learning, that they (as you say) have passed by laws, nor want of discretion
at all in you, to teach them, that would so gladly learn at your hand. For if
a man may prove by conference of scriptures any article therein comprised,
either in the letter, or by argument boulted forth without any dishonor to
God, or blemish to him that takes the matter in hand, (as a man in deed may)
shall you count the Realm dishonored, or want of discrecion in your self, to
prove such doctrine (as your self do publishe) because it is auctorised by
man, and by thassent of the Realm? which in time of your baptism assented to
the contrary, as al other christian realms did, without any contradiction at
all, amongst the learned: whereas in this assente, as many learned clerks,
well known to the world, said nay, and more to, then hitherto has said yea.
And if the chief proof of your doctrine be the assente of this realm, shall
not other christian realms, that teach quite contrary unto you, rest in
doctrine auctorised by them, and al christian realms besides? Here you ar
driven, if you rest so stoutly upon thassent of realms, to confess that the
doctrine taught here is true, because this realm has auctorised it: and the
doctrine in strange realms is ^rew, being quite contrary to yours, because
by like reason the realms there has auctorised it. You have no refuge in this
case, but to say, that this realm followed the scripture in such doctrine, as
they aucthorised, and that other realms followed not the scripture in
auctorisinge the contrary. I am well contented with your answer. But where be
the scriptures whereby the realm auctorised your doctrine? You may not say, it
shall be great dishonor to the realm, to have such scripturs known, for
want of discrecion in you, to utter them: as you seem to say in your letters.
Let us know such scriptures, as your trust is most upon, to prove your
doctrine by, and we will depart quietly. And as all wise men will count it the
office of a discrete man, either to stay such as stagger, or to persuade such
as verily think otherwise: So shall I not only so think, but also if you
give me good cause why, yield you great thanks, and my poor service to. In
your silence herein, if you have ought to say, you shall do nothing else but
hide the candell under ye busshel: where as the order is to set it upon the
candelsticke, to light all such as are within the house. If you have no
scriptures to lay for you, then trouble our mother the holy catholic church
no longer. You stand in negatiues: you say against private Masses and
certain other, which as you pretend, cannot be proved. Have we not here good
cause to marvel that you, which studdie so marvelous reformacion of all
doctrine to the touch stone of scripture, will openly profess, bearyng such
a personage in such places of honor, such doctrine as can neither be proved
by scripture, nor any other substancial record: and all because it stands in
negatiues? May not children in this sort devise negatiues conteinyng false
doctrine, and when they are called upon to prove it, B.
say they are not bound to prove their assercions, because they are ^egatiues?
This dare I be bold to say: Against his stayinge upon the negative.
^f you had sentence, or half sentence, word, or half word in the
scriptures, ^lde doctoures, general counsels, or example of the primative
church against private Masses, al England had runge of it ere this day. But
you have none, as your silence imports. It were either great folly to keep
that secret, the which without any damage may do good to many, or marvelous
envy to enclose that without gain, which law and reason would have to be
commen. Quicquid dando non deficit (says sayncte Austin) Quamdiu habetur, and
non datur: non dum habetur, quomodo habendum est. All that decay not by
bestowynge, as long as they are had, and not bestowed they are not yet had, as
they ought to be had. The laws may in diverse special factes, not restrained
to time and place, teach perhaps, that a negative can not be proved. But to
say that a negative in doctrine, as yours is, can not be proved upon only
consideracion that it is a negative, as your shifte is, that I am well assured
no learned man hitherto ever taught: either in law; or in any other science
besides. Ye the contrary rather appears in Logic: the which teaches the
general grounds of all disputacions. Where we have in every figure,
negative conclusions. And for other short kind of arguments, there are as
many places dialectical of the negatiues to destroy, as there are affirmatiues
to build on. So that shifte of descant can not serve your turn. Does not the
scripture many times ioygne issue in the negative, and prove the same? We are
not justified by Moses law, and so the like. Does not the Apostels prove it at
large? But for as much as you are not able to prove the negative, I will no
further trouble you therewith. Yet when there is an affirmative employed in the
negative, as there is here, though I discharge you of very gentilnes from the
proof of the one, order of schools will drive you to prove the other: though it
were in factes, much more in doctrine.

Your negative was, 2. Cap.
that there was no private Mass at all, in the primative church: thus you
say, and show no cause why. This term private, A distictio^ of private
which you in this place first invented, I mean Luthers school, may be taken
concerning this matter diverse ways. One way, private is contrary to common, A.
to many. And in this significacion, we never said that any Mass was
private. For the catholic church ever taught, that the Mass is a common or
public sacrifice, restrained to none so, but that the whole church, or any
lively membre thereof, had thereby great commoditee: and might, being prepared,
and well disposed, be partaker, not only of the common Prayer and Suffrages
offered up to God in the Mass, but also of the holy sacrament of Christ's
body and blood therein consecrated, and offered. We never yet prisoned up the
holy Sacrifice of the Mass, or the sacrament therein received, or the use of
any of them, from any that disposed them selves godly. If you had hard us
preach that the Mass is only auailable to the priest, or to princes, or to
us of England, or to them of Italy, or to men, and not to women, or to such as
are alive, and not to such as are dead, or to say that none ought to receive
the Sacrament, but the priest, you might have charged us that we went about
to enclose that to some one sort of private profit, that ought to remain in
common for all sorts of people. And in this wise we never taught, that any
Mass was private. But you have the other significacion of this term private.
B.
That is, the soole receiuynge of the Sacrament by the priest, imbarrynge none
to communicate with him, yea rather rejoicing, if any would be so well disposed
to receive with him. And lamenting, when he sees the people so evil
disposed, that none will order them selves so, that they may worthily receive
with him. And yet not forsying them to receive, when they are not disposed,
nor ready. And in this meaning of private, the catholic church does teach,
that the priest may receive the Sacrament at Mass alone, when none other is
disposed to receive with him. Now if you be able, we require you to prove
thaffirmatiue included in your negative. Which is this. That every priest or
any other ought, when he receives the sacrament, to have company to receive
with him in the same time and place, upon pain of Gods high indignation: and
then we will yield unto you. If you be able to prove neither the negative, nor
the affirmative, storm not so sore against the doctrine of the catholic
church, the which falsehed many times assaulteth, and was never yet able to
overthrow.

As you say, 3. Cap.
there was no private Mass in the primative church, and say untruly, so may
you say and say truly, there was no christian king in the Apostles time. That
all things should not be brought to the form of the primative church.
There was no christian man that then counted any thing his own of such
things as he possessed: but all were common. There was then no doctrine
taught, but it was confirmed by miracles. There was no woman that might come
with open face to the church. There was no Bishop indewed with temporaltees.
There was no distinction commonly of parishes. There was nothing eaten that was
mingled with blood. There was no whole realms turned to the faith. There was
no receuyng of the Sacrament, but after supper. There was no infant but was
housled. And thus may we roll in a great sort such, there was not truly,
as you roll in diverse of yours falsely. And will you I beseech ye reform al
things to the very state of the primative church now? Will you suppress al
christian kings which were not in the Apostels time? A.
Will you alter the state now, and make all things to be common? Will you
disgrace, all preachers that work not miracles? Will you enforce women to
hoodwinke them selves in the church? will you rail against bisshoppes that
keep any temporalties? Will ye set men at liberty to do their duty at what
church they will? Will ye inhibit the folks to eat bluddynges, or Pigions,
or Capons, such as are killed by stiffilyng? Will you enforce us to be
houseled after supper? Will you housell all babes and infantes again? B.
To call such things to the state of the Apostels time, The primative
church, the state of infa^cie.
and of the primative church again, is nothing else, but to enforce a taule man
to come to his swadlynge clothes, and to cry alarm in his cradel again. I
trust when you say there was no private Mass in the primative church, not
withstandinge you disalowe private Mass, yet you will allow Mass to be in the
primative church: or else wisdom would have said more generally, there was no
Mass at all, nor private, nor common. etc. And yet there is an open difference
between these two sentences: there was no private Mass at that time, and there
ought to be no private Mass at any time. In the one, we conceive the use of
that age, not withstanding the law of the church even then might stand
indifferently to the contrary, upon circumstances and good consideracions. And
in the other, we precisely conceive what the law does determine, either
lawful or unlawful. The constant faith, C.
the pure life, An argument of the comparison of the times.
the fervent charitee, the contempt of the world, that then florisshed so
amongst such as professed Christ, might cause perhaps that no Mass was
celibrated, but that diverse christians, and specially lookyng for continual
persecucion, would be houseled there at, and be always sure to have their
viaticu^, as it is termed in the old Cannons, that is to say, their v^age
provision. In that state of burning charitee, and of contempt of the world,
and all the pleasures thereof, some of the people, perhaps of their own accord,
did always willyngly and gladly prepare them selves at every Mass to be
housled with the priest: And will you now in the state of keycolde charitee, D.
when the people are nothing willing to dispose them selves to receive their
housill, E.
pluck the priest from the altar, whose office as to offer that daily
sacrifice for the people, unless there be that will receive? Will you imbarre
him that is bound to offer up the daily sacrifice of duty, because they will
not dispose them selves to receive their housill? Who, as concerning so often
receiuyng, are not bound, but stand at liberty. The church does exhort them
to ye frequentacion of their housil, but gives no commandment to bind them:
as Christ said, Si vis perfectus esse, vade, and vende omnia quae habes, and
da pauperibus. If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and
give it to the poor. Which imploieth the nature of a counsel, to exhort men
to ye highest degree of christianity, consernyng the bestowyng of the goods of
the world: and yet is no commandment to bind any that are not so disposed.
Even so we may exhort and counsel folks to frequent the receiuyng of their
rightes without any commandment to bind them. Now the ley men are at
liberty, consernyng the frequentacion: the priest is bound to the
frequentacion. Is it then reason that he, that may choose whether he will
frequently receive or no, should, when he is not disposed, cause him to offend
the law of God, that is bound thereto? If you had any such text in the holy
scripture to bind the priest never to say Mass without some to communicate,
as this text, Si vis perfectus esse, vade vende. Seems to command him that
will be perfect, to sell all that he has, and bestow it upon the poor. Lord
how would ye then triumph: because you had then some color against private
Mass. F.
And yet when the matter were well bulted, you shall never be able to prove any
commandment thereby against the soole receiving of the Sacrament by the
priest, but a counsel to exhort him, if it might be, too the highest and most
perfect estate. But to prescribe of necessitee that there ought, upon pain of
Gods indignacion to be a company to communicate with the priest at every Mass,
or else forbear the celebracion of the holy sacrifice, having no title of any
such color in the holy scripture, I will not call that by the name that I may
justly, but will temper the matter, and term it an itchyng folly, to alter all
things that are well settled alredie.

S. Chrysostom in his third homely upon the epistle to ye Ephesians in his
complainte there does so set forth the matter, 4. Cap.
as it is to be wished both what the people should do, and what the priest may
do. If the people will not follow his exhortacions, than no man, I suppose
without great impude^cie, will any longer stand in ye denial thereof. For as we
may well and godly wisshe that al folks were so well agreed that al suites in
the law might surseasse: A.
A similitude that company is not necessary
and yet this godly wisshe when any contention should chance, yt cannot
otherwise be finished does not inhibit but ye men may sew for their right. For
ye highest or the perfitest state does not extinguishe ye mean or the low:
Even so all good men may wish that al christian people were always so devout
and well disposed, that they might with gods favor, receive their housil
daily. And yet were it injury because al will not, The priest of duty bound
to sacrifice.
to inhibite such as would. Or if none would, to imbarre the priest that is
bound to offer up the daily sacrifice for him self and the people.

S. Chrisostom writes thus: 5. Cap.
In aliis quidem te^poribus quu^ puri frequenter sitis, A.
non acceditis. In pascha vero sicet sit aliquid a vobis perpetratu^ acceditis,
O consuetudinem, O presu^ptione^, sacrificiu^ frustra quotidianu^ offerimus. In
cassum assistimus altari, nullus est qui co^municetur, hic non vt temere
co^municemini dico, sed vt vos dignos reddatis. At other times says he
although you be for the most part in clean lite you come not, but at Easter
you come, though you have done somewhat amiss. Phie upon that custom, phie
upon such presumpcion, the daily sacrifice is in vain. We stand at thaulter
for naught. There is none to be howslid. I speak not these things because you
should receive your housil rashly, but for thinte^t you should (...) was
nothing auaylable, but because he looked that the people would dispose them
selves to do as they were exhorted. And that was vain, because nullus est qui
communicetur. There was none that would be howslid. And yet the priest did
celebrate notwithstanding. For it is said, that he stands at the Altar,
and what to do but to celebrate the daily sacrifice. Can you call that a daily
sacrifice that is not daily offered up? C.
or that a daily sacrifice that is not celebrated but once in the year, at
Easter? At the which time the people used to receive: all other times they
refrained, Quia nullus est qui co^municetur. D.
There is none to communicate. Is it not evident by this complainte of S.
Chrisostom that the priest did his duty, not withstanding there was none to
receive with him? Or else if he were constrained to refrain when none would
receive with him, does it not appear that then it follows that he did
celebrate but at Easter only, for then he had company, and at other times he
lacked. Quia nullus est qui communicetur. And then how could it be calde
Sacrificium quotidianum. The daily sacrifice. Doubtless it could not. And
therefore it is plain that then the priest did his duty in celebracion of the
Mass, though none received with him. Have we not found then that in
Chrisostomes time there was private Mass, as you do term it? Why say you
that in all other things we hold contrary unto you. We had some color
other in scriptures, or old doctors. But in such doctrine as you made your
entry upon, whereof this is one, you are assured we had no color at all to
make any proof in very deed. You here that Chrysostom testifies the use of
his time for private Mass plainly and flatly without color at all. What
color I pray you have you, either in scriptures, old Doctors or counsels,
against private (...) do you minister it to the layties, where Christ gave it
only unto the Apostels yt were priests? You will say yt we have no
commandment to exclude any state of me^. Why do you minister it to more or
fewer, when christ ministered it only unto twelve? And what answer have you
here, but to say as you said before, yt as place, sex, time, day, degree,
state of people, secretnesse, are nothing aperteinyng as necessary to ye
substance of the sacrament: so number is but an accident or a ornament rather
to bewtifie yt devotion of christian people in receiuynge the sacrament, then
thereunto apperteinyng as necessary unto the substance. And thus may you
perceive that when you require the like dooyng to Christ herein in every small
poincte or title in us, as in place, time, sex, day, state of people,
secretnesse, number, you deceive your selves, and others. Taking these things
to be necessary for the safegarde of the substance of the sacrament, the
which are nothing else but very accidents: the alteracion whereof do lie in
the discrecion of spiritual governors, without damage or hurt done to the
substance of the sacrament or the use there of: and are to be compted amongst
such things, as saint Paul speaks of, when he wrote. Cetera cum venero
disponam. I will set the other things in order, when I come.

But the great matter you harp on to have company together in one place to
receive at any time with the priest is because that in the use of this
sacrament there ought to be a communion. 7. Cay.
And I pray you is not there a communion among all christians in prayer? A.
For in our prayer we say our father, not my father which art in heaven, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, not in me as it is in heaven, give us
this day our daily bread, we say not give me this day my daily bread, forgive
us our trespasses, we say not forgive me my trespasses. etc. Whereby we know
that we communicate in prayer with all christendom being members of one
mystical body of Christ. And will you inhibite me to say my Pater noster
when I am alone in my chaumber, void of company to say with me, or will you
shut up al christendom in some narow room, that they may be togethers at
one time to say the Lords prayer? Or will you grant that there may be a
Communion in prayer amongst all christians without any respect to have them
together at one time in any one place, and that there can be no communion in
the use of the Sacrament, unless all the communicantes be together in one
place and at one time? Have you any scripture to lead you to say that the
communion in the use of the sacrament must of necessitee have all the
communicantes in one place at one time closse up, more then the communion in
prayer? One of the articles of the Creed is, B.
Credo sanctorum communionem. I believe the communion of saints. I believe
we have communion in Baptism, in penance, in confirmacion, in extreme
unction, in prayer, in fasting, in alms deeds. And must all they that
practice any of these, be driven to do it, at one place, in one season, or else
to have no part of such a communion as there is comprised in these holy
sacraments? Is this your doctrine? Where have you these in scripture? There is
an old doctor called Dionisius: that teaches us why it is called a
communion. Not because it requires unity and idemptitee of time and place, in
the communicantes: but because al christians thereby being lively members of one
body first are brought to an unity with Christ their head, and then every
member with the mystical body: and then every member with other. So that in
the workynge of this marvelous unity, number, time, and place are no
principal dooers, but foreners and very strangers in deed. And the place of
Saint Paul means no less in the first to the Corinthes. Quonia^ vnus
panis and vnu^ corpus musti sumus, omnes quide^ de vno pane and de vno casice
participamus, whereby we here ye christians are pertakers of one lofe, and yet
there is no one particular place able to receive the^, nor yet no one
particular lofe able to serve the^. Surely as touching your fancy to have of
necessity the communicantes closed up in one place, there to be served at one
especial time, C.
or else to be no partakers of the communion, it will fall in process of
reasoning to so many follies: that we must know how large the place must be
and how long you will appoinct the time apperteining to one communion. And as
for the place when the multitude of the communicantes are very great, whether
may be a communion betwixt him that receives at the Altar in our Lady chapel
in Paul's, and him that receives in the lowest place of the west end of
Paul's church. It there may, why are they not partakers of one communion that
receive in two diverse churches in London not so far distante the one from
the other, as our Lady chapel is from the west end of Paul's? And if they
can not, let us know why: and have some scripture for proof thereof. If they
may, why may not the communicantes be partakers of one communion in three
churches: and why not be partakers of one communion in four or five churches
no further distant? If not, limit you then the furthest distance that a
communion may be had in, and bring in scriptures, doctors, or any counsels to
prove the limitacion, and we will cry creake. And in like manner we may reason
for the appoinctmente of time. Appoincte you the longest time that a communion
may be had, and show some good evidence for your limitacion. And likewise we
will cry creake. You drive men to these trifels that the world may know you
hang in nifels.

Erasmus Roterodamus in his epistle that he wrote against false gospellers, 8.
Cap.
reports how they were wont in the old time in the primative church, A.
to deliver every one ye sacrament in their hands to bear home with them and
receive it when their devotion served. Obim (says he) corpus domini, dabatur
in manu vt domi cum vellent sumerent qui accepissent. The Lords body in old
time was delivered into folks hands to the entente that they who had taken
it might receive it when they would. When diverse people took the Lords body
in their hands to receive it at home in their several houses when their
devotion served them to receive it, are any yet so unwise to think that they
that so received it were either in one place, considering their houses were
several, or at any one time, consideringe the variety of their deuocions,
wills, purposes, and trade of life? Do you not se in these few words that the
partakers of any one communion were not-wonte to be clogged to receive it in
any place or at any one especial time? Do not you manifestly hear a
reseruacion of the sacrament confessed here? And where as it was delivered in
their hands, as wine is not, understand you not thereby a communion under one
kind? But you will say it was but Erasmus report. But I say he reported it as
he found in ancient writers. And Erasmus pardie was wont to be a great man
amongst you: and do you so little esteem him now? You have ouerrun him (I
grant) as you have done Luther, that was once your God. B.
Erasmus is not the first father of this report. But Tertulian him self
which florisshed not long after the Apostles time: in his second ^ooke that
he wrote to his wife, reports no less. How that the christian wife kept it
close from her husband, being a Panime, that she received every morning
secretly before meat. And if it so happed that he espied it, that he would
think it were bread: and not that which christian men took it to be. Non
sciet maritus quid secreto ante omnem cibum gustes. Et si sciuerit, panem non
illum credit esse qui dicitur. Thy husband shall not know what thou do eat^
secretly before thy meat. And if he do know it, he believes that it is
bread: and not he whom we call it. Ponder these words well: and se whether
it agrees not with Erasmus report. When the christian wife did secretly
receive the holy sacrament, was there any company received with her? Can a
thing done in company, be secret? Or could she keep close from the Panime
her husband that thing that should be often practiced in any open assembly?
Were not think you the panimes that at that time were the greater number,
diligent to search what the christians did? Seems it not in her secret
receiuyng before all meats, that she reserved the sacrament at home, to
receive it when she would? And where Tertulian says, that if it chanced
that her husband knew what she eat, he would think it to be bread, (making
no mention he would think it to be wine) and not the very body of Christ, as
the christians do confess. Furthermore seems not this woman to have received
it under one kind? For her husband that saw her eat the form of bread, that
was wont to be first received, would soon have perceived when she drank the
form of wine, that should be immediately received after. To conclude, it
appears by these old writers, that this woman received alone without any
company to receive with her. And that she reserved the sacrament with her at
home, to receive at (...) mutabitur sacro sanctum corpus christi, sed virtus,
benedictio and viuificatiua gratia magis in eo est. They are then mad that
say the mystical benediction or blessing leaves from the sanctification, if
any leauyng remain of it till the next day. For the very holy body of Christ
shall not be changed. But the power and virtue and the lively quickenyng grace
is continually abiding in it without company to receive. When ye hear
Chrysostom tell of the daily sacrifice, when you hear the aunciente father
Cirillus, call them mad, that deny the reseruacion, when ye hear him say
plainly and flatly that there is no alteracion in the very holy body of
Christ, though it be kept, and the virtue, and full power of the consecracion,
and the lively quicknynge grace does continue still in the holy porcions that
are reserved: when S. Ciprian that holy martyr makes report of the holy
sacrament reserved at home in the woman's coffer, to receive when her lust, when
devotion served her: and when he shows that God wrought the miracle in the
stiryng of the fire from it, because she thought to use it irreverently, to
cause her to forbear. When Tertulian before that agrees with the same, and
when Erasmus Roterodame, a man famous in his time, records the matter as he
had learned it of these holy fathers and other: that the people received it in
their hands, received it at home, received it when every man saw his time:
Shall any man continue so impudent to deny that ever people used the soole
receiuyng without company, or deny the reseruacion? The Scripture says, In
ore duorum vel trium. etc. Two or three witnesses are able to try any matter:
and especially such witnesses as these are, men of holy life, aunciente fathers
of great learning, called forth to witness ye truth from every quarter of
the world, some from Asia, some from Africa, some from Europa. etc. What say
you to Satyrus, E.
that hanged the hely sacrament about his neck in a stole, when he went to
the sea? What say you to the great clarke S. Ambrose bishop of Millayn, that
praised him greatly for his so doing? Apered not there a reseruacion? And I
trow under one kind, unless your brain will serve you to enclose wine in a
stole, as mine will not.

What say you by Syrapion, 9. Cap.
who being in dispaier of his life, sent for the priest to minister him the
sacrament in the night season. But when the priest lay sick in his bed, and
could not go him self, he took Syrapions ladde the Sacrament in his hand,
and bad him moist it, and so minister it into the mouth of his sick master.
The priest was sick and could not rise. The lad came in the night time, the
priest delivered the sacrament into his hand, he bad him moist it, and geeue
it to the sick. A.
And does not this prove both that the priest had reserved it, and the
moystynge thereof that the sick man took it under one kind, and when he sent
no more then would serve the sick man, was not there the howselyng of one
alone without company? The twelfth Cannon of Nicene counsel provides for
such as are like to depart this life, to receive the sacrament or they
depart. And if any such that is in ye case howseled chance to recover, then
to be amongst the communicantes prayer. The words be these De iis qui
recedunt excorpore, antiqua segis regusa obseruabitur etia^ nunc. Ita ve si
quis forte recedat ex corpore, necessario vitae suae viatico non defraudetur.
Quod si desperatus asiquis recepta communione superuixerit: sit inter eos qui
sola oratione communicant. Concerning those that depart this life, the old
rule of the law shall be kept now also. So that any be like to depart this
life he be not disceiued of his necessary viage provision for his life. If he
that was in dispaier of life after yt he received the communion chance to
recover, let him be amongst them that do communicate by prayers only. The
holy ancient counsel of all the learned fathers at Nice, thought it
convenient that such as were like to die, should be howseled before their
departing: And could this rule be vnuiolably kept amongst so many casualties
of sickness and sodeine infectiones and diverse other chances that fall at
diverse and sundry times both by day and night, B.
unless the holy sacrament were reserved? And unless every man received as
necessity served alone with out company, when necessity so required? Some
time the priest as Chrysostom says in the celebracion of the daily sacrifice
receives without the people: and sometime the people without the priest: and
some time one alone without any company at all, as we have at large showed
before.

In the bisshops and priests absence, 10. Cay.
the Deacons received alone, if they were disposed to receive, as the
foureteenth Cannon of thauncient and old counsel of Nyce has taken order. The
words be these. Peruenit ad sanctum consilium quod in locis quibusdam and
ciuitatibus, presbiteris diaconi sacramenta porrigant. Hoc neque regula, neque
consuetudo tradit, vt ij, qui offerendi sacrificij potestatem non habent, hiis
qui offerunt corpus christi porrigant. Sed and illud innotuit quod quidam
diaconi etiam ante episcopu^ sacrame^ta sumant. Haec ergo omnia omputentur, and
acciplant secundum ordinem post presbiteros ab episcopo ves a presbitero sacram
communionem. Quod si non fuerit in presenti vel episcopus, vel presbiter,
tuncipsi proferant and edant. It is reported to the holy counsel that in
certain places and cities the deacons deliver the sacrament to the priests.
Neither rule, neither custom taught this, that they that have no aucthoritee
to offer sacrifice should deliver the body of christ to them that offer it. And
an other thing also came to our ears that there are certain deacons who
receive the sacrament before the Bishop. Wherefore let all such things be cut
of, let them receive the holy communion orderly after the priests of the
bishops or priest. And if the bishop or the priest be absent, let them selves
bring it forth and eat it: If the deacons, as it appears by this Canon, that
had no authority to consecrate, and to offer the sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood, might in the bishops or priests absens, fetch forth the sacrament,
and receive it, can you deny but it was reserved? And that the same grace of
Christ's body remained in the holy sacrament after the consecracion in the
bishops and priests absence? Which could by no means be consecrated, but
by the bishops and priests presence. A.
I will not cavil with you upon the term above rehearsed in the Cannon,
concerning the deacons, that they might in the bisshoppes and priests absence,
bring forth the sacrament and eat it: which is proper to the form of bread,
and not to the form of wine: and thereby declare that the deacons received it
but in one kind: Notwithstanding I might as well stand therein and better
to, then you stand upon Accipite and manducate, and bibite ex hoc omnes, to
drive the sacrament immediately without any reseruacion to his use, and that at
every communion there must of necessity be a company to receive with the
priest, and every one of the lay people ought of necessity to receive the same
in both kinds. B.
I will not I say use no such daliance upon the word, eat in the Cannon as you
use in take eat and drink al of this in the use of the sacrament very
sophistically. But let go all such vauntage upon titles. I am contented to use
none other proof, but such, as al men that have any discretion, do so
evidently perceive to be so good, that they are never able to find any
occasion in the world to controlle it. Such as I have used before for the
proof of private mass, reseruacion the soole receiuynge or ministracion of
the sacrament in certain cases under one kind, to have been used in the state
of the primative church.

Read S. Cyprian in his fifte sermon De sapsis, 11. Cap.
there shall you se that the deacon gave an Infant, that had received before
part of such meats as were sacrifised up to the Idols, a portion of Christ's
blood out of the Chalis. And as soon as the infant received it, it was
wonderfully vered, because it was marvelous dishonor to the blood of Christ
to be powered into the mouth that was a little before defiled with the Idols
sacrifice. And thereby may you understand that the infant received the
sacrament of the Deacon under the form of wine only, and not under the form
of bread. For by that reason if the infant had received it under the form of
bread, before being part of the sacrament as precious as the other, it should
have been vexed very sore, before the cup had been offered it. But the first
vexacion that it had was when the Deacon gave the sacrament in form of wine.
And therefore it is evident that the deacon gave not the infant the sacrament
under the form of bread. And was not this a communion under one kind only?
You have hard now I suppose not a word, or half word, not one sentence, or
half a sentence as your calling was, but many, and full prouses against
certain of your assertions. And by these you have good cause to distrust all
the rest of your doctrine.

Thus far my leisure served me, 12. Cap.
being otherwise occupied with business though, to answer in the defense of my
spiritual mother the catholic church. Not for because it was our part, that
are in possession, to render any reason for our right, wherein prescription of
time out of mind is a sufficient bar: but partly, because I saw your
importunity in calling upon them to strike, that you had bound in
recognisaunce of great sommes to be forfaited, if they had gone about to give
you any blow. So that you may perceive well by this, that they are better
armed, then you thought they were: when I, who am nothing in comparison of the
learned Doctors of this realm, being a man of no great reading, A.
but in stories, am yet able thus to say in so good a matter, that I trust you
will here after leave your importunity of prouokyng so many learned men of
this realm, to show what evidence they have for the truth. It had been more
reasonable, that you (that would dispossess us of the interest we have in
the true doctrine, that the catholic church first taught us, and has recorded
sufficiently in her practice these.xv.c. years and more, and in records of
writers this.lr. hundred years and.lx. as your self do seem to confess)
should show sufficient causes, why we ought to be dispossessed: rather then
we to lay for our selves prouses to keep possession. I meruell that you
think it not hurt to your side, to grant that the hole practice of the church
has run with us this.ix. hundredth years and three score: where as, in
possession of lands, quiet possession for the space of one hundredth years or
two, puts ye case out of all doubt. You hang upon the state of the sire
hundredth years, that were next after Christ, and you se how that the whole
record of the state runs against you. Tertulian is against you: Ciprian is
against you: Eusebius is against you: Ambrose is against you: Cyrill is against
you: The holy and aunciente counsel of Nyce is against you. And yet you will
make the people to ween, that all are with you of that state. C.
I have not brought in the empty names, as Poticaries do upon their bores, but
have showed you what good drugges they have. I have not cast but from the wall
any victayis in your assanite, to make a brag in penury, as many of your
part commonly use to do, as though they had great plenty of victailes, but
have brought you unto the fight of such provision, as the holy ancient
fathers of the primative thurche, such as your selves do allow, have made for
us. But come unto the practice of the church, and records of she fathers, D.
of the latter.ix. hundredth years. They cry so thick and threesolde against
you, that you are not able to abide them. And therefore you were woonte to
disgrace them art. By what aucthoritee, I pray you, would you have them all
discredited? It sanorth of a maruerlous arrogancy, to discredit them all. Can
your doctrine creep no other ways into credit, unless you deface the
practices of the church, and the aucthoritee of the fathers, for the space
of.ix. hundredth years and odd? Have you no other means to get honor, but to
dishonor so many ancient fathers, as have written this latter.ix. hundred
years? Know you not the scripture, Qui masedixerit patrives matri morte
morietur. And what malediction is there greater, then to blase, that our
learned fathers (that lived so godly in prayers, fastyngs, almesdeedes
continual study of doctrine, that has their common agreementes for the space
of.ix. hundred years and more) disceiued Christ's flock, know not the right
faieth, but trained the people to the state of dampnation? And I pray you, if
they were so many years disceiued, and yet given all the while to spiritual
exercises, more then you, as it appears by their works, or any now a days,
what assurance can you make us, that you do now know the truth? Being a man
far underneath them in all pein^tes? and one that has not continued here much
(as I here say) above forty years, and not bestowed the fourth part of that
time neither (as I here) in study of the scriptures, or old doctors? Shall
you with.ix. or.x. years study in the matters of doctrine think your self
able to sit as a judge, to control all such doctors, and the doctrine, which
they have left in record for the space of.ix. hundred years? No man gave you
such aucthoritee: but your self. Luther, and Melancthon took upon them to be
reformers of religion in all poinctes. But if you mark them, they make no
mattier of necessitee to communicate the laytie with both kinds. They
acknowledge that a general counsel may take order in it, as a thing
indifferent. And having no scripture for the prouse of the necessitee thereof.
They confirm also the being of christ's body in a thousand places at once,
meaning therein as the catholskes mean.

If you had acquainted your self with Abraham and Isaac, 13. Cay.
(that said that quaecunque promisit deus, potens est and facere: What so ever
God promises, he is able to perform it. Or with the Angel that said unto
Mary in as great a mattier as this is, Non est impossible apud deum omne
verbum. There is no word impossible unto God:) as well as you have acquainted
your self with Ismaell and Agar, that se no farther then the trade of common
nature, or if you had marked, but the very rule of nature, how of an antecedent
granted, all necessary consequence do by force of reason issew there hence,
you would never put the mattier in question. We find in scripture that eur
savior said in the consecracion of the blessed sacrament, This is my body,
that shall be desmered for you. And when the sense of this sentence is, as the
catholic church teaches, the very real presens of Christ's body to be in
the blessed sacrament: upon this sense, once settled, many labelles do
necessarily hang: not expressedly had in scripture, but by drifte of reason
out of the first verity gathered. And so did saint Chrysostom, S. Ambrose,
S. Basil, and S. Bernard, when they understood the sense of Christ's words
concerning the consecracion to be, as the holy catholic church understood
it. And not to have power in the parlour at Jerusalem only, where the
sacrament was first instituted, but in all places, where the thing was so
practiced, as Christ began it: Thereunto they saw they must needs confess by
drifte of argument that Christ's body is in diverse places at once: and of the
remainders of the accidents, you need no other proof, but your own sensis,
your iye, and your tastyng. And of the alteracion of the substance of bread,
the fathers in diverse ages saw it so depend upon the first verity, that they
have omitted no varietee of terms, to express it and to bring it into the
knowledge of the world. They have transmutation, transelementation, mutation,
conuertion, faction, afteration, transsubstanciation, and diverse other such,
that are not to be rehearsed now. You have taken upon you to control yt
counsel of Constance alredie: but now you will control the great counsel of
Lateran, where were so many learned clerks, as there were never more gathered
together. And the counsel of Valense, and the counsel of Rome, sub Nicolao,
and the general counsel of Florence, and the counsel of Basil. In the
which all your errors, concerning the holy sacrament, are overthrown.
Concerning your doubt how Christ's hodie is in diverse places at once, sithen
you believe no counsel that has determined that mattier, nor ancient fathers,
Greeks us Latins, I will send you to your great god Luther, in a littell book
that he wrote against the Swinglians, of the sense of the words of the supper
of christ. They yet remain undefaced. There he answers you at the full: Or
else to Brentius that great Cane, in the exposition of the article of
thassention in the first of the Acts: where he enterpreteth thereof at the
full: though very far in diverse poinctes from the sense of the church. Yet
may he not suffer that blind reason of yours to have his force in no case. It
is but a very fond daliance to braule upon the labelles, before you agree upon
the original veritee. The true sense of this littell sentence, This is my body
that shall be desiuered for you, Is the root and the original of all such
labelles as we teach, not mentioned in scripture expressly, but bulted out by
drifte of argument, as these are, (...) similitude for ^uwritte^^ ^ee^^^^^.
that offend you so sore. When the master says to his servant, make ready
that I may dine: he speaks nothing in these words of scommynge of the
pot, of cleans water for the potage, of the earbes to be chopped, of
scaldynge and drawing the Capons, of making after, of hewyng of woodde, of
laiyng the clothe, and other things necessary belongyng to his dinner. And
yet, if the servant would leave the pot vnscommed, herbs ungathered, make
potage with stinkyng water, put the Capon upon ye broche, feathers, guts and
all, because his master made no express mention of the particular orderyng of
all these: I ween no man would allow his wit or honesty. Because in his
masters first commandment all such necessaries are employed. And so we
answer you as your mother the catholic church has taught us. We need not
to show you of accidents, remainynge without any subject, nor of Christ's
body being in diverse places at once, nor of the adoracion of the holy
sacrament, nor of many other trifling doubts you make: because all such
doubts are answered to the full, in the oryginall verity of Christ's words,
being in the nature of the veritee, necessarily employed. As these are,
against the which you may kick, till you be very: but it lies not in you to
alter the nature of Christ's own words. If you had found in the scripture
spoken by Christ concerning the blessed sacrament. This is not my body, but
the figure of my body, being absent in substance, and only present to your
imaginacions, by the sight of the bread. You might have triumphed and blowed up
your horn lustely in every pulpit, and made your auaunte, that you had bin
able to controlle all christendom. But now the letter is very plain against
you, and the sense of the letter also, as the fathers do record in all ages,
and general counsels to: As may appear by your own mistrust for the space of
the last.ix. hundred years and odd. I take God to judge, I wrote not this for
any malice to such as are otherwise ^ente. I pity them rather, and daily
pray for them, that they may embrace the catholic faieth. But when I perceived
Goltas in his bravery, having trust in his big bones and strong weapons,
braggyng many times, as though there were none of the Israelites hable to
match him: Notwithstanding there are very many that could have handled him
better then I, being a man of small learning, troubled with much business: yet
I thought it my duty, for the honor of my mother the catholic church, to
hurl out four or five stones in David's sling against this champion: not to
hurt him in the forhead, as David did Golias, but to crushe in pieces certain
untruths that he taught. Wyshyng him as well to do as I would my self: And
all my country men of England to be ware, least they fall into the snares and
trappes that our ghostly enemy lays abroad every where: not only to hurt
their bodies, but to hurl down both body and soul into the deep dongeon of
hell. The which I beseech God most heartily geeue all men grace to avoid.

Amen.

An Answer in defense of the truth. Against the Apology of private Mass.

LONDINI Men's. Noue^b. 1562.

The chief poinctes touched in this defense of the truth.
Against private Mass, or soole receiving by the minister in the common place
of prayer.

Why the doctors call the sacrament of the Lords supper by the name of
oblacion or sacrifice.

Against communion under one kind.

Of reseruacion of the sacrament.

Against the arguments of multitude and long continuance of time.

Against the alleging of the aucthoritee and name of the church.

What is to be attributed to the ancient fathers.

Of real presence and interpretacion of christ's words, Hoc est corpus. etc.

The preface to the Reader.
IT is well known to a great number, partly by presence in hearing, partly
by wrytinge set forth of the same, that a worthy learned man and Bishop of this
Realm, stoutly in deed, as the matter required, and clerkly also, as learning
and knowlage taught him, did openly protest in certain Sarmons not to the
furtheraunce of untruth, as malice carpeth, but to the confusion of falshodde;
as the end proves: that, if any of those things, which he then rehearsed,
could be proved of the contrary side by any sufficient authority of the
scriptures, old doctors and ancient councels, or by any allowed example of
the primative church, then he would be contented to subscribe, and yield to
their doctrine. This his doing, as no less was to be looked for, sum men
depraved, many dispraised, all they misliked, that maintained such
superstitious errors, as false teachinge has trained people in, the space of
certain hundred years. And in deed, saying they hard their doctrine so
plainly defaced, and their wilful misleadynge of Christian men so openly to
be noted: a man may think they had good cause to startle at the matter, and
somewhat to look about them, lest they seemed altogether careless. Wherefore,
as diverse have dyuersly showed their mislikinge, so one of that party has in
writing privily spread abroad an answer to the forsaide offer or protestation
for private masses: wherein he both persuades him self, and would have other
also to believe, that he has so fully satisfied the parties request, as it
may seem great folly, and as he terms it, impudency, any longer to stay
upon it. One of the copies of this answer by occasion as it fortuned, not many
months sense lighted into my hands: which, I understand, is so spread abroad
in diverse places of this Realm, as there be few mislikers of the truth, but
they have it, and make such account of it, as a great number of the unlearned
sort stay their consciences there upon. Who the aucthour is, or what manner of
man, I neither know, nor can guess more, then he witnesses of him self in
the entrance of this treatise. Where he signifies, that once he embraced that
religion, which he now detesteth and writes against. In that part me thinks
he does deal, as fond men sometime are wont to do: which to displease their
enemies, stick not to hurt them selves also. So he, to discredit the
doctrine that he is revolted from, gives such testimony of his own naughty
life and conscience, as he would be loathe to hear at any man's mouth but his
own. All that time (says he) and neither regarded god, nor good relygion,
nor any good conscience beside. What malice it is to charge the doctrine, that
by hypocrisy he professed, with the cause of his evil doing, I will not
declare with such words, as the matter requires. This much I will say,
that he learned this of old Adams great counselor: Who at the beginning,
being blamed for his disobedyence, seemed to bourden God him self with the
cause of it: and excused his own folly by that thing, which his maker had
given him to his comfort and commodity. In like manner, when this man's
conscience, as it seems by his own words, accused him of lewd living and
lack of the fear of god, to excuse his own ill disposed mind, he casts
the fault upon the doctrine of the gospel, which God did open unto him
undoubtedly to his great commodity, if he would have taken it. And under this
pretense, both forsakes it him self, and by his example exhorts other to
eschew it. But as the wicked life of a man, to his own great harm, may be a
blotte to the religion, that he professes: so God forbid it should be
compted a full reprofe of the same, or a just cause to be of all other
rejected. If it were so, men should refuse Christianity, because diverse, not
of the basest sort, but of the heads of the Church, as their own histories
witness, have been of horrible and wicked life. But we must think, that the
hypocrisy and traitorous covetousness of Judas and his fellows is a confusion
to them self, but no just reproach to Christ that they follow, or to his
doctrine that they seem to profess. I will judge and hope better of this
writer, to whom with all my heart I wish much more good: trustinge that god
shall once again open his heart to receive the truth, which I cannot but
think God has taken from him in punishment of that naughty conscience, that
he witnesses has been in him self. But, what soever he be, let him stand or
fall to his lord god, I will not take upon me to judge him, neither would I
have spoken this much of him, but that he does odiously excuse his own evil
mind by the good doctrine of Christ's gospel. My purpose is to confute his
doctrine, I will not meddle with his person. I intend to answer his cauelinge
at other men's words and doings: I mind not to discredit or deface his
estimation or honesty. And yet in this point I know some may judge me
presumptuous and arrogant, that I seem to take upon me his quarrel, who is
far better able to answer for him self then I am. But I would desire
those, which so think, to consider: First, that this is a common quarrel,
touching not only him, that is named, but all other that either teaches or
believes as he does. Secondly, that he against whom this writing is directed,
either knows not that any such thing is spread, or if he do know it, either
thinks it not worthy answer of it self, or else has not at this present
such leisure, as he may intend to answer it. Thirdly and chiefly, that by
private conference with certain persons, I understand, perhaps more then
either he or any other does think, how much this treatise is esteemed among
many, which otherwise happily might be persuaded to embrace the gospel.
Therefore I have been moved the sooner my self, in such sort as I might, to
shape an answer unto it. For, to all such of the contrary opinion, as have
fear of God, and stay upon conscience rather then self will, I acknowlage my
self in christian charity to owe this much of duty, as that I should, to my
power, travail to lift this stumbling block out of their way, that it may
not be a let or stay unto them to come unto Christ, at this day by his word
calling them. Wherefore gentle Reader, seeing thou do understand my meaning
and the occasion of my doing, I will cease any more to trouble thee, and will
turn the residew of my talk unto the aucthour of this writing: with whom I
will make my entry there, where he first begins to confute the reasons,
that were alleged, why account should not be made to Docter Cole of that
religion that now is taught. In this part I will be the shorter, partly because
those things be sufficiently answered in the conference already published,
although this writer seems to dissemble it: partly, because the questions
have more captiousnes of words then profit of good matter.

The defense of the truth.
WHere you reason against my lord of Salesburee, 1. Cap.
for refusinge to bring proof of his doctrine because he was a Bishop, and at
that time preached before the Queens grace and her counsel: You deal somewhat
like with him, as you do afterward with the Doctors that you do allege.
For you first bring your own sense unto their words, and so allege them for
your purpose, where as they mean nothing less. So in the words of the
first epistle to Doctor Cole you apply your own sense unto them, and after
reason against it, as though it were his meaning. Whether this be to be compted
a cauilling, rather then a confutyng, I leave to the judgment of other. He
never said simply, A.
that he should make no recknynge of his doctrine, because he was a bishop. For
he does the contrary daily as well in his preachinge as otherwise. He never
said that the consent of the prince and realm was a sufficient proof of
doctrine in christian religion, as you would have men think of him by your
reasonyng against him. He said this, that, for so much as he was called to the
state of a bishop, and at that time uttered before the prince and her counsel
that doctrine, which was confirmed by the aucthoritee of the whole realm: he
might seem to do unadvisedly, I just cause of his refus^ll.
if he should make account thereof to a subject, and especially such a
subject as always has professed him self to muslike it, and at that time,
under pretense of learning, but in deed quarellyng, required a proof thereof.
Were it good reason think you, that a magistrate at the demand of every
subject should bring reason to prove any law publisshed by the prince to be
good, which the same subject would proteste to be an evil and unjust law, and
therefore would not obey it? If that should be so, a gappe might be opened to
every busy person to pick a quarrel against the law. If that should be so,
beside other inconveniences, he might seem to submit the judgment of the
prince and realm to the mislikynge of one waywarde subject. Which could not
be done without great impeachement to the princes aucthoritee, and wisdom
of the whole state of the common weal. That this was his meaning, it may
appear in those words, where he says he might not do it with out farther
license. Wherefore in this part of his answer, knowing with whom he had to
do, he respected his doctrine, as it was a law confirmed by the prince and
states of the realm: and not as it might be a controversy of religion before
the law publisshed. More over in that he is orderly called to the state of a
bishop (say you what you will to the contrary,) he is in possession of the
truth: And therefore it were not reason, that he should be requested first to
show his evidence and take upon him the person of the plaintiff: especially
toward those men that make exception to his possession, and claim the right
thereof them selves. He ought not lightly to give over to you in this poincte:
he ought to acknowledge and stand in defense of that benefit, whereby, through
gods word and aucthoritee of the prince, he is set in open possession of
that, which you before usurped. Seeing then it is the plaintifes part first to
show evidence, and he now (god be thanked) stands with other as defendante:
You do disorderly and contrary to reason to will him to do that, which by
order your self should first do. He proffered openly to give over to you, if
you could show any reasonable evidence for your part out of the scriptures,
doctors, or counsels: If you refuse it, all men will think, that either you
have no evidence at all to show, or else that, which you have, is such, as you
are well assured will not abide the trial. B.
In like manner do you mistake his restyng upon the negative. You write not
against his meaning, but against that your self conceiueth to be in his
words. He said not absolutely no negative proposition could be proved,
neither does D. Cole find so much fault with him for deniyng that a negative
might be proved (for him self had so said before) but with this, that to
grieve his adversary he would stay upon the negative, and put you of the
contrary part to prove the affirmative. Which was upon good reason done at
that time, to the end, as I think, that he might press upon you somewhat
narre, then other before had used to do. The cause why he might justly rest
upon the negative.
For whereas you have untruly borne the world in hand, and make your auaunte
continually, that the church has taught as you do these. xv. hundred years,
that the holy scriptures, aunciente fathers and counsels do make altogether
for your doctrine and against ours: he both wisely and learnedly did see, that
there was no way so fit either to drive you from this auaunte, or to declare
it evidently to be false, as to rest upon this true negative, that you have no
sufficient proof out of the aucthoritees before rehearsed. For thereby he
should either force you to show what you have, which in effect is nothing,
or else to confess that the chief poinctes of your doctrine by him recited be,
as they are in deed, clean beside the word of god and example of the
primative church: or, if you would not for shame confess it, yet that all men
in the end might perceive it is so, when that you neither would nor could
bring any sufficient confirmation of the same, by the scriptures, old fathers,
ancient counsels, or allowed example of the church by the space of. vi. hundred
years. I will declare the mattier by example of those things, that your self
takes in hand to prove. All the preachers of this time teach, that the right
use of the lords supper is to be celebrated in manner of a communion or feast
with company, and that as well the laytee as clergy should receive under
both kinds. This doctrine they say is according to Gods word and use of the
primative church and not the contrary. For proof thereof they allege out of
the scripture the Evangelists and saint Paul, in which appears evidently
that company was, and both kinds were indifferently used, and no
significacion at all of the contrary. For the primative church they bring
Justine, Dyonisius, Cyprian, Chrysostom and other (...) there he did of
purpose seek a shifte to cauille, or else in deed had nothing to say? Or if
you do think it reasonable, I will learn at your hand how you could prove
that negative by all your law or logike: I do scante think you will say that
a man may be orderly required to prove such mere negatiues. When a negative or
what kind of negatiues may be proved, I leave to be discussed in some other
place, as a question more mete for Sophisters in the paruise school at
Oxforde, then for dyuines in matters of weight and importance.

After your reasoninge against the causes, 2. Cap.
that, as you say, were alleged not to prove the negative, An answer to the
distinction of private
as it were to lay the ground of your controuersee for private masses, ye
begin with a distinction, that this term private may be taken after diverse
sorts: Either as contrary to common to many for the commodity thereof, or else
as sole receiving by a priest aloue without any company. In the first way, A.
you say ye never affirmed mass to be private, but to pertain to the behalf
of all states and sorts of men, whatsoever they be. In deed I were to blame
and very injurious unto you, if I would dente, that ye have been very
bountiful in bestowinge the benesite of your mass: and especially when money
was brought in abundantly. For then ye applied it unto high, to low: to
Princes, to private persons to absent, to present: to quick, to dead to
heaven, to hell, ye and to purgatory to: Over and beside that ye made it a
sali^e for all sores and a remedy for all mis^heffes. Here were a large feeld
for me to deseant upon the diverse abuses, that you applied it unto, contrary to
Christ's institution and ordinan^^: but that any Christian heart may rather
yerne and lamente to remember: so ungodly profanation of the holy Sacrament,
then to seek occasion pleasantly to daly in the rehersall and deluding of the
infinite vanyties thereof. The other signification of private in sole receiving
by the priest, not imbarringe any that is willing and ready to be partaker
with him, ye say the Catholic Church does and always has taught. And here upon
making your proposition, ye require a proof of the affirmative included in the
negative: that is, that every priest or any other ought, when he receives, to
have a company to receive with him. Why sir, is this the trust that you would
seem to have in the truth of your cause? is this the plain and sound
dealinge, that ye after profess to use? is this the leaving of all shifts,
where by ye may seem to cavil, rather then stay upon the chief profes of
your matter? Who sees not that even in the very entrance, mistrustinge your
quarrel, ye seek a shiste as it were by policy to help that, which in the open
feelde is not able to defend it self? This was no part of the challinge (as
you term it). This is not that ye pretend so earnestly to prove. The matter
is of private masses, and you make your issue in sole receiving. Is there no
difference, think you, between sole receiuinge and private mass: does every
one, that receives alone, say a private mass? Then may not only priests say
mass, but also by your own authorities after brought in, lay men and women
also. And yet your reasoninge in the residew of your treatise is such, as if
it were a sufficient proof of private mass to show, that some men and women
in certain cases received alone in the primative Church. But of your
arguments afterward. In this place ye shall give me leave to find that fault
in you, that Tussy in the beginning of his offices lays to Panetius: who,
intending to write of duty in behavior, omitteth the definition of the same:
where as every reasonable discourse ought to proceed of a viefe declaracion of
that, which is in controuersee. If ye had this done, I doubt not but ye would
rather have plucked your pen from the paper, th^^ have meddled with the matter,
that ye are now entered into. What private mass is.
I will therefore thewe you out of your own aucthours, what I take your
private mass to be. B.
It is a sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ used in the Church in place
of the Lords Supper, by one priest alone offered to God the father for the
sins of quick and dead: which, without any to participate with him, ha^ may
apply to the benefit of what persons and thinge^^ he lists. That it is a
sacrifice of Christ's body, that it is used in place of the Lords Supper, that
one may offerat for quick and dead, that it is in the priests power to apply
it, all your sort do not only without resistance easily confess, but without
reason stoutly defend. Therefore I shall not need to make any further prouse
of the parts of this description. I do therefore take private mass to be,
not only as you and some other patrons of your cause of late years have
wrested it, sense the ministers of gods truth in this latter time have driven
you to the best shifts of interpretacion: but as it was commonly used in the
world before, and as it is set forth in your schole men to the great defacinge
of Christ's death and passion. And yet ye shall not think that we of truth
can or ought to yield to the best of your interpretacions that ever I could
hear. Of this private mass that I have now declared to you, the challenge,
that ye take so greuousy, was made: And therein do I also at this time ioigne
issue with you, and say, that nether you nor any of your part will ever be
able to prove the same by the ho^y scriptures, ancient fathers, or allowed
councels: yea and because you urge the negative, that, with gods healpe, we
will abundantly prove the contrary. This will I do quietly and calmely,
without stormynge or tempestuous blustering either at you or at your doctrine:
as one most glad to bring you again to that heavenly truth of the gospel:
which, under the blasphemous names of falshode and phantasee, you declare your
self to have forsaken.

In the residue of your discourse ye would seem to take from us the true and
right rule to reform the church of Christ, 3. Cap.
that is, to prove that in doctrines and use of the sacraments al things
should not be reduced to the pattern of the Apostles time and the primative
church. Herein you do as they are wont, whose conscience does prick them
to have done amiss. For such always draw back and lurk out of the light:
being loathe to come there, where they know that truth would be tried. Even so
you, fearyng to be found fautie, would wring us from that rule, whereby all
truth in doctrine ought to be examined. To this purpose ye may seem to bring
three reasons. One is a rowlyng in of a rabble of such examples as no
reasonable man would deny unto you. The second is a resemblyng of the
primative church unto an infant in the swadlynge cloutes: and this latter time
to a tall man of perfect years and ripe age. The third is the comparison of the
times and the fervent charitee that then was, with the key-colde charitee that
now is. As touching the first, I cannot choose but greatly merueile at your
manner of reasonyng: which endeavor to prove the contrary of that, that no man
did ever affirm. Did ye ever here of any, A.
that would have all things without exception reduced to that very form of
the world, that was in the primative church? And yet your examples tends to
the (...) rupted, either with false opinions depraved, or with superstitious
ceremonies defaced, is it not full time think you to call for redress
according to the scripture and primative church? So to do we have good
example in Christ him self, and in his apostle S. Paul. When Christ would
purge the law from pharisaicall mitigations, and interpretacions, he had
recourse to ye first fountain and original: Math. 5.
saiynge, Dictum est veteribus. etc. Ego autem dico vobis. So he ruduced all to
the first fountain. In ye mattier of deuorseme^t he alleged not the Rabins
and late writers of Jews: but said, Ab initio non fuit sic. Countyng what
soever was added to the first ordinance of the law to be a corruption of it. S.
Paul mindyng to redress the abuse of this sacrament of the lords supper,
even in this poincte, that they took it in parts and not together, brings
the institution of Christ from the beginning and says: This have st received
of the Lord. Willing to alter nothing therein. The like does S. Cyprian
epist. ad Cecisium, against Aquarios. We must not harken (says he) what
other did before us, but what Christ first did, that was before al. And here
he speaks of the same sacrament, and against them that abused if contrary to
the first fou^dacion were they never so holy. This, Tertussian also takes to
be a sure rule against all heresies and abuses, who says in this wise, This
reason is of force against all heresies. That is true, that was first ordained,
and that is corrupted, that is after done. And Cyprian in the same epistle
before mentioned. Hereof (says he) arise divisions in the church, because we
seek not to the head, nor have recourse to the fountain, nor keep the
commandments of the heavenly master. Therefore, seeing it is so good a rule
in religion to resort to the first institucion, we also without any just
reproach may require to have the sacraments reformed, according to the
scripture and the primative church. But you think perhaps, although for
shame ye may not say it, that their successors in calder age of the church,
were of more wisdom and discretion, and know better what they had to do,
then the Apostles and old fathers. Thereto tends your similitude of bringyng
a talle man again to his swadlyng cloutes: B
therein resembling the primative church to infancy, and this latter time to
ripe age and discrecion.

That the primative church was not of the state of infancy.
This is not your only similitude: It is much in the mouths: of such as
maintain your doctrine. But, I assure you, it was never invented without the
spirit of Antichriste: nor cannot be maintened without blasphemy against
Christ, and singular reproach of his Apostles and their successors. If that
time were the state of infancy in the church, when Christ him self
instructed, when his Apostles taught, when the holy fathers governed next
their time: then we must needs reckon Christ, the Apostles, the fathers, to
be infantes in religion, to be babes in government of the church, not to be
able so well to se what was conueniente in the use of the sacrament, as their
posteritee were. Can any christian man's heart fall into that cogitacion
without fear of Gods wrath and displeasure? And yet that must needs follow
upon this defense of your doctrine. I pray you, when has a man best discrecion
to rule him self? Will ye not say, when he is most endued with the use of
reason and wisdom? When had the church of God such abundant wisdom and
knowledge of his heavenly mysteries? When was it endued with so plentiful
graces of the holy ghost, as it was in time of the Apostles and first fathers?
Did it not appear in their pure life, in their fervent zeal, in their
miraculous workyng? And will you then to defend your ceremonies affirm that
time to be the state of infancy in the church? Do you not remember, that
immediately after ye attribute to the primative church passing fervent charitee,
with exceedyng holiness of life, and contempt of the world? To this latter
time keycolde charitee, slack devotion, love of the world, and contempt of
virtue? Whereof I pray you comes this? Not because in the first time they
were strong in godlynes, abundante in lively spirit and grace of God? and we
now feeble and fainte to all virtuous doing, lackinge wisdom, and as it were
dotinge for age? For what other cause was young age of children called
infancy, then for that it had not the use of the tongue, nor could not speak?
But the primative Church could speak, and continually declare the good will
of God and his great benefits to his people. S. Paul spoke with a loud voice
and a strong spirit: Woe be to me, if I preach not the gospel. The same was
the voice of all the old fathers and godly men in the beginning. They were
occupied in nothing but either in teaching and confirminge truth, or in
reprouinge and defacinge falshode and heresee: but after. 600. years the
prelates of the church well nere clean lost their voices. Wealth of the
world, honor and riches had stopped their mouths in such sort, that within
few years it came to pass, that it was a rare mattier, and almost a reproach,
to see a bishop in the pulpite, and hear him speak to the people. Wherefore
ye can not so aprely resemble the primative church to infancy, as ye may this
latter time to dotinge old age: wherein they that should do nothing but
preach the word of God and teach the people, have either clean lost the
use of their speech through infancy and ignorance, or else babble they wot not
what, through dotage and folly: That ye may not think me to speak of stomach
more then truth, read the histories of this latter time, read those that
write particularly of the Bishops of Rome, see how many be praised for
preachinge to the people and for teachinge the word of god, either by
speakinge or writing. So that they may not only seem for age to have lost
the strength of their voice, but as it were with a paulsie to have lost the
use of their hands, onles it wear in wrytinge of decrees or fingringe of
pence. In that ye attribute unto the primative Church so good devotion, C.
An answer to the comparison of this time, with the primative church.
so earnest zeal, so feruente charitee, and there by that they came daily to
the receiving of the Sacrament: it is most true that ye say. But you must
again consider, that the often frequenting of the Lords Supper, by grace
therein conferred, did both breed and increase that same lively faith and
fervent charitee, that in mutual love and contempt of the world so
flourishingly did show it self in them. So that their earnest zeal did not
so much cause them to come often to the Lords Supper, as the often
frequenting thereof did increase their so great zeal and charitee. For by that
means it was always fresh in their memory, not only by hearing, but also by
feeling in them self, that they were all members of one body, all the children
of one father, all delivered out of bondage by one ransom, all fed with one
food, and norished at one table. And therefore that it was as meet and
necessary for them to embrace one another, as for one limme of the body to
healpe another: for one brother to love another: one delivered out of
thraldom to rejoice with the other: One household companion to tender the good
estate of the other. Therefore that kaycolde charitee, that you say, and truly
say, does reign in these days, may not more justly be attributed to any one
thing, then to your private mass. Cold charity is not so much cause of
private mass, as private mass is of cold charity.
For there by the common use and frequentation of the holy Sacrament of
unity, love, and concord, has been taken from among the people of God
being persuaded by you, that it was sufficient for them to be present in the
church, when one of you alone did say a private mass. You lay the cause of
private mass upon the keicolde charitee of the people: (and perhaps the
first occasion came thereof in deed) but your scaulding hot and firebourning
charitee may be more justly charged with the continuance thereof. And therefore
the people of God may worthily cry out upon the chief masters and
mainteiners of it: for all the mischief and diueleshnes either in naughtiues
of life, or corruption of doctrine, that the Church has been drowned in this
certain hundred years, may seem to be drawn in first by that occasion.
Hasten you (says signatiue) to the sacrament of thanks geninge and to the
glory of god. For when that is continually frequented, all the powers of the
devil are expelled. Then must it of necessitee be, that the slack use of the
same does bring in weakness of faith, coldness of charitee, contempt of
virtue, love of the world, and the hole heap of those things that the devil
most desires and chiefly shows his power in. Therefore, not without a
cause, that perpetual enemy of mankind quickly did seek occasion even in. S.
Paul's time to corrupt the right use of this Sacrament, and bring them to
faccions in receiuinge of it. He did well see of how great force it was to
maintain concord, love, and charitee: which is, as it wear, the very
cognizance of a Christian man. For that cause he indeueringe, as he does
always traitorously to train away the servants of God: first always by the
abuse of this Sacrament of unity, he, as it wear, cutteth of the cognizance
from their liueries: that, not being known whose Soldiers they are, he may
the sooner conueigh them into his camp, and there put on his badge of hatred,
malice, and dissencion. Your fault therefore in furtheryng his endeavor cannot
be excused: But is to be taken of Christian people as very grievous and
heinous. An objection.
But ye will say, that the priest does not imbarre any that will communicate:
that he would rejoice to se them dispose them selves unto it: that they do
lament to se the contrary. The answer.
These be fair words without any sound truth at all. I assure you sir, if
the matter were so indeed unfeignedly, and not you by force of truth against
you driven to seek that interpretacion for a shifte, your soole receiuyng had been much more tolerable. But when I pray you did any of you use in private
masses to call for the people? to reprove their slacknes? to show them the
danger of being priesente and not receiuyng? to tell them of the great
commoditees that comes by the use of it? When did any of you stand at the
altar as Chrisostom did, and cry for the people to be partakers: declaryng to
them, that, in being present at this heavenly feast as gasers and no receivers,
they did run into the indignation and displeasure of god: even as they,
which, being bid of a prince to a feast, and coming into the house where
tables be laid and furnisshed with meat, will stand lookyng on and eat none
of it, must of necessitee greatly displease that prince, whose provision and
furniture they do so disgrace. When (I say) did any of you follow his example,
whom unjustly ye bring for defense of your error? Is not the whole manner of
your Mass contrary to this? Do you not turn from the people? Do you not
whisper softly to your self? Do you not use a strange language, that neither
the people, neither the priests sometime do understand? Do you not persuade
them, that they may have the benefit of it, though they receive not the
sacrament? Chrysostom proves and other doctors witnesses, that those, that
be present and not receive, do wickedly and impudently: and you teach that,
being present and not receiuynge, they do holily and godly. If this be not to
teach contrary to the fathers and to the primative church I can not tell what
may be contrary. To conclude therefore, if the people be slack and not well
disposed to frequentyng of the sacrament, the fault is in you. And you, whose
duitie it was to warn and instruct them, shall make account for their decay
and perishing in their negligence. But the effect of your argument, wherein ye
allege the cold charitee of the people, there by to drive us necessarely to
grant sole receiuinge, tends to this end: if their devotion be so little,
as they will not with calling and exhortation dispole them self to receive,
wheather their we will (as your phrase is) pull the priest from the altar.
First, acknowlage and amend that saute of your mass, wherein appears neither
calling and exhortacion, nor gesture and language sit for that purpose.
Then, I say it wear better not only to pluck him from the altar, but also to
cast him out of the Church to, rather then he should under that pretense
both him self continually alter the institution of Christ, and also cause the
people being present, by Chrisostomes witness, to run into gods displeasure.
Moreover this keycolde charitee, that ye say the peoples hearts be frosen
with, does it stretche unto priests or no? Is their devotion any hotter?
surely their bourninge zeal, that of late time they have used, proves, and
their hole behavior to the world witnesses, that right devotion and true
charitee is even as little among your massinge priests, as among the
ignorante people. How happens then, that they do so offen frequent the
Sacrament in these days? There were never half so many Masses (though ye take
Mass for the communion) as there is in this time. Ye shall never read in the
primative church that they had more then one celebracion in a day: unless the
church were so littell, that it would not receive the communicants. (As Leo in
a certain epistle mencioneth.) But in your churches ye have sometime. xx. or.
xxx. and yet not two communicantes at any of them. Ye must then confess
either a great and horrible abuse of the sacrament: or else that your priests
devotion now is much mor then in yt primative church. But ye obiecte that
priests are bounden of duitie to the daily frequentacion of it, ^.
and the people left free. That would I feign learn at your hand, and se
some good proof of the scripture for the same. But I answer that you, which
say we have no color of scripture for that we herein defend, have less
then a light shadow to hide your false assercion in: and that in this ye speak
clean beside the word of god. Christ's institucion was general, and his
commandment therein stretches as well to the people as to the priests. Take,
cafe, drink you all of this, do this in remembrance of me, binds the people
as well as the priests. That ye may not reply, that all which were present
were priests, because they wear apostles, and so apply the sacrament unto
priests of necessitee, and to the people upon free pleasure: Understand you
that S. Paul, a good interpretour of Christ's mind, applies the same to the
whole congregation of Corinth: where, it is certain, were both ministers and
common people. As for the duitie of ministracion, whereby perhaps ye think
priests more bounden: Ye should not attribute more to the priest ministrynge,
then to Christ ministering. But Christ took the bread, gave thanks, brake it,
gave it to them present, willed them therein to remember his death. Then the
priest in his ministracion must do as Christ did, and no otherwise: that is
to take, give thanks, break and give unto the people. But why should he
break it, or how should he distribute it, if there be none present to
receive it. So that hereon I conclude the priest is not bound to minister, if
there be none to receive.

If we had no scripture at all to prove that the priest should not receive
without company: If ye did give us the overthrow in that: yet could ye not
triumph therein, as though ye had won the filde. It wear but the shiftinge
back of one winge of the battle, which ye might overthrow, and yet miss of
your purpose. Our contention is for private mass, and your purpose is to prove
your use of private mass to be good: of which sole receiuinge is but one
part: and yet have not sufficiently concluded that neither. For it follows
not to say, the priest in case of necessity, when none will receive, may take
the Sacrament alone: Therefore he may do it without necessity, when he may
have other to communicate with him. Do you never receive alone in your mane,
but ye he driven for lack of other? How happens then, that in one church
ye shall have at^one time. vii. or. viij. massing in sundry corners, where they
might communicate all together: as the manner was of the ministers in the
primative church? Is it of necessity or a purposed altering of Christ's
institution, when that ye turn it from a Communion and Supper, to a work that
one man may do to the benefit of many: and there by have made it a
merchandise to bie and fell for your own gain? What color or shadow have
you for this in the Scripture? Surely, wear my moderation much more then
yours is, I could not choose but term this, not an itchinge folly, but an
impudent wilfulnes, so plainly to goo against the express and appointed form
of the sacrament. F.
Because ye urge so earnestly to have dew proof against sole receiuinge by the
priest, if the people will not communicate: I will show you some reasons. But
before Ienter into that, I must warn you once again, that, if our reasons
wear not so well able to prove necessitee: yet could you not conclude your
purpose, for that your private mass is nothing less then necessitee. In
necessitee many things may be granted, that otherwise are not tolerable. The
thief, that Christ at his death witnessed should be with him in Paradise, was
never baptized: being excluded by necessity. The ancient histories make
menciou of diverse martirs, that died before they wear baptized, being
excluded by necessitee. And yet is this sentence neues the less true: Baptism
is necessary to a christian man. Likewise if was should grant your case of
necessitee, yet is this sentence always true: The supper of the Lord in the
ordinary use of it ought of necessity to have communicants to be partakers of
it. But ye shall hear the foundation of our proffes against sole receiuinge
by the priest in place of ministry: and they shall not be gaily garnished
with colors and amplifications, to make them appear more goodly then they be,
but plainly and nakedly set for the, that even the meanest may see what force
and strength they have. For I write not this so much to you, whom I know not,
as to an number partly of unlearned persons, partly young men lea^^ed, but not
much conversant in the scriptures, to whose hand, these your writings being
brought has boon greater face of proffe, then any man meanly conuersante in
the controuersees of this time: can acknowledge to be in them. Our proof is
this. In the celebration of this Sacrament of the: Prouffes against private
mass, out of the scripture.
Lords Supper we ought to do that only and nothing else, that Christ the
aucthour of it did in his institution. But in Christ's institution appears
neither sole receiuinge, nor ministering under one kind: Therefore in
celebration of this Sacrament neither sole recoun^^ge nor minystringe under one
kind ought to be used. The mayor is Saint Ciprian proved at large and much
stayed upon in his Epistle, ad ce^isium de sacramento sanguinis, in the
beginning whereof he seems to signify that by inspiracion he was admonyshed
of God, to advertise men only to do us Christ did in the institution of his
Sacrament. I thought if (says he) both godsy and necessary to write, if any
man continue in this error (he means using water only in the Sacrament instead of wine) that he, seeing the fight, do veturne to the root and
beginning of the lords ordinance and institution. And think not that I do
this upon my own fantasy or any humayne judgment. etc. but when one is
charged by the inspiration and commanndmente of god, it is necessary for a
faithful servant to obey: being hofden excused with all men, because he takes
nothing upon him arrogantly, that is compessed to fear the displeasure of
god, if he do not as he is bid. Do you know therefore that we be
admonished, that in offeringe the sacrament of the lord blood his own
institution should be kept and no other thing be done, then that the lord
did first for us him self? No man can make any exception to this proposition,
unless he will clean weaken Cyprians reason against those abusers of the
Sacrament. And then shall we have no ground to stay upon, but every gloss or
interpretation upon humayne pretenses shall be admitted. This assertion of
Cyprian is confirmed by Ambrose upon the first to the Corinthes. There he
says, that they receive the Sacrament unworthily which celebrate otherwise
then the Lord delivered it. For he (says Ambrose) cannot be deuouie, which
presumes to do it otherwise then the aucth our has taught. Yea and adds
that we shall make an account how we have used it. For the proof of the
Minor, let us consider the history thereof as it is set out in the
Evangelists. In the celebration of the Sacrament used by Christ there
appears two parts: the mattier and the form: The mattier is bread and the
body of Christ; wine and the blood of Christ, of which, he that alters or
takes away any, does alter and maime christ's institution, as appears by
Ciprian. The form of ministringe the Sacrament must be taken out of Christ's
doings. At that time it was taken, blessed with thanks geuinge, broken,
distributed, eaten, dronken, charge given to remember Christ and his death.
Therefore he that alters or takes away any of these things maimeth the form
of christ's institution, and breaks Ciprians rule. Moreover the force of
these words, Gave to them present, does bind to a company: because it
signifies a bestowinge of the death of christ not to one but to many.
Therefore in Luke he gives an express commaundmente of distributinge, as he
does of eating, and drinking: saying, Take you this and divide it among you.
But how can he deuyde it, it there be not a company to receive it: unless we
should, to the deludinge of Christ's ordeinance, make such a fantastical
breaking and dividing, as you do in your mass. For therein by Sergius decree
ye break it into three parts: the one of which ye let fall into the wine, which
there soked signisieth the body of Christ raised from death, and sittinge in
the glory: The other dry part, that the pryeste eats, signifies the body
of Christ being upon the earth. The third part, which is wont to tarry on
the altar to the end of mass, signifies the dead in the Sepulchers until
the day of judgment. O great vanities wherewith God punishes the rashness of
folishe men following their own fantasies, and leaving his holy word. But to
return to the proof of the mattier. I will follow Cipryans example, and
confirm the manner of Christ's institution by the testimony of. S. Paul. In him
I find two arguments. One is in these words, Vnus panis vnum corpus musti
sumus. Nam omnes de eodem pant participamus. Which words the holy fathers
interpreting, call the Lords holy supper a Sacrament of unity. Because that
as the bread consists of many grains, and the wine made of many grapes, so
we, that be partakers of that one loffe and one cup, should be knit
together in love and charitee, as the members and parts of one mistical body.
Wherefore Chrysostom notes that it is not said, this eats of one bread,
and he of another: but all be partakers of one bread: and adds why we be
one loffe and one body. Because of the common participacion that we have of the
sacrament. This significacion is clean taken away by private mass: the use
whereof may seem rather to be a Sacrament of separation and dispension, as
after shall more appear. The second argument out of Saint Paul is, where to
the Corinthes he reprehendeth the abuse of the lords Supper brought in by
dissension and factions, that wear among them. Whereby it came to pass, that
one company would not tarry for another to communicate, but one sort would
receive with out another. Against this abuse he allegeth the institution of
Christ signifienge the same to be against such receiuinge in parts, and
therefore exhorts them to tarry until the congregation came together, that
they might receive according to Christ's institution. That this was. S. Paul's
mind, it appears by his first proposition and reason, and by the conclusion
that he adds in the end. When ye come together (says he) ye can not eat
the Lord supper, where first it is to be noted that to the celebracion of the
sacrament they resorted together, and were not privately in sundry corners. He
adds the reason why they could not at their meetinges celebrate the Lords
supper. Because every man is occupied in eating his own supper. Herein Paul
blames them, not only for immoderate feeding of their own meat, but also
for the disordered vsyng of the Lords supper in parts: where as they should
be together, as Christ and his Apostles were. This he declares more plainly in
that conclusion, that he infers upon the rehersall of christ's words in
ordering the sacrament. For he says. Therefore my brethren, when ye come
together to eat the Lords supper, do you tarry one for an other. What can
more plainly declare that S. Paul took the right use of the sacrament to be
a common receiuynge together, and not a several use by one man alone. As if he
had said: In christ's supper ye se the master together with the disciples, the
table and the meat common to all, not so much as Judas the traitor excluded,
one lofe and one cup discributed among the whole company. Therefore when ye
come together ye must imitate the concord and equality, that he then used. If
he thought it an abuse in the Corinthes to receive in parts, he would count
it a far greater abuse for.x. or xii. to receive each of them severally in
one church, at one time, as though they were of diverse religions, or members of
diverse mystical bodies. If the Corinthes in receiuyng by parts were blamed of
Paul, for that they seemed one to contemn an other: may not pristes be as
justly blamed, because they seem in their private Mass to disdeine and
contempne the people? I will now therefore conclude with Cyprians words. If so
be both it be ordained by christ, and the same confirmed by the Apostle, that
we should do in this sacrament as our Lord did: we find that we steep not
that is commanded, if we do otherwise then Christ did. Seeing then Christ
used company in ordeinyng the sacrament of that holy feast and supper:
Priests also ought to have company in ministering the same. For the aucthoritee
of the primative church to confirm that this is ye right use of the
sacrament, Proufes against private mass, out of the fathers.
I will in this place bring in only two witnesses: which shall not speak of
this mattier lightly or by the way: but of very purpose declare the manner that
then was used among the people of God, allowed and confirmed by godly and holy
fathers. In so much that if any other manner had been then used, they could not
have omitted the same: especially seeing they professed to declare yt manner of
christians therein. Iustine the martyr in his Apology descriueth it thus.

After prayer we safute each other with a kiffe: then bread and the cup
mixed with water is brought to the chief brother, which after he has taken
giving praise and thanks unto the father of all in the name of the sun and
holy ghost, for a space he continues in thanks geuynge. After prayers and
thanks geuyng, the whole company says Amen. When the ministers geuynge of
thanks, and the peoples well wisshynge is finisshed: those which we call
deacons gene parie of the bread and cup, over which thanks is given, unto
every one that is present, yea and suffer the same to be carried to them that be
absent. This nourishment we call Eucharistiam, the sacrament of thanks giving.
A little after he declares the same thing again. On sunday (says he)
companies of the town and country come together. Where lessons of the
prophets and Apostles be read. When the clarke cease, the minister
exhorts and allureth them to the imitation of so holy things. Afier, we all
arise and pray. Then (as I said) bread and wine mixed with water is brought
forth, and the chief minister so much ae he can prays, and gives thanks,
the people syngyng Amen. Then the things consecrated are distributed to al
present, and be sent by the Deacons to those that be absent. The same form and
manner of celebracion of the sacrament with very little difference is witnessed
by Dionisius: who in Ecclesiastica Hierarchia after he has descriued a few
other circumstances, and noted that only they tarried in the church which
wear meet for the sight and communion of the divine and holy sacrament
adds this. After he has she, wen the gifts of those divine works he hoth
comes to the communion of the same him self, and also allureth other. When
the dynine communion is both taken and given, it ends in holy thanks
geuinge. Would a man desire any plainer testimony of the use of the Lords
supper in the primative Church? Does not all things agree with the institution
of christ and example of the Apostle? Is here any conjecture either of the
laitee receiving under one kind? or of sole receiuynge by the priest? or of
sacrifienge the body and blood of Christ for quick and dead? Is here any
word or ceremony that signifies such use to have been at that time? Yet (as
I said) these men write not of this mattier by the way, but of purpose
undertake to show the manner of the church in their days. And will you yet
continue to affirnie that we have no color or title in the scripture and
fathers for the reproffe of your private mass. But ye will urge, after your
manner, to have an express sentence, that forbids the priest to receive
without company. I answer Christ's institucion, the example of the apostels,
the common use of the fathers was other ways: therefore the priest should not
communicate without other. Ye have no express commaundmente that forbids
you to baptism in the name of the father only, but that christ's institution
was otherwise. Will ye therefore say that ye may without offense baptize in the
name of the father only? If christ's institution in baptism be a sufficient
forbidding of the contrary to be used: why should not his words and mauer used
in the supper forbid you to do the contrary? Ciprian (as I have said)
takes it for a full prohibition of the contrary: and if you will not, ye must
of necessity weaken his reasoninge against those that he writes: which did
bring even as good reasons and as holy considerations for their part, as ye
be able to devise any for yours. Now that I have in this manner-layed the
foundation of our proofs, I will proceed to examine the residew of your
arguments against us.

In recityng the authority of Chrysostom you bring in a similitude or
comparison, 4. Cap.
which of how small force they be in prouyng, your learning can not be so
little, but that ye must needs know. A.
Even as (say you) it is to be wisshed that al contencion and strife were
clean banisshed, and yet men are not to be forbidden to sue for their right
when they be injured: so is it to be wisshed that people were so devout, as
they would daily receive their howsill (for so ye term it.) And yet is not
the priest to be let to receive, when the people will not dispose them selves
unto it. Beside that ye conclude here only the case of necessity (which
healpeth the common use of your private Mass very little.) Ye make your
comparison between things very unlike and of nature diverse: that is, between
possible and impossible, and lawful and unlawful. That all cotencion should be
banisshed from among men in this world is a thing impossible, and a
perfection not to be looked for in this frail life. But in a christian
congregation to have some of the people or ministers to communicate orderly
with the chief minister celebratynge is a thing so possible, as both the
space of many hundred years it was continually used in the church, and may at
this day with good example and instruction of the ministers be brought to
pass, although not every day, yet very often times. Moreover to sue for ones
right is not only a thing suffered, but of it self lawful and good: and we
have thereof example and aucthoritee in gods word. But for the priest to
minister the lords supper alone, is a thing neither tolerable nor lawful,
but contrary to the form that Christ him self used, neither have we either
aucthoritee or example in the scripture as a sufficient warrant to alter that
form that he used and apoincted. Therefore your comparison is fautie on both
parts: and especially for that ye seem to gather thereby, that it is no more
necessary for company to receive with the priest, then it is to have all
contencion banisshed from christian men: which, as I have said, in the
frailtee of this woride is impossible. If such similitudes should be allowed, a
man might break all gods commandments, and yet prove him self not to do
amiss. Is not this a ioyly reason think you? As it is to be wisshed that all
variance and strife were clean abandoned from among christian men, and yet
are not they to be forbidden to sue for their right, which be injured of other:
so it is to be wisshed that all unmarried priests did live chaste: but if they
can not, the bishop must not forbid them to have a^coosen of theirs to keep
their house, with whom, Si non cast, tamen caute. This comparison is as
rightly applied as yours is, and yet, how well it proves. I will make your
self judge. All your drifte in this part is, by alledgyng the corruption of
the world and slacknesse of devotion, to signify, that the people can not be
brought to communicate with the priest: and therefore of necessity that he may
receive alone. But, be the world never so corrupt, I think it as impossible,
to have a priest to celebrate devoutly every day: as it is to have some of the
people often times to communicate with the priest. Wherefore I may as
effectually conclude, upon the corruption of this time, that priests can not
be brought devoutly to Mass every day: as ye do, that the people can not
dispose them self, in this cold charity, godly to frequent the sacrament.
And then were ye best to restrain your daily massynge priests, and apoincte
them, either to once, or at least to fewer times in the year: as ye have taken
order for the people generally to receive only at Caster. B
But the priest (say you) is bound to offer up the daily sacrifice for
himself and for the people. This is the root of all the abuses of the Lords
supper, that ye have brought into the church of christ. This is it, wherewith
ye do pitifully deface the death and passion of Christ, making your selves,
for your glories sake, as it were means of reconciliacion between god and his
people. This is it, that has discouraged christian people from the often use
and frequentacion of the Sacrament. For hereby ye signify, that, of
necessity, it apperteineth only to the priest, and (as you wrote before) the
people to be left free to come as seldom as they will. This ye take for the
ground of your reason in this place: and yet within few lines have twice
rehearsed it without any proof at all. But in deed ye must of necessitee
leave yt unproven: that ye be not in any wise able to prove. For, sure I am,
that neither the institucion of Christ makes mention of any oblation or
sacrifice to be done by the minister, sauinge only the sacrifice of thanks
giving: for yet the scripture apointeth any bounden duty for the priest more to
use the sacrament then other godly and well disposed christian men. What
significacion have you in the words that christ used in ordeining the
sacrament, or in the manner of his doing, that he then offered him self to
his father? He did that the next day after him self upon the cross, as S.
Paul says, perfectly once for ever: neither does he grant his privilege of
the everlasting priesthodde to any, but to him self. Therefore when your
priests take upon them his office to offer sacrifice propitiatory: they go
beyond their commission, and take more upon them then their duty, not without
just reprehension of arrogancy and presumption. Christ's institution (as the
evangelists and S. Paul sets it forth) is a teaching that he gave to us
his blessed body and blood: and not that we should offer it up to god the
father. He said, Take, eat, do this in remembrance of me, he said not,
give, offer, and sacrifice for your sins. A sacrifice is a thing given to
God: the sacrament was a thing given to us. Nothing therefore can be of
nature more contrary then your sacrifice, and christ's sacrament. Wherefore it
must needs be that ye sucked this error out of the phrases and fashions of
speaking, that the old fathers used, peruertinge the same to a far worse
sense, then ever they meant it. For wh^ causes the Lords supper is called of
the De^tours a sacrifice. 1.
This thing more evidently to declare, it behooves to consider, that the
fathers upon diverse occasions used to call the Sacrament, by the name of an
oblation or sacrifice. First, Csemens, Asexander, Teriussian, Jraenens and
other make mention of a certain oblation or offering that Christen people
commonly used, when they came together to celebrate the Lords Supper. In this
they offered up bread, wine, and victuals abundantly, not only to serve the
communion (as we had a shadow of late years in the holy lofe): but also that
of the overplus thereof as well the ministers might have their findinge, as poor
people also be refreshed. Hereof partly it came to pass, (the erample being
taken first of the common people) that the admynistracion of the Sacrament,
of this offeringe, was called an oblation. As in Jraeneus sib. 4 cap. 32. He
taught us a new oblacion of the new testamente: which, the church taking of
the apostels, offers up to god in all the world. But in other places after,
as in yt. 34. cap. he expounds him self and signifies that he speaks not
of the offeringe of the Sacrament consecrated, but of the bread and wine
offered: partly, to the use of the supper: partly, to the findinge of the
poor. Vt behoneth us (says he) to offer to god the first fruits of his
creatures. And again a little after. We must make offeringe up to god and in
all things be found thankful to god our maker, offeringe up to him the first
fruits of his creatures, in pure mind, in faith without hypocrisy, in firm
hope, in fervent love. And this pure offeringe the church only offers to our
maker, geuinge to him part of his creatures with thanks geuyng. Instine also,
in his Apology, affirms: that, after the communion, all that would offered to
the behalf of poor people, fatherless children, and sick persons. An other
occasion that the doctors used those terms of sacrifienge and offeringe was,
that in celebration of the Sacrament, they had prayer for all states, and
thanks giving to god for all his benefits: which the doctors in infinite
places affirm to be the true and only sacrifice of the new testament. Csemens
Asexan. Strom. 7. sib. Of god reioiseth to be honored, when a^ by nature he
needs nothing: not without good cause we honor him with prayers, and send up
to him that most excessent and holy sacrifice. And after in process of writing
he gives the same name to the reading and study of a godly man. Whereby it may
appear (as Saint Augustine also signifies) that the fathers called every
good and godly action a sacrifice, wear it private or common. And therefore
their successors, by little and little bente the same name unto the action and
celebration of the Sacrament: wherein most solemly prayer and thanks geuinge
were offered. So writes Jraeneus sib. 4. cap. 34. We offer to him not as one
that needs, but giving thanks for his benefits to us. And again. He will
have us to offer our gift to the aulier often times: our anlter is in heaven.
For thither our praiere and offeringes be directed. To this agrees Eusebius de
demonstr. Euang. sib. 1. We offer (says he) to the most high god a sacrifice
of praiser we offer a full, sweet, and holy sacrifice, after a new sort,
according to the new testament. And that ye may not obiecte, that in this place
he speakech not of the sacrament: It follows in this wise. net my prayer be
made as intense in thy fight. Therefore we do sacrifice and burn incense to
him: sometime, celebrating the, remembrance of that great sacrifice, according
to the mysteries instituted by him self, both giving thanks to god for our
salvation, and offering holy hymns and prayers unto him: some time,
consecrating and bequethinge our selves holly to him both in body and mind.
Here he speaks of the sacrament and makes no mention of any sacrifice
propitiatory, but only of the sacrifice of remembrance by prayer and thanks
geuinge, and of the offeringe up of our selves to god: which is the offering
of Christ's mistical body, that, saint Augustine speaks of in diverse places:
Of whose testimonies ye are wont to bring some for the confirmation of your
sacrifice. As that he has, De ciuitate dei. The sacrifice (says he) that we
offer is Christ's body. But immediately he declares, that he meant his
mystical body, that is, the unity of the faithful congregation. For he
adds. which we offer not to marti^s, because they be the same body them
self. How the bishop or chief minister offers up the people in the
communion, he shows in his. 59. Erist^e a^ Pausinu^ Another cause, 3.
that the holy fathers call ye sacrament an oblacion or sacrifice is, because,
according to christ's ordinance, we celebrate the remembrance of his death and
passion: which was the only, true, and perfect sacrifice. And so may ye
perceive, that Eusebius did take it in the place before recited. For he says,
we sacrifice, celebratinge the remembrance of that great sacrifice. etc.
Chrisoston^e likewise Hom. 17 ad Ebreos. After he has in many words declared,
that there is no more but one sacrifice once offered by Christ for ever, he
adds this. Do not we then offer every day? yes verily we offer, but doing it
in remembrance of his death. And again, That we do is done to the remembrance
of that was done Before. Saint Augustine also de fide ad petrum, declares the
same very plainly. Belene steadfastly (says he) and in no wapee doubt, that
the only begotten of God, being made flesh for us, did offer him self a
sactifice to God as a sweet savor. To whom with the father and holy ghost in
the old testament beasts were offered: and to whom now, together with the
father and holy ghost, with whom he has one divinity, the church cease not
to offer the sacrifice of bread and wine. (He says not of the body and blood
of Christ.) For in those carnal sacrifices there was the figure of the flesh
of Christ: which. etc. but in this our sacrifice, there is a thanks geuinge
and remembrance of the body and blond of Christ, that he gave and shed for v^.
Here he says not, there is an offering of the body and blood for our sins,
which he would not have omitted, if the church had taught so in his time. For
some of these causes before rehearsed, the fathers used to call the Lords supper
a sacrifice: not meaning, as you do, yt it was a sacrifice propitiatory to be
offered of ye priests for them self and for the people. This your facion of
speaking ye seem to take of the manner of ye Iewisse priests: which had an
offering for them and the people. As though Christ had left to us a like
sacrifice, as they had, daily to be repeted: where as S. Paul in his whole
Epistle to the Ebrues reasons against it: and proves the contrary, that
Christ did it perfitly once for ever, in such sort, that it needs not to
be reiterated. But perhaps ye will obiecte S. Cyprian, where he speaking of
the dead says. We offer sacrifice for them. But it is evident he offered
there for Martiers: which, he was thoroughly persuaded, were in heaven, and
needed no offering for their sins. Likewise Ambrose mencioneth, that he
offered for Valentinia^ the good Emperor: of whom (in the oracion made at his
burial) he witnesses that he doubted not of his salvation, but believed, by
the witness of Angels, that he was carried to heaven. Therefore their offering
for the dead was no more, but, as I mentioned before, the sacrifice of praise
and thanks geuynge to God for them. This thing the Greek Cannon declares
more plainly: where it is mentioned, that they offered for the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, ye and for the blessed virgin Mary the mother of God. For
whose sins, it can not be, that they offered: which, by the testimony and
faith of the whole church, be with God in heaven. This thing is well descriued
by Chrisostom upon the. 8. cap. of Math. Therefore (says he) the priest
standing at the auster, when the sacrifice is proposed, commands us to offer
thanks to God for the whole world, for them that be abset, for those that were
before us, and for those that shall come after us. The same Chrysostom also
calls this their offering, Rationalem cultum, which ye can not interpret
a propitiatory sacrifice, but a reasonable worshippyng of God by prayer and
thanks geuyng for his holy saints: by the which he has builded his
church, and which now remain as members and parts of his mystical body:
whereunto we also, by the celebration of the sacrament, be ioygned, and so, as
it were, kniffe in unity with them. This was their offering for the dead, and
not a practice to pull souls out of Purgatory for merchandise and money, as
ye have used in your private Masses a great number of years, to the great
defasing of the death and passion of Christ. Wherefore your Mass can not
justly be called the Lords supper, but a peruertyng of the institution and
ordinance, clean to an other purpose and end, then he willed to be kept
among his people. For the Lords supper (as I said before) is a gift of God
to us: which we must receive with thanks geuyng. Your sacrifice is a price
to be paid to God, and of him to be taken as a satisfaction. The Lords supper
is a remembrance of one perfect sacrifice: whereby we were once sufficiently
purged from sin, and continually are revived by ye same. Your sacrifice is a
daily offering up of Christ for our sins: as though it had not ben
perfitely done at the first. The Lords supper is to be distributed in the
common assembly of his people, to teach us the communion whereby was all be
knitte together in Christ Jesus. The use of your sacrifice in private Mass
seems, by the priests se^le receiuyng, to be a testimony of seperacion, and
a mean to bring the communitee out of christian men's minds. For, after they
once believed, that priests must sacrifice for them: they began to leave the
communion, and frequentation of the sacrament, as a thing either not
apperteinyng, or very little apperteining to them, but especially to priests.
And, by that means, the way was made to your common use of private Mass. So
much difference therefore as is between to geeue, and to receive: to remember
one perfect sacrifice, and daily to reiterate a sacrifice: to celebrate in
common as a testimony of unity, to creep in corners or by chapels as a sign
of separation: so much difference is there between the sacrament by Christ
apoincted, and the sacrifice of the Mass by you devised. This have I spoken
more largely of this mattier, then either I purposed, or you gave me occasion
by any proof brought for the confirmation of your sacrifice. First, because
this is an other great abuse in your private Mass, that yes take upon you to
defend. Secondly, that I might declare the ground of your reason to be very
weak, where ye affirm the priest to be bound of duitie to sacrifice for him
self and for the people. Thirdly, that I might answer more aptly to
Chrisostomes authority, which next is to be examined.

The place of Chrysostom, 5. Cap.
that you allege, is otherwise in him, then you recite it. A.
For he says: Frustra habetur quotidiana oblatio, Frustra stamus ad altar:
nemo est, qui simul participet. In vain we have our daily offering: in vain
we stand at thanlter: there is no man to communicate with us. As touching
those words that ye most beat upon, An answer to Chrisosto^
There is no man to communicate, by them to prove, that they received only at
Easter, and, at other times, there were none at all to communicate with the
ministers: I will show you out of Chrysostom him self, that they must of
necessity have an other sense: and that in those words he uses that figure
of aggrauatinge, that he commonly uses in all places. For even in the same
place, D.
not many lines before the words that ye recite, he declares that a number
used to receive at certain other times. C.
I se many (says he) rashly, not passing how, and more of a custom then
lawfully and of good consideration, to be partakers of christ's body. If the
holy time of lent were at hand (say they) if the day of Epiphanie were come:
having no regard what he is, that is partaker of the mysteries. But the time
of cumming to it, the Epiphanie, the holy season of Lent does not make them
worthy that come: but the sincerity and putitie of mind. Do ye not here
perceive, that many used ordinarely to come to the Communion at the Epiphanie,
and in lent, as well as he mentioned before at Easter? how can ye then gather
by Chrysostom that there was no company to receive but only at Easter? but
what if I declare out of Chrysostom, that some used to receive oftener times?
will not your collection upon this place, that ye seem to triumph upon,
appear to be of very small force. Hom. 17. ad Hebreos. Many (says he) take of
this sacrifice once in the whole year, some twice, some oftener times. Hereby
it is most evident, that Chrisostom had other to communicate with him at
diverse other times beside Easter. The manner was (I grant) that some of
custom addicted them selves to certain days. And in some places the bishops
or sinodes appointed men to receive, once, twice, thrice or four times in the
year (as Augustine witnesses). Concilium Eliberinum apoynteth to communicate
thrice in the year. But these prescripte times were ordained only for them,
that used seldom to come to the sacrament, that at the least, they should
receive at those times, if they would knowlage them selves to be of the
church. Notwithstanding they did not only lean free to other to frequent the
sacrament, but earnestly calls them to it at every assembly of the people. As
Ambrose grievously blames the custom of many in the East parts, that used to
come but once in the year: and says, that he, which is not meet to receive
every day, will not be meet to receive once a year. Therefore as in the
primative church very many in diverse places used to be partakers of the
sacrament, but ones, twice, or thrice, in the year: so it is evident, that
diverse other better disposed did receive with the bishop and ministers at
sundry other times. That forte, because they were not so many as they should
have hene, and as Chrysostom wished for to have in his church, to exaggerate
their slacknes, he says, There is none to be partaker with be. Meaning
that they were very few and seldom in comparison of that their duitie was.
But if ye will stand upon these few sillables, Nemo est, to prove that sometime
the minister received alone: I answer, all be it this place did prove, that
none of the common people would communicate, whose slacknes, he there
reproves: yet ye cannot by this testimony declare, that none of the ministers
or the clergy received with him heynge bishop there. For the manner was not
then, as you do use it now, that every priest received particularly at an
altar by him self: but all the mynisters and clergy did communicate together
with the bishop or chief minister that celebrated. This to prove true,
although I could bring in many examples and testimonies, yet I will content my
self with one, that your self puts me in mind of, in recitinge afterward
the.14. cannon of Nicene counsel: for therein order is taken by that holy
counsel, that the deacons should not minister to the bishop and priests, nor
receive before them, but after in order as it seemed more convenient. Look for
further declaration of this, in examininge the cannon that ye afterward
allege. Wherefore this your place of Chrysostom does not sufficiently
justify sole receiuinge by one minister, as ye would have it seem to do, for
proof of your private mass. But if I should flatly deny, that the mynister
received, when none of the people were partakers, how could you prove it by
this place? Ye will say, because he calls it, Quotidianam oblationem, and the
people, as appears, did not every day communicate. I answer, he named it
Oblationem, either for that it was done in the remembrance of Christ's
sacrifice, or for the offeringe up of the bread and wine to the celebration of
the Lords supper: he called it Quotidianam, to the inmitacion of the sacrifice
of the old law: not because it was every day done without intermission, but
for that it was oftentimes celebrated: that is, so often as the people
assembled together to the church or common place of prayer: as he him self
witnesses upon the. 8. chapter of Matthew. At which times he always had,
either some of the people, or the residew of the mynisters and clergy to
communicate with him: as the manner of that time was. But ye will here dally upon
the proper signification of this word, B
Quotidianum, every day without intermission, every day daily sacrifice, every
day mass, every day at the altar. Then must you give me leave as extremely
to urge these two sillables Frustra, in vain is our oblation, in vain is our
sacrificing, to no profit or commodity is our mass, in vain we stand at
the altar, because it is done without company to receive with us. And surely,
if a man rightly consider this place, he may justly marvel, why ye would
allege it for private mass. For in deed there is no thing, that has any
color for it, but only the wreasted argument, that you wrynge out of the sound
of these words, Quotidiana obsatio, and Nemo est qui parbicipet: by the tone
part gatheringe, that the people then used to receive only at Easter, as they
do now: by the the other, that the priest received every day, and there upon
conclude your sole receiuinge. Which your collection of how small effect it
is, any man may perceive, if he consider these two things before declared.
First, that at that time all the ministers received together, as it shall be
afterward more plainly proved by your own testimonies. Secondly, ye I have
evidently showed out of Chrysostom him self, that many used to receive at
diverse other times of the year beside Easter. For in deed he does not there
blame the general manner of all without exception, but of a number, that
addicted them self either to Easter, or some other times, whether they were
meet, or unmeet: And at other common seasons would not frequent the
sacrament, though they were more mete to receive. But these were not al (as I
said) but a number of the common people: and ye residew of the better disposed
were so few, as oftentimes when the lessons of scripture wear read, when
prayers and thanks giving were made, when bread and wine were (as the manner
was) offered up for the communion: (which were the first parts of celebration
as appears in Iustine) then he was compelled either to suffer the ministers
and clergy to receiure alone: or else for lack of communicantes to leave of
the residew of the ministration. And that is it, that be complains of, and
says is done in vain: because it was vnperfitly done. For the preparinge to
communion, the prayers and thanks geuinge for that purpose, the offeringe up
of bread and wine, the calling of the people to it, may seem to be in vayns,
when none did come to participate with the mynisters. Wherefore Chrysostom in
this place does not only nothing confirm private mass, but also makes very
much against it: and declares, that he took the right and true use of the
Lords supper to be, when the people were together partakers of the same. For
if he had taken it as you do, for an offeringe up of the body of Christ for
him self and the people, Or if he had at such times received alone, and
thought it well done, he neither could nor would have said: Frustra babetur
quotidiana obsatio, in vain we have our daily offering, giving no other reason
why it was vain, but because the people at such times did not receive.
Therefore it appears by those words, both how necessary he esteemed the
peoples communion, and also that he took not Oblatione^ for a propitiatory
sacrifice, as you do. For then he could not have said frustra habetur. To
this purpose it makes, that the same Chrysostom in the same place so
earnestly calls the people to it: as he says to them: Whosoever is not
partaker of the mysteries, does impudently and wickedly to stand there. And in
the. 17. Hom. upon the epistle to the hebrews, he signifies, that the manner
then was, that a deacon stood in a place higher then other, and with a sign of
his hands and a loud voice called the people to the communion. This was not
only at Easter, but at other times also. By this earnest manner of calling,
therefore it may appear how much this doctor took it to be of the substance of
the Sacrament, that a number should be partakers of it: and how far diverse
his manner was from the fasshion of your private mass. Now then your amplyfied
conclusion, wherein ye claim Chrysostom to be wholly with you, shows it self
to be very vain. And we may now, as justly say as we did before, that ye
have no proof out of the ancient fathers, for that ye do herein so earnestly
defend: And that we have right good testimonies both out of the scripture and
out of the Doctors against it. For ye must not use to ground doctrines upon
the conjecture of a few sillables in one sentence: but compare the same with
diverse other places, as well of the same doctor, as of other, and al together
with the common use and manner of that time: and thereby gather a perfect
conclusion. If you will skanne and stay upon every word or clause in the
Doctors, as you do of the holy scriptures, and not consider them by
conference with them self and other: you may easily erecte infinite new
doctrines, that hitherto were never heard of in the church.

The reason, 6. Cap.
that you bring in, grounded (as you say) upon our principal, is even of as
much force, as the other before mentioned. A.
That is not evidently determined in scripture (say you) ought to stand as
indifferente: but the necessity of company to receive with the priest is no
where determined: ergo it ought to remain indifferent. Your second
proposition is not true. For I say, and partly before have proved, that it is
determined in Christ's institucion. In Luke he says, Accipite hoc and diuidite
inter vos. But how can it be taken at the ministers hands and divided or
distributed among the^, unless there be a company. I se no sufficient
warrant, that ye can bring us for the discharge of this commau^demente. If ye
will say Diuidite is no commandment, but a counsel, that may be undone, and
yet the substance of the sacrament remain: then bylike ye will say, Late,
drink, is no commandment: nor yet, do this in remembrance of me. But all be
indifferent counsels that may be altered (as you after say) by spiritual
governors. So that your spiritual governors may by this means clean alter
Christ's institution: and leauinge out eatinge, drinking, distributinge, doing
in remembrance of Christ's death, (as they have done) devise a a new fashion of
their own brains more fit for the church to use, then that order which
Christ has left. But as he takes away the right use of the sacrament, that
takes away from it, eating, drinking, and doing in remembrance. etc. So I
say that he takes away the same, that leaves out distributynge. Which
because it can not be without company, I conclude the Sacrament can not be
used in the celebration without company.

Cyprian teaches you, that Christ's institution should be of more authority
with you, than, so lightly, to change it at your own pleasure. Only Christ
(says he) is to be heard in the order of this sacrament. And we must not in
any wise depart from the precepts of the Gospel. The Apostle also more
constantly and stoutly declares in an other place, that the disciples ought to
observe and do the same things, that their master taught and did before
them: saying in this wise. If either I or an angel from heaven teach you
otherwise then I have taught you before, accursed be he. Seeing therefore,
neither the apostle him self, nor an Angel from heaven can tell us or teach
us otherwise, then that Christ has once taught us already, and the Apostle
declared to us: I marvel how this came in use to do contrary to that which
Christ did. And what I pray you can be more contrary, then, when Christ had
them drink, to take away the cup: and, when Christ bad them distribute among
them, and S. Paul willed one to tarry for an other, until they came
together: yet contrary to this (as you do) to minister and receive alone.
Therefore I say with Cyprian, that in alteryng the sacrament, either by soole
receiuyng or geeuing under one kind, ye worship God in vain with men's
tradicions. The mattier that Cyprian wrote against (that is) vsinge of water
alone in the Sacrament in steed of wine, might perhaps, in case of
necessity, be granted to some, that of nature could not abide wine.
Nevertheless the necessity of a few is not to be drawn to a general example
in the common use of the Lords supper. Even so it may be granted that in
cases of necessity one may receive alone: and yet that is not to be taken for
a common manner and fashion in the church, when the sacrament is celebrated, as
you used in the private Mass. That many circumstancies of place, person, and
time, B.
may be altered or taken away for good considerations, without impeachement to
the right use of the sacraments, we grant you: but that company in
receiuyng is one of those circumstances, that we can not grant: as well for
the reasons before declared, as also that we have no aucthoritee or example of
the Apostles or primative church, that we may so do, as we have in all
other things that you recite with more words then needs. We dare minister
in other places then Jury, because we se in scripture, that the Apostles did
so.

We minister to women and lay men: because S. Paul applies Christ's
institucion to the whole congregation of Corinth: where were both lay men and
women. We celebrate upon any day indifferently, because the Apostles did so,
Actum. 20. vno die sabbatorum. We minister to fewer or more then twelve, by the
example of the Apostles in.20. of the Acts, and of Paul in.10. and.11. to the
Corinthes. We receive in the morning, both because time is a thing indifferent
in this sacrament, and also for that we have plain examples in the primative
church, without case of necessity or extraordinary chaunses. Christ said
not do it after supper, as he said, Divide it among you. He did it after
supper him self: because he would institute the Sacrament of the new law, in
place of the sacrament of tholde law, that at the same supper he had
celebrated. Neither is it so much of the substance of the sacrament to be
done after suppper, as it is to be celebrated with company: because of the
significacion of unity and charity among christian men receiuynge together.

Which is one chief poincte in this sacrament of the Lords supper. The very
proporcion and likeness of that ceremony of the old law, in place whereof
the Lords supper is ordained, may teach us the right use of it. The Passover
was a solemn eating of the Pascale lamb together in remembrance of Gods
great benefit of their deliverance and passing of his plague from them. This
ceremony they could not solempnice alone: but if they had not company of
their own house, they should take of their neighbors. Even in like manner
Christ, having finisshed at his last supper the celebracion of that ceremony
of the Passover, ordained for his, even a like sacrament, a supper, a feast,
wherein they, being together, might celebrate the remembrance of their
redemption, by his body and blood geeuen and shed for them. And even as the
Jews in solempnisinge their sacrament had a community of the remembrance of
that benefit, when their companies were in sundry howses separate, and yet
might not one alone eat the pascall lamb in his own house, for that god had
ordained it to be done with company: so all the churches in the world have
community in the sacrament, be they never so far a sunder: and yet can not
any one alone minister it in one church without company to celebrate with him,
because Christ's institution was otherwise. Will ye say here, that company to
eat up the pascal lamb was not of the substance of the sacrament, but an
ornament to commend it or set it forth, and might be altered by spirytual
governors? Although the Jews wear very bold in altering many ceremonies,
yet we read not, that ever they durst altar this chief sacrament: as you
take upon you to alter, change and take away, by your spiritual governors,
all the parts of the Lords Supper: as I will declare to you in order by the
doctrine of this your defense of pryuate mass. The sacrament, as it is in use,
has two parts, the mattier, and the form: the mattier is bread and the body,
wine and the blood of Christ. The form of ministration is, that the minister
should take the mattier, and with the words of the gospel give it to them
present, as Christ did. This form (say you) may be altered by your spiritual
governors. For sometime the priest may receive alone with out the people,
sometime the people without the priest: sometime both together. So that no
certain form of ministration is needful (as you say) in this sacrament to be
kept. The mattier also, ye signify, may be altered at your pleasure. For, to
receive the sacrament of the blood, is not of the substance of Christ's
institution. For, if it wear, the church could not alter it, as you do
commonly in ministringe to the people, and as you conjecture by Tertus. and
Ciprian, that they did in the prymatiue church. Likewise the sacrament of the
body is not so much of the substance, but that upon considerations the church
may commonly omit it, and minister the wine only. For so you seem togather
by the history of the child, in Ciprian, to which the priest gave only wine,
as you say. So that the sacrament of the lords supper, by your doctrine,
either has no part, that is of the substance of it, but consists only of
mutable accidences: or else your church is of such power, that it may clean
alter and take away Christ's institution. For if you have considerations, for
which ye may commonly leave out the wine, and use bread only: and other
considerations, for which ye may omit bread, and use wine only: when both
those considerations come together, then may you take away both bread and
wine, and defraude the people of the whole sacrament, or instead of that may
point them another. What is this but, with exceeding arrogancy, to make your
spiritual governors omnipotent in alteringe and transposinge the sacraments
by Christ ordained? How much more comely wear it for you reuoking your
error: to say with Ciprian. If we will walk in the sight of Christ, (in the
order of his sacraments) we must not swerve or depart from his precepts and
instructions: geuinge thanks for that he, instructinge us what we ought to
do hereafter, does pardon us for that offense, which by simplicity we have
before committed.

Where you endeavor to prove, 7. Cap.
that there may be communion in the sacrament, although it be received alone:
in the one part you make your comparison (as you have done before) between
things of nature very diverse: that is, between prayer, and the lords supper.
In the the other, where ye confirm general communion between all saints, you
prove that no man denies. There man be communion in the benefit of prayer
(say you) though one do pray alone: A.
therefore in the Lords supper, also. Who sees not, that prayer and the Lords
supper in the use of them be nothing like? That prayer is a common action,
which, done of one alone, may stretch to the benefit and commoditee of many,
we have aucthority in ye scripture, and example in Christ him self: but that
the Lords supper is such a common action, we neither have authority, nor
example in gods word. By as good a reason we may prove, that a man may
baptize him self without a minister, because one may pray alone without one
to guide him in the form of his prayer: Or that ones baptism may profit
another, that is not baptized: as a man's prayer may profit him that prays
not. But you must consider that there is great difference between the nature
of sacrament, and other common good works. The sacraments have an external
form by christ appointed in the administration of them: which we may not
alter. In other good works and godly exercises it is not so. And yet you
reckon them up together, as though they wear in all points like. As prayer,
baptism; penance, confirmation, fasting, alms deeds. etc. Another man's
pra^^r or alms d^^de may profit you, I grant, and procure gods grace for
you. May an other man's baptism therefore receive you into the church? or an
other man's penance satisfy for your sins? I think you will scant affirm it,
although ye be ready to affirm strange things. No more therefore can your
receiuinge profit another, that receives not. Christ taught us, and his holy
word commands us, to pray on for another. But he never said receive the
communion, or be baptized one for another. To confirm your purpose, you
bring an article of our creed: B.
that is, I ^eseue the communion of saincted. By this you prove that there is a
communion of all good things between them that are in place and time far
distante: which we deny not. But to understand how little this communion of
saints does serve your purpose of sole receiving: it behooves to consider
what communion is. It is called of the Greeks, (...), and may be defined to be
a society of a company or multitude, which, by certain laws and couenantes,
are all partakers of one thing. As among Marchantes, that upon certain
conditions occupy jointly, and are partakers of like gain and damage. So all
Christian men have a certain society or conjunction: which consists in
this, that they are all partakers of one salvation, and all members of one
mistical body, the head whereof is christ Jesus. The laws and couenantes, whereby
we be all thus knit and ioigned together, are the word of God, and the
sacraments used according to Christ's institucion. Therefore all churches of
the world have the same word of God, and the same sacraments: and by them
through faith are graffed into one and the same body of Christ, though they
be thousands of miles a sunder. By the word of God our faith is instructed: By
baptism we be received first into the society of christian communion, and
made members of the mystical body. By the Lords supper we have from time to
time, heavenly food ministered unto us, and, as it were, lively spirit from
the head of this body Jesus Christ. He therefore, that is baptized in India,
has the same baptism that we have: and, being graffed into the same body,
has communion with us in baptism. Likewise they, that receive the Lords
supper, be fed with the same feed of the body and blood of Christ, that we
be: and so have communion with us in that sacrament, though in place they be
far of. This is the communion between christian men: and this we most
reddely grant. But will you conclude here upon, that there is like communion
of the benefit of soole receiuyng in private Mass, as there is of prayer,
when a man prays alone? Then must ye say the same of baptism also. As for
example, that our baptism here may benefit some, that are in France, and
receive them into the church: like as our prayer here may obtain the healpe
and grace of God for them, that be there. Which were great folly to affirm. In
deed we have communion in baptism: but every man's own baptism brings him
the grace of that sacrament. And in like manner is it in the Lords supper. We
have all communion therein: and yet every man's own receiuyng does profit him.
You will say perhaps, you do not infer this upon the argument of general
communion, but only that they, which be in diverse places, may communicate.
Well sir I grant you that, but yet, ye should have inferred the other poincte,
if ye would orderly prove that ye began. That is, to be like communion in the
Lords supper of one alone received, as there is in prayer, when one man in
place alone prays ^^r a multitude. The multitude, that prays not, may have
benefit by one man's prayer. But prove you by Gods word, that one man receiuyng
or ministringe the Lords supper alone, does benefit those that receive not, or
that it is such a thing as may be done of no for many. And surely, it
stands you upon, substa^cially to prove that point, or else your private
Mass will fall to the ground, and be of no estimacion. For if people shall
understand, that your sole receiuinge in your Mass does not only nothing
profit them, that be present: but (as Chrysostom witnesses) brings them in
gods displeasure, if they receive not them self: think you that the gain and
advantage thereof will be so great, as has been before? Assure your self it
will not. But what do you infer upon this proof of communion between them
that are in place far distante: forsooth in effect, this. That if there may
be communion between those that are not together in one place: then a priest,
saying Mass in our Lady chapel in Paul's at six a clock in the morning,
does communicate with him, that does the like in Jesus Church at.ix. of the
clock the next day: although in place and time they be separate. Sir I deny
your argument, and say that neither the one nor the other does communicate with any
Christian man, because neither of both receives according to Christ's
institution. I confess there is communyon between them, that receive in sundry
places according to the order by Christ appointed, as there is likewise in
baptism. But, if they alter the sacrament, they do not cummunicate. I said a
little before, that in the pass over all the companies of the Jews in sundry
houses did communicate, and yet one might not eat up the lamb alone, because
god had taken an other order. Likewise all societees of Christian men
communicate together in the Lords supper: and yet should not one celebrate it
alone, saying Christ's example shows, and the Apostles interpretation
declares, that in ministringe of it, there shousd be also a particular
communion (as I may term it) between the members of one congregation. Wherefore
the grauntinge of community between all christian men in use of the
sacrament, does make nothing against this, that Christ ordained it to be
received as a feast with company: to the end it might more lively represent,
both the general giving and bestowing of his body to death for many, and also
the unity and concord, that ought to be between Christian men, receiving
together of one lose and one cup. For this purpose, as S. Augustine signifies,
he used those external elements of bread and wine: to declare, that, as the
bread of many grains is brought into one lofe, and the juice of many (...)
apes is made wine in one cup: so the multitude of a christian congregation,
receiuyng together the Lords supper, are made members of one body, knit
together in like faith and charity, and having like hope of salvation. The
like effect is done in baytisme (as S. Augustine witnesses In sermon ad
infantes) and we be graffed into Christ and made partakers of his body and
blood. But he would have it more lively represented and set forth in this
sacrament of communion: as well for the multitude, as for the apt
signification of the external elements. More over the ecclesiastical
histories declare, when Chrysostom was banisshed, much against the peoples
hearts, that diverse of them would not communicate with his successor, but
had their assembles and received the sacrament in an other place by them
selves, so that diverse of them by the Emperors thretnynges could not be
constreined to communicate with him, that was bishop after him. This their
dooyng was to no purpose, if diversity of time and place do not declare a
seperacion between them, that be of one congregation. The whole use of
excommunication in the primative church does so sufficiently prove this, as no
reasonable man needs greatly to doubt it. The effect whereof, this your
devise may seem to take away. For what other thing is excommunication (as
touching the external act) then a debarryng of the party to receive with
other of the same congregation, and thereby to note him not to be of that
mystical body. But after your devise, a priest, that is excommunicated of the
bishop, may say Mass in his chamber, and affirm that he will communicate
with him, whether he will or no. Because distinction of place makes nothing to
the purpose. Because we necessarily require a number together, you press upon
the mattier very earnestly, and think, by your dalliyng folly, to drive us to
many folies. For, you curiously require a mesure of place, a prescription of
time, and a certain number of persons: as it were thereby to portray unto you a
perfect plat of a christian communion (for so it pleases you to dally in this
weighty mattier.) I answer that we se in the Evangelists and S. Paul, that
Christ took bread and gave with it his body: that he took wine also and
gave with it his blood: that he did it in convenient place and time: that he
had a company with him to receive, and willed them to distribute among them.
Therefore (with S. Cyprian) we compte his example in these things necessary,
and not to be altered. As for the kind of bread or wine, the fashion or
quantity of place, the conueniencie of time, the increasing or deminisshynge
of the number or company, we reckon among those things that may be altered
(as you say) by spiritual governors. But to apointe a geometrical measure of
place, a prescripte proportion of time, or one certain number, that may serve
for all churches, times, and ages, is far above our reach. And therefore I
leave it to be devised of such profound and curious brains, as you and yours
have. Which, beside the word of god, and contrary to his workynge in his
creatures, can compryse accidences without subjects, and bodies without
fashion, quantity or measure, with other such high mysteries, which neither
scripture, nor any necessity of reason does teach. For in deed our wits
are so simple as, in gods mysteries, we can see no more, then his holy word
leads us unto.

Next is, that you burden us with Erasmus authority, 8. Cap.
and challenge us, that we will not believe his report. Sir it seems very
strange to me, that you, which have so much hated Erasmus, A.
as ye have often chased him out of grammar schools, and driven him into the
fire, should now in your need take help and succor at his hand. Answer to
Erasmus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Ciril.
Truly we do now esteem Erasmus, as we have always, for a man of excellent
learning, and a singular instrument provided of god to begin the reformacion of
his church in this latter time: and yet think we not all his opinions to be
true. For you, I think, do esteem Tertullian and Origin and that right
worthily. And yet if ye will grant all, that they write, to be true: I will
prove you an heritke. Notwithstanding we deny not that, which Erasmus says
in this mattier, and knew whens he had his assertion, before you told us. How
little it serves your purpose I will show hereafter. You confirm Erasmus
opinion with that Tertullian writes in his. 2. book Ad vxorem, of the Paynimes
wife that was Christened, and every day privily received the sacrament at home
in her house. And also with the history that Ciprian rehearses of the woman,
that irreverently opened the cheste, where in she kept the Lords body. To
this also ye add Cirilles aucthority for reservation. Out of these places you
suck not only soole receauinge, but also mynistringe under one kind,
reservation, yea, and real presence also. Of soole receiving.
First, for soole receiuinge, it behooves to consider, that in the time of
Tertullian, B.
Ciprian, and all that age, the church was in much trouble, vexacion, and
persecution: so that they could not have their ecclesiastical assembles and
congregations for common prayer and ministracion of the sacraments so
conveniently, as afterward in time of peace. For every Paynime, especially if
his wife, child, or servant, were turned to Christianity, was ready and
sought occasion to bewray them, and bring them in trouble (as it may appear by
the same book of Tertullian that you allege). Therefore they were oftentimes
compelled of necessity to send the sacrament to such as were absent, and
either durst not or might not conveniently come: as ye may perceive by Iustine
the Martyr that the fashion was in his time. Hereof it came, that diverse
received alone in their houses. But nor these places, nor any other, that you
be able to allege, can prove, that there were ministers or priests privately
celebratinge with other standinge bie, that received not. That, which these
persons received at home, was part of that was distributed in the common
celebration where company were: and, upon case of necessitee, sent by the
ministers to them being absent. But you should bring such places, as might
prove, that the common minister, in place of the lords supper, did celebrate
and receive alone, other being present and not partaking. For such a sole
receiuinge is your pryuate Mass, that you pretend to strive for. Now
therefore let us see, how aptely your argument, gathered upon these places,
does conclude your purpose. Women and lay men sometime, in case of necessity,
privately received at home part of that, which was sent from the common
celebration: therefore common ministers, as often as they list, out of
necessity may consecrate, and receive alone in the common place of prayer,
when the people is present, and does not communicate. I think your self may
easily se, of what force this collection is. That may be granted to a lay
person receiuinge, that may not to a pryest ministringe: that sometime in
necessity, which may not always at pleasure: that at home where none is,
that may not in the church where many be. Wherefore these testimonies are but
weak grounds to build pryuate Mass upon. You will perchance obiecte, that
such receiving in houses was used, when the church was in quiet, and without
persecution. I grant you, (as the manner is) that facions, brought in by
necessity or some great consideration, be oftentimes kept and followed with
abuse, when neither necessity does constrain it, nor good consideracion can
maintain it: and so was it in this matter. Hierome against Iouinian
mencioneth, that in his time some used to receive in their houses: but he
earnestly inueigheth against that manner. Why (says he) do they not come into
the church? he Christ sometime abroad in the common place, sometime at home in
the house? etc. In Socrates the. 2. book, we read, that Sinodus Gangrensis
condemned Eustathium for that, contrary to the ecclesiastical rules, he
granted license to communicate at home. So that hereby it may apeare, that a
custom, that, in necessity, to some persons, is either tolerable, or pius
error: is at another time, and to other persons intolerable and Impia
prophanatio. If you dilygently examine that manner of receauinge in their houses
at that time, which ye think to make with you, you shall well perceive it not a
little to make against you. When they did celebrate (as Iustine before rehearsed
does witness) they did not only distribute to them, that were present, but,
by the deatons, sent it to such, as could not be present. Did they not in this
point declare a necessitee of partakinge, if it were possible at every
ministratio^? In so much that when their place would not receive all, or other
necessary cause did let them to come to the common place of prayer: yet, that
they might be partakers of the Lords supper, they sent it to them where they
were. How well does this fashion agree with your private mass? Wherein ye
neither call, nor proffer, nor send to the people: but so do it all alone in
sight of the hole congregation, as though it wear a thing, that nothing
appertained unto them. Now then you may evidently se, that none of these
aucthorities, hitherto alleged, does prove directly your Mass: that is a sole
receiuinge in the celebration of the sacrament. But how necessary that time of
the church did think it to be, that the people should be partakers with the
priest, that Epistle signitieth, that you attribute to Anacletus: where it is
this written. Peracta consecratione omnes communicent, qui noluerit
ecclesiasticis carere liminibus. Sic enim apostoli statuerunt, and sancta
Romana tenet ecclesia. After consecration (says he) let all be partakers,
which will not be excommunicate. For so the Apostles decreed, and the holy
church of rome observed. The same words by some are attributed to Calixte.
Do you not hear excommunication threatened to all, that do not communicate?
Do you not hear that the Apostles decreed it, and the holy church of Rome
observed it? And will you yet stand so stubburnly in your assertion, that there
was private mass in the primative church? Will you have better witnesses of
that time then Iustine, then Dionisius, then Anacletus, then Calixte, then the
other holy fathers before mentioned? would Ambrose have blamed the people for
not resortinge to the sacrament daily? Would Chrysostom have said, that
they, which be present and not receive, do wickedly and impudently? Would they
have commonly used (as Iustine says) to send to those that could not be
present, if Christ's institution and the manner of the prymatiue church had been
such, that the minister might celebrate alone without calling or offeringe,
and people without offense be present and not communicate, as you of long
time have used it? Surely say what you will, and allege as often as you list
the aucthoritee of your holy mother the church of Rome so many hundred years:
I think very few, that have fear of god and care of their salvation, will give
credit unto you. Especially saying you can bring no better testimonies for
your purpose, then in this defense you have used.

Against communion under one kind.
An other poincte, that you pick out of these aucthorities of Tertul. and
Cyprian, is for ministrynge under one kind: wherein we have the institucion
of Christ expressly against you, as we had in the other. For in the
Evangelists and S. Paul we se testified, that Christ took bread and gave
with it his body: and afterward took the cup and gave with it his blood,
and willed them to observe and use the same. Here you must of necessity flee
to your ^lde place of refuge: that is, that, to receive under both kinds; is
not of the substance of the sacrament, but such a thing as may be altered by
spiritual governors. For Christ's body (say you) is not without his blood,
and therefore he, that receives his body under form of bread, receives his
blood also, Per concomitantiam. Therefore you say the people is not defrauded of
that Christ's will was, that they should receive, yea and, for good
consideracions and honorable to the blood of Christ, they receive it more
convenient then under bothes kinds. O profounde and deep set reason, wherein
you seem to make your self wiser than Christ him self, that ordained the
sacrament. While you will seem with your gay gloses to glorify the blood of
Christ, you clean take away the right form and manner of his sacrament.
These are the vanities wherewith God justly does punish you for your rashenesse
in leauyng his word and following ye fantasies of your own brain. But it
should have been your obedience to Gods word to consider, that the communion
of Christ's body and blood is not the work of nature in this Sacrament. For,
what so ever is here given in these things, is to be taken by faith: and is
offered to us in the words of Christ's promises. So much is given us as God
appoincted to give. Of whose will and pleasure we know no more, then his
words declare unto us. But Christ (as I said) took two parts of the
sacrament: in one of the which he said we should be partakers of his body:
in the the other of his blood, and left his prescripte and appoincted words, as
well for the tone as for the the other. Wherefore we must more trust him than man's
subtle devise. You allege a perpetual society of the body and blood, which
ye call Concomitantiam. It is your own devise and not Christ's promise in his
sacrament. In Christ's natural body, that is in heaven, I know his flesh is
not without his blood. But in the sacrament, which is no natural work, how
will you assure me, that the flesh and blood is ioinctly signified and given to
me under one part only: seeing Christ himself, who knew, as well as you, the
ioincte condition of his flesh and blood, did notwithstanding, in two sundry
external things, give the communion of them to his disciples. Therefore the
faieth of the communicantes in the tone part receives the body of Christ,
trusting to Christ's promises: The same faith in the other part receives
the blood, beleeuyng also our saviors words therein. It has respect to
Christ's words and promises, it looks not how the body and blood is in
Christ naturally. What ground shall our faith have if we leave the word of
God? Oh ye will say our holy mother the church has so ordained it. Yea, but I
say to you, that, if your mother the church of Rome be the fold of Christ,
and if the sheep thereof be his sheep, they will hear his voice and obey his
word. If they do not, allege the name as often as ye will, I will say you be
sheep of an other fold and not of his. For he says, Oues meae vocem meam
audiunt. He says not they hear them self and their own devises, but they
hear my voice. Remember what Cyprian says. Only Christ is to be heard in
this. And we must not look what other did before us, but what Christ did
before all other. When we doubt, we must have recourse to the order taken by
Christ and by the Apostles in their wrytinge. But ye will say the church has
authority to alter diverse things especially being indifferent, and not of
the substance of the sacrament. Yea but Cyprian says the precepts of this
sacrament be Grandia and magna. And if he be called least in the kingdom of
god, that alters one of the least commandments, what shall be said of him,
that takes away these great and weighty commandments. Ciprian wrate
against those that were called Aquarij, water drinkers: which used only water
instead of wine in the ministration of the sacrament. But they offended not so
much as you do. For they altered only the licour, and that upon holy
considerations. They kept the words and promysses of Christ. But you take
away the one part clean, and leave out the words and most comfortable
promysses of Christ's blood to be shed for us. If then Cyprian were so earnest
against those users of water in steed of wine, how much more earnest would
he have been against this manner, if it had been common in his time? Here, those
places that you recite may seem to help you, and to make against us. For,
where Tertullian speaks of the Paynimes wife, he mencioneth bread only. And
when Ciprian reports that the woman kept the lords body in her coffer, it
may seem to be under one kind. These are but conjectures, and the same very
uncertain. For oftentimes in the doctors, where one kind is mentioned, both
are understood, as after shall more appear. But to make this more probable:
you allege afterward out of Ambrose the history of Satyrus his brother,
that hanged the sacrament about his neck in a stole (as you call it,) when,
in a shipwarke, he leaped into the sea: which must needs be inform of bread
only, because neither our brain nor yours can deuyse, which way wine can be
in such an instrument enclosed. Surely if we had not known before, that you
had nothing in the aunciente fathers directly to maintain your maymynge of
Christ's sacrament: this your coniectural gatherynges and surmisinge reasons
would most evidently declare it to be true. Would a man think that any,
having the fear of God, would in so weighty mattiers, either ground his
own conscience, or seek to confirm others by such feeble proofs and
arguments? Is not this a strong reason think you? Satyrus S. Ambrose
brother, in extreme danger of shipwrake, purposing to leap into the sea,
took of one, that was in the ship, only the sacrament of the Lords body, and
tied it about his neck: therefore in the primative church in ministration of
the sacrament they gave only one kind unto the laytie. Though it had been
here mentioned that Satyrus had, in this extremitee, received one kind alone:
it had been no argument to prove, that it might orderly be used in the
church. But (as Ambrose signifies) this Satyrus at that time was, but, as I
might say, a nouice in Christian religion, not so far instructed in the faith
that he was as then admitted to the communion of the Lords supper. And
therefore he had not the sacrament about him self, but took it of other
christian men, that were there. Which whether they were ministers or other, the
place makes no mention: but that it calls them, Initiatos. That is, such as
in the congregation were admitted to the communion. Neither is there any thing
to the contrary, but that the same persons, which had the sacrament of our
Lords body, had also about them the sacrament of the blood, either in some
convenient vessel, or else after some other fashion, as diverse of simplicity
upon a zeal at that time used. That is either by sokinge the sacrament of
the body in the wine, or else by moystinge a linen cloth in the sacrament of
the blood, and so carrying it with them. For, even as I signified before, that
persecution and trouble of the church at the beginning drove some to receive
at home in their houses: in like manner the same troublous time, and other cases
of necessity with feruencie of zeal, caused men to seek other shifts also,
and to do those things by simplicity upon zeal at a time, that in the common
use of the sacraments they could not do according to the word of god.
Therefore as some learned and holy me^ for the time did wink and bear with
such things: so afterward other even as holy and profoundly learned did
mislike and reprove the same. As for example, when men did travail any
dangerous journey, and for zeal and devotion would have the sacrament with
them: because they could not conveniently carry wine with them, that they might
go as nighe to Christ's institution as might be, they would soke the sacrament
of our Lords body in the blood. Some other would moist a linen cloth in the
sacrament of blood (as I said before) and keep it to moist with water when
they would receive. Some, that either of nature could not, or for religion
would not drink wine, at other times used only water. Some upon other
consideracions used milk for wine in the sacrament. Some were persuaded that
in such cases men might use one kind. Wherefore to sick men or children they
would use wine alone. But the particular cases of a few, ought not to be taken
for a general rule of the holy church. Neither those things, which some did
(as Ciprian terms it) upon simplicity by sufferance, should be brought as
testimonies, what the church either then did, or ought now commonly to do.
For a man may well doubt whether these shifts, that men in necessity did use
beside the institution of Christ, were acceptable to god or no, although diverse
of them might seem to proceed of a fervent zeal, and to be done of good and
godly men. It appears in Cyprian, that many of them, that used water for wine,
were godly men: and yet by zeal and simplicity did err. Therefore he says
of them in this manner. If any of our predicessours either by ignorance or
simplicity did not observe and keep that, which the lord by his example and
instruction did teach us to do: by good mercy his simplicity may be pardoned.
But we cannot be forgeuen, which be instructed and admonyshed by the lord to
do as he did. etc. The godly and holy fathers did bear in many points with
the zeal and simplicity of a number, in that time. Wherefore those examples
cannot be brought justly to prove the common manner used in the primative
church, which by manifest testimonies I will a little after declare to have be
far otherwise in the same times, that these things were done. That the same
things, before rehearsed, were not generally allowed, it may appear by this,
that, when the church was settled, they did forbid those things, and bound them,
so nigh as might be, to Christ's institution. Hereof ye have example in Julius
his decrees. 1. Hom. Conc. Where all the fashions before recited are expressly
forbidden. We hear (says he) that some led with schismatic ambition, in
the divine mysteries do consecrate milk for wine: some serve to the people
the sacrament of the body moysted in the blood, as a perfect communion: other
offer in the sacrament of the lords cup, the juice of grapes squised: some
diepe a linen cloth in the wine, and keep all the year. Therefore (says he)
henceforth it shat not be lawful for any in their sacrifice to offer any other
thing, but only the cup mixed with water and wine. Gelasius also after him
even as flatly forbad receiving under one kind: saying. We find that some
taking a portion of the fordes body refuse the cup: which, because I know
not of what superstition they do it, either let them take the whole sacrament,
or be kept from the whole. For the division of this mystery cannot be without
great sacrilege. Here you see that Gelasius does count it and call it sacrilege
to receive under one kind: and your sort contrary to this, affirm it to be
Herisie, if a man say the people should receive under both kinds of bread and
wine. If you would rightly have proved your ministringe to the laytie in one
kind: you should not have brought conjectures upon such rare chaunses, as may
seem for the time to be borne with, rather then allowed: but you should have
showed some plain and evident examples, that it was in the primative church
commonly used in celebration of the sacrament. But that you were never able to
do, and so was it said in the protestation, that you call the challenge. For
herein the whole number of the fathers be against you. And that you may not
justly say, that we brag of our empty boxes, that have the name only, and no
stuff in them: I will rechearse and show you some of ye mattier, which shall be
directly applied to that malady and disease, that you have brought to the
right use of the lords holy sacrament. You hard before rehearsed out of
Iustine declaringe the manner of the church of Rome in his time, that both bread
and wine were given to companies of the town and country, and the same also
sent unto those, that were absent. Here is manifestly declared, that such as
were absent, and received at home in their houses, had both kinds sent unto
them, contrary to your conjecture upon Tertullian, where (you say) one kind
only is mentioned and therefore received. Tertullian and Iustine were both of
the church of Rome, B.
and were not in time far a sunder. Therefore it is like one manner was used in
both their ages. The fleash (says Tertullian him self) is fed with the body
and blood, that the soul may be filled of god. He says not only the body,
wherein the blood also may be understood: but he adds seperately the
Blood. Declaringe the manner of Christ's sacrament ministered in two sundry
parts. Cyprian also speakinge not only of priests, but of other lay men,
that were like to abide persecution and martyrdom for Christ, says in this
wise. How do we teach and provoke them to shed their blood in confession of
Christ, if we deny them his blood. or bow make we them meet for the cup of
martyrdom, if we do not first by communion admit them to drink the cup
of the lord? Is not this a plain testimony, C.
what manner of mynistracion was used in Cyprians time? And will you then, upon
a surmise, gather the contrary? If ye read this father in all places, where he
speaks of the sacrament: you shall find nothing more common, then, Bibi
sanguinem Christi. How wisie thou (says Ambrose to Theodosius the Emperor)
with those hands receive the holy body of our lord? how will thou be so bold,
with thy mouth to be partaker of the lords blood. This Emperor was a lay man:
E.
neither is it likely, that he received any otherwise, then the other people
did at that time. And shall we think by a vain conjecture of the history of
Satirus, that the custom of that time was otherwise, because your mocking head
could not devise how to carry wine in a stole? and yet they of that time (as ye
may perceive by dipping a linen cloth in the sacrament of the blood) had
devised which way it might be done. But to our purpose. Without confusion and
doubt (says Gregory Nazienzene) eat his body and drink his blood, if thou
have any desire of life in thee. And yet he speaks to the people, Oratione.
4. in sanctum pascha. Hilarious also. li. 8. de trinitate. These things (says
he) being eaten and drunk make that we be in Christ and Christ in us.
Basile de baptismo, upon these words. As often as ye shall eat. etc. What
profit have those words (says he)? That we easing and drinking may be
perpetually mindeful of him that died for us: and so may be instructed in the
sight of god and his Christ, of necessity to keep the doctrine delivered by
his Apostles. Here, beside the mention both of eating and drinkinge, he adds,
of necessity to keep this doctrine of the lords supper: which you in many
points, without prick of conscience take upon you to altar. Prystes (says.
S. Hieronime upon Sophon) which make the sacrament and dystribute the blood of
the lord unto the people. This man was priest in Rome in Ambroses time: and yet
he signifies, that the manner then was to mynister the blood to the people. E.
And shall the history of Satyrus, nothing perteining to the mattier, persuade
us the contrary? What can be more plain and expressly against you, then that
Chrisostom has Hom. 18. in poster. ad corinth? There he says, that in this
sacrament the priests part, is not better then the peoples. For it is not
(says he) as it was in the old law, where the priests had part and the
people part: neither could the people be partaker of that was the priests.
But now it is not so, for one body and one cup is indifferently offered to
all. And it is notable that he says. All be like worthy to be partakers,
neither does the inferior differ any thing at all from the priest in that
matter. Why do you then (so plainly against Chrysostom) make difference of
dignity between the priest and the people? Is not this, which Chrisostom
speaks against, one of the chiefest reasons, that you have for the geuynge of
one kind to the people? But S. Paul to Timothy and Titus, declares other
causes that should make the order of ministry honorable: and not to defraude
the people of one part of ye sacrament. Cyprian again, in the same sermon De
lapsis, that you afterward aledge, and the same History, shows, that all the
company of lay men and women took the sacrament of the Lords cup and
drunk of it in order, one after an other. But I fear I shall seem to most
men to commit much folly, in that I stand so long with aucthorities to prove
that thing, which of it self is most manifest: that is, that in the
primative church the only manner, in the common celebracion of the sacrament,
was, that all received under both kinds of bread and wine. Seeing therefore
Iustine says, that on sundaies bread and wine consecrated were distributed
to companies of the town and country, seeing Gelasius calls it sacrilege to
divide the sacrament; seeing Cyprian counsels that lay men should be
admitted to the communion of the Lords cup, and by an History shows that
in his time they used it: seeing Chrysostom affirms no difference to be
between the priest and ye people in use of this sacrament: seeing all the
residue of the fathers of al countries and all ages of the primative church
agree to the same, were it not more then wilful blindness not to se, that
holy men at that time in celebracion of the sacrament ministered both parts to
the people, according to Christ's institucion and the doctrine of S. Paul to
the Corinth? Were it not almost desperate stubburnesse to persuade the
contrary to ignorant people, and by libelles privily spread to deteine the
unlearned in error? But it stood you upon to say somewhat, least you should
seem to have nothing to say. And yet in very deed it had been better for the
confirmacion of your doctrine to have said nothing. For then perhaps such, as
of simplicity depend upon your aucthorities, would have thought, that you
had had far better provision for your defense in so weighty mattiers. Which
now, seeing your selender and feeble grounds, will begin, I doubt not, as
they have the fear of God, to mistrust your dealyng, and more diligently
examine the residue of your doctrine. It is not good for them any longer to
walk on other men's feet, nor to be guided by other men's eyes, but them self
to se what way they go: least their guides, either by ignorance or wilfulness,
lead them into the pit of continual error.

Of reseruacion.
The third poincte, that you gather out of these testimonies, is reseruacion of
the sacrament: which to deny (say you) is extreme impudency. I think you
have not met with any, which have flatly denied; that in the primative
church diverse used reseruacion. But it follows not thereupon, but that a man
may deny without any impudency at all, either, that we have any testimony in
the word of God to justify it, or, that all the holy fathers did approve it.
Or if ye will say the contrary, I will not doubt to make the crime of
impudency, that you charge us withal, to rebounde upon your self. But you will
say, you have witness that it was used, and that of good men, which is
sufficient. Indeed it is sufficient to show, that it was then used: but it is
not sufficient to prove, that it must therefore be always used: or, that all
did well at that time in using of it. Oh ye will say, this is your old manner,
so long as the fathers make with you, you will admit them: if they seem to be
any thing against you, ye will reiecte their authority. What authority is
to be attributed to the doctors.
Because, you commonly take hold here, and, through this odious report, often
use to stir men's stomachs against us: before I answer your reseruacion, I
will protest what authority we attribute unto the old fathers. This will I
do not with my own words, but S. Augustines in his epistle to Hierome. I
confess that I have learned to attribute this reverence and honor only to the
canonical scriptures, to believe steadfastly without controversy all, that is
written in them. As for other I so read them, that, be they never so excellent
in great holiness and learning: I do not therefore count it true. because they
were of that opinion: but because they could persuade me, either by scripture
or good reason, that it was not against the truth. Here you may obiecte that
men, of such learning, holiness, and devotion, would never have written any
such thing, if they had not thought it to be agreeable with Gods word. Ye
sir, I think they as good men, were so persuaded: but that they did leave in
writing many things, not only beside the word of God, but also against it, I
think it is not unknown to you. And that other also may know it, and thereby
hold us excused when we do not in all poinctes agree unto them, I will
recite some proufes thereof. Clemens Alexand. with Iustine and diverse other
taught, that Angels fell from their estate for the carnal love of earthly
women.

Which doctrine, I think, you will not say rises of true interpretacion of
the scripture. The same Clement, Strom. 2. and. 6. writes, that men's souls
are transformed into Angels, and first learn a thousand years of other
Angels: afterward teaching other new transformed Angels, at the length become
Archangels. Which can not be soundly taken out of the scriptures.

Iustine, Lactantius, Iraeneus and other wrote, that good men, after the
resurrection, should live a thousand years in all joy before Christ should
come to judgment. And yet is that but a misunderstandynge of the scripture.

Tertullian seems to attribute a bodily substance to God and in diverse
places, De trinitate, speaks dangerously of Christ: for which, and like
things, many would have had his works counted Apocrypha. Therefore he does not
always agree with scripture. Cyprian would have Heretics to be rebaptised,
and speaks so dangerously of them that are fallen from the faith, that he
might seem to give some occasion to Nouatians heresy. What shall we say of
Origin, in whom be found so many perilous doctrines, as both I, in this
place, am loath to rehearse them, and in the primative church diverse great
learned men would have had his books burned for the same. I could say the
like of diverse other, but that I fear some will maliciously gather, that I
rehearse these things of purpose, so much as in me lies, to deface the
authority of the holy fathers.

Which, God is my witness, I mean not: but only to signify, that, when we
measure their doctrine by Gods words, or teach not in all poinctes as they
did, we be not so much to be blamed as that men should count us, as you do,
to controlle the doctors, and as it were to set them to school. For if God
has suffered them to err in so weighty mattiers as is before mentioned:
(although for good cause I have omitted the greatest) it may be also, that they
have taught amiss in some other lighter things, and therefore are to be read
with judgment, as Augustine counsels both in himself and in other.
Nothwithstandynge we do greatly esteem the fathers: not only as holy me^
endued with singular grace of God: but also as right good witnesses and strong
defendours of the chief articles of our faith, at that time, when Satan
endeavored, partly by cruelty of persecution, partly by infinite numbers of
Heresies to deface and extinguishe the same. Therefore who does not much
honor them, and (when truth constreineth) with reverence go from their
opinion, is scantly worthy the name of a christian man. Nevertheless, I think
not ye contrary but, if they had seen, what abuses and supersticions would
have followed upon diverse things, that they either taught, or for the state of
that time winked at and suffered: undoubtedly they would either have recanted
those things, as Augustine did many, or else would have made a more perfect
interpretacion of their minds. Before the Pelagians Herisie began to be
spredde, S, Augustine so wrote of free will, as he seemed not to himself
afterward, sufficiently and as the truth required, to express the mere grace
of God. Therefore, upon occasion of that Herisie, he writes more perfitly of
that and of predestination, then either the other doctors do, or, then it is
to be thought, that himself would have done, if that occasion had not been. So
doubtelesse both he and many other would have done of diverse things now in
controversy: if at that time they had been brought in question. This much by
the way have I spoken of my opinion in the doctors, so much as I can, to
eschew the malicious report, that your sort is most ready to spread of us
in this mattier. Now I will return to reservation. Of reseruacion.
We deny not (as I said) that some, in that time, did use it, as it appears
by your witness of Ciril As touching whose words by you in this place recited,
D.
I have this much to say: that, as I know the same place is alleged of diverse
other, and therefore I will not plainly deny it: so, because that work of Ciril
is not ertante, I have good cause to suspecte it. And so much the more, for
that diverse of your sort have alleged out of the same doctor in his work
Thesaurus, certain words for the supremicie of the Bishop of Rome, which are
not there to be found. This unjust fatheryng of your own late devised
fantasies, upon the ancient doctors and writers of the church, may cause us
justly to suspecte the residue of your doing. But be it so, that those are
Cirils own words indeed. We have for that one suspected place a number of
sound testimonies, that all did not allow reseruacion, nor think it according
to the word of God. Origin upon the.v. chap. of Leuiticus. The Lord (says
he) deferred not the bread, that he gave to his disciples: saying, take and
eat: neither commanded it to be kept until the morrow. The residue of his
words, upon the same place, be such, as he seems thereupon to gather an
argument, that it should not be reserved. He, that wrote the sermon De caena
domini in Cyprian, says plainly of the sacrament, Recipitur non includitur.
At is received, it is not enclosed or Butte up. Isychius upon Leuiticum, at
large declares how that in his time, if the ministers and people were not able
to eat up so much as was consecrated, the restdue was bourned, and consumed
by fire, that it might not be kept until the next day. Therefore you may not
force upon us to receive reseruacion as a thing either grounded in scripture or
generally allowed by the primative church.

What will you say to your second. Epistle of Clement bishop of Rome. Ret
so many holy loves (says he) he offered upon the altar, as may be
sufficiently for the people. If so be any shall remain, let them not be kept
until the morrow, but, with fear and tremblyng, let the ministers eat it up.

This was a Bisshoppe of Rome, this was Peter's successor, this was (as you
say) head of the church: and yet you hear his appoin^mente and order taken
erpressely against reservation. If ye will not beleene us, why do you not
believe your own? Will you say, with your testimony of Ciril, that Origin
was mad, that Isychius was mad? Or if ye be not afraid to say it of them:
Will you say that Clement was mad also? Well sir, if ye will prove us
impudent or mad for not receiuynge reseruacion: I trust you se, that we
shall have company in our impudency and madness. But Clementes Epistle
presses you hard in soole receiuynge and private Pass also, and signifies
that all the ministers received together with the people. For, in the words
before rehearsed, he speaks of the Pass that was used, when that Epistle was
made: and yet it wills you to prepare for the people. Why do you not follow
his authority in these poinetes? You will say, as you said in the beginning,
if the people be absente, and, when the sacrament is prepared, either will not
or can not come to receive, Clement then says not that the priest
consecratyng should forbear, because the other bidden guests will not come. The
church (you will say) did always profess a communion, (...) prove, out of the
same history, that it were no abuse, to have boys and children to minister the
sacrament commonly: because, in that extremity, Sirapions boy delivered him
the sacrament, which the pryest sent. Surely in this your manner of defending
private Pass, wherein you show your self to be able to bring nothing for the
mainteinance thereof, but only extraordynary chanses in extremity and
necessity, you do much bewray the evil use of it: and manifestly declare, yea
and as it wear protestee, that in deed it is euel and without all authority
or example of the primative church, if you be not bryuen to it by necessity
and lack of communicants. You will reply perhaps and say, by these examples
it may appear that company in receyninge is not of necessity, or if it had been they would not have used the contrary. Yes sir, necessity and extremity
may cause some kind of gods commandments at times to be omitted, and yet out
of necessity the same commandments ought necessarely to be observed and
kept. The Jews were commanded on the Sabbath day to do no bodily or
toylinge work. Nevertheless sometimes we read, that, by necessity of there
enemies constreined, they kept war and fought on the Sabbath day. Yet can you
not say but that commandment was necessary. I said the like before of
baptism: and the same must I say in the lords supper: that a case of
necessity may perhaps for a time, alter some necessary part of it: and yet
not be taken for any general rule. Therefore if ye will receive alone in your
Pass, or minister under one kind: you must never do it but in extremity:
otherwise your proufes help you nothing at all. Yea but in the history of
Sirapion but one kind is mentioned, and reservation manifestly appears in
that it was so ready to be (...) boy to soke the sacrament consecrated in a
licour not consecrated: And especially if he were of your opinion in
transsubstantiacion. This may you se by your own place, that in reservation
they used often to keep both kinds: Which might well stand with the manner of
that time, wherein they did every day communicare: so that the wine also might
well tarry until the next day.

The.xiiii. ca^non of Nicene council in no sense does prouce sole receiuinge,
10. Cap. Answer to the.xiiii. Cannon of Nicene counsel.
as you would have it seem to do. It apointeth who should minister, and in
what order they should receive: first the bishop, then the priests, after the
deacons, and so forth other that did communicate. This order taken by that
holy counsel makes so plainly against the manner of your pryuate Mass, as
I assure you, I marvel, that you could for shame allege it. Who sees not
by this testimony that all the ministers used commonly to receive together with
the bishop being present? Here was not my lord at the high altar, and the
residew of his chaplains and priests in sundry chapels celebrating by them
self: but all received together deacons and all: that it might appear to be a
heavenly feast or supper, and not a work or sacritice to be done of one to the
behoufe and benefit of a number, that stand by and look on. The council
speaks not here in this point of any extraordinary chance, as it does in
that part that you allege, but of the common ordynary manner which by the
aucthority of the same council was appointed to be used in the church. It we
had lacked testimonies for the truth against pryuate Mass: we had been
much beholdinge to you, for puttinge us in mind^ of this place. I think, such
as favor your assertion, will smally thank you for bringing in this council.
But thanked be god, that you are driven so much (...) and better to, you may
prove, out of the same place, that priests also received but only the body and
not the blood: because: it says, Corpus christi porrigant, and mencioneth not,
Sanguinem The like you shall read in many places of the old fathers, where
one part only is mentioned when they speak of the priests receiuinge. And yet
both are understood. If you will upon this gather, that deacons used but one
kind: I will infer upon the same place, that priests also used the like
manner. But a reasonable man will easily conceive that in speakinge of one
part, both is understood. For in the acts of the Apostles the whole
celebration of the sacrament is termed breakinge of bread: whereby we must not
gather that Apostes used only bread in ministration of the lords supper. I
marvel why you make such courtesy to recite this for a proof of one kind
then used, seeing the best of your collections for this matter be even of the
same sort. Is not your conjecture out of Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, even in
the same manner gathered? For that they seem to mention but the one part
only? And yet you make such a brag upon them as you count all such to lack
discretion as will not by and by without contradiction yield unto them, and
acknowledge them invincible. In deed it stands you upon, saying your proufes
are of them self so sclender, somewhat to help them with stout words: that
men may be almost afraid to doubt of them. You obiecte to us that we dalley,
B.
when we press you with the words of Christ's institution: Accipite,
manducate, bibite, diuidite: and yet you will urge the words of the fathers, as
though every syllable in them were in like manner to be scanned as the words of
the bible, written wholly by the inspiration of the holy ghost. But in deed
you declare of what authority you coumpt Christ's words, that esteem it a
dalleinge to repete often his commandments. Did Cyprian think you, dally,
when, in one Epistle, to Cecilius, he does well neene.xx. times repete and
beat upon this: that the sacrament is to he ministered in no other manner then
Christ him self did use it? Did he dally when he pressed upon the matter in
this wise? If in that sacrifice, that is Christ him self, none but Christ is
to he followed: then must we obey and do that Christ did, and willed to be
done. When as he in his gospel faith, if you do that I hyd you, then I call you
not seruanies but fuendes. And that Christ is only to be heard, his father
witnesses from heaven saying. This is my dear beloved son, him you must
hear. Wherefore if only Christ is to be heard, we must not gene ear what
other did before, but what Christ did before all. Neither must we follow men's
custom but good truth: semge he says by his prophet, in vain they worship
me teachinge men's tradicions and doctrines. And again, the lord says in the
gospel, you reiec^e my command mente for your own tradition. And in another
place, he, that breaks one of these least commandments and so teaches,
shall be called feast in the kingdom of god. If then it be not leeful to alter
one of the least commandments: how much less may we alter so great and
weighty commandments, as these are, so nigh touching the sacrament of the
lords passion and our redemption: or to tourue them to any other purpose, by
man's tradition, then the lord ordained them. These are not my sayings, but
word by word as they lie in that holy father: and will you say that he
cauilleth or dalieth, when he this urges Christ's institution to be kept:
and would have nothing therein to be altered for any cause, that man could
devise? The matter, that he wrate against, was of no more effect, then these
are of sole receiuinge and ministering one part of the sacrament: and yet is he
so earnest, as you see, with a great number of words mo to the same purpose.
Think you not, they could have brought for the use of water only the examples
of holy men, and also goodly considerations in apperance? (...) full and
negligent, as we neither knew the place, nor would seek to examine it: Or
lastly, that of purpose you did abuse the simplicity and ignorance of them,
that you conueighed your wrytinge unto: which commonly believe all that you say
without examination: and therefore do you allege for your self, that makes
expresse^y against you, if ye place be red: which in Cyprian is in this wise.
The child being among the holy company, was not able to abide our suffr^ges
and prayers: but the ignorant soul in the simple and young years, sometime
with wepinge and cryinge did sterile: sometime with trouble and anguyshe of
mind tossed hither and thither: and as it were by a tourmentour constreininge
it, by such means as it could, did confess the gilte of the fact, (meaning
the eatinge of the Idolle offeringe) And, when the residew of the celebration
was ended, the dearon began to offer the cup to them, that were present: and
after other had received and the childs course was come: the babe, as if we
are by institucion of god, turned away the face, held the mouth and lips
together, and refused the cup. Yet the deacon continued, and, although the
infant stryued against it, poured some of the sacrament of the lords blood
into her mouth. Then followed ye^ing and vomiting. etc. Here were gathered
together with Cyprian, not priests only but lay men, women, and Children also:
and you see the cup of our Lords blood was offered to all, and all drancke
in order without exception. Neither is hear any thing, that by conjecture
can lead a man to think otherwise, but that this was the common manner then
used. How than can you gather by the extraordinary chance, which you recited
before out of the same Tertullian and Cyprian, that the laytie then used to
receive the one kind of bread only: whereas this place, brought by your
self, shows, that, in celebracion, they used the cup also. The child you
say in this history received but wine only, and so one kind. That you make
probable, because the child, that had received the Idol offering, was not
(...) them to say that which they never meant. In like manner you do a little
after in Luther and Melancthon, saying that they compte it a thing indifferent
to communicate the lay people under one kind: and that a general counsel may
take order in it as a thing of no necessity. Sir it had been plain and
sound dealing, that you should have recited some place where they had so said:
but that ye were not able to do. For any man that has been conuersante in
their works, may right well judge that it is not so. I will not trouble you
with looking on many places. There is a little treatise of Melancthons
entitled De vsuintegri sacrame^ti: in which ye shall find diverse arguments
concludyng the necessity of both kinds, and that they sin and grievously
offend, that do restrain the people from one part of the sacrament. But I
perceive this is your common fashion, to make Doctors and writers to speak
whatsoever you would have them to speak.

Now sir, 12. Cap.
if ye have no better proufes and testimonies out of the holy scriptures and
old fathers, then these which ye have in this your Apology alleged: I
assure you, the challenge, that before was made, may justly be again repeted.
And, A.
it may be said to you, that you have out of the scripture nor syllable nor
tittle: out of the ancient doctors nor sentence nor half sentence, that
does directly prove either your private mass or communion under one kind to
the laity. For all, that here you have uttered, be nothing but wrythed
conjectures upon cases extraordinary, and shifts of extremity, to prove a
continual or general rule to be observed in the church of Christ, contrary to
the example and order by him self appointed: Wherefore there is no cause, that
you should so confidently conclude, as though you had profoundly (...) ben
fair clokes for them to hold their peace, where as in deed they have in
these poinctes or little or nothing to say for them self. And surely, if I had been of your sort, I would have wyshed, that you also had been bound in
recognisance, if that would have stayed you from wrytinge. For both your
reasons and aucthorities by you uttered, though they seem to your self never
so strong, does rather bewray your part, the^ pithely defend it. But if you
and yours had never so great store of armor, provision and furniture, as to
the terror of men, you would pretend to have: yet ye should never be able to
bear down the manifest truth, so evidently apperinge in the words of
Christ's institution, nor the witnesses of the primative church agreinge with
the same. Answer to the argument of multitude, continuance of time. etc*
Therefore the thunderinge in of the authority of the holy catholic church,
the prescription of.xv C. years, the consent of most part of Christendom,
the holiness and learning of so many godly fathers, as has been these ix. C.
years, the age and sclender learning of those that stand against you, does
nothing at all either fear us or move us to suspect that doctrine, which, by
Christ's authority and witness of the Apostles, we know to be true. We
have been accustomed of long time to those vain voices. We see they all be
either manifestly false, or at the least of small effect. These are the
mystes, which you have always cast before the eyes of the simple and ignorant,
as it were to blind and amase them: to the end, that either they may not see
the truth; when it is brought to them: or, if they see it, to make them
suspecte it, when they hear that.xv. C. years the more part of the world
have been of contrary opinion. But this is evidently false, that you say.
For.600. year after Christ and more, these doctrines were never heard of in
the church, much less (...) under one kind, prohibicion of marriage in
priests, purgatory, the supremacy of Rome, nor a number more of your errors.
Yea and at this day think and do contrary to you in those things. And will
you then so falsely bear men in hand that the whole church was always of your
opinion? But be it so, that the most part of christendom.ix. C. years has
taught as you do. Is that a sufficient argument to reiecte a doctrine evident
by the word of god? May not all christianity be clean defaced, if such
arguments of continuance of time and multitude of persons should be rules to
govern men's conscience? Might not the gentiles have alleged the like against
the Apostles and their successors? Might not they have said, and said more
truly then you, that the worshipping of their gods had continued, not hundreds,
but thousand of years? that the whole world held with them? that the wise
and profound learned Philosophers defended their doctrine? that the Apostles
were but new heretics. Ideotes and unlearned persons? that their doctrine came
from the dotinge people of the Jews? that the gods declared their dyspleasure
and indignations against the new teachinge of Christ, with seditions, tumultes,
wars, plagues, dearthes, tempestious weatheringes, and such like? Might not
the Israelites have counted great folly in the house of Judah, that they would
swerve from them in worshippinge of god: saying they were ten parts to one?
Might not the priests in the old law, yea did they not allege against the
prophets, continuance of time and multitude of doctors, priests and Rabins?
Were they not hundredes to one poor Micheas? Did they not the like in Christ's
time? Did they not beat upon the long continuance of Moses law: which, they
said, he came to destroy? Did they not (...) none can forsake the guidinge and
instruction of our holy mother the church, without manifest peril of their
own souls, and such as they do lead from the church. In deed this
accusation is grievous, and may not lightly be passed of me, although you stay
not long upon it. This is that you fear men's consciences withal. This is it
that in deed makes many to stagger in receininge the truth: when they hear
you continually beat upon the name of your holy mother the church, and in
words claim that to you, which verily and in deed is not in you. For all be
not the sons of Abraham, that brag and auante that they came of Abraham's
stock: All be not the people of god, that say, they be the people of god: All
be not Israelites, that descended of Israel: All be not Christian men in deed,
that name them self Christians. I will therefore in few words declare what the
church is, and how we may, if we take not good heed, be deceived by the name
of the church, taking the church of Antichrist, for the true and right
church of Christ.

First, how necessary indeed it is for a christian man to believe the faieth
of the holy church, it may by this appear, that to be borne to everlasting life
and salvation, to be made the son of God and heir of the kingdom of heaven,
of necessity we must be conceived in the womb of the church of Christ,
and, as it were, fostred up in her lap. For she is the mother of all those,
that are the true children of God: And in her custody Christ has left the
treasure of his grace, by her ministry to be bestowed among his people.
Therefore if we couitte to have entrance into the kingdom of God, and be
partakers of the graces and promises of Christ, I confess we must remain
in the faith of his holy church. But what is this church, or how may it be
known?(...)

What the church is and whether it may err.
Forsooth the scripture speaks of the church of Christ two ways. Sometime
as it is indeed before God, and not known always to man's judgment. Into this
church none be received, but only the children of grace and adoption, and the
very members of Christ by sanctifiyng of the holy ghost. This church does not
comprehend only holy men and saints living on the earth, but all the elect
from the beginnynge of the world. This church is the pillar of truth, that
never continues in error. This church is never forsaken of the spirit of
God. This is the holy communion of saints that in our Creed we profess and
acknowledge. But this church, as after shall appear, does not always flowrish
in sight of the world. Sometime the church is taken for the universal
multitude of al those, which, being dispersed through the world, acknowledge
one Christ, and, being through baptism admitted into the same, by the use of
the Lords supper openly profess the unity thereof in doctrine and charity.
Sometime the church is taken for the multitude of those that bear rule in the
church. This church is resembled to a net, which cast into the sea,
brings up both good and badde. It is resembled to a feilde, that has not
only pure corn, but also Cockle, Darnell, and other weeds. And as we often
se, that good corn in some grounds is so choked up, and over run with
wedes, as the good grain may hardly be deserned, for that the weeds bear the
chief rule: Even so in this church the evil and corrupted does sometime bear
down the better sort, that a man can hardly judge, which be the true members
of the church, which are not. This church therefore, for the most number, may
be misled, and in many things stray out of the way. This church may err, and
not continually abide in pure and incorrupt worshippyng of God, as I will now
with good prouse farther declare unto you. God has had this his external
church from the beginning of the world, instructed by his holy word,
instructed by his Patriar^es and Prophets, instructed by hi^ apoincted law and
ceremonies: and so continued till the coming of his d^^^ form Jesus Christ.
This church he called his spouse, his tabernacle, his privy garden, his loved
city, his elect and chosen vineyard. But did it always continue in florishyng
estate? Did it always in like manner retain the truth of Gods morde, that it was
taught in the beginning? Did it always cherish and maintain such ministers, as
God sent from time to time into it, to redress and reform his law according
to his holy will? In what state was this church in Nous time, when.viii. only
were saved? In what state was it, when ye.x. Tribes forsook the right
worshippyng of God, and lest only the Tribe of Judah? In what state was it
afterward, when ye same one Tribe of Judah under diverse kings sell to
Idolatry? In what state was it, when Elias pitifully complained, that he only
was left, and all other were departed from God? Where was the enternall face
of the church at that times In what state was it when Esaias, Jeremy,
Ezechiel, and all the Prophets of God were persecuted and put to death. I pray
you was not Jury then called the people of God? Had they not at that time the
law of God? Did not they use his ceremonies? Did not they brag and make
their auaunte that they could not err? that the truth could not depart
from the mouth of their priests and doctors? that they had the temple of
God, the temple of God? Yes certainly they had even then the law of God. They
had even then the sacraments and ceremonies by God appointed: or else the
Prophet? would never have used their temple or compante of their prayers and
ceremonies. Yet how miserably the law of God and his sacraments were corrupted
among them, it appears by that Esaias says: The silver of the people of God is
iourned into dross. How they interteined the messengers, that God sent to
reform his law, it is euidente in this, that all the Prophets were slain
among them. This external church then did err, this external church
refused the truth of Gods law. This external church did persecute the
Prophets. And yet did not the Prophets think, that they could cast them
out of his true church, or make them not true members of his people, to which
the promises were made. Neither did the Prophets for that cause cease to call
for a redress of the pure law and ceremonies of God, and worshipyng him
according to his holy word. They did not refrain to tell even those, that faib
they were the chosen people of god, the elect vineyarde of God, the city and
habitacion of God, that they had fortaken the law of God, that they followed
their own devises, that they worshipped God in vain with their owist
tradicions. And therefore that he would not acknowledge them any more for his
people: that he would set his vineyarde open to spoil: that he would bring
his own city into thraldom and captivity. After the captivity of Babylon,
when the same church was restored, and his people taught by adversity to
reform the law, and receive again the right worshippinge of god appointed in
his word it continued of many years, but that it was again corrupted
horribly, and led far out of the way, to lowinge again their own
fantasies. For when Christ him self came, for whose cause God had so
preserved that people, they said, that they had Moses law, that they were the
seed of Abraham, that they were the chosen people and true church of God:
that he went about to take away the law and destroy the temple, and for that
cause did they put him to death. In like manner did they use ye Apostles* They
reproved their doctrine as vain and fantastical: they cast them out of
their Synagoges as Schismatikes and Heretics. Yea and, when they did this,
they had in face of the world those things, wherein the church is compted to
consiste. They had doctrine out of the law of God. They has the ministry of
the same by their Priests and Doctors. They had the sacrament of circumsicion
as the covenant, whereby they were admitted as the people of God. They had the
other ceremonies* wherein they were practiced to the confirmation of the same.
They had the counsels whereby the conde^pned Christ, wherein they condemned the
Apostles and refused their doctrine. They bl^med their predicessours, for that
they had ^illed the Prophets: and yet they persecuted Christ and his
Apostels. Shall we think therefore, that the Apostles were not of the church? or
rather shall we indge, that them, which have the gouernemente of the law and
sarr^mentes; and to the world have the fac^ and name of the church, may so
fowly er^e, as they may refuse the true doctrine of gods law, and persecute
the ministors and setters forth of the same^ There lacked not gods promises
among the Jews. There lacked not succession of bishops and ^^istes. There
lacked not opinion of great holiness and austeritie of life. There lacked ^^^t
great s^il and knowledge of the law of god: And yet is it most evident that
they erred: that they refused the truth, that under the name and gay show of
the church, in very deed they persecuted the church. Why shall we not think
that the like maybee in this time? Yea why should we not surely persuade our
selves, by the course of gods beinges, and by the testimonies of holy
scripture, that the like is now in this ^urtime. Our savior Chirst and his
Aposties have left warning abundantly, that it would he so in his churche^ and
especially toward the end of the ^h^^lde. Christ him self prophesied that
desolacion should stand in the holy place that is, in the church. Saint Paul
witnesses that Antichrist should sit in the temple of god, that is, in the
church. Where it is also signified, not that he should be an abiecte in the
church but a power auantinge him self above the name of god. Peter sai^th;
that in the church should be masters and teachers of lies. Paul affirms
for surety, that, in the latter days, such shall come, as shall give eat to
doctrine of the dyuel, for bidding to mary and eat such meats, as god had
created to be taken with thanken geuinge. These things were prophesied to
come, not among Turks and Sarasens, not among Infidels and Paganes, but in
the temple of god, in the church of god, in the society of them that did
profess Christ. We have therefore great cause to mark the working of god, by
the example of the old church among the Jews. We see that the Prophets were
first vered by those, that bare the name of the church, and should have most
gladly received them. We see that in Christ's time and the Apostles, not the
Gentiles first refused the comfortable tidinges of the gospel, but they that
called them self the people of god, and had among them the custody of his
law and ceremonies. Even in like manner we have to think that he will do in
this time, saying ^ee has of the same forewarned us. For even as the old law
and religion of the Jews was a shadow and pattern of the true relygion brought
in by Christ so the state and manner of that church may well resemble the state
of Christ's church in the latter time: As the old church therefore to ward
the ^ndedid forsake this law and right use of gods ceremonies, and, being
denyeded in sundry sects, devised new worshippinges according to their d^^^^
fantasies: in so much that, for the maintera^ce thereof, they refused Christ
and his Apostles So in like manner and we justly think, that the church, after
Christ toward the end of the world, shall depart from the truth of Gods
word, and right ministration of his sacraments, cleautinge to their own
inter pretacions? and being divided in sundry sects of religion, for the
defense of the saine, shall refuse and cast out of the church such, as god will
send so renew the truth of his holy word and gospel. Wherefore it ought to
comfort and confirm us, and cause us to think, that we be in deed in the
church, rather then to fear us: saying they, that in the pomp and glorious
face of the world seem to have the gouernmente of the church, does refuse us
and take us to be none of the church. For such they were always, that from
the beginnynge refused and oppressed the truth: Such they were, that vexed the
Prophets: Such they were, that refused Christ: Such they were, that persecuted
his Apostels. Here perhaps some curious conscience will be pricked, and think
it is not likely, that god of his great mercy would suffer his church and so
great a number of people to err so many hundred years. But we must beware
how by our reason of likelihodde, we enter into gods judgment and
vnscrutable providence. We must think of him, as the court of his doinge^
shows us, We must think of him, as his holy word teaches us. We must not
think of him, as our so^de reason will lead us. Is it not merueilous, think
you, and to our judgment vnscrutable, that thousands of years he suffered
all the nation^^ of the earth to be ^^selled in: Pola^^y, and opened his
knowledge to only one little people of the Jews? Is it not merue^lous, that,
of.xij. parts of that one people, he suffered.x. and a halse to forsake him at
one time: yea and that one part, that remained, not a fold times clean to
give ouel: the trus worshyppinge of god: so that in those days he might scante
seente to have any true church upon the whole face of yt earth. Be not these
things beyond the likelyhoddes of man's feeble reason? Nay ^^^e not say with
S. Paul, O vnscru^^sse and Botomlesse deepenes of his diu^^^e judgment, and
leave to seek what is likely in his ddinges? The Jews were his chosen people,
from which the sausour of the world^ should rise* They had among them his law
a^^^ ceremonies, his abundant promises and sacraments. They had his
tabernacle, out of the which he, as present, spoke unto them. If then the
depenes of gods judgment were such toward them, that he suffered them so
often and so long to go astraie: and sense Christ's time most miserably. 1560.
years has scattered them upon the earth: may (...) not fear the like also
among us in this latter time? Does not S. Paul put us in fear, that, if god
did break away the natural branches of the Olive, he would also, if cause
were given, cut of those, that were but grassed on beside nature: Does not
Christ in the gospel forewarne us, that in the latter days should be such
mischief and blindness in the church: that even the elect should be in
danger to be seduced? And shall we then hope at that time to seacute;e the
true church in so triumphant glory of the world, as it shall make even the
greatest Emperors and Princes of the earth in world, might and power subject
unto it? Truly that agrees not with Christ's prephecie, nor the warninges of
the Apostels, wherein they tell us of the great danger, that shall happen in
the church, toward the end of the world* That it may not be thought to be
my euely fantasy that the adversary of Christ shall in the latter days sit
in the church, and bear the face of religion: Hear you what Hylarie says;
Conrra Auxentiu^^n. In whose time the Arrians, by the furtherance of the
Emperor, and a number of Bishops, took on them the name of the Catholics,
and persecuted the true christian church. Ye do ill (says he) to be infout
with walls: ye do ill to worship the church of God in gay honfes and
buildinges: ye do ill to bring the name of peace under them. Us it not certain
that Antichrist shall sit in them and Mountains, woddes, marrice^, prison^,
denne^ are more safe for me. For in those the Prophets, either vosuntarely
abydinge, or cast thither by violence, did prophecy by the spirit of god. How
could a man more plainly declare that the true church both then was and after
should be vexed and persecuted by those, that, in sight and power of external
government, were taken for the church. At is notable also that Augustine has
Deciuit. dei. lib. 20. speaking of Antichriste, Rectius putant etiam latin
dici sicut in graeco est: non in templo, sed in te^plum dei sedeat, ^^nq ipse
sit templum dei, quod est ecclesia. Some think it were better spoken in Latin
as it is in the Gre^e, as to say, that A^^ithriste sho^th sit, not in the
temple of God, but as the temple of God: a^ though himself were the temple of
God* which is the church. What Bernarde did think of the church in his time
above 400. years ago, it appears in viuers places. There is no sound part
now (faith he) in the clergy: it remains therefore that the man of sin be
revealed. And in an other place. All my friends vt now become my foes, all my
mainteinere ^^e now become aduetsari^^* The (...) of Christ ^o service so
Antichrist. If I should ^^eite out of authour^, and Histories al such
testimonies as serves to this purpose, I should be a great deal longer then
this place requires. I will therefore at this time omit them. Seting therefore
it does evidently appear; that in the latter time they shall bear the name of
the church, which in deed be not the right church? we must book
diligently that we gene not over to every power that will claim the name of
the church, but consider, whither the true mark of the holy church be among
them. What is the true mark of Christ's church.
Christ the true pastor, noting which were his sheep, faseth, (...) sheep
will here my voice. And as by his word and voice he calls them into his
fold, so by his sacraments there he marketh them. The right church therefore
as the fold of Christ has the true word of God and use of his sacraments
according to the same, for the due marks thereof. So much then, as the word of
God and use of the sacraments be corrupted among ady people, or congregation,
so far shall that company be from the shate of the true and perfect church of
Christ.

Therefore it is easy to judge what is to be thought of them that leave ye
word of God, and worship him well nere altogether with their own devised
pha^tasies. That the scripture, which is the voice and word of God, is the
true trial of the church, we have good authority in the ancient fathers. S.
Augustine contra Petilianu^. cap. 2. The controversy is between ve^ the
Donatiste^ (says he) where the church is. Therefore what shall we dot? shall
we seek if in our own words, or in the words of out forde Jesus Christ
the head thereof? and think we ought rather to seek it in his words, that is
truth, and best knows hie body. Therefore they be not to be compted the
church; that with their own words will san they he the church: but they
whose doctrine ^^^reeth with the word of Christ that is head of the church.
In like manner has Chrysostom in Mat. cap. 14. wherefore (says he) in this
th^^ off chaif^ou^ men ought to resort to the se^^^^ ture^, because in this
time since theresie is come into the churches, there can be no other proof of
true christianity, nor any other refuge for christian men desyryng to know the
tune faith, but only the holy for ipture^: for before it was she wed by many
means which was the church of Christ, which was gentilitie. But now to them
that will know, which is the right church of Christ, there is no means but
only by the scriptures. S. Augustine has the like in many words in the. 16.
cap. contra epistolam Periliani, which I let pass here for breuiries sake.
The place begins in this wise, Vtrum Donatistae ecclesiam teneant, non nisi
diuinatu scripturarum canonicis libris ostendant. Quianee nos, ppterea dicimus
nobis credere oportere quod in ecclesia Christ sumus. etc. Wherefore a Christian
conscience, that in this dangerous time will walk safely, must take the word
of god to be his only state: must ^ake the holy scripture to be as well the
rule whereby his shall measure the true pattern of the church, as the very
touchstone whereby he must try all the doctrine of the same. For god in time
paste spoke by his prophets many and sundry ways, but last of all by his dear
son. Whose doctrine, how perfect it was, the woman of Samaria witnesses
saying. When Messiah comes he shall tel^^ all things. And the same Messiah
him self says I have made known to you all that I have heard of my father.
And therefore sendinge his Apostles he says. Teach them to observe all that I
have commanded. As if he had said, ye shall declare unto the gentiles not
whatsoever shall seem good to your self, but those things that I have
commanded you. Those things therefore are to be hard, those things we must
stay upon: In those we must seek our salvation and life. What soever is not
agreinge with them, must be cast of and compted of no forse. So says Origin.
We must needs call the holy scriptures to witness. In Hierem. Hom. 1.
For our senses and declaracions without those witnesses have no credit. So
says Hierom. That has not authority in the scripture, in even as lighily
contenmed, as it is spoken, And again in psalm. 86. Consider what he says.
Which were in it, not which be in it. So that, except the Apostles, whatsoever
should be spoken afterward, let it be cut of: let it not have authority.
Therefore be one never so holy after the Apostlee, be he never so eloquent, he
has not authority. Because the lord will make his declaracion in the writing
of people and princes that were in it. In that place Hierome at large declares
that the doctrine of god must be proved by such wrytinges as were in the
church until the Apostles time, and those that after followed to be of no
sufficient authority, were they never so holy. Let us stay therefore upon the
canonical scriptures and holy word of god. For (says S. Cyprian) Hereof arise
schisms, because we self not to the head, nor have recourse to the spring,
nor keep the commandments of the heavenly master. Let he ask Peter (says
Ambrose) let us ask Paul if we will find out the truth And Christ him self
bids us search the scriptures and not presume of our own spirit upon
unwritten verities beside the word, of god. What credit is to be given to
those that so speak, Chrysostom teaches us. As Christ (says he) when he
understood that they said commonly of him that he was a deceiuour, to purge
him self of that suspicion witnessed that he spoke not of him self, because
he spoke out of the law and prophets: even so if any man saying that he has
the holy ghost speaks of him self and not out of the gospele, we must not
believe him, For as Christ said the holy ghost shall not speak of him self,
but shall declare unto you those things that it has heard. That is those
things, that I have spoken, he shall confirm. These words of Chrysostom
clean overthrows ye ground of all your unwritten verities beside the word of
god, much more such doctrines as be expressly against the same, as is your sole
receiuinge and communion under one kind. Wherefore neither your multitude of
sundry nations, and great learned clerks, neither the continuance of.ix. C.
years (if it were so,) neither the name of your holy mother the church, which
you so often repete, can be any sure proof of your doctrines without the
express testimonies of the scripture to witness the same. For the holy ghost,
which you assure your church of, does not speak of himself (says
Chrisostom) but confirms that Christ spoke before. After that you have at
your pleasure in sundry parts of your treatise charged him that you write
against with folly, rashness, arrogancy, and impudency, even in those points
that the same crimes may be more justly returned to your self and yours: in
this place also you endeavor to debase and imminishe his estimation,
extenuatinge his age, continuance in study of holy scripture and manner of life,
in comparison of your late holy fathers, which you do greatly extolle. Such is
your shifts, when the matter will not healpe it self, to transfer your
talk to the persons, and by scorneful disdeining of other to procure your self
authority. What your opinion is of him, your writing declares: but they,
which have been of longer and better acquaintance with him then you are, do
right well know, and in his behalf do protest, that.xx. years sense he was
able fully to have answered stronger arguments for these matters, then any
that you have brought at this time. But whatsoever he is to you, god be
praised in him, he so lives, as the most malicious of your part cannot justly
blame him: and his learnings is such, as, when the matter shall be tried, I
doubt not, but it will fall out, that he with his.xl. years age, and such other,
whom in like manner you disdain, shall show more true divinity, then a many of
your hoare heads and great reading clerks, as you think: whose authority
and name alone ye judge sufficient to bear down whatsoever shall be brought
against them.

Toward the end you show your opinion of real presence of Christ's 13. Cap.
Of real presence.
body in the sacrament, and in that part blame us, as though we had more
acquainted our self with Ismael and Agar (as you say) then with Abraham and
Isaac: thereby signif^yng that we misdoubted the almighty power of god in
bringinge that to pass, which he promises or speaks in the institution of
his sacraments. But I must needs judge this to be in you, either ignorant
blindness, or hateful malice. Blindness, if you do not understand and see;
that in this controversy we stay not upon gods omnipotency: malice, if you
know it and vpbrayde us with the contrary. We grant as freely as you with
Abraham and Isaac; That god is able to perform whatsoever he both promise. We
grant as freely as you with the Angel, Th^^ no word it (...) to god. We
grant as freely as you with David, That god has done whatsoever his (...) We
grant with the holy fathers, that (...) great and merueilous mutation and
change is made in this sacrament by the power of good word. We detest even as
much as you all such, as see no more but common bread or a bare sign in this
holy supper: neither can we think well of you, when you do so falsely charge
us with that assertion. But how can you show, that it was gods holy will to have
so many miracles wrought, as you without necessity do make in this
sacrament? Yea and of such sort as be contrary to the manner of all those
miracles, that the holy scrinture mencioneth to be wrought by his divine
power. Moses turned his rod into a serpent: but all that were present saw
that it was a serpent. He made water miraculously to come out of the rock: but
all the children of Israel saw and tasted of the water. Christ turned water
into wine: but all the company drank and felt it to be wine. The same is to
be said of all the residew of merueylous works. And when gods power had
miraculously turned these things, that, into the which they were turned,
reserved and kept that nature, that was agreeable to such a thing. The
serpent had the very nature of a serpent: the water was of such nature, as it
behooved water to be: the wins lost not the right nature of wins. Otherwise it
may seem rather a iudglinge then miraculous workinge. You never read in all
the course of the scripture, that gods power turned the substance of any
thing, and left the qualitees of the other thing that it was before: saving
only in this case that you imagine it. God is able to turn darkness into
light, and light into darkness but it were madness to require at gods almighty
power to make light, and not to have a shininge, that is, to make light, to
be light and not to be light all at ones: or to make light and darkness all
one. This were nothing but to pervert the order of gods wisdom. Do you not
this in the sacrament, when you apoint the body of Christ to be without
quantitee, proportion and figure, or to be in a thousand places at ones: which
is proper only to his divinity? Is not this to take away the nature of a body
from his body, and in deed to affirm it to be no body? And yet we say not,
but that god is able to work that also, if it be his pleasure. But we say it
was not gods will and pleasure in ordeining the sacrament to have it so. For
neither is there any necessity, that should constrain him to it: nor does his
word teach us, that over he did the like. Oh ye will say we must believe
Christ's words, This is my body, which be of as great power now, as they were
in the parlour at Hierusalent, to make the very body of Christ really and
carnaly present: and so the Catholic church (say you) does teach us.
Wherefore upon this verity once settled, diverse other things must of
necessity follow by drifte of reason, although they be not expressly
mentioned in scripture: as the adoration of the sacrament, the turninge of the
substance of bread and wine, the being of Christ's body in many places at
on^^. etc. In deed in such is the vanity of man's reason in gods holy
mysteries. For when it is once departed from the true sense of gods word, it
draws in, as it were by linkes, a number of other absudities: none of which
can have any profft in scripture, seeing the first root of them came not out of
the true sense of scripture. Even so, when you had devised and given to
Christ's words another sense, then the meaning of them does importe, no
marvel, if the same reason do lead you to a multitude of other doctrines, not
only beside the word of god, but expressly against it. Whether that
interprefacion, that you make upon these words, do more agree with the
scripture and ground of our faith, then that which we teach: any indifferent
man, that is not contentiously bente to the one part or to the the other, may
easily discern. Your sense is, when Christ says. This is my body, that the
natural substance of the bread, which Christ took, was turned into the
natural substance of the very body, that Christ dyed in: notwithstanding that
the color, taste, form, and power to nor^she; that were before in the
substance of bread, does still remanyn^* And yet under those qualities and
accidences of bread; is really contained the natural body of Christ, having
neither bigness, nor any proportion or sensible quality rightly apperteininge
to such a body. To express this your meaning, you use to say, that the bread
is transsubstantiate into the body of Christ. In what tongue or language was it
ever seeue: In what author was it ever read that Sun^, es, fui, the verb
substantive might be iuterpreted by transsubstantiare? Or if the propriety of
the word will not in any wise admit that sense: what one sentence or clause
have you in all the course of the bible, that under the like words can receive
the like interpretacion: Or what prouses can you bring by conference of other
places of the scripture, that these ^^^des in this place ought of necessity in
this manner to be interpreted. If neither the propriety of the tongue can bear
the sense, nor you can bring any examples or prouses out of the word^ of god,
where upon men in so weightis a matter may stay their consciences is it not
extreme cruelty in you, under pain of damnasion to compel them to believe it?
Here you will burden us with the authority of the holy catholic church:
which, as you say, has always received and allowed that interpretacion. Unto
this I answer, that the catholic church of Christ never generally received
the meaning of any sentence, but that they gathered the same, either by
examples of ye like, or else by grounded reasons, taken out of the scripture,
declared, that of necessity it must be so understood. This rule was
appointed to the church by Christ and his Apostles: who in their doubts
willed men, Serutari scripturas, to search the scriptures. Therefore when the
church decreed against the Arrians and other Heretics, that in this sentence,
In principio erat verbum, the word was in the beginnynge, that Verbum was to
be taken for the person of the son of God: Or when they decreed, that the
son was eiusdem substantie cum patre, of the same substance with the father:
they stayed not only upon their own consent and authority: but brought a
great number of prouses out of the scripture, that it must of necessity be so
taken: as it appears in Cyrill and other of the holy fathers. Now then if
this, that you defend, be the judgment of the catholic church it has
undoubtedly good proffe in the scripture: or if you can bring for it no such
testimony out of the word of god, it is euydent that you do wrongfully
father this interpretation upon ye holy catholic church, and under the covert
of that name you do promote and set forth your own error. And this much for
your opinion. On the the other part, when we interpret Christ's words: we say
it is a figurative speech, and such as the holy ghost often uses in the
institucion of sacraments and ceremonies, or in the deseriuyng of other
mysteries. The figure is named Metonymia: when the name of the thing is given
unto the sign. When these words therefore be laid unto us, This is my body,
we say it is most true. But mistically, sacramentally, figuratively, not
really and according to the natural substance. For this interpretacion we
have a number of examples out of the canonical scriptures. God, speaking of
circumsicion, says: This is my couenante. And yet was circumsicion not the
couenante indeed, but the sign and testimony, whereby they were assured to be
the people of God and partakers of his promises. The Paschale lamb is called
the Passover: and yet was it but a testimony and remembrance of the great
benefit of God, in passing his plague from them. This is the victory, says
S. Paul, that overcome the world, even your faith: And yet is not our faith
the victory it self, but the instrument or means whereby the victory is
gotten. In like manner diverse other places: As, I am a vine: God is a consumyng
fire: The seven kine be seven years: And that S. Paul has to the Corinthes.
Petracrat Christus: The rock was Christ. And yet was not the rock Christ
himself really: unless ye will take it, as he there does indeed, for the
spiritual rock. For that spiritual rock was Christ himself verily and
indeed, not only in a mystery or signification. So in the Lords supper, if
you take bread for spiritual bread, as Christ does in the.vi. of John: I will
say with you, that it is really and essentially the very true body of Christ
it self, and not only mistically. If we had not these many examples with a
great number me in the holy scripture to justify our manner of
interpretacion: yet the very words, which the spirit of God by singular
providence has used in the Evangelist and S. Paul, does manifestly lead us
unto this sense, rather then to that you have devised. For in ye second part
of the sacrament, where Math. and Mark say: This is my blood of the new
Testament. That, Luke and Paul utter in this manner: This is the new Testament
in my blood. Which can not be otherwise understand, but that this sacrament
is a testimony or pledge of his last will and gift of our salvation
confirmed by his most precious blood. Wherefore if you say never so often times
with Math. and Mark, This is my body: This is my blood: we will repete as
often with Luke and Paul, who were led with the same spirit, This is the new
Testament in my body and blood.

This interpretacion and meaning of Christ's words, which we gather by
conference with other places of holy scripture, is confirmed also by the
consent of the aunciente fathers in many places. Whose testimonies I will recite
more copiously: partly, because you seem to signify, that they altogether
make for you in this mattier: partly, that all men may se how unjustly your
sort do term us Figuratores, because we interpret that sentence by a
figure, whereas it is not our devise, but the exposicion of all the aunciente
fathers of the primative church. First I will begin with Augustine contra
Adimantum cap. 12. There it appears that Adimantus used Moses words, Sanguis
est anima, trumake this sonde argument. ^loud is the ^^oule, says Moses,
(...) flesh and blood (says Paul) shall not possess the kyndome of God.
Therefore the soul shall not possess the kingdom of God. Augu^tnes answer to
that argument is; that this sentence Sanguis est anima, must be under standed
figuratively, and not literally, as he in that argument took it. To prove
that, he uses these words of Christ, Hoc est corrusmeum. Saying in this
wise. Possum interpre^^ illud praeceptum in signo positum esse. No^ enim
dubitauit dominus dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum corporis sui. I
may (says Austine) interzete that precept to consiste in a sign or figure.
For the lord bonbted not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of
his body. As if he had said, in a far greater mattier then this, that is, in
institutinge the sacrament of his death and our redemption, the lord doubted:
not to use a figure, and to say, this is my body, when be gave the sign of his
body. Therefore this sentence, ^loud is the soul, man sooner be interpreted
figuratively. So that the meaning of it is, that blood is the sign of the
soul or life, and not the very soul in deed. The same Augustine in his
exposition upon the thirds psalm. Iudam (inquit) adhibuit ad conuiuium, in quo
corporis and sanguinis sui figuram discipulis suis commendauit. He admitted
Judas to that feast, wherein he commended to his disciples the figure of his
Body and blood. The same exposition Tertullian makes most evidently in his
forth book against Martion. Panem (inquit) acceptum and distributum
discipulis corpus suum illum fecit: Hoc est corpus meum dicendo: Hoc est,
figura corporis mei. Christ (says Tertullian) made that bread, that he took
in his hands, and gave to his disciples, his body saying, this is my body:
that is to say, the sign of my body.

What can be playner then this exposition of this ancient father, if men did
not study rather to maintain parts, then to confirm truth. His purpose was
there to prove against Martion that Christ had a true body in deds because in
the sacrament he ordained the sign or figure of his body, and therefore
afterward he adds. Figura autem non esset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. That
should not be a figure of his Body, onles he had a very true body in deed.
Augustine again in. 23. Epistle to Bonifacius. Si (inquit) sacramenta
similitudinem quandam earum rerum, quarum sunt sacramenta, non haberent, omnino
sacramenta non essent. Ex hac autem similitudine plerumque rerum ipsarum nomina
sortiuntur. Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum sacramentum corporis Christi
corpus Christi est: and sacramentum sanguinis Christi sanguis Christi est, ita
sacramentum fidei, sides est, And a littell after. Sicut de ipso Baptismo
Apostolus, Consepulti (inquit) sumus Christo per baptismum in mortem. Non ait,
sepulturam significamus, sed pror sus (inquit) consepulti sumus. Sacramentum
ergo tantae rei, non nisi eiusdem rei vocabulo nuncupauit. If sacraments had
not a certain similitude of those things, where of they be sacraments, they
should not be sacraments at all. And for this similitude or likeness they
commonly have the names of the things them self. Therefore as the sacrament
of Christ's body after a certain fashion is Christ's body: and the sacrament
of his blood is his blood: so the sacrament of faith is faith. etc. As the
Apostle speaks of Baptism: We be buried (says he) in death to Christ by
baptism. He faith not, we signify burial, but plainly, we be buried.
Therefore he does nothing else but term the sacrament of so great a thing, by
the name of the thing it self. Saint Augustines meaning is to declare to
Bonifacius, that Baptism might be called by the name of faith, and that
therefore the Infant baptized might be truly affirmed to believe, or to have
faith, because it had Baptism the sacrament of faith. This he proves by
comparison with the sacrament of Christ's body and blood: Which, for a
similitude or likeness, he says is called the body and blood of Christ, and
that after a certain fashion: adding, that Baptism in like manner is faith.
And yet no man will be so unwise to say, that Baptism is faith in deed really.
Wherefore the like is to be judged of the sacrament of the Lords body, whereby.
S. Augustine proves it.

This also is diligently to be noted that Augustine says, all sacraments
generally be uttered by name of the things them self, because of a certain
similitude or likeness: and therefore Paul says not we signify our buryall,
but we be buried: calling the sacrament by the name of yt thing, as Austine
says. Again, in Libro sententiarum prosperi, as it is recited in the decrees
De consecratione distine. 2. cap. Hoc est. The same father has these words.
Coelestis panis, qui est caro Christi, suo modo nom inatur corpus Christi: cum
reuera sit sacramentum corporis Christi. Vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis, quae
sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio, mors, crucifixio, non rei veritate sed
significante misterio. The heavenly bread, which is the flesh of Christ, after
a fashion is named the body of Christ: where as in deed it is but the sacrament
of his body. And the offeringe of the fleash, which is done with the priests
hands, is called the passion, the death, the crucifiynge of Christ, not in
verity of the thing, but in a signifiynge mystery. The gloss in expounding
these words of Augustine, says, this. Caeleste sacramentum, quod vere
repraesentat Christi carnem dicitur corpus Christi, sed improprie: vnde
dicitur: suo modo: and, non rei veritate, sed significante misterio. Vt sit
sensus: vocatur corpus Christi, id est, significat. It is called the body of
Christ, (says he) that is to say, it signifies the body of Christ. To this I
will add Chrysostom, Operis imperfecti Homil. 11. Si, inquit, vasa
sanctificata transfer ad priuatos vsus peceatum est, in quibus non est verum
corpus Christi, sed misterium corporis Christi continetur, quanto magis vasa
corporis nostri. etc. If (says he) it be sin to transfer holy vessels
unto private uses, in which is not the true body of Christ, but yt mystery of
his body is contained: how much less should we. etc. What can more plainly
declare ye figurative sense of those words of christ, hoc est corpus meu^ then
that Chrysostom says, in which vessels is not the very body, but the
mystery of it. For if those words were literally to be understood (as you
say) then should the holy vessels that conteyne the sacraments have in them,
not only the mystery of Christ's body and blood, but his very body really in
deed. Which Chrysostom denies. In the. 83. Homil. upon Matthew the same
doctor says. Si mortuus Jesus non est, cuius simbolum aut signum hoc
sacrificium est. If Christ be not dead: of whom is this sacrifice a figure and
sign? And upon the. 22. psalm. Vt quotidie in similitudinem corporis and
sanguinis Christi, panem and vinum secundum ordinem Melchisedech nobis
ostenderet in sacramento. That he might daily show us in the sacrament bread
and wine according to the order of Melchisedech, as the similitude of his body
and blood. As before he used Symbolum, signum, misterium: so he has here,
Similitudinem. Likewise. Dionisius de ecclesiastica Hierarchia: cap. 3. Per
venerabilia signa Christus signatur and sumitur. By those reverent signs
Christ is signified and received. Ambrose also, De hijs qui imciantur
misterijs. cap. 9. Ipse clamat dominus Jesus, Hoc est corpus meum. Ante
benedictionem verboru^ caelestium alia species nominatur, Post consecrationem
corpus Christi significatur. Our Lord Jesus cries, this is my body. Before
the blessing of the heavenly words one kind is named: after consecratione
Christ's body is signified, In the. 4. book also, De sacramentis. cap* 8 The
same Ambrose says. Fac nobis hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabile^,
acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis and sanguinis domini nostri Jesus
Christi. Make to us this offering alowable, reasonable, acceptable, which is
the figure of the body and blood of our lord Jesus Christ. Here he acknowlegeth
the sacrament to be a figure. In the. 6. book De sacrame^tis. cap. 1. He has
these words also. Ideo in similitudinem quidem accipis sacramentum, sed verae
naturae gratiam virtutemque assequeris Therefore thou receiuest the sacrament
as a similitude, but thou atteinest the grace and virtue of the true nature in
deed. This sentence of Ambrose contains our whole doctrine of the sacrament
of Christ's body and blood: which is, that it is a figure or sign of his
body: and yet not a bare or naked figure, but such a one, as there by we
atteine in deed the full grace and benefit of his body: that suffered for us
and was crucified upon the cross, and have our souls fed and norished with
the same to everlasting life. Origin upon Matthew says. Panis sanctificatus
iuxta id, quod habet materiale, in ventrem abit, and in sesessum encitur. etc.
The sanctified bread (says he) according to that it has material, passes
into the bealy, and is avoided out of the body. But according to the prayer,
that comes to it, it is profitable: making that the mind understands and
has regard to that is profitable. Neither is it the matter of the bread,
but the word spoken over it, that profits him, which receives it not
unworthily. And thus much have I spoken of the typical and figurative body.
Much also may be said of the lively word it self, which was made fleash and
very meat in deed: which meat, he that eats shall surely live for ever:
which no ill man can eat. etc. Here note you, first, that Origin says
that the mattier of the consecrated bread of the sacrament passes into the
bealy and is avoided out, expressly against^ your interpretacion of Christ's
words, whereby ye say the bread is transsubstantiate, and no mattier of it
left^ but only accidencies. Secondly that he calls the sacrament, Typicum
and symbolicum corpus, the typical and figurative body. Thirdely that he
affirms constantly, that no ill man can eat the very flesh of the second
person in Trinity. And yet that is one of the necessary labels that your
sort does teach to depend upon your wrongefull interpretacion of Christ's
words. Wherefore Origin with this one sentence teareth of diverse of your
counterfaited Labels, that you stitche to Christ's testamentes by drifte of
reason, without the warrant of his holy word. More over Austine de doctrina
Christ. lib. 3. cap. 9. After he has declared, that in the new Testamente God
has left unto his people but few sacraments and ceremontes, and the same to
be understand not carnally and seruilely according to the letter: and there
for example has mentioned baptism and the celebracion of the Lords body and
blood: in the end he adds these words. In which (says he) as, is follow
the letter, and to take the sygure for those things, that are signified by
them, in a poincie of servile infirmity: so, to interpret the signs evil,
is the poincie of wandrynge erron^. As he counts it a fond and wicked error
not to interpret the sigkes well and according to Gods word: so, by a
straight litteral sense, to take the signs for the things signified, he
esteems a servile infirmity. What can be more plainly spoken against that
interpretacion that you make upon these words of Christ: whereby you do
bind us to a servile and litterall sense of this word, Js, and in such forte
take the signs of this sacrament for the things signified, as you affirm
bread and wine (which S. Augustine and the other Doctors call the external
signs) clean to be turned into the body and blood of Christ.

The same Augustine contra Adima^rum Manich. The Lord faieth, this is my
bobie, when he gave the sign of his body. Also upon the. 98. psalm. he speaks
in this manner. Ye shall not eat that body, that you se, not ye shall not drink
that blood, that they shall shed. It is a mystery, that I tell you, which
shall reliue you, if you understand it spiritually. Will you not yet
understand, from whence our men received this interpretacion? will you not yet
perceive, that we sucked not it out of our own singers, but were led unto it
by the testimonies of holy scriptures and teaching of these aucient fathers?
Will you not cease unjustly to bourden us, that we cavil and dally upon
titles and sillables: whereas your self in this sentence would drive us to
such an understanding of this one syllable, Js, as the like is not in ye whole
Bible? But ye will aledge for your self, as you signify in you writing, that
Ambrose, Cyprian, Chrysostom, and other ancient fathers have in this case
used the terms of transmutacion, alteration, conversion, transelementation.
etc. Whereby they have plainly declared their meaning to be as yours is: and
that no bread there remains, but only the substance of Christ's body. True it
is in deed, that those holy fathers used such words, not for that they were
of your opinion, but only to thend they might more reverently, as meet was,
and more lively express the dignity and effect of that heavenly mystery:
wherein Jesus Christ, by his infallible promise, unfeignedly gives to the faith
of his people the very fruition of his body and blood, with the hole benefit
of his precious death and passion: and, by the workinge of the holy ghost,
merueilously joins us in one body together with him. Is not this think you a
merueilous change and to man's estimation a miraculous work: when by the power
of the holy ghost and word of god, of commen bread and wine, such as we daily
feed our bodies with, is made the dredful and reverent sacraments and
mysteries of Jesus Christ: whereby (as I said) he does, not by a bare sign
only, but verily and in deed, endow is faithful people, and make them
partakers of his body and blood? Yea and that in such sort, that even as truly
as the bread does norishe our body: and even as truly as the wine does
comfort our spirits: so truly and unfeignedly does the heavenly food of his
body and blood toren and shed for us, by fait h in time of that holy supper, no
ryshe, strengthen, and comfort our soul: and, by the wonderful workinge of
his spirit, make our bodies also apt to resurrection. Truly when I earnestly
consider the effect of this sacrament, as it must needs be by the truth of
Christ's promises, I confess I am not able with words to utter so much, as
in my mind I do conceive, and together withal eschew the absurdity of your
real presence and transsubstantion. Wherefore I merueile not if those holy
fathers fearinge no such inconveniences, but lokinge rather pithely to
express the thing, did use those earnest words and manners of speakinge: and
yet mente not as you now of their words do gather. All though no similitude
can sufficiently declare the thing: I will, for the simplar forte, so much as
I can, endeavor by a comparison to set for the, that I do conceive. If a
temporal prince, for certain causes mouinge him, would give you a thousand
pound land by the year, and for that purpose had caused the wrytinges to be
made: The same wrytinge, until it be confirmed by the prince, is nothing but
common parchment and ink framed into letters by some inferior man's hand,
neither does it bring any effect: but when the prince has once added to his
seal, and confirmed ye grant, it is no more called parchement or common
writing, but the kings letters patents. And now has that reverence, that all
to whom they be showed, do veil there bonetes, as bringinge with it some
part of the princes majesty. Such a change is now made in those trifelinge
things, that before no man esteemed. You also, to whom this land should be
given, would not think this writing common parchement blotted with ink, but
the perfect deed of your prince: whereby you were assuredly possessed of the
foresaid lands. Moreover, when the prince, at the delivery of the same, should
say: sir, here is a thousand pound land that I give freely to you and to your
heirs. I think you would not be so fond to think, either that the Prince
does mock you: because you see not the lands presently, or else to conceive
with your self, that you have the lands really enclosed within the compass
of your writing. For the kings authority, in ye writing, gives you as full
possession of the lands, as though you held the^, if it were possible, in
your hand. And you in this case might justly say to your friend, showing
your letters patents: Lo, here is a thousand pound land, that my prince has
given me. If then there be so great a change made in framyng the covenant and
deed of an earthly prince: If his seal do bring such force and effect to
his gift and letters patentes: How much more merueilous change, alteracio^, or
transmutacion must we think it to be: when the base creatures of bread and
wine be consecrated into the sacrament of the everlasting couenante and
testament of Jesus Christ: wherein he gives us, not earthly vanities, but the
precious food of his body and blood, remission of sins, and the heritage of
his heavenly kingdom? how much more of effect must this sacrament be, that
is sealed with the promise and words of our savior Christ: who is truth it
self, and cannot deceive any, that trusts in him? Wherefore, to express
this change of the external elements into so heavenly mysteries: to show the
effect of this sacrament: to withdraw the ignorant minds of the people from
the profane cogitacion of a bare sign in this mattier, the ancient fathers
had good cause to use such words. And yet therein do they nothing at all
defend your miraculous works, that you devise to be made in the Lords
supper. As for the similitude, wherewith you would declare the necessity of
your Labels, depending upon the first founded absurdity, it is both of as small
force as other, that you before used: and you handle it with more sluttish
eloquence, then is meet for such a mattier as this is. For the drawyng of the
Capons, the scumming of the pot, the stinkyng water, the hewyng of wodde, the
puttyng on the broche with guts, garbage and al. etc. Be phrases and terms
more meet for the kitchinne, then for the Diuinitee school, and such as your
self, I think, would not have used, if your mockyng spirit had not so
rauisshed you, as you wist not what you did. If we had resembled your Labels,
which you cut out by drift of reason, unto so base mattiers: you would have
said that we had rayled, and done otherwise then it became us. But sens your
self does so take them, we must think, that God oftentimes moves his
adversaries to utter truth against them selves. But if the same master, that
you imagine to command his servant to make ready, that he may dine, did
mean only that he should set upon the table such cold meat, as was in the
house, because he saw no cause or necessity of greater provision: And the
servant, upon his own foolish head, would mistake his masters
commandment, and conceyuing that he would have great strangers, did kill
his Capons, Chickens, and other provision about his house, and busied
himself, with more labor then thank, to make them ready: Do you not
think, I pray you, that he might justly be compted an unprofitable servant
and worthy by correction to be taught more wit, for that he puts his
master to greater chargies, and himself to more pains then the mattier
required: if he had rightly understood his masters will and commandment?
Even so sir those things, that you say follows by force of reason and
argument upon the first sentence, do follow indeed only upon that sense, that
your self does imagine mistakyng your masters will and pleasure, and not upon
that meaning that Christ himself would have his words to be taken in. For
all that he would have done may be sufficiently done without the working of so
many miracles, as you in this case would drive his omnipotency unto.
Wherefore we are not so much to be blamed for mistrustynge the almighty
power of God, which we confess to be in all things, that his pleasure is to
have it shown, as you are for presuming upon the same to have miracles wrought
beside his will and without necessity.

For by the means of your manifold miracles without the express word of
God, whereupon men's faith in such mattiers should be grounded, you make that
sacrament a torment to try men's weak and feeble consciences: which Christ
ordained to be a comfortable and spiritual feeding, to increase and strengthen
the consciences of christian people. This have I thought good to answer your
defense of private Mass: and, as a champion not meet to match with any
great clerk, yet in such sort as I could, to resist your assaute, that you
make upon the foresaid protestacion, not as good David valiantly assauted
Goliath in defense of his Prince and country: but as amorous Paris
traitorously shot at Achilles in ye behalf of his love Helena. For neither
is it Goliath that you fight against in his bravery, as you say, bragging
against the people of God, but rather Achilles manfully reuengynge the inceste
committed with the spouse of Christ, which with your amorous cups you have
allured from him: nor yet do you come stoutely as David did in the name of the
living God, before the face of both the armies to hurl your stones, but
privily out of a corner shoot your arrows against him as Paris against
Achilles. You were afraid perhaps, if he had seen you, that, with shame
enough, he would have wrong your bow and arrows out of your hand: but truly
I think he would not have so done, but rather, knowing that in this quarrel
he could not be wounded, he would have suffered you to shoot your in, and
with his naked hand receiving your blount arrows, in such forte would have
picked them at your face, as for shame either you should have run out of the
place, or at the least submitted your self and yielded to the truth, yt you
protest your self to have forsaken. Wherefore as you have the fear of God, as
you have care of your souls health, I most earnestly exhort you, to leave
study of contencio^: and with a single heart diligently to ponder the reasons on
both parts as the weight of the mattier requires. Consider, as the holy
father Cyprian counsaileth, of what authority Christ's institucion ought to
be: that we should not be so bold to alter any part of those weighty and
great precepts yt so nighly touch the sacrament of our salvation. Consider
yt neither Christ's ordinance, nor the testimony of S. Paul makes any
signification of soole receiuyng, or ministrynge under one kind, but all
contrariwise. Consider that Iustine, Dyonisius, Cyprian, the holy counsel of
Nice, withal other the ancient fathers testify the common manner of the
primative church to have been in form of a communion and that in both kinds.
Consider that Chrysostom and other so earnestly call the people being present
unto it, as they affirm them to do impudently yt do refrain. Consider that
ye manner of the primative church was, as Dyonisius witnesses, yt none did
remain in ye church, but those only that would communicate. Consider ye
Anacletus, Sixtus, the cannons of ye Apostles and Antioch counsel threatened
excommunicacion and punishment to such, as, being present at consecration and
readyng of the lessons of scripture, would not receive. Consider I say, and
unfeignedly weigh these things with your self, and ye cannot choose but se
that the authority of Gods word and consent of the primative church makes
wholly with us in these mattiers. And on the contrary part you shall perceive
that you have no coullor in the scripture for private Mass: that you are feign
to seek defense in the churches authority beside Gods word: that your
reasons be grounded on false principles and such as have no proof at all.
That your aucthorities out of the doctors be either abuses of the primative
church, or such extraordinary cases of necessity, contrary to the common
manner, as they can not be rules to show either what was then orderly done, or
what now ought of right to be done. Be not these gaye reasons think you to
build men's consciences upon? Private Mass is nothing but soole receiuyng in
case of necessity: therefore it is lawful. The Priest may celebrate alone in
thassemble of ye people, because diverse in necessity and extremity received
alone in their private houses. The priest may receive alone when the people
will not, because he is bound to offer, and the people is left free. The
priest may do it when he will, because he may do it in necessity when the
people will not. The minister may receive alone, for company is but an
ornamente and not of the substance of the sacrament. The Doctors in diverse
places name one kind. Therefore one kind only was received of the people. How
will you be able to prove that private Mass is nothing but soole receiuyng in
necessity? How will you be able to prove, that it is al one thing for the
minister in the congregation, and a lay man at home in peril to receive alone?
How will you prove that the priest is bound to the frequentyng of the
sacrament, and the people lest free? How will you prove, that company is but
an accident or ornamente to the sacrament, or that one kind only was
received, because one kind only was named? And yet these arguments must be
good, or else those prouses and testimonies that you would have to seem
invincible, shall indeed be of no force. Oh sir, for the love of God, weigh
the mattier more indifferently. Do not dissemble that you must needs know. If
you will have your doctrine tried by the balance of ye scripture and primative
church, add more weight to your side of the balance, or else confess that
your part is the lighter. Let not the vain sound of the holy churches name,
where the thing is not, lead you to be enemy to that doctrine, which you se
to have more force in the word of God. Remember that the true church is ruled
and guided only by Christ's word and doctrine. If you abide (says he) in my
word, then be you my true disciples. Christ is the good shepparde, and the
church is the fold of his right sheep. Christ is the wise master: and the
church is the company of his diligente scholars.

Christ is the bridegroom, and the church is his derely beloved spouse. The
true church therefore will not go rangynge what way she lusts, she will not
learn of her own brain, she will not follow her own fantasy. They be
wild Goats, they be not tame sheep, that when the shepardes voice calls
one way, will run headlonge an other way. They be selfwill moichers, they be
not diligent scholars, that leauyng their masters teaching will follow their
own interpretacions. She is a froward and presumptuous woman, she is not an
obedient wife, that will make light of her husbands commandments, and
think she may alter them at her pleasure. The true sheep of Christ therefore,
the diligent scholars, the obediente spouse, that is, the right and true
church will harken only to her good shepardes voice, will follow her masters
precepts, will obey her housbandes commandments.

How then can you excuse your self by your holy mother the church, if you
teach otherwise then Christ has taught? and make such interpretacions of
your own head as have no ground in his holy word. You do under that name
maintain your own error, ye follow not the churches authority. If you will
harken to Christ's church, to the Apostles church, to the old fathers
church, neither Christ, nor the Apostles, nor the fathers teach you any
such thing. And so ye seem your self in a sort to confess, or else ye
would never strive so much for unwritten verities, and authority of the
church in doctrines beside Gods word. You needed no such helps if your
teaching had just proof in the scripture and ancient fathers, as indeed it
has not. This have I framed my answer unto you in such sort, as I trust
the indifferent reader may judge, that my mind and purpose is, rather directly
and plainly to consute ye sum of your untrue doctrine, thou, as you do, to
seek shifts by cauelynge to discredit my adversary. For if I should have
scanned every syllable, word or sentence, that in this writing has passed
you, and endeavored capciously to have taken advantage at every trifle, (as
your sort is wont to deal with us for fault of better mattier) both I
should have fallen into that fault, that I proteste my self to mislyke in
you, and my answer would have grown to such a length, as it might justly
have weried the reader.

I have therefore meddled only with the principal poinctes of this your
Apology, which may seem to be of chief force in those matters that you
touch: And of purpose have let pass many small trifles, wherein both you
might justly have been reproved, and some men, I know, will think meet and
worthy to be answered. I will now end, and cease any further to exhort you to
a more diligent examinyng and discussyng of the residue of your doctrines:
trusting that your own conscience, having now more fear of God, then you
say you had before, will drive you to the same. Which I pray God may be, if
not by this occasion, yet by some other, when his holy will shall be.

FINIS.
Imprynted at London in Fleetestreete, by Thomas Powell.


