THE TRVE COPIES OF THE LETters between the reverend father in God John Bishop
of Sarum and D. Cole, upon occasion of a Sermon that the said Bishop preached
before the Queen's Majesty, and her most honorable Counsel. 1560.

Set forth and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queen's
Majesty's Injunctions.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis per septennium.



THE COPY OF a letter sent from D. Cole to the Bishop of Sarum, upon occasion
of a Sermon that the said Bishop had preached in the Court before the Queen's
Majesty.
IT ru^ (...) I shall not need^ many words to make my entree with you. You
hau^ made so large and gentill an offer, that my request being employed wyth^
the compass of the same, shall have an answer I hope to my comfort.

Where in these Articles you seem very resolute, and as it is thought so well
armed, that you have wh^ withto persuade any reasonable man to be in them of
(...) opinion: may it therefore like you to send me the chief places, in these
^atters not written, (for that were to mutche pains for you) but noted, or, as
they term it, coted which and where they be. And I promise you by yt ^aith I
bear to God, I shall yield fo far as you shall give me cause.

I would wish it might please you to write herein again, for talk will not so
well further, that you should herein entende. If happily it shall like you to
write any more then the places, which ye account will thoroughly prove your
opinion, I pray you do it rather, dialectice, then otherwise. For the weght of
these matters, more requires learning then words.

If the places that you have in these Arti^les, be but such as are already
answered by learued men on our side, or but such as Calvin, Bueer, or other
of the protestauntes have laid for them self, then I trust you will lay more
weght or reason to them. For such as they be, in them, I have already seen. I
repute them percase somwat able to do with young folk, or the simple and
unlearned people, other, I wene, weigh them no better then they be worthy.

Yet one thing more I long much to be answered in, why ye rather offer ^othe
in your Sermon yesterday in the Court, and at all other times at Powles
Cross, to dispute in these iiii. points, then in the chief matters that lie
in question betwixt the Church of Rome and the Protestau^tes. Yt semith to me
far the nearer way to compass that you would so feign win, if ye began not
with such matters which we deny not, but a general Counsel might take order
that they should be practiced as ye would have it. Mary the Article of the
presence of Christ's Body and bludde in the Sacrament, the article of our
Justification, the valewe of a Christian man's good works, whether the Mass
^sed in the church of Rome be tolerable yea or no, yea whether that ye mass
be not a very sacrifice acceptable to God in deed, and good both for the
quick and the dead, whether any Scripture forbids a man to de^re the
blessed Apostles and Martyrs in heaven to pray for us, whether it be lefull to
honor them, and whether it be lefull for us, and good for them, to pray^ for
all christian Souls: I wene if ye ^ad the upper hand but in one of these
questions, the world might well think we were smally to be trusted in all the
^est. For we make a platte and plain answer to them, without if, or and. So
do we not, whether the Service ought to be in English or not. Or whether the
people ought to receive in both kinds or no. Or whether any private* Mass
ought to be said in the Church or no.

I ha^ ^eoparded to wade this far with you, for no worse purpose then I have
uttered at the beginning. For of trou^h, if you show me good cause why, I shall
yield as I have promised.

M^ adventure in this case syalbe so taken I trust, as no advantage be sought
against me, as for breach of any part of my (...) one way or other. Wherefore
I pray you constrewe my doings by the meaning I had in them.

I have here set in writynge the (...) that you have so gentelly of^d ^o ^e
reasonable, in such sort in (...) (...) ^y (...) ported (...) your mouth (...)
me.

1. Whether there remain any substance of Bread and Wine after the
consecration done as the Church appoints?

2. Whether it be tolerable that y^ people should receive under one kind or no?

3. Whether it be any offense before God that the common Service should be
said in a tongue that the people understands not?

4. Whether it be any offense before God a Priest to say Mass, onles one or
other receive with him?

18. Martij. Henricus. Cole.

The Bishop of Salisburies answer unto the letter before written.
I Perceive by your letters that ye were not present your self at my Sermon
in the Court, but only herd of it by the report of others. And where you
desire to be answered in certain points touching the same, considering both
my calling and also the place where I spoke, I stand in doubt whether I may
safely without further license give a rekening of my doctrine, being uttered
before the Prince, the Counsel, and the whole state of the Realm, specially
to a subject, and such a subject as mistiketh all Sermons, and yet will not
vouchesaue to hear one. Notwithstanding forasmuch as I am persuaded that you
charitably desire to be resolved* I can also charitably be contented, as a
friend with a friend, or a scholar with a scholar, to confer with you herein,
reseruinge always my former protestation.

Touching^ y^ quotations of the special points and grounds that I stand upon,
if you had herd y^ manner of my doctrine your self, I be leave, you would not
have required the^. For your reporterhath altered the whole form of my
speaking.

For I stood only upon the negative, which as you said, when time was, in the
disputation, that should have been at Westminster, is not possible to be proved.

My offer was this, that if any one of all those things that I the^ rehearsed,
could be proved of you^ side by any sufficient authority other of the
Scriptures, or of the old Doctors, or of the ancient Councels, or by any one
allowed example of the primitive church, that then I would be content to
yield unto you.

I say you have none of al those helps, nor Scriptures, nor Councils, nor
doctors, nor any other an^iguitye, and this is the negative. Now it stands
you upon to prove but one affirmative to ye contrary, and so to require my
promise.

The articles y^ I said could not be proved of your part were the^e*

That it can not appear by a^y authority other of the old Doctors, or of
the ancient Councils that there was any private mass in the whole Church of
Christ, at that time.

Or yt there was then any communion ministered in the church to the people under
one kind only.

Or yt the commen prayers were then pronounced in a strange tongue, that the
people understood not.

Or that the Bishop of Rome was then called Vniuersalis Episcopus, or Caput
Vniuersalis Ecclesiae an universal Bishop of the whole world, or else the
head of the universal Church,

Or that the people was then taught to believe that in the Sacrament after the
consecration, the substance of Bread and wine departs away, and that there
remains nothing else but only the accidents of Bread and wine.

Or that then it was thought lawful to say, x. xx. or. xxx. masses in one
church in one day.

Or that the people was the^ forbidden to pray, or to read the scriptures in
their mother tongue.

And other ^o Articles a great number I rekened up then at Poules Cross, which
it were long now to rehearse.

And if any one of all these articles can be sufficiently proved by such
authority as I have said, and as ye have borne y^ people in hand ye can prove
them by: I am well content to stand to my promise.

^f you say these are but small matters in comparison of others, yet as small
as ye would have the^ seem now* sum men have felt no small smarte for them,

And where you merueile why I began not rather with the real presence, with
Justification, with the value of good works, with the sacrifice of the Mass,
with praying unto saints: with prayinge for the dead: although in deed it
may seem very mutche for me to be appointed by others what order I should
take in my preachinge, yet to answer the truth, why I passed by these matters
at the first, and rather began with other, the cause was, not for that I
doubted in any of the premises, but only for that I knew the matters that you
^ue question of, might at least have sum color or shadow of the doctors. But
I thought it best to make my entree (...) such things, as wherein I was well
assured y^ ^lde be able to find not so mutche as any color at all. And if ye
will first grant this to be true, as I believe you will, notwithstanding the
people have been long told the contrary, afterward I am well content to travel
with you father in the rest.

Further I merueile mutche ye write, yt touching a private mass, or the
receiving under one kind, or the comme^ prayers to be had in an unknown
tongue or otherwise, ye are not resolved to answer precisely without, if, or
and* For where ye say ye are content to be ordered herein by a general
Council, first I would (...) what general Council of any antiquity ever
decreed any of those matters against us, (...) perhap ^es ye will say the
council of Cou^stauce, that of late years pronounced o^y against Christ
himself* and all the primit^ church, that it should be a (...) disorder, if
the people should comm^ cate under both kinds. And ha^g no (...) counsel, that
(...) was to allege, in these matters, I maru^ how ye can justly say, ye are
altogether ordered by cou^celles. And yet farther would I learn, what warrant
any general Counsel can have to decree any thing contrary to gods word.

Where ye say, ye have seen master Caluines, and master Bucers reasons, and
have found them very weak, and not able to move any other then young (...),
and unlearned people, me thinks that answer is so commen and so general,
that it man ^erue our turn as well as yours. For we have read Coclaeus,
Eckius, Pigghius, (...), and such others, and have found such reasons and
answeares in them, as I believe you your self are not m^che moved withal.

Where you say that master Calu^es, an^ ma^ster Buc^rs reasons have benne
answered, I grant in deed they have (...) answered, but not so mu^che by
learning, as by other means, as you know^. But your reasons have (...)
answered by reason (...)* as now, God be thanked, the whole world knows.

But to conclude, as I began I answer that in these articles I hold only the
negative, and therefore I look how you will be able to affirm the contrary,
and that, as I said before, by sufficient authority. Which if ye do not you
shall cause me the more to be resolved, and others, to stand the more in doubt
of the rest of your learning.

20. Martij. Io. Sarum*

D. Coals second Letter to the Bishop of Sarum.
I Shall for this time pass^ over all other parts of your answer, and renew
my former suite unto you, in most hartye and humble wise desiring you to give
ear unto me in the same.

Remember ^or gods sake how I began with you, not for other intent then to
be instructed, why I should be accounted obstinate for standing in contrary
opinion with you. Now when I weighe your answer sent me lately in writing, I
think you do mistake my doing, supposing that the same comes not of such
ground as it does. My letter sent to your declares in my first entree with
you, what my meaning was, and whereof it proceeded. I heard by report of many
that both at Powles and other where, ye openly wished that one man thinkinge
otherwise then you do, would charitably talk with you, whom you would with
like charity answer and ^ndeuour to satisfye. And although yo^ had not so
protest^d, yet is it the part of a common and public preacher to perform no
less when occasion is given. With which cause I was moved to write as I did,
entendinge if I might to learn of you that I knew not, and that could by
learning persuade a man not wholly vnl^arned to yield thereunto, according to the
words of my writing, and ^rotestation.

But I ^nde not this meaning in your writi^g sent unto me, wherein you sh^e
your self ^isposed only to defede your teaching as confessed and take f^r
true, and n^ to give any acc^pte th^rof, or to satisfye any y^ doubts. And
there you (...) me all^age to the contrary and ^proue your saying, which
neither reason, nor law, can drive me to. R^ason, ^icause the doctrine being
yet d^btfull and standinge upon proof, the teacher should first approve it
unto such as doubt. Which the custom of learning in all universities proves
true. Where the oppen^t, when ^atter is ^enied, as your doctrine is by us,
alleges ^or y^ part which he would have some ^rew. An^ (...) (...) (...) ^ou
to disprove that do^ (...) which lon^e time has benne (...) (...) (...) more
when any man professed a r^formation of doctrine, as you d^, (...) (...) has
ever alleged causes wl^y they so did, (...) so take ^ hand* to prove that
they taught* against such as did and would think otherwise.

But because you a^e a^ Bishop and (...) (...) ^tche an (...), ye doubt (...)
^ou ought (...) show cause of y^ you (...) or no, and therefore ye spoke by
(...). Where at I do ^utche (...) for the person (...) the place makes ^ereuce
w^o should prove or disprove* The greater personage you bea^e, the less cause
have ye to be put to answer. You have not yet I wene all forgot the trade in
^reforde which you and I were brought up in. In sc^oles of philos^phie a
master of art is the highest degree, where the master is rather put to
oppose, the^ to answer. And like wise in divinity in ordinary disputation
y^ doctor opposes, the meaner man answeareth* And what reason should lead
you to to think y^ a Bishop should not rather show cause of ye he teaches, the
any other. Sa^et Paul requires in a Bishop that he be (...), a man before all
other meet and able to teache. And it is a reule in Bishops that they be ^eady
to give an acco^pte of their believe. And ma^ye reasons are there why it should
be so.

You can not say I am an heretic, or obstinate, and thereby put me of. For I
offer to yield in all that ye prove to me. I stand in place and case to learn,
and you a man appointed to teach. I come for no other purpose but to learn
more then I know. I come to you for council in those points ye seem very
resolute in, I mean you no harm nor guile. Cast me not of for Gods love, as
men do beggars, when they mind to do them no good.

If ye have Scriptures, Councels. etc. with you, I desire to know them. If ye
have none, let me and my fellows alone in your Sermons. We trouble you not,
nor give you cause to deal so unmerciful with us, as some of your side does,
as though we were the most unreasonable men in the world.

By law upon good grounds no man should be put to reason where matters are
once agreed on. I and my fellows are in bands to avoid such kind of
reasoning as ye would put me to. Wherein wise men se, when ye openly provoke
us to disprove that ye teach, ye fare as if you should say to one that is
bound hand and foot, come strike me and thou dare. We are as I said in
place of learners, and ye in place to teach. We are defendauntes, and ye y^
plaintifes. We continue in the faith we professed sith our Baptism, ye
pretend a change in the same. We have with us an Aposticall church, ye have
none yet approved. We make no innovation, for, In rebus nouis constituendis,
says y^ law, euidens debet esse vtilitas: and all new attemptes are to be
suspected.

Ye seem to mistike in manner all y^ hitherto has been received. But ye say
ye bring us again to the Primitive Church. It is a foul fall in reasoning, to
bring that for proof, which lies yet in question or plainly denied. We are in
possession, ye come to put us from it. Ye mean to draw us to you, we desire
to know cau^t why. What rea^ (...) adeth you to put a negative in qu^n thereby
to greu^ your adversary (yet have you none of me, for I seek on you to be
taught) where in Law a person (...) a^ted can be put to no more but to defede.
Where a negative implies in it a yea or affirmatiou, there the plaintiff is put
to his proof. But I protest once again, I come not to dispute, but to learn.

^u will happily say that both ^ur side and yours has already sa^ eue^ so
much in the ma^ers y^ be in qu^stion betwirte, us, that as ye can say no more
for your part the has been (...) al^eady no more can we neither, and (...) as
good neu^r a whit as never the b^ ^f the reasons that Calu^, Bucer, and ot^
Protesrants does make, can not (...) you, what avails any mo^e (...). (...)
the case be such in d^de, that (...) part can go further, but all is s^yd
that makes for either part, then either let both parts let other alone,
until such a general Council be assembled as ye will agree to stand by,
which will not be I trow whiles I live, nor seven years after for ought I se
yet. And yet I se other folk think that not reasonable, because the chiefest
poin^es we strive on are already determined.

And here it boteth not to say as ye do of ^e Council of Constance
slaunderou^y, till ye had proved that ^e say. I am some what bold with you in
this term, but pardon me I pray you, this case require^h the same. It boteth
not I say, to say the Church has walked in blindness, so as ye make none
account of such determination. Remember ye have not yet proved the error of
one general Council.

If (...) be as you say all is said y^ can be, then you and I now should do
well to weighe the reasons of both sides. ^ere if ye say what weghtes or
balau^ce will ye weigh them by, let us hardely do herein, as men do when the
que^stion is which of two pieces of gold or two pieces of cloth is best, then
they take a fine piece of Gold or Clothe and that y^ goes nerest the best,
that ought to be so taken for best. Let you and me weyghe your men's reasons
and ours by the fathers weghtes and balance, and see who reasons most like S.
Augustine, S. Basil, S. Cyprian, Tertullia^, Ireneus, and ^ionysium, the
Councelles, and such other weghtes fit for that purpose.

Thus we see there is yet good cause enough, why men may soberly learn one of
an other. And if it misfortune y^, for lack of insight, we can not agree
which balance wegheth heauiest, let us borow eyes of our neighbors. And if ye
begin handsomely with me, I mistrust not but men shall at length get more
liberty for so good a purpose, when good meaning is well known.

By this ye see I mean no guile, nor attempt no new practice. If ye refuse me
at this request, fore see what may be thought. You are not all withont enemies
pardie. Sum will percase constrew ye refuse Conscientia imbecillitatis, etc.

Well, if ye send word year at a point, and will goo no further, the^ I pray
you that of all this incou^ter there grow no farther breach of amitye, or harm
other ways. I mean and deal plainly, and trust upon your open promis to go
harmeles again from you as I began. Here repeting again my former
protestation, that I am not nor will be against any Article that learning or
reason can she we I ought to believe, being ready without malice to hear and
take what may be alleged to drive me to that y^ teach, and desiring you here
withal to constrew my sayings by the intent I bad in them, and also to tender
my suite: I shall here make and end, and trouble you no further, onles I see
more comfort at your hand.

I had once made ready to be sent you an other answer, which upon be^ter
advise I thought good to stay. I meant in both one thing but my first was
somdeale sower, and would have been as bitter as a medicine, or in time of
Lent, penance. I strive with nature, the les to offend you, and so I trust
you see cause to forgive me, if in any part of my writing I seem over ^ager.

24. Martij. Henricus Cole

The answer of Jo. Bishop of Sarum unto D. Coals second letter.
IN your second

For in my Sermon at Powles and else where, I required you to bring forth on
your part either sum Scripture, or sum old Doctor, or sum ancient Council,
or And I would have merueiled y^ you brought nothing all this while, soning yt
I knew ye had nothing to being.

But now for asmutche as you

Ye ask why ye should be called

You put me in remembrance I thank God, so I do and have done hitherto to my
power, both privately and openly.

But if this be my dewtie, and required

^ou would have men think I Paralogismus, A no^ causa, vt causa.

I alleged the place and audience

But as touching my calling, I am not only ready to answer any man in any
thing that I profess, but also upon sufficient allegation, as I have promised,
very well content to yield unto you.

But I beseech you, what reason

Therefore ye ground of your petswasion Nos habemus lege^, and secundu^ lege^.
etc.

You know what follows, for Communion under one kind* and (...)*

It gives you that I should rest upon the negative, and (...) put you to your
proufes. Wherein notwithstanding ye allege against me the custom of the
Schools, yet, ye know. Christ used the same Hoc Abraham non fecit, this thing
Abraham never did. And again when he answered them in the ^ase of matrimony,
A p^incipio non fuit sic, it was not so from the beginning: he stood only upon
the negative. ^herein if the Pharisees had been able to (...) but one
affir^atiue, either that Abraham had done so: or that the law of divorce had
been so from the beginning, Christ with his negat^ue might sone have been
confounded.

Even so when the Bishop of Constantinople had taken upon hi^ to be ^alled
the vnive^sal bishop of the whole Church, which title after ward the Bishop
of Rome began to (...) to himself, and for the (...) of the same had (...)
(...) dis^quieted and shaken the (...) world, but when the Bishop of
Constantinople first began to use this style, Gregorye being then the Bishop of
Rome confounded him Nemo, said he, decessorum meorum ho^ profano vocabulo vti
voluit, none of my predecessors would ever use this (...) and lew^ name. Lib.
4. Epist. 80. And ^gain. Epist. 92. Sancti ante legem. Sancti in lege. Sa^cti
sub gratia, omnes perficientes Corpus Domini in me^bris sunt constituti. At
nemo se vniuersalem dici voluit. The holy men before the law, the holy me^
under the law, the holy men under the grace of the Gospel altogether making
up one body of the Lord, are placed amongst his members: but none of them
would ever suffer him self to be called universal.

I have chosen especially these examples, because they seem to serve me to
double purpose. Thus Gregorye reasoned the^ as we do now, only upon the
negative. And if the^ the Bishop of Constantinople had been able to prove but
one affirmative, y^ any Bishop of Rome before time had used yt style or that
ever any man, other before the Law or under the law, or under y^ Gospel, had
suffered him self to be called universal Bishop, then had Gregory ben
confounded.

But as touching the custom of

And what better ground can we

He that will make any innoua the order of the primative church, and yet ye
never gave any good reason of your doings.

You say you are in possession. Nos sumus filii Abraham, we are the children
of Abraham, and thereby claymed their possession. Therefore ye were possessores
malae fidei, and for that cause ye are now justly removed.

Now if ye think ye have wrong,

You would have your private

Where ye say ye are in place of for these are the Schools if a man list to
learn. It is a token the scholar passes (...) for his Book, ye will never be
brought to Schole.

Ye desire ye may not be put of,

You call for the special proufes

Yet lest I should seem to fly rekening

Agayust your new de^se of tra^substantiatio^, Gelasius, whose judgment I
believe ye will regard the more, because he was so^time bishop of Rome, which
See as you have taught can never (...).

And is alleged in the decries: Non desinit esse substantia panis, and natura
vini. It leaves not to be the substance of bread and the nature of wine.

But to avoid this authority sum Non desinit esse substantia, hoc est, non
desinit esse accide^s. It leaves not to be the substance of bread, yt is to
say, it leaves not to be the accidence, or the form, or the shape of Bread.
A very miserable shift.

Even as right as the Scholie Did. 4. Statuimus, id est, abrogamus. Yet doctor
Smith of Oxford took a wiser way. For his answer is, that Gelasius never wrote
those words, and that they hang not together, and that there is no sense nor
reason in them.

Here have you that after the co^,

Now bring ye but one doctor

As touching a private Mass, Qui non communicate locum cedat alteri, who so
will not receive the Communion, let him depart and give place to others.

To break the ordinance of Gelasius calls it Sacrilegiu^. And Theophilus
Alexandrinus says, Si Christus mortuus fuisset pro Diabolo, non negaretur
illi poculum sanguinis. ^f Christ had died for the Devil, the cup of the blood
should not be denied him.

That the Common prayers were used in the commen tongue, you have S. Basil, S,
Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom. Saint Ambrose, and the Emperor
Iustiniam, the places be known.

You see I disadvantage my self spoken. For at this present I have no leisure
to write Books.

Now must I needs likewise

You desire us to leave (...) against you, and no more to (...) so (...) with
you in the pulpittes.

O master Doctor, call you

We only tell the people, as our manifest truth, and yet have nether Doctor,
nor Council, nor Scripture for you, and that you have showed such extremity,
as y^ like has not ben seen: and now can give no rekenyng why. Or if ye can
let it appear.

You say our doctrine is yet in

You are bound, you say, and may grounds. But when ye were at liberty* and a
free disputation was offered you at Westminster before the Queen's most honorable
counsel, and the whole estate of y^ Realm* I pray you whether part was it that
then gave over? And yet the^ you know ye were not bound.

Ye say ye remain still in the (...) (...).
Rome? B who commended it with his preface?C who set it forth with Bonner.
solemn Sermons?D who confirmed Tonstall.


You have ecclesiam Apostol* Cole. And in manner (...) the rest.
came, ye say, and we have none. Nowbeit in all these matters that we now
entreat of, we have, as you know, and must needs confess ecclesiam
Apostolicam.

Where ye say ye make no innovation, ^uidently appear by all these matters that
be now in question between us, wherein ye have utterly changed and abolished
the order of the old church, and do nothing but the contrary. And what
evident profet ye Church of God has gotten by it, I think it a hard matter
to declare.

You would have the matter

Notwithstanding I dare boldly the falshed truth, but the thing y^ is taken to
be ^rew, it certifyeth only to be true. But what redress can there be looked
for of such a Council, where as no man shall be judge or suffered to speak one
way or other, but only such as be openly and justly accused and fon^d falt^,
and where as he that is himself most out of order, shall be head and refourmer
of the whole.

Both parties, ye say, have waded

Where as you say you would and ye in ye matters ye w^ of, I desire even so to
betried.

But why throw you away us if ye could have found any thing in them for
your purpose, I believe you would not have brought them empty. But that is a
policy in the time of Seige when the Soldiers within begin to want vitales,
to throw forth a feweloues over the walls, that the enemy without may
think they have stoore enough, and so give over the Siege.

You say. I slanderously misreporte

For the words of the Council Per^ asserentes oppositum, tanquam Haeretici
arcendi sunt, that is, they, that stubburnly defend and maintain the
contrary, that is to say, they that stand in defense of that, that Christ
commanded to be done and the Apostelles, which all the old Catholic doctors
and the whole Primitive Church observed, ought to be punished so, as is miet
for Heretics. By these words they are called not Schihnatiks, as I said, but
stubburn heretics, which is a great deal more odious you see therefore my
report was more gentle then yt counsel deserved.

Where as you say we could never Albertus Pighius the greatest learned man as
it is thought of your side, has found such errors to ou^ hands, for in his
Ecclesia Hierarchia, speking of ye ii. Council (...) at Ephesus, which you ca^
not deny but it was general, and yet took part with the here^ike Abbat
Eutyches against the catholic father Fla^anus, he writes thus: Concilia
vniuersalia etiam congregata legitime, vt been, ita perperam unjust, impieque
iudicare and definire possunt. General Councelles; says he, yea even such
as be lawfully summoned, as they may conclude things well, so may they (...)
judge and determine things rashely, unjustly, and wickedly.

And of the two Cou^celles holden nature, and against all examples of
antiquity, and against the word of God. And yet both these councelles were
called general.

^e press me sore that if I write Conscientia imbecillitatis. For the
distruste of the weakness of my part. Bilike you have forgotten wherefore you
with all your company ^ot long sense openly refused to enter disputation with
us at Westminster. Doubtless y^ gretest part thought it was (as it was in deed)
Conscientia imbecillitatisi, even for distrust of y^ weakness of your part. And
what think ye is there now judged of you, y^ being so long time required, yet
can not be won to bring one sentence in your own defense.

I have before alleged a few* reasons of my part, which by order of
disputation, I was not bound to do, now let y^ world judge which of us two
flies conference. I protest before God, bring me but one sufficient authority
in the matters I have required, and afterward I will gently and quietly co^fer
with you farther at your pleasure.

Wherefore forasmutche as it is

The people must needs muse fiftene hundred years, and the consent of
antiquity and generality, that ye have so long, and so much talked of, shall
come to nothing. For think not that any wise man will be so much your friend, y^
in so weghtie matters, will be satisfied with your silence.

Where as you say I am not

You suppressed ye say your first to quail the truth. Howebeit to my knowledge
I gave you no evil word to encrese y^ humor. But (...) ye will still strive
against nature, as ye say ye have done now, and co^quere the rest of your
affections to, I doubt not but we shall sone agrie.

Here I leave, putting you ^sones Conscientia imbecillitatis, for that there
was nothing to be brought. *

20. Martij. Io Sarum

* Doctor Coals answer to certain parcelles of the Second Letters of the
Bishop of Sarum set forth in such sort as it came from the Author. 8.
Aprilis. Anno* 1560.
IT likes you thus to say

How oftentimes must I tell you, I

You require that is dangerous for

Well railed, you shall find that we

These words glistered gold like,

You say mutch, and prove nothing, your trueths be so open that none sees them
but your own side.

I have no priuiledg, when reason, and

I must needs think sum part of your

So did I to. Your doctrine against

That you are required, that you refuse,

We brought more then ye were able

This argument would I feign see Stout and bold asseueration, makes no prouf
in the law.

Here is again one place that I reke^ ye put not in your self, for it makes
quite against you. For Christ proved y^ Pharisees were not Abraham's children,
and that a man may not put away (...) wife for every cause.

Two purposes against your self. Driedo will teach you, if you vouchsaue to
read him.

If you read again y^ place in Aristotle's Dialectice, in such sort as we do
not, and ther^ore it served not your purpo^e. But I tell you yet once again, I
cum not to dispute, but to learn.

Ridetur, chorda qui semper aberrat eadem*

In the end of this writing ye shall

When you meddle with law, you show Malae fidei possessorem, after that he has
continued in possession an hundred years. But I pardon you for mistaking y^
law, it is not your faculty.

I enter no suit against you, and it were Patie^tia.

When I commence law against you,

Why I cum not to your Sermons? S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom. etc. Sermons
tend more to teach, then to convince.

We stand not in case like, what need

All that I required may be couched

It is no disconrtesie to refuse to do

I se well ye write much, and read little. Gelasius is full answered by Tapper*
in articulo de transsubstantiatione.

You allege his words otherwise

Show what they are, that it be not

This gloss you mislike, because you

Soft and fair, you have not read the Roiarde and you shall see more.

At my cue I shall be ready for you.

Ye have better stuff tha^ this I trow.

The decries, where you learned this Gelafius, tells you how you should
understand it.

Theophilus shall be answered, when I cum to dispute with you.

Whether the Grek and the Latin tongue,

I pray you take good leisure, and write

I wis you know I may not, nor y^ case

Men of your side used the^ selfs tray*

Not manifest, until it be better proved.

I doubted more then I do. You give

At Westminster we came to disput, none appointed, where we re^used not to
write neither. But when our Book could not be red as yours was, we refused
not utterly to di^ute, but only this case, if our book could not be suffered to
be red as indifferently as yours was. Now hardly weighe whether you have
indifferently reported, that we utterly refused to dispute with you or no.

What one thing am I gone from:

To this and some part of the ^te

What needs so (...) of one thing, I grant.

Such fond excuses me^ lay, how true

You forget your self, I say not thus

Then begin, if you think y^ time will

All these be but words often repeated,

^ede the place again. I say not so, and

You say the council at Co^stance opely 4. Canonem Concilij Constantiensis.

You ground your prouf upon Pighius Pighius ^oldeth the Counsel of Ephesus was
general, which the counsel of Calcedon denies. So y^ I merueil much herein
of you, that you alledg that for a Council, which has no place in y^ Book of
Councelles.

Wherein does Pighius prove y^ Cou^celles Gerson. I trow this be one place that
you wrote not your self. Yet I ^ke^ no error proved in any geuerall Counsel,
by that you have said.

To this I have answered already to

I have answered to this already, what

If you refuse to enstruct me, onle^ ^orfeit my Recognisaunce which you
guilfully allure me unto.

God wot I pass little in these matters

You would bear folk in hand that

As though mine affection only caused

This place is above answered.

NOw forasmuch as you make this a great foundation against us, that we vary
from y^ Primitive Church, and thereby make y^ simple souls wene that we were in
the wrong side, here I pray you show your opinion wether we are bound to do
all things which we find by sufficient authority were in ure in y^ Primitive
Church. And because you shall not be herein squemish, I shall here begin to
show you mine.

I am of the opinion that the Counsel of Consta^ce was in this matter. I think
it an error, I am bound to do as y^ Primitive Church did, where the Church
customably used the contrary. I ^eken an ^ra^ple no bond. I deny not, but
those examples were to be followed, and not to be broken at every man's will and
pleasure, until by comme^ assent, other order were taken. But if you seek old
writers and find me that the Church these sire hundred years observed no^
many thigs. which were practiced, and accounted for good, holesun^, and holy,
in the Primitive Church, and thereby dieme us in error, this were a wrong
judgment. For the church of Christ has his childhode, his manhod, and his
hoorheares: and as that that is miet for aman in one age, is vnmiet in another:
So were many thigs miet, requisite, and necessary, in the primitive church,
which in our days were like to do more har^ then good.

This is no new devised fantasy, but uttered. xi.C. years agoo by Saint
Ambrose, without reproach. I showed you, and red you the place at ^estminster
(as you may remember) and it were to long to make rehersall of his words here.

We might by taking the contrary opinion herein, be led to think we ought to
receive the Sacrament evermore after Supper, and not fasting. But S. Augustine
says, that Christ left this to his church, to take order how, and in what
sort, his Sacramets should be received and used, wherein he says it is a
marvelous insolent kind of madness, to mis^ike y^ which is received in the
Church, where yt custo^ is not against any commandment in the Scripture. S.
Peter ^aused (as Dam^ sus says) a commandment to be given, that no woman
should cum bare faced to the Church. S. Clement took order, that the Clergy
should have all things in common, and to line together, as in the late
reformed order of saint Ben^tes Monks does most godly appear. And not many
years since, the said order in all Cathedral churches was observed. Yet I
wene it were an error to hold, of necessity it should be so still, or to say
yt Church were in error, because it has suffered a contrary custom to criep
in. Then if y^ custom of yt church may break y^ was in the Primitive church
commanded, it is less offense to leave undone y^ was at yt beginning
practiced, and no commandment given for other to follow the same. Thus much I
thought to put you in remembrance of, for such matters as you thouch in the 17.
42. 43. no^bers.

8. Aprilis. Henricus. Cole,

A Letter sent from the Bishop of Sarum to doctor Cole, wherein he requires
of him a true and a full Copy of the former answer.
I Understand by the report of di^ers that ap pearinge of late before y^
Queen's Majesty's visitours at Lambeth, and being there demanded of a Letter
that was then abroad in your name, as answer unto me, whether ye would
acknowledge the same as your own, or no, and so much the more for that ye had
used the matter under covert, and sent your copies abrod into al places, even
into mine own dioces, and yet not unto me, thereby to discredit me in corners at
my first cuming, whereof I have the greater cause to complain of your doings,
ye made answer not only that it was your own, but also y^ it was much
abridged, and that y^ original was twice as much. If it be so, the fault is
your own, that would so unadvisedly bestow your writings. As for my part, as
they came to me not by your sendinge, but by very chance, even so did I cause
them to be copied out justly, and truly, without adding or diminishing of one
letter, and according have I made out mine answer to the whole. Now forasmuch
as I understand there (...) certain both honorable, and worshipful, yt would
gladly have our doings to the print, and so published, these shall be to desire
you, for the bettering of your own cause, to send me your own copy full and
large, as ye say ye gave it out at ye first, yt I may do as I shall think good,
and you have no cause to to think your self iniuried if I answer one parcel of
your letters, and not to the whole. I pray you let me here from you with
expeditio^, for I mean plainly, and therefore have caused the print to stay
upon your answer. Thus I bid you farewell.

From Shireburn. ye xxii. of July. An. 1560. Io. Sarum.

Unto this Letter D. Cole, being bisides by messenger ^arnestlye required,
would make no answer one way or other. Therefore upon his refusal, it was
thought good to answer his Letters as they were.

The Reply of the Bishop of Sarum to the Letter above written, which D. Cole
contrary to even dealing had given out and sent abroad, not to the said Bishop
to whom he wrote it, but privily and secretly unto certain of his own friends.
THere came to my ha^bs of late by chance a Scroul set forth in short broken
sentences containing an answer to the second Letters that I had sent unto you
before, which as by certain familiar Phrases, by that date, by the subscription
of your own name, and by other tokens, appeared to me to be yours: So by the
vsinge and ordering of the same, I had sum cause to think it should not be yours,
and especially for that being, as it appeared, written unto me, it was sent
privily abroad unto others and not to me. For I thought y^ you being a man of
this age and credit, would not have been ashamed of your own writings, or
would have concealed them from him, to whom you had directed the^, or have
soght for a false light to set forth your matters in, as Merchants sumtimes
use to do, y^ better to utter their sorry wares.

Moreover I saw yt your words throughout were heaped up with tauntes and
scorns, and were somewhat to much steined with cholar, to have proceeded from a
sober grave man, as I ever took you to be.

Thus being uncertain of the truth herein, after I had sent oftentimes to
you, to know whether you would avouch it for your own or no, and could never
get word from you, by reason y^ you shifted your self and would not be found. I
thought it good to stay my self from answering, until I might get certain
knowledge of the author.

At the last, after I had assayed many ways, and could by no means hear from
you, having no (...) continuance in the City to stay the untrue reports
which I herd werscattered by su^ of your friends. I could not, but before my
departure hence, make out mine answer unto you, as hauig cause to think the
letters that were brought me, should be his in whose name they were given
abroad.

First where you have made your answers several, and set them so far of from
the parcelles of my letters, I guess you did yt of very purpose, that your
reader might see your answer, but not see what it was whereunto you answered.

Therefore I have joined my sayings and your simply, and plainly, both
together, without color or shadow, that the indifferent reader may have all
before his eyes, and (...) be y^ better able to judge aright.

Sarum.
IN your second Letters I find many words to small purpose. It had been (...)
better for you to have alleged one sufficient authority whereby I might have
learned that I looked for.

Cole
IT likes you thus to say, that your Readers may think you touch me very
sore, where you discover a great untruth in your writing. (...) my purpose
was to be taught, and to this mark only I shot. You for lack of good matter
ans^. I speak not to the purpose, not to your pur pose, but to mine. How
oftentimes must I (...) you, I come not to teach but to learn.

The Reply of the Bishop of Sarum.
Contrary to y^ Rueles of Rhetorik, I sie you begin to (...) and to inflame
all your affections even at the first. Sobernes were much fitter for a doctor.
But your heats be such, yt your fre^des have showed me you must be born wtal.

I neither discover, nor cover any untruth in my writing, but as you know,
only utter y^ very truth For at Paul's Cross I required you, or any of you,
to show the grounds of your religion, if you had any, that by indifferent
conference the truth the better might appear. And this had been to your
purpose, if ye had meant plainly, and to mine to. But you run away in the mist,
and (...) the net, lest happily ye should be taken, and so purposly go about to
blear your readers (...), and to cover the truth and having in very died
nothing to alledg for your self, yet ye make a countenance as though ye lackt
nothig. And so I grant you follow your purpose, and not mine.

Where you say, ye cum only to learn, and not to quarrel, he must niedes be
your very friend y^ will believe you. Nowbeit the pretense of a learner may keep
your credit for a while, and save you from shewig what ye can say. And
therefore I read you, use it still. But by your scoffs and scorns it may
pppeare, you cum to controlle, sooner the^ to learn. God send us both
humble^esse of heart, that we may content our selves to be taught.

Sarum.
IN my Sermons as well at Powles Cross, as else where, I required you to bring
forth of your part, either sum Scripture, or sum old Doctor, or sum ^ncient
general Council, or else sum ^llowed example of y^ (...) church. For these are
good grounds to build upon. And I would have merueiled that you brought forth
nothing all this while, saving that I knew you had nothing to bring.

Cole.
YOu require that is dangerous for me, ^ you know.

Thereply. Sarum.
(...) it be dangerous to you because you stand bound, why do you not put it
over to sum other of your syd that is not bo^d. This shadow will serve well
before your ^endes, that will wink when you bid them, and see no more the^ you
will have them see. But forasmuch as ye have used this excuse so often, and so
few wise men will believe it. I would think it good that now ye would devise sum
other.

Sarum.
BUt now forasmuch as ye seek shifts, and will not cum to answer, I account
him unwise that knows not your meaning.

Cole.
WEll rayled, you shall find that we have more then all you shall be able to
answer when time shall require.

The Reply. Sarum.
THis answer notwithstanding it is bitter, yet because it is untrue, and
bears more smoke the^ flame, it moves me the less. Here I miss in you sum
part of your courtesy. These matters would be tried by reasonig, better then by
scoldyng. By likelihod sum other man had moved your cholar, for my words be as
far from railing, as yours are from modesty.

Where you write that you have more the^ all we shall be able to answer, if
every crake were a good substa^tial argument, I were co^fu ted. But
notwtstandinge these terrible threats, yet in conclusion, as your custom is,
ye bring nothing.

The arguments that you say we shall never be able to answer, are sweard and
fire, such as of late days ye used so plentiously for lack of others. And
yet as strong and as forcible as they were (God be thanked) they have been fully
answered to the great and unspeakable comfort of gods people, and to your
shame and confusion for ever.

As touching the old doctors and Councelles, I would ye had a term assigned
you, ad exhibendu^. In the mean season for lack of other witness, ye may
write test (...), as Princes do.

Sarum.
YE ask me why ye should be counted obstinate. Doubtless I for my part have a
better opinion of you, and trust you are not so. But if a man withstand and
open truth, having nothing wherewith to defend him self, I remit him to your
own judgment, whether he may be counted obstinate, or no.

Cole.
THese words glittereth Gold like, and disclose in you no will to (...) my
(...), I (...) for lack of (...).

The reply. Sarum.
IT pleases you to make yourself merry with these words. I alleged unto you s.
Augnstin, S. Ambrose, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S, Nierome, Gelasius,
Theophilus, and S. Gregory. Therefore it is untrue that ye say. I had no will
to satisfy your demand. Now bring you but one of all these, or any other of
your syd in y^ matters that lie now between us, to satisfy my demand, and as I
have said, you shall have the victory.

You say we lack stufe to prove out purpose. O would to God your stufe and
ours might be laid together, the^ should it sone appear how true it is that ye
say, and how faithfully ye have used the people of God.

Sarum.
YOu put me well in remembrance of mine office, that forasmuch as I am a Bishop
should be (...), that is ready to yield an account of such things as I teach, I
thank God so I do, and have done to my power, both privately and openly. But if
this be my deutie, and required at my hands, what privilege have you, that you
only may not allow out one sentence to the confirmation of your doctrine?

Cole.
YOu say much and prove nothing. Your truth is so open, that no man can sie
it, but your own side. I have no privilege, when reason and Law shall will me
to do it, you shall find it. Now I stand bound to the contrary as you know.

The reply. Sarum.
I Speak not to much as your self can witness. Now much I prove shall
rest upon the wisdom and judgment of the reader, both the truth of our
part, and the untruth of your part is so open, that now God be thanked the
whole world is able to see it, unless there be sum such as has eyes and will
not see. Yet Iustificata est sapientia Dei, a filiis suis.

Ye say you will speak when reason and law shall will you to do it. Of the
law I will say nothing, but only this by the way, because you are a doctor
of law, what Law have you that (...) drive a man to prone a negative: or if ye
have no Law* what reason have you that I should do it? But me thinks both
reason and humanity would ye should have answered me sumwhat specially being so
often and so openly required. At the least you should have alleged Au gustine,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Nierome, as ye did sumtimes allege the decrie of the
Council of Ephesus, the first, for the Communion under one kind, which
decrie never was yet found, nor never will be. Nowebeit because you speak of
reason, whereas a man has nothing to say, it is good reason he keep silence, as
you do.

Sarum.
YOu would have men think I (...) answeringe because I am a Bishop. This in
Sophistry is called Paralogismus, a non causa vt causa. I alleged the place
and audience where I spoke, and not only mine office. For I thought it might
appear sum want or discretion, to call that doctrine into questrio^, which I
knew was grounded upon gods word and authorized and set forth by y^ Queen's
Majesty, and by y^ asse^te of y^ whole realm.

Cole.
I Must niedes think sum part of your writing made by sum smatterer: as here,
for a show of skill in Logik, brought in a place of Logik out of al purpose.
How frame you this to your purpose, and you shall find me therein true, as
happily I shall make you to sie, if your drive me to it. Your (...) against
transubstantiation is yet to be proved, and no man bound to believe it. And
being as true as ye would have it seem, yet may you ^nforme the weak and
willing to learn.

The Reply. Sarum.
YE do me to much wrong, that will not allow me thus much Logik of mine own.
But it was ever your grace, to bear the people in hand that all we are
altogether unlearned, and know nothing. Which thing if it were ^rew, it were
y^ more to your shame, thus openly to be confounded through the whole world,
by men of so small learning. Howbeit thus it pleased you to talk, for want of
better reason.

Ye call me a smatterer in Logik, as if your self were as perfect in Logik as
Aristotle. And yet I remember well I understood as much logik as this cumeth
to, and sum deal more, for twenty years ago, ywis when you, by your own
report, were but a simple smatterer in divinity. Neither did I bring it in
for a she we of skill, as you say, but to declare your oversight, and lack of
skill, which appears now not only in divinity, but also in logik. For where
you say I brought it in out of all purpose, me think you have forgotten sum
part of your old rueles, and know not what Paralogismus a non causa, vt
causa* means. Which is when so ever in reasoninge the very true cause is
suppressed, and an other cause of purpose set in place. For example I say, I
confer with you under protestation, lest I should seem to call yt doetrine
into doubt, which I knew to be established by gods word, and by sufficient
authority thronghout this ^ealm. And you would have it taken that I do it,
because I am a Bishop. Which indede is of your syd a sophistication, a non
causa, vt causa, So likewise I say, you alledg no dectors, nor scriptures, nor
general Cou^celles, as true it is, because ye have none to allege. But you
would make men believe ye dare not alledg the^, because ye stand bound in
Recognisaunce to y^ contrary. And this of your syd is another Sophi stication,
a non causa, vt causa.

Where you say, ye will show me that I brought this in out o^ all purpose, it
had been more for your credit, if ye would have done it out ofhand. But
forasmuch as ye fairest show of your learning ha^geth on the futurtens, and
stands only upon promis. I trust you will bring forth your old Doctors, and
Councels, and perfurme this both together: which will be ye know when.

The truth of our Doctrine against tra^substantiation was proved sufficiently,
and well allowed, before your doctrine with transubstantiation was ever heard
of. For you are not able to show me, not so much as the very name of
transubstantiation in any kind of writer, new or old, before the late Council
of Laterane: which as you know, was holden in Rome. M. CCxv. years after
Christ. So long the Church of God, and the Catholic faith was able to stand
without your transubstantiation. Which, if it were so true, as ye would have
men think it, I merneile, it could never be known before.

Sarum.
BUt as touching my calling, I am not only ready to answer any man in any
thing that, I profess, but also upon snfficie^t allegatio^, as I have pro^sed,
very well co^te^t to yield unto you.

Cole.
THat you are required that you refuse, and make large offer to no purpose.

The reply. Sarum*
THat you required me I have partly performed, even in my last Letters, as you
your self do know right well, and that not altogether from the purpose, as it
shall appear. Brig you forth as much of your syd, and I will say ye cumme well to
the purpose.

Sarum
BUt I beseech you what reason of your faith in these matters, gave you su^time,
when you were in place? Scriptures, Doctors, Cou^celles, ye had none, as now
appears by your silence.

Cole.
WE brought more then ye were able to answer, all were it not Scriptures, nor
doctors, nor councelles.

The Reply. Sarum.
IN steed of scriptures, Doctors, and Councelles, ye brought such extremity, as
the world has not seen the like, and as you are now loath to hear of. And yet
it pleased god that the same should be anwered sufficiently, with patience and
sufferance, But here am I glad ye confess one truth by the way, that ye
brought in all that time, nether scriptures, nor Doctors, nor general
Councelles of your side, and yet I trow ye were fry from Recognisa^ce. This I
believe passed you unawares and not of purpose* As your Proloqu^tor in the
disputation at Oxforde, gave out one truth by chance vndad. uisedly, as he
gave knowledge to the audience in the divinity schole of what matters they
would dispute. For thus he said, and that in your own hearing, Vir^ (...),
conuenimus huc holdie disputaturi contra horribilem illam Haeresim, de veritate
Corporis, and Sanguinis Christi, in Eucharistia. Brethern, said he, we cume
hither this day to dispute against that horrible Heresy, of the verity of
Christ's body and blud in the Sacrament. God would have him utter sum truth
then, as you do now, because he was Pontifex illius anni. But forasmuch as
you confess ye brought nether Scriptures, nor Doctors, nor Councelles, Iremit
the matter to your own reader to consider what ye brought.

Sarum.
Therefore the ground of your persuasion must then needs be, Nos habemus legem,
and secu^dum legem. etc. Yo^ know what follows, that is, we have a law, and
accordiug to our law he must die.

Cole
This argument I would feign see proved.

The Reply. Sarum.
YOur whole practice, and the order of your doiuges for six years together
has proved it sufficiently. And besides yt, a Bishop of yours, even in that
tune, sittyng in judgment upon a poor man in a case of Religion, and hearing
him allege the Scripturs, and other authorities for him self, rounded a
geutlema^ in the ear that sat next to him, with these words. Nay if we
strive with them in Scriptures and reasoning, we shall never have done. We must
proced against them with the Law.

Sarum.
FOr as truly as God, is God, if ye would have vouchsaued to follow either the
Scriptures, or the ^ncient Doctors, or the Co^celles, ye would never have
restored again either y^ suppremacie of Rome after it was once abolished, or
the private Mass, or y^ communion under one kind, etc.

Cole.
(...) and bold asse^eration, makes no pro^ in the Law.

The Reply, Sarum.
TRue and ernest asseueration makes a proof sufficient in y^ law, as long as
^e have nothing to the contrary, as in ded ye have not, nor never shall have.
But without question your terrible guard of Bills and halbardes, your grinning
and skoffing, with other like your demeanor, as ye used in the disputations at
Oxforde against the mar^irs, and faithful witnesses of gods truth, and as
now your crakes of many things, and bringing forth of nothing, I believe to any
wise man makes but small proof in divinity. But if ye would have had any wise
man myslik my asseueratio^, ye should have showed by what scriptures, by what
Cou^celles, or by what doctors, ye restored these things again.

Sarum.
IT greaueth you that I should rest upon the negative, and so put you to your
proufes. Wherein notwithstanding ye alledg against methe custom of y^ schools
yet you know Christ used the same kind of reasoning in his schole. As when he
said to the Pharisees, Hoc Abraham non fecit. This thing, Abraham never did.
And again when be answered them in ye case of divorce, A principio non fuit
sic, it was not so from the beginning, he stood only upon the negative.

Cole.
HEreis again one place that I reken you put not in your self. For it makes
quyt against you. For Christ proved the Pharisees were not Abraham's Children,
and that a man may not put away his (...) for every cause.

The Reply. Sarum.
I See you would feign put me out of credit, as though I were not able to answer
your letters without conference. But this I reken you do for a ioly policy,
that while your reader is lokig upon me, he should forget the whole matter that
we talk of. Y^ y^ era^ples that I allege be against my self, then are you the
more beholding to me. For they can not lightly make against me in this case,
but they must needs make for you. Yet I pray you show me by all your Logik,
how holds this argument of yours.

Christ proved that the Phatisees were not Abraham's Children, and that a man
may not put away his wife for every cause. Ergo. this matter makes quite
against me. ME thiketh here is a very short. Sillogismus. I merueil where you
left your Medius terminus. You should have squared it better, before it had
past your hands. As for the allegation, it makes evidently for me. For as I
said, Christ stood then upon the negative against the Pharisees, as we do now
against you.

Sarum.
Even so when John the Bishop of Constantinople had taken upon him to be called
universal Bishop of the whole Church, which title afterward the bishop of
Rome began to usurp to him self, and for the maintenance of y^ same, has
oftentimes disquieted and shaken the whole world, but when the Bishop of
Constatinople first began to use this title, Gregory being then Bishop of
Rome, confounded him only with the negative. Nemo, said he, decessorum meoru^
hoc profano vocabulo vti voluit. None of my predecessors (which had continued
from Peter downward, for the space of sir hundred years after Christ) would
ever use this vnchristianlik and lewd name. Lib. 4. Epist. 80. And again.
Epist. 9^* Sancti ante ^eg^m, Sancti in ^ege, Sancti sub gratia, omnes
perficientes corpus domini in membris sunt constituti. The holy men before the
Law, the holy men under the law, the holy men under the grace of y^ Gospel,
altogether maki^g up one body of the Lord, are placed amongst his members. But
none of them would ever suffer him self to be called universal. I have chosen
me specially these examples, because they seem to serve me to double purpose
Thus Gregory reasoned then, as we do now, only upon the negat^: and if the
Bishop of Constantinople had been able to prove but one affirmative, y^ any
Bishop of Rome before time had used that title, or that ever any man other
before the law, or under the law, or under the Gospel had suffered him self to
be called universal bishop, then had Gregory been confounded.

Cole.
TWo purposes against your self. Gregory proved D. Cole confesses y^ no
Bishop of Rome before Gre^ory, that ^s, for the ^pace of (...)* hundred yers
after Christ. would ever take upon him the title of universal Bishop.
a negative because none of his forefathers ever used that title. As one might
say, that you preach is naught because me^ in times past taught not so. This
parre of Gregory serves no whit to dispro^ the So^eraintie, as Dr^do (...)
(...) you, (...) you vouchesaue to read him.

The reply. Sarum.
YOu say I bring Gregory against my self. God be thanked you are able to
bring ne^her Gregorye, nor any else, that in any of these matters may but seem
to make with you. But if Gregorye stand upon the negative, as I do, and as
you your self confess, he makes sufficiently to my purpose. Now judge you
whether these proufes be negatiues, or no.

Nemo decessoru^ meoru^ hoc pro^ano vocabulo vti voluit. Or this. Nemo se
vniuersalem dici voluit.

And say not I alledg matter against my self, onl^s ye have where with to
disprove it better.

You answer farther, yt one might say y^ like against us, ye we preach this day
is naught, because me^ in times past taught not so. Like as Gregorye found
fault with John the Bishop of Constantinople, for yt he ^titled him self an
universal Bishop of y^ whole Church, where as none of his preder^ssours durst
euer-take that name upon him. In deed this answer might have sum show, if me^
in times past had never taught so, as we teachnow. But I doubt not but herein
your own learning and conscience cries out against you. For you know that
the matters that lie in question between us, have been taught, as we now teach
them, both by Christ him self, and by his Apostles, and by the old
Doctors, and by the auneient general co^celles: and that you, having no^ of
these or like anthorities, have set up a Religion of your own, and built it
only upon your self. Therefore I may justly and truly conclude, y^ you now
teach and of long time have taught the people, touching the Masie, y^
Supremacy, the Comme^ prayer. etc. is naught: for neither Christ, nor his
Apostles, nor the old Doctors, Tertullian, Ciprian, S. Hierom, S. Augustine,
S. Ambrose, S. Chri^om, etc. ever taught the people (...) as you have taught
them.

You say this place serves me nothing against the supremacy, I marueil much
you say not, it ferueth you to prove the Supremacy. Gregory says no Bishop of
Rome until (...) time, which was vi. r; years after: Christ, would ever be
called the vuiuerial Bishop.

He says, that Leo his predecessor re^used yt name, notwithstanding it were
offered unto him in y^ general Council of Chalcedon.

He says, it is a proud, and a profane title, and a name mere for Antichrist.

He says, who so ever will take y^ name upon him, is Antichrists forerunner.

He says to consent to such a name is the denial of y^ faith. And yet say
you, he speaks not one word against the Supremacy.

Here would I (...) be answered one thing by the way, if no Bishop of Rome
would ever take upon him to be called the universal Bishop, or head of the
whole Church, for the space of vi. c. years after Christ, where then was the
head of the universal Church all that while? Or how could it then continewe
without a head, more then now? For now you say it is impossible. Or if the
Church had no universal head in the earth for so long a time after Christ, why
do you now fournish out the Bishop of Romes authority in y^ hearing of y^
unlearned, with such a glory and face of antiquity? As if the Bishop of Rome
had ever been named the head of the Church, sense the time that Peter came
first to Rome. But because your self were not able to avoid the force of
Gregory's words, you did well to (...) me oner to Doctor Dr^do.

Sarum.
BUt as thouching the custom of the Schools, I trust ye have not yet for
gotten, that Aristotle gives order to the opponent in many cases to require an
instant of the respondent, ap I do now at your hands. And what is that else,
but in denial to defend the netiue? and to drive y^ adversary to (...) the
affirmative?

Cole.
If you read again the place in Aristotle's (...), you shall see there the
better to understand it. He speaheth it, where men dispute Di^etice, in such
(...) (...) we do not. And therefore it serves not your purpose. But I tell you
yet (...) (...), I cum not to disputo, but to learn.

The Reply. Sarum.
I Never thought it had been so high a mystery to understand y^ nature of all
Instant. Children were wo^t to have it in their common disputatio^s in y^
paruise Schools in Oxford if it serve only for them y^ dispute dialectice, and
ye (as ye pretend) be are the person only of a lerner and cum not to dispute,
why the^ did ye allege against me the custom of the Schools, and the
disputation o^ masters of art in the universities? ye know they use there to
(...) (...) dialectice, and none otherwise. And that I spoke herein, I spoke
only upon occasion of your own words. How shall I think ye remember your
Aristotle, if ye so (...) (...) your own letters?

Sarum.
BUt that ye will not do, and ye know why, (...) ye (...) (...). But (...) ye
r^quire to se our grounds. And what better ground can we have on our side,
then that Doctor (...) (...) man on the other side, can (...) no ground to
stand against (...)?

Cole.
RIdetur, chorda qui semper aberrat eade^. Doctor Col^ prove it, when it (...)
to his turn.

Thereply. Sarum.
Seeing for lack of Doctoures ye answer me with Poets, it shall do well to
answer you again with the same. Decies repe^ placebunt. And yet when ye come
so often with the pretense of desire to be taught, and of your re^, if I list
to (...) as ye do, why may not I as well say to you, Ridetur chorda qui semper
aberrat eadem? As for the proving hereof, ye do well to take a day. In the mean
season give others leave to think the truth.

Sarum.
HE that will make any Inno^arion say ye, must give a reason of his (...). O
master doctor, this reason (...) most against your self, for ye have misliked
and put away the most part of the order of y^ Primitive church, and yet ye
never gave good reason of your doings.

Cole.
IN the end of my (...) ye (...) (...) mine (...) (...) (...) (...) ye (...)
(...). (...) (...) (...).

The reply. Sarum.
ANd there shall you find the Reply.

Sarum.
YE say ye are in possession. No, ye were sometime, ye are not now and when ye
were ye had no right title or good evidence to claim by. No more then they
which sometime sat in Moses chair, or they yt said. Nos sumus (...)
Abrahami, we are the children of Abraham, and thereby claimed their possession.
Therefore ye were possessores (...) (...), and for that cause ye ar now (...),
and orderly removed.

Cole.
When ye meddle with (...), ye show (...). I am (...) in possession of all
that ever I taught, and if you put me out of possession by (...). I ought to be
restored. Had not the (...) (...) the old law good title to sit in Moses
chair? What ye forget your self, yes perbie. The (...) ^ccompted no man, maloe
fidei possessorem, after that he has continued in possession an ^ored years.
But I pardon you for mistaking (...) (...), it is not your (...).

The Reply. Sarum.
I Have not so little skill in ye law but I understand what are malae fi. dei
possessores. And as now (gods name be praised) it is well known yt ye have been
they, ye are put out of possession not by violence of man, but by ye very force
of gods truth, which so deuoureth and consumes (...) error and falshed, as
Moses (...) devoured and swalowed up the fained serpe^ts of yt Sorcerers. If
ye claim to be restored be not agreued to show your evidence.

Where ye say the Bishops and Priests yt were in Christ's time had good title to
sit in Moses chair. I grant you they had even as good title, as ye had to
sit and beat rule in the Church of Christ. And therefore your example misliketh
me never a white. (...) ye know Christ called them Fures and latrones, thieves
and robers: and said unto them, Vos ex patre diabolo estis, ye are y^ children
of the devil.

Ye say the law accompteth no man possessorem malae fidei. yt has continued in
possession one hundred years. Which thing notwtstanding I can be content to
gau^t you to be true in the civil law, yet is it not true in the law of God,
and that, as ye know is proved by diverse authorities eue^ in your own decrees.
Did. 8. There is alleged s. Augustine, whose words are these.

Veritate manifestata, cedat consuetudo veritati. Nemo cousuetudinem rationi,
and veritati praeponat: quia consuetudinem ratio and veritas semper excludit.
After y^ truth is once found out, let custom give place unto the truth. Let no
man set custom before truth and reason, for reason and truth evermore put
custom to silence.

Likewise S. Gregory, and his words are these.

Si consuetudinem opponas, ad^uertendum est, quod Dominus dicit, Ego sum via,
veritas, and vita: non dicit, Ego sum (...). Et certe quaelibet consuetudo
quantumuis vetusta, quantumuis vulgata, veritati omnino est postponenda. If ye
lay custo^ for your self, ye must remember that Christ faith. I am the way the
truth, and the life: he says not I am custo: And doubtless any custom, be it
never so ancient, never so commen, yet must it needs yield to the truth.

Likewise. S. Ciprian, whose words be these.

Si solus Christus audiendus est, ^on debemus atte^dere, quid aliquis ante nos
facie^dum putarit, sed quid, qui ante omnes est, Christus prior fecerit. Neque
enim hominis consuetudinem sequi debemus, sed veritatem Dei, cum per Esaiam
Prophetam Deu* loquatur, and dicat, sine causa colunt me docentes manda^a, and
doctrinas hominum.

If only Christ must be herd, we may not wey what any man has thought good to
do, that has been before us, but what Christ ^ath first done y^ is before all
men. For we may not follow the customs of man, but the truth of God:
specially for that God says by the Prophet Esaias: They worship me in vain
teaching the commandments and doctrines of men. Thus ye see, even by your
own decrees, that custom against the truth is a very simple ground to build
upon.

And like as ye use to say. Nullum tempus praescribit Regi, Some thinks, of
good right* cye ought as well to say, Nullum tempus praescribit Deo. Otherwise
Antichrist shall cum, and sit in possession of the holy place, and bear
himself as if he were God, and that, God knows, how many hundred years
together. And yet at the last he shall be but. Antichrist, sit he never so high.
For prescription of an hundred years, can not make the falshode be to the
truth nor can any prescription be auaylable in your own law, unless it have
bonum titulum: and that in Religion must needs be the word of God. Which word,
forasmuch as ye have not to allege (as ye your self know, no man better)
all the face of your prescripcion is but vain. And therefore ye were as I said,
possessores malae fidei. And ye have a rule of your law, possessor malae
fidei, nulla temporis longinquitate praescribit. And therefore Christ in the
case of divorce rested not upon the custo^ that was the^ received, but appealed
unto the first institution of marriage and fold the Pharisees the^, as we now
tell you, A principio non fuit sic. It was not so at the beginning.

Whereas ye say I mistake your law, I grant it is possible I may so do, as well
as you. Nowbe it, I am we^assured in this place I mistake it not. I would to
God you being a doctor of the law, did no worse mistake the Scriptures.

Sarum.
NOw if ye think ye have wrong, show your evidence out of y^ Scriptures, the
Doctors, or Councels, that (...) may have your right again^ and so reenter.
I require you to no great pains, one good sentence shall be ^ent. Ye would have
your private massethe, Bishop of Romes (...), the commen pra^ers in an
unknown tongue, and for defense of the (...), ye have made no small a do, me
thinks it were reason ye should bring sum authority besides your own: to
avouch the same withal. Ye have made the unlearned people believe that ye have
all the doctors, all the counsels, and. rd. (...). years of your side. For your
credites sake, let not al these great ba^tes cum to noght.

Cole.
IEnter no suit against you, and it were (...) (...) show my evidence until it
may (...), and take place. I cr^ue only to be (...), which I can not obtain,
when I co^mence law against you, then this speech may serve you to sum purpose.

The Reply. Sarum.
IF you will not prosequute your suite, it is reason ye be cast in a non suit.
But ye do best to make a delay, for ye know ye have to do (...) the^ that have
seen your evidence

Ye say ye keep your proufes until some better tym, when they may serve, and
take place. When Pompei, a noble gentilman of Rome, was marching forth to fight
in yt field against his enemy Julius Caesar, and ^ato an old grave Senator,
one of the same party, had showed him he w^ted men, tushe quoth he, I shall
have men enough, for as soon as I shall but stamp the ground with my force, ye
shall se spring up a swarm of Soldiers. Afterward when the field was sought and
Pompei disco^fited, and began to fly with much dishonor, O sir said Cato,
where is now your promise, why stamp ye not the ground, when shall we se your
swarm of soldiers? even somay I say to you, notwithstanding your great vauntes
that ye have made, ye se now ye are discomfeited, ye se the field is al most
lost, where are now your crakes of doctors, and councels? Why stamp ye not
your books? why cum ye not forth with your evidence? Now ye stand in need of it,
now it will serve and take place, if ye have any. But ye learned this policy
of your Tully, Scitum est, says he, causa^ co^iicere in te^pus, cum adferre
plura, cum velis, non queas, when ye have no more to say, it is wisdom to lay
the faut in time.

Sarum.
WHere ye say ye are in place of a learner, and gladly cum to be taught, ye
must pardon me to say the truth, I taken your very friends, in this point,
will hardely believe you. For if ye werde ^rous to learn, as ye would seem to
be, ye would cum to the church, ye would resort to the lessons, ye would abide
to hear the Sermons, for these are yq schools if a man list to learn. It is a
token the scholar sets little by his (...), yt will (...) be brought to
(...).

Cole.
Why I cum not to your Sermons? this question is captious: and yet ye are
(...) discharged why (...) should not (...) me. As men chouse their wives, so
chouse they their teachers. S. Augustines and S. (...), Sermons (...) more to
teach, then to convince.

The Reply Sarum.
I Meant not to be captious, but only to put you in remembrance that your
pretense of learning is but femed, and that you are not in deed so willing to
be taught as ye would seem to be Whenever ye shall show me by your law that
a man may be required to prove a (...) negative, I will be content to confer with
you, and to show you the reast of my prou^es.

Ye say ye chouse your teacher as men do their wives, many me^ are led by folly
and phansy in chousing their wives. I would your luk should be better in
chousinge your teacher. But S. Paul prophesied in his time, yt there should
come scholars with titling ears and chouse them selves teachers according to
their own appetites yt should turn away their ears from the truth, and
give themself to the hearing of fables. The Prophet Esaias says, there were
scholars in his time that would say to their teachers. Loquimini nobis
placentia, videte nobis errores. Auferte a nobis viam, declinate semita^,
cesser a facie nostra (...) Israel. That is speak to us such things as may
like us, See us errors, lead us out of the way, bring us out of the path.
Let us have no more of the holy God of Israel before our face. And shall I
think you chouse me for love, as men do their wives? I can as yet little find
it in your talk. But because I came nere to the matter, and with my negative
declared ye weakness of your side, more then some others did, therefore ye brake
out first upon me, and laid in a claim without evidence.

And having nothing to say, ye would seem to have somewhat. As women yt would
seem to be with child, sometimes rear up their bellies with a cushion.

Sarum.
Y^ desire, ye may not be cast of, but that your suite may be (...).

And yet this half year long. I have (...) of you, and all your brethren, but
one pore sentence, and still, I know not how, I am cast of, and can get
nothing at your ^andes.

Cole.
WE stand not in case like. What (...) so much ot one thing.

The reply. Sarum.
YE are much beholde^ to your recognisau^ce, ye make much a do, and yet bring
nothing.

Sarum.
YE call for the special proufes of our doctrine, which thing requires a
whole book. Whereas if ye of your part, would bouchsafe to bring but two lines,
the whole matter were concluded.

Cole.
(...) that I required may be couched in (...) and for ought I see in less to.

The reply. Sarum.
LEt the rest of your truth be tried by this. Ye know that the old father.
Theodoretus, had more then six lines of our side, and therefore D. Clement
tare the whole plate out of his book, and burnte it, thinking there had been no
more copies, least perhaps it should cum to light.

Ye know, that Occam, one of your own doctoures, has more then six lines
against you. And therefore the last Pope condemned him as an heretic.

(...) know, there is sumwhat beside in S. Augustine, in s. Hierome, in S.
(...). etc. I believe more then Royarde, or Tap^, could ever answer.

Ye know, that ye your self in your last answer granted me yt the examples
of y^ primative church are of our side and therefore ye rest (...) an (...)
point that the Primitive church in the Apostles, and old doctors time was but
an infant and a babe in comparison of your Church of Rome. Therefore me
thinks, sauinge that it was your pleasure, ye were sumwhat over seen to say,
that all our allegations may be couched in six lines. But as I have offered you
often times, bring ye but two lines of your syd, and the field is yours.

Sarum.
YEt lest I should seem to fly conferece and trial, which in deed in this case
I most desire, or to follow you in discourtesy, I will perform sum part of
your request, although in deed it be unreasonable.

Cole
IT is no discourtesy, to refuse to do that, wherewith I might forfeit my
recognisaunce.

The Reply. Sarum.
YOur recognisaunce does you good service to save your credit, ye fly away like
a faint Soldier, and yet hold up your shield as if ye were fighting still.

Sarum.
AGainst your new devise of transubstantiation (besides many others who^ I
now pass by) ye have ye old father, and doctor, Gelasius, whose judgment,
I believe, ye will regard yt (...), because he was sometimes a Bishop of Rome,
which See, as ye (...) taught, (...) never err. And is alleged in yt decrees,
his words be plain.

Non desinit esse substantia panis, and natura vini.

Cole.
I Se (...) ye write much, and read little. (...) (...) is full answered by
Tapper, in articulo de (...). Ye allege his words otherwise then ye find them.
Which fault I trust goweth (...) over sight.

The Reply. Sarum.
How are ye so privy to my reading* Wise men avouch no more then they know,
ye lackte shift when ye were driven to wryt thus. I assure you I have not been
so slack a student these. xx. years, but that besides other old writers of
diverse sorts Grek and Latin, I have not spared to read over, even such as
have written of your side, as (...), Pigghius, Hosmasterus, (...), Hossius,
and such others, and yet, vmil this day I never set abroad in prynte. xx.
lines. But this is your old wont, to make the people think that we read
nothing else but. ii. penny doctoures, as ye call them. As in the disputation
at Westminster, ye would seem to stand in doubt, whether we were able to
understand you or no, when ye speak a little Latin: and as of late ye
doubted not to say, that master doctor Martyr was not abl^ to make a
Sillogismus, which thing in deed, is as true, as the rest of your religion.

But I pray you, what had Stephen Gardener red, when he alleged the third
voke of S. Augustine, de sermon domini in mo^e and yet S. Augustine never wrote
but two.

What had the same Stephen Gardener read, when he alleged Theophilactus, and
called him Theophilus Alexandrinus, who was before Theophylactus well nere five
h^ndred years:

What had doctor Smith of Dron. red, that openly in the disputatio^s there,
An. Domini. 1554. alleged the counsel of Nice to prove the phansy of your
transubstantiation: and when he came to show the place, was not able to find
one word, other in that counsel, or in any other of antiquity, that might
seem to make for it.

What had he red, that being a Judge in y^ same disputations cried out so
bitterly upon ye man of god, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and that four or
five times together, D. Ogl^throp.
oste^de mihi qualis corpus fuit? qualis corpus fuit? and was not hable to
utter his mind in co^grue latin. This thing I trust ye will record with me, for
it was spoken in your own hearing.

Your importunity has caused me, contrary to mine own nature, to utter these
things, which otherwise I could have conceiled. O, bost not ^our self to much
of your great reading. When ye bring me any old Doctor, or council, for your
purpose in the matters ye we now talk of, then will I say, ye have read much.

As for Gelasius how soever it pleases. D. Tapper to co^tue him, he says
plainly, that in the Sacrament there remains the substance, and nature, of
bread and wine. But ye say, I allege Gelasius otherwise then I find him, and
hereof your friends have made much a do. I se, it must be a very small fault
that shall escape your eyes. Gelasius words be these. Non desinit esse
substa^tia panis, vel natura vin^. Which words, having not the book at hand, I
re ported thus: Non desinit esse substantia panis, and natura vini. I beseech
you, how far went I (...) from the words, or from the meaning of the author?
I se it was not for naught, that children in the Schools were wont to find a
difference between these two proposicions comedi bis pane^, and bis panem
comedi. But I perceine the faut was such that ye were loath to make matter of it.
If I had altered any part of the sense and meaning of the writer, I trow, I had been like to hear more of it.

I remember what a clappinge of hands, and stamping of fete, ye made at Oxen.
against that notable godly learned man, the Archbishop of Cantorburye, for
that he, alleging a place out of Saint Hilarie, had changed but one letter,
and written, vero, in stende of vere, Ye triumphed over him, and poynted him to
the people, and called him a falsarie, a wrester, a corrupter of the Doctors.
And yet afterward it was found, and will yet appear ye two of your own
doctors Steven Gardener, and Smith in their own printed books had changed
the same letter, and written, vero, as well as he.

Howbeit, God be thanked ye will not give me cause to find such fault with
your allegations, for ye are able to allege nothing at all.

But it were to long to show how many times, and how shamefully, the writers of
your syd have corrupted the old doctors. Yet for example sake, of a great
number to show you one or two, how think ye by your doctor Pighius, that
violently alters both the words, and the meaning of S. Augustine. For where S.
Augustine writes thus. Quid tam grate offerri, aut ab illo suscipi potest,
quam caro sacrificii De. Tr^. libro. 4. capi. 14.
nostri, corpus effectum Sacerdotis nostri, meaning the Sacrifice that Christ
offered upon the Cross. Pighius puts in of his own A nobis, which S.
Augustine had not, and made up the sentence of this sort. Quid tam grate
offerri a nobis, aut ab illo suscipi, potest, quam caro sacrificii nostri,
corpus effectum Sacerdotis nostri, and so perforce, turned it to the pretensed
Sacrifice of your mass.

How think ye by Steven Gardener, that in his book of ye deuels sophistry,
was not afraied to corrupt ye words of ye holy Prophet* for where as david had
writ. Esca^ dedid timentibus se, he doubled the pronoune, and wrote it thus.
Esca^ se dedit timentibus se. This must needs appear to be somewhat more then
an oversight. But what needs mo examples? Camotensis a doctor of your own,
says in general of all your syd. Vim faciunt Scripturis vt habeant
plenitudinem potestatis, they wreste, says he, ye Scriptures violently yt they
may have the fulness of their power.

Sarum.
BUt to avoid this authority, sum me^, of your side, have been driven to
erpound these plain words of Gelasius, in this sort: Non desinit esse
substatnia, hoc est, non definit esse accidens. Even as right as the gloss
expounds y^ Text. Did. 4. Statuimus, id est abrogamus.

Cole.
(...) what they are, that it be not thought y^ ye devise this of your own
fantasy. This gloss ye (...). because ye understand not y^ Glosers (...). It
may stand full well.

The Reply. Sarum.
WHat if I should say Doctoure Cole has expounded it so? If not, then I pray
you imagine with your self how ye may be able to shift away Gelasius
otherwise. Yet because ye will needs put me to my proufes, in a matter that ye
know is plain, I pray you take the pains to read Steven Gardener, in his
book that is answered by the Archbishop of Cantorbury Thomas Cranmer, ye shall
find these words. Gelasius says he, speaking of the bread and wyn, recites
not precysely the substance to remain, but says the substance or nature:
which nature he calls after the property. Here by this doctoures mind,
substantia, is latin for property, which as ye know, is nothing else but
accidens.

And again in his book that he calls. Marcus Antonius Constantius, written
in latin, ye shall find these words: Quod ait pane^ in sua substantia, vel
natura manner, vel substantiam sentit Accidentiu^, vel naturae proprietate^. It
is a very strau^g phrase of speech to say substantia accidentium. But it is as
strange to say, as he says in another place, Accidentia sunt substantiaru^
parts. Howbeit after ye had once devised a new religion, it was mete that ye
should devise out also some new phrases of speech, that never had be^ heard
before. And yet is not this the grossest part of your learning neither. Now I
trust, ye se I devised not this of mine own phantasye.

I marueil sum what that ye say I understand not y^ Glosers meaning. For me
thiketh there is not so high nor mystical learning in it, but that a mean
learned man may sone reach unto it. But I se, it must be a desperate sore, but
ye will find sum salve for it. I pray you first read the text, and then
consider how handsumly the gloss will frame unto it. The text is this:
Statuimus, vt septem hebdomadas plenas ante sanctum Pascha, omnes Clerici, id
est, in sortem Domini vo eati a carne ieiune^t. Now follows your gloss,
Statuimus, id est, abrogamus. And because ye understand the gloss better then
I, as ye say, and like it so well, read the text accordingly, and say thus,
Abrogamus vt ^ptem hebdomadas plenas ante sanctum Pascha, omnes clerici a carne
ieiunent And I believe what soever meaning ye make of it, ye shall make but
vnhandsom latin. Now let your reader judge, whether of us two better
understands the glosers meaning.

Sarum.
HEre ye have, that after the words of consecracio^, there remains in the
Sacrament the substance of bread and wine. Now bring ye but one doctoure, that
will say, as ye say, that there rematnesh only the Accidents, and shows of
bread and wine and I will yeide.

Cole.
SOft and (...), ye hau^ not read y^ answer. (...) (...), and ye shall se more.
(...) my (...) I shall be ready for ye.

The Reply. Sarum.
IF Royardes answer had been worth the hearing, ye would not have been ashamed
to have alleged his words. At your ^ue ye will be as ready, as S George a horse
back, evermore ryding, and yet evermore standing still, ye will be a very evil
Auditour, y^ lay down so little, and reken so much. But bring sum old
council, or doctor, with you at your cue, or else folk will say, ye have none
to bring.

Sarum
AS touching a private mass, Gregorye says in his dialogues, that before the
time of the communion the Deacon was wont, eue^ in his time, to cry unto the
people on this wise. Qui non communicate, locum cedat alteri. Who so will not
receive, let him depart, and give place to others.

Cole.
YE have better (...) then this. I (...), for thi^ (...) some what weak.

The Reply. Sarum.
Whatsoever this stufe seems to you, your answer seems to me very weak. ^f ye
be no better able to answer this, how will ye be able to answer the reast:
It appears by these words of Sainet Gregory, that in his time; which was six
hundred years after. Christ. who so would not communicate with the Prist, at
the communion was commanded out of the Ehurche. Whereby it is clear they had
then a communion, and that all the congregation present, received together. Now
either show ye me so much for your private mass or else say no more, this stufe
is weak.

Sarum.
TO break y^ ordinance of Christ, and the people to communicate under one
kind only, your own do^tout Gelasius calls it Sacrilegium. And Theophilus
(...) of y^ sa^ matter, (...) (...): Si Christ^ (...) fuisset pro Di^olo, non
^tur illi poculum sanguinis.

Cole.
THe (...), where (...) (...) this of Gelasius (...) (...) (...) (...) should
(...) it. Theo^ shall be (...), when I cuine to dispute with you.

The reply. Sarum.
HEre, I trow, your memory deceived you, ye mean the gloss, and not the decree.
For the words of Gelasius in y^ decree, are plain: Diuisio vnius eiusdemque
mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non potest peruenire. And the words y^ he
uses further: vt integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur:
seem not so much to pertain to the Priests as to the people. But ye did well
to turn over Theophilus until sum other time, for I wene ye had no answer
ready made.

Sarum.
THat the common prayers were used in the common known tongue yhaue. S. Basil,
S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom and the Emperor Justinian,
and many others. The plares be known.

Cole.
WHether the Greek, and Latin tuug, were then understand of the common people
remains yet upon prou^e* well. I trow. S. Basil aproueth not very well. Here
I remain (...) in doubt.

The Reply. Sarum.
I Matueile much that any learned man should doubt at this. For if the common
Greek people understood not the Greek tongue, nor the common Latin people, y^
latin tongue, then would I sain know what tongue they understood? I can see no
great cause why they should forgeat their own tongue, and learn another. But
Arnobius, in his tim called the latin tongue, Sermonem Italu^, because it was
used throughout all Italy.

S. Ambrose in his time, preathed to the people of Italy in latin, and as it is
to be thought, the people understood him.

S. Augnstin, in his sermons to y^ commen people in Aphrica has diverse times
these words. Nunc loquar latin vt omnes intelligatis. Now will I speak latin
says saint Augustine to the commen people, that ye may al understand me. S.
Gregory, in his sermons used the latin tongue to the people, and I trow he spoke
not al in vain. I marueil why ye doubt not as well, whether the commen Greek
people understood Demosthenes, or Aeschines: or the comme^ latin people
understood Cicero, or Hortensius, when they spoke unto them in their mother
tongue.

Now, that the common prayers, in S. Basiles, S. Ambrose, and S. Augustines tym
were in the commen bulgare tongue, mark how well it may be proved. S Basil
says thus of the usage of the commen prayer in his tym. Coniu^ctus sonus
virorum, mulierum, paruulorum, tanquam fluctus fecie^tis littora, in nostris ad
Deum precibus excitatur. In our prayers yt we make to God, we raise up such a
sound of the voices of men women, and children praying together, as if it were
y^ noise of the waves beating against the sea banks. Whereby it appears that
in S. Basiles tym, men, women, and children, sang in the Churches altogether.

Chrisostom of his tym says thus: Ne mireris, si in sacris nostris, populus,
cum sacerdote colloquatur?

Maruil not, says he, if that in our prayers the Priest and the people talk
together.

Augustine of his tym, says thus: Non est opus loquutione cum oramus, id est,
sonantibus verbis, nisi forte sicut Sacerdotes faciunt, significa^dae me^tis
suae causa, non vt deus, sed vt homines audiant. We need not, says he, to use
words, or sound of voice, when we pray unless it be, as the Priests do, to
declare their meaning, not to the intent that god may therefore hear them, but
that they may be heard of men.

But, because ye be a doctoure of law, I would not have you forget Justinian
the Emperor, the first compyler of your laws. He, if ye be remembered,
commanded the Bishops that they should set forth the commen prayers in open
voice, and that, as he says: Vt maiori deuotione audientium animi efferantur.
That is, that the minds of the hears may be stricken with more devotion. He
thought then that y^ understanding of y^ prayers should enkendle devotion in
the hearts of y^ hearers. For I believe, he had never heard say, that ignorance
should be the cause of true devotion, as ye boldly avouched in the
disputtacion at westminster, in the hearing, and wonderinge, of the most part
of the honorable, and worshipful of this realm. I know not by what secret
Revelation ye learned this first. For your own Counsels say. Ignorantia matter
est cuuctorum erroru^. That is to say, ignorance is y^ mother of all manner
errors. And the same words ye have alleged in your own decrees. Distin. 38.
and are very agreeable unto Christ's words in the Gospel. Erratis nescientes
Scripturas: ye are in error, because ye understand not the Scriptures.

Origenes, one of the oldest doctors of y^ Church, says thus: Tormentum est
Diabolo, si quem videat legere sacras literas: possidet enim omnes qui
versantur in ignorantia. It is a skourge (says he) and a torment to the
deuell, if he se any man read the Scriptures: for he has power upon all them
that (...) in ignorance.

S. Cyril says, Pueri nostri legunt sacras literas, and ex eo fiunt
religiosissimi. Our children, says he, read scriptures, and thereof they be cum
devout and holy.

And what needs mo allegations? your own Doctor, Lyra, says. Si populus
intelligat rationem sacerdotis, melius reducitur in Deum, and maiori deuotione
respondet, Amen. That is, if the people understand the Priest, they are better
brought to God, and with more devotion they answer. Ame^. It must needs be a
miserable cause that is grounded only upon ignorance, for no man hates the
light, but he that does euel. Christ said to the Pharisees, this is your time,
and the power of Darkness if the people had understanding of the truth, they
would not suffer you thus to lead them into error as ye do, and have done. But
I remember Plinius writes, yt, notwithstanding the Lion be a marvelous fierce
and courragious beast, yet if he may once hodwinck him, or make him bli^d, ye
may lead him whither ye list. Thus much by the way, I thought good to put you
in remembrance, for that the strangenes of your doctrine so required, if ye had
as much to show of your syd, I believe, of your courtesy, ye would not hyde it.

Sarum.
YE se I disadua^tage my self of many things that might be spoken for at this
present, I have not (...) to write Books.

Cole
I pray you take good leisure, and writ affectually.

The Reply Sarum.
A Doctor of Law, and a man of wisedo^, should bring more learning, and fewer
skornes.

Sarum.
NOw must I needs desire you forasmuch as I have followed your mind so far,
either to bring me one Doctor of your side, or else to give us leave to think
ye have none.

Cole.
I wis, ye know I may not, (...) the case I (...) in, (...) it not.

The reply. Sarum.
I wis, ye know ye can not, and therefore ye do best to say ye may not.

Sarum.
YE desire us to leave talking against you, and no more to deal so
unmercifully with you in the Pulpittes. Alas master doctor, call ye this
unmerciful dealing? what was then your dealing, when ye were in place? if ye
remember ye could never vouchsaue to call us other then Schimatikes, Heretics,
or Traitors, in your Pulpittes. And yet besides all that, ye used our Bodies as
ye know. We only tell the people, as our dewty is, that ye withstand the
manifest truth, and yet have neitherscripture, nor doctor, nor council for
you. And that ye have showed such extremity, as the like has not been seen.
And now can give no rekning why, or if ye can, let it appear.

Cole.
YE misreporteme. I said (...) men of your side (...) sed the^ seltes
traitorously to Queen Mary as none of us do now, not manifest, until it be
better proved. ye had but the Law, ye require more then any Law will (...)
against us.

The reply. Sarum.
IF they were Traitors, why did ye burn the^, as Heretics? The matter would
be to odious to show what has been wrought by men of your side against their
Princes. But as I then never liked the^, that drew their sword against their
souerain: eue^ so now I pray god co^fou^d the^, whosoever they be, yt shall
first begin the same.

What law ye ministered us in those days, I remit it unto you that are a
lawier. But I am well assured, ye showed us neither diuinitye, nor humanitye.
But I pray you, what law had ye, to imprison such even as had broken no law?
and so to keep them in your cole houses, in stokes, and fetters, with all
extremity and exueltye, until ye had made a law for them, and to do with
them, as Cyril says the Jews did with Christ, primum ligant, deinde causas
in eum quaerunt* prius captu^ habent, quam accusatum. First, they bind him
fast, says Cyrill, and the^ they devise matter agaiust him: They lay hands
upon him before any man accuse him.

What law had ye, to burn the Queen's subjects hands with candelles, or
torches, before they were condemned to dye by any law? What law had ye, to
ascite a man to appear, peremptory, at Rome within lxxx. days, and yet that
not withstanding to keep him still in prison in Oxforde? and afterward for not
appearinge at his day, at Rome, to condemn him there as obstinate?

Or what law had ye, to put the same man to death against the express words
of your own law after he had subscribed unto you, and was found in no
relapse? I trust ye can say some what herein. For that you being then a lawier
and in commission, had the execucion of yt law. But I believe, when ye have
searched your b^kes through, ye shall find ye had not so much law, as they
that said. Nos habemus legem, and secundum lege^ debet mori.

Sarum.
WHere ye say, our doctrine is yet in doubt. I assure you, to us it is most
certain, and out of doubt. But if ye for your part be yet in doubt, reason and
charity would ye had been better resolved, and qyut out of doubt, before ye had
dealt so unmercifully with your brethren.

Cole.
I Doubted more the^ I do now, ye give me good cause to be well confirmed.

The reply. Sarum.
THis is a fair shift of retorike when other help fails you: Even thus the
Pharisees after they had been long in a mammering, and in doubt of Christ, at the
last were fully confirmed and out of doubt, and said unto him, (...) scimus te
habere daemon^um. As if they should then have said unto Christ, as you say
now to us: we doubted more before then we do now, for now ye give us good
cause to be well confirmed* But if I have confirmed you bringynge such proufes
as ye are not able to answer, how then (think ye) have others cause to be
confirmed at your hands, that have used such extremity, and yet ar able to
bring nothing at all,

Sarum.
YE are bound ye say, and may not dispute: yet are ye not so bound as ye
have bound others. But when (...) were at liberty, and a (...) disputation was
granted and offered at Westminster before the Queen's ma^esties most honorable
council, and the whole state of the Realm, I pray you, whether part was it
that then gave over? And yet the, ye know, ye were not bound, unless it were
to ^lence because ye had nothing to say.

Cole
AT Westminster we came to dispute. and were answered that there was non
appointed, where we refused not to write neither. But when our book could not be
read as yours was, we refused not utterly to dispute, but only in the case if
our book could not be suffered to be red as indifferently as yours was. Now
hardely weigh whether ye have indifferently reported, that we utterly refused
to dispute with you, or no.

The reply. Sarum.
YE could not lightly have gotten so many untruths together, without sum
st^y. Where ye say, ye were answered, there was no disputation appointed at
Westminster, if I should ask you who made you that answer, I reke^ ye would be
to siek. For I trust ye have not yet forgotten, that ye your self were the
first man that began to dispute there that day, and spoke there an whole hour
together without interruption. But I marueil ye say not, that we of our part
gave you over, and refused to dispute.

Ye say, ye refused not to write your allegacio^s, and answeares as ye had
promised to do, and earnestly required it might be so, and yet contrary to your
request and promise, ye could not begotten, as ye know, to writ one line.

Ye say, your book could not be read as ours was, and yet ye know ye had no
book there to be read at all, as we had.

As for the indifferent ordering and hearing of the matters, I remit that to
them that were the orderers of it, of whom ye can not in any wise complain, but
both your own, and the hearers consciences, must needs accuse you.

The order of the disputa^ion was that both parts should the first day bring
in their assertion al in writing and that the next day, either party should
answer the others book, and that also by wrytig: which was your own request, as
it will apperre by your protestation sent to the council in that behalf. The
first day, ye came without any book at all, contrary to the order taken, and
also, as I have said, to your own request. The second day, ye refused to
proceed any father, and stood only upon this point, that unless ye might have
the last word, ye would not disput. For ye said whosoever might have that, were
like to discedere cum applausu: for these very words two of your own company
uttered in latin, even by the same terms as D. Skot. ^d Fec^.
I do now. Otherwise ye said ye would not dispute. Which answer was so vain,
that not only y^ rest of the hearers, but olso y^ Bishop, that the^ was, of
York, your own friend, found fault with it and was ashamed of it, and bad you
proceed. In conclusion, contrary to al men's loking for, only upon your
refusal, the disputacion was suddenly broken of: And I am content to stand
to the judgment of all the hea^ers herein, whether I have reported
indifferently, or no.

Sarum.
YE say ye remain still in the faith ye were baptized in. O ma^ter doctor,
stand not to much upon that point. Ye know ye have already forsaken a great
number of things that were thought necessary when ye were baptized. And yet
besides that, how many times have sum of you altered your faith within the
space of xx. years. Remember well your self (...).
who wrote the book, de vera obedientia, against the supremacy of Rome? Boner.
Who commended it with his preface? Tu^stal
Who set it forth in solemn Sermons? D. Col. and almost al ther^
Who confirmed it with open oath?

Cole.
What one thing am I gone from? ye say much, and prove little. Ye mean the
(...) Bishop of winchester, who repented at the hour of his death. and where
ye mean I condesce^ded to the (...) of king Henry at (...) first coming home,
or I had labored the matter, ye did the ^ke your self. For in Queen Mary's
time* ye subscribed to the (...), sum of them we are entered to talk in, (...)
your no les blame then mine. There be in this town that both saw yo^ subscryb,
and can bring forth you^ hand.

The Reply. Sarum.
YEs, I think ye are gone from one thing at the least, besides pardons, and
pilgrimeges. I meant not D. Gardener to pull him out of his grave, and to torment
him being dead: as ye did master Bucer, master Fagius, in Cambridg, Doctor
Peter martirs wife in Oxon. and others mo: but only that I would not have you
build to much upon your constancy, which hitherto has ^en fo^nd to be (...)
as the pleasure of the prince.

But he repented him, ye say, when he saw he should needs dye. I trust he did
so, for he had good cause so to do. But if he repented himself of his book y^
he had written so stoutly against y^ pope, why did he not recant it in all his
life time? why did he not re^oke his error openly? why held he his peace? why
disse^bled he so depely, for the space of xx. years together.

^e say, it was only at your first coming home from Italy, that ye
condescended to the Prymacie of king Henry. Here must I put you in
remembrance that ye continewed therein still all king Henry's time out, even
until the death of king Edward, and y^ cumming in of Queen Mary. And if her
grace had continewed out to have entitled her self y^ Supreme head of the
church of England, as she did a great whyl after her first entry, and y^ (as it
is to bethought) without burden of her conscience, I doubt not then but ye
would have talked better with your self, and continewed so still. At this
mean while ye came to the church, ye said and heard ye common prayers, ye
ministered, and received the communion, and in all your doings bare your self
as any other subject of this realm. And thus held out, as I said, for the
space of xxyeres, I may say to you this was a good long cumming home. Therefore
I may well thus conclude, ^ ye must needs confess the same, yt either ye
deceived the people then by your example, and conformitye of all your doings,
allowing that religion for good, which in your conscience ye knew to be
naught, or else that ye be a dissembler, and deceive the people now, making
them, as much as in you lies, by your example, to think this religion to be
naught, which in your conscience, and knowledge ye find to be godly, and good.
So yt what soever judgment ye have now, or hertofore have had of this
religion, it must needs appear, that either ye be now, or else have been a
deceiuer of the people.

But after ye had labored the matter better, and, as ye say had red the
doctors, I pray you what doctor found ye, y^ ever told you, either that y^
Pope ought to have the supremacy of y^ whole church, or yt the Prince in his
own church ought not to have it.

But I have subscribed, ye say, as well as ye, and my hand is to be seen, and
there be sum that saw me when I did it. These proufes were needful, if I had
denied the fact. But I have confessed it openly, and unrequired in the mides of
the congregation. The arguments that ye made were so terrible, ye concluded
altogether with fire and faggot. I confess I should have done otherwise: But
if I had not done, as I did, I had not been her now to encounter with you, if
ye should now be apposed with ye like conclusions, I doubt not but ye would
be glad to do, as both ye your self, and your fellows have done heretofore.

Sarum.
YE have Ecclesiam Apostolicam, ye say and we have none, yet ye know in all
these matters yt we now entreat of, we have the old doctors church, y^
ancient councels church, the primative church. S. Peter's church, Saint Paul's
church, and Christ's church. And this (...) believe, unless ye can brig me good
reason to the contrary, may be called y^ Apostles church. And I marueil much
that ye having, as ye know, none of all these churchs, or any shadow or token
of the yet should so boldly say, ye have Ecclesi^ Apostolicam.

Cole.
TO this, and sum part of the Article ye shall be answered in the end of this
writing, as I before said.

Sarum.
WHere ye say, ye make no innonatio^s it is no marvel, for in a manner all
things were altered to your hand, as may most evidently appear by all these
matters yt be now in question. Wherein ye have utterly changed and abolished
the order of the Primative church, and do nothing else but y^ contrary. And what
evident profit the Church of God has gotten by it, I think it a hard matter
for you to declare.

Cole.
What needs so much of one thing? This serves you to seem to say to much.

The Reply. Sarum*
THis answer is so short, that it concludes nothing.

Sarum
YE would have the matter turned over to sum such general council, as we
would be content to stand unto. How^it that ye think will not be in your
time. Notwithstanding this I dare boldly say, such a council will be, a great
while before (...) shall find any doctor, or old council, to serve your
purpose. But if there never be such a council, yet truth will be truth,
notwithstanding. For y^ counsel can not make fal^hed truth, but that thing
that it takes for truth, it certifieth only to be true.

Cole
I (...).

Sarum.
BUt what redress can there be (...) for at such a council, whereas no man
shall be judge or suffered to speak (...) way or other, but only such as be
openly, and justly accused, and found faulty? And whereas he that is himself
most out of order, shall be head and reformer of the whole?

Cole.
(...) (...) excuses men lay, how (...), let (...) (...) (...).

The reply. Sarum.
YE know, that in your own law there was evermore, Exceptio iudicis
incompetentis. And by what law can ye find, that a man may be a competente
judge in his own cause? if the indifferent using of the matter may be tried by
experyence, in this your last general council holden at Trydent, ye know,
that not one man of our side, notwythstandynge there were a great number of
them there, seute thither of purpose by their Princes, could be suffered to
sit among the rest or to have a voice, or to yield a reason of his faith. And
y^ Pope, Julius third, gau^ out under his bryeue, that none of them all should
be heard there, unless it were* as he said, to recant their errors.

And notwstandinge, Pighius himself had confessed there were open errors in the
mass, notwithstanding Latomus, a doctor of your own, had confessed a great
abuse in the Communion under one kind* notwitstanding Pius. ii. Bishop of Rome
had seen and confessed great abuse in the restrainynge of Priests marriage: yet
in the same council they concluded among the^ selves, yt no manner of thing
should be changed at all, that had been once received in their Church.

Therefore these be not fond excuses, y^ world sees they be to true.

Sarum
BOth parties, ye say, have waded so far herein, that now they can go no
farther, and therefore ye would have ^ther party let other alone. This ye say
now, because ye see ye are called to an audit, and are not able to make your
account. But if ye of your part had been so indifferent when time was, many a
godly man had now been alive.

Cole.
YE forget your self, I say not so (...), look bet (...) in the place.

The Reply. Sarum.
IF ye meant not so, it skilleth not greatly. It is to small purpose. Consider
it well, and ye shall find my conclusion true.

Sarum.
WHere ye say, ye would have the sayings of both parties we^ed by y^ balaunce
of the old doctors, ye se, that is our special request unto you. And that in
the matters you wryt of, I (...) (...) so to be tried. But why throw ye away
these Balance? And being so often times required, why be ye so loath to show
forth but one old doctor of your (...) (...) make (...) believe, ye would not
have the man cum to trial. Only ye set forth the empty names of S. Augustine,
of saint (...), of S. Chrysostom, of S. Bastll, of S. Ciprian, of Tertullia^,
of Ireneus, of Dionysius, of the cou^celles. etc. As y^ Apothe^aryes set for^h
their painted Bores, and oftentimes nothing in them. Ye show me only the
names of the doctors, which I knew before. But ye show me not one word in
them of the private mass, or of the (...) of the matters that lie between us.
If ye could have found any thing in them for your purpose, I believe ye would
not have brought them empty.

Ye say all these matters be already determined. But where I pray you? or in
what general council? This is it that I would so gladly know at your hand,
and that ye say, ye have, and yet so ungently keep it from me.

Cole.
THen begin, if ye think the time will serve, (...) put it over till another
tym. All these be but words often repeted, and answered already.

The Reply. Sarum.
I Have offered and begone in vain. For ye keep your self of, and will not come
to answer. These words I grant have been upon good occasion oftentimes repeted,
and I think ye would say some what to them, if ye were able.

Sarum.
YE say, I (...) misreporte the late Council of Constance. O good master
doctor, these words sa^ to much of your choler, and might better have been
spared. I spoke more favorably of y^ council, then I might have done. The
words of the council be these speaking namely of y^ communion under both kinds.
Pertinaciter assere^tes (...) pofitum, tanquam Heretici ^rcendi sunt.

By these words they that maintein the manifest ordinance of Christ, and the
practice of the Apostles, are not called (...), as I said, but (...) and wilful
heretics. Ye se therefore, my report was more favorable, then y^ cou^^
deserved.

Cole.
YE say, the council of Constance openly pronounced against Christ. Wherein
Ipray you? (...) the fathers there said, who so says it is of necessity to
receive under both kinds, and the (...) custom of the church is sacrilege,
(...) to be taken as an (...): and yet non heretik, but in a wrong opini^. Then
be like ye can bring in sum text, where Christ commanded it should not be
received but under both kinds which ye ca^ never do. So is your report of this
council slanderous still. Read. 4. Canonem concil^ Constantienfis.

The Reply. Sarum.
IT grcueth you that I should say, y^ council decreed against christ.

But consider it a right and ye shall find it. Christ as ye know, appointed the
Communion under both kinds, and commanded his disciples to do y^ same as he
had done it. Therefore he that commands the contrary, and that under the
pain of heresy, pronounces openly against Christ.

Ye call it an approved custom of the church. Yet ye remembers. Ciprians
words that be alleged in your own decrees, Christus non dicit, ego sum
consuetudo, sed ego sum veritas: that is to say, Christ says not, I am custum,
but I am the truth, But if custume might justly prevail against an open and
plain truethe, I pray you where was your Communyon under one kind ever at
any time, sense the beginning of the world, allowed for a general custome^ Or
being but a particular custo^, as it is, and that received only o^ your selse,
in what general council was it ever allowed?

Ye say, your own ordinances may not be broken, without y^ anthority of a
general Council. And dare ye without any such authority, only upon a vain and
particular custom, to break the universal ordenaunce of Christ?

Ye say, men are not to be judged heretics, that withstand your order herein,
but only to be in a wrong opinion. Here I se that ye, and your brethren, agree
not in judgment both together. And therefore ye shall the less marvel, if we
disagree, from you, and mistrust you both. For Hossius, a doctoure of your
side, is not afraid to call it heresy, and sacrilege, his words be plain.

Nunc haeresin profert, seque pollicetur ostensurum, omnes esse impios, qui
vtriusque speciei co^munionem laicis denega^t. And again. An autem idem in
regno tuo factu^ non vidimus? vbi Calix per summum sacrilegium vsurpatur? And
again: vellem autem vnam mihi terram aliquam ostendi, vbi priuata libidine,
calix vsurpari coeptus est in quano^, e vestigio, multae sint aliae and quide^
horribiles haereses consequute.

Thus, to do that thing that Christ and his Apostles, and all the old fathers
did in the primitive Church, without exception, this doctor concludes it to
be an horrible heresy.

And if it were taken for no heresye, as ye say it was not, then was your
Council to much to blame that gave so cruel sentence against the people of
Bohema, for that they thought it necessary to use both kinds, accordingee to
the institucion of Christ, and pronounced thus against them: Tanquam Haeretici
arcendi sunt. For if they take them for no heretics* they did them great wrong
to punish them as heretics. And yet is your doctor (...) to much to blame,
to condemn any thing for heresy, without any word of God, and specially
without the authority of any old doctor, or any general council.

Ye ask me what text I ca^ bring forth wherein Christ commanded that the
communion should be received under both kinds. The institucion of Christ, and
his commandment thereunto annexed, as me thinks, is text good i^ought to
him that will be ruled by Christ. I will not ask ye, what text ye can bring
wherein Christ has commanded you to minister the communion in one kind. But
this only would I know, what text ye can bring where by a Priest ministering the
Sacrament, is commanded to receive it in both kids, more then any other lay
man. I know your answer, ye must needs say, the institution of Christ. And yet
by your own interpreta^ion, if a priest communicate himself under one kind,
Gelasius calls it Sacrilegium which thing I reken he would not have said, if
he had not thought it contrary to the open words and institucion of Christ.
Again, what text can ye bring wherbi as touching this point the Priest has
any priueledg above the people. If ye can find none, as in deed ye shall never
be able, the^ yt, that is sacriledg in the Priest, is also sactiledge in the
people.

Again, what text can ye bring, whereby Christ has precisely forbidden any man
to baptize only in the name of the holy ghost? un* doubtedly ye can find none,
in all the Scripturs, but only Christ's institution. And yet whosoever would
decree that such kind of Baptism should be used, I trow ye would say he
decr^ against Christ, because he breaks the institucion of Christ.

Even so does your Council o^ Constance, in the matter we last talked of.
Therefore my words are true still, and yet ye (ye must g^ue me leave to say the
truth) have concluded with a slander.

Touching the thing it self, ye are so certain of it, yt none of you all can
tell at what time it first began. But this ye know well, if ye list to be
known of it, that it began another in Christ's time, nor in the Apostles time,
nor within the old Doctoures time, nor within the Compass of seven hundred
years after Christ. And therefore if a man should ask you of your communion
under onekind, De coelo est, an ex hominibus? ye must needs answer, it came
not from heaven, forasmuch as it has no testimony of gods word but only
crept in (as Ste^n Gardener confesses) by a supersticious negligence in the
people.

Sarum.
WHere ye say, ye could never yet (...) the error of one general council, I
trow this escaped you, for default of memory. Albertus Pighius, the greatest
learned man of your fide, has fou^^ ^ut such errors to our hands, namely in
his book that he calls, (...) Hierarchia, speaking of the second cou^tell
holden at ^phesus, which ye ca^ ^ot (...) but it was general, and yet tok^
part with the Heretic, Abbat Eutyches, against the godly man, (...): he
writes thus, (...) (...), (...) congregata legitime, vt been, ita perperam,
unjust, impieque iudicare, ac definire possunt, that is, general councels,
yea eue^ such as be lawfully summoned, as they may conclude things well, so
may they likewise judge and determine things rashely (...), and wickedly.

Cole.
YE ground your self upon Pigghius (...)* For Pigghius holds the council of
Ephesuo was general, which the Council of (...), (...). So that I marueil much
herein of you, that ye alledg that for a council, whyc^ has no place in the
^oke of councels.

The Reply. Sarum.
IN Pigghius words there are two things to be noted. The one is, that he says
a general counsel may err in faith The other, that he says, the second
council of Ephesus was general. And forasmuch as ye challenge him only for
y^ latter, I think ye will agree with him in the first, which to my purpose is
sufficient.

But here ye cause me to marvel, what ye mean to make so little account of
Pighius, for he, as ye know, has been taken for y^ chiefest champion of your
side.

Pighius says, the council o^ Ephesus was general, and ye say it was not so.
Ye must give me leave to say the truth, if ye matter come to a, quid dicunt,
Pigghius will be taken in yr cuntry for a (...) as well learned, and as skillful
in yr counsels, as D. Cole. Ye should not so little esteem the doctors of
your own side, least that being not able to allege any old doctoure, and
refusing the new, it may happily be thought ye have neither old, nor new. And
yet when ye (...) before the Queen's majesty's commisioners, at Lambeth, ye
said openly there, that Pighius is full of erroures. But forasmuch as ye your
self have begone to find fault with your own doctors, I trust hereafter ye
will the better bear with us, if we sometime shall do the same. Here ye drive
me to use the more words, partly to defend Pighius in his right, and partly to
make you se how, wilfully ye wythstande an open truth, having so little to
the contrary. And as ye shall be found true in this, even so am I well content to
take you in all the reast.

First Nicephorus, and Euagrius, that write the whole Storye and order of the
council of Ephesus, never denied it to be general.

(...) the Emperor, that summoned the Bishops together, as it may appear by
his words, took it to be general. For thus he writes to ye council,
Cogitantes non esse tutum absque vestra sancta Synodo, and vbique sanctaru^
Ecclesiarum praesulibus, huiusmodi quaestionem de fide renouari, necessariu^
duximus vestram sanctitatem conuenire. These words: Sanctarum Ecclesiarum,
quae vbique sunt, importe a generality of all churches through the world.
Farther, there was the emperors authority the Bishop of Romes legate, which,
as sum men think makes up al together, and other Bishops of all nations. And
how could such a council not be general.

You^ doctors of Pa^yse, have concluded thus, Articulo XXII. Quod autem
magistri nostri dicu^^ de legitima congregatione, notandum est ad hoc, vt
concilium legitime congregetur, sufficere, quod solemnitas and forma iuris
solemniter sit seruata. Quia si quis trahere vellet hoc in disputationem, vtru^
praelati, qui ibi sedent, habeant rectam intentionem: and vtrum sint docti, and
vtrum habeant scientiam sacrarum literarum, and animu^ obediendi sanae
doctrinae, esset processus in infinitu^. That is to say, where as our doctors
speak of a lawful council, we must mark, that to this, that the council be
lawfully gathered, it shall be sufficient that the solemnity, and form of law
be solemly observed. For if we should move question, whether the Bishops ye
sit in council, have a godly meaning, and whether they be learned, and whether
they have under standing of the scriptures, and whether they mind to submit
them selves to sound doctrine, then should we never have done. Thus it is
decreed by your doctors, that nether godly meaning, nor learnig, nor knowledge
of the Scriptures, nor obedience unto sound doctrine, is to be weyed in y^
Bishops that rule the council, but only a certain solemnity, and form of
law. Dioscorus, that was President of the same council, and his words be
reported in the council of Chalcedo^, says thus. Theodosius confirmauit omnia
quae iudicata sunt a sancta and universally synodo generali. Theodosius, says
he, has confirmed all such things as were determined by this universal and
general council.

Here ye see, it is called an vniuerlall, and a general council. And
afterward in the same council of Chalcedon, ye shall find these words.
Sanctissimae, and Domino amantissimae, vniuersalli Synodo congregatae in Epheso
metro poli To the holy, beloved unto the Lord, y^ universal counsel gathered in
the mother City of Ephesus.

But if perhaps ye doubt of these words, because the one was Eutyches, the
other was Dioscorus, by whom they were spoken (howbeit notwithstanding they
were heretics, yet could they not lightly make an open lie in a matter that
was so evident) then rea^ ye the old father Liberatus, that was, Archidiaconus
Carthaginie^^^, and lived under ^igilius Bishop of Rome, at the least a
thousand years ago, and writes the very story of this council, his words
be these. Fit Ephesi generale concilium, ad quod conuenerunt, Flauianus, and
Eutyches, tanquam iudica^di. There is appointed, says he, at Ephesus a
general council, in the which Flauianus and Eutyches, made their appearaunce,
as men standing to be judged. Now if ye will say, that generale concilium, is
not in English a general counsel, then I would it might be put over to some
other court. O master doctor, if ye meure nothing else but truth, ye would
not do, ^s ye do.

Thus much have I written in the defense of your doctor Pigghius, for that I
saw him accused of you without cause.

Sarum.
ANd of the councels holden of la^ years at Constance and ^asile* whereas Pop^
John, and Pop^ ^ugenius were deposed, he says plainly, that they decreed both
against reason and against nature, and against all eramples of antiquity, and
also against the word of God. And yet both these councels were called general.

Cole.
Wherein does Pighius prove the councels (...) Constance, and Basil, to have
erred? Mary because they decreed the general council to be above the Pope.
Ifye take these two councils to have erred in these points, ye are a greater
papist, then I am. For I hold herein rather with Gerson, I trow this be one
place (...) ye wrote not yourself. Yet, I reken no error proved in any
general council by that ye have yet said.

The Reply Sarum.
YEs, I assure you, master doctor, I put in this place, and all the reast my
self alone without conference. And yet God be thanked. I can find nothing in
your wrytinges but such as any man may sone geasse it came only from your
self alone. Ye take exception before with yt I alleged the counsel of Basil,
and sent me word that no such thing could be found. But now I see ye are
better advised.

As touching Pighius, I used his authority herein, as S. Paul, to reprove them
that denied the resurrection, used the authority of them that baptized for the
dead, not for that, he thought such baptism well ministered, but only for that
it serves to his purpose. For I showed you not what I thought my self, but
what Pighius, your great doctor, thought and what ye your self must needs
think, unless ye will pull down your own doctrine, and set the Pope himself,
and all his adhetentes upon your top.

But if ye take part with Gerso^ as ye say ye do, mark how the chief pillar
of your buildinge begynnes to shake.

If the Pope be head of y^ church as ye say, and the council be but, Ecclesia
representatiua, that is a resemblance of the church, as your Canonistes and
schole men say* how ^an it be but y^ Pope by your own saying (whether Gerson
will ornyll) must ^des be head of the council? for he that is head of the
whole) must also be head of y^ part: unless perhaps ye will say, the part
is greater then the whole.

Of these grauntes of yours there follows consequentlye great ^conuenience
against your self, ye say: The pope is not above the council.

Ergo.

May some other man say* He is much less above the hole church.

Again.

The Pope is not above the church.

Ergo.

He is not head of the church.

But all this notwithstanding ye say the counceli is above the Pope. And yet
ye know, that even now whatsoever is decreed in any general counsel, there is
evermore deuolucio^ made to y^ Pope as unto him, yt is thought to be above the
council, and without whom nothing may be concluded.

Have ye forgotten, that Pope Pius, and Pope Julius, of late years commanded
there should no appeal be made from the Pope to any council.

Have ye forgotten, that the last general council holden at Tride^t concluded
thus at the cude, Salua semper in omnibus, Sedis Apostol^cae authoritate: as
confessing openly, that they took the Pope to be above the council.

Have ye forgotten, that your own doctoures say. Papa est for omnis iuris, the
Pope is the fountain of all manner law. And Papa habet omnia iura in scrinio
pcctoris sui, the Pope has all law under the secret of his breast.

Have ye forgotten, what is written in the Popes own decretales? Extra, de
electione, and electi potestate. Si totus mundus sentiet in aliquo contra
Papam, videtur quod standum sit sententiae Pape. If all the world should give
sentence in any matter against the Pope, it appears for all that, we ought to
stand to the determinacion of the Pope.

Have ye forgotten, that is written in your own councels, Papa a nemine
iudicatur, the Pope is judged of no man. And a ioly reason joined to the same.
Quia non est discipulus supra magistru^: for there is no scholar above his
master.

Have ye forgotten, that, that is written in your decrees, Neque ab Augusto,
neque a regibus, neque a toto clero, neque a populo, Iudex iudicabitur. The
judge, that is to say, yt Pope, shall be judged, another by the Emperor, another by
kings, nor by the whole clergy, nor by the people.

And again, Aliorum hominum causas voluit Deus per homines ter minare: sed
huius sedis praesule^, suo sine questione seruauit arbitrio.

Other men's causes God would have to be determined and ruled by men. But the
Bishop of this See, out of all doubt, he reserved only to his own judgment.
And again, Facta subditorum iudicantur a nobis, nostra autem a solo Deo, the
doings of our subjects are judged by us: but our doings are judged only by
God.

Have ye forgotten, yt your schole men say, Papa habet ius infragabile, de quo
non licet disputare. The Pope has a right yt no man may withstand, of wiche
right no man may dispute?

Have ye forgotten, that is written in your decretales. De translatione
episcopi, in the gloss. Papa naturam rerum immutat, substantia^ vnius rei
applicando alteri: Et de nullo potest facere aliquid: Et sentetiam quae nulla
est, facit aliquam.

Quia in his quae vult, ei est pro ratione voluntas. Nec est qui illi (...),
cur ita facis. That is he changes the nature of things, applying the
substantial parts of one thing, to another: And of nothing he is able to
make sumwhat. And that yt is no sentence, he makes a good sencence. For in any
thing that he wills, his will stands in stead of reason. And there is no
man, that may say unto him, why do thou thus?

Have ye forgotten, the words of your own councels, Papa non potest iudicari,
the Pope can not be judged. And the same fortefied with a good reason, out of
the words of the Prophet Esaias who spoke in the parson of God, Quia scriptum
est, Nunquid gloriabitur securis aduersus eum qui secat cum (...)? shall the
axe boaste himself against him that heweth with it? Or have ye forgotten, that
Nostiensis, your own doctoure writes, Papa est omnia and super omnia. The
Pope is al, and above al, which words S. Paul speaks only of Christ. So
reverently the doctoures of your side use gods holy Scriptures.

Yet I pass by a great a number of the like sentences to the same purpose.
Thus ye se, if ye tak part with Gerso^, a great many of your own friends will
fall out with you, and ye will be in hasard to be called an heretic.

Ye se by this, that the council of Constance, and Basil, being both
general, as Pighius says decred a falshead, and were in error, as ye your
self must needs confess, as well as Pighius if ye will stand to your own
doctrine. And therefore, Cardinalis Caietanus, one of your own side, says, yt
both these councelles were afterward justly abrogate, I think for that they
were thought to have decreed amiss. And so both Gerson and ye, by the
judgment of all your brethren, remain still in error.

And when ye have sought out y^ bottom of your learning, I believe it wylbe
hard for you to find any good sufficient cause, why a general council may
not as well be deceived, as a particular. For Christ's promises. Ecce ego
vobiscu^ sum, and, vbicunque duo aut tres conuenerint in nomine meo, ibi sum
ego in medio illorum, are made as well to y^ particular council, as to the
general.

Howbeit, whether the council may err or no, ye know it avayleth you but
little to stand greatly to the defense of councels in these points, unless ye
had sum counsel to make for you. But like as the Romans, in old times,
worshipped their god Uulcanus, with al godly honor, and yet would never
vouchsaue to give him a chapel within their town: even so ye, as it appears
can content your self to honor the councels, and to have them ever in mouth,
yet will ye not vouchesafe to take the^ near to you, and to be ordered by
them. And therefore these words of yours, are only of office, and of course,
that the very countenaumce ye give the matter, might make your reader believe,
that ye have all the councels of yoursyde, and w^ have none.

Bnt alas what reverence, or regard, have ye to the councels? The council of
Nice, appointed iii. Patriarchs to rule the hole church, each of them within
his precinctes of like authority. Ye have broken this council, and given al y^
whole authority to one alon. The council holden at Eliberis, decreed, that
there should be, no kind of Image, of any thing y^ is worshipped, painted in the
church. Ye have broken this council* and filled your churches full of Images.
The council of Antioch, decreed, that such as came into the church, and heard
the Scriptures read, and abstained from the communion, should be excommunicate
from the church. Ye have broken this council, and nether do ye read the
Scriptures in such sort as y^ people may perceive them, nor once e^horte them
to the communion. The council of Charthage, commanded, there should nothing
be read in the church, but only the Scriptures of God. (...) have broken this
council, and red such Legendes, and fables, unto the people, as ye your self
know, were ma nifest and open lies. The council of Rome under Pope Nicolas,
commands, that no man (...) present at y^ mass of a pryest, who^ he knows
undoubtedly to keep a concubine, and that under yt ^ayne of (...), yet he, whom
ye would se fayn have to be taken for the head of your church, not only has
broken this council, but also, for a certain ordenary tribute to be yearly
paid, gives his Priests free license, and dispensacions under his great
seal, ^ly to keep concubines without co^trolment. And what need we (...)
examples? (...) make the cou^celles wey as ye will: when ye list, as heavy as
gold: again, when ye list, as light as feathers. Pope Julius, the second called
a council at Rome, only to overthrow the counceil of Pisa. And the whole
order of S. Dominiks freers cried out shame upon the council of Basil, for that
the Bishops there, had taken part with the Scotistes, against the Chomistes,
touching original syn in our Lady. The council of Paris was scott at, and
iested out of all parts, and until this day kept of no part. For our
Doctors of England said, it had no power to sail over the Sea* Egidius of Rom
says, it was to heavy to clim over the Alps. Thus much, for that ye seem to
stand so (...) to the defense of councels, having in these points not one
counsel to al ledge for your self.

Sarum.
YE press me sore, that if I write you not a book of my proufes, it will be,
thought I do it, conscientia imbecillitatis. By like ye have forgotten, why ye
withal your company not long sense refused to enter into disputacion with us at
Westminster. Doubtless the greatest part thought it was, as it was in deed,
conscientia imbecillitatis. And what think ye is there now thought in you, y^
being so often required, yet can not be won to bring so much as one pore
sentence in your own defense? I have before alleged a few reasons of my part,
which, by order of disputacion, I was not bound to do. Now let the world
judge, whether of us both flies conference.

^ Colo.
I have answered to thi^ already. What order of (...) discharges you of
proof. Yet remember, I came not to dispute, but to be taught.

The Reply Sarum.
YE have answered me by saying nothing, which I think ye would not have done,
if ye had any thing else to answer, from proof in this matter I am
sufficiently discharged, by the law of impossibility. For, as ye said, openly
at Westminster (and once again I put you in remembrance of the same, because
it is your own law) it is impossible to prove a negative. All your help is in
the shadow and pretense of learning whereby it appears well ye fly
disputation. ^e were best to get some better cloak to hyde you under, for these
be but fyg leaves, and cover not your shame.

^ Sarum.
I Proteste before God, bring me but one sufficient sentence or authority, in
the matters I have required, and afterward I will gently, and quy^tly confer
with you farther at your pleasurs. Wherefore forasmuch as it is Gods cause, if
ye mean simply deal ^mply, betray not your right, if ye may save it by
speaking one word.

Cole.
IF ye refuse to enstruct me, unless I bring some proof of my part, ye bid me
to my cost. Ye bit ^e to a ^east, where, whil I should take on me to prove
your doctryn naught, I were like to for^eit my recognisance, which ye
guylefullye allute me unto.

Thereply. Sarum.
YE hyde your self under your Recognisaunce, and think ye walk invisible,
as the Oystriche, when he has once touched his head under a little bough,
though the rest of his body which is great and large stand open and uncovered
yet he thinks no man can esp^ him. Although ye be sanded, and set a ground,
yet ye keep up the sail still, as if ye had water at your will.

^e say, ye may not dispute, lest ye should forfeit your recognisau^ce. I would
wysh you to remember your self, and to let the people understand the truth.
^e know ye are not bound in Recognisaunce for disputinge with any man, but for
that being required to disputacions by the Queen's most honorable council and
the place appointed, and great and worthy audience assembled to y^ same, ye
gave over, as ye know, upon the sudden, and would not dispute at al. And
therefore for your disobedience, and tonte^p^ ye were bound in recognisance.

But I pray you, were ye thus bound in Queen Mary's time ^o, as well as now? Or
if ye were not bound, how happened it that ye never durst alledg one ancient
doctor in these matters al yt while? Remember your own words. (...) said a
little before, that ye brought more the^ we were able to answer,
notwithstanding it were, as ye said, nor Scriptures nor councils, nor
doctors. And farther, I pray you, were all y^ rest of the doctors of your
side, Pighius, Eckius, Hofmasterus, Bu^derius etc. bound in Recognisaunce as well
as ye? Or if they were not bound, why were they sodeinty of their doctoures,
that in these matters they could never vouchsaue to allege one. Look better
upon your Recognisaunce, I can not believe ye should be so free to sco^e and to
scorn, more then either diuinitye, or good humanitye would bear wythall, and
only be forbidden to do that thing, which of al good reason, ye ought most to
do. Or y^ ye should be restrained from the alledginge ofs. Augustine, S.
Hierome. s. Ambrose, S. Chrisostom, s. Basil. etc. and have a privilege only
to allege Aristotle, Horace, y^ decrees, the decretales, the Gloss, Gerson,
Driedo, Royard, and Tapper, such me^ as I never could, have thought had been
canonized and allowed for doctors of the church. Augustus Caesar on a time as
he was passing through Rome and saw certain straung women luling apes, and
whelps in their arms, what, said he, have the women of these countries none
other children? So may I say unto you that make so much of Gerso^, Driedo,
Royard, and Tapper have yt learned me^ ofyour side none other doctors? for
alas, these that ye allege are scarcelye worthy to be allowed amongst the
black guard. Hilarus says unto the Arrians, Cedo aliud Eua^geliu^, show me
sum other gospel, for this that ye bring helps you not. Eue^ so will I say
to you, Cedo alios doctores, show me sum other doctoures, for these that ye
bring are not worthy the hearing. I hoyed ye would have cume in with sum
fresher band. It must needs be sum miserable cause, that can find no better
Patrones to cleave unto. I know it was not for lack of good will of your part
ye would have brought other doctors, if ye could have found them.

Sarum
THe people must needs think ^m what of your silence, and mistrust your
doctrine, if it shall appear to have no manner of ground, neither of y^
counsels, nor of the doctors, nor of the Scriptures, nor any one allowed
example of the Primitive church, to stand upon. And so your fyftene hundred
years, whith the consent of antiquity, and gene^ality, shall come to nothing.

Cole.
GOd wot, I pass little in these matters what the pore sely souls deem of my
doings. Wherein ye have no cause to complain sith they ve edified toward you.
Wise men I doubt not, see, what just cause I have to do, as I do.

The Reply. Sarum.
Now God wot, then are the pore sely souls little beholden to you, that have
been so long and so worshipfully maintained by the sweat of their brows and
now seeing them, as ye say, deceived, and perish before your eyes, ye ca^ hold
your peace and let al alone. Saint Paul said, Quis infirmatur, and ego non
infirmor? quis offenditur, and ego non vror? Cupio Anathema esse a Christo, pro
fratribus men's. And so would ye say to, ifye were so sure of y^ matter, as s.
Paul was, or if ye had the spirit of S. Paul.

Wise men, ye say, know that ye have just cause to do, as ye do. Doubtless:
for he yt can find nothing to say, has a reasonable cause to hold his
peace. And yet I think, a mean wise man may see, yt by y^ virtue of your
recognisaunce ye might as well have aliedged s. Augustine, and s. Hierom, as
Royard, and Tapper. But ye know, the matter is such, that if ye once cum to
allegations, whatsoever ye say, it will be the worse. As for my part, so that
both the wise, and the un wise may see your errors, and how little ye have to
say for your self. I pass not greatly whether yeconfesse the same by
speking, or by holding your peace. For, qui tacet consentire videtur, as ye
your self are wont to ^ay.

O master doctor, deal simply in gods causes, and say ye have doctors. when
ye have them in deed: and when ye have the^ not, never lay the fault in your
Recognisaunce.

Sarum.
WHere ye say, I am not altogether without enemies. I assure you who soever he
be that is enemy unto me, I for my part, am enemy unto no man but only wyshe
that gods truth may beknowen of all men. But he that is enemy unto me, in
this behalf, I fear me is enemy unto sum other, who^ be would be loath to name.

Cole.
YE would bear ^olke in hanbe that they that agree not in doctrine with you*
are not the Quen^s friends, which ye gather by pour own side in Queen Mary's
r^ygne. But I never brake a^ity with any man for dissent (...) religion, I ^epe
still my old friends be their religion good or bad.

The reply, Sarum.
TO the first part thereof, I will not say so much as* I were able, God sone
confound al them that be, or shall be otherwise. If ye love your friends,
notwithstandin^e their religion, ye are more ^itable then sum of your
brethren. For ye remember how vnfre^dly sum of you have used their friends,
only for dissent in religion, unless perhaps ye will say ye imprisoned them,
and burnte them, even for very love.

Sarum.
YE suppressed, ye say, your first letters, for that they were to sow^ That
had been all one to me, for sour words are not inought to quail^ the truth.

Howbeit, to my knowledge, I gau^ you no ill words to increase that humor.
But if ye strive still against nature, as ye say ye have done now, and conquer
the reast of your affections to, I doubt not but we shall sone agree.

Cole.
AS though myn^ affection only, caused me to dissent from you in religion.
Which argument may (...) you well in Rh^torike, but no where else I wene.

The reply. Sarum.
WHen ye shall bring me any such authority as I have required of you, wherefore
ye should dissent from us in these points, then will I grant ye dissent not
only for affection. If ye be able to bring norhing, I trust ye will pardon me
to say, as I say. This argument, ye say, would serve me in rethorike, and
no where else. Thus ye wryt to make your reader bel^e (as ye have reported in
places) that the ground of my Sermons is rhethorike, and not diuinitye.
Wherein ye were sumwhat to blame for your so light cre dit. For if ye had heard
me your self, as ye never did, I think ye might have hard sumwhat else the^
rhetorike. But it appears ye hu^t very narowly for faults yt account
learning for a fault. If I were skill full in rhetorike, as ye would have me
appear, only to discredit me with the people, yet can I not understand
wherefore that thing should be so faultye in me, that was sumtymes commendable
in S. Augustine, in saint Chrysostom, in saint Hierom, in Arnobius, in
Lactantius, in Cypryane, in Tertullian, and in many other old godly fathers:
for all these, as ye know, were great rhetoricia^s. But as in the book of the
kings, the Assyrians, when they were overthrown by the Jews, cried out, Dii
mo^tium sunt dii illorum, the gods of the hills, be their gods as though
Siluanus, or Pan, or Faunus, had conquered them, and not the true living God of
Israel, Even so ye at this time after ye see your self scattered, and put to
flight, cry out, it is rhetorik and eloquence, that has overthrown you, and
not the force of the gospel of Jesus Christ,

Likewise was Porphirius wo^t to say that S. Paul persuaded so far, and won
so many to the faith of Christ, not for that he had any truth of his side, but
only for that with his eloquence, and other subtility, he was able to abuse the
simplicity of the people. But, alas, small rhetorike would suffice to show how
little ye have of your side to alledg for your self.

Sarum.
HEre I leave, putting you e^tsones in remembrance, yt being so often, and so
ope^^ desired to show forth one Scripture, or one allowed example of the
Primative church, or one old doctor, or one ancient council, in the matters
before named, yet hitherto ye have kept back and brought nothing. And that if
ye stand so still, it may well be thought ye do it, conscientia
imbecillitatis. For that there was nothing to be brought.

Cole.
This place is above answered.

The Reply. Sarum.
Dou^tles, by sayi^g nothing, as all the reast.

Cole.
NO we forasinuche as ye make this a great foundation against us, that we varye
from the Primitive church. and therefore Make simple souls wene that we were in
the wrong side, here, I pray you, show me your opinion, whether we are
bound to do all things which we f^nde, by sufficient authority, were in
(...) in the Primitive Church?

And because ye shall not be herein squemi^. I shall here my self begin to
show you mine. I (...) of the pinion that the council of Constance was in this
matter. I think it an error, I am bound to do as the Primitive Church did.
Where the (...) customa^ uses the ^ontrary, I (...) an example, and no bond.

I d^ny not, but these examples were to be followed, and not to ye broken at
every man's will, and pleasure, until by co^en assent other order were taken.

But if ye seek old writers, and find me that the church this six hundred
years ob^rued (...) many things which were praciysed, and acco^y^ for good,
wholesome, and holy in the Primitive church, and thereb^ (...) us in error, this
were a wrong (...). For the church of Christ, has his childhod, his manhod,
and his hoarheares: and as to one man that is mete to (...) in one age, is not
mete for him in another: So where many things requisire and necessary in the
Primitive church, which in our days, were like to do more harm then good.
This is no new (...) phantasy, but (...) 1100. years ago by (...) (...)
morose, without reproach. I showed you and read you the place at (...), as ye
may (...), and it were to long to make rehearsal of (...) words here. We
might by taking contrary opinion herin, (...) led to think we ought to rece^
the Sacrament evermore after supper, and not ^astinge. But S. Augustine says,
that Christ (...) this to his church, to take order how, and in what sort the
Sacraments should be received and used. Wherein he says, it is a maruc^ous
insolent kind of mandnes to (...) that, which is received in the church, where
the custom is not against an* commandment in Scripture. S. Peter, cau^ed (as
Damasus says) a comma^ that (...) woman should come (...) to the church. S.
(...) (...) order, that the (...) should have al things in commen, and so
live (...): as in the late reformed order of Saint Benets munkes does most
godly appear. And not many years sense, the same order in all Cathedral
Churches was obscrued. Yet I wene it were an error to hold of necessity it
should be so still. Or to say, the church were in an error because it has
suffered a contrary custume to cre^e in.

Then, if the (...) of the church may break tha^ was in the Primitive church
commanded it is less offense to leave undone that was at the beginning
practiced and no commandment given for other to follow the same.

Thus much I thought to put you in remembrance of for such matters as ye
touch in. 1. 7. 42. 43. nombers.

The Reply. Sarum.
IN the conclusion ye take great advantage to answer many things in one
Wherein your words, because they came flowing down in abundance like a
Stream, they carried away a great deal of ^ime and baggage with them.

First where ye grant that ye of your side have varied, and do yet vary, from
the custom of the Primitive church, I can not but commend your plains therein
in telling the truth.

But where then is your antiquity becum? where be your ancient doctoures?
Where be the fiftene hundred years, that ye have so much talked of? If ye
would grant the same in the pulpit openly before ye people, that we require
the use and order of the Primitive church, and that ye, of your part maintain
your private mass, your supremacy, your unknown prayers, and the most part
of your religion, contrary to the same, that our doctrine is old, and that yours
is new. If ye would but grant this simply, and plainly before the people, we
would desyer no more at your hands.

But ye say further, that the examples of the Apostles, and doctors, vinde you
not: that in their time the church was but an infa^t and that many things that
were good for her in that age, would be hurtful to her in this age: And
thereto, notwithstanding your recognisaunce, ye allege S. Augustine, and S.
Ambrose, wherein I have cause sumwhat to (...) at your doings, that now can so
franckely bring in your doctoures to so small purpose, and before in matters of
weght, touching the greatest part of the contencion yt stands ^etwene us,
durst not once name one doctor for fear of your Recognisaunce. At the last ye
conclude, that it were an error to say, we are bound of necessity, to follow the
use of the Primitive church.

To make you a full and a clear answer hereunto, I must needs use this
distinction. There were sum orders in ye Primitive church commanded by God,
and sum other were devised by men, for the better trainyng of ye people. Such
orders as were commanded by God, may not be changed in any case, only because
God commanded the^. For as God is everlasting so is his word and
commandment everlasting.

Of the other side, such orders as have been devised by men, may be broken,
upon sum good consideracion, only because they were men that devised the^.
For as men them self be mortal, so all their wisdoms and inventions be but
mortal. As that the communion should be used in the morning, or at night.
That women should cum to the church either covered or open faced, wherein ye say.
Saint Peter took order. That the ministers goods should be all in comen, or
otherwise. etc. These and other like, were things appointed and ordered by men,
and therefore were never used in all places of one sort. But as they were
brought in by men, so might they be dissolved and broken by men. In these
things, I grant, the examples of ye doctors, or Apostles, bynd us not. In
these things it were an error to say we are bound of necessity, to follow
the use of ye Primitive church. These and other like things they be, that. S.
Ambrose speaks of, whom ye at Westminster alleged in the case ye then
entreated of directly making against your self. And we, when we heard you
name him first, marueled much what ye meant to meddle with him above al others.
For as touching yt commen prayers to be had in a strange tongue (which matter
we had then in hand.) S. Ambrose seems of purpose to controlle both you and
your brethren, in manner one whole chapter through wrytinge upon yt. xiiii.
chap. 1. Cor. And farther, the examples that he uses, in the place, where ye
alleged him, are these. That the deacon, in the Primitive church, used to
preach, and in his time preached not: and that women in the Primitiu^ church,
used to baptyse, and in his (...) baptized not: and that in (...) ^tiue church,
the Sacrament of Baptysme was ministered at all times indifferentlye, without
difference of days, and that in his time it was ministered only upon certain
days.

And yet in your church, contrary to the order of s. Ambrose, both women
baptize, and deacons preach, and children are baptized every day without
difference of time.

Thus ye would seem to follow S. Ambrose, and yet allege him in such places,
where your self most of all varye from him. But perhaps your mind was
occupied, or ye had not the^ leisure to mark him better.

Hitherto, I think we agree, yt touchi^g such things as have been ordained by
men, we are not bound of necessity to the order of yt Primitive church.

But of the other part. I say, yt such things as God (...) commanded
precisely by his word, may never be broken by any custom, or consent And such
be the things yt we now require at your hands, not devised by men, but
commanded by God to last for ever. Unless ye will happily say, as Montanus
did, that God has revealed both mo things, and also better things unto you,
then ever he did unto his Apostles: or else, as Manicheus said, that the Apostle
saw nothing, but only in speculo, and in aenigmate: or as your doctor
Siluester Prierias says, Indulgentiae non habent authoritatem ex verbo Dei,
sed habent authoritatem ab Ecclesia Romana, quia mayor est. Pardons, says he,
have no ground of gods word, but they have their ground of ye church of Rome,
which is a great deal more. The cup which ye have taken from the people, is
not a ceremony, but a part of the Sacrament. And as good right as ye had to
take that part away, so good right had ye to take away also the other, and so
to leave the people nothing atal. And therefore yt old father Gelasius, says,
aut integra percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, either let the^ receine ye
hole Sacrament, yt is to say, under both kinds, or else let the^ be put from ye
hole. By which words of the old doctor Gelasius, it may appear, yt unless
both parts of the Sacrament be received together, the Sacrament is mangled,
and not whole.

Again, to pray in such a tongue as the people may understand, and thereby be
edified, is not a ceremony to be changed at man's pleasure, but the
commandment of God, for Paul, when he had spoken long thereof, concludes at
the end. Si quis est Propheta, aut spiritualis sciat, quod quae scribo, domini
sunt praecepta. If any man be a Prophet or spiritual, let him well know, ye the
things ye I wryt, are the commaundeme^ts of God. Prayer in yt vulgar and
known tongue. S. Paul says, is the commandment of God, and not an order
taken by man.

Again, for any one man to take upon him to be universal Bishop of the hole
church. S. Gregorye says, it is both against the Gospel of Christ, and also
against the old canons, and a^cient orders of the church, his words be these.
Quis est iste, qui contra Statuta Euangelica, con^a Canonu^ decreta, (...) sibi
nome^ vsurpare praesumit, what man is this that takes upon ^un this new
fangled name, to be called the universal Bishop of the hole church, co^rtary to
the laws of the gospel, and contrary to the decrees of the Canons. And farther
he says, Consentite in hoc nomen est fidem amittere. To agree unto this name,
is ^o go from the faith. These things, and other like, because they have their
foundation in gods word, may not be changed by any order of ye church. For
the church, as she is Lady of her own laws: so is she but a handemayd, to the
laws of Christ.

But here would I feign know what smatterer taught you to frame this argument?

The church has power to break sum orders.

Ergo. She has power to break all orders, where, and when she lists.

As per^te a Logicio^ as ye make your self, yet here ye have made a
sophistication, A secundum quid ad simpliciter. Which, as ye know in Logik is a
foul error in reasoni^g.

But it is a world, to consider the reason ye use to prove your purpose withal.
For ye say the Church in Christ's, and the Apostles tym, was but an infant, but
now she is well strike^ in age, therefore she must be otherwise dieted now, the^
she was then. This is not the handsomest comparison yt I have herd of. For I
never herd before now, yt Christ and his Apostles, wet called infants. Or yt
ever any man before now took upon him to set the^ to schole. Esaias says yt
Christ should be, pater futuri seculi, yt is, the sather of the world to cum,
which is ye tym of yt gospel. And s. Hiero^, in your own decrees, calls yt
Apostles, patres that is, not infa^ts, but the fathers of y^ church. And I
believe, though ye would study and labor for it, yet would it be very hard for
you, either to find out any good substantial reason, wherefore ye with your
brethren ought to be called y^ fathers of gods church, or Christ and his
apostles ought to be called babes. O yt ye would indifferently compare the one
with the other. Ye should find, that as like as ye and your Bishops are to the
Apostles, so like is your church to the Apostles church.

But if I would grant you your comparyson, that Christ and his Apostles are
unto you, as children to old fatherly me^, yet how could ye make this argument
good by all your Logike.

The church is now be cu^ old and ancient.

Ergo. The people must pray in a strange laguage, they know not what.

Or this. The church is old.

Ergo. The people must receive the Sacrament but under one kind.

Or this. The church is old.

Ergo. The people may not be exhorted to the holy communion, but only content
the^ self with a private mass.

If these arguments seem to be good in law, yet I assure you they seem to me
very weak, either in logik, or in divinity. Howbeit of such reasons ye have
stoar enough, as I were able to show you at large, if need so required. As
where ye say. Ext^ (...) Maior^tate, and obedie^tia. Cap* vn^ Sa^ct^.


Quae sunt potestates. a Deo ordinatae sunt. The powers that be ar ordered by
god.

Ergo. The Pope is above the Emperor. Spiritualis, a nemine iudicatur. The man
that is ruled by gods sprite, is judged of no man.

Ergo. No man may judge the Pope.

Sancti estote, quonian ego Innocentius did. 82. proposuisti.
sanctus sum. Be you holy, for I am holy, says y^ lord

Ergo. No married man may b^ a Priest.

Christ said unto Peter, (...).
Solue pro me, and te, pay y^ tribut money for me and thee.

Ergo. The Pope is head of the church.

Ecclesiasticus says, (...).
In medio ecclesiae aperu^t o^ suum. He opened his mouth in the mids of the
congregation.

Ergo. The Priest must turn round at the midst of the altar. Fecit Deus
homine^ ad ima Concilii^s (...) (...) (...) sub. (...)
ginem and similitudine^ sua^. God made man to the I. mag and likeness of
himself.

Ergo. There must be Images in the church.

Papa iuratur in fidem Apostolicam. Concili^ Basi. sub Euge^
The Pope is sworn to ye Apostles says.

Ergo. The church can not err.

Non est discipulus supra Concili^ Romans sub Siluestro
magistrum. There is no scholar above his master.

Ergo, No man may judge the Pope.

Papa est dominus omnium The Canonistes*
beneficiorum. The Pope is Lord of al benefices.

Ergo He can not commit Simony, though he would. (...)


Domini est terra and plenitudo eius. The earth is the Lords, and the ^nes
thereof.

Ergo. The communion cake must be ^ounde.

Omnis spiritus laudet Do (...).
minu^. Let al sprits praise the Lord.

Ergo. Ye must have Organs in the church.

Lac vobis potu^* dedi. Or D. Col^ (...) West^nster.
Ignorantia est matter pietatis. I gave you milk to drink, or Ignorance is
the mother of devotion.

Ergo. The people must make their prayers in a strange tung.

Logike was good cheap, (...) these arguments were allowed. But these and a
great many others, as good as these, have been made of your side, as ye know.
But judge ye whether they seem to, you to be of such warrant, that upon the
syghte of them, we may^ safely break y^ commandments of God, or no.

Very loath I was so much to open the weakness of your side. But for as much
as ye write that master Cal^ins and master Bucers reasons be such, as none,
but yung folk and children will be moved with the^: your importunity herein
has caused me to do otherwys^ then I would. Therefore out of a great number of
like arguments of yours, I have laid forth a few And I believe* nether child,
nor young body, nor your self wylbe greatly moved with them.

Where ye say these things may not be broken by any pryuate authority, but
only by a general consent: This is but a dilatorye plee to defraude your
aduersarye. Pe know all the Princes of christen* ^endom are not so sone brought
to together. In the mean while perhaps ye will say to your self, as ye know
whosaith, Interea fiet aliquid spero. But for as much as ye give such credit to
a general consent I would fain learn at your hand, where this custume of
yours first began, or by what consent it was ever allowed.

Steven Gardener in his book of the deuels Sophistry, touching the communion
under one kind, imagines that first sum good devout body, for reverence he
had to the Sacrament, thought himself not worthy to receive the cup and so
absteined. And then followed another, and so another, and after ano there, and so
at length it became, as he says, a general consent.

Thus he imagines, only upon ^is own guess. For therwas never any man y^ so
wrote before him. Nether was he able to show nor whence, nor where this
custume (...) began, nor how far it went abroad. But if any one man began it
first, and so another, why did not y^ Priests and Bishops then speak against
it? Why did they suffer one singular man, only upon a singular pha^sy to break
the general order, yt was given by Christ, and observed by general consent
through the hole church? ^fit it had be^ staid at the first in one, it had
never past afterward to so many. ^f it be a wickedness as ye say, for one man
of his own vain pha^sy to alter the general order of the whole church then ye
see, even by Steven Gardiners confession, yt your general consent, whereunto ye
lene so much. proceeded at the first only of wyckednes: And being so, ye
remember ye have a rule in your own law. Quae a principio male inchoata fuit
institutio, temporis tractu non conualescit, that is, the thing that was naught
at the beginning, can not be made good by process of time.

O master doctor, let us lay aside all self will and contention and have
recourse only unto the truth, that God has reueyled to us in his holy word.
For thereby shall ye be able to know whether y^ church do right, or no. And
thereby shall ye be able to reform her* if she happen to do amiss* For it is
possible the church may err but it is not possible the Scriptures may err.
And the Scriptures of God, have authority to reform y^ church, but I never
heard y^ the church has authority to reform the Scriptures.

Thus Christ reformed the errors of the church in his time brought in by the
Scribes and Pharisees, and said unto them, Scriptu^ est. Thus S. Paul
reformed y^ Corinthians for misusing the holy communion in his time, and told
them. Quod accepi a Domino, hoc tradidi vobis, I delivered you that thing, that
I received of the lord. Thus the old father Ireneus, to stay the erroures of
his time, bad the parties have a recourse to the most ancient churchs, from
whence religion sprange first. Thus says Tertullian, to redress he errors of
his time. Hoc co^tra omnes Haereticos praeiudicat, id esse ve^um, quodcunque
primum id esse adulterum, quodcunque posterius.

This saying says the preuayleth against all heretics, yt the thing that was
first ordained, is to be taken for true, and whatsoever was devised
afterward, is to be taken for false.

Thus says S. Hierome, of the abuses of his time. Quae absque testimonio
scripturarum, quasi tradita ab Apostolis asseruntur, percutiu^tur malleo verbi
Dei. The thigs that are fathered upon the Apostles, and have no testimonye of
the Scriptures, are beaten down (...) the hammer of gods word.

Thus says S. Ciprian, to stay the schisms and sects of his tym. Hinc
Schismata or^tur, quia caput non quaeritur, and ad fontem non reditur, and
caelestis magistri praecepta non obseruantur. Hereof spring Schisms and
divisions, for y^ we have no recourse to the first institution, and go not
backward to the spring, and keep not the co^maunments of the heavenly master.

Thus says S. Augustine, to refourme y^ errors of his time: N^ audiatur, hoc
ego dico, hoc tu dicis: sed haec dicit Dominus. Ibi quaeratur Ecclesia. Let not
these words be heard between us, thus say I, or thus say ye, but thus says y^
Lord. And there let us seek for y^ church of God.

Thus says S. Ciprian. Si ad diu^nae traditionis caput, and origine^
reuertaris, cessat omnis error humanus. If ye will return to y^ head, and
beginning of Gods ordinance, all erroures of man will sone give place.

Theodosius, the Emperor, pronounces that they only are to be taken for
Catholic, y^ follow the doctrine that Peter delivered at the first to the
church of Rome, and so examined he the matter by the original.

Wherefore it stands you now upon, to prove that your pryuate mass, your
communion under one kind, your prayers in an unknown tongue, and your
Supremacy, was delivered at the first by Peter to the church of Rome, or else
to confess, that these things be not Catholic.

To conclude, like as the errors of the clock be reueiled by the constant
course of the son, even so the errors of the church are reueiled by the
everlasting and infallible word of God.

But to say, as sum of you have said, the church is the only rule of our faith,
and whatsoever God says in is word, she can never err, is as much as if a
man would say: how soever the son go, yet the clock must neds go true. For
gods truth is an everlasting truth, and hangs not upon the pleasure or
determinacion of men: but being once true, is true for ever. God open the eyes
of our hearts, that we may se it, and rejoice in it, that the truth may
deliver us.

Thus much I thought it good to say to your letters, before my de parture
hence, not for y^ I knew precisely they were yours, but only because they bare
your name. If ye think I have been sum what long, specially your answers
being so short, ye shall remember, that a little poison requires often times a
great deal of Triale.

Here once again I conclude as before, puttyng you in remembrance, that this
long I have desired you to bring forth sum sufficient authority, for proof
of your party, and yet hitherto can obtein nothing. Which thing I must
needs now pronounce, symplye and plainly, because it is true, without, if,
or, and, ye do Conscientia imbecillitatis, because as ye know, there is
nothing to be brought. All these things considered, if I might be so bold
with you. I would say friend ly to you, as S. Augustine says to S. Hierome,
Arripe seueritatem Christianam, and cane palinodiam.

18. May. 1560. John. Sarum.

The copy of a Sermon pronounced by the Bishop of Salisburie at Paul's Cross,
the second Sunday before Ester in the year of our Lord. 1560. whereupon D. Cole
first sought occasion to encounter: shortly set forth as nere as the author
could call it to remembrance without any alteration or addition.
TERTVLLIANVS. Praeiudicatum est aduersus omnes haereses: id esse verum,
quodcunque primum: id esse adulterum, quodcunque posterius.

This is a prejudice against all heresles: that that thing is true, what
soever was first: that is corrupt, whatsoever came after.


Concilium Nicenum. (...).

Mores antiqui obtineant.


THE COPY OF a Sermon pronounced by the Bishop of Salisbury at Paul's Cross
the. ii. Sunday before Ester, in the year of our Lord God. 1560. Whereupon D
Cole first sought occasion to encounter: shortly set forth, as nere as the
authoure could call it to remembrance without any alteration or addicio^.
1. Cor. ii. Ego accepi a domino, quod et tradidi uobis: quoniam Dominus Jesus
in qua nocte tradebatur accepit panem. etc.

I have received of the lord, that thing which I also have delivered unto you:
that is, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took bread.
etc.


SAint ^aule after he was once appointed out by God to be his chose^ vessel,
to carry his name a monge al people, having occasion to make his abode for a
long time in the City of Corinth, began there to instruct the people, to
draw them from the foltes, and errors, that they, and their Fathers had long
lived in before time, and to lead them to the gospel of Christ, which then
God of his mercy had newly showed unto the world. And therwithall he
delivered unto them the sacrament or holy misterye of Christ's last supper, to
be practiced and continewed amongst them, as a most certain pleadge and
testimony of the same.

But after that, through the wickedness of the Jews, he was driven to depart
thence, and to sail into Siria, the faise Prophets. men full of pride, and
vain glory, taking occasion at his absence, sought means to discredit what so
ever he had taught or don: and caused the people not only to mislyke the gospel
of Christ, that they had received at Sainet Paul's hand, but also to missence
the sacraments. For as touching the Gospel, they were fallen from it in to
sundry great and horrible heresies, concerning the resurrection, and other
special points of Christ's religion. And as touching the sacraments, where
as S. Paul had appointed the^ the holy mysteries of the breaking of Christ's
body, and sheddynge of his blood, that they should al eat and drink together
with fear and reverence in remembrance of his death and passion, and so
cleue together in brotherlye charity, as being all the members of one body,
they forgetting the very use and institution thereof, made small account of
Christ's death, took each man to him self severally his own supper, despised
their pore brethren, rent and divided the church of God and so make ye holy
sacrament of love and charity, to serve them as an instrumente of discord, and
dissension,

Therefore says S. Paul unto the^: shall I praise you for thus doing? in this
thing surely I may not praise you. For I see your congregations and comen
metings are not to the better, but to the worse.

For a redress hereof he calls them back to the first original, and to the
institution of Christ from whence they were fallen* For I, (says he*) being
amongst you delivered you none other thing the^ that I had received of the
Lord. That thing he thought meetest for you. And therefore with ye same ought
you also to be contented.

Thus, when soever any order given by God is broken or abused, the best
redress thereof is, to restore it again into the state that it first was in at
the beginning.

Thus when the Temple of god at Jerusalem was so shamfullye difordred by the
priests and Levites* that it was become a cave of thieves. Christ for
reformation thereof, called them back again to the first erection of the
temple. Scriptum est: Domus mea Domus orationis vocabitur. It is written (says
Christ) in the Scriptures: My house shall be called the house of prayer. Thus was
the temple of God used at the beginning and thus ought it to be used now.

Thus when Christ was apposed by the Scribes and Pharisees in the case of
divorce, whether he thought it lawful for a man to put his wife from him for
every light cause, and to mary another, he made them answer by the first
institution and ordinance of marriage. A principio non fuit ita. Scriptum est:
Eru^t duo in carne vna. It was not so (says Christ) at ye beginning. It is
written. They shall be two in one flesh. Now therefore they are not two, but one
flesh. As if he should have said: This is the ordinance of God my father.
This may not be broken for your pleasures sake, but must remain in strength,
and last for ever.

This S. Paul, that the Corinthians might the better understand, that they had
irreverently missensed the Lords supper, and be the more willing to redress
the same* laid Christ's first institution before their eyes, as a true pattern
whereby the sooner they might redress it. Lokes (aith he) what thig I received
of the Lord, the same thing I delivered cuer faithfully unto you. I gave you
not any pha^sy, or devise of mine own, but that thing only that Christ had
before delivered me. This rule is infallible. Hereby your doings may best be
tried? This, I judge, to be the very true meaning of these words of S. Paul.
Now for as much as in this last age of the world, the* same holy sacrament
or mystery of Christ's last supper has been likewise stained with diverse foul
abuses, and specially for that, notwithstanding it has pleased almighty God
of his great mercy, in these our days to remove away all such deformities,
and to restore again the same h^ly mysteries to the first original: yet there
be diverse that wilfully remain in ignorance and not only, be unthankful unto
almighty God for his great benefits, but also take pleasure in the erroures,
wherein they have of long time ben trained. And that not only the pore and
ignorant, but also the rich, and such as should be learned, and know god. I
have thought it good therefore, at this time, to stand the longer upon the same
words of S. Paul: that we may the more clearly see the first institution of
the holy sacrament, and how far in these latter days we have straied from
it. It was to be ^oyed, for as much ^s the glorius light of the Gospel of
Christ is now so mightily an^ so far spread abroad, that no m^ would lightly
miss his way, (as before in the time of darkness) and perish wilfully.

But we may remember when the Jews were delivered out of Egypt, and had been
wonderfully conducted through the redsea, and set at liberty, and were passing
quiet ly into the land of promise, a land flowy^g with milk and honye: yet
we^ there diverse weary of their being there, and feign would return again into
Egypt to be in bondage, in thraldom and in misery as they had been before.

We may remember, when the Jews were delivered from Idolatry, wherein they and
their fathers had long continued, and were brought to the true knowledge and
worship of the everliving God of Israel, notwithstanding they were in deed the
people of God, yet were there many amongst the^ yt mislyked the time, and as it
is reported by the Prophet Hieremye, cried (...) (...) him.

Sermone^, quem locutus es nobis in nomine domini, non audiemus ex te* sed
facientes faciemus omne verbum quod egreditur ex ore nostro vt facri ficemus
reginae coeli, and libemus ei libamina: sicut fecimus nos and patres nostri,
reges nostri, and prin cipes nostri in vrbibus Iudae, and in plateis
Hierusale^L and saturati sumus panibus and been nobis erat, and malu^ non
vidimus. That is: We will not hear the word, that thou spekest unto us in the
name of yt lord, but we will do every thing that shall proceed out from our
own mouth, as to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to offer up Drink
offerynges unto her, as both we have done, and our fathers, and our kings and
our princes in the city of Judah, and in the streates of Jerusalem. For then
had we plenty of victualles, and were well, and felt no evil.

We remember, when the Gospel of Christ was preached by. S. Paul at Ephesus,
and the deuels mouth was thereby stopped, and all his force and power taken from
him, yet there was a great n^ber that rose up against Paul and violently
withstode his doctrine, and cried out with mayn voyte against him, Magna est
diana Ephe siorum. Great is Diana the Goddess of the Ephesians.

Eue^ so in these days, notwithstanding the comparion may happily seem
somewhat od^ous, where as the holy Communion is restored to the use and form
of y^ primitive church, to the same order y^ was delivered and appointed by
Christ, and after practiced by the Apostles, and continued by ye holy doctoures
and fathers, for ye space of five or six hundred years, throughout all the
whole Catholic church of Christ without exception, or any one sufficient
example to be showed to the contrary, yet are there sum this day that refuse
it, and shun it, and unadvisedly. and wilfullye run hedlong to the Mass: of a
good zele (I hope) but not according unto knowledge. For alas, they understand
not what* they do, they know not neither the communion, neither the Mass:
neither will they harke^, or inquire to come to knowledge. And so in yt midst
of the light they remain still in darkness.

Wherefore as I said before I have thought it needful to intre at sumwhat hereof
at this time, and have good hope through Gods grace so to lay forth the
whole matter, not with eloquence of words, but with simplicity of the truth, yt
it may be plain both unto the^ that have forsaken the mass, for what cause,
and how justly they have forsaken it, and also unto them that as yet delight in
it, what manner of thing it is that they delight in.

I know, sum man will say, for as much as y^ sacrament is a holy thing, the
ordinance of Christ, the high mystery of his death, and of our salvation, to
remain in the church for ever. Therefore it cannot possibly be abused, and all
that we speak this day in this behalf, we speak of malice, and not of truth.

True it is the sacrament is an holy thing, y^ ordinance of Christ, the
mystery of our salvation: yet is there nothing so good, no ordinance so holy,
no mystery so heavenly, but through y^ folly, and frowardnes of man, it may be
abused.

The Serpent that was set up by Moises in the wilderness was an holy thing, for
it was a sacrament, and a figure of Christ hanging on the cross: yet was it
abused. The Gospel of Christ is an holy thing, yet S. Paul says to the
Philippians, there were sum then that preached it for malice and contention,
doing thereby service not unto Jesus Christ, who^ they professed in their
mouth, but unto their own bellye. And thus being holy in it self, yet was it
shamefully abused.

And what thing is there s^ holy as the name of God? and yet what thing is
there so often taken in vain, or so much abused?

But to cum near to our purpose, the sacrament of Baptyme is an holy thing:
yet has it ben abused, and that in the church of God: yea, even at the
beginnynge of the church: even when the Apostles of Christ were yet a live,
and the blood of Christ, as yet fresh and green before their eyes.

In S. Paul's time there were sum that baptized for y^ dead: after that, there
were sum that baptized such as were already dead: and sprinkled the^ with water
in the name of the father of the son and of the holy ghost, laid their hands
over them, and called the^ by their names, as if they had been alive. Which
thing was reproved and forbidden in the council of Carthage.

Others there were that baptized children before they were borne, being as yet
in their mothers womb. Which thing is mentioned and reproved by S. Augustine.

All these as may sone appear, were great abuses.

Thus the sacrament of Baptism, not withstanding it were a holy thing yet was
abused.

The sacrament of the brekinge of Christ's body, and the sheading of his blood
is an heavenly mystery, and an holy thing, yet has it often times ben abused,
and that in the Primitive church, when the religion of Christ seemed to be in
highest perfection.

In the time of Tertullian, and of S. Ciprian, which was athousand and four
hundred years ago, women commenly took the sacrament home with the^ in their
napkins, and laid it up in their chests, and received a portion of it in the
morning before other meats.

This was an abuse of the sacrament, and therefore was it broken. In S. Ciprians
and S. Augustines time, young babes, as soon as they were Baptized, received the
Communion. But that was a great abuse. For by the doctrine of S. Paul, the
holy misteryes ought to be given unto none, but only unto such, as be able to
understand the meaning thereof, to sudge the Lords body, and to declare his
death. And therefore now infantes, when they be baptized, receive not the
Communion. In the time of S. Hierom, sum portion of the holy Communion was sent
from the church to the new married man, and to his wife to be received at home.

This was a disorder of the sacrament, and therefore now is not used. S. Ireneus
(says) that one Marcus a necromanser was wo^t to enchaunte the cup of the
sacrament of Christ's blood, so that the liquour should seem to increase and
multiply, and from a little to grow to a great quantity. This also was an
horrible abuse of Christ's holy sacraments.

Sum of late time, have received the communion for their purgation to clear
them self against sum notorious slander. And then the priest changed the
words which comenly be used at the ministration, (and said thus:) Corpus
domini nostri Jesus Christi sit tibi ad purgationem. Sum others have used to
hang the Sacrament, as an Agnus Dei, before their breasts, for a protection
against the assaults of the deuel, and all other wordly enemies. S. Benet
ministered the communion unto a woman that was dead, and it may well be thought
that other did so as well as he: For it is forbidden by general consent, in
two counselles, the one holden at Antifrodorum the other at Carthage.

No man can lightly deny but these were great abuses. For Christ appointed
not the Sacrament of his last supper that women should bear it home, and keep
it in their chests nor that it should be sent home to new married men and women,
to be received in several, nor that it should be ministered to babes and
infa^tes, that knew not what it meant: nor that Inchaunters or Necromansers
should thereby auaunt their detestable practices: nor yt men should thereby
discharg them selves from slander: nor that it should be hanged before men's
breasts, and carried about as a shield against the Deuel, nor that it should be
ministered unto dead men or women, and ^losed up in their mouths, and laid with
them in their graves. But yt such as bare the name of Christ, and trusted to be
saved by his blood, should communicate together, and solace them selves in
the remembrance of his death.

This Christ himself has instructed us* do this, he says, in remembrance of
me. This is the very true and lawful use of the holy Communion of Christ's
body and blood, and all others are abuses.

We se therefore, that albeit the sacrament be an holy thing, and an heavenly
mystery, yet that notwithstanding it may many ways be abused.

But what need we so many proves in a thing that is so evident. Saint Paul
himself saw the abuses thereof in his time. S. Paul himself, even in the
beginning of the Church, within forty years after Christ's death,
withnesseth, that even then there were abuses crept into y^ sacrament, and
therefore repro^eth the Corinthians. And for redress thereof calls them back
to the example and first institution of Christ. That same self thing, (says
he) that I received of the Lord, that I delivered unto you, in such sort as I
had received it. Let that be a pattern for you to follow.

Sum man, perhaps, will hear reply: notwithstanding the sacrament in it
self, either through the wickedness, or through ye folly of man, may be, and have
benabused, yet neither was there ever, nor can there be any such abuse, in the
mass. For it stands of four special parts, godly doctrine, godly
consecration, godly receyuinge of the sacrament, and godly prayers. In
conclusion, it is so heavenly and so godly a thing, that no folly, or wickedness
can enter into it.

These things, good brethern, I know have been often times spoken out of such
places as this is, and stoutly auoutched in your hearing. And therefore, after
that the mass had been once abolished, by y^ noble prince of godly memory kind
Edward the sixth, and the next prince for that she knew none other religion, and
thought well of ye thing that she had been so long trained in would needs have
it put in ure again, through all her dominions, it was forthwith restored, in
like manner, in all points, as it had been used before, without any kind of
alteration, or chaung: as I believe, that their very doings therein might
stand for proof sufficient, that neither the mass it self, nor any parsel or
point thereof, had ever ben abused.

But alas, what if they that most of all other defend the mass, themselves
find faults and abuses in ye mass? Mark (I pray you) what I say: what if the
very mainteyners, and proctours of the mass, confess plainly unto the world
in their books openly printed, and set abroad, yt there have been, and be abuses
and errors in the Mass?

Albertus Pigghius, the greatest pillar of that part, in a little trea^ise that
he writes of the Mass, has these words: Quod si qui abusus in rem
sacratissimam, and saluberrimam irrepserunt, vt irrepsisse plerosque non
diffitemur, scimus ad quem, and ad quos pertineat eosdem corrigere. That is to
say, if there have certain abuses crepte into y^ holy and holsom thing, that is
the Mass, as I grant, there have crept in very many, yet we know, to what
man, and men the redress thereof does apperteine. Here Pigg^ius grants
simply without color, that diverse abuses have at sundry times privily crept
into y^ Mass. And yet I believe, he was no such enemy to the cause, that he
would ever have granted so much, specially against ye same self thing that he
defended, unless he had known it perfectly, to be true. It any man doubt of
this man Albertus Pigghius, and know not his authority, nor what he was, let
him understand yt when I speak of him, I speak of all, for this is he, that
all the rest have chosen to follow as their captain: The greatest learned man,
as it is supposed, and as he himself thought, that ^uer wrote in y^ quarrel.
He has found out errors, and abuses, in the mass, and is not abashed openly
to confess the same.

Of these errors I have intended sumwhat to entreat at this time, not of all,
for that would be an infinite labor, but of so many and so ta^eforth as the
time shall suffer me.

I will not here enter to speak, either of transubsta^tiation, either of the
real presence, either of y^ sacrifice, either of the comen sale or vtteraunce,
either of the superstitious ceremonies of the Mass, which are for the most
part both very vain, and also in manner without number.

Of these things I am content to disaduauntage myself at this time, and
bryefly to touch two or three points, as of the latin tongue, wherein commenly
the mass has been used: of the Communion under one kind: of the Canon: of the
adoration of the sacrament: and of the private mass. And of these things I
inte^d to speak, although not so largely, and with so many words, as y^ cause
would require: yet, by Gods grace, so simply and so truly, that who so will
be moved with truth or reason, shall sone perceive there has been abuses in the
Mass. And if there were but one of these abuses in it, yet were it worthy to
be spoken of, and to be amended. But if we shall plainly see with our eyes,
that all the er, rours, and disorders, beside a great number else, which I
wyllingly pass by, have been in the mass, (O good brethren,) let us not then
think, that so many godly men, in these our days, have spoke^against it
without cause.

First, as touching y^ vnknow^n and straung tongue yt has been used in the Mass,
S. Paul's counsel and commandment, is in general, that what so ever is done,
or said, in the congregation should so be done and said, that the hearets may
have confort thereby, and yield thanks unto God, and say Amen. But the same
saint Paul says, if thou make thy prayer in y^ congregation with thy spirit,
or noyce of a straung words, how shall the unlearned man thereunto say Amen?
For he knows not what thou say. For not withsta^dig thy prayer, perhaps
be good, pet has the other no comfort or profit by it. And therefore (he
says)* farther, I had lever utter five words in the congregation with
understanding of my meaning, so that the reast may have instruction thereby,
then ten thousand words in a strange and known tongue.

Saint Angustine writing upon the Psalms (says) thus. Oportet nos humano
more, non auicularum ratione cantare, nam and Merulae, and Psipttaci, and Corui
docentur sonare quod nesciunt. We must, (says S. Augustine) in the prayers that
we make to god, not chirpe like birds, but sing like men. For Popinioyes, and
Ravens, and other birds are taught to sing, they know not what.

Justinian a christian Emperor made a strait constitution, that all Bishops and
priests should pronounce the words of the ministration, with open voice, y^
the people might say. Amen. And to pass by all other authoryties and examples
in this behalf, before the church grew to corruption, all christian men
throughout the world made their common prayers, and had the holy communion in
their own commen and known tongue. But in y^ mass, as it has been used in this
later age of the world, the priest utters the holy mysteries in such a
language, as neither the people, nor oftentimes himself understands the
meaning. And thus the death of Christ, and his passion, is setforthe in such
sort, as the poor people can have no conforte or fruit thereby, nor give
thanks unto God, nor say, Amen. Of all that holy supper, and most confortable
ordinance of Christ, there was nothing for the simple souls to consider, but
only a number of gestures and countenaunces, and yet neither they, nor the
Pryeste knew, what they mente. Think you this was Christ's meaning when he
ordained the communion first? Think you that s. Paul received these things
of the Lord and delivered the same to the Corinthia^s? O good brethern, Christ
ordained the holy sacrament for our sakes, that we might thereby, remember ye
mysteries of his death, and know the price of his blood.

Touching the second abuse of the communion under one kind it would be long to
say, so much as the place would seem to require. For, besides the Institution
of Christ, and the words of S. Paul, which to a christian man may seem
sufficient, it was used through out the whole catholic church, six hundred
years after Christ's ascension, under both kinds without exception. But in one
word, to say, that may be sufficient for a wise man to consider: Gelasius, an
old father of the church, and a bishop of Rome, says that to minister the
communion under one kind, is open sacrilege. His words be these: Diuisio
vnius eiusdemque mysterii sine gra^di sacrilegio non potest peruenire. I trust
I shall need no farther evidence, to prove yt the mass, in this part, has been
abused. The third point y^ I promised to speak of, is the canon, a thing, for
many causes, very vain in it self, and so uncertain, that no man can readilye
tell, on who^ to father it. S. Paul says, scio cui credidi, and cer^us sum. I
know whom I have believed, and I am certain, And unto Timothe he says, permane
in his quae didicisti, sciens a quo didiceris. Stand steadfastly in such
things as thou have learned, knowinge of whom thou have learned them. Yet many
men, this day, stand to the Cano^, as unto the holiest part of all the mass,
and know not of who^ they have learned it. Sum say Alexander the first made
it: sum say Leo: sum say Gelasius: sum say Gregorius the first:
Gregorius (says) one Scholasticus: sum others say Gregorius the third: But
Innocen^ius tertius, to put the matter quyte out of doubt, said plainly, it
came from Christ, and from his Apostles. How be it, who soever was the ^yrste
deviser of it, it forces not. The substance of it, and the meaning is more
material* and thereof I think it nedeful to touch sum part in as few words, as I
may. For notwtstanding, I have small pleasure in opening such matters, as may
seem odious, yet is it behoueful. for every man, to understand, of that thing
that was compted so high and holy, what manner a thig it was, and what it
contained.

First the priest in the Cannon, desires God to bless Chrysts body, as though
it were not sufficiently blessed alredi. Further (he says) that he offers
and presents up Christ unto his father, which is an open blasphemy. For
contrarywyse, Christ presents up us, and makes us a sweet oblation in the
sight of God his father.

Moreover he desires God so to accept the body of his son Jesus Christ, as
he once accepted the sacrifyce of Abel, or the oblacion of Melchisedech. It is
known that Abel offered up of the fruit of his flock a lamb or a sheep: and
that Melchisedech offered unto Abraham, and his company, returning from the
battle, bread and wine. And thynk we that Christ ye son of God stands so
far in his fathers displeasure, that he needs a mortal, and a miserable man
to be his spokesman to procure him favor, or think we that God receives the
body of his only begotten son non otherwise, then he once received a sheep or a
lamb at the hands of Abel? or the^ Abraham received bred and wyn of
Melch^sedech? If no? why then makes the Priest this prayer, in the canon
immediately afther the con^ecration, supra quae propitio ac sereno vultu
respicere digneris, and accepta habere, sicuti accepta habere dignatus es
munera pueri tui iusti Abel, and sacrificiu^ patriarchae nostri Abraham, and
quod tibi obtulit summus sacerdos tuus Melchisedech. That is to say, look down
with merciful countenance, upon these sacrifises, (that is the body of Christ
thy son, and the cup his blood) and vouchsafe to receive the^ as thou sumtyme
vouchsauedst to receive the oblatio^s of thy child Abel the just, and y^
sacrifice of our patriarch Abraham, and that thing yt was offered unto the by
thy high pryest Melchisedech. Besides this he desires God y^ an angel may
come and carry Christ's body away into heaven. This is y^ prayer that he makes.
^ube hec perferri per manus sancti angeli tui in sublime altar tuum* what a
fable is this that Christ should be borne upon an angel, and so carried up away
intoheue^? I would not stand so long upon these folies, if force drove me not
thereunto.

Therefore I leave to speak farther of the Canon, giving you occasion, by these
few things, ye better to better to i^dge of the reast.

The fourth matter, that remains to be touched, is yt adoration, a great
matter full of danger, and full of ieopardie, and so much the more dangerous,
for that it is an honor be^lo^ging only unto God, and yet without any
warraunt of Gods word. Christ that best knew what ought to be done here in,
when he ordained, and delivered the sacrament of his body and blood, gave no
commandment that any man should fall down to it, or worship it. S. Paul that
took the sacrament at Christ's hand, and as he had taken it, delivered it to
the Corinthians, never willed adoration, or godly honor to be given unto it.
The old doctors, and holy fathers of the church, s. Ciprian, S. Chrisostom,
s* Ambrose, S. Hierom, s. Augustine, and others, that received the sacrament, at
the Apostles hands, and as it may be thought, continewed the same in such
sort, as they had received it, never make mention, in any of all their books of
adouring, or worshipping of the sacrament. It is a very new devise, and as it
is well known, came but lately into the church. About three hundred years past,
Honorius being then Bishop of Rome, commanded the sacrament to be lifted up,
and the people, reverently, to bow down to it*

After him, Urbanus, the fourth appointed a holy day of Corpus Christi, and
granted out large pardons to the kepers of it, that the people should with
better will resort to the church, and keep it holy. This is the greatest
^ntiquity of the whole matter, about t^re hundred years ago, it was fir^e
found out, and put in prac^ise. But Christ, and his Apostles, the ho^y fathers
in the primitive c^urche, y^ doctors that followed them, and other learned and
godly me^, what soever for the space of. M. cc. years after Christ, never heard
of it.

Once again I say, for the space of M. cc. years, after Christ's ascension into
heaven, this worshipping of y^ sacrament was never known, or practiced, in any
place within y^ whole catholic church of Christ throughout the whole world.
But after it was once received and put in use, and the people began to worship
the sacrament, with godly honor, the learned men, and schole doctors, that
then were, saw it could not stand without great danger, and confessed that
the ignorant sort, thereby, might sone be led into idolatry. Mark I beseech
you, what I say, for I know, unto sum men it seems not possible, yt there may
be any kind of danger, in worshipping the sacrament of Christ's body. And
therefore, sum have alleged Saint Augustius words in this behalf: Nemo
ma^ducat nisi prius adoret, No mon eats Christ's body, but first he does
worship it. And again, Non peccamus adorando, sed mag^s p^caremus non adorando.

(...) offend not, in worshippinge the flesh of Christ, but (...) we should
offense, if we should not worship it. But in deed, the schole doctors, and
learned men saw, there might be danger in worshipping the sacrament, and
therefore gave warning of it.

Io^n Duns, and william Durand say thus, if there remained the substance of
bread, after consecration, the people would thereof take occasion of Idolatry,
and in stead of Christ's body, would give godly worship unto y^ bread. And
therefore, they thought it best to remove away the bread* and to bring in
transubsta^tiation a word ne^ly devised* and never once herd, or spoken of,
before the council of Laterane, holden at Rome, in the year of our Lord. M.
ccxv. But the old doctors, and fathers, which first planted the church, and
to whom more credit is to be given, write plainlye, that in the sacrament,
after consecration, there remains still, very bread, and wine in nature, and
substance as before. And to alleadg one or two in stead of many, Saint
Augustine (says) in a sermon ad infantes. Quod videtis in m^nsa, panis est.
That thing that ye see, upon the table, is bred. Gelasius also says; in like
sort. Non desinit esse substa^tia panis, vel natura vini: sed mane^^ in suae
proprietate naturae. It leaves not to be the substance of bread, or the
nature of wine, but they remain, in the property of their own nature.

Theodoretus, and old doctor of the church, likwyse says: Christus ea sy
mbola, quae videntur, cor. poris and sanguinis sui appelatione honorauit, non
naturam transmutans, sed naturae adiiciens gratiam. Christ (says) Theodoretus
honoted the bread and wine, which we see, with the names of his body and
blood: not changing the nature thereof, but unto the same nature ioyninge his
grace. I know not* what may be more clearlye (...). Saint Augustine says, it
is bread: Gelasius says, it leaves not to be the substance, and nature of
bread, and wine: Theodoretus says, Christ honored the bread and wine, with
the natures of his body, and blood* but yet changed not their nature* Thus,
the old godly bishops, and fathers of the church, acknowledge, and affirm
that bread remains in the sacrament, after co^secratio^. But Duns, and
Durand, and sum others of y^ young fathers, and doctors say, if the people
worship the sacrament, and bread remain, then must they needs be, in great
danger of idolatry. Wherefore we may well conclude of them both, for as much as
it is clear, by the old doctors y^ bread remains, that the people
resortinge to the mass, and ther^ worshipping the sacrament, must needs be in
danger of idolatrye. Fartherthey say, Idolatry may be done to ye sacrament, if
a man happen to worship the accidents of the bread, (that is to say,) y^
whitenes, or rou^dnes or other such outward fourmes, or shows of bread, as he
sees with his eye, and give the honor unto in yt stead of Christ's body. O
miserable people, yt thus is lead, to worship they know not what. For alas, how
many of the^ understands these distinc^ions, or care for them? how many of
the^ understand after what sort accidentia may be sine subiecto? or how
whytenes is founded in the sacrament, or what is the difference, between
substantia and accidens? Or what priest, when he went to mass, ever taught
the people to know these things, and to avoid the danger? Undoubtedlye, I
could never yet perceive, by any readinge, either of the scriptures, or else of
other profane writings, but that ye people of all ages has ever more ben
redier, to receive idolatrye, then to learn ye distinctions, and quiddities of
Logike or Philosophye.

Thus we see, even by the confession of Duns and Durand, and other their own
doctors, that he that goes to the mass, and worshippeth the sacrament,
onlese he be learned, and take good head, may soon commit idolatrye. The
doctrine of it self is new: ye prosite of it such, as the church of god for
the space of twelve hundred years, was well hable to be without it. The
ieopardy of it, great and horrible, and scarcely, possible, to be avoided. I
speak not these things (good brethren) to thentente to spoil Christ of the
honor, that is due unto him. I know, and confess, that Christ's blessed body
is most worthy of al honor. I know (...) the flesh of the son of God, is not
therefore the less honorable, because it is now become glorious, and sytteth
in heaven, at the right hand of God his father. The body of Christ, sitting
above al heavens, is worshipped of us, being here beneath in earth. Therefore
the priest at the Communion, before he enter into y^ holy mysteries, gives
warninge unto the people, to mount up with their mynds into heaven, and cries
unto them, Sursum corda: Lift up your hearts, according to y^ doctrine of s.
Paul. os. 3.
Si vna surrexistis cum Christo, ea quae sursum sunt quaerite, vbi Christus est
sedens ad dexteram patris. If ye be risen again with Christ, seek for those
things, y^ be above, where as Christ is, sittinge at the right hand of his
father. And again: Nostra (...) est in coelis, bili. 3.
vnde Saluatorem expectamus. Our conversation, or dwelling is in heaven: from
whence we look for our (...).

Therefore S. Augustine speak the words yt I before alleged. Nemo manducat
nisi prius adoret: No man eats Christ's flesh, but first he does worship
it. The eating thereof, and the worshipynge must join together. But where we
eat it, there must we worship it? Therefore must we worship it syttyng in
heaven. So says the old doctor, and father, s. Chrisosto^. Vbi cadauer, ibi
aquilae, Cadauer, do mini corpus est: Aquillas autem nos appellat: vt ostendat,
oportere illum ad alta contendere, qui ad hoc corpus accedit. Aquilarum enim
non graculoru^ est haec me^sa. That is to say. Where soever is the carcass,
there be the Egles: The carcass is Christ's body: us he calls the Egles: to
declare, that, whosoever will, approach near to that body must geat a lofte.
For this is a banquet for Egles, y^ soar a high, not for Iayes, yt keep the
ground. Christ's body is in heaven. Thither therefore must we direct our
hearts: there must we feed: there must we refrcshe our self: and there must
we worship it.

So says, S. Hierome. Ascendamus cum eo in caenaculum magnum Ad Hebidiam.
stratum: ibi accipiamus ab eo sursum calice^ noui testamenti: Let us get up,
says S Hierom with him, into the great dyninge chamber, that is already
prepared, and there let us receive of him above, the cup of the new testament.

So says saint Ambrose. Non super terram, nec in terra, nec secundum In Luca^
Ca. 2. 4.
terram te quaerere debemus, si volumus inuenire. We may not leke for the,
neither upon ye earth, nor in yt earth, nor about ye earth, if we list to find
yt. And to conclude so says Eusebius Emissemus.

Exaltata mente adora corpus Dei tui. That is, lifting up thy mind unto heaven
there worship and adour the body of thy God.

Thus did the old Catholic fathers worship y^ body of Christ. Thus may we
also worship it safely, and without peril.

But to give Gods honor to y^ sacrament is a thing both latelye brought into
y^ church, unknown and strange, to the ancient doctors, and as the
scholemen, and the greatest mainteiners of it, have them selves confessed, an
occasion of idolatry, and full of danger.

For what if the priest happen not to consecrate? what if he leave out of the
words of consecration, and never speak the^? as it is known, that sum priests
have done many years together. Or what if the priest have no intention or
mind to consecrate? what case stands the pore people the^ in? Or what thing
is it that they worship? Christ's body cannot be there without consecration:
Consecration there can be none as they them selves have taught, if there miss
either pronu^tiation, an vtteraunce of ye words, or else purpose to consecrate
and intenton. And how can the people know, with what intention or mind y priest
goth to the mass? Or whether he has duly pronounced the words? Or whether he
has consecrated or no? And knowinge none of these things, which in very deed
is not possible for the^ to know, how can they be well assured, yt it is the
body of Christ yt the priest holds up? and whereunto they fall down, and give
godly honor? Thus, by their own learni^g, ye people must needs stand still in
doubt, and never know certe^li what they worship? O good people, think not yt
I imagine these things of my self. Our own aduer saries, yt stand against us in
this cause, even, the famoust, and best learned of them al, have seen, and
written, and confessed the same.

Alexander, a Bishop of Rome, writing upon the master of ye sentences, takes
up the matter on this sort: for as much as ye priests purpose, and his privy
(...) about y^ consecration, cannot be known, yt therefore no man ought to
worship the sacrament, when it is holden up, but with this condition, si ille
consecrauerit. That is, If the Priest has consecrated.

That is to say, when ye se ye ^acrament lifted up, ye must say, or think
thus with your self. If this priesthath consecrated, the^do I worcester ship it: If he
has not consecrated, the^ do I not worship it. This says Alexander a Bishop
of Rome.

But Thomas of Aquine, leaves the matter a little more at large* He says. Ista
conditio non semper actu requiritur: satis est habere habitu^. That is to say:
It shall not be needful at every time, to say or to think thus, whenever
ye knele down to worship: but it shall be sufficient if ye have a certain
redines, in your mind to say or to think so. Yet Holcot, writynge likewise
upon the master of the sentences, says thus: Laicus adorat hostiam non
consecratam: ista fides sufficit illi ad saluationem: tame^ est erronea. The
lay man, says he, as it may sumtymes happen, worshyppeth a wafer y^ is not
consecrate. This faith is sufficient unto him to his salvation, and yet is it a
false faith, and erroneous. And farther he concludes in this sort. Homo potest
mereri per fide^ erroneam, etia^si co^ti^gat, vt adoret diabolu^. By these
words, we may se, such as will not content, the^ selves to be ordered by Gods
wisdom, how daungerously they run headlong at the last.

Holcot was not the wurst learned man amongste them. Yet to uphold the
error, that he had once taken in hand to defend, he was driven to confe^se
that a man may meede at Gods hand by an erroneous and false faith, yea
although he worship the deuell.

This is the certe^^y of ye doctrine that ye people of God of long time has been led in. In ye highest and heauenliest point of religion, yt is in ye
worshippinge of God, they them selves know not what they do:

It is true, of them, that Christ says to the woman of Samaria, ye worship ye
know not what.

Alas* is this the honor yt is due to Christ? Is this the worshipinge of God
in spirit and truth? Is this y^ seking of Christ inheaue^? But sum man will
say, these be (...) and light matters and prove nothing. Such reports, I know
are given abroad, of all that is preached and taught this day, that what soever
is spoken by any of us, is light, and childish, and not worth y^ hearing. But
the reporters hereof are they, to whom the authority of the old doctors, the
authority of y^ primitive Church, the authority of the scriptures, the
authority of Christ himself seems light, and not greatly worth the hearing.

Loath I am here to rip up, and to open unto you the high mysteries, and
secrets of their learning, and the force and strength of their reasons. Yet at
this time the importunitye of them forces me so to do: y^ after ye have once
taken as well sum taste of their arguments, as ye have of ours: ye may the better,
and more indifferently, judge of both. And let not them, yt privily and
untruly find fault with our reasons, be agreued, if they hear openly, and
truly, sumwhat of their own. And first to begin with the head: mark ye well
and wey this argument. God made two lights in heaven, the greater light to
rule the day, the less light to rule the night: Ergo, there be two powers to
rule the world, the Pope, that resembles the son, and the Emperor that is
far less then he, and is likned unto the moon. And how much the Emperor
is less, the gloss declares by Mathematical co^putatio^, saying yt the earth
is seven tymeg greater then the moon, and the son. viii. times greater then
the earth: So follows it, yt the Popes dignity is six and fifty times
greater then the dignitye of The Emperor. De Maiori. and obed. ca. (...) and in
glos. ibidem.
This is an argument of theirs used by Innocentius tertius unto the Emperor
of Constantiuople. In principio creauit Deus coelum and terram, non in
prineipiis. God created heaven and earth, in the beginning, as in one, not in
yt beginnings, as in many. Ergo the Pope has the souerainty over all kings
and Princes. This is an argument of theyrs used by Pope Bonifacius the. viii.
Extra de maioritate and obedientia: vnam sancta^. Cum transierit ad Dominum
tolletur velamen. That is, when the infidel shall cumme to Christ, y^ veil of
darkness shall be taken from his heart. Ergo, he yt becumeth a priest, must shave
his crown. This is an argument of theyrs, to be found in Isidorus. There is
but one only God: Ergo, al nations, throughout the world, must pray^ to him in
one tou^g. This is an argument of theyrs, made by Gerson sumtyme chauncelour of
Parise.

Ecce duo gladii hic: Behold here be two swords: Ergo, the Bishop of Rome
has power of boothe sweardes, both spiritual and temporal. This is an
argument of theirs used by Bonifatius, ye. viii. Extra de maioritate, and
obedientia, as above. The Bishop of Rome grants out pardons, Ergo, there
must needs be a Purgatory. This is an argument of theirs used by John Fisher
Bishop of Rochester. Euntes docete omnes gentes: Go and teach all nations. And
again: Quam speciosi pedes euangelizanr^um Esa. 52.
pacem, euangelizantiu^ bona. O, how bewtiful be the feet, of the^ y^ preach
peace, of them that preach good things. And again* Calciati E^e. 6.
pedes in preparationem Euangelii pacis. Having your fete shod to the
preparation of ye Gospel of peace. Ergo, the Bishop must wear purple
sandales. Aspergam super vos aquam mundam. I will sprinclevpo^ you clean water.
Ergo, the priest must spri^kel the people with holy water. Sine me nihil
potestis facere Without me you can do nothing: Ergo, the Bishop only must
consecrate the church, and no man else. All these, with a number more of the
like, be their arguments, used by Willian Durand in his Rationali diuinorum.
But let us cumme near, and se the arguments. Whereupon the Mass is builte,
Nolite sanctu^ dare canibus. Give not holy things to dogs. Ergo, the priest at
Mass, and other where, may no^ speak to ye people, but in a stra^g tongue. The
title of Christ's death, was written upon the cross, in Greek, Hebrew, and
Latin. Ergo, all comen prayers in the church, must be used in one of the same
tou^ges, y^ is, either in Greek, or in Hebrew, or in Latin. These arguments
have been used by many, devised first, as may he thought by Master Eckius.

Christ was buried in a shroud of linne^ cloth. Ergo, ye corpor^ll must be made
of fine linne^. This argu meant may be found in Syluester.

Many of the lay people have the palsy, and many have long beardes. Ergo, they
must all receive the communion under one kind. This is a commen argument, used
in manner, by all them that have written in this behalf. Petra erat Christus.
Christ was the rok. Ergo, the altar must be made of stone. Domini est terra
and plenitudo eius. The earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof. And veritas
tua in circuitu tno. Thy truth is in thy compass. The money for which Judas
sold Christ was round. Ergo, the host or the sacramental bread must be
round. Calix aureus Babylon in manu mea. Babylon is a cup of gold in my hand,
says the Lord. Ergo, the chalice must be of silver or gold. This is an
argument of theirs used by M. William Durand. When Uirgil says, C^ faciam
vitula, he uses facere, for sacrificare. That is, he uses this word doing,
for this word sacrifycing. Ergo, when Christ said to his disciples, Hoc facite
in me^ memoriam, Do this in remembrance of me, he meant sacrifice this in the
re me^braunce of me. This argument is fashioned out by M. Clitouey.

And to be short, the Angel looked into the grave: Ergo, the priest must take of
the paten, and look into the Chalice. Pilate washed his hands before the
people. Ergo, the priest must likewise wash his hands, when he is at Mass.
Judas kissed Christ: Ergo, the yriest must kiss the altar. The thief, on the
cross, repented himself of his wicked life: Ergo, the priest, at mass, must
fetch a sigh, and knock his breast. These, and other like be their reasons.
And who so lists to se them, may find them, and other more, as good as these
in Wylliam Durand. Now, good people, judge ye in your conscience
indifferently, us both, whether of us, brings you the better and sounder
arguments. We bring you nothing but Gods holy word, which is a sure rock to
build upon, and will never flete, or shrynke. And therefore, are we able truly
to say with saint Paul: Quod accepimus a Domino, hoc tradidimus vobis. We
have delivered unto you, the same things, that we have received, of the Lord.

For concerning the last matter, that I promised to touch, it cannot be
denied, by any man, be he never so wilful, but Christ in his last supper
ordained a communion, and showed no manner token of a private Mass, as may
plainlye appear, both by the words yt he spoke, and also by the order of his
doings. For he took the bread, brake it, divided it, and gave it to his
disciples: and said. Drink ye all hereof, not unto one alone, but unto the
whole. He said farther, by way of charge do this: That is to say: Practice this
that I have here done, and that in such form and sort, as ye have seen me do
it.

S. Paul likewise, when he saw* that the use of the sacrament was grown to
disorder, yt every man took his own supper privately to himself, and that
thereby, both the holy communion, and also brotherly love, and unity was
despised, as it has been, in the west part of the church, now a great meany of
years, in this latter time: he called them bak again, to the beginning
thereof, and to the institution of Christ: as giving the^ thereby to
understand, that the sacrament cannot be better used, then Christ himself
used it. This he says. Cum conueneritis in vnum locum, non potestis dominicam
caenam manducare: vnusquisque enim praesumit caenam suam: when ye resort
together into one place, ye cannot eat ye Lords supper: For every one of you
eats his own supper before hand. Therefore he says unto the^, Alter alterum
expectate: Tarry ye and wait, one for an other: and so receive the holy
communion altogether. For this is it* yt I delivered unto you, and the same
self thing, I received of the Lord.

Here have I brefely showed, the disorder of the private mass, by y^ first
institution of the sacrament, and by the commandment, and authority of S.
Paul. Now will I, by Gods grace, also declare, and open the same, by the
examples, and whole practice of the primitive church, and by the ancient
D^ctours, and other learned fathers, that followed after ye Apostles time, for
the space of six hundred years, or more. And I trust, ye shall clearly se,
that for so long time, there was no private mass, in the catholic Church of
Christ, in any country or cost, through out the world.

For all the writers, that were within the compass of that time, have left
behind them witness sufficient of a Communion: but not one of them all could
ever tell us, of any private mass. Cleme^s, who, as they say, was scholar to
Saint Peter, writes thus in an epistle to S. James. Tot in altar holocausta
offerantur quot populo sufficere debeant. Let there be so many hosts offered
upon y^ altar, as may be sufficient, for y^ people to receive.

Dionysius an ancient writer, and as sum have thought, disciple unto S. Paul,
(although the contrary may appear, plainly by his own words) in a litel book,
that he has made of the whole order of the church in his time, setting forth
the manner of the Lords supper, writes thus: Tum sacerdos ad sacram
communionem, and ipse conuertitur, and reliquos, vt vna comunice^t hortatur.
That is: y^ priest both turns him self to the Communion, and also exhorts
the reast to communicate, and receive with him. And farther he says: sumpta
demum atque omnibus tradita communione diuina, gratias referens, finem
misteriis imponit. That is, The priest, when he has received himself, and
delivered the holy communion to al y^ people, gives God thanks, and makes an
end of the mysteries. Hitherto we find plain tokens of a communion: But not
one word of the private Mass.

Justinius martyr, in his apollogie, or defense of the Chrystian faith, shows
in what sort the Lords supper was used in his time. Diaconus (says he)
hortatur populum, vt illorum, quae proposita sunt, velint esse participes. That
is, the deacon exhorts the people, y^ they will be partakers, of those
things, y^ be laid forth before the^. Farther he says. Diaconi distribuunt, ad
participandum praesentium, vnicuique, ex co^secrato pane, and vino and aqua,
illis vero, qui non adsunt, deferunt domum: That is, y^ deacons deliver of ye
consecrate bread and wine and water, to every one y^ is there present. And if
there be any away they carry it home to the^ Here also we find a communion, but
no private mass.

S. Ambrose rebukes his people, yt were then grown negligent, in reciuyng the
Lords supper, and used to excuse the matter, for yt they thought themself not
worthy. Si non es dignus quotidie, ergo nec semel dignus es in toto anno.

If thou be not worthy, says s. Ambrose, every day, then art thou not worthy
once in a year.

And again, the same S. Ambrose expounding these words of S. Paul: Alius
alium expectate, writes thus. Expectandum dicit, vt multoru^ oblatio simul
celebret, and omnibus ministretur. That is, he commands them, to tarry one
for an other, that the oblation of many may be celebrate, or done together, and
so be ministered unto the^ al. These words also sauer altogether of a
Communion, and nothing of a private Mass.

Saint Hierom, S. Augustyn, and the ecclesiastical history, witnesses, that
until yt time commonly every where (but specialli in Rome) ye people used to
communicate every day. Leo wrytig unto Dioscorus, the Bishop of Alexandria,
gave him this advise, yt where the church was so little, that it was not able to
receive all the whole people to communicate altogether: the^ the priest should
minister two or three communions in one day: yt as the people came in and had
once filled y^ church, so they should receyne the communion, and afterward
give place to others.

S. Hierom, writing upon the xi. chapter, of the first to the Corinthians, has
these words. Caena dominica omnibus debe^ esse communis, quia ille omnibus
discipulis suis qui aderant, aequaliter tradidit sacramenta. That is* the
supper of the Lord must be comen to all the people. For Christ gave his
sacraments to all his disciples, y^ were present. I leave out other authorities
for shortness sake, for it would be to long, to say as much herein, as might be
said. All these holy doctors, and godly fathers give us most perfyt evidence
of a communion, without mention making of any private Mass.

Thus the catholic church of Christ used the holy communion at the beginning.
And even thus, the most part of Christian people, throughout the whole world,
the Iudians, the Mauritanians, the Egiptians, the Persians, the Arabians, the
Armenians, y^ Gre^anst and as many as bear the name of Christ, has kept, and
continued y^ same, amongst themselves, from the first time they received the
Gospel, until this day: And never received, or used the Private Mass.

But what better witness may we use in this behalf, the^ the very mass book
it self. which is ye rule and direction of the mass. If the mass book it
self bear witness against the private mass, then I trust our cause shall
appear sumwhat better, then it has been taken heretofore.

First by the way, before I enter nere into the matter, y^ prayers that be
used in the Mass be commen, as well to ye people, as to the priest. The priest
says. Oremus, let us pray. And so goes forth in his collecte. And at the end
thereof, the whole people by ye mass book, are taught to say, Ame^. The priest
says, the Lord be with you, the people, by ye mass book: is taught to
answer, And with thy spirit. The priest says, lift up your hearts the people,
by ye Mass book should answer, we lift them up to the Lord? The priest
turns him to the people, and says: Orate prome fratres and sorores. Pray for
me brothers, and sisters. And, by the very order of y^ mass book, ye people
should know what he says, and at his request should pray for him. Herby we se,
yt what soever praters be used about the ministration of the sacrament, ought
to be the commen requests of all y^ people. Therefore says Justinius, an old
godly father, and a holy martyr: Vbi gratias egit praepositus, vniuersus
populus acclamat. Amen. That is, when the priest has given thanks, y^ whole
people say, Amen. And Chrisosto^ likwyse says. Ne mireris, si populus in
mysteriis nostris, cum sacerdote colloquatur. Marvel not says Chrisostom,
though the people and the priest, in our mysteries, talk together. For in the
commen prayers, that be used about the ministration, the priest and the people
both in voice and heart should join together. And when the priest has once
done the consecration, and the people should, at his hand receive the
communion, the Mass book it self, bids him to break the bread in three
parts. And thereof have idle heads, of late lym, phansied out many mystical
follies: as though one part thereof were offered for them that be in heaven, the
other for the^, that they say, be in purgatory: The third for them that be
alive. These be fantasies, and very folies, wout any ground, either of the holy
scriptures, or of the doctors, or of the old catholic church. But in very
deed, the breaking and dividing of the bread is a remainent of the true, and
the old communion, that was in use in the time of the doctoures of the church,
and of the holy catholic fathers. For to that end, the bread is broken, that
it may be divided among the people. And therefore, the supper of the Lord is
called, Fractio panis, that is the breaking of bread. Moreover the, priest, by
the Mass book, is taught to say. Accipite, edite. Take ye, eat ye. And,
habete vinculum charitatis, v^ apti sitis sacrosanctis myster^s. That is, have
ye the bond of charity, that ye may be mete for ye holy mysteries. And to whom
shall we think the priest speaks these words? It were to vain a thing for
him in the open congregation, to speak to him self, and specially in the
plural number. Yet were it a great deal more vain for him, to speak the same
words to the bread and wine, and to say unto them: Take ye, eat ye, or have
ye the band of charity, that ye may be meet for the holy misteryes.
Therefore it is evident, that these words should be spoken to the people. And
that in such sort, as they might well understand them, and prepare the^ self
to the communion.

And to conclude, the priest by his own Mass book, is bidden to say these
words immediately after the. Agnus Dei. Hec sacro sancta co^mixtio, and
consecratio corporis, and sanguinis domini nostri Jesus Christi, fiat mihi and
omnibus sumentibus, salus mentis, and corporis. That is to say, this commi^tion
and consecration, of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, be unto me,
and to all that receive it, health of body and soul Thus in the mass book it
self, which as I said before, is the very rule and direction of the Mass, if
it were used accordingly, we find a Communion for the whole congregation to
retain together, and no private mass. Perhaps there may be sum that will say,
we grant these things be spoken of the communion in the old doctors: but
there be as many things or (...) spoken by them of the private mass, and all
that you dissemble and pass by. I know, such replies have been made by
diverse. But, good brethren, I will make it plain unto you through gods grace,
by y^ most au^cie^t writers, that were in, and after, the Apostles time, and by
the order of the first and primitive church, that then there could be no
private mass, and that who so would not communicate with the priest, was then
commanded out of the congregation. In the canons of the Apostles, there is a
decree made, against al such, as would be present at the communion, and yet
not receive the sacrament. The words be these: Fideles qui in ecclesia^
ingrediuntur, and scripturas audiunt, et communionem sanctam non recipient,
tanquam ecclesiasticae pacis perturbatores, a communione arceantur. That is:
such christian men, as come to the church, and hear the scriptures, and
receive not the holy communion, let them be excommunicated, as men that
disquiet the whole Church.

Calixtus, a Bishop of Rome, not long after the Apostles time, gives out the
like commandment in y^ same behalf: His words be these. Peracta
consecratione, omnes communicent, qui noluerint carere ecclesiasticis
liminibus, sic enim Apostoli statuerunt, and sancta Romana tenet ecclesia. That
is: when the consecration is done, let every man receive the communion, unless
he will be put of from the entry of the church. For this thing have the
Apostles ordained, and the holy church of Rome continues the same. S.
Chrisostom, upon the epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians, sharply rebukes
the people, for refrainyng the holy Communion. Thus he says. Nones dignus
communione: ergo nec precibus: Qua ratione preco dicit abite: tu vero
imprudenter perstas. Thou will say (says s. Chrysostom) that thou art not
worthy to receive the Communion. Then art thou not worthy to be present at the
comen prayers. The deaco^ says unto you, that will not communicate, geat you
hence: and yet thou like an impudent man stand still.

S Gregorye, in his dialogues, showed the manner of the Communion in his time,
to the like purpose. Diaconus clamat, si quis non communicate, exeat, and locum
cedat alteri. The deacon, says S. Gregory, speaks out a loud. Who so will
not communicate, let him depart away and give place to others. This was the
order of the old time. The Deaco^ gave warning to the people. Exeunto
catechumeni: Exeunto paenitentes. Let such, as be young nouices in y^ says, go
forth, let such as are in their pe naunce go forth. That they that might not
communicate with the reast, should depart from the church, and not be present
at the communion. And this order continued still, until the time of S.
Gregory. which was six hundred years after Christ. Who was there the^ that
consecrated the bread and wine, and received altogether, to himself alone?
where then was the private mass? where the^ was the single Communion all this
while?

Yet are there sum, that whisper in corners, that the mass is ablessed, and a
catholic thing, and y^ the holy Communion, which now god of his great mercy
has restored to us, is wicked, and scismaticall, and therefore they murmr
against it, therefore they refrain it, and will not, come to it.

O merciful God, who would think, there could be so much wilfulnes in the
heart of man? O Gregorye? O Augustine? O Hierome? O Chrysostom? O Leo? O
Dionyse? O Anacletus? O sixtus? O Paul? O Christ? If we be deceived herein, ye
are they y^ have deceived us. You have taught us these sci^nes, and divisions,
ye have taught us these heresies.

Thus ye ordered the holy communion in your time, the same w^ received at your
hand, and have faithfullye delivered it unto the people. And that ye may the
more meruell, at the wylfulnes of such men, they stand this day against so
many old fathers, so many doctoures, so many examples of the primitive
church, so manifest, and so plain words of the holy scriptures, and yet have
they herein, not one father, not one doctor, not one allowed example of the
prymitiue church to make for them. And when I say, not one, I speak not this
in vehemency of spirit, or heat of talk, but even, as before God, by the
way of simplicity and truth, lest any of you should, happily, be deceived, and
think, there is more weight in the other side, the^, in conclusion, there
shall be found. And therefore once again I say: of all the words of the holy
scriptures: of all the examples of y^ primitive church: of all the old
fathers: of all the ancient doctors: in these causes they have not one.

Here the matter it self, that I have now in hand, puts me in remembrance
of certain things that I uttered unto you, to y^ same purpose, at my last
being in this place. I remember, I laid out then here before you, a number of
things that are now in contronersie^, whereunto our adversaries will not
yield. And I said, perhaps boldly, as it might then seem to sum man. But as
I my self, and the learned of our adversaries themselves do well know, sincerely
and truly, that none of all them, that this day stand against us, are able,
or shall ever be able to prove against us, any one of all those points, either
by y^ scriptures, or by example of yt primitive church, or by the old
doctors, or by the ancient general councelles.

Since that time, it has been reported in places, that I spoke then, more then
I was able to iustifye and make good. How beit, these reports were only made
in corners, and therefore ought the less to trouble me. But if, my sayings
had been so weak, and might so easelye have been reproved: I marvel that the
parties never yet came to the light, to take the advantage.

For my promise was, and that openly, here before you all. That if any man
were able, to prove the contrary, I would yield, and subscribe to him. And he
should depart with the victory. Loath I am to trouble you, with rehersall of
such things, as I have spoken before, and yet, because the case so requires,
I shall desire you that have already heard me, to bear y^ more with me in this
behalf. Better it were, to trouble your ears with twyse hearing of one thing,
then to betray the truth of God.

The words, that I then spoke, as nere as I can call them to mind, were these.
If any learned man of all our adversaries, or if all ye learned men that be
alive be able to bring, any one sufficient sentence, out of any old catholic
doctor, or father: Or out of any old general counsel: Or out of y^ holy
scriptures of God: Or any one example of the primitive Church, whereby it may
be clearly and plainly proved, yt there was any private mass in the whole
world at that time, for the space of six hundred years after Christ: Or that
there was then any Communion ministered unto the people under one kind: Or that,
the people had th^r comme^ prayers then in a strange tongue, that they
understood not: Or that, the Bishop of Rome was then called, an universal
Bishop, or the head of y^ universal church: Or that, y^ people was then taught
to believe that Christ's body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally or
naturally in the sacrament: Or that, his body is or may be in a thousand
places, or mo, at one time: Or that, the priest did then hold up the sacrament
over his head: Or that, the people did then fall down and worship it with godly
honor: Or that, the sacrament was then, or now ought, tobe hanged up under a
canopie: Or that, in the Sacrament after the words of consecration there
remains only the accidents and shows without the substance of bread and
wine: Or that the priest then divided the Sacrament in three parts and
afterward received him self all alone: Or y^, wh^ so ever had said the
sacrament is a figure, a pledge, a token, or a remembrance of Christ's body,
had therefore been judged for an heretic: Or that, it was lawful then, to
have. xxx. xx. xv. x. or v. Masses said in one Church, in one day: Or that
Images were then set up in the churches, to the entente the people might
worship them: Or that the lay people was then, forbidden, to read the word of
God in their own tongue. If any man alive were able to prove, any of these
articles, by any one clear, or plain clause, or sentence, either of the
scriptures: or of the old doctors: or of any old general Counsel: or by
any example of the primitive chuech: I promised then that I would give over and
subscribe unto him.

These words are the very like I remember I spoke here openly before you all.
And these be the things, that sum men say I have spoken, and cannot justify.
But I for my part, will not only, not call in, any thing that I then said,
(being well assured of the truth therein) but also, will lay more matter to y^
same. That if they, that seek occasion, have any thing to y^ contrary, they
may have the larger scope to replye againstme.

Wherefore, beside all that I have said already, I will say farther, and yet
nothing so much, as might be said. If any one of all our adversaries, be able
clearly and plainlye to prove, by such authority of the scriptures, the old
doctoures, and councelles, as I said before, that it was then lawful, for the
priest, to pronounce the words, of consecration closely, and in silence to him
self: Or that, the priest had the authority, to offer up Christ unto his
father: Or to, communicate and receive the sacrament for an other, as they do:
Or to apply the virtue of Christ's, death and passion, to any man by the mean
of y^ mass: Or, that, it was then thought a sound doctrine, to teach the
people, that y^ mass ex opere operato: That is, even for that it is said, and
done, is able to remove any part of our sin: Or yt then any chrystian man
ealied the sacrament his Lord and God: Or that, the people was the^ taught to
believe, that the body of Christ remains in the sacrament as long as the
accidents of the bread remain there without cortuption: Or that, a mouse, or
any other worm, or best may eat the body of Christ: (for so sum of our
adversaries have said and taught) Or that, when Christ said. Hoc est corpus
meum. This word, Hoc, points not the bread, but Indiuiduum vagum, as sum of
them say: Or that, the accidens, or forms, or shows, or bread and wine, be
the sacraments of Christ's body and blo^de, and not rather the very bread and
wine it self: Or y^, the sacrament is a sign or token of the body of Christ y^
lies hidden underneath it: Or that ignorance is the mother and cause of true
denotion, and obedience: These be the highest mysteries, and greatest keys of
their religion, and without them, their doctrine can never be mainteyned and
stand up right. If any one, of al our adversaries, be able to auouche any one
of all these articles, by any such sufficient authority of scriptures,
doctors, or Councelles, as I have required as I said before, so say I now
again, I am content to yield unto him and to subscribe. But I am well assured,
they shall never be able, truly to allege one sentence. And because I know
it, therefore I speak it, lest ye happelye should be deceyned.

All this notwithstanding ye hau ehearde men, in times paste, allege unto you
councelles, doctors, antiquities, successions, and long continuance of time,
to the contrary. And an easy matter it was so to do, specially before them,
that lack either leisure, or judgment to examine their proufes. On a time
Mithridates the king of Pontus laid syege to Cizicum, a town joined in
friendship to the City of Rome. Which thing the Romans hearing, made out a
gentleman of theyrs, named Lucullus, to raise y^ siege, After yt Lucullus was
within the sight of yt town, and showed himself with his company, upon the
side of an hill, thence to give courage to the Citizens within, that were
hesseged: Mithridates to cast the into despair, and to cause the^ the rather
to yield to him, made if to be noysed, and bare them in hand that all that new
company of soldiers was his, sent for purposely, by him, against the City.
All that notwythstandynge the Citizens within, kept the walls and yielded not.
Lucullus came on, raised the siege, wanquished Mithridates, and slew his men.
Even so, good people, is there now a siege laid to your walls: an army of
doctors and councelles, show them selves upon an hill: The adversary, yt
would have you yield, bears you in hand, that they are their soldiers, and
stand on their side. But keep your hold, the doctors and old catholic
fathers, in the points that I have spoken of, are yours, ye shall se the siege
raised, ye shall se your adversaries discomfeited, and put to flight. The
Pelagians were able to allege S. Augustine, as for them felf, yet when the
matter came to proof, he was against them. Heluidius was able to allege
Tertullian, as making for him self, but, in trial he was against him.

Eutyches alleged Julius Romanus for him self, yet in deed, was Julius most
against him. The same Eutiches alleged for him self, Athanasius, and
Cyprian, but in conclusion, they stood both against him. Nestorius alleged
the counsel of Nice, yet, was the same council found against him.

Even so they, that have auaunted them selves, of doctoures, and Councelles,
and continuance of time in any of these points, wh^ they shall be called to
trial, to show their profes, they shall open their hands and find nothing. I
speak not this, of arroga^cy, (thou Lord know it best, that know all
things) But for as much, as it is Gods cause, and the truth of God, I
should do God great iniurye, if I should concele it. But to return again
to our matter. There be sum that say, y^ no mass is private, or to be taken, as
y^ action of one private man. For they say, y^ priest that says mass here,
does communicate, with an other priest, that says Mass sum other where, where
so ever it be, the distance being never so great. This commission seems very
large. For so, may the priest that says mass in England, or Scotland
communicate with the priest that is in Calicute, or in the farther most part
of India. And by this means, should there be no excommunication at all, for
the party excommunicate might say, he would communicate with the pr^est whether
he would or no. But Saint Paul gloseth not y^ matter on this sort, but says.
Alter alterum expectate. That is, tarry ye one for an other. And again he says,
when ye cum together, ye cannot eat y^ Lords supper, for every one of you
takes his own supper aforehand.

Sum others say, the priest may communicate for the people, and that is as
meritorious unto them, as if they had communicate them self. But what
commission has the priest so to do? or from who^? or what certain knowledge
has he, that his receyuinge of the communion shall be auailable for the people,
for if it be so what neded it then Christ to say: Accipite, bibite, ex hoc
omnes* Or if we may receive the sacrament of Christ's body one for an other,
why may not we as well be baptized one for an other? Why may we not as well,
confess our faults before the congregation and receive absolucion on for an
other? Whi may we not, hear the Gospel, and believe one for an other. O that
these folies so weak and so vain, without show, or shadow of any truth,
should ever synke into a Christian heart, or take place in Gods religion. S.
Paul says: Qui manducat, and bibit indigne, iudicium sibi ma^ducat, and
bibit. Who so eats or drinks unworthily, eats and dri^keth judgment, not
unto others (says S. Paul) but to him self. Again S. Paul says, who so
believes in him y^ justifies the wicked, not the faith of any other man, but
his own faith is rekened to him unto justice. S. Chrisostom says: It is the
heresy of the Martionites, to think that any one man may receive the
sacrament for an other, and therefore he makes light of such disorder of the
sacraments and calls them Sacramenta vicaria. Origene says. Ille est
sacerdos and propitiatio, and hostia. Est enim Agnus Dei qui tollit peccata
mundi* Quae propitiatio ad vnumquemque venit, per via^ fidei: He is our priest
says Origene, he is our atonement, he is our sacrifice. For he is y^ lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world. Which atonement, (says he)
comes unto us, (^ot by the application of the mass,) but by the way of faith,

S. Augustine like wise says. Si non obliuiscimur mundi saluatoris, quotidi^
nobis Christus immolatur. Ex ipsis reliquis cogitationis, id est ex memoria,
Christus nobis quotidie immolatur. If we forget not the savior of the world.
Christ is every day sacrificed unto us. Even by the remeinentes of our
cogita^ions: that is, by our remembrance of his death. Christ is made a
sacrifice unto us every day. It is not therefore neither the faith, neither
the doing of the priest, but our own doing, and our own faith, that applies,
unto us, the virtue and merits of Christ's death, Sum other say, that s. Peter
said mass at Rome, and Saint James at Jerusalem. And why say they not rather,
that Christ himself said mass? for that were the nere way to bring the
mass into credit. Or why, say they not sooner, that Aaron and his ch^pleins
said mass* For in deed* as it has been used, y^ church has had much more of
the robes, of the ceremonies, and of the sacrifices of Aaron, then of the
institucion or or^inaunce of Christ: But this have me^ told you, and with such
things, as they have found out them self, they have (...), and fathered the
Aposties of Christ. So commenly, (...) and sorcerers make their vau^tes that
they have al their books and their cunnyng from Athanasius, from Moses, from
Abel, from Adam, from Raphel the Archangell.

Thus the people of God is deceived and mocked, and in stead of precious
stones, driven to take counterfeites. For I assure you brethern, in the time of
Peter and James, nether was there any man that ever heard the name of mass,
(for Missa was never named, until iiii. hundred years after Christ* And yet
then was it no Private mass nether, but a Communion) nor yet were the pieces
and parts of y^ mass, as we in our time have seen them, set together. And
what mass could that be, yt as yet, had neither her own name, nor her parts.
But, for as much as they affirm so constantly, that Saint James said mass at
Jerusalem: and what soever it were that he said, will needs have it called, by
the name of a mass: let us compare their mass, and S. James mass, both
together. S. James said his mass in the commen tongue, as y^ people might
understand him: They, say, their mass in a strange latin tongue, that the
people should not know what they mean. S. James spoke out the words of
consecration distinctly and plainlye: They in their mass, suppress the same
words and keep them close. Saint James in his mass ministered the communion
unto y^ people: They, in their mass, receive them self al alone. S. James, in
his Mass, ministered the sacrament unto the people under both kinds: They in
their mass, minister the sacrament unto y^ people in one kind only. Saint
James in his mass, preached and setforth the death of Christ: They, in their
mass, have only a number of dum gestures, and ceremonies, which they
themself understand not, and make no manner mention of Christ's death. Saint
James Mass was full of knowledge: Their Mass is full of ignorance.

S. James mass was full of consolation. Their mass is full of superstition.
When S. James said Mass, the people resorted to receive the sacrament. When
they say Mass, the people resorteth to look upon only, and to behold the
sacrament. And to conclude. S. James in his mass, had christ's institution:
They, in their mass, have welnere nothing else but man's invention.

Such difference ye may see, between S. James Mass and theyrs, O that Saint
Paul were now alive, and saw the behauoure, and order of the prieest, at their
mass. Think ye, that he would take it and account it, for the Lords supper?
When he had espied, but one fault in the holy communion, amongst y^
Corinthians, straight way he rebuked them, and called them back to Christ's
institution. This (says he) I received of the Lord, and the same, I gave over,
unto you.

But if he saw the disorder that we have seen, would he not be moved as much
against us now, as he was sumtyme, against the Corinthians? would he not pull us
back to the institution of Christ, as he did them? Would he not say unto us,
did I ever teach you, to minister the holy Communion, in a strange laugage?
did I ever teach you, to receive the Communion, privately to your self alone,
and so to disdayn, and to despise your brethren? Did I ever teach you, to
minister the Com munion to the people in one kind?

Did I ever teach you, to say Mass, or to receive the Sacrament for the
people? Did I ever teach you, the idle folyes of your cannon? Did I ever
teach you, to offer up the son of God unto his Father? Did I ever teach you,
an^ other propitiatory sacrifice for sin, then that Christ once offered upon
the cross? Did I ever teach you, to minyster the Lords supper, wherein the
people should nothing else but look upon, and behold your doings, without any
kind of knowledge or conforte? Did I ever teach you, to lift the sacrament
over your head? Did I ever teach the people, to fall down thereunto, and to
worship they know not what?

Be these the things, that I delivered you? Be these y^ things, that I
received of the Lord? This would Saint Paul say unto us, if he were now
alive. Thus would he reprove us, and call us to the standarde, and original of
the first appointynge of the holy Sacrament.

Our own inventions, and fantasies, wherewyth we had filled the Mass, were
so many, and so gross, that they quyte covered, and shadowed the death of
Christ, and the holy misteryes of our salvation.

Therefore we could not truly say, these things Paul delivered unto us, or
these things Paul received of the Lord.

Wherefore, good people, and derelye beloved brethren, for as much as we see,
there have (...) great and evident abuses, and errors in the Mass, so plain
and so manifest, that no man, that has reason, and will consider them, can
deny it. Let us follow the counsel of S. Paul, let us return to the ordinance
of Christ, unto the true standard that cannot fail us.

As it is not in the power of man, to appoint sacraments: so is it not in the
power of man, to alter or change sacraments. God will not be worshipped,
after our pha^tasies, and therefore, so oftentimes, he charge us, in the
scriptures: Non facietis quod bonum videtur in oculis vestris. Ye shall not do
that thing, that seems good to you in your own sight: ye shall not turn,
neither to the left hand, nor to the right: But what thing soever I bid you do,
that only shall ye do. Your thoughts be not my thoughts, neither be your ways
my ways. For as far as heaven is from the earth, or the east from the west,
so far of, be your thoughts from my thoughts, and your ways, from my
ways, says the Lord. It is a dangerous thing, for a mortal man, to
controlle, or find fault, with the wisdom of the immortal God. Tertullian, an
old father of y^ church, shows us, the wilfulnes of ma^s heart, after it has
once enterprysed, to presume a little against Gods truth, and ordinance. Prae^
scripturas faciunt, vt post, (...) contra scripturas faciunt*

First says he, they attempt sumwhat beside the scriptures, to thente^t,
that afterward, they may gather courage and boldness to do contrary to the
scriptures.

At the end they procead as far, as the Scribes and Pharisees, that for
maintenance of their own tradicions, despised and brake the commandments
of God. For redress therem, there is no better way, then to follow S. Paul's
council here, and to have recourse to Gods holy word.

Saint Ambrose says. Interrogemus Petrum: Interrogemus Paulum, si verum
volumus inuenire. If we will find out the truth, and be put out of doubt, says
Saint Ambrose, let us harken what Peter and Paul will say unto us.

Saint Cyprian says. Hinc schismata oriuntut, quia caput non quae^, and ad
fontem non reditur, and caelestis magistri praecepta, non serua^tur. Hereof
says Saint Cyprian, arise schisms, and divisions, for that we seek not to the
head, nor have recourse to the spryng, nor keep the commandments of the
heavenly master. Tertulli^ says, Haec ratio contra omnen haeresim valet, hoc
veru^ est, quod primum fuit. This reason says he, is able, to confound al
manner he* resies. That thing is true, yr was first appointed.

O that our adversaries, and all they that stand, in the defense of the Mass
this day, would co^tente them self, to be tudged by this rule.

O that in all the controversies, that lie between us and the^, they would
remyt the judgment, unto Gods word. So should we sone agree, and join
together: So should we deliver nothing unto the people, but that we have
received at Gods hand.

And if there be any here, that have had, or yet has, any good opinion of the
Mass, I beseech you for Gods sake. even as ye tender your own salvation,
suffer not your self, wilfully to be led away: tun not blyndlye to your own
confusion. Think with your self, it was not for naught, that so many of your
brethren, rather suffered them selves to dye, and to abide all manner
extremity, and cruelty, then they would be partakers of that thing that you
reken to be so holy. Let their death, let their ashes, let their blood, that
was so aboundantlye shed before your ^ies, sumwhat prevail with you, and mout
you.

Be not ruled by your wilful affections. Ye have a good zeal, and mind
toward God. Have it, according unto the knowledge of God. The Iues had a
zeal of God, and yet they crucified the son of God. Search the scriptures,
there shall ye find everlasting life. There shall ye learn to judge your
self, and your own doings, that ye be not judged, of the Lord. If ever it
happen you, to be present again, at the mass, think but thus with your
self: what make I here? What profit have I of my doings? I hear nothing: I
understand nothing: I am taught nothing: I receive nothing: Christ bad me,
take: I take nothing. Christ bad me, ^ate: I eat nothing. Christ ^ad me,
drink: I drink nothing. Is this, the institucion of Christ? Is this, the Lords
supper? Is this, the right use, of y^ holy misteryes? Is this it, that Paul
delivered unto me? Is this it, that Paul received of the Lord? Let us say but
thus, unto our self, and no doubt God of his mercy will open our hearts, we
shall see our errors: and content our self, to be ord^ed by the wisdom of
God: to do that God will have us do: to believe that God will have us believe,
to worship that God will have us worship.

So shall we have comfort, of the ho^y mysteries: So shall we receive the
fruytes of Christ's death: So shall we be (...) of Christ's body and blood: S^
shall Christ truly dwell in us: and we in him: so shall all error, be taken
from us: So shall we join al together, in gods truth: So shall we all be able,
with one heart, and one spirit to know, and to glorify the only, y^ true, and
the living God* and his only begotten sun Jesus Christ to whom both with the
holy ghost be all honor and glory for ever, and ever.

Amen.
An Index or table of the most notable things and words contained in this
work.
A
A (...) of the bread if they be worshipped it is ^dolatry. 141. they are
vn^nown of the peo (...). 141. b. Accidentium substa^tia. 65. b ^doratio^ of yr
bread 137. b a new (...) 138. very dangerous. 139 Agnus (...). 128. b Albertus
Pigghius. look Pighius. Altar must be made of ston, whi. 149. (...) Antyquitye
boasted in vain. 106 Antiquity of the papists religion. 49. b Apostles knoledge
in Mo^tanus (...). 109 Apostles church an infant. 111 Ap^l from Pope to
counsel forbod 93 arg^mentes gathered of D. Col^s wordsagainst ^he Pope most
effec^. 92 (...) (...) of the (...) ^ble* (...) 147 Argument of (...). (...) 47
Argument of D. (...)* very (...), 110. b. of (...) (...)* touching y^ church
111. b. (...) propo^ded ^y Satum, impossible to be proved by the papists. 4. b
Asseueracio^ trew^ is sufficient prou^ in the law. 46 Authorities, papists do
forge when they la^. 41
B
Baptim abused. 126 b. for the dead, and after yr dead, ibide^ Baptim
ministered at al times indifferently 108 Baptizynge for the dead. 92 Basil
counsel erred, 91 Bishop of Constantinople attempted the supremacy. 15 Bishop
universal. 47 Bishop universal against gospel and old canons, 110 Bishop
only must co^secrat the church why. 149 Bishop must were purple sa^dals why
148. b. Bohemyshe people unmercifully dealt withal. 85 Bold offer of Saru^, 162
Bound not to dispute. 75 Bread remains in the sacrament. 140 Bread
wourshiped, 137. b a new deuis 138. Idolatri. 139. b Bread sacramental must be
round, why 150 Bread sacramental divided in three, why. 156 Bu^ers and Caluins
reasons answered by the Papists how. 7 Camotenses. 64. b Canon of the mass.
135 Chalice must be of sil uer or gold. 150 Children sing in the church with
men and women. 69. b Christ's body not suf (...) blessed alredi. 136. offered by
the priest ibidem. Christ has nied of our prayers. 136 Christ's sacrifice for
^s every day. 169. ^ Christ and his? (...) no infants. 111 Christ's flesh
honorable. 142. his (...) is to be (...) and eaten in heaven. 143 Christ^ death
applied unto us, how 169. be* Church may not be hallowed but of a bishop (...).
149 Church is ladi of her own laws and handmaid of christ: 110. b Church an
infant in thapostles time. 106. b Church may not be reformed with hout ge n^rall
consent. 114 Church can not (...), wh^. 113 Church may er 115 b Church only
rule of our faith, papists say. 117. b Clok goes trewhow so ever the (...)
goes, 117. b Cole. look D. Cole. Commau^deme^ts of God may not be bro^en. 108.
b. Co^municatynge for the people by the priest. 168 Communion refuiers
excommunicated 158. b. 97 Communion under one kind how it began. 114. b
Communion under one kind, great abuse. 81. b Communion under one kind, by
Ephesus counsel. 41 Communion under one kind why. 112 149. b Communion under
one kind of no antiquit^. 86. b Communion under one kind. 1^4. b un der both
(...). 600 (...) (...) (...). 67 b. 135 under o^ kind open (...). 135 Communion
under both (...). 83. under (...) ki^d n^ ^er allowed (...) ge nerall counsel.
84 Communion (...) both kinds. 6. b. Communion under both kinds. 85. b
Communion given to infants. 127. b. to the dead. 128. trem end thereof. 129
Communion every day. 154. b. thrice onday. ibidem. (...) licensed to Priests by
the Pope. 97. b Conscientia (...). 97. 104 b Consecration is very difficult.
144 Consent general necessary for reformig y church. 114 Constantie of
Papists. 77. b (...) con^sel (...) ^y (...). 83 ^ 91 ^ openly against Christ
and all the primitive church 6. b. Consuetudo. 53 b. Co^tinuans no good
ground. 54. b Corporal must be of fyn linen, why 149. b Corpus Christi day
began. 138. b Corrupters of doctors. 63. b. Council general of gretter
authority with the papists then the universal ordinau^s of christ 84 Counsel
general, non is to be loo^t for. 80. b Counsel general above the Pope in D.
Coals opinion, 91. b. Counsel inferiou^ to the Pope. 93 Counsel is but a
resemblaunse of the church. 92. b Counsel general what makes. 89 Counsel
general may as well be deceived as particular. 92 Counsels nothing regardid by
the papists for all their brags. 96. b Counsel general have erred. 87 Counsel
of Co^stans against christ, 6. b Cranmer asscited to ^ome, how. 73. b Croun of
a Priest must be shaven, why. 148 Cue of D. Cole. 66. b Cup is no ceremony
lefull to be removed. 109 Cushion. 58 b Custu^ refuted. 115. b Custum of
scools. 16 Custum. 53. b Custum. 83. b
D
Darkness most esteemed of sum. 123. b Dea^o^ preacher. 108 Dema^ds of D. Cole
satisfied. 39. b Demur made by D. Cole. Devotion increased by understanding the
prayers. 71 Devises of man. 173. b Devises of me^ may be altered* 107 (...)
papists at not. 13. b. 40 Disorders in ye churh wherbi they oght to be
redressed. 121 Disputacion refused 75. 76. b D. Clement ^et book. 59. b D. Cole
ashamid of his writing. 35. b. fumish hasty. 37. a scholden. 38 D. Cole
against Pig g^ius. 88 D. Cole agrieth not with (...). 84. b D. Cole confesses
papists brought nether script. doct. nor counsels in (...). Mary's tim. 44. b D.
Cole deceived of the people. 78. b D. Cole forget of authority. 41 D. Cole
grants h s doctryn new and ours old. 106 D. Cole a lerner. 57 D. cole (...)
apes. 100 is nothing (...) for the people. 101 D. Cole not the great test
papist. 91. b (...). Cole (...) both in divinity and (...) (...) D. Cole
vanquished by his own confession. 48 D. Cole has non of y^ principal grounds
to defend his religion 14. D. Coals demandes satisfied. 39. b D. Col^ loud lie.
50 D. Coals redines at his cue. 66 b D. Coals substa^tiall argument. 110. b D.
Oglethorps reading. 62 D. Smithz redig. 61 Doctors alleged by D. Cole
notwtstanding his recog. 105 D. nams empty. 82 b D. old ar a good balanse of
controuer sies* 82 Doctryn and reasons of the Protestants ^hyldish. 146. b
Doctrine of the prote sta^ts in doubt how 74 Doctrine of y^ papists new and ours
old. 106 (...) of y^ papists 74. b
E
Eati^g and wourshipi^g of christ's bodi, both is in one place. 143 Ecclesia^
apostolicam papists brag they are. 79. b Emperor under y^ Pope. why. 112
Emperor under y^ Pope as y^ mo^e under the sun. 147 Ephesus counsel forged. 41
Ephesusgeneral co^ seler^ed. 87. that it was general. 88 Errors of y^ church
how they shall be re formed. 116. 117. 121 Euide^s papisis have non to show, tha^
is (...). 55. b
F
Facere in the words of y^ supper signifies to sacrifice, why. 150 Faith
altered up the papists. 77 Faith (...) (...) to salvation. 146 Falls light used
by D. Cole. 35. b Fig leaves. 98 Fifteen hundred yers 106. Forgers of
authorities a^ y^ papists. 41 (...) of sound (...). (...). 12. b. 38 Futur tens
fairest show of D. Coals lernig. 43.
G
(...) against tra^ substant. 18 Gelasius mistake^ by Sarum. 62. b. (...)
expounded by papists. 64. b Gelasius touchyn^ the cup. 109. b Gospel of Christ
abused. 126 Gregory against ^niuersal (...). 110* Gregory Bishop of Rome
opinion of y^ universal (...). 47 b. 49. 50 Gregori B. of rome opinion of the
supremacy. 15. Grounds to build sound doctryn upon ar iiii. 12 b 38.
H.
Hand burnt with a torch. 73. b (...) to receive the sacrament for an other.
169 (...) isit not to receive under both kinds D. Cole confesses. 83. b Heresy
horrible. 85 Headvniuersal of the church no where for y^ space of 600. yers
after Christ. 50 Holiest things man be abused. 126 Hol^ water must the people
be sprinkled withal, why. 149 Hossius a maker of he^esie, 85. b Host must be
round why, 150
I
James said mass at at Jerusalem 170. b Idolatry if bread remain in the
sacrament 139. b Jewel subscribed. 77 Ignoranse, hate of light, power of
darkness. 71. b Ignoranse cause of true deuocio^. 70. b mother of al errors 70.
b Image must be in the church, why 113 Image inchurch forbodden. 97 Indiuiduum
^agum 165 I^fa^t, was y^ church in thapostles tim. 106. b. 111. Infant is the
primitive church. 60 Infants receive the communion 127. b Innouacion papists
make none now, because all things ar altered to their hands. 80 Instant what.
51 Intent in consecracion. 145 Innouacion how it oght to be made. 52 Inuencions
of man 173. (...) Judge in a man's ow^ cause unlawful. 81
L
La^gage one, to pray in, through all nations, why. 148 Languag^ strange must
be used in the church, why. 149 Language strange in the church, why 111. b.
113. b Language unknown in the church. 133. Latera^ counsel author of the word
of transubstant. 436 Latin ^u^g, sermo Italum. 68. b Law only defense for
papists. 45. b Law used bp the papists was nether according to divine tie nor
humanity. 73 Legendes reding against the counsel of Carthage. 97. b. (...) is
a fault with D. Cole. 103. b Light hated of sum. 123. b (...) of apes. 100
^yon (...) like ignorant people. 71. b
M
Manicheus error. 109 Marcionistes error, on to receive for an other. 169
Marriage of priests. 81. b Married man may be no priest, why 112. b Mass
private. 67 Mass private fit to be used, why. 112 Mass private was non in the
church for y^ space of. 600 years after Christ 152. in no ancient doctors. 155
Mass ca^ not be private. 167, b Mass book against private mass. 155 Masses
error confessed by Pighius 81. b. Mass consists of four parts. 130. it is
sautie by the pa pists (...). 131 has ^ani abuses. ibidem. Mass nothing
comfortable to the hea rers. 134 Mass of a priest y^ (...) a concu^yn
forbodden to be hard. 97. b Men women and children sing in the church
altogether 69. b (...) first named. when. 170. b Mithridates stratagem. 167.
Montanus error. 109
N
Name of God abused. 126, (...) Negative holden in this controversy, by Sarum.
7. b Negative rested one by Christ. 46. b Negative question leful to be rested
on. 14. b. holden by Gregory. 15. b Negative impossible to be proved. 98
Negative, ca^ no law drive a man to prove. 40. b Non ^uit. 56 Nullum tempus
praescribit regi. 54. b
O
Obstinate parson who. 13. 39. b Ordinances of god may not be altered. 107.
devised by men may be changed. ibidem Organs must be in the church, why.
113. b Original sin in our ^ady. 97
P
Papists ^roght nether script. doct. nor (...) in (...). Mary's time 44. b
Papists are not (...). 40. 13. b Papists reasons. 46 Papists arguments (...).
147 Papists alter their faith. 77 Papists use (...) (...) policy. 166 Papists
dowting (...) the Pharisees. 74. b Papist doctrine new, and ours old. 106
Papists may not be (...) against. 72. b Papists persuade now gentle and
merciful dealing 72. b Paralogismus a non causa vt causa. 41. b 42. b
Paralogismus a secu^dum quid ad simpliciter. (...) Pardons authority whens.
119 Patriarchs iii. t^ rule y^ church. 96. b Peter said mass at ^ome. 169 b.
Pigghius what he was. 131. b Pigghius corrupter of doctors. 63. b Pighius
accused by D. Cole. 87. b. defended by (...) 88 Policy of Mithri^ates. 166
(...) stamping 56. b Pope has power over both swards why. 148. b Pope has the
souerainty over al (...) why. 148 Pope is above the Emperor, why. 112. is head
of the church. why. 112. b Pope and emperor compared to y^ sun and moan. 147. b
Pope above the co^ sell. 93 Pope inferior to a general counsel in D. Cols
mind. 91. b Pope may no man judge, why. 112. b. 113 Pope commits no simony,
why. 113 Pope no head of the church 92. b Possession. 52. b Possessores malae
fidei. 52. b. 55. b Prescription of a h^ dred years. 52. b Prayers in y^ church
must be in Hebrew, Griek, or Latin, why* 149 Prayers in a strange tung. 108
Prayers in commun known tung. 68 Prayer in the vulgar tung commanded by God.
110 Priest communicating for the people 168 Priests marriage 81. Priest may be
no married man, why 112. b Priest has no pryuiledge above the people to receive
under both kinds 86 Priest must shave his (...) why. 148 Priest (...)
sorcerers 170 Prist must (...) into the chalice, why. 150. b. must wash his
hands kis the altar, give a sygh, and (...) his breast. etc. 150. b (...)
church, who foloueth, erreth. 106. b Primitive churches order lefull to be
broken 108. b Primitive church against the papists 59. b. an infa^t. 60 Private
mass. 67 Protestants have no lerning. 41. b pr^testants doctrine light and
chyldish 146. b Protestants reasons sound. 150. b Proufssufficient are deduced
out of on of the four principal grounds of religion. 12. b. 38 Proufs used by
the papists. 46 Proufs brought by papists in (...). M. time. 44. b Purgatory
is certainly, why. 148. b
R
Reading of Sarum. 60. b Reading of scripturs tormenteth y^ Deuel. 71 Reason no
defens for papists but onlilaw. 45 b Reasons of the protestants chyldishe. 146.
b Reasons of the Papists. 46 Reasons brought by papists in (...). Ma. time. 44.
b Reasons of the Papists very strong. 111. b Reasons of extremity used by the
papists how then also have been answered. 44. b Rec^gnizans. 60 Recognizans is
D. Coals clook. 98. b. ^orbids him not to dispute. 99. nor to allege approved
doctors. 99. b Re^cognizans no let to D. Cole when he lift. 105 Redres of the
errors of the church. 121 Redres lefull in religion, what manner 174
Reformacion lefull, of what sort. 174. b. Reformacion leful is only by the
scriptures. 116. 117. 121 Reformacion m^e noon be had without general consent
114 Religion of the Papists of such antiquiti, as we may well object, a prin
cipio non fuit sic. 49. b. Rhetorik ground of Sarums serino^s 130. commendable
in the old Fathers 103. b Ridetur chorda. etc. 51. b Roabes of the mass from
whens. 170
S
Sacrament if it may be abus^d. 126. 127. Sacrament must (...) (...) with
co^dici^n, si ille consecrauerit. 145. ^ Sacrament wourshiping perilous 144
Sacrament under on kind, wh^. 112 Sacrament (...) for an other, is heresy. 169
Sacraments may nether appointed nor altered by man. 173 Sacrament, look
communion. Sacrifice of Christ daily. 169. b Sacrilege after ^e lasius
opinion. 86 S. George a horse bak. 66. b Sandals of Purple must a Bishop were
why. 148. b Sarum burdened with subscripcio^. 78 Sarum mistaks ^e lasius
perilously. 62. b Saru^s reading. 60 b Scholars froward and peruers. 58
Scripturs reding. 71 Scripture wresters. 64. b Scripturs ^a^ not e^. 115. b
Scripture no defens for Papists bu^ only law. 45. b Scripturs councels nor
Doctors have the Papists any. 6 Scripturs only to be ^ed in the church 97
Serpent abused. 126 Service of y^ church in comun know^ tung. 68 Simon^ can
not the Pope commit if he would. why. 113 Sir^es. 59 S^tterer both in diuinitye
and also in logi^ is d. Cole. 42 Sophisticacion a secundu^ quid ad simpliciter.
11^ Sophisticacion a no^ causa vt causa. 42. b Stamping of Po^pie 56. b
Statuimus, abrogamus. 66 Steven Gardiners reading. 61. b. corrupting of doctors
64. falsifiyng of Ge lasius. 65 Stratagem of Mithridates. 166 Substantia
accidentiu^ 65. b Substantia, subiectum and accide^s, unknown of the people.
141 Supremacye attempted by the Bishop of Constantinople. 15 Supremacye of no
necessity, why. 50 b. of no antiquity 50. b Supremacye of the Pope. 93
Supremacye restored without scrip. Doct. or counsel. 45. b Sursum corda. 142.
b Syllogismus of ^. Coals maki^g. 47
T
Talking against papisto. 72. b Traitors that draw their swords against their
prince 73 Transubstantiation, how it began and when. 139. b Transubstantiation
impugned. 60. b Transubstantiation impugned with mor ancient reasons then
defended. 43. when the word was ^yrste hard of. 43. b Transubstantiation
ouerthrown. 18 Treuth puts custum to sylens. 53. b Treuth refused of su^ in all
ages. 123. b Treuth uttered at un ware by D. Cole and Westo^. 44 b Trident
counsel. 81 Tung known in the church. 68 Tu^g known to pray in, no ceremonye
to be change* 109. b Tu^g unknown miet to be used, why. 111 b. 113. b Tung
strange in the Tchurch. 108 Tung strange must be used, why. 149 Tung unknown
in y^ church. 133 Tung one in all nations to pray in, why. 148
V
Va^ts of the papists of their doctors. 167 Vero for vere a sore error. 63
Understanding of y^ prayers. 70. b Universal bishop. 47 Universal bishop
against gospel and old canons. 110^ Vntreuths by heaps made by D. cole. 75
Vulcanus honored of the Romans. 96
W
Women baptyz. 108 Women sing in the church together with men. 69. b Wemens
wills. 58 b. Weston utters treuth unawares. 44 Wresters of script. 64. b
Wourshiping of the sacrament. 137. b. a new deuis. 138. it is dangerous. 139
Z
Zeal must be according to knoledge* 176 Zeal for the people has D. Cole no^
101
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.
FOl. 6. line, 19. read for father, farther. fol. 7. line. 10. read we have
red. fol. 21 line. 12. read content, li. last read counsel. fol. 29. line 14.
read affectually. fol. 30. line. 13. read pronounced. fol. 35. line 16. read by
the. fol. 36. side. ii. line* 3. read yours. fol. 40. line. 13. read should.
fol. 5^ line. 2. read negative fol. 53. line. 7. read grant. fol. 55. line. 3.
read to be. fol. 56. ^yde. ii. line. 15. (...) foot. fol. 64. line. 20. read
dedit. fol. 67. side. ii. li. 22. read learned. fol. 71. side 2. line read ye
may. fol. 76 side. 2. line read farther. foiio. 105. line. 3* read to be
broken, line. 14. read so were, fol. 116. line. read. id esse. fol. 118. line.
15. read triacle.

FINIS.

