(...)r, a pretty Jest of a Bride and a Bridegroom, where the Bridegroo^ wa^
most neately deceived of his Sweetheart by a Seruingman.
To the Tune of, Better late thrive then never.

(...)Among all the creatures by sea land and Air,
believe me I think there is no man,
(...) find one that equally he may compare,
(...) lewd and unconstant Woman:
(...) Mother beguiled the Daughter of l^^e,
(...) Daughter her Mother deceived of her mate,
(...) now a strange story I mean to relate
(...)ow a rich Goldsmith was cozend* was cozend
(...) how a rich Goldsmith was cozend.
(...) far hence of late a rich Goldsmith did dweil,
honest reputation,
(...)ho in his rare skill did so many excel,
(...)at he merited comendation,
(...) fell into love with a rich man's Daughter,
(...) to win her affection he daily besought her,
(...)e gave her consent, but she cozend him after,
(...) thus the rich Goldsmith she cozend, etc.
(...)hen he by his care and good ca^^iage at last,
(...)ad behavior had won her affection,
(...)d many deep vows betwixt them had past,
(...) make sure each others election:
(...) mark but a woman's unconstant behavior,
(...)hen he had assured her never to leave her*
(...)d she had vow^ faith til death did bereave her,
(...)et she the rich Goldsmith did cozen, etc.
The day was appointed they married would be,
before a whole congregation,
Their friends were invited to witness and see
the end of this my relation:
Near London t'th Country as I do hear,
At an In was prepared both wine bread and beer,
and for all their friends and acquaintance great cheer,
and yet the rich Goldsmith she cozend, etc.
The Goldsmith his faith and his promise did keep
which to the man's daughter be plighted,
Wishing that the time might vanish like sleep,
his senses were so delighted,
To think of the joys that in marriage bed was,
Especially with such a delicate Less,
But his Touch stone did prove all his gold to be beasse
for the Bride the rich Goldsmith did cozen, etc.
When his expectation was come to an end,
which was chiefly his marriage day,
The iouiall Bridegroom with all his good friends
came to fetch the man's Daughter away:
but when he came there he heard such heavy news
That all outward joys he did wholly refuse,
And all his good friends and acquaintance did muse,
and grieved that the Goldsmith was cozend.
and grieved that the Goldsmith was cozend.

