A glorious medytacyon Of Ihesus crystes passion

woodcut of a wounded Christ

woodcut of several men

woodcut of mother with book, child beside her

A woman recluse and solytary coueytyng to know* the nombres of the wou^des of
our lord Ihesu christ prayed often to god of his specyal grace yt he would
vouche save to show to her the said wounds And at the last our lord Jesus
christ spoke to her and said. Say every day in ye hole year.xv, pater nosters
and.xv. aues and at theyet^s end thou shall worship every wound and fulfill
the nombre of the same And also our lord said every man that says these
pater noster / and these aues and these oraysons following every day in the
year And as often as he says these oraysones he shall have.xl. days of
pardon. And he that redeth to any other person these present oraysons shall
have Joy and bliss that never shall fail but ever last withouten end And
where so ever these present oraysons be said or where he be that says them.
I am present as. I was when saint. Paul did pray / and. I shall keep him
from all pery^les / and. I shall defend him fro wicked spyrytes what man or
woman so ever it be ye does say every day these orayso^s of my bitter passion
for his own medycyne.

An aungel came unto a good holy man and badde him that he should show to
every man and woman that should learn ye said oraysons and say them devoutly
every day And this holy man came into a monastery. of systers and showed these
oraysons to the abbess of the said monastery and she showed yt to her systers
/ and some of them said them with great devotion / and some for / they should
not trespace but they should be delivered from everlasting penury / and
honger. And I shall give them of my blood that they shall never have thyrste.
And I shall put before him the sign of my vyctoryous passion in defense and
subsydye against All his enemies. And before his death I / shall come with my
dear mother and. I shall take / and led his soul to everlasting bliss. And
when that. I have it thither brought. I shall give it a draught of the chalyce
of my good head. And though a man had lain.xx. years in sin and he would say
these oraysones devoutly. I will forgive him all his sins / and save him from
all temptacyo^s and keep his five wits / and defend him from sudden death
and evermore keep him and his soul from everlasting pain / and all the
sins / that he has done from his child hode unto this present day / I
will forgive him / and by my grace he shall be better than he was before. And
what so ever ^e / asks ryghtfully of me or of my mother he shall not be
denied and. I shall keep him perfyte against all deuylles. It pleases so much
god most of might that it is granted to him that says these oraysons though
he were in the estate of everlasting dampnacyon our lord Ihesu christ shall
change everlasting pain in to the puryfycacyon of purgatory And if he were
in ye most pain of purgatory our lord changes it in to the pain of this
present world / and brings his blissed soul in to the glory of heaven that
never shall have ending unto the which the creator and redemptour of humayne
lygnage bring us all

Amen.
The noumber of the dropys all
I will rehearse in general.
Five.C. thousand for to tell.
And.xlviii. thousand well.
Five.C. also great and small.
Here is the noumber of them all.
woodcut of image of Christ's face on a cloth
The veronycle I honor in worship of the
That made it through his preuyte
The clothe set over his face
His mouth / his nose / his eyes twain
Shield me lord for that in my live
I have sinned with my wits five
Namely with mouth of sclaunderynge
Of falls oaths and backebytynge
And making boost with my tongue also
Of great sins that I have do
Lord of heaven forgive them me
Through virtue of ye figure that I here se
woodcut of pelican feeding its young with its blood
The pelycan his blood does blede
There with his birds for to feed
It fygureth that god with his blood
Us fed hanging on the rode
when he us brought out of hell
In Joy and bliss with him to dwell
And be our fader and our fode
And we his children meke and good
woodcut of the host
The pens also. that Judas told.
For the which our lord was sold
Lord keep me from treason and couetyse.
Therein to deye in no manner wise
woodcut of lantern, axe, and mace
The lantren that they bare in the light
when Christ was taken in the night
Lord keep me fro night sin
That I never deye therein
woodcut of weapons
The swerdes / and battes yt they did bare
Therewith Ihesu christ to fere
From fendes lord keep thou me
Of them aferde never to be
woodcut of staff
with a staff thou had a stroke
Therewith Jews thy heed broke
with good chere and mylde mode.
All this thou suffered and still stood
when I mysse do any or any me
It be forgyuen for thy pity
woodcut of hands
The hands lord that rate thyn here
And the hand that smote the under ye eers
For that pain lord be my socoure there
That. I have sinned with pride of here
And oll other sins also
That. I with eeres have herkened to
woodcut of cloth hung on rod
The clothe before thyn eyes two
They bobbed the, they knytted so
Lord keep me fro vengaunce
Of chyldhod and of ygnoraunce
And of many sins also
That I se with mine eyn two
And my nose in smelles of sweetness
By vanytes and wantonness
woodcut of coatThe Jews also kest lote
On thy precious purple cote
A great dysayte to ye always
when any with dyce play
Lord be thou my helpinge
if. I have used mysclothy^g
By vaynglory and vanite
Gracyous lord pardon me
woodcut of flails
with rods great thou were to dasshed
And with knotted whyppes all to lasshed
Socour me lord of my great sins
Of slouthe and of idleness gynnes
woodcut of crown of thorns
The crown of thorn on thy heed fast.
Thy here to torn / thy skin all brast.
Lord keep me from pain of hell pytte
Never to deserve it by mysspent wit
woodcut of pillar wrapped with rope
To the pyller lord also
with a rope men bound the so
Herd drawn and strayned fast
That synewes from the bones brast
Lord lose me of bands in dystresse
Though I am unkind against kyndnesse
woodcut of Christ carrying cross
Thou bare the cross upon thy back
Out of Iherusalem it is no lack
Thy fete sleppes as thou forth yode
were seen through shedynge of thy blood
Thou mettest with womem of Bedleem
Also with women of Iherusalem
All they wept for thy great tourment
To them thou said apertiment
Ne weep ye not for my smerte
But for your children weep ye at heart
For they shall have tourment and pain
And hundred year here after certain
The steps of grace to us ye pardon
when we go with devotion
On pilgrimage with good mind
Of my sins lord thou me unbind
woodcut of nails
The nails through foot and hand also
Lord keep me out sin and woe
That I have in all my life done
with hands handled and fete mysse gone
woodcut of hammers
The hamers both strong and great
That perced holes in hands and fete
Lord be my socour in all my life
And keep me harmles frowerde or knyfe
woodcut of jars
The vessel of eysell and gall
Lord keep me from sins all
That to the soul be no venym
That I never be poisoned therein
woodcut of large hammer
when thou had great thyrst and need
They gave the eysell and gall on a read
Of that I have wasted in glotonye
Lord forgive me when I dye
woodcut of spear
Lord the spear so sharp ygrounde
That in thy heart made a wound
It quenchehe the sin yt I have wrought
And with my heart in ydelnesse thought
with my prydde and boost thereto
And mine vnburumnesse also
woodcut of ladder
The ladder that was raised hy
From the cross to take thy body
when I am lord in dedly sin
Give me repentance and shryfte to win.
woodcut of tongs
The tongues that drew the nails out
Of fete and hands withouten dout
And losed thy body from the tree
Of my sins lord lose thou me
woodcut of men spitting on Christ's face
The Jews that spytte lord in thy face
All thou suffered and gave them grace
That I have offended or any man me
Forgive it lord for thy pity
woodcut of Christ surrounded by items relevant to the passion
The cross behind thy back bone
That thou suffered passion upon
Lord give me grace in my live
Clean of my sins me to shryue
And thereto very repentance
with space to perform my penance
woodcut of Christ's body in the tomb
The seyulere wherein thou were laid
Thy blyssed body all to brayde
Lord grant me or that I deye
Sorrow of heart with teeres of eye
And clean remyssyon for to have
Or I be buried and laid in grave
And heaven to have at my last end
Jesus christ us thither send
Amen.
Innocentius papa secu^dus co^cessit cuiuslibet hanc orationem seque^tem deuore
dice^ti quatuor milia dieru^ Indulgentia
AVe vulnus lateris nostri saluatoris.
Ex quo fluxit flumi^s fo^sque cruoris.
Medicina miseria esto nunc doloris.
Aue plaga lacetis la^ge et fecunda.
Laua multitudinis fordes et emunda.
Ne ledat inferius tuos mors secunda.
Sed in visu numinis fiat men's ^ocunda.
Amen. Pater noster. Aue maria. Credo in deum. etc^
Here follows the prayers of ye.v. wounds of our lord. Ihesu christ
Of the five wounds of our lord.
woodcut of the five wounds of Christ
Gracyous lord for thy great passion
Observe my prayers that I do repete
And on my soul take compassyon
At my death for thy wounds great
Of the right hand.
well of mercy passing all mysdede.
Of mercy I pray that I may speed.
woodcut of angel holding image of right hand
well of mercy
Thy right hand lord of truth and ^^yte
That was through perced with a rugged nail.
Be my socour in the extremyte
Of death when he shall me assail
To the lift hand.
well of grace yt be my gyude
Night and day on each syne
woodcut of angel holding image of left hand
well of grace.
Thy lift hand of right and Justice
Fallen^^ to the cross by great vyolence
Deliver me of every deedly vice
That I may come unto thy presence
Of the heart
woodcut of pierced heart crowned well of life that ever shall last
My heart in the make you steadfast
Pity.

Love

Charity

Well of life.



Thy heart that always had mind
By pycefull love and charity
with fervent favor to mankind
was launced with great inyquyte
The tyrauntes fell without pity
Openned thy side blyssed sauyoure
Both blood and water therout began pour
The virtue of that precious blood
In honger and thyrst of mortal sin
Be evermore my helthfull fode
There by thy bliss for to win
No dampnable work let me begin
And that my heart may so enclyne
The for to serve as one of thine
The water that there began issue
Upon the cross tree dystylynge
Keep my heart in menynge true
And clenlynesse of all thinking
The vile works done in my living
By virtue of that water clear
Be cleansed and never to appear
Of the right foot
woodcut of angel holding image of right foot

well of pity.
The right foot with the wound so wyd^
which in this world was all bare
Grant me grace my self to guide
That in thy service I may fare
Of the lift foot
well of comfort yt never shall fail
Keep me fro sins yt me assail
woodcut of angel holding image of left foot
well of comfort.
The wound made in the lift foot
with a sturdy nail to the cross ere
Gracyously be my refuge and bote
And comfort in aduersyte.
Amen
To the glorious vyrgyn Mary Queen of heaven and mother of mercy
woodcut of person kneeling at throne of holy mother and child Sancta maria Ora
pro nobis.
Dei Memento Mei:

matter



BLyssed Mary mother vyrgynall
Integrate maid sterre of the se
Have in remembrance at the day fynall.
Of thy poor servant now pr^^^^ to the
Myrour without spot reed rose of Ieryco
Close gardyn of grace / hope in dysparage
when my soul the body parts fro
Socour it fro mine enmyes rage
Of saint George the noble knight. Of whom no torment could have might.

woodcut of knight on horseback slaying beast

O Blyssed martyr of god saint George to ye begyue^ laud and glory above al
other knights by whose virtue a kings daughter being in dread and danger to
be devoured of on horrible dragon was gracyously preserved and saved with in
any other I poor and miserable sinner the require with steadfast heart and
feythfull mind that it will / please the to be my defe^der in this life from
all temptatyous and persuacyons dyabolycalles / as of the world the flesh
and the devil. And at the most dredefull hour of my death I humble beseech
the by thy blyssed intercessions to be as aduocat and mediator toward the
sovereign Judge for me when ye most tedious and dampnable dragons of hell shall
be ready to take my pore soul and engloute it within their infernal belyes /
to the end yt. I may be one of the nombre of the saved and chosen people of
paradyce. To the which we may come by ye merit of thy glorious martyrdom.
Amen.

To the blyssed martyr saint Sebastyan whose grievous pains none tell can.
woodcut of saint flanked by archers and pierced with many arrows

Glorious martyr of god saint. Sebastyan which had lever to be grievously
tourmented and shot to death than to worship and do sacryfyce to the
ydolles and falls gods. I sinful creature beseech the for the said passion to
aid and socoure me when the false and cursed enmyes shoteth and casts at me
arowes of da^pnable temptacyons of sin to enforce me to do oblacyons and
seruyces to ye sensual voluptuosytes of my frail body for to bry^ge me to the
death eternal of hell from the which keep us al / he that was borne in an ox
stal. Amen. Amen. For charity.

Inprynted by me Rychard Fakes Dwelling in Dura^ Rent / or else in Poules
church yearde at the sign / of the. A B C

woodcut of Christ risen from tomb xps resurge^s ex mor

tuis iam non moritur



Here endyth A glorious Medytacyon Of Jesus Crystes Passion

