SEVEN GODLY AND LEARned Sermons, preached by the Reverend Father in God JOHN
IVEL, late Bishop of Salisburie. Never before imprinted. Newly published to the
glory of God, and benefit of his Church.

LACTANT. Nostrae voces licet aurae misceantur atque euanescant, tamen
plarunque permanent literis comprehensae. LONDON Jmpensis G. Bishop. 1607.

To the most Reverend Father in God, my L. of Canturburie his Grace, Primat of
England, and of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
I Offer here unto your Grace a kind of present: which if it be valued by the
greatness, is but small; if by the goodness either of it self, or of my
duetifull affection toward your Grace, is surely great. Certain Sermons are
they of that reverend learned Father of so worthy memory B. Iuel; which having
received of a friend, and reserved by me some good time in written hand
(howbeit faithfully written, as I trust shall after appear) I could no longer,
no longer, I say, could I be either so injurious, or so envious to the public
good, as not to publish the^ to the glory of God, and benefit of his Church.
And if the renowned Orator Tully could not endure to have the least and meanest
of his painful trauells perish or be lost, were it but some familiar Epistle
or letter, as is appare^t by that he wrote to his friend Varro in the like
case: Etsi (...) erat illa epistola, Albeit the letter which Caninius caused
me to write (but as I take it, had forgotten to call for) were stale and out of
season, yet have I sithe^ce delivered it unto him for thee: Quia nolui perire
lucubratione^ mea^, says he. Norblame him pardy, for why should so sweet a
vein of wit and eloquence flow out in vain? Then what reason were it that
these so many, so learned, so godly, so eloquent Sermons of this reverend
Father and great Divine; especially treating, not as Tully does, of matters
earthly, but heavenly, not of things temporal, but eternal, not of the
Commonwealth of the Romans, but the saving health of al christians: I say, what
pity were it that these his so sundry and worthy labors, should either be
smothered up in hugger mugger, or buried in oblivion, or (...) wife always
impropried, engrossed, and restrained unto any one, and not rather imparted,
diuulged and made common unto many one, for the general behoof of the present
age, and so of future posterity? They are in Philosophy (as your Grace well
knows) rules both ancient and authentike: Bonum quo communius, quo
diuturnius, eo melius, Good things the more they stretch themselves to the
benefit of many, and the more durable they are, the better they are. For as
Lactantius says, and says very well, Nostrae voces etc. Our words once
uttered, dissolve and vanish into air: but let them be put in writing, or
print, and for the most part they remain unto all succeeding ages. Wherefore
not long to hold your Grace (being holden sufficiently with your public
travels for the good both of Church and Commonweal; for which to Almighty God,
to his excellent Majesty, and to your Grace we are, and I trust, shall be still
more and more beholden) It may please your Gr. to accept this small (...), or
(...) of my thankful duty, and dutiful thankfulness; of whom I am bold to
say truly, which I add without flattery, that next after God the mean
liuelihood I have, whatsoever I have, by your Graces mean I have: and therefore
do pray, and ought to pray, and will not cease to pray; that like as the
Almighty has in special favor placed you in so high room of honor and
above others graced you; so he will continue forth his loving kindness and
gracious favor toward you; so he will multiply his spiritual gifts, and
heavenly blissings upon you, to the glory of his name, the good of his Church,
and your Graces incessant comfort both here and for ever.

Your G. most bounden at com. I. K.

SEVEN GODly and learned Sermons, preached by the reverend Father I. IVEL,
Bishop of Salisburie.
I. Corinth. 4. verse. 1. 2. 1. Let every man esteem us, even for the Ministers
and Stewards of the secrets of God.

2. Now is there no more required of the Stewards, but that they be found
faithful.


Dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, The people of the city
of Corinth, to whom S. Paul wrote this Epistle or letter, were at great
strife, contention, and variance among themselves, as touching the Preachers of
Christ's Gospel, and Ministers dwelling among them. For, whereas God had sent
them store of Preachers, as Peter, Paul, Apollo, Cephas, and such other, which
were notable in the ministry of God; they of these great gifts and benefits
of God, took occasion of strife, took (I say) occasion of great contention
and debate among themselves. For whosoever liked Peter best, would say, I hold
of Peter; whosoever thought Paul's Doctrine better than Peter's, would say, I
stand of Paul's side; whosoever again thought that Apollo excelled the rest,
would say, I hold with Apollo. And thus of their own fancies, they took
occasion of strife, and found fault with the preaching of Christ's Gospel. As
for Peter, as for Paul, as for Apollo, they all preached one thing, they taught
one Doctrine, there was no strife, no debate, no dissension among them. Yet
notwithstanding, though the Schoolemasters agreed, the Disciples and Schoolers
could not be at one: though they all preached one and the same Doctrine, yet
could not the people fancy their Preachers alike. And therefore Paul concluded
before, and said; Let no man rejoice in men, for all is yours, whether it be
Paul, or Apollo, whether it be Cephas or the world, all is yours. And
hereupon followed these words of his, that you heard read unto you. As for us
(says Saint Paul) esteem us as the Ministers of Christ: whatsoever they be
that Preach unto you the Gospel of GOD, regard them as the Stewards of the
secrets of God.

So it happens oftentimes that either the people judge too much of the
Preachers of Gods word, or else they judge too little: Sometime they attribute
unto them too much honor, sometime again they give them too little honor:
Sometime they credit them too much, sometime they believe them nothing at all.
So are the people always inconstant, so are they moved on either side. When
Paul and Barnabas at Listra began to Act. 14.
preach, by and by the whole multitude of the people thought them to be Gods
and no men, forthwith they erected Altars, they brought their Sacrifices, their
oxen, their calves, their sheep, minding to have sacrificed unto them, and
Paul they called Mercurius; Barnabas, Jupiter. This was too great an honor.
And therefore when Paul and Barnabas understood the same, they rent their
clothes, tore their own garments, run in among the people, cried out and said:
Ye men and brethren, why do ye this? So likewise Peter being appointed by
God to go to Cornelius the Captain, Act. 10.
so soon as he came in unto him, by and by Cornelius met him, fell down at
his feet, and worshipped him, he thought him a God and no Man. And thus, as
ye see, sometimes the people offended too much on that hand, and gave more
honor and reverence unto Gods Ministers than God himself required, or they
looked for: Sometimes again on the other hand, they gave them no reverence,
they attributed no honor unto them, they did set too little by the Preachers
of Gods word; and this was a fault on the other side.

When Christ in our nature began first to preach, and set abroad his fathers
will, and the glad tidings of the Gospel, the people forthwith found fault
with him; he is, said they, but a Carpenters son, John. 6.
we know his Father, we know his Mother, he was never set to School, how can
this man have learning? Afterward, when the Disciples and Apostles of Christ
preached and taught the people, and began to speak with strange tongues,
Act. 2.
in so much that every man maruailed to hear his own speech and language,
both Medes, Persians, and they of Mesopotamia; yet said the people, these men
are full of new wine. And this was too little honor. Therefore if the Preacher
be too much honored, then is God dishonored: if he be despised and nothing
set by, then is Christ himself despised, and not regarded. They that said
Christ was a Carpenters son, a man unlearned, and such a one as never went to
school: they that said the Apostles of Christ were full of new wine, spoke not
this of any private malice or hatered that they bare either unto Christ, or his
Apostles, but only to bring Gods word to shame, only to bring Christ's holy
Gospel out of credit with the people: this was their intent and purpose, and
nothing else. Therefore Saint Paul in this place shows the Corinthians how
they should esteem the teachers of gods holy word, how they should think and
judge of them. For the people sometime esteem most a policicke man, such a man
as by his great wit is able to conclude Peace and Leagues between Princes,
they regard him that is of stout courage and learned in the Laws, they set
most by him that is eloquent and able to persuade; yea and they regard him not
that is not excellently learned, and seen in all Sciences: but here Saint
Paul shows them, that they should not esteem the Preachers of Gods Gospel
as men politic, as men of great wit, as men of stout courage, and learned in
the Law as men eloquent, and excellently well seen in sciences: but as the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the secrets of God. Thus should the
Ministers of Christ be esteemed, and thus ought the teachers of Gods word show
themselves, as Ministers of Christ, and dispensers of Gods secrets. And
therefore saint Paul in another place says; We come not to preach our selves,
2. Cor. 4.
all our preaching, all our teaching, all our Doctrine, is that you know Jesus
Christ; as for our selves, we are but your servants. So Christ himself; Qui
de se loquitur, gloriam propriam quaerit, Ioh. 7.
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory, says Christ. 1. Cor.
3.
So Paul likewise, Quid Petrus, quid Paulus, quid Apollo, nisi Ministri? What
is Peter, what is Paul, what is Apollo? think you them any other than the
servants and ministers of God? Paul has planted, Apollo watered, but God has
given the increase. The increase came not from Peter, not from Paul, not from
Apollo, but from God alone. Apollo, Paul, and Peter, are nothing else but the
ministers and servants of God; God is he that gives the increase, God alone is
he that gives the increase. When the great City of Jerusalem understood of
John the Baptist, and began to seek unto him, they asked him, What art thou?
He answered them, Ego vox clamantis in deserto, Parate viam Domini. John 1.
I am. said he, a man not worthy to be esteemed, I am but a messenger sent
unto you, I am nothing else but a voice to cry, Prepare you the way of the Lord.
So Moses and Aaron that had the conducting of the people of God, when the whole
Camp was in a tumult and uproar, and the people ran in rage against them, like
to have slain them, they stretched out their hands and said, Exodus 16.
Non contra nos, sed contra Dominum, nam nos qui sumus? This stir, this hurly
burly, this tumult, that you make is not, said they, against us, but against
God; for alas, what are we? we are but Gods servants, Gods messengers,
appointed to lead and guide you. Thus therefore ought every man esteem the
Preachers of Gods gospel, as messengers, as servants as Ministers of Christ,
thus ought every man think, and judge of them.

But what kind of servant is this Preacher, what manner of Minister is he?
Saint Paul says, He is the Steward and Dispenser of Gods secrets, he sets
forth, and shows abroad the mysteries of his holy Gospel. And these
mysteries that S. Paul here means, (to conclude in one word) are none other
than the Articles of our Faith: That Christ is the Son of God, conceived by
the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Marie; that he was crucified, dead,
buried, descended into Hell, rose again, and sits at the right hand of his
Father; that by his blood, our sins were washed away; that our bodies shall
at the last day arise, and we possess eternal life. These be the secrets,
these be the mysteries, that the Ministers of Christ, the servants and Stewards
of God, do utter and declare to Gods people: no wisdom of man is able to
compass this, no learning of this world able of it self to expound these
hidden secrets. For says Saint Paul, Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt
ex Deo. 1. Cor. 2.
The natural man perceives nothing of the spirit of God, he understands not
such things as are of God. It is foolishness unto him, and he can not perceive
it, for it must be spiritually discerned. Ioh. 1.
Christ himself also, Non ex hominibus, neque ex voluntate carnis, sed ex
voluntate Dei, they which are Gods children, and able to understand his
mysteries, are such which are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God. When Christ had asked of Peter what he
thought of him, and Peter had said, Math. 16.
Tues Christus, filius Dei viui, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God:
He answered, O happy art thou Simon the Son of Jonas, for flesh and blood
has not opened that unto thee, but my Father that is in Heaven. These
mysteries therefore are only opened by the spirit of God, by Gods only
working, not by any wisdom of man, not by any cunning and great learning of
this world. Now therefore, says Saint Paul, think thus of us, judge us to be
the Ministers and servants of God, and mark well whether we reueal unto you
Gods mysteries, and his holy Gospel; Consider with your selves, and see
whether we open unto you Gods hidden Secrets: By this shall you know, whether
we be the servants and dispensers of Gods mysteries.

But like as in S. Paul's time, there was dissension, strife, and great debate,
even amongst the Christians, and such as professed the name of God: So likewise
in our days, (good Brethren) even in the time that we our selves have seen,
there has been discord and parts-taking among us. Some have said, I will
believe the old learning: some again have said, I will believe the new: some
have said I will credit this man: some I will believe that man. And thus the
father has fallen out with the son, the Mother with the daughter, the
brother with his brother, and one neighbor with another; each man defending that
part, which he himself best liked. But alas, (good Brethren) this is no new
thing, this has been from the beginning, and even in Christ's time. For at
what time Christ himself walked here on this earth, and began to preach the
glory of his father, some said he was a good man, Ioh. 7. Luke 7.
some other said no, some said he was a Prophet, some other said he was none,
but one that deceived the people, some rejoiced that it pleased God to send
such a Preacher as Christ was, some again despised his doctrine, and said,
Ioh. 7.
he had a devil. These words the people then spoke of Christ, these words, I
say, they spoke of Christ himself. He was called a Samaritane, Luke 7.
a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners, a seducer of the people.
Therefore, it is the less marvel if such words be now at these days spoken,
as were spoken in the beginning of the Church; if such words be spoken against
us, as were spoken against Christ himself. But S. Paul has here given us a
rule, whereby to know the true servants of Christ, and Stewards of Gods
secrets. Christ was the true Prophet, and why so? because he preached his
fathers will. Ioh. 15.
What ever I have heard of my Father, says Christ, the same have I declared
unto you. Saint Paul was the true servant of Christ, and steward of his
secrets, and why so? because he labored in Gods vineyard, he preached, he
taught, more than all the rest of the Apostles of Christ did, Laboraui plus
quam, caeteri omnes. 1. Cor. 15.
I have labored more than all the rest of the Apostles have done. Therefore was
he the true and faithful minister of Gods mysteries, because he thus diligently
always taught Gods Gospel, and the glory of his name: for this cause I say,
and none other, was he the Steward and dispenser of Gods secrets. So were the
Patriarchs, and the Prophets, the true servants of God, because they declared
the will of God. And here have we to consider, that Christ which was the true
Prophet, the Apostles which were the ture Ministers and Stewards of Christ, the
Patriarchs and Prophets, which were the true and faithful servants of God,
were all grievously afflicted, persecuted from place unto place, and lastly put
to most cruel death. This I say, happened to Christ himself, and all his
Apostles, S. John the Evangelist only excepted. And yet was Christ Gods own
son, the Apostles were the true Ministers and Stewards of Gods secrets. And
therefore if we shall in our time see the Preachers of Gods word afflicted, the
Teachers of the Gospel of Christ persecuted, the Stewards of Gods secrets
miserably tormented, yet let not us (good Brethren) let not us give over and
shrink from Gods gospel, let us consider that this is no new thing, no strange
hap, but such as happened to the Patriarchs, to the Prophets, to the Apostles,
yea, and to Christ himself.

Now then, let us take this rule of S. Paul's, and thereby let us try whether
the Preachers in times past, the Popes, the Cardinals, the Bishops, were the
true servants of God, Stewards and dispensers of his holy secrets. There are
at this day some that be called Bishops, some that be called Cardinals, and
they say that they carry up the Church of Christ, and are the props and pillars
of the same: and therefore in token thereof they have always pillars borne
before them. At this day the Bishop of Rome calls himself a general Bishop,
an universal Bishop, not over this part, or that part, but over all
Christendom; yea, and he says, he is the head of Christ's Church: he says
that he has power over Kings, over Princes, he has power over purgatory,
over Souls departed, over Devils, over Angels: he can parden not only sins
already done, but such also as shall be at any time hereafter committed: and
that he can not mistake the Scriptures of God, that he can not err, and be
deceived: what ever he does, all is well done: no man can judge him and sit
upon his doings. I speak not this of malice, I speak it not for any grudge or
hatred I owe to his person, God is my witness, I neither know him that now is,
nor any of them that have heretofore time been Bishops of Rome. But all these
their doings are written, all these words which I have here spoken, are written
I say, even in their own Laws and Decrees; the places may be alleged and
brought forth. Alas, these are glorious titles, to be called universal Bishop,
and head of Christ's Church, to have dominion over Kings and Princes, to have
power over Purgatory, over Souls departed, over Devils, over Angels, to have
authority to pardon sins past, and sins hereafter to be committed, not to
err, not to be deceived: all these are glorious and triumphant titles, as you
well see. But let us now take Paul's rule, the rule I say that S. Paul has here
given us, and let us by the same try, whether the Bishops, the Cardinals, the
Popes, have heretofore time, or at this time, do dispense unto us the mysteries
of the Gospel, as Stewards of the secrets of God: whether they do preach and
teach the Gospel of Christ, as the servants and Ministers of Christ. Alas, we
see they do nothing less, they do, we see, nothing less than set forth the
Gospel of God, and the glory of his holy name. Now then can they call
themselves Pastores, when they feed not Gods sheep? how can they call
themselves watchmen, when they have no regard to Gods flock? how can they call
themselves pillars of the Church, yea, and the head of the Church, when they
show themselves rather destroyers of the Church of Christ, and not members of
the same? Alas, if they be not Gods servants, whose servants are they? if they
be not Dispensers and Stewards of Gods secrets, of whose secrets are they
Stewards? if they be not so much as members, how are they then the Pillars and
head of Christ's Church?

Saint Paul goes further and says, It is not sufficient to be called
Servants, to be called Ministers, to be called stewards of Gods secrets, but it
is further required at the Stewards hand, that he be found faithful. In this
world the Master commits the order of his house to the governance of his
Steward; the disposing of his whole living, and order of all other things, he
commits only to his Stewards wisdom: and he looks that he be found
faithful in all his doings. And if this be in worldly things, if the Master
here in this world will look for, and require faithful dealings at his Stewards
hands, in such things as are but transitory, and of little value: how much
more then will God require faithfulness in his Stewards, as touching things
Eternal, things Heavenly, and the disposing of his secrets. But from the
beginning, even from the first beginning of the world, there have been always
untrusty and wicked Stewards. For, at what time God framed man, and placed him
in Paradise in great joy and pleasure, the Devil envying this his felicity,
became a wicked Steward, and said unto Adam, Tush, ye shall not dye, eat of
this fruit, Genesis 3.
ye shall not dye, God does but mock with you: for he does know that in what
ever hour ye eat of it, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as God,
knowing both good and evil. And thus he became a most wicked Steward. Jeremy
also the prophet says, that in his time there were wicked and untrusty
Stewards: Currunt says he, at ego non misi, loquuntur, at ego non sum loquutus
illis, Ier. 23.
They run, says God, but I sent them not, they have spoken, but I spoke not
unto them. So Christ himself said, that in the later days there should come
false Stewards, false Prophets, false Preachers, and say, Math. 24*
Hic est Christus, illic est Christus, Lo, here is Christ, there is Christ; and
should do great wonders and tokens, in so much that, if it were possible, the
very chosen should be brought into error also. Antechrist in likewise shall
come says Paul, The man of sin, the son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
he shall exalt himself above all that is called God, he shall sit in the
holy place, in the Temple of God, in the conscience of Men: and when he
comes he shall not say, I am Antechrist, I am a false Prophet, I am a wicked
Steward; but he shall rather say, I am a true Prophet, I am a faithful Steward.
I am Christ the Son of God, yea I am God himself. Now therefore how will you
know the true servant, from the false Minister, how will you try the faithful
Steward from the unfaithful? Mary, says S. Paul, if he does his Masters will
and commandment, if he does all those things faithfully that his Master
requires at his hands, if he this does, then is he a faithful Minister and a
trusty Steward. By this shall you know him, by this token, and none other
shall you soon discern, whether he be a faithful Steward, this is the point
of a trusty servant. And therefore God unto Ezechiel his prophet, and so by him
to all such as shall become his Stewards and Preachers of his Gospel, says,
Ezech. 3.
I have appointed thee a Watchman over my house of Israel, to cry unto my
people, therefore take good heed to the words of my mouth, and give them
warning at my commandment: thou shall hear it at my mouth, says God, and
then shall thou pronounce it unto my people. So Paul was bold to say, 1. Cor.
11.
Quodaccepi a Domino, tradidi vobis, That which I delivered unto you, received
I of the Lord: what thing soever I received of the Lord, that have I delivered
and sthewed unto you, without adding any thing thereto, or diminising any thing
therefro. Even so, Christ himself said, Ioh. 7.
Sermo quem audistis non est meus, sed patris mei qui misit me: The doctrine
which you hear is not mine, but his that has sent me: These words that you
have heard, are not mine, but my fathers that sent me: I do but my Fathers
message, says Christ, all that I teach, all that I preach unto you, is nothing
else but the will of my Father. Ioh. 7.
By this therefore (my Brethren) shall you soon try whether they are true
servants of God: for if they shall only disclose unto you the will of God, if
they shall preach unto you the secrets of Gods Gospel, and the glory of his
holy name, then are they true servants, then are they Christ's ministers, and
faithful dispensers of Gods secrets. But if they teach you not the sincerity of
Gods Gospel, if they preach not unto you the mysteries of Gods word, if they
disclose not unto you the will of God, if they do not this; then are they not
Gods servants, then are they not Christ's Ministers, nor Stewards of Gods
secrets. And therefore says S. John in his Epistle, ^. Ioh. 1.
If any man come unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into
your house, neither salute him: if any man, says he, come unto you, and teach
you any other Gospel, than this that I have preached, let him not enter into
your house, do not so much as bid him, God speed. So Esaias the prophet, Esa. 8.
If they speak not according to this word, they shall have no morning light.

Now as touching the variance and diversity of opinions nowadaies, as touching
the dissension and controversy that is at this time among us I would to God
that all such as defend and maintain the Popes authority and power, would be
content to be judged by this rule, to be tried by this only rule that S. Paul
here gives. These are the most and the greatest controversies, whereupon has
risen all the contention and variance that we have seen; whether we should have
a Communion, or a private Mass: whether the Communion should be ministered under
both kinds, or not: whether we ought to have our Prayers in our vulgar tongue:
whether we should have and set up in our Churches any graven Images: and whether
we may lawfully have the Scriptures in our common tongue, that every man may
read and understand them. These are, I say, the controversies, whereon hangs
all our debate. But now let us see and consider, whether such as taught you to
have a private Mass: such as would have the Communion ministered under one kind
alone: such as taught you to worship Images: such as would you to pray in an
unknown tongue: such as would not suffer you to have the knowledge of Gods
word and his gospel: let us I say, according unto S. Paul's rule, see whether
they were the true Ministers of Christ, and faithful stewards of the secrets of
God; let us weigh whether they disclosed unto you the mysteries of Gods word,
and whether their doctrine agreed with the gospel of Christ.

Christ at his last Supper ordained a Communion, Luke 22.
for the comfort of all our Souls; but they turned this into a private Mass,
that one man should receive alone. This was contrary to Christ, contrary to
that he ordained. And how then should we esteem them, as the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the secrets of God? Christ ministered this Communion to
his Disciples in both the kinds; yet they notwithstanding ministered it under
one kind alone, they robbed the people, and took the cup from them. And this
was contrary to Christ, and his institution. And how then should we esteem
them as the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the secrets of God? God gave
us in commandment to make no graven Image: they taught that we should make
ourselves graven Images, that we should kneel, that we should bow, that we
should creep unto them, and that we should offer and stick up candles before
them.

This they taught to be necessary doctrine, and that our salvation depended
thereupon. This have they done, you all right well know, and this contrary to
the express commandment of God. And how then should we esteem them as the
ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the secrets of God? S. Paul wills our
prayers in the congregation to be such, 1. Cor. 14.
to be red and song in so plain a tongue, in so distinct and known a language,
that the common people may understand them, and so altogether may answer the
minister, and say Amen. And this was used in the Patriarchs, in the Prophets,
in the Apostles, in the old Doctors times, in the Primitive Church: and yet
there have been men, and now are, that would have the prayers in Latin, in a
tongue to us strange and unknown, and in a tongue that few or none understand.
And how then can they say they are the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of
Gods secrets? God, in the old Law, gave in charge to his people, Number. 15. Deuteronomy.
11.
that they should have his Law always before their eyes, that they should have
his commandments written in their hands, on their sleeves, on their door
thresholds, in the skirts of their garments. This God himself commanded. And
Christ in the new Law, Scrutamini Scripturas, says he, illae enim testimonium
perhibent de me, Ioh. 5.
Search ye the Scripturs, for they do bear witness of me. And yet this
notwithstanding, notwithstanding Christ commanded us to searth the Scripturs,
yet you your selves have known men, and such as were Preachers, forbid you to
have Gods Gospel in your hands, would not suffer you to have the holy
Testament of Christ in your houses, no nor in the Churches for all men to read.
This was contrary to Gods commandment, and the mind of our savior Jesus
Christ. And how then can they say they are the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of Gods secrets? Christ said unto Peter, Amas me? pasce oues meos,
Ioh. 21*
pasce agnos meos, pasce gregem meum: Peter (said Christ) love thou me? feed
my sheep, feed my lambs, feed my flock: But our great clearkes, our Popes,
our Cardinals, our Bishops, would seldom or never make a Sermon; they fed not
Gods sheep, they fed not Gods lambs, they had no regard to Gods flock: and
how then could they say, they were the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of
Gods secrets? I leave out much of purpose, good brethren, I wittingly ouerpasse
here many things else, that I could say herein; the time would fail me, if I
should rehearse unto you al those things wherein they have most shamfully abused
themselves. But judge you, my brethren, by these things only which I have here
showed unto you, whether they should be esteemed as the Ministers of Christ and
Stewards of the secrets of God? Christ willed them not only to be Stewards but
faithful Stewards, faithful ministers, faithful dispensers of his secrets.
If to do nothing be the faithfulness that God requires in them, if this be
the charge that Christ demands of them, then may we well call them the
servants of God and ministers of Christ: otherwise how can we say, that they
are the Stewards of Gods secrets, and faithful dispensers of his hidden
mysteries?

Saint Paul goes forth and says; It is but a small thing that I should be
judged of you. Saint Paul notwithstanding he was an elect vessel of God, to
bear abroad the glory of his name, notwithstanding he was the greatest of
the Apostles, and a faithful dispenser of Gods secrets; yet some men said that
he was unlearned, some said he was no Minister of Christ's, some said that
there were many other Preachers better than he. And this was spoken of him
even by the Christians, and such as professed Gods name. And thus a great
number of the people judged that S. Paul was not the servant of God, was not
the Minister of Christ, was not a Steward of Gods secrets. But S. Paul
appealed from them, he appealed from their judgments, and said; It is but a
small matter for me to be judged of you, or of man's day etc. Here may we see
what a bold courage, what a stout stomach was in S. Paul, when he durst thus
openly, and as it were, to their faces, appeal from the peoples judgment, and
so bring them before the dreadful majesty of the eternal God. This was a
great courage of his, this was a sign that he little or nothing feared the
force of the people. But this he did, because he well knew that what ever befell
him in this world, what ever punishment he suffered in this life, he could not
miscarie before God, he could not do other than well in the life to come. And
therefore likewise in another place he bouldly said unto the people, I am pure
from the blood of all men, I have kept back nothing that was profitable, I have
hid nothing from you, but have showed you all the counsel of God. And so,
where, at this day some men there are which say that this Doctrine which is now
preached unto you, shall again have a change, that this Religion shall be
taken away and once again altered, that it can not long stand and continue: to
such we boldly answer here as S. Paul to the Corinthians did, that it is but
a small matter for us to be judged of you, that we much force not what you judge
and deem of us. For we have kept nothing back from you, we have disclosed
unto you all the counsel of God. But if such change does happen, if any
alteration of our Religion does chance, as possible enough it is so to come to
pass, yet is it not (good brethren) a thing to be rejoiced at, it is not a
thing whereat we should triumph and be glad.

For oftentimes when God sees his benefits misused, when he perceives his
Gospel little regarded, when he espieth his holy word neglected and nothing
set by: then he pulls from us again his benefits erst bestowed, then he
takes away his word from out of the congregation, then he will not suffer the
light of his holy Gospel, any longer to shine upon them. And this when he
does, he does it only for our sinfulness, only for our own sins and
wretchedness. For so in times past he said by Ose his Prophet; For the
wickedness of my people I will get me away, they shall not see me. So Christ
himself also said; Mat. 21.
Auferetur a vobis regnum Dei, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to the heathen which shall bring forth the fruits of it. But alas, when
Gods kingdom is taken away, in whose kingdom and dominion do the people then
live? when Gods gospel and his word is no longer preached, what learning, what
doctrine, what discipline is there left to be taught? And this oftentimes
comes to pass by means of our own sin and wickedness: that for ye misusing
of God and his gospel, we neither have Gods Kingdom, nor his Gospel among us.
But then alas, in what great misery, in what wretchedness, in what woeful
case shall we stand? For if Gods Kingdom be shut from us, whither shall we fly?
If the light of his gospel be taken from us, what light shall be left us? If
God will get him away from us, who shall be our succor? And therefore no man
ought to rejoice hereat, no man ought to be glad of such a change. But though
Gods kingdom be taken away from us, though Gods Gospel be no more preached
unto us, though God fly from us, and will hide himself away, yet is God and
his gospel nothing thereby altered; God is still one, and the same God, his
gospel is the same gospel that it was before, his Kingdom continues in one
stay and estate, it is not changed nor altered. For says Christ, Caelum and
terra transibunt, Mat. 5.
verbum autem meum non transibit: Heaven and earth shall perish, but may word
shall not perish. And again, Portae inferoru^ no^ praeualebu^t aduersu^ Mat. 16.
illud: The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And therefore S. Paul
having on his side this word of God, which never changes, but always
continues one and the same: having, I say, this word of his which shall never
perish, and against which the very gates of hell shall not prevail, he was
bold to appeal from the slanderous judgment of the people, and say, I pass
not what you think of me, It is but a small matter for me to be judged of
you, or of man's day, etc.

Good people, you have here heard declared unto you, and thereby you may well
perceive, that S. Paul notwithstanding he was the servant of God, an elect
vessel of the holy Ghost, and the chiefest Apostle of Christ; yet was evil
spoken of and misliked even of the Chrians, and such as professed the name of
God: notwithstanding he was indeed the true servant of God, the minister of
Christ, and a faithful dispenser of the secrets of God, yet could not all men
speak well of him, al men could not give him a good report. And therefore to
cause them to conceive a better opinion of him, and report of him none other
than he deserved, he here wills them, that they should first weigh well and
consider his doings, they should examine his doctrine, and the gospel that he
had preached amongst them: they should mark well and see whether he had been a
faithful dispenser of the mysteries of Gods gospel, and then so esteem him,
as the minister of Christ, and Steward of the secrets of God. And therefore
judge you nothing (says he) before the time that the Lord come, which shall
bring that to light which is hid in darkness, and open the counsels of the
hearts, and then shall every one have praise of God. And so in these days, as
Paul in his time was misliked of many, so I say, in these our days the
ministers of God, and preachers of his gospel, are evil spoken of amongst all
men: some say they are unlearned, they know nothing, they are crafts men, they
were never set to school, this they have said, and do yet report of them. Some
men say, they preach they cannot tell what, they speak against prayer, against
fasting, against alms deeds, and all other good works; they allow nothing that
good is, they disallow in manner all things. This you know has been spoken,
and yet is reported of such as now are ministers in Gods gospel. But hereunto
have I none other thing to say, than that which S. Paul in this place writes
to the Corinthians, It is sufficient for us to be found the servants of God,
the ministers of Christ, and faithful dispensers of Gods secrets. In the mean
season do not you (good brethren) think evil of the preachers of Gods word,
report not amiss of the ministers of Christ, account not them your enemies,
that bring unto you the glad tidings of the gospel. Acts 17*
When Paul came to Berea from Thessalonica, and began there to preach the
Gospel of Christ, the people ran to their books, searched the Scriptures,
conferred his doctrine with the word of God: and when they found that in all
points it agreed therewith, then they believed Paul, then they embraced his
doctrine, then with willing hearts they claue to his discipline. And as they
did, even so let us do, good brethren; let us not judge rashly of Gods
ministers, let us not over hastily give sentence of them, let us not report
evil of Gods servants: but let us well weigh and consider what thing they
teach us, let us examine and try their doctrine with the touchstone of Gods
word: let us confer their preaching, their teaching, their discipline, with
the Scriptures of the holy Ghost. And this when you have done, then be you our
judges; then if you see that we teach you nothing but the mysteries of God, if
you perceive that we only disclose unto you the will of God, if you see that
we preach unto you none other thing than the secrets of Gods gospel, esteem
us to be the servants of God, the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
secrets of God.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND Sermon.
Psalm 67. 3. 4. 3. Let the people praise thee O God, let all the people
praise thee.

4. O let the people rejoice and be glad that thou iudgest the folk
righteously, and gouernest the Nations upon the earth, etc.


AT what time the Jews had grievously offended God their Lord, forgotten their
obedience toward him, and betaken themselves to strange gods, every man
wandering after his own lust and fancy; and thereupon God began to plague and
punish them with sundry and diverse plagues, and with unseasonable weather, so
that their grass, their corn, their fruits, and what ever other commodities
sprang out of the earth, were al in great danger: then David the Prophet,
seeing all these miseries at once fall upon the people, called them home
again, showed them how they should return from their wickedness, and come unto
God. For God desires not our destruction, he is loath to work reuengement upon
us when we anger and displease him. Eze. 18.
In what ever hour the sinner shall return from his sin, and come unto me,
says the Lord, I shall be ready to receive him. As for all his sins that he
did before, they shall not be thought upon: but in his righteousness that he
has done he shall live. In what ever time a man shall hold up his hands,
acknowledge gods mercy, and be sorry for his offenses from the bottom of his
heart, God asks no more, he craves no more at his hands, he is pleased only
with his humble repentance. And therefore David in the beginning of this Psalm
showed the people how they should in this wise come unto God, and desire mercy
at his hands, saying: God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the
light of his countenance, and be merciful unto us.

And now therefore, when David perceived that this grace of god, this mercy,
this blessing of his was not given in vain, was not frustrat and void, he
caused all the people to say, Let the people praise thee O God, let all the
people praise thee. This is a short sentence, but such a sentence it is, as
shall endure and continue for ever. This is our profession, this is our
baptism, this is our religion. It is not sufficient to know the gospel, to
know God, to know Christ, but we must confess the gospel, we must confess
God, we must confess and acknowledge Christ. The gospel that Christ left us,
is not a song to delight our ears, it is not an harmony to content and please
our hearing, but it is a squire to direct our lives by, it is a rule to frame
all our doings by. S. Paul says, Titus 2.
To this end has the grace of God, that brings salvation, appeared unto us,
that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: and that we should live
discreetly, righteously, and godly, in this world. Therefore has God given us
h^^ gospel, therefore has he given us his word, that we should according
thereunto live a sober, a discreet, and modest life, says he. And in another
place: That we by the same gospel may serve and please him in newness of
life. And so Zachary that holy Father, being filled with the holy ghost, Luke
1.
said: that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve
him all the days of our life, in such holiness and righteousness, as is
accepted before him. For like as our profession is, so should our lives be. If
we profess the name of Christ, we should live like christians: if we profess
God, we should live as becomes the servants of God. 1. Ioh. 3.
Saint John says, For this purpose appeared the Son of God, to loose the
works of the devil: to this end, that all sin and wickedness should be
left and forsaken. By this are the children of God known from the children of
the devil. S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans says, before God they are not
righteous which hear the law, but they that do the law shall be justified. God
reckons no man just for hearing of the law, he accounts no man righteous
for knowing of his gospel, but for the keeping of his law, for the observing
of his gospel; though no man indeed be able thoroughly to fulfill and keep the
same. Iam. 1.
S. James also says, See that ye be doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceiving your own selves. For if any hear the word and do it not, he
is like unto a man that beholds his bodily face in a glass: for as soon as
he looks on himself, he goes away and forgets immediately what his
fashion was. But who so looks in the perfect law of liberty, and continues
therein, (if he be not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work) the same
shall be happy in his deed. If ye therefore hear the word of God preached unto
you, if you know the gospel of Christ never so well, if ye daily and howerly
read and study the same: yet if you live not according to the word of God, if
you walk not after the gospel of Christ, you do nothing else but deceive your
selves, you do I say, naught else but deceive your own selves. S. John the
Baptist when he preached and prepared the way of the Lord, he began with this
lesson, Math. 3.
Penitentiam agite: do you (said he) the works of repentance. For hereunto
are we all called, not only to know Gods way, but also to walk in Gods way:
not only to know God and his name, but also to confess God and praise his holy
name. Therefore do we receive Christ's holy Sacraments, therefore are we
baptized, therefore eat we the Sacrament of Christ's body, and drink his most
holy blood. But O merciful God, how many are there that say they know Gods
way, and yet walk not in that way! how many that say they know their faith and
promise made in baptism, and yet forsake the same! how many that receive the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, and yet continue in their old sin and
wickedness! But God says, God I say, that cannot lie, 1. Ioh. 2.
says, Qui manet in peccato non nouit me, he that continues in sin knows
not me. Ezechiel declaring the folly of the people in his time, Ezech. 33.
says: O these come unto thee after the manner of a great people: yea my
people sit down before thee, and hear thy words, but they do not thereafter:
For in their mouths they show themselves as though they were fervent, but their
heart goes after their own covetous lucre. They have my word in their
mouths, they speak ever of my name, says God, but their hearts are far
from me. And so likewise Jude the Apostle of Christ, Jude 1.
Veritatem Dei verterunt in luxum, says he, They have turned the truth of
Gods word into riot: they are ungodly, and turn the grace of our God into
wantonness, and deny God. Paul complaining of the misliuing of of the people
in his time, Romans 1.
said, Whereas they know God, they glorify not God: Where they know his name,
they glorify not his name. Whosoever he be that takes upon him to know Gods
way, and walks not in Gods way, whosoever takes upon him to know God and his
gospel, and directs not his doings according unto Gods will and his holy
commandments, he does not confess God, and glorify his holy name. Saint
Paul found fault with the Jews, Romans 2.
and said, For your sake is the name of God evil spoken of among the Gentiles:
for your sake, for your evil and corrupt living, said S. Paul Good brethren,
let us consider that as many of us as say, we know gods way, we know gods word
and his gospel; if virtue follow not, if honest conversation and upright living
follow not this our profession, we shame God, and dishonor his holy name.
Dicunt se nosce Deum, says S. Titus 1.
Paul, sed factis negant: they say they know God, says he, they say they know
his holy word and gospel, but in their deeds they deny God, they deny his
gospel. An horrible thing it is to deny God. The Turks, the Jews, the Heathen,
and Infidels, do not deny God: and yet S. Paul said that in his time Christian
men, such as professed the name of god, in their deeds denied god and his
gospel. If thou say thou know God, if thou say thou know his gospel: if
thou live not as God commands thee, if thou live not as it becomes a
professor of Gods gospel, thou blasphemest Gods name, and dishonorest his
gospel. Ore suo appropinquant ad me, Esaias 29.
says God by his prophet Esaias, corda autem illoru^ long absunt a me: this
people draws nigh unto me with their mouths, but their hearts are far
from me. They honor me with their mouths but with their hearts they deny me.
And in another place God by his Prophet David says: O thou man, Psalm. 50.
why do thou preach my laws, and take my covenant in thy mouth? for with
the sinful thou art sinful, with the thief thou art a thief, with the
adulterer thou art an adulterer.

Therefore, if we have the word of God as a song to delight our ears, if we
turn the truth of Gods gospel into riot and wantonness, if we confess God
with our lips, and deny him in our deeds, if we say we know Gods law, we know
his commandments, and yet live not thereafter; we do not praise God and
confess his name, but we shame God, and dishonor his holy name: we cause the
people to think evil of Gods word, and slander his gospel. And this is the
cause why the common sort of people judge, that not to be the gospel, which is
this day preached and taught unto them; because such as profess the gospel,
live not after the gospel, because such as say they know Gods way, walk not
in Gods way. And thus through our own folly, through our own evil and corrupt
living, we offend our brethren, we offend our selves, and so in them offend
Jesus Christ: and their blood shall be required at our hands. Let us remember
what God by the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias 39.
Haec est vera via, ambulate in ea: This is the true way, walk in the same.
Chrysostom says, if ye hear Gods word preached unto you, and ye follow it
not, ye learn, says he, but your own damnation, ye learn naught else but
your own destruction: The words that you hear preached unto you, shall accuse
and condemn you. God says, Thou shall not steal, Exodus 20.
thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall bear no false witness, etc.
these words, this law of God written unto us, shall accuse, yea, and condemn
us, I say; if we to our powers follow not the same, if we walk not and
continue in them accordingly. Alas, the very age of the world, the profession
that we have taken upon us, is, or should be enough to put us in remembrance
of another life, of another world to come. Let us not take the name of God in
vain, let us all praise and extol God, let our mouths, our hands, our
hearts, and all other our members praise and confess his name for ever.
Laetentur and exultent populs, etc. O let the people rejoice and be glad, that
thou iudgest the folk righteously, and gouernest the nations upon the earth.
Thy way, O Lord, is known, said David, thy way is known upon the earth,
therefore let all people, all nations, yea, all the whole world rejoice and be
glad thereat.

Diverse people set their minds on diverse things: some in conquest, some in
great power and force of men, some in heaps of money, and treasures of this
world, some others, that they are able to make other men fear, and they fear
nothing themselves. But all these things are vain, both conquest, power, and
heaps of great treasure, are transitory, and fade away: but the man of God,
that dreadeth God, and has a delight in his Law, sets his joy and delight
in those things which have no end, but continue for ever. And therefore David
here says, Let all the people rejoice and be glad, in this thing alone,
because thou iudgest the folk righteously, and gouernest the nations upon the
earth.

Let us consider if there were a whole Christian nation brought in captivity
under the Turk, in thraldom and subjection unto him, in such sort that they
should never hear the Scriptures, never receive the Sacraments, never come to
the church to pray, but always be where God should be despised, and his name
dishonored: consider I say with your selves, in what misery, in what
wretchedness, in what great thraldom should they be. With what conscience
should they be able to abide this? But if it would then please God to deliver
them standing in this state, if it would please God to restore unto them his
Scriptrues, if it would please God that they might receive again his holy
Sacraments, and might come and pray together: if God would thus much do for
them, O what joy, what triumph, what mirth would they make! Let us therefore
here consider the estate of Gods Church before the time of the Prophet David,
and as it was in his time. Before the Reign of David, the Tabernacle of God
was broken, 1. Reg. 5.
the Arc lost, the Scriptures taken from them, the Priests slain: God made
them no answer by Prophet, Angel, nor by dream: every man ran whither
himself best liked, without any fear of God, or dread of his Law: so had Saul
that wicked King, miserably tossed and turmoyled the same. But it pleased God,
by the hands of King David his Prophet, to restore again his Church so
overthrown, to her former estate and condition: it pleased God by him to make
up the Tabernacle again, 2. Reg. 6.
to find out the Arc that before was lost, to set up all other things in good
stay and order: and this was as much, as if he had called them from death unto
life, from bondage to freedom, from Hell to Heaven. Therefore when all these
things were thus restored again by the might and power of God, this prophet
David comforted his heart, Psalm. 118.
and said; Haec est dies qua^ fecit Dominus, laetemur and exultemus in ea: This
is a joyful day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad therein.
And so likewise in another place; Psalm. 99.
Dominus regnauit, moueatur terra: The Lord bears the rule, the Lord is king,
be the people never so impatient: Let the whole world conspire (says he) let
it be moved and do what it can against God, for God rules and reigns over
al. Zachary, when he saw the comfortable time that should ensue the birth of
Christ, he fell down and cried out, saying: Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel,
Luke 1.
quia visit auit and fecit redemptione^ plebis suae: Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people. So Simeon that old and
holy father, so soon as he beheld Christ, and had received his redeemer into
his arms, by and by his heart brake out for joy, and said; Nunc dimittis
seruu^ tuu^ Domine, Luke 2.
secundu^ verbu^ tuu^ in pace etc. Now let thou thy servant, O Lord, depart
in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have beholden thy salvation,
mine eyes have seen thy Savior, whom thou have prepared for all people. Even
so in this place the prophet David considering the great mercy that God had
showed, ye wondrous work that he had then wrought, and how that in his time all the whole people knew Gods way, he said; Laetentur and exultent populi etc: Let
the people rejoice and be glad, yea let all the people rejoice, because thou
iudgest the folk righteously, and gouernest the nations upon the earth.

Now (good brethren) forasmuch as we have here seen and considered the state
of Gods Church before David's time, and the state whereunto it was restored again
in David's time: Even so let us in like consider the state of Christ's Church
before our time, and the state and condition of ye same in our own time, in
those days that we our selves have seen. Let us consider how horrible
darkness, what error and confusion has of late time bin in the Church of god,
let us weigh and consider (I say) ye deformity and great abuses ye were in ye
same. For alas, we had the sacraments, we had ye holy gospel and word of god,
but we had them al in vain. Baptism we had, but we knew not the Principles of
our faith. The Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ we had, but we
understood not why Christ left us this Sacrament, we knew not why he said;
Take, eat, this is my body etc. It is the greatest Sacrament, and yet we
perceived not what it meant. We had Prayers, we had Psalms, we had
supplications unto God, and yet we understood them not, we understood no word
of them. We worshipped things made with men's hands, Images of blocks and
stones, such as had eyes and saw not, ears and heard not, neither had any
breath in their mouths: such things we worshipped, and this contrary to the
express commandment of God. The Scriptures were rent, were torn, were trodden
under foot, were burnt before our eyes. We groped our way in the midst of
the day, as said the Prophet Jeremy. And as the same Prophet of his own time
spoke, saying; Secundum numerum Ciuitatum tuarum sunt Dij tui: Ier. 11.
According to the number of the cities, are thy Gods, O Judah: so might we of
our own time have said. For look how many cities we had, so many Gods had we
also. Every Borough, every Town, yea, every village (in a manner) had his
proper and peculier Saint. It was then come to pass that Esaie prophesied,
Esa. 5.
saying; Hell has opened her mouth marvelous wide, Hell has gaped (says
he) because they have no knowledge of God, because they have no understanding.
And so likewise Solomon: Pro. 29.
When Prophecy fails, the people must needs be scattered. This is the word
of God, and this is the misery that we our selves have seen. The old father
Tobie, when God had stricken him with blindness, and so taken his sight from
him, and therefore his friends and acquaintance, resorted unto him to comfort
him, and somewhat, if they might, ease him of his great grief: Tob. 5.
Alas (said he) what comfort can I receive that cannot see the light of the
Sun. Thus said he only because he could not behold the light of this world.
Alas, what comfort then, what joy, what consolation could we have, when God
took from us the knowledge of his gospel, the light of his word, yea the
knowledge of God himself; when every man ran whither himself best liked, and
followed that way which pleased his own fancy. Therefore were we carried
away, therefore were we led into error, therefore lost we the knowledge of God,
because prophecy failed, because Gods word was not taught and preached unto
us. But now it has pleased God to reveal himself unto us, now we know what
is what, now can we discern light from darkness, good from bad; now we
understand and know this, I say. Now we have the Scriptures in our mother
tongue, that every man may read and understand them: the same Scriptures that
Christ has sealed with his own blood. And these Scriptures Jeremy that old
father calls, The prop of our Faith. Ioh. 5.
So Christ himself; Illae sunt quae testimonium perhibent de me: They bear
witness of me, (says Christ) and they shall lead you into al truth. Hillary
says; The Scriptures are the squire and Rule of our life. Ioh. 5.
In the Scriptures (says Christ) you shall find everlasting life. And Paul
writing unto the Romans, says; Romans 1.
The Gospel of Christ is the power of God, to save all that believe thereon.
The Scriptures were written (says he) that we thereby should know our
salvation. All these things God has now restored unto us. Now are we able to
know our profession, now are we able to know our Religion, to know God, to know
Christ, to know our salvation. Now have we the use of the Primitive Church,
the Communion under both kinds: now have we our prayers in our known tongue,
as in the Apostles time, as in the old Fathers and Doctors times they were
used: Tertullian that old Doctor speaking of his time; We come together (says
he) and hear the Scripturs read unto us. We may now do, as S. Basil writes the
people in his time did: Sonus viroru^, mulieru^, and paruuloru^, in orationibus
claugore^ edit, ta^qua^ fluctus ferientes littora: The sound (says he) of men,
women, and children praying together, makes a noise like the waves of the Sea
beating on the shore. Thus says that old father, they did in his time, and
thus may you now do. Now may we say, as Athanasius said; If I be deceived, thou
have deceived me, O Lord. For thy word is plain, thy Gospel is true, and
therefore if we be now deceived, it is thy word, it is thy Gospel, that
deceives us: God has so plainly showed unto us the light of his Gospel, the
knowledge of his word. Therefore have we most just cause to say with the prophet
David: Laetentur and exultent populi, Let the people rejoice and be glad. And
therefore let us not be unkind, let us not be unthankful, let us say; thou O
Lord, iudgest the folk righteously, and gouernest the Nations upon the earth.
Thou have now restored unto us our prayers in our known tongue, thy sacraments
as they were used in the Apostls time, in ye Primitive Church; in the old
Fathers and Doctors times. And let us say with Zachary that holy father;
Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel, Blessed is the Lord God of Israel. Let us say
with David; Haec est dies, laetemur and exultemus in ea, this is the joyful
day, let us rejoice and be glad therein. Let us with Simeon the prophet say,
Nunc dimittis seruum tuu^ Domine, secundum verbum tuum in pace, Now let
thou thy servant, O Lord, depart in peace, according unto thy word. Let us say,
as the prophet here says, Laetentur and exultent populi, Let the people
rejoice and be glad, because thou rulest the Nations upon the earth. O let the
people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee. And God, even our
own God give us his blessing, that the earth may bring forth her increase.

Thou have, O Lord, sent unto us thy measure, thou have given us thy squire,
whereby to measure and rule our lives: thou have sent, I say, unto us thy
Gospel, thy holy word, the light of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ,
whereby we may guide our selves, and direct our ways upon the earth. And when
we shall thus live, when we shall once begin so to direct our doings, as Gods
Gospel teaches, and his holy word commands us; then shall the earth bring
forth her increase, then shall she yield us her fruit in due season. For like
as God. when we turn from him, following our own lusts and desires, plagueth
and punishes us: so when we repent and return unto him, he is good, he is
loving, he is merciful unto us. Turn unto me, Ier. 3.
says God, by his prophet Jeremy, and I will turn unto you. Eze. 33.
When soever a sinner repents him of his sins, I will forget his
iniquities, says the Lord. It is the Lord that gives us fruit, it is the Lord
that makes the ground fertile; it is not the ground of it self that brings
forth fruit, it is not the corn that feeds us, it is the blessing of God,
the blessing I say of God alone. And therefore says the prophet David, Psalm.
145.
If thou O Lord, wilt open thy hand, then all things shall be filled with thy
blessing. It is the Lord that makes the Sun to shine, Psalm. 44.
the Moon to give light, the rain to fall on the earth. I am the Lord that
does all this, says God. David also in his Psalm says, Psalm. 85.
Sciant quod manus tua fecit haec, Let them know, O Lord, says he, that thy
hand alone has done these wonders. It is God, I say, that causes the earth to
be fruitful, and bring forth increase, it is God that causes the heavens to
hear the earth, the earth to cry unto the Heavens. Your hearts shall be full
of my blessing, says the Lord. If we shall forsake our sins, if we will
leave our wickedness, and turn unto God, our hearts shall be full of his
blessing, and then shall the earth bring forth her increase: the earth this
dead thing, this insensible thing, this mass of clay, at Gods commandment,
at his will and pleasure, it shall bring forth corn, it shall bring forth
grass, and all other kind of fruits, to serve them, that never think upon him
that bestowed them. O that we were kind, that we were not unmindful, that
we would remember God: But alas, we are unkind, we are unmindful, we neither
think on God, nor his works: and therefore God closes up his hand, therefore
he gives not unto us his blessing, therefore is the earth barren and
unfruitful. And this our own sins causes, this our own wickedness, and
sinful living causes. Ose the prophet unto the people of Israel, (when they
had forsaken God their Lord, and therefore were grievously punished) cried out
and said, Osc. 13.
Malum tuum ex te o Israel, Thy evil is come of thy self O Israel. All this
scarsitie, all this dearth, all this plague, comes of thy self alone: Thou
art, says he, the cause, thou thy self art the cause hereof. And even as they
were the cause of their plague, so are we the only cause of all this our
punishment: and yet we see not, nor know Gods anger. I have stricken thee, says
God by his prophet, and yet thou feel not: and where shall I strike thee
once again? Esa. 1.
Filios educaui, says God by his prophet, I have bred up, I have nourished up
children, and they despise me, they set naught by me, they will not
acknowledge me their father. Good Brethren, let us turn unto God, let us
amend our sinful living, let us submit our selves wholly to his mercy: so
shall the earth bring forth her increase, so shall she yield us her fruit in due
time and season. Let us consider the dignity that God has given us: he made
us in Paradise, he fashioned us to his own likeness, he breathed life into
us; and lastly, where we by the fall of our first parent Adam, were all
adjudged to eternal death, he redeemed us again by the blood of his dear
Son, and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ. Behold these things, and be not
unthankful. Let us (good Brethren) behold our selves, let us behold our own
vocation, our own profession, let us behold Christ our Savior. We are the
children of God, the brethren of Christ, and heirs of the everlasting
kingdom; we are Christian men, we profess Gods Gospel: let us therefore
remember that we must walk as becomes the servants of Christ, we must live
like the professors of Gods holy Gospel. Let us remember how many ways God
calls us, how diversely he allureth us unto him, by what sundry means he
provoke us to come unto him. O thou proud soul, says God by his prophet,
thou earth and ashes, when will thou forsake thy sinful living and come unto
me? when will thou repent and turn unto me? Alas, do we look that the stones
in the streets, the very stones under our feet should rise up, and call us to
repentance? The heavens drop down tears for our sake, they weep and are
sorry for us; and wilt not thou O man burst out in tears, and bewail thy
sinful life? God looks when we will come, he wayteth when we will return
unto him, he daily and hourly watches when we will submit our selves, and
receive his mercy. So loving, so good, so gracious a Lord is he. Why should
you perish, says Christ, give me thy heart, O thou man, and I am contented.

Let us all therefore my Brethren, let us all return unto God, let us
altogether come forth and confess Gods holy name; let our hands, our mouths,
our hearts, praise and laud him for ever: let all the people rejoice and be
glad, that God judges the folk righteously, and governs the Nations upon
the earth. So shall the earth bring forth her increase, so shall she yield us
her fruit in due season: so shall we be blessed in our houses, blessed in the
fields, blessed in our commings in, and our goings out: so shall our corn, our
cattle, our sheep, and oxen, be always blessed: and so shall Gods blessing
be upon us, and our Children, and God, even our own God shall bless us, and
remain with us for ever. Amen.

THE THIRD Sermon.
Romans 6. verse. 19. 19. Like as ye have given over your members to the service
of uncleanness, from one wickedness to an other: even so now also give over
your members, to the service of righteousness, that ye may be holy etc.
FOr the better understanding of these words written by the Apostle S. Paul, we
must consider that there be two Princes of contrary dispositions and natures,
which have the rule and governance of this world, that is to wit, God, and the
Devil; and that never was there man, sithence the first foundation of the
world, but was in subjection and under obedience either of the the one, or of
the other: And as God is the father of light, the God of all good men, so is
the Devil the father and Prince of this world, the Lord of darkness, the king
of this age, Ephesians. 6.
as says S. Paul, and ruler of the wicked: And like as all good men fight
under the banner of God their Lord, so all ungodly fight under the standard of
the Devil their Prince: And even as the just man has his reward of God, so
has the wicked man his stipend of the Devil. And thus be Infidels, Turks,
Jews, and all Heathen people, under the power and dominion of the Devil,
under the standard of Satan: and therefore are they not able to think any
good, to conceive one good thought, because they fight under his Banner,
because they have given over all their members to be ordered of the Devil,
without any feeling of good, without any fear of God. And thus, as I said, do
the Turks, thus do the Infidels, thus do all Heathen people at this day, and
so did the Jews in the time of Paul, In vmbra mortis ambulauerunt, Psalm. 107.
Ephe. 4.
says he, They walked in the shadow of death. But after that it pleased God
the Father, by the coming of his dear Son Jesus Christ, to reveal himself
unto them, to open and declare his Gospel among them, then began the people to
renounce the Devil, to forsake his Law and service, and to betake themselves
wholly to the governance of God. And therefore S. Paul, the further to encourage
them thereunto, wills them in this Epistle of his, That like as before time
they gave over their members to the service of uncleanness, from one
wickedness to another, so should they now give over the same their members, to
the service of righteousness. For, to this end was Christ borne into this
world, to this end lived he here among us, to this end preached he, and taught
the people Gods holy word, that we by his example, and the doctrine of his
Gospel, should live an upright and holy life. And therefore Zachary that
holy prophet, being filled with the holy Ghost prophesied, and said, before
Christ's birth, that Christ should for this cause appear in this world, That we
being by him delivered from the fear of our enemies, Luke 1.
might serve him in pureness and holiness all the days of our life. And S.
Paul likewise says, Ye were darkness, but now ye are light, Ephe. 5.
walk therefore as becomes the children of light. Therefore are we delivered
from the power of darkness, says S. Paul, that we should walk in the light,
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. And so in
like, Vocauit nos Deus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
non ad immunditiem, sed ad sanctitatem, God has not called us to
uncleanness, but to holiness and sanctity of life. Thus has he called us,
that we not only in Body, but in Soul, should be pure and unspotted. And
therefore S. Paul unto the Romans, Know you not, says he, that all we which
are baptized into Jesus Christ, Romans 6.
are baptized into his death? Therefore are we buried with him by Baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, even so also should we
walk in a new life. And for this cause this same Paul likewise says, Exhibete
vos tanquam viua membra, Romans 12.
Show your selves as quick and lively members. And in an other place, Exhibete
corpora vestra sacrificium sanctum and acceptatum Deo. Romans 12.
Give over your bodies for a sacrifice holy and acceptable before God. And
also, 1. Cor. 3.
Nescities corpora vestra esse templa Dei? Know you not that ye are the temple
of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? These and such other many
lessons has S. Paul given us, to call us unto pureness and holiness of life.
Let us therefore, (good Brethren) live holy; consider that God has not called
you to uncleanness, but to purity of life; consider if ye be baptized with
Christ into death, you must also walk with him in a new life: let your bodies
be a sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God: show your selves lively members
of Christ, and the Temple of the holy Ghost. Vocauit nos Deus, 1. These. ^.
says S. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
Vt viueremus sobrie, God has called us, God has appointed us, to live in
soberness, to live in pureness, to live in holiness: and this not in one
part of our Bodies, not in one part of our Souls, but in our whole bodies, in
our whole souls. For Christ our Savior suffered not his body to be crucified
in one part, Math. 27.
Sed a planta pedis, vsque ad summum capitis, But even from the sole of the
foot, to the crown of his head, was he beaten, rent, and torn, and miserably
tormented in his whole Body. His Body was scourged with whips, his head
pricked with thorns, his hands and feet nailed to the Cross, his side pierced
with a sharp spear. For Christ speaking of himself, says, Psalm. 22.
Foderunt manus meas, and pedes meos, They have dug my hands, and my feet,
they have made holes thorough them. And thus sithence Christ suffered all his
whole Body to be tormented for us, sithence he suffered all his members to be
crucified for our sakes; let us apply our selves, and all our member to serve
and please him in holiness and upright living all the days of our lives. And
therefore says s. Paul here, Ye have now betaken your selves unto Christ;
therefore let your conversation be according, live as becomes the servants of
Christ: For even as before this time, ye gave over your members to
uncleanness, from one wickedness to an other, so now give over your members
to the service of righteousness.

And such (good Brethren) was the life of all Christian men, in the beginning
of Gods Church: such was, I say, their life and living. They subdued their
flesh, they mortified their members, and gave them over wholly unto Christ, and
so made them members unto righteousness. When Christ walked here on this
earth, and was conversant in our flesh, and this nature of ours; at what time
he entered into the house of Zacheus, which was a Ruler of the Publicans, and
desired to see Jesus, by and by Zacheus was turned into a new man, and by and
by he stood forth, and said unto the Lord: Behold Lord, Luke 19.
the half of my goods I give unto the poor, and if I have defrauded any man,
I restore him four fold. Thus was he only by the presence of Christ, turned
into a new man, thus he of an uncircumcised Publican was made the child of
Abraham, and of a sinful and wretched creature, he became forthwith a
Christian. And so in like, when Christ had but once called unto Matthew, Math. 9.
and bad him follow him, immediately he left the Toll-gathering, he left the
receipt of the custom, he left his own proper game and profit, and ran after
Christ. Of such force was the presence of Christ unto Zacheus, of such power
was the commandment of Christ, with Matthew the Toll-gatherer. Saint Augustine
a little before he returned unto Christ, and embraced his truth, he feared, he
trembled, and always stood in doubt: but so soon as Christ had once inspired
him with his holy spirit, and revealed his truth unto him, forthwith without
any further doubt or delay, he renounced his errors, and became a perfect
Christian. There was once a Christian man, whose name was Eusebius, and being
demanded what he was, answered, a Christian: being asked what country man,
said, a Christian: who was his father, a Christian: where he dwelt, a
Christian: and so to each other demand, he answered a Christian: as who would
say, what so ever I be, I am nothing else but a Christian. In the beginning of
Gods Church, all good men were called Christian men: and yet was it not one
thing to be a Christian, and a good man. The Christian men, for that they
considered they were called to salvation, to redemption by the death of Christ,
and to the inheritance of Heaven, they had their delight and only felicity in
heavenly things: they esteemed not the vain pleasures of this world: and
because they thus carried Christ in their Bodies, because they had their
members crucified unto Christ, therefore were they called Christians. And so
should we do, (good Brethren) so should we consider our redemption, so should
we mortify our members, and renouncing the vain delights of this world, we
should fix our eyes, our minds, and all our doings on Heavenly things alone.
Saint Cyprian says, The people come to learn the Gospel, to hear the word
of God; and wherefore? that they might work according unto the Gospel, that
they might bring forth fruits worthy the word of God: that they may thus do,
therefore they hear Gods word, says S. Cyprian. And thus if we do not, what
ever we brag of our Redemption, what ever we brag of our profession, what ever
we boast of the knowledge of Gods Gospel, it is to no end, it is not to effect
or purpose. And therefore if we have heretofore time given over our members
unto uncleanness, from one wickedness unto an other, now let us give over the
same our members unto the service of righteousness.

For, says S. Paul, What profit, what fruit had ye at that time in those
things, whereof you are now ashamed? for the end of such things is death. It is
the part of a wise man, and the office of a discreet man, in such good order to
dispose all his business, and to bring all his doings to so good end, that he
take no foil, nor have any shame therefore. Ye have committed sin (says saint
Paul) ye have given over your members from one wickedness to another, and now
ye be ashamed, now are ye sorry for those your misdoings: But what profit then
had ye of those things, whereof you are now ashamed? This is an horror, and
the greatest horror that may be, that no man can commit sin without a great
burden of conscience, without great torment and disquietnesse of mind. Judas,
when he had betrayed his master Christ, Mat. 27.
by and by, his conscience accused himself, and was so great a burden unto
him, that to delivered and eased thereof, he went imediatly and hanged
himself. When Caine had slain his own brother, and committed that execrable
Genesis 4.
murder, God said unto him, Why do thou lowre? Such a thing is sin, that
whosoever commits it, it will forthwith appear in his face, it will appear
and show in his countenance. But happy is that man that soonest comes to
repentance, happy is he that is soonest sorry for his sins and misdoings.
Adam, Genesis 3.
so soon as he had eaten of the forbidden fruit, and so transgressed the
commandment of God, God called unto him, and said, Adam, vbies? Where art
thou? He answered; I am fled away Lord, I hide my self. And why fled he away,
why hid he himself from the sight of God? because he was ashamed. Luke 15.
The prodigal Son spoken of in the Gospel, after he had riotously consumed
his whole substance, and so brought to extreme poverty, he returned again,
came home to his father, fell down before his feet, and said; O father, I
have sinned against Heaven and against thee. And why said he thus? because he
was ashamed. The people in the time of Daniel the Prophet, Dan. 9.
when they saw their own wickedness, and repented them thereof, cried out
and said; Shame is come upon us, shame and confusion is this day fallen upon
us. David the Prophet, when he had by tyranie caused his faithful and trusty
servant Vrie to be slain, 2. Reg. 11.
thereby to have his pleasure of Bersabee his wife, and after had seen his
own folly, cried out unto God, saying; Psalm. 51.
Miserere mei quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco, Have mercy upon me, O
Lord, because I know mine iniquities. And why said he thus? because he was
ashamed. Jeremy, Postquam ostendisti mihi peccata mea, erubui: After thou
had, O Lord, showed me mine offenses, I was ashamed (said he.) Thus (good
brethren) a wicked conscience evermore bears shame about with it, evermore
carries a most heavy burden, evermore is pricked and tormented, and never at
quiet.

And though some men there be, so given over unto sin, that they feel no
shame in this life, that are not moved in their conscience in this world, yet
may they assure themselves they shall feel bitter torments in the world to
come, and eternal shame that never shall have end. And if there be any that
will now say, as the people in the time of Daniel did; whatsoever we do, God
will not look unto us, he regards not our doings, whether we do good or
evil, God has no respect unto it; and so be nothing moved in their
conscience for their sinful living: when they shall be cast into utter darkness
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, then shall their conscience be
moved with repentance, then shall they be ashamed; but then al too late. Luke
16.
Remember the glutton, the rich glutton (that in his life time had nothing but
pleasure, never felt adversity, nor never was pricked in conscience for his
mislyuing) after he fell into Hell fire, was there tormented, and the worm of
his conscience began to gnaw him; then he cried out unto Abraham, then he was
ashamed, but then was it too late. And thus shall the wicked people do at the
last day, the wicked people (I say) that shall then be living and see the great
terror of that day, They shall say unto the Hills, fall upon us, unto the
mountains, Luke 23.
comecouer us: then shall their own wicked conscience accuse them, then shall
they be ashamed, but then too late. Now (good brethren) what profit had all
these of their own sinfulness, what profit and commodity had they of all
their wickedness? What profit had Adam by transgressing the commandment of
God? What profit had Cain for murdering of his brother? What profit wan the
prodigal Son by mispending of his fathers goods? What profit had the people in
the time of Daniel, for their misliuing? What profit had David by killing of
Vrie? What profit had the rich glutton that lived in such pleasure? What profit
(I say) had all these of their own wickedness? No profit, no commodity, no
pleasure a^ al, but shame, nothing else but shame and confusion. Even so here S.
Paul; What profit (said he) had ye then of all those things, of which ye are
now ashamed? It appears well ye have gotten nothing but displesure, nothing
but shame and confusion. For the end of such things is death.

And this that is well spoken of honesty of life, this that is well applied to
honest conversation, may well be spoken and applied to Religion. For it
behooves a man so to worship God, that he have no shame, no confusion
therefore. But alas, from the beginning, even from the first creation of man,
there have bin good, there have bin bad: some there has bin, that forsaking
the living God, have worshipped their own devises: some in steed of God, have
worshipped stocks and stones: some have sacrificed to the Sun and Moon, Ier. 8.
and made them their Gods: and this has been from the beginning. Ier. 44.
And therefore Jeremy writes, that the people in his time said, Ibimus and
sacrificabimus Lunae Reginae caeli: We will do sacrifice and offer oblations
unto the Queen of heaven: for so (said they) our Fathers did, and did prosper
in their doings. Ier ^.
Some said unto the Stone, Pater noster es, and to a Stock, Deus noster es,
exuerge adiuua nos.

And this has been even from the beginning. The Babilonians worshipped Bell
their God, Bell.
which was but a block: they worshipped also a Dragon, which they called their
living God, and this did they in good sooth. The Jews made a golden Calfe, and
fell down before the same, and worshipped it, Exodus 32.
and said, Isti sunt Dij tui, These are thy Gods, O Israel, these are they
that brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and delivered thee. We read also
that they worshipped a Brazen Serpent, 2. Reg. 18.
and burnt Incense and sacrifice unto it. And as they had these vain Idols for
their Gods: so likewise had they a number of Superstitious ceremonies of their
own devising, which here were too long to be spoken of. And all this did they
of blindness, thinking they had done well, meaning nothing but good therein.
But afterward when it pleased God to show them their own blindness, to show
them their folly, to show them the wickedness they walked in: then were they
ashamed of their doings, then (I say) they were ashamed confounded. And
therefore said Jeremy the prophet, Vere patres nostri colueru^t me^datia, truly
our forefathers followed after lies. The Gentiles, when they perceived that the
Sun and Moon their chief Gods, were indeed no gods, and able to do them no
pleasure, then they were ashamed. When the people of Babylon saw and understood
their own folly in worshipping their God Bell and their Dragon, and that they
were not such, as they took them to be, then were they ashamed. And so in
like, when the Jews saw before their eyes their golden Calfe molten, and their
brazen Serpent broken and ground into poulder, then were they ashamed, then
were they sorry and ashamed of their former doings. Thus says the Prophet
Esaie, or rather God by the mouth of his Prophet, Why offer ye so many
sacrifices unto me? offer me no more oblations. Esai. 1.
I abhor your incense, I may not away with your new moons and Sabbathes. I
am troubled with them, I am weary of them, Quis ista requirit? Who looks for
these things, who commands you so to do? Esaie in another place also; Esai.
55.
Why do you lay out your money for the thing that feeds not, and spend your
labor about the thing that satisfies not? And so likewise in another place
the same prophet says; They make my people forget my name, Esai. 59.
for their own traditions. He says also; Taelas aranearum texunt, They weaue
the Spiders web, they do nothing else but breed the Cockatrice eggs, and weaue
the Spiders web, says he. And so Jeremy cried out, Ier. 2.
and said, Duo mala fecit populus meus, me dereliqueru^t Dominum Deum suum, and
foderunt sibi cisternas quae aquas non possunt continere: my people, says God
by his Prophet Jeremy, have forsaken men their Lord, and dug themselves
pits that can hold no water. Esaias 1.
Esaias calls man's invention Sordes, dross: Jeremy calls it chafe: Ier.
23. Malach. 1.
Malachie, very man's dung: Zachary, Gods curse. Christ himself calls it,
Luke 11.
Fermentum Pharisaeorum, the leven of the Pharisees: He calls it also,
Tenebras, utter darkness. Thus it pleased God to describe unto us man's
invention, to call it cobwebs, to call it filth, to call it dross, and chafe,
man's dung, Gods curse, the leven of the Pharisees, and utter darkness. And
this does he for none other purpose, than only to make his people ashamed of
their own devises. Acts 22.
Paul notwithstanding he was a great learned man, skillful in the laws and
customs amongst the Jews, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel: yet when he
knew Christ, when he was filled with the holy Ghost, and embraced Gods gospel,
he was ashamed of all he had learned before, he was ashamed of his own
ignorance. John 20.
Saint Thomas, who would not believe Christ to be risen from death, when he
felt Christ's side, and had put his finger into his wound, then he was ashamed,
then he was sorry for his vnveleefe. The Jews when they perceived their own
folly and ignorance, Acts 2.
said, Viri fratres quid faciemus? O men and brethren what shall we do. The
Ephesians, when S. Paul had preached unto them, Act. 19.
and they received the doctrine of Christ, by and by such as used curious
crafts, came and brought their books of enchauntment, their books of
witchcraft, and burnt them, cast them into the fire and burnt them: so much
were they ashamed of their own folly. 1. Cor. 13.
And so S. Paul, Cum essem paruulus, sentiebam vt paruulus, When I was a child,
I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I imagined as a child. But as
soon as I was a man, I left all childishness: Now I am become a man, and
therefore I am now ashamed of my childishness Thus might the Prophets have said
to the Gentiles, what profit had you of your gods, the Sun and the Moon, what
profit had you of them, whereof ye are now ashamed? So might Moses have said
to the children of Israel, what profit had ye in this golden calfe? So
Ezechias, what profit had ye in this brazen serpent, of which now ye are
ashamed? Even thus Esaias might likewise have said, what profit had ye in your
calends, and new Moons, in your holy days and sacrifices? And so other the
Prophets might well have said, what profit had ye in your dreams, in your
spider cobbes, in your dross, in your chafe? what commodity had ye of all
these things? Alas ye are now ashamed of them, and therefore ye had no profit
of them, ye had no pleasure by them, they brought you no commodity, they
brought you only shame and confusion.

Thus (good brethren) let us weigh and consider, what profit we had in times
past of those things, of which we are now ashamed. And let us consider how
much we are beholden to god, that now may see and know our own folly and
ignorance, and so be ashamed. But herein, good brethren, there needs not many
words: for there is no man so blind, but may well see, no man so deaf, but may
well hear, no man so dull, but may well perceive and understand, the great
error, the great blindness, the great darkness, that we have been in. And
therefore let us all now give God thanks, that he has restored his light
unto us, and taken that great error and darkness from us. Loath I am here to
speak of those things whereof we may be ashamed: loath and sorry I am to repeat
that unto you, whereof we are now ashamed: but this place now requires the
same, this time and place wills me somewhat to speak thereof. The time has
been, that we have put our trust in pardons, in Bulls of the Popes, in vain
scrolles, and writings of his; yea, and in them we have had greater hope and
affiance, than in the death of Christ, and merits of his passion. We have
fallen down before images, before stocks, and stones, such as had eyes, and
saw not, ears, and heard not: before them we prayed, before them we kneeled,
and stacke up candles. But now we are ashamed of them, we all are, I think,
now sorry and ashamed of this our folly: but what profit had we then of all
these things. Sometime we prayed in a strange tongue, in a tongue that we
understood not: we prayed contrary to the use that was in the Patriarchs
times, in the Prophets times, in the Apostles times: but then what profit had
we of those prayers, whereof we are now ashamed? We have seen lawful
marriage forbidden, and men's lawful wives taken from them: and yet the use of
a concubine granted, as though God were displeased with marriage, and pleased
with whooredome: but what profit had ye then of that thing, of which ye are
now ashamed? We had Baptism, but we understood not the principles of our
faith: and even as the Prophet spoke of his time, Qualis populus, Ose 4.
talis Sacerdos, the Priest is become like the people: so might we well have
said of our own time; blind were they both, and therefore both fell into the
dike. This we are now ashamed of, but what profit had we then thereby? Ier. 5.
The Prophets (said Jeremy) teach falsely, and the Priests follow them, and my
people has pleasure therein. And lo, even this same which the Prophet Jeremy
said, the Priests and Prophets did in his time, we our selves have seen done
in our days, and now we are ashamed thereof: but what profit had we then by
it? We had the Sacrament of Christ's body, but we knew not why Christ
instituted the same, we knew not why Christ left us that Sacrament; we did
all things contrary to Christ's institution. Christ ordained a Communion, but
we had a private Mass: Christ ordained, that the whole people should receive
in both kinds, but we ministered it under one kind alone: Christ, when he
instituted this Sacrament, spoke in the common tongue that all might understand
him: but we contrary to Christ, contrary to the Apostles, contrary to the
primitive Church, consecrated the same in an unknown tongue, that no man might
understand us. And hereof are we now ashamed, but what profit had we then
thereby? We have known this to be taught, that the bread in the Sacrament was
turned into the very body and blood of Christ our Savior: this we al know,
and do yet remember. But Christ, when he said, the Sacrament should be
turned, meant not that the bread should be turned into his body, but that we
which receive the same should be turned, that we, I say, should be turned, and
made one body with him. This was the meaning, this I say, was the meaning of
our Savior Christ. And therefore S. Paul, 1. Cor. 10.
Panis quem frangimus, participatio corporis and sanguinis Christi est, the
bread which we break is the participation of the body and blood of Christ. For
we many are one bread, and one body in as much as we all are partakers of one
bread. Math. 14.
Christ himself said, I will drink no more of the liquor of the vine: Christ,
I say, after the consecration, said he would not drink any more of the liquor
of the Vine: The blood of Christ is not Wine, it is not the liquor of the vine.
Saint Augustine, in Sermon ad Infantes, says plainly, Quod videtis in mensa
panis est: that which you see on the table, is bread. Theodoretus also, Non
mutatur substantia panis, the substance and nature of the bread is not changed,
says he. Gelasius likewise, whom peradventure ye will the more credit,
because he was sometime bishop of Rome, says, Non desinit esse substantia
panis, there leaves not to be the substance of bread. Natura panis in
Sacramento remanet, the nature of the bread remains in the Sacrament.
Chrysostom also, Non mutatur substantia panis, the substance of the bread is
not altered. I could say more, but this is for this time enough; this only I
trust, amongst a number of other, shall be now sufficient to persuade you the
truth herein. Ye see here that S. Augustine, Theodoretus, Gelasius, and Saint
Chrysostom do all affirm, and herein agree; that the substance or nature of
the bread, after the consecration is not changed.

Let us therefore, good brethren, notwithstanding we have been otherwise
taught, let us, I say, believe these holy Doctors, let us credit them; they will
not mock us, they will not deceive nor beguile us. But this other doctrine,
this doctrine of transubstantiation, was of late devised, not past three
hundred years ago, in the council of Laterane. And there, upon this new
devise of theirs, they made a great solemn, and festival day, and called it,
Corpus Christi day. And now we are ashamed of this: but then what commodity,
what profit had we thereof? We found out of our selves a new sacrifice, the
sacrifice (I mean) of the mass, as though the death of Christ had not been a
sacrifice sufficient, as though Christ's blood had not once for all washed away
our iniquities, as though Christ had not said, I have paid the ransom for your
sins. It were an infinite labor to repeat unto you particularly, all the abuses
of late days used in the Church of Christ; you your selves can well remember
them, I need not here to rehearse them unto you. But then what profit had ye of
al such things of which you are now ashamed? But some men there be
peradventure, that will not be ashamed of these abuses, but always uphold and
maintain the same: and such if there be any, they are like them whom Jeremy
prophesied of, saying: Thou have taken an harlots countenance thou have gotten
thee a whores forehead, Ier. 3.
and can not be ashamed: they are like them also whom Esaias the Prophet
speaks of, and says, Malice has made you blind, you bark against the
truth. This is the sin that never will be forgiven, this is so great an
offense, that it will never be pardoned. Therefore let us, to whom God has
given eyes to see, ears to hear, and hearts of understanding: let us I say,
consider that it is no shame to confess our errors, to acknowledge our
blindness; but shame it is to continue in error, too much shame it is to
remain still in blindness. And such as will not be ashamed of their evil, but
laugh at and scorn others, that are sorry and ashamed, may well be likened
unto them whom saint Paul writing to the Ephesians speaks of, Ephesians. 4.
They being past repentance, have given themselves over unto wantonness, to
work al manner of uncleanness, even with greedines. And such are given over in
reprobum sensum, Romans 1.
into a lewd mind. Such David the Prophet speaks of, saying: Psalm. 17.
They cast their eyes down to the ground. For such as wilfully offend, and
wittingly cast away themselves, there is no salvation Paul says, Finis illorum
mors est, Romans 6.
their end is death, their end is only destruction. This is the same that
Saint John speaks of, Math. 12.
which neither shall be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come.
Wherefore were they cast into hell, that now lie therein? for what cause
continue they in those endless torments? because they would not acknowledge
their errors, because they would not be ashamed of their own folly. Wherefore
is there in hell, fire unquenchable, torments such as cannot be thought, utter
darkness, and eternal death, but only to punish such as wilfully live in
wickedness, to plague them that will not be ashamed of their sins and offenses.
Mar. 9.
They shall be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, into fire that never shall be quenched, where the worm of the
conscience never dies. If we delight in covetousness, in adultery, in
fornication and filthy living, the end, let us say, is death, the end thereof
is none other than eternal death. Psalm. 15.
Quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo? said David the Prophet, O Lord, who shall
dwell in thy Tabernacle, says he, or who shall rest upon thy holy hill? Even he
that leads an vncorrupt life, that does the thing which is right, and
speaks the truth from his heart: He that has not sworn and deceived his
neighbor. But O merciful God, who walks now innocently? who leads an
vncorrupt life? who does the thing that is right? who speaks truth from his
heart? what man is there, that has not sworn and deceived his neighbor?
Jeremy speaking of the people in his time, says, Confusi sunt, imo non sunt
confusi: They are ashamed, nay, they are not ashamed, says Jeremy. And even
so may we of our days well say, the people are not ashamed, they are nothing
sorry nor ashamed of their evil living. These S. Paul speaks of, writing unto
the Philippians: I speak with tears, Philipp. 3.
says he, they are the enemies of Christ's cross, their end is damnation,
their glory shall be turned into shame.

And shall we then live thus? shall we thus dye? shall we thus end our lives?
shall we thus appear at the later day, and not be ashamed? shall adulterers,
fornicators, whooremongers, covetous persons, come and stand before the
judgment seat of God, before the throne of his majesty, and not be ashamed?
Is this the marriage garment that we should be clad with? are we those that
are called to the feast by the Bridegroom? are we Christ's brethren, and heirs
of the kingdom of God? No. Non resurgent impij in indicio, Psalm. 1.
the wicked shall not arise in judgment, says the Prophet David, the ungodly
shall not be able to stand in the judgment, neither the sinners in the
congregation of the righteous. Woe be unto them that run from God with a
desperate mind, woe be unto them that wilfully forsake, and fly from him. S.
Gregory says, One sin linketh in another, as one link of a chain holds
the other. It is an horrible thing to turn from God, it is a terrible thing to
fly from him: for if we turn from God, whither shall we go? if we fly
from him, whither shall we run? Conscientia mill testes, our own conscience,
though we hide our selves never so close, shall be as a thousand witnesses
against us, our own conscience shall utter and bewray us. Saint Augustine
says, If we do not indeed repent, we feign that we do repent, we only
feign, says he, that we do repent, and so we mock with God. But God will not
be mocked of us, he will not be deluded by us. But we shall be ashamed and
confounded, when we appear before God, when we appear, I say, before the
judgment seat of God. But then what profit shall we have of that we are
ashamed? what commodity shall we then have of that whereof we are ashamed.
Let us consider, that we are flesh of Gods flesh, bones of his bones, and
members of his members. And therefore let us give over our whole bodies, let us
give over all our members, let us give over our eyes, our ears, our tongues,
our hearts, unto the homage and service of God. So shall we have profit of
Christ our Savior, so shall we have profit of his death and passion, and so
shall Christ say unto us, Come ye blessed of my Father, and inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Amen.

THE FOVRTH Sermon.
Psalm 7. verse. 11. 12. 13. 11. God is a righteous Judge, and God is ever
threatening.

12. If men will not trune, he has whet his sword, he has bent his bow, and
made it ready.

13. He has prepared him the weapons of death, and ordained his arrows to
destroy.


Almighty God our heavenly Father, like as he is both good, and also
merciful, like as he is patient, and of long sufferance: So he uses two manner
of ways to allure and call us unto him, when we of our own heads follow our
own devises, and lewdly run whither our lusts leads us: Sometimes of his
great mercy he uses promises; sometimes of his justice he uses threatening.
He promises to us for our well doing, his favor and grace, for keeping his
commandments eternal bliss. He threatens us for evil living, with plagues
and punishments, and for breaking of his Law, eternal death. Thus he of his
mercy sometimes uses promises, and threatens again of his rigor and justice.
He promises to comfort, aid, and succor us, if we come unto him: and he
threatens to strike the terror of death into us, if we turn from him. And
so almighty God most mercifully used his promises unto Abraham. Ego sum
protector tuus and merces tua, I am (said he) thy defender and thy reward: Genesis
12.
Ego benedicam benedicentibus tibi, and maledicam maledicentibus tibi, I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. So ample, so
large. so great a promise made God unto him. And thus almighty God when he
would deliver his elect people the children of Israel from their great bondage
and captivity, Deuteronomy. 11.
Inducam te in terram fluentem lacte and melle, I will bring you into a land
that shall flow with milk and honey; this will I perform, this will I bring to
pass for you, and this will I do for my names sake. And so likewise to these
his people he made this merciful promise against their enemies, Leuit. 26.
saying: Ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall into the sword
before you, five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall
chase ten thousand. Thus also God by his Prophets promised his people, Zach. 1.
and said: Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you. And even thus likewise
Christ in the Gospel, makes most clear and manifest promises of everlasting
life and salvation to all such as for his name shall forsake the pleasures and
delights of this word, and repose their felicity only in him: Beati pauperes
spiritu, beati qui lugeant, Mat. 5.
beati qui esuriunt, beati qui persequutionem ferunt: Blessed are the poor in
spirit, blessed are they that mourn, blessed are they that hunger and thirst,
blessed are they that suffer persecution. And why so? For what cause are they
blessed that are poor in spirit? For what cause are they blessed that mourn?
Why are they happy that hunger? What reward shall they have that suffer
persecution? because (says Christ) theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, they shall
be comforted, they shall be filled, they shall obtain a crown of glory.
When two or three are gathered together in my name Math. 18.
(says Christ) I will be in the midst of them. Whatsoever ye shall ask my
father in my name, Ioh. 14.
it shall be given unto you. These manifold and great promises it pleased
almighty God to make unto his chosen and elect people: these comfortable
promises Christ himself vouchsafed to pronounce to al such as shall cleave unto
him: thus mercifully it pleased God by fair promises to allure and win us unto
him. But oftentimes, alas, we set little or nothing by these sweet and
comfortable promises, we little esteem or regard them: and therefore god then
uses his threatening, his rigor and Justice among us: when no sweet words can
win us, then he strikes his terror into us. For when god in old time
perceived yt no gentleness, no kindness, no mercy of his could win his people
unto him, he caused Esaias his prophet to cry out and said; Impius in beneficijs
me no^ aguouit, in angustijs aute^ clamauit ad me: The wicked and sinful man
(says he) in my great goodness and benefits bestowed upon him, would not
acknowledge nor confess me; but in his misery and trouble, in his anguish and
woe, then he ran unto me, and called on my name. And so likewise by the Prophet
Jeremy God him self says; Ier. 32.
Conuerterunt ad me terga, non faci^s suas: in die autem tribulationis
inclamant me: They have turned their backs, and not their faces unto me: but
in the day of their trouble, in the time of necessity they call and cry upon
me. And so in like the same Prophet Jeremy, or rather God by this Prophet
Deuteronomy. 32. Ier. 2.
says: Impinguatus and incrassatus est populus meus, My people are waxen fat
and lusty: they have forsaken me the well of life, and dug themselves
pits, yea vile and broken pits that can hold no water. Such a thing is the
felicity and pleasure of this world, that it makes us soon to forget God,
and the felicity of the world to come. And therefore God so often warned his
people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 8. 11.
that when they were once come into the land of Canaan, into that plentiful
country which flowed with milk and honey, wherein should be no dearth nor
scarceness: that then they should not forget the Lord their god, that then
their hearts should not be deceived, that then they should not go aside, and
serve other gods; and so his wrath and indignation wax hot upon them. And
therefore when fair promises and loving kindness, cannot win us to God, then
uses he another way, then does he appoint another mean, then begins he to
threaten and fear us, and that of his rigor and justice. And thus did he to
our first father Adam: because he would not he should transgress his
commandment, he threatened him, Genesis 2.
and said; In quocunque die comederis ex hoc fructu, mortem morieris, In
what-euer day thou shall taste of this fruit, thou shall dye the death. So
likewise God to the whole multitude of his people of Israel said; Deuteronomy. 28.
Unless ye give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, to do all his
commandments and ordinances, cursed shall you be in the town, and cursed in
the field, cursed shall thy basket be and thy store, cursed shall be the fruit of
thy body and the fruit of thy land, cursed shall thou be in thy coming in,
and in thy going out. You shall call, and I will not hear, you shall cry unto
me, and I will not give ear. Leuit. 26.
Dabo vobis caelum aeneum, and terram ferreum, The heaven shall be as brass,
and the earth as Iron; the heavens shall give you no rain, the earth shall
bring you forth no fruit, your travel and labor shall be lost, your land shall
not give her increase. Thus almighty God threatened his elect and chosen
people, and all to keep them in awe and fear of him. And so in another place
he says; Leuit. 26.
I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies,
and they that hate you shall have dominion over you, and ye shall fly when no
man chaseth you. Thus you see, that it pleases almighty God oftentimes to use
these and such like words of threatening, to use such rigor, to beat a terror
into his people, when fair promises and sweet words can do nothing; and this
does he of his great justice. And therefore David in this place; God is indeed,
(says he) a rightful judge, and God is ever threatening. If men will not
turn, he has whet his sword, and has bent his bow and made it ready: He
has prepared him the weapons of death, and ordained his arrows to destroy. So
mighty, so omnipotent is God, that he can punish, and so righteous a judge is
he, that he will punish when it best pleases him. But some man would here
peradventure say, if God be thus able to punish, and will indeed punish when
he is offended, why then does he it not by and by, why is not he revenged out
of hand? because (says the Prophet) he is merciful, pacient, Psalm. 103.
and of long sufferance. Therefore he proceeds not to revenge his anger,
therefore he hastes not to wreake himself on us, so soon as we offend him,
and transgress his will: but tarieth, and makes long delays to see whether
we will repent and return unto him. But yet (says David, forasmuch as he is
abused, for as much as ye have left and forsaken him, notwithstanding he be
merciful, notwithstanding he be pacient cient and of long sufferance, He has
now whet his sword, he has bent his bow, and made it ready, he has
prepared him the weapons of death, and ordained his arrows to destroy: and
this will he do out of hand, he will make no longer delay at all. Here must
we not fancy, that God will strike us with a sword of Iron, that he has a
bow bent and arrows to destroy withal: for every creature on the earth, what
ever it be, be it never so vile, never so simple, never so weak and abject,
but is able at Gods commandment to be an instrument to plague and punish
withal. And therefore consider what is so weak as water, so simple as flies,
so vile as lice and frogs: and yet it pleased almighty God, by these weak, by
these simple, by these vile things, to punish and strike the Egyptians, yea,
and so much thereby to plague them, that never before they felt the like, never
erst they heard of the like punishment. It pleased God to turn their water
into blood, Exodus 7.
so that in the whole country no water could be found to drink, no liquor of
water to refresh their Bodies. This was a great plague, and yet was this
wrought by want of water, which was but a weak and simple creature. A fly,
you know, is a simple thing, a thing of little strength and no force: yet God
so increased the number of them, he sent such a multitude of Flies among the
Egiptians, Exodus 8.
that even in the kings house they fell upon what ever the king eat or drank,
fell upon his meat, fell into his drink, and so putrified and corrupted the
same. The Lice wherewith God in like plagued them, fell not only upon the king,
and his people, but upon their Sheep, their Dren, their Asses, their Horses,
their Mules, and their whole herds of Cattle, what ever they were. The Frogs
entered into their houses, into the kings Palace, into his hall, his p^rlor,
his chamber, yea, and into his Bed also. Thus it pleased God to use against the
Egiptians these simple, these base, and vile creatures, as his rod, as his
scourge, as his sword of punisment. Every creature, every thing, whether it
has life, or no life, when it pleases God to use it, is his sword, is his rod
to strike withal. The fire that fell from Heaven, and destroyed the two famous
Cities, Sodom and Gomorra, and the whole Region there about, was none other
than the sword of God. Genesis 19.
Therefore says the prophet David, Psalm. 104.
The spirits of tempests do his will, the thunder and lightnings fulfill his
commandment. And so the same prophet, here in this place: now has God begun
to strike, Now has he whet his sword, and bent his bow, says he, now has he
prepared his arrows to destroy, and there is no way now to escape his
vengeance, no way to avoid his punishment, but only this, to turn unto him, to
run and submit your selves wholly to him.

These words David the prophet (being persecuted of his enemies, and beset
round about of them) spoke unto Saul the proud king, and his adherents and
soldiers: putting them in remembrance how they had provoked and justly
deserved the vegeance of God, for persecuting of his innocent soul. And even
as this prophet David spoke and pronounced these words unto Saul, and his
wicked company, to reduce unto their memory the power of God, and the
punishment that then hanged over their heads: So may we likewise well use the
same in these our days, first to bring us in remembrance that God is a
righteous Judge; and then to consider how we daily provoke and deserve his
just wrath, and so at the least for fear of punishment, to be sorry for our
misdeeds, and return unto him: For if we will not be converted, he has whet
his sword, he has bent his bow, prepared him the weapons of death, and
ordained his arrows to destroy. But before we come unto God, (good Brethren)
before we return unto him, we must one come unto another, we must one turn to
another; before we be reconciled to Christ, we must be reconciled unto our
neyghbor, before we be at one with God, we must be at one with our Christian
Brother. This is the order that God looks we should observe, this is that
rule which Christ commanded us to keep. Remitte, and remittetur tibi, Luke 6.
Forgive, and thou shall be forgiven. Si remiseris alijs peccata sua, tua
remittentur tibi, Math. 18.
It thou shall forgive other men their offenses toward thee, then shall thy
sins also be forgiven; then shall God pardon thee thine offenses, when thou
shall pardon thy Brother that he has offended thee, then, I say, shall God
forgive thee, and not before. Math. 5.
And again, Nisi remiseritis alijs peccata sua, vestra non remittentur vobis,
Unless ye forgive other men their trespasses, your own sins shall not be
released, says Christ. Remember (good Brethren) remember and mark well these
words, Christ is the author, Christ is the speaker, Christ is the commander
hereof. And so Christ our Savior in an other place of his Gospel, Math. 5.
When thou offerest thy gift at the Altar, says he, and there remembrest that
thy Brother has ought against thee; leave there thine offering before the
Altar, and go thy way first and reconcile thy self to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy gift. God is contented his honor be deferred, he is
contented to tarry for his Sacrifice, till thou art agreed with thy Brother,
till thou art at one with him. And when thou have thus done, then come and
there offer thy Sacrifice. This is the ground of the atonement between God and
us, this is the token that Christ is reconciled unto us, if we be at one with
our neyghbor, if we be reconciled to our Christian Brother. 1. Ioh. 4.
For if we shall hate our Brethren whom we see, if we shall be at debate with
our Neyghbors being daily conversant with us; how can we love God whom we see
not, how can we agree with Christ, with whom we are not conversant? But to
declare further unto you, that God accepts not our Sacrifices, that he
regards not our petitions, that he is not pleased with our prayers, unless
we be at one and pleased with our Brethren; He cries out by Esaie his
prophet, and says, Esa. 1.
Cum clamabitis ad me, ego non exaudiam vos, quia manus vestrae plenae
sanguinis sunt, When you shall call upon me, I will not hear you, though ye make
many prayers, yet hear I nothing at all, says God. And wherefore? Because
your hands are full of blood. It is written in Genesis, Genesis 4.
that God would not look upon Cayn and his Offering, that he would have no
regard to his Sacrifice: and wherefore? because his heart was full of malice.
Solomon says, Precatio iniusti abhominabilis est, The prayer of the wicked is
abominable, the sinful man's prayer is abominable in the sight of God. Psalm.
109.
David also, Let their prayers be as a sin, let their prayer be turned into
sin, says he. O miserable man thou art, if thou be not in charity, wretched
and too sinful thou art, if thou be not in love and unity, thy Prayer is
abominable, yea, thy prayer is no prayer, thy prayer is sin. Thou prayest to
be forgiven, but thou thy self wilt not forgive, this is enough to condemn
thee. For our Religion is none other but a Brotherhood knit together in the
love of God; our profession is none other than charity and brotherly love
toward all men in our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ. 1. Ioh. 4.
God is the God of love, Christ is the Prince of peace, his Gospel is the
Gospel peace; and we that are Gods servants, ought to live in godly love, we
that are Christ's brethren, ought to live in Brotherly peace. We are all
baptized in one water, whereby we should have in remembrance, that we should in
love live as one together. These, and such other are, or may be, sufficient to
bring us in remembrance of Brotherly love, of faithful amity, and unfeigned
concord, if we of our selves were not too forgetful. O how often said Christ to
his Disciples, Ioh. 14.
Pacem meam do vobis, pacem meam relinquo vobis, I give you my peace, my peace
I leave unto you. Ioh. 13.
By this cognizance and none other shall men know you to be my Disciples says
Christ, if ye love together, if ye have love one to an other. He says also, A
new commandment give I you, that you love together, as I have loved you. What a
zealous fire, what an earnest love had Christ when he prayed and said, O
Father, Ioh. 17.
cause that these be one, as thou and I are one, that like as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. Because ye be few, said
Christ to his Disciples, and in the midst of your enemies, live you in
concord and peace one with an other, one bear with another, and all you hold
together. S. Paul says, Romans 13.
That he which loves his Brother, has fulfilled the whole law. Let not the
Sun go down on thy wrath, Ephesians. 4.
says Paul. And again, Romans 12.
Revenge not, but give place unto displeasure; wreke not your selves, but give
room to the wrath of God. David, when he was in most extreme persecution, and
his enemies laid daily wait for his life, seeking his destruction, even then
fell he to most earnest prayer, he sought not to be revenged, but he made his
prayer unto God, and said, Psalm. 108.
O Lord, they speak evil of me, they revile me, they call me Traitor, they
call me all that naught is, but I have none other help, but to pray unto thee,
my only succor is to fly unto thee. Thus did that holy prophet David, and so
did the Christians in the beginning of Christ's Church. For Tertullian, an old
and holy father, says, Fratres se appellabant and more voluerunt pro muicem,
They called them selves Brethren, says he, and one would not stick to dye
for an other. O what a charity, what a love, what a Brotherly affection was
this among Christians, in the beginning of Gods Church. Saint Steven, when he
was stoned, all his bones crushed and burst in pieces, and his Soul ready to
leave his body, even then he prayed for his Tormentors, even then he cried out
unto God, and said, Act. 1.
O Domine, ne statuas illis peccatum hoc, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge. So that holy father Nazianzen, when the hangman that most cruelly had
tormented him, desired pardon of him, he meekely answered, Qui mihi ignouit,
ignoscat tibi He that has forgiven me, the same forgive thee; God has
pardoned me, and I beesech him that he will in like pardon thee. Even so
likewise Christ, when he hanged on the Cross, when his hands and feet were
nailed to the tree and he in the midst of all his woe, even then he prayed
for his persecutors, then he desired his Father to pardon them, and said, Luke
23.
O Pater, ignosce illis, nesciunt enim quid faciunt, Father, forgive them, for
they wot not what they do. This is an example for us to follow, thus ought
we to do, as in the beginning of Christ's Church, the Christians did, who
called themseues Brethren, and one would dye for an other: Thus ought we to
say, as S. Steven said, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge: thus should
we do, as that holy father Nazianzene did, and say, He that has forgiven me,
the same forgive thee. And lastly so ought we to pray for our enemies, as
Christ did for his persecutors, and say, Father forgive it them, they wot not
what they do. Thus ought we to do, if we mind to live according to our
profession, and if we will be Christians, as we are called Christians. We read,
written by S. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, that in the beginning and first
spring of Gods Church, the whole congregation had one thought, Act. 4.
one mind, one heart. Such a love, such a charity, such a Christian conformity
was among them. And in commendation of Christian charity, and brotherly love
one with an other, the prophet David said, Psalm. 133.
O quam bonum, and quam iocundum, habitare fraires in vnum, Behold how good and
joyful a thing it is Brethren to dwell together in unity: He esteemed love
to be so great a jewel, he thought concord and unity a thing of so great
price, that he could not speak too much good of it. And therefore he said, It
was like the ointment that ran unto Aarons beard, and like the dew of Hermon
which fell upon the hill of Sion, where the Lord promised his blessing, and
life for evermore. But O merciful God, unto what times have thou reserved us?
where is now the peace given, the love left by our Savior Jesus Christ? where
is that charity that should always remain among Christians? Now is the time,
even now, (good Brethren) are the days come, which Christ himself prophesied
should come, Math. 24.
saying, The time shall be that iniquity shall have the vpperchand, and the
love of many shall abate. Christ said, that such a time should come, and even
now, even now, that time and season is come upon us. So likewise Saint Paul the
Apostle of Christ said, 2. Timo. 3.
In the last days there shall come perilous times, Erunt homines seipsos
amantes, There shall bem en which shall love them selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, cursed speakers, and such as shall be despisers of them that are good. O
see the prophet says, Non est veritas in terra, Ose. 4.
There is no truth, no faithfulness in the whole world, there is no mercy,
no knowledge of God in the land; but swearing, lying, manslaughter, theft, and
adultery. Jeremy also the prophet of God, Frater venabitur fratrem ad mortem,
Ier. 9.
says he, One Brother shall hunt and persecute an other unto death: no man may
safely trust his own Brother, for one Brother vndermyneth an other, and one
neighbor beguyleth an other. And all this do we now see, we, I say, in these
our days do see and behold all this. We see now that which Nazianzen that old
holy father speaks of, Membra Christi pugnant inter se, The members of
Christ are at strife and variance among them selves, says he, and even those
members that Christ died for, those members I say that Christ's blood redeemed,
those members we now see at debate and fighting together. I speak but in
generality, I speak not now in particularitie, I do not here repeat to your
memories our particular offenses, and great crimes, which to consider would
cause any honest heart to be sorry, yea, which to remember would enforce the
stony heart to bleed. I do not now rehearse unto you by name any such our
offenses. O rip up your consciences, descend into your own hearts, see whether
iniquity does not abound, see whether there be not in these our days, men,
such as are lovers of them selves: see whether there be any truth, any
fidelity upon the earth: see whether one brother does not hunt and persecute
an other unto death: and lastly see whether the very members of Christ are not
now at debate and fighting together. David, when he considered the great
oppression, tyranny, and persecution used against the faithful, in his time,
cried out and said, Psalm. 12.
Serua me Deus, quia defecit sanctus, O save me Lord, for there is not one
Saint more, very few faithful are there among the children of men: Every man
tells lies to his neighbor, they do but slatter with their lips, and
dissemble in their heart. Jeremy the prophet, when he saw the whole multitude
of the people in his days forsake God, and run after their own affections,
every man whether his lust lead him, he cried out and said, Ier. 9.
Quis capiti meo dabit aquam, and occulis meis fontem aquarum, O who will give
my head water enough, and a well of tears for mine eyes, that I may bewail
the iniquity of this people. And even like as David in his time, so may the
just man say now, Serua me Deus, quoniam defecit sanctus, O Lord help, because
there is no holy man left. Like as Jeremy, so may the virtuous bewail now
the wickedness of these our days, and say, O who shall pour water into my
head, and give a fountain of tears unto mine eyes, that I may bewail the
wickedness of this people. O Christ, where is now thy new commandment? where
is now thy cognizance, thy badge whereby thy servants are known? where is that
peace which thou leaftest to thy Disciples? where is now that one heart, that
one mind, that one thought, that was in the congregation in the beginning of
thy Church? But what need I to speak, what need I to say any thing, if they
would hear thee, Lord, if they would hear thy word and Gospel? O Lord where
is thy strength become? where is that power, that force of thy word, which was
able to divide the marrow from the bone? Heb. 4.
What is now become of that marvelous might of thy word? Thy word, O Lord, is
one, thy Gospel is the self same and one, but the hearts of men, the hearts of
thy people are not one. But this comes to pass for my sins, this I see
well is wrought by thee, O Lord, for mine own sins and offenses: for other
poor men preach thy Gospel, other poor men do teach and instruct thy people
with thy holy word, and by and by the people mourn, by and by they are sorry
for their sins, they repent them of their wickedness, and turn unto thee.
And I speak as they do, I preach the same Gospel, the same word of thine as
they do, and yet I do see no amendment, I do not see any one won unto thee
thorough my teaching. And therefore my sin is the cause, mine own sin and
nothing else is the cause hereof; thou have not thought me a man worthy, by
whom any one lost sheep should be converted, and brought home unto thee. But O
thou my Brother, that here stand like an ydoll, thou host eyes to see, and
ears to hear, see thou not that God has his sword whet, his bow bent, his
arrows ready to destroy? hear thou not how he calls thee to repentance?
Thou do see, and hear this, and yet thou increasest sin upon sin, and
so heapest up anger and displeasure against the day of wrath. I call God to
witness. I have uttered unto you Gods truth, I have preached among you his
holy Gospel, I have revealed unto you his divine word, so that none of you
all can excuse your selves by ignorance. But take you heed to your selves, take
good heed, I say, my Brethren, and mark well what S. Paul says, Hebr. 10.
Peccantes post acceptam gratiam, destituti sunt omni misericordia, They which
wilfully sin after they have once received the knowledge of the truth, are
destitute of all mercy: there remains unto them no more sacrifice for their
sins, but a fearful looking of judgment, and violent fire, which shall
consume the adversaries. And this is it that the Apostle says, to be cast
into a reprobate sense. This is the sin that S. John makes mention of, saying;
Est peccatum in spiritum sanctum, there is a sin against the holy Ghost, which
shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. And for this
great sin, for this horrible wickedness, good people, God has drawn out his
sword, for this cause has he bent his bow, and prepared his arrows to destroy.

Therefore (good brethren) let us lay aside al contention, al strife, and
debate, and let us look up unto heaven, let us cast our eyes thither, where is
no rancor, no discord, no strife, no debate: let us fix our eyes, our hearts,
and our whole minds on Jesus Christ, on him I say, who hanging on the cross,
praid for his persecutors, and said; O father forgive them, they wot not what
they do. Let us imagine that we now behold him, and that he now spreads out
his arms unto us, and says, O thou sinful man that slumbrest in thy sins, and
sleep in thine own wickedness, awake, now is it time for thee to awake out
of thy slumber, to arise from thy heavy sleep: remember thou art a Christian
man, consider thou are a lymbe of my lymbs, a member of my body, the child of
God, and coheire of my fathers kingdom. You children of men, how long will ye
dwell in your old wickedness? How long will ye live in hatered one with
another? How long will ye continue in rancour and strife? Shall I so forgive
you as you forgive your neighbors? shall I so pardon you your sins, as you
pardon your brethren their offenses? O I forgave thee thy great debt, and wilt
not thou forgive thy brother that little, wherein he has offended thee? I have
paid his debt, I have paid the ransom for his trespass, if my blood be a
sufficient ransom for the same: for that bloods sake of mine forgive him, if
naught else will move thee, if thou will not for his own sake, yet for my sake
pardon him. Good brethren, we have long enough served the devil, the prince of
this world, let us now serve God our maker, and Christ our redeemer. We have
long enough, yea too long, continewed in rancour and malice one with another:
let us now therefore, if there be any society between God and us, if there be
in us any love of Christ, if there be any fear of Gods wreake and vengeance,
let us one forgive another; let every man forgive his Christian brother, let us
all cast aside al rancour, strife, and debate, and so let us dwell together in
unity, in brotherly love, and concord.

This day we have heard Gods Gospel preached unto us, this day we have learned
out of the word of God, that if we be Christians, we should live like
Christians, if we be the children of God we should live as becomes the
children of God, without envy, without hatred, without strife or malice. Let
us therefore now leave off our old contention and strife, let us even here in
this place one forgive another, and so be reconciled one unto another, and
say; Remitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimus debit oribus
nostris, O Lord forgive us our sins, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. This is our profession, this is our Religion, hereunto are we called of
God, appointed by Christ, and commanded by his holy word. Let us consider our
white and hoar hairs, let us behold our riueled skin, let us have always
before our eyes the grave whereunto we are creeping: Let us consider that death
daily hangs over our heads. And shall we then in this sort live out the rest
of our years? Shall we thus die, and come to our graves? Let us show our
selves in our works to be the children of God, and the brethren of Christ: let
us not show our selves Christians in name and not in deed: let us not love in
word alone, but in deed and verity: let us not requite evil with evil, one
mischief with another; but let us (according unto S. Paul's Rule) Romans 12.
Overcome evil with good, hatred with love, and so fulfill the Law of God. So
shall God hold back his sword, though already drawn, so shall he not smite
us though he has bent his bow, prepared him the weapons of death, and ordained
his arrows to destroy. But God shall continue our God, and remain with us for
ever. Amen.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
Luke 10. verse. 23. 24. 23. And he turned him to his Disciples, and said:
Blessed are the eyes which see that ye see.

24. For I say unto you, many Prophets and kings would have seen the things
that ye see, and have not seen them, and have heard the things that ye hear,
and have not heard them.


OUR Savior Christ, before he began to declare and set forth the will of his
Father, before he began to preach abroad the high mysteries of our redemption,
the glad tidings of man's salvation, sent abroad into the world a many of
Disciples to the number of three score and ten, to the end that they should
epsy out and see the stay of the people, how they would accept his Doctrine,
and first to give them this warning, and say; Paenitentiam agite, appropinquat
enim regnum caelorum, Repent your selves, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. These Disciples of Christ, after they had in all points accomplished
their masters commission, and fulfilled his commandment, returned again unto
Christ, and showed him the maruailes that they had wrought in his name,
rejoicing much thereat, and especially for that Devils departed from men
possessed, and were driven out by them; The very Devils (said they) are
subdued unto us in thy name. But when Christ heard them thus say, and perceived
that they rejoiced there at, he turned to his Disciples, he pulled them from
this vain fancy, and said; I saw Satan fall down from heaven as lightning.
Behold I have given you power to tread upon Serpents, to go over Scorpions,
over all venomous and noisome beasts; they shall be subject, and obedient unto
you, and they shall not hurt you. But rejoice not in this, rejoice not that you
shall have power over Serpents, that you shall be able to tread upon Scorpions
and all other venomous beasts, and be nothing therewith annoyed, but rejoice you
in this, that your names are written in the book of life. Put away (said
Christ) this vaineglory that your have conceived, this fond fancy wherein ye
rejoice, and rejoice ye only in this, that your names are written in heaven:
and that you know God, and his son whom he has sent into the world. For no man
knows the Son, but the Father, Math. 11.
neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son will
open it. This is your felicity, this is your joy, and no man but you, has
this great joy and felicity. And therefore blessed are the eyes which see, that
ye see. This heavenly felicity, this marvelous bliss, that Christ in this
place spoke of to his Disciples, was prophesied and long time before spoken of,
even at the first beginning of the world: for at what time Adam had
transgressed Gods commandment, and so fallen from the joys of Paradise; God
himself, to put Adam in some comfort again, prouounced these words against
the wicked Serpent that had wrought him that woe, Genesis 3.
and said, Ipsum conteret caput tuum, The seed of the woman shall tread down
thy head: he, he it is that shall break down and destroy the power of the
devil, said God unto Adam. This promise (I say) even at the beginning of the
world was made by God unto Adam, and so continued to the time of Christ: for
afterward this same promise declared God likewise, to many a good and godly
man. He said unto Abraham, Genesis 22.
In s^mine tuo benedicentur omnes fiues terrae, In thy seed (said God) in that
seed of thine shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. To David also God
declared likewise this promise, and said; Psalm. 131.
De semine tuo ponam super soliu^ tuu^, Of the truit of thy body shall I set
upon thy seat. And so in the time of Esaias his prophet, god continued this
promise, and said; Esa. 7.
Ecce virgo concipiet, and pariet filium cuius nomen erit Emanuel, behold, a
virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son, whose name shall be Emanuel,
that is, God amongst us. And hereunto witnessed all the Patriarchs and
Prophets, even from the first beginning of the world, unto the time of the
coming of our Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore, because the whole Scriptures,
the Patriarchs, the Prophets, spoke thus plainly of Christ, and declared his
coming. Christ said, Scrutamini Scripturas, Ioh. 5.
illae enim testimonium perhibent de me, search you the Scriptures, for they do
bear witness of me. Likewise again to the Scribes and Pharisees, he said,
Si Mosei crederetis crederetis and mihi, Ioh. 5.
If ye believed Moses, ye would believe me, for Moses also has written to
me; he has told you of me, said Christ, and therefore if you believed him,
ye would also believe me. And thus all the whole body of the Scriptures bare
record of the coming of Christ: the Patriarchs knew long before that Christ
should be borne: the Prophets prophesied of his coming into the world. But
when Christ should be borne, when his glorious coming should appear, that
neither the scriptures declared, neither the holy Patriarchs knew, nor the
Prophets were able to show. And therefore said Christ, John 8.
Abraham voluit videre diem meum, Abraham would feign have seen my day, and he
saw it, and therefore he reioiced. But how did Abraham see it? with bodily
eyes? no, but in faith, and because he was in faith able to see it, therefore
he rejoiced. What then if he had with his eyes seen Christ, if he had talked
with him, if he might have touched and embraced Christ: what joy would he have
made? how would he have rejoiced and been glad? No doubt, as the birth of
Christ was most acceptable and welcome to al good men in that time, so was his
coming much longed for of the holy Patriarchs and Prophets before time: for
they well knew that his time should be a time most acceptable, that then all
things should be in quietness, unity and concord in every place, peace
through the whole world. And therefore said Esaias the Prophet, Esa. 9.
Et vocabitur princeps pacis, He shall be called the Prince of peace. And to
declare this more plainly, the same Prophet says, Esaias 11.
Then shall the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard shall lie down by the
Goat, Bullocks, Lions, and cattle shall keep company together, the Cow and
the Bear shall lie together: and there shall be no crying, no wayling, no
noise heard in the streets. And therefore this Prophet Esaias in another place,
considering the great joy, the great felicity that Christ should bring into
the world, when he should be borne, cried out and said, Disrumpe coelos, and
descend, Esaias 64.
O Lord said he, break the heavens and come down. And so another Prophet in
like foreseeing this great felicity that should ensue the birth of Christ,
said, Quis viuet, and videbit haec? O who shall live to enjoy this merueilous
felicity? When Christ was come into this world, though then not borne, but in
his mothers womb, John the Baptist being a babe, and in his mothers belly
also, yet at the Majesty of his Lord, Luke 1.
and at the presence of Christ, he sprang for joy, and leapt in his mothers
womb. So likewise at the birth of Christ, for joy that the Angels in heaven
conceived thereat, Luke 2.
they sang Gloria in excelsis Deo, and in terra pax hominibus, Glory be to God
on high, and in earth peace unto men. After that time when Simeon that holy
prophet had in spirit perceived the true Messiah, and Savior of the world to be
born, and had received Christ into his arms, Luke 2.
he cried out and said, Nunc dimittis seruum tuum Domine, secundum verbum tuum
in pace, Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word:
Now, even now that this sight is provided before the face of the whole world,
that so long has been looked for, now that light is appeared which shall be
the light of the Gentiles: Now, O Lord, said be, let thy servant depart in
peace, I have lived long enough to see thy salvation.

Thus, good brethren, all the Scriptures throughout, the Patriarchs, the
Prophets, showed long before unto us, the joy and felicity that should come
upon the whole world, at such time as Christ should be borne. And therefore to
confirm all this that they before had prophesied of him, Christ here said unto
his disciples, Blessed are the eyes which see that ye see. Blessed are your
eyes, said Christ, for your eyes have seen Gods promises performed: that
promise which he made to Adam, saying, The seed of the woman shall break the
head of the Serpent: Your eyes have seen that promise made unto Abraham, The
seed wherein all nations shall be blessed: That promise also your eyes have
seen performed, which God made unto David, saying: Of the fruit of thy body
will I set upon thy seat: You have seen, and do now see that Emanuel, of whom
Esaias prophesied: You, I say, have seen that thing, whereunto all the
Patriarchs, all the Prophets, and the whole body of the Scriptures do bear
witness: You do see and behold him, whom Abraham would gladly have seen: You
see him, whom Esaias calls the Prince of peace: him, in regard of whom the
Prophet cried out, and said, O who shall live to see this great joy? You see
him, at whose presence Saint John the Baptist being in his mothers womb,
sprang, and leapt up for joy: him, at whose birth the very Angels in heaven
sang, Gloria in excelsis: him, whom Simeon pronounced to be the Savior of the
world. All this, said Christ, you see, you my disciples, your eyes do see all
this, and therefore blessed are your eyes, happy and blessed are the eyes that
see which ye see. In the beginning, Heb. 1.
says S. Paul, God spoke diversely, and by sundry means unto his people,
sometimes by dreams, sometimes by revelation, sometimes by prophesies,
sometimes by Angels, and sometimes by his own voice: but now in these days
he has sent amongst us his own son: by him, says he, God has declared
his will unto us clearly and plainly, even by the mouth of his own son. When
S. John the Baptist baptized Christ in the river of Jordan, it pleased God the
Father to cry from heaven, and say, Hic est meus filius dilectus, Luke 3.
ipsum audit, This is my beloved son, hear him, hearken unto his voice, give
ear unto his doctrine: for he it is to whom both the law and the Prophets have
their respect. And S. Paul says, Colloss. 1.
Mysterium absco^ditum a saeculis nunc autem reuelatur per Iesum Christum, the
mystery, that high mystery of man's salvation, that has been so many hundred
years hid, is now revealed by Christ our Savior: so long it has been hidden,
says Saint Paul, and now it is opened and showed unto the whole world by
Christ. Therefore blessed are your eyes, said Christ, yea, blessed are the eyes
which see that ye see, for your bodily eyes see that which the Angels did
lack, you see that which the Patriarchs and the Prophets never saw: you, said
Christ, you my Disciples are blessed that see me, that hear my gospel and
believe the same, and therefore blessed are your eyes, and the eyes which see
that you see. For otherwise the Scribes saw Christ as the Apostles did, the
Pharisees saw him as the Aposles did, and yet were they always Scribes and
Pharisees, that is, such as withstood Christ, and gainsaid his doctrine:
Caiphas saw Christ as the Apostles did, and yet he rent his clothes, and said,
that Christ was a blasphemer. Mar. 14.
Pilat saw Christ as the Apostles did, and yet he gave judgment against
Christ. Luke 23.
Judas saw Christ as the rest of his fellows the Apostles saw him, John 13.
and yet he betrayed Christ. Math. 27.
The Soldiers, and such as hung Christ on the cross, saw Christ as the
Apostles did, yet were they wicked men, and did put Christ unto death. Shall we
then say, that these men's eyes were blessed? that the eyes of the Scribes and
Pharisees were blessed? that Caiphas eyes, Pilats eyes, Judas eyes were
blessed? shall we say, that the Soldiers eyes, and the eyes of them that put
Christ unto death, were blessed, because they saw Christ, and beheld his body?
O good brethren, these men saw Christ, and yet saw him not: they saw him with
their bodily eyes, and yet they knew him not: they saw him as the Ass, the
Wolf, and the Dog saw him: they saw him as the devil saw him, Luke 8.
and said, Tu es filius Dei, Thou art the son of God: thus they saw Christ as
touching the body, but they saw him not as the Apostles saw him: they saw him
as a man, but not as the son of God: they saw him as the son of a
Carpenter, Luke 4.
for so they said he was, Math. 13.
but they saw him not as the Apostles saw him, to be the very son of God:
they saw Christ as a miserable man, but the Apostles saw him as the Savior of
the world. And therefore Peter was bold to say, Math. 16.
Tu es Christus, filius Dei viui, Thou art Christ, the son of the living God.
And again he was in like able to say, Ioh. 6.
Tu habes verbum salutis, Thou have the words of life. Thus the Apostles saw
Christ, and believed him to be the redeemer of the world, and therefore Christ
said unto them, Blessed are your eyes, and the eyes which see that you see. For
I say unto you, many Kings and Prophets would feign have seen the things that
you see, and could not see them.

This promise, good brethren, of the birth of Christ, and his coming into the
world, to redeem mankind, was made long before, yea, it was promised by God
the Father, even in the first beginning of the world, as I have already
declared unto you. And therefore in hope of the performance of this promise,
many a godly man did put his affiance in Christ, and long before his coming
had a fixed trust in the merits of his passion. The Patriarchs, the Prophets,
and all such as lived under the old law, had the same Law and Testament that
we now have, they had the same doctrine, the same faith, the same prayer, the
same Sacraments that we now have: we drink of Christ, and so the Jews
drank of Christ: 1. Cor. 10.
Bibebant de petra, petra autem erat Christus, They drank of the rock, says
Saint Paul, and the rock they drank of was Christ. They were circumcised, and
so are we: for, says Saint Paul, Colloss. 2.
We also are circumcised, but with circumcision without hands: We are
circumcised, but we are circumcised in heart by the power of the holy ghost.
The Patriarchs and the Prophets knew well, and believed, that by Christ they
should be redeemed, that by his only blood, shed on the cross all the world
should be saved: but this they knew, this they saw, only by faith, and in
spirit, for then was not Christ borne: we have the lamb of God offered up for
us, and so had they the same lamb offered up for them. For S. John says,
Apocal. 13
Agnus oblatus a principio mundi, Christ was the lamb offered up from the
beginning of the world. 1. Pet. 1.
And now therefore, forasmuch as the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and the holy men
in old time, had the same ^^^^ament, the same doctrine, the same faith, the
same prayer, the same Sacraments that we have: forasmuch as they drank of
Christ, as we do: forasmuch as they were circumcised, and so are we: forasmuch
as they did believe that they should be saved by the death of Christ, as we
do, shall we think that they were not blessed? that their eyes were not as
happy as ours? that they saw not as much as we do? Shall we think that Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and diverse other such good men, lackt any part of their
felicity? Or if they were blessed, why said Christ only to his Apostles,
Blessed are the eyes which see that ye see? When our Savior Christ said thus,
blessed are your eyes, and the eyes which see that ye see, he meant not and
peculiar blessing given unto them alone, but he signified the blessing of that
time: as if he should have said, blessed is this time, blessed are the days
that you see. For there is in times and seasons a great difference and
diversity. Some one time is blessed, another is accursed. The time of the
wicked king Manasses, 4. Reg. 21.
wherein the Testament and law of God was burnt, Baals altars reedified, and
Idols set up, was a miserable time: this time, I say, of Manasses reign, was
an accursed time. 4. Reg. 23.
But the time of Josias, wherein the law of God was restored again, Baal cast
out of the Temple, the Idols pulled down, and all good orders again set up in
their former estate, was a blessed time, a time most happy; and blessed was he
that lived to see that time. So likewise the time of the birth of Christ was a
blessed time, and the time of Antichrist a time accursed. And therefore Christ
oftentimes wept over Jerusalem, and said, Luke 19.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest my Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, O that thou knew the time of thy visitation: O that
thine eyes would once see, thine ears hear, and so thou would know when God
has sent his son unto thee. Romans 13.
Saint Paul says, Nunc tempus est nobis a somnis surgere, Now is the hour for
us to arise from sleep. Nox praecessit, dies autem illuxit, The night is past,
and the day now begins to shine: and therefore in conclusion, he says, 1.
Cor. 6.
Ecce nunc tempus acceptabile, Behold now is the acceptable time, behold now is
the time of salvation. These were blessed times, these were acceptable times,
that Christ our Savior and S. Paul spoke of, John 12.
Dum habetis lucem, ambulate in luce, Whiles you have light, walk in the light
says Christ, receive the light, and so shall you be the children of light. And
so that time was a blessed time: because Christ was borne in that time, because
the force and power of the devil was by Christ then destroyed, because the
dominion and kingdom of satan was then thrown down, therefore was it a
blessed time. But as touching the blessing of the men in times long before, men
were as blessed as they were then: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and such
other, were as blessed as the Apostles. They had the same Christ, the same
Savior and redeemer that the Apostles had. For says S. Paul, Hebr. 13.
Jesus Christus, heri, hodie, and semper, Christ, is for yesterday, this day,
and for ever. One Christ served for all the world. Otherwise most miserable
were we, and in most wretched condition were all such as either now live, or
have lived sithence the time of Christ. For we never saw Christ in the flesh,
we never beheld his body, we were never conversant with him on the earth. But
Christ has told us by S. Thomas, (...)
Beati qui non vident and credunt, blessed are they that believe and have not
seen, blessed are they that see not, and yet believe. These things be for our
great comfort. For although we never saw Christ with our eyes, though he was
never conversant with us, as he was with his Apostles, yet have we through him
the same salvation that the Apostles had, we have him our redeemer and Savior
as they had him.

Now let us compare this saying of Christ unto our selves and our time: let us
see whether this that Christ then spoke to his Disciples, may not be spoken of
us, and our time. For thus ought we to read Gods word, to this end we should
read the Scriptures of God. Now therefore, good brethren, let us consider well,
and see whether the Church of God has not been so disordered before our time,
yea, and in our time, that we may now well say, blessed are our eyes, and the
eyes which see that we see: for many a good and godly man would said have
seen that we see, and could not see it. I will be short, I will not long
trouble you in this thing, I will not use many words unto you herein. The
errors that have been taught and preached in the church of Christ, have been
(good brethren) so gross, that such as could not see them with their eyes,
might have felt them even with their fingers: so horrible, and so gross were
the errors in the church: so were all things confounded, and scarcely the form
of the Church left unto us. But that this should so come to pass, Christ
himself, S. Paul, S. Peter, and Daniel the Prophet, long time before gave
warning to the world, and prophesied it should so be. And even as they spoke,
so has it come to pass, look what they said, the same have we seen
fulfilled. For Christ himself openly showed, that the time should come, Math.
24.
that desolation should stand in the holy place. And again he said, When the
son of man shall come to judge the earth, think you that he shall find any
faith upon the earth? As if he should have said, when he shall come to judge,
there shall be no faith on the earth, no fidelity and trust among men, so
shall all things be confounded, and no faith shall be found. Saint Paul likewise
says, 2. These. 2.
The time shall be, that Antichrist shall nestle himself in the Temple of
God, in the consciences of men, in the place of Christ, and shall be exalted
above all that is called God, or Gods service. And he says further, 3. Tim. 4.
Erit tempus cum sanam doctrinam aspernentur, The days shall come, when men
shall despise and cast away all wholesome doctrine: the time shall be (says
he) that they shall not suffer this Gospel that I have preached, these
Epistes, and letters which I have sent unto you, But they shall turn their
ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fables. This S. Paul aforehand
told us, and indeed we have found his tale most true. 2. Pet. 2.
S. Peter also says; Erunt magistri mendatiorum, There shall come Preachers
and teachers of lies; there shall come false teachers, which privily shall
bring in damnable sects. Daniel likewise that Prophet of God, Dan. 9.
long before the coming of Christ, prophesied and said, Antechrist shall come,
there shall be an abominable desolation in the Temple, it shall be destroyed
al, and the truth shall be cast flat to the ground.

Now, good brethren, consider well with your selves, where should this
desolation be, which Christ spoke of? Amongst whom shall so small faith be
found? Where should Antechrist nestle himself? Where should good Doctrine be
despised? where should there be preachers and teachers of lies? Where should the
truth be cast flat to the ground? where should all these things come to pass?
Amongst the Turks, the Sarasins, the Heathen, the Infidels? amongst such as
never heard of Christ, nor his Gospel? should these things, that Christ, that
S. Paul, that S. Peter, that Daniel prophesied to come to pass, should they
(I say) be fulfilled amongst them? Let not us deceive our selves, good
brethren, Christ said that desolation should come into the holy place, that
such as professed God and his name, should have little faith. S. Paul said
that Antechrist should sit in the holy place, in the Temple of God: that
amongst Christians wholesome doctrine should be despised, and cast away: S.
Peter also, that even amongst the professors of Gods Gospel, some there should
be that should preach and teach lies: And Daniel likewise, that in the Temple
Antechrist should sit, and there al truth should be cast flat to the ground.
And this should not come to pass among the Heathen and Infidels, but in the
Church of Christ, even in the very Church of God. S. Hillarie, who was an old
father in the Church, says: O you will soon deceive your selves if ye trust
in the walls, know you not that Antechrist in the Church? Let us not therefore
deceive our selves, let not us, good brethren, deceive our selves. And here I
pray you consider with me, how that God, for our better understanding, has in
similitudes opened and set forth unto us the state of his Church. For Christ in
the Gospel compares his Church unto a ship in the Sea, tossed and tumbled
with perilous waves: and what I pray you, betides unto a Ship so tossed in the
Sea, if there be no Lodes-man to stir it, or if the Lodes-man does not his
duty, Christ has likened his Church to a vine: Esaias. 5.
and what becomes to a vine, if it be not shred and underpropped? He does also
liken it to a flock of Sheep: Ioh. 10.
and what becomes to a flock of Sheep, if there be no Shepherd to guide and
look unto them? And now therefore consider with me, I pray you, even from the
mean Priest, to the Bishop of Rome, consider, I say, whether they have done
their duties: which of them all has done that which is required in them,
which of them has fulfilled that God gave them in charge to do. Christ to his
Disciples, and in them to all such as should become Preachers, Mat. 16.
gave this Commission, saying, Ite, and praedicate, Go you and Preach: and
what is he that ever saw the bishop of Rome in a Pulpit? who has heard a
Cardinal many times preach? Judge you then (my brethren) when shall the ship
come safe to the haven, if the Lodes-man does not his duty? When shall the
Vine bring forth any fruit, if the husbandman apply not his diligence to dung,
to shred, to underprop the same? What shall become of the flock, if the
Shepherd shows not his industry and earnest labor amongst them? Now let us
consider a little further, what they were what should have bin our Lodes-men:
what they were that should have played the good husbands in Gods vineyard: what
they were that should have looked to the flock of Christ. Here will I declare
nothing of my self, I will not here utter unto you any thing of mine own
invention; I will only show you the minds of the ancient Doctors in the
Primitive Church, and the sayings of old holy fathers, that have written of the
Church of God. Saint Gregory speaking of the Church of God, says, Ecclesia
Dei, si ab vno pendebit, corruet, If the Church of God shall hang upon one man,
if the whole sway thereof shall depend upon one alone, that Church must needs
fall, says S. Gregory. Now let us consider whither in times past it has bin
so in the Church of god, whether we have known one man to have called himself
the head of the Church: and if it so be, how can it then be otherwise, but that
the same Church must needs perish and fall. Saint Barnard, an old holy father
writing of the Bishops and Prelates of the Church in his time, says; Non sunt
Pastores, sed Impostores, non Doctores, sed Seductores, non Praelati, sed
Pilati: They are not (says S. Barnard) good Pastors and feeders of Gods flock,
but they are impostors, such as deceive Gods sheep, they are not Doctors, but
they are seductours, such as lead men out of the right way: They are not
Prelates, but they are very Pilates. And again, the same Saint Barnard, in
the Council holden at Rhemes, where he made a Sermon in the presence of the
Bishops there assembled, said; Habemus iam non mercenarios pro Pastoribus,
neque Lupos pro mercenarijs, sed in loco Luporum; Daemones habemus, We have
not now, said this holy Father, hirelings in steed of Sheepe-heards, nor Wolves
in steed of hirelings, but in place of Wolves, we have very Devils. This
spoke Saint Barnard of the Preachers and Pastors in his time. But O miserable
is that Church, wherein are hirelings in steed of good Sheepeheards, more
miserable, where are Wolves in place of hirelings, and most miserable, where
Devils in room of Wolves. For then all goes to ruin and decay, then must
needs all goodness in Gods Church be overthrown.

And so was it then, so was it in his time, said this old Father S. Barnard. So
Platina also an ancient writer; Defecit tum maiestas Imperatoris, and
sanctitas Episcopi, When the Bishop of Rome, said he, took so much upon him,
when he would be called, Universal Bishop, and head of Gods Church, then
decayed the Majesty of the Emperor, and the holiness in the Bishop. Saint
Hillarie likewise says; The Church wherein Gods word is not preached, must
needs run against the rock. Tertullian also, Miremur si fides deficit, cum
non sit instructio? Do we marvel (says he) if faith fail, if faith be
not found amongst men, sithence there is no Preaching, no teaching, no
instruction? Even so anotherold writer speaking of his own time, says,
Calamitosa est desolatio in Domo Dei, There is an horrible desolation in the
Church of God. And therefore also he says further, Nos sumus, in quos feces
terrae deuenerunt, We are they, upon whom all the dregs of the earth are
fallen. So Chrysostom: If you (says he) perceive it to wax dark in the
vale, you say it is toward night, if you see it begin to be dark on the hills,
you say it is nigh night: but if you see it once dark in the sky, you say it
is high night: So if you see ignorance in the people, you may say it i^ toward
night, if you see ignorance in the Priests, it is almost night, but if you see
ignorance and little learning in the Bishops and Prelates, then may you well
say, it is high night.

Barnard that holy father in another place speaking of the Priests of his own
time, says, Nothing is now safe amongst the Clergy, all things are
confounded, all things out of order; and therefore there is now nothing left,
but that Antechrist be revealed. I recount here nothing unto you, my brethren,
but only the sayings of the ancient Doctors and holy Fathers which have
written of Gods Church in times herebefore, and therefore I trust you will
believe them the better. The same S. Barnard of whom I spoke before, says
also: It appears now that there is no persecution, no Martyrs done unto
death: Nay not so, says he, it is not so, for now even they that sit highest
in the Church of God, they that bear the greatest stroke therein, they begin to
persecute and destroy Gods servants. And again, speaking of the Priests and
Prelates, They would seem to be Gods friends, yet they are his enemies they
would be Christ's kinsmen, yet they are his adversaries, they would be servants
to Christ, and yet they serve Antechrist. And thus, (Good Brethren) it has
bin in our time, and you your selves have seen it, you your selves have seen
that the whole Church has hanged on one man alone: that such as should have
bin Pastors, have bin deceivers: such as should have bin teachers of the right
way, have bin seducers and guydes into blind ways: such as should have bin
Prelates, have bin Pilates. You your selves have seen in the Church of God
hyrelings in steed of good Shepherds, wolfes in place of hyrelings, and very
devils in the room of wolfes. All these things have bin spoken of before, That
the Majesty in the Emperor, and holiness in the Bishop should decay: that
where Gods word is not preached, there must the Church needs run against the
rock: that it is little marvel if faith fails, where good instruction
wants: that pityfull desolation is come into the house of God: that we are
they upon whom the dregs of the whole Earth are come: that it is then high
night, when ignorance reigns in the Bishops: and lastly, that there is
nothing now left, but that Antechrist be revealed. All these things have been
spoken of before, and are now come to pass, and you your selves have seen
them, you your selves, I say, have seen all these things fulfilled. You have
seen such sit highest in Gods Church, that have persecuted God and his Church:
such as have martyrd the servants of Christ, such as would seem Gods friends,
and yet are his enemies: such as would be Christ's kynsmen, and yet are his
adversaries: such as would be servants to Christ, and yet do serve Antechrist:
such as Esaie speaks of, saying, They have broken down my vine, and
destroyed my wine press: such as Christ himself speaks of, and says, Math.
21.
They have made my Church a den of thieves. Therefore (good Brethren) let not
us deceive our selves, let us not say all things were well in the Church, there
needed no reformation, all things were as they should be, there needed nothing
to be amended. For, alas, all things were out of order, all things out of
square, all things so confounded, that all things needed to be amended. I
speak herein only generally, I speak not here of the particular things amiss
in Gods Church, for then should time fail me, if I should recount them unto
you particularly. In time past, if any one man would have sought comfort for
his afflicted conscience, where should he have sought it? whether should he
have gone for comfort? where should he have craved consolation? what comfort
could we have of our own merits, what help by our own deserts, and good
deeds? what consolation of the Popes Bulls and Pardons? Alas, no comfort, no
consolation, no help at all. And yet unto those were we taught to run, in
those were we taught to seek comfort, and at them to crave consolation. In the
Church, before time, it has been both said and sung unto the people, Tu per
Thomae sauguinem, fac nos ascendere vbi Thomas nunc est, Thou Christ, by the
blood of thy Martyr S. Thomas, make us worthy to ascend thither, where Thomas
now is. This, I say, as a prayer has been used and sung in the Church of God.
The Mother also, that blessed Mother of our Savior Christ, has bin openly
blasphemed in the Church: she was called, Spes, vita, dulcedo, Our hope, our
life, and our sweetness; and further, Salua omnes sperantes in te, Save all
them that trust in thee. Thus have men openly prayed unto her, to the great
blaspheming of her holy name. But O Christ, O thou that suffredst for the
whole world, where was then thy Passion, where was then that precious blood of
thine that washed away the sins of Man, where was then the Lamb of God that
redeemed all mankind? Loath I am to speak of these things, loath and sorry I
am to repeat them here unto you, but I am enforced so to do, somewhat the more
plainly to open unto you the great abuses, the wonderful Errors that long time
have reigned in the Church of God. We had Prayers, but, alas, as they were
used, they were no prayers: we had the Sacraments, but we knew not to what end
those Sacraments were left unto us. We had Baptism, but we knew not what
Baptism meant. The Testament, and holy Gospel of God, was burnt, cast down,
and trod under foot. And in one word, in one word for all, there was in Christ's
Church nothing but a heap of wickedness, nothing but a very heap of confusion
and wickedness. Jeremy the prophet said, That all men, Ier. 31.
(after Christ once appeared) should have such knowledge, such perfect knowledge
of God, that no man should say to his neighbor, know the Lord, for all men
should know him, even from the highest unto the lowest. Baruch also the
prophet, Baruch. 4:
said, O blessed art thou Israel, how happy art thou, seeing God has showed
unto thee all such things as are pleasant unto him; what ever God would have
known, that is revealed unto thee. O then, what may we say of our selves, and
the blind time that is now past, wherein we neither knew God, nor had Gods word
revealed unto us? what may we say of that time? O we may well say, miserable
were we, and cursed was that time wherein we then lived.

And thus (Good Brethren) I have in few words laid open before you, both the
miserable estate that Gods Church has stood in, and the great ignorance,
error, and blindness that you have been led in: to the end, that you may now
become the more thankful for Gods great mercy showed unto you. For now has
it pleased Almighty God to reveal unto you his holy Gospel, his truth, and
verity. Now we know that what ever we do, when we have done all things that
we can do, yet, we are unprofitable servants. Luke 17.
Now we know that all our comfort, all our consolation, all our helps, is to
be sought for at Gods hands alone: Now we know, that Christ is only our Savior,
our Redeemer, and that his blood alone, as S. John says, has washed away our
iniquities: 1. Ioh. 1.
Now we know what we pray: Now we know wherefore, and to what end the
Sacraments were left unto us; what our Baptism means: Now have we Gods
Testament and his helie word restored unto us: Now we need not to say to our
neyghbor, know the Lord; for we all are, or may be, sufficiently instructed to
know God, to know Christ, to know the holy Ghost. Now may we say, as Baruch to
the Children of Israel, O happy are we, for all things that God would have
known are revealed unto us. And therefore blessed are our eyes, and the eyes
which see that we see; And on the other part accursed are those eyes which will
not see that we see, accursed are the ears which will not hear that we hear,
and accursed are those hearts that will not believe God, and his Gospel. My
Brethren, consider the miserable estate that the Church of God long time has
stood in, and consider again, the speedy redress thereof, which God now has
sent unto us. The kingdom of God is come upon us, Gods kingdom (my Brethren)
is even now come upon us. Christ said, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
stonest my Prophets, and such as are sent unto thee, O that thou would know
the time of thy visitation. We are that Jerusalem, Christ has called, Christ
has cried unto us: O therefore let us now see and consider the time of our
visitation. O how many of our Brethren which have suffered persecution for
Christ and his Gaspell, how many of them, I say, would feign have seen the
things that we see, and hear that which we hear, and could not see it. O let
us not despise our Brothers blood, let us not despise the calling of christ,
let us not despise the blessing of God, the greatest that may be. Alas, if we
consider the miserable estate that we have stood in, and the great goodness
and mercy of God now showed unto us, doubtless we cannot despise this great
mercy of his, unless we will be too unthankful, we cannot neglect this
merueilous work, and goodness of his, unless we will be counted too much
ingratfull.

Let us therefore make our selves new hearts, new souls, new minds, let us
joyfully embrace God and his Gospel, let our eyes, our ears, and our hearts
say, Blessed are the eyes which see that we see, and ears which hear that we
hear: for many Kings and Prophets have desired to see that we see, and could
not see it. And thus if we do, then shall we be blessed, then shall our eyes,
our ears, our hearts, be blessed; and God the father of light, and giver of all
goodness, shall bless us, and remain with us for ever. Amen.

THE SIXTH Sermon.
2. Cor. 6. verse. 1. 2. 1. We therefore as helpers, exhort you that ye receive
not the grace of God in vain.

2. For he says, I have heard thee in an acceptable time, and in the day of
salvation I have succored thee, etc.


SAint Paul, after he first began to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel,
and testify the name of Christ unto the whole world, as he was much troubled
with false Prophets, false Teachers, and such as seduced the people from God;
even so he found a number of them among the Corinthians, to whom he wrote this
Epistle, or Letter. Some of them, to discredit Paul, and bring an evil
opinion of him among the people, said he was an enemy unto Moses, one that
sought to abolish the Law given by Moses, and such a one as despised and brake
the same. Some other said that he was a teacher of false doctrine, a seducer of
the people, one that dissented clean from the rest of the Apostles, yea, and
such a one as disquieted the whole Church of Christ. All these things were
reported by S. Paul, thus was he slaundered, thus was he evil spoken of: and
this was done even by such as professed the name of Christ. Therefore he
feeling himself herewith touched, and perceiving also that this not only
touched him, but God him self, thought good by his Letters to avoid this
slander so risen, and to clear himself unto the Corinthians, among whom this
evil brute first sprang of him. And therefore in the Chapter before, he said,
Christ has committed unto us the preaching of the atonement, and so what ever
we do, what ever we teach, or preach unto you, is only to this end, to show
our selves instruments of the reconciliation between Christ and you.

Now then are we messengers in the room of Christ, and therefore, even as
though God did beseech you thorough us, so pray we you, that ye be at one with
God; and further we exhort you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.

Almighty God perceiving the frailty and weakness of this nature of ours,
even at the first beginning of the world pronounced thus, Genesis 6.
and said, Pronum est cor hominis ad malum, a inuentute sua The heart of man is
prone and ready unto evil, even from the cradle. This God himself saw well
in our weak nature, and therefore he spoke thus of it. So dull are we of our
selves, to learn any good, and so quick are we to forget the same, so ready
are we to fall unto vice, and so hard are we to incline unto virtue. And this
has been ingraffed in us, this has been grounded in this nature of ours,
even from the beginning, and this will so continue in us whiles the world
lasts. The heart of man has always been ready to fall from God, and decline
unto vice, always prone unto evil, and hard to be won unto good. And
therefore it behooves all such as are Preachers, all such as are messengers
sent from God, and will show them selves as trusty and faithful servants, it
behooves them not only to show their message, to declare their commission, but
they must also encourage them to whom they are sent, they must improve, rebuke,
exhort, and control them, and that in time and out of time, in season and out
of season, that their message may be fruitful, and they found faithful. So
Paul to Timothe says, Insta oportune, importune, 2. Timo. 4.
Preach the word, be fervent, be it in season, or out of season, Do the work
of a Preacher, be earnest, call upon them, both in time, and out of time. And
even this thing that he willed his Scholar Timothe to do, the same performed
he in him self; 1 Thessalonians. ^.
I have not ceased, says he, to Preach unto you, to teach you both day and
night. So likewise in another place, he says, Act. 20.
Mundus sum ego a sanguine omnium vestrorum, I am clean from the blood of you
all, I am pure from the blood of all men: For I have kept nothing back, but
have showed you all the counsel of God. So in like, he says, Quis infirmatur,
2. Cor. 11.
and ego non infirmor? Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is hurt in the
faith, and my heart burns not? As who would say, there is none of you all, no
not the least of you, that is grieved, but I also am grieved, none of you
troubled, but I also troubled, none of you made weak, but I also am made weak
with him. Gal. 4.
So Paul again says, Filioli mei, quos iterum parturio, My little children, of
whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be fashioned in you. Thus was S.
Paul always careful for the salvation of the people: thus was he continually
mindful of the safeguard of his Brethren, and what ever grief or
disquietnesse fell to any of the flock of Christ, the same was a grief and
disquietnesse unto him. And thus must every good Preacher do, thus must all
such do, as are sent messengers from God, and will show them selves faithful
servants, and true workmen in Gods vineyard. We must do that which longs
unto us, and then will God do that longs unto him. We must admonish the
people outwardly, and God will move their hearts inwardly. Saint Paul speaking
of him self, of Apollo, of Cephas, and other such, 1. Cor. 3.
notable in the ministry of God, says, Paulus plantauit, Apollo rigauit, at
Dominus dedit incrementum, Paul planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the
increase. God it was, yea, God alone that gave the increase.

These things, I speak now to them which have taken upon them the ministry
of Gods word, to them that have taken upon them to be guides unto the flock of
Christ, to them I speak this, to put them in remembrance, that they never
forget their message, that they forget not their duty, that they improve,
rebuke, exhort, and control the people, that they be earnest and fervent,
calling still upon them, both in time and out of time, in season and out of
season, that they fulfill the office whereunto they are called, that their
conscience may be found without spot: and in conclusion, that they may plant,
that they may water, and God may give the increase, that they may both reform
the ungodly, and encourage the godly. And this have we in our commission,
this is our duty, this will be required of us; and this if we do not, we
shall be found faulty: for, we are debtors unto all men, Romans 1.
as well unto the Page, as unto the Prince, unto the poor, as unto the rich,
unto the foolish, as unto the wise, unto the bad, as unto the good. And
therefore, (my Brethren) even for this cause alone, all good and godly
Preachers, and such as were sent from God, have ever been so zealous, and so
much desired the salvation of Gods people. Moses, when he saw the people of
Israel after their deliverance from Captivity by the mighty hand of God, fall
from God, forsake him, and forget the wonders that he had wrought for them, he
cried out unto God, Exodus 31.
and said, O domine, me potius de leas de libro vitae, Sooner then that these
perish, O Lord, wipe me out of the Book of life, let my name be stricken out of
it. So Paul, Romans 9.
Cupio Anathema esse pro fratribus meis, I wish my self to be accursed from
Christ for my brethren, I would that I might be cast away, so they might be
saved.

O my brethren, consider these hearts, consider, I say, the zealous heart that
Moses, the zealous affection that Paul had unto the salvation of the people.
What think you is it to be stricken out of the book of life? What think you
is it to be a man accursed, and have portion among reprobates? Moses was
content to be blotted out of the book of life, so that the people of Israel
might be saved. S. Paul was content to be accursed and cast from the face of
God, so that Gods people might not be cast to perdition. Thus they of an
earnest heart and zealous love they bare to the congregation of God, wished
their own destruction for the safeguard of others. Therefore also it behooves
you, my brethren, you that are temporal men, it behooves you on the other
part not to despise Gods messengers, not to set light by them that preach you
the Gospel and glad tidings of your salvation. For this is the only means
whereby it pleases God that we should be saved, this only is it whereby the
people is won unto Christ. God might have sent an Angel unto the chamberlain
of the Queen Candace, Acts 8.
and so have converted him: but he sent Philip, he sent Philip, I say, a poor
and mean man, that thorough his preaching he might be won to the faith and so
brought to salvation. God might have sent an Angel to Cornelius, Act. 10.
but he sent Peter, who instructed him in the faith, and wan him to the Gospel
of Christ. God might have sent an Angel unto Paul to have mollified his heart,
and so turned him from persecution of Gods Saints: but it pleased God to send
Ananias, Act. 9.
that thorough the putting on of his hands the scales should fall from his
eyes, that by him he should receive his sight, and be baptized, and so by
means of a man he might be brought home unto God, and made a member of his
flock. Therefore whenever we hear the word of God preached, notwithstanding
the preacher bear no pomp of eloquence or show of great learning,
notwithstanding he be a simple and poor man: yet if he bring unto us the rule
of Christ's Gospel, if he teach us the will of GOD, and the glory of his
word, let us not despise him, let us consider that he is Gods messenger, and
appointed by God to help us to salvation.

I beseech you, says Saint Paul, that ye receive not the grace of God in
vain. This only Boun I ask of you, this is only the request that I make
unto you, that ye take not the grace of God in vain. A great matter it were
if any one man would misuse the grace of his Prince, a great matter it were for
a man to despise the friendship of his friend, or the gentleness of his
enemy: but a greater matter it is, yea a far greater matter, to take the
grace of God in vain. For what avails it us, what should it profit us, if
GOD once deliver us from our sins, and we turn again to our old wickedness?

What gained we, if the covenant of God, and Testament of our Savior Christ
be broken unto us, if we receive the same in vain? Luke 11.
Blessed are they (says Christ) which hear the word of God, and keep it. The
Scribes, the Pharisees, the Jews, Annas, Caiphas, and Pilate heard the word of
God, heard Christ himself speak and preach amongst them, and yet they received
this word of God in vain, they received this grace of God in vain. Christ
likened his word to a sower that went forth and sowed his seed, whereof some
fell by the way side, and so wast trodden with men's feet and destroyed, some on
the stone, which took root, but yet soon withered away because it lacked
moistness, some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprung up with it and
choked it. So the poor husbandman lost in manner his whole cost and labor, for
of all that he sowed, little fell into the good ground and brought any
increase. And even thus stands it with Gods Gospel now a days: for preach
we never so often, teach we never so much, few, yea very few are found that
receive the same, and continue therein, and so bring forth fruits of salvation.
When Moses the servant of God, was but a little time departed from the people,
Exodus 32.
and gone up into the mount there to talk with God, and ask council of him,
the people by and by made themselves a golden Calfe, and fell to the
worshipping of that Image. And this did they because they received the grace of
God in vain. When Moses was dead, and Joshua succeeded into his room,
straight-waies the people worshipped Baal and Astaroth, they forsook the
living Lord who had delivered them, and in steed of him they worshipped very
Devils. And this did they because they received the grace of God in vain. Saul
though he once was the servant of God, and inspired with his spirit, yet at the
length he fell from God and persecuted David the chosen of God, and so in the
end miserably slew himself. 1. Reg. 28.
And this did he, because he received the grace of God in vain. Judas being
one of the Apostles, and the servant of Jesus Christ, yet he not only betrayed
his master Christ, but also became himself a very devil: Ioh. 6.
for so said Christ, Vnus vestrum Demon est, One of you is the Devil. And
this did he because he received the grace of God in vain. And therefore S.
Paul in this place willed the Corinthians that they should not receive the
grace of God in vain, as the people did in Moses time: that they should not
receive it as they did which lived in the time of Iosuah: that they should not
in such sort take it as Saul did: and lastly that they should not so receive
it in vain as Judas did, and work their own destruction. This was his
request, this thing he only desired, that they would not receive the grace of
God in vain.

For God says, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee. These words are written in the prophecy of
Esaias, and pronounced they were by him of the appearance of Christ our Savior,
and his coming into this world. And these words thus spoken by the Prophet, S.
Paul here fitly applied to the preaching of Christ's gospel. For like as our
Savior came into the world at such time as Christ was borne; so when the
Gospel is truly preached, and Gods holy word sincerely taught us, then is
Christ opened unto us, then is the acceptable time, and our salvation, is
wrought thereby. Therefore S. Hierom that holy father and old Doctor of the
Church, says; Quotiescunque audimus Euangelium Christi, toties caro and
sanguis Christi funduntur in aures nostras. As often as we hear the Gospel of
Christ preached unto us, so often the flesh and blood of Christ is powered into
our ears, says S. Hierom. And these words of his do plainly and most
evidently show us, how we should understand the eating of Christ's body, and
drinking of his most holy blood in the Sacrament; these words, I say, may
sufficiently teach us what is meant by the eating and drinking of Christ's body
and blood. This is it that S. Paul here speaks of, that they receive not the
grace of God in vain. And whenever the gospel of God is truly and sincerely
preached, and it received accordingly, then is the acceptable time, then is the
time of grace and salvation. O what a comfortable saying is this; whenever we
hear the Gospel taught us, whenever we hear Gods holy word preached unto
us, then is the gate of salvation set open unto us, and then is the time of
grace. And on the contrary part, when Gods word is taken from us, and the
light of his Gospel hidden from our eyes, then is the gate of salvation shut
upon us, and then is the time of perdition. But alas, the time of grace, the
acceptable time, the time of mercy and salvation has oftentimes but little
continuance among us, oftentimes it has small time of abiding with us. For
before Christ appeared, and was borne into this world, for the space of four
hundred years, the whole world, the Jews only excepted, was in ignorance and
altogether blindness. And when Christ was borne, when he once appeared, then
was the acceptable time, then was the time of grace, then was the time of
salvation. Here some man will peradventure say; Why did God suffer the whole
world so long to be in blindness? why would he in that long time have no
respect to any other nation, but only to the nation of the Jews? This case is
deep, and passes our capacity to reason, it is above the reach of man's wit,
and therefore herein we have only to submit our selves, to humble our hearts
and our minds, and say with Paul the Apostle, O homo quis tu qui Deum arguis? O
man, what art thou that find fault with God? What art thou that reproouest
the almighty? As God of his providence and good wisdom has appointed for us
both Summer and Winter, the spring, and likewise the fall of the leaf again:
So has he ordained a time of light, and a time of darkness, a time of
salvation, and a time of destruction. And no man may say unto him, Why do
thou thus? These things seem good in his eyes, and therefore what art thou,
Romans 9.
O man, that wilt call God to account why he does this, or why he does that?
Thus it pleases God, and stands with his good will, oftentimes to show us
his light, and the glory of his gospel: and oftentimes again to take the
same from us, and leave us altogether in blindness, altogether in ignorance,
altogether in utter darkness. (...) 8.
For so he has said by Amos his Prophet, I will send an hunger upon the
earth, not the hunger of bread, nor the thirst of water, but an hunger to hear
the word of the Lord: so that they shall go from one Sea to the other, yea,
from the (...) unto the East, running about to ^^ke the word of the Lord, and
shall not find it. Christ himself also in the Gospel, Math. 21.
says, The kingdom of God shall be taken away from you.

And yet, when he has thus done, when he has sent an h^nger and thirst of
his wor^ into the ^arth, when he has taken Gods kingdom from amongst us; yet
I say, he oftentimes powers down his t^ueth into the earth, he distilleth
his grace from heaheauen, that it may sink into the hearts of men: For so
says God by his Prophet Malachie, Malach. 1.
Abortu solis, vsque ad occasum, magnum est nomen meum inter Gentes: My name is
great, even from the rising of the Sun to the fall thereof, amongst all
Nations. I am a great King (says the Lord) and my name is fearful amongst
the Heathen. This is the time that the Prophet Esaias calls The acceptable
time. And what needs more examples? the whole Scriptures, both the old and the
new Testament, are full of these and such like other.

There are times that are times of knowledge, there are times again that are
times of ignorance. And who is there now, what man so old, or child so young,
but may well remember the blindness that has been in our time, and our
fathers times before us? Who is so blind, who so far past knowledge, but may
both well see and remember the dark ignorance that has been in times past,
and the great grace that God has now powered down upon us in these our days?
Therefore as Saint Paul gave the Corinthians warning that they should not
receive the grace f^ God in vain: even so now he warns us, and bids us
beware that we take not this grace of God in vain, that we turn not to our
old vanity again, that we return not to our former wickedness, that we
defile not the Gospel of God by our evil and corrupt living. And therefore in
another place he says, Give your members as instruments of righteousness
unto God, Romans 6.
and let not sin have power over you. Herein is set out unto us, and as it
were painted before our eyes, our whole office and duty, and how that we as
well by our works, as our words, should be an example and pattern for other
men to follow, and that we give no cause of offense or slander of the Gospel
of God. I speak this not only to the Preachers and Ministers of Gods word
(though chiefly to them indeed) but I speak it generally to all you my
brethren, that profess Gods Gospel, and bear the name of Christ. For S. Paul
indifferently to all men says, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Ye are not the children of darkness, but the c^^i^ren of light, walk you
therefore as becomes the children of light. And again in another place, he
says, Give no man occasion of evil, offend no man, 2. Cor. 6.
that in your office ye be not found faulty. And such was in old time the
life of all good and godly men, such was their living that professed Gods
Gospel, and the name of Jesus Christ.

But if it so happen (as oftentimes it chances) that men will needs be
offended with us, live we never so uprightly, walk we never so circumspectly
(as Christ, notwithstanding he was the Savior of the world, notwithstanding
he was without spot, and one that never transgressed the law, yet was called
the Stone of offense:) 1. Pet. 2.
If it thus happen, I say, that we be ill reported of without cause, then may
we say, as Christ himself to the Scribes and Pharisees said, Sinite illos,
caeci sunt, duces caecorum: Math. 15.
Let them alone, they are blind, the leaders of the blind. This is the comfort
that we have, this is all the comfort that is left unto us, if any man
wilfully be offended with us, if any man judge of us other than we deserve: for
so it behooves us to line, so ought we to direct our lives, that if any man
accuse us, if any man find fault with us, our upright living may be a
testimonis against him, and be able to confound him. ^. Cor. 6.
S. Paul says, it is our part to take away occasion of offense. When Christ
by procurement of his enemies, (the Scribes and Pharisees) was brought before
Pilat to be condemned and adjudged to death, the innocence of his (...) was
such, that he was cleared and a^^^i^ed even by the mouth of his very enemy:
For when Pilate had heard all that was laid against him, and (...) whole
accusations wherewith they (...) him, he pronounced openly, and said, I find
(...) fault in this man. The Scribes when they had nothing to accuse Christ's
Disciples of, nor nothing wher^^ they might entrap them, (...) of their Law,
they came unto our Savior Christ* and said, Quare non obseruant Discipul^^^
traditiones (...)? Why do not thy Disciples observe the traditions of our
fathers? Why keep they not the customs of our elders? said they. And upon
this place of the Gospel, Saint Chrysostom an old Doctor of the Church, says
thus: That the Disciples of Christ in all points so exactly fulfilled the law,
that the Scribes could find no fault in them as touching the same: and
therefore they controlled them for breaking their own traditions, and the
traditions of their forefathers. Traianus that Emperor of Rome, and most
cruel persecutor of the Christians in his time, when he had used al kind of
extremity toward them, and indeed put a wonderful number unto death, and
heard say, that they all suffered merueilous patiently, and willingly went so
execution, and that notwithstanding th^^, they daily increased and grew more
and more: he sent abroad into all parts of his dominion, to understand what
manner of men they were, of what (...), and in what sort they lived, that (...)
the name of Christ: And (...) ha^ from (...) Gentleman of (...) and a Magistrate
in that City; (...) said, That they were men without (...) and lived without
offense, as touching the laws, saving that in the morning they used to resort
together, and so make their prayers, and call upon the name of Jesus.
Tertullian also, an old father of the Church, says, that in his time this
report went of one Scianus, a Christian, and was amongst all men so common a
saying, that in manner it became a proverb: Marcus Scianus, vir bonus, si non
Christianus. This was all the fault they could find in him, That he was a
Christian man, and one that professed the name of Christ. So the same
Tertullian in another place speaking of the Christians in his time, says,
Vide, appellant se fratres and mori volunt pro inuic^m: Lo, they call
themselves brethren, and one will die for another. This was the only fault they
found in them, that they loved so together, that one would vouchsafe to die for
the other: this was I say, the greatest fault, that they could find no fault in
them.

Thus was it amongst Christians in the beginning of Christ's Church, and thus
ought it to be amongst us: so should we live, that we may be found
vnreproouable and unspotted in the sight of all men. And therefore Saint Paul
here says, that we should walk in such honesty, in such uprightness of
life, That we give no man occasion of evil, that in our office there be found
no fault: that if any man would accuse us, he might be controlled by our
virtuous life: that our enemies have nothing to lay to our charge, nothing to
accuse us withal; but that even their own mouths should acquit and discharge
us: that in our selves and our lives, there should none other fault be found,
but only this, that we are called Christians: that we should in such love
live together, that one of us would willingly dye for the other: And lastly,
that this only fault should be in us, that we are clean and without fault,
that both our words, works, and deeds may testify us to be professors of God,
and his holy gospel.

Good people, let us consider that God of his goodness has sent unto us this
acceptable time, the time of mercy and grace: that he has delivered us from
the horrible thraldom that we sometimes lived in: that God has put away the
blindness, and dispersed that great darkness where under the whole word was
sometime whelmed: that we may now worship him in spirit and holiness, without
superstition or idolatry: that we may now walk in the light, without any
error or wandering. And this great blessing of his, who so sees not, I pray God
open his eyes that he may both see and understand it.

Let us not, good brethren, let us not take this grace of God in vain, let us
not despise this Gospel of Christ, whereby the whole world is saved. God
knows how long this acceptable time, this time of grace, this time of
salvation, shall last and continue amongst us. And what know thou* O thou
man, whether by one only Sermon many may be converted, and won to the faith
of Jesus Christ? Acts* 4.
Saint Peter by one only Sermon converted five thousand people, ^s it
appea^^th in the Acts of the Apostles.

Saint Hierome has a saying worthy to be noted, and it is this: I know not
says Saint Hierome, whether that soul may be saved, that is negligent in
hearing the word of God, and the Gospel of his salvation preached: I know not,
says he, whether such a soul may be saved. Alas, good brethren, we are not
able to save you, God is your only Savior and redeemer: we are but Gods
messengers sent unto you, we are but helpers appointed to exhort you to the
Gospel of God, and to open unto you the glory of your salvation. If you then
will wilfully refuse to hear Gods holy word, and will not embrace the same,
we cannot save you, we are not able to work your salvation. I my self rose
up ever betimes to warn my people, Ier. 7.
says God by his Prophet Jeremy, I my self stand all the day at the gate
crying unto them to commune with them, yet would they not hear, I called unto
them, yet would they not answer me.

O my dear brethren, God knocks, let us open the gates of our hearts unto
him: he calls, let us hear him: he cries, and wills us to come unto
him; O therefore let us run, let us make have, Esaias 65.
let us fly unto him. I have ever stretched out my hands to an unfaithful
people, says God by his Prophet Esaias: all the day long have I stretched out
mine arms unto a people that will not hear me: all the day long have I
stretched out my hands unto them, and yet they will not know me: I have sent
you the acceptable time, I have given you the days of grace, the days of
mercy, the days of salvation. O then let us not receive this acceptable time
in vain, let us not take this grace of God in vain: Let us remember how many
thousands of people perish this day for want of the gospel of God, and
knowledge of his holy word. We are they whom God has called to be his
children, whom he has appointed to be saved, whom he has received to his
grace and mercy. If we have any great policy, if we have any great wit, if
we have any learning, riches wealth, and felicity in this world: let us
consider that we have them from God alone, that God gives us our policy, that
God gives us our wit, that God gives us our learning, that he alone gives
us our riches, our wealth, and all other felicity that we have in this life.
O then let us not take these great gifts of God in vain, let us not take these
graces of his in vain. Let our lives so shine before men, that they may see
our good works, and glorify our father which is in heaven. Amen.

THE SEVENTH Sermon.
Romans 12. verse. 16. 17. 18. 16. We desire you, that ye think all one thing,
that ye have like affection one to another. Be not high minded: be not wise in
your own opinion.

17. Recompense to no man evil for evil.

18. If it be possible have peace with all men.


Dearly believed in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, This Epistle, or letter
of Saint Paul, written unto the Romans, is divided into two several parts.

In the first part, Saint Paul instructs and tells them of the beginning of
their religion, of the foundation of their faith, of the grace whereunto they
are called by the merits and death of Jesus Christ. And, for because he saw and
well perceived, that even such of the Romans, who had received the faith, to
be farce from the works of the faith, and the profession of the gospel of
Christ, therefore he instructs them that they know the testament of Christ,
that they know the covenant of their salvation: and that they should remember,
that where before time they were strangers from God, clean without any promise
of grace, enemies unto God, and the children of perdition, were now called unto
God, were become the sons of Abraham, Gods dear friends, and the children of
adoption: and this not of any desert of theirs, not by any merit of their own,
but only through the great grace, and mere mercy of Jesus Christ. For the
whole world was covered under wickedness, the whole world, I say, the Jews
only excepted, was overwhelmed in sin, and had no promise at all of any
salvation by God. But yet when Christ Jesus the Savior of all the world
appeared, and the Jews would not acknowledge him their redeemer, it pleased
God by him to save the whole world, and call unto his grace as well the Gentile
as the Jew, the uncircumcised as the circumcised: and this did he only of his
infinite and great goodness. And therefore Saint Paul in the conclusion hereof,
cries out, and says, Romans 11. 33
O the deepnesse of the abundant wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Who knows
the mind of the Lord? who was his Counselor? Who has given unto him first,
that he might be recompensed again? And therefore he concludes thus: Romans
11. 36
Quia in illo, ex illo, and per illum omnia, illi omnis honor and gloria: For
of him, through him, and for him are all things: to him therefore be glory
for ever. Thus does Saint Paul conclude the first part, to know the covenant
of their salvation, to know the greatness of Gods mercy, whereunto they are
called, and to give the praise and thanks therefore to him alone.

In the second part, which I now handle, he instructs them of a virtuous
life, of honest conversation, and upright living among all men. For it is not
enough to change our Religion, it is not sufficient to alter our faith, but we
must also change our old life, we must walk in newness of life, we must
walk in holiness, we must walk as becomes the professors of a new
Religion, as becomes them that are of a right faith, as becomes all such as
confess God and his Gospel. And therefore S. Paul writing unto the Hebrews
says; Heb. 10. 19.
Seeing that we by the means of the blood of Jesus have liberty to enter into
the holy place, let us draw nigh with a true heart in a sure faith, let us
provoke unto love and to good works. So in another place he says; You were
sometimes darkness, Ephe. 5. 8.
but now ye are light in the Lord, walk therefore as becomes the children of
light: So God himself when he had chosen the Jews to be his people, and them
alone amongst all other Nations to worship him, said; Deuteronomy. 10.
O Israel, what is it that I require or seek for at thy hands, but that thou
love me, and keep my commandments: This is the only thing that I would have
you to do, that you keep my Law and walk in my Precepts.

Therefore Saint Paul himself also, after he had declared and set forth at
large, the great goodness and mercy of God, he said, I beseech you, that ye
make your bodies a quick and lively Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
which is, your reasonable serving of God. Renew your spirits, make your selves
new hearts, that it may show and appear in you, that you are reconciled unto
GOD, that you are the children of adoption, and professors of Gods holy name.

Therefore be not high minded, be not wise in your own opinions: recompense
no man evil for evil: provide aforehand things honest in the sight of all
men: and if it be possible, have peace with all men. Mark well my brethren
these words by the way, If it be possible have peace with all men. Christ,
though he was the author so peace, and the true peace it self, yet could he
not have peace with all men. Non veni pacem mitt^re in terras, sed bellum, Luke
12.
sed discordiam, I am not come (says Christ) to send peace into the world, but
war and dissension: for from hence forth there shall be five in one house
divided, three against two, and two against three. The Father against the Son,
and the Son against the Father. The mother against the daughter, and the
daughter against the mother. The peace of the world is no peace with God: the
love of this world is no love before God.

So the Patriarchs and the Prophets, though they were men of peace, yet could
they have no peace in this world. And therefore Saint Paul here says, If it
be possible, as much as in you shall lie, have peace with all all men, be in
unity and love with all manner of men. This thing, my brethren, I have put you
in remembrance of by the way.

But that S. Paul should thus do, that he should exhort the Romans, as he
here does, that they become not high minded, nor wise in their own opinions,
nor recompense no man evil for evil, and that they should, if it were
possible, have peace with all men, good cause there was, there was, I say, good
cause, why he should thus do. For there were at the same time in Rome, a great
number both of Jews and Gentiles, and amongst them there was great strife and
division. The Jews on the one side esteemed not the Gentiles: the Gentiles on
ye other side despised the Jews. Thus between them the people were divided,
and rent into dissension: thus between them the whole people oftentimes were
ready to fall together by the ears: and thus thorough them, were they at such
great contention and strife that they that were brethren would not vouchsafe to
commune, and talk together: they that before were linked in such love and
united together, that one would die for the other, could not then one abide
another: and such as were friends, became open enemies. And this came to pass
only through pride. Pride was the cause that such as were brethren fell out
one with another: pride was the cause that such as should have died one for
another, could not one abide another: pride was the cause that such as
beforetime were friends, became then open enemies. The Jews on the one part
were proud, for that they were the children of Abraham, Romans 9.
for that they were under the Law and promise, for that they had knowledge of
Gods will by Oracles, for that God had oftentimes both sent his Angels unto
them, and spoken by his own mouth unto them; and the Gentiles had none of all
these: they were not of the seed of Abraham: they were not under the promise:
they never had knowledge of Gods will, neither by Oracle, nor vision: God never
spoke unto them, nor never sent his Angels unto them. The Gentiles on the other
sides, were as proud as the Jews: they said that they had wise men amongst
them, men of great learning and knowledge: they had Philosophers, they had
Astronomers, they had Geometritians, and great Orators; and so had not the
Jews amongst them: They had no men of great wisdom, they had no men of any
high learning, they had no Philosophers, no Astronomers, no Geometricians, nor
Orators; they were men ignorant, and without any great knowledge at all. Saint
Paul therefore to set an unity between these two which were thus far at
discord, exhorts them that They all think one thing, that they be of like
affection one toward another: that they be not high minded, nor wise in their
own opinions. For pride it is that breaks all love, and pride it is that
breeds all dissension. There was never yet division, there was never any
discord or dissension, but Pride was the first cause and author thereof.

Lucifer, that sometime was an Angel of GOD, set himself against GOD, and
said; Exaltabo me super Aquilonem, and ero similis Altissimo, I will get me up
above the North Pole, I will sit above the clouds, and I will be like unto the
most highest. And this did he, for that he swelled with pride. And therefore
was he thrown down, only for this great pride of his was he cast into utter
darkness, and deep dungeon of hell.

Coral^, Number. 16.
Dathan, and Abiram, being puffed us with pride, conspired against Moses and
Aaron: but God caused the earth to open, and swallowed up both them, and all
such as then were in the Tents with them.

The Jews themselves, which had professed the Gospel of Christ in Saint
Paul's time, were divided; and some of them said; I stand with Paul, some
other said; 1. Cor. 1.
I hold with Apollo, and so were drawn on either side.

And this did they only thorough pride. But alas, says Saint Paul, Is Christ
divided? both Paul and Apollo preach one and the same Christ unto you, they
teach you all one Gospel, is Christ then divided amongst you? So likewise some
of them, which professed Christ's Gospel (because all meats and drinks were
indifferent unto them, Romans 14.
because they could with safe conscience indifferently eat of all meats and
drink of al kinds of drink) were proud, and thought themselves more perfect
than other men. On the other side, such as had a conscience therein, such as
could not for conscience sake indifferently use all kinds of meats and drinks,
were likewise proud, and thought themselves more holy than other men.

And thus pride, even amongst such as professed Christ and his Gospel, brake
the love and unity which should have been amongst them that lived under the
Gospel. Pride it was that caused the Jews to hate the Gentiles, and the
Gentiles to despise the Jews. Pride it was that caused Lucifer so much to
exalt himself, and make himself egall with God. Pride it was that caused
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, to conspire against Moses and Aaron. Pride it was
that caused such as could indifferently eat all meats, to think them selves
more perfect than such as could not so do. Pride it was again, that caused the
other which could not indifferently use all meats, to think them selves more
holy than the rest. Therefore in this place S. Paul wills the Romans for
avoiding of all dissension, first to put away all pride, which is the very
root and mother of all discord. Be not high minded, said he, for so shall you
abate this rancour and malice among you, but humble your selves, humble your
courage; be not proud of your wit, of your great learning, of your eloquence,
but make your selves egall to them of the lower sort. This is the golden chain
of humility. For like as pride is the mother of all wickedness, so is
humility the mother of all virtue: like as pride makes us like unto Lucifer,
so humility makes us like unto Christ. Therefore Christ him self, when he
first gave his Disciples charge for to preach, when he first gave them in
commandment upon the mount, to publish abroad his Gospel, Luke 6.
Beati pauperes, said he, and why so? quoniam ipsorum est regnum caelorum,
Math. 5.
Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of God. And again, Beati
mites, and why so? quoniam ipsi possid^bunt terram, Blessed are the meek, for
they shall inherit the earth. So again, to his Disciples he said, Math. 11.
Discite ex me, quia ego mitis sum, Learn ye of me, for I am meek, I am
gentle, learn this of me said Christ. Philip. 2.
So Paul, Hic sensus sit in vobis, qui fuit in Christo, Let the same mind be in
you, that was also in Christ Jesus: which when he was egall with God, yet
nevertheless made himself of no reputation, and humbled himself unto death,
even the death of the Cross. So David, notwithstanding he was a King, a
Prophet, and a man chosen, even according to the heart of God, yet he humbled
himself, and said, Psalm. 131.
Non ambulaui in magnis, neque in mirabilibus super me* I am not high minded, I
have no proud looks, I do not exercise my self in great matters, which are
too high for me. 1. Cor. 1.
So Paul, God has chosen the foolish things of this world, that by them he may
be able to confound the wise: he has chosen the weak things, that thorough
them he may subdue the strong. Thus God uses humble and lowly things, Psalm. 8.
says S. Paul, Ex ore infantium et lactantium perfecists laudem tuam: Out of
the mouth of very babes and sucklins have thou made perfect thy praise, even by
the mouths of infants and sucking babes thou have ordained strength, and spread
abroad the glory of thy name. So Paul, notwithstanding he was a great learned
man, and skillful in the Laws among the Jews, yet he bragged not, nor boasted
of his great knowledge he had, but he humbled himself, 1. Cor. ^.
and said, Ego me arbitror nihil scere nisi Christum, and eum quidem
crucifixum: I think thus of my self, that I know nothing, save Jesus Christ,
even the same that was crucified, other knowledge have I none to auaunt my
self of said S. Paul. And upon this foundation of humility, it pleased
almighty God, at the first to erect and build his holy Church, upon his
Apostles, I say, who were the very paterns of meekness, it seemed good unto
God to build his holy Church. And after them such as were of the congregation
of Christ, such as professed the name of Christ, were not proud men, were not
men of haut courage, nor high minded. And therefore, as we read in the Acts of
the Apostles, Act. 4.
Erat illis cor vnum, and anima vna, They were all of one heart, and one mind
together. So at the beginning, the Disciples of Christ were poor in spirit,
and therefore were they meet to inherit the kingdom of Heaven: they were
meek in heart, and humble of mind, and therefore were they meet to possess
the earth: they learned at Christ to be meek and lowly, they had the same
sense in them that was in Christ, and therefore they humbled them selves unto
death: they were counted the foolish things of the earth, therefore were they
meet instruments to confou^d the wisdom of the world: they were counted the
weak things, and therefore were they meet to overcome the mighty. The Babes
were meek and lowly, and therefore were they meet to spread abroad the glory
of God. Saint Paul of all his learning thought that he knew nothing, so much he
humbled himself: and therefore was he meet to be an Apostle of Christ, and
Preacher of his Gospel. There is a story, or rather a fable, written of S.
Anthony; whether you take it as a story, or a fable, I much recke not, but it
serves well for this purpose, it is thus. Saint Anthony on a time lay in a
trance, and as he so lay, he looked down from Heaven, (as he thought) and saw
all the whole earth so thick covered with snares, that possible it was not for
any man to tread upon the earth, and not be entangled therewithal: and this
when he beheld, suddeinly he cried out, and said, O Lord, and who can then
walk on the earth, and not be intrapped? with that he heard a voice that
answered him, and said, Sola humilitas, Only humility it is, said that voice,
that may go, and not be entangled; only Humility, and nothing else. Who so is
Humble, he may walk without danger, he may go and not be taken. This is
written that S. Anthony should see, and hear in his trance. But David, the
prophet of God, says in deed, Sacrificium Deo spiritus contritus, The contrite
and humble heart, is a sacrifice unto God, the meek and lowly heart is a
sweet and acceptable Sacrifice unto God, says the prophet David. So again, in
another place, Psalm. 138.
he says, Deus humilia respicit, and alia a long prospicit, God has regard
to the humble and lowly, and as for the proud, he beholds them a far off.
Esaie also, or rather God by his Prophet Esaie says, Esa. ^5.
Super quem r^quiescet spiritus meus, nisi super humilem? Upon whom shall my
spirit rest, says God, But upon the humble and meek? for otherwise, Tytus 3.
says Saint Paul, Qui inflatur, cadit, He that is puffed up with pride,
falls into the hands of the Devil.

Thus, (good Brethren) humility preserves the Church of God, humility
vphouldeth all good Commonweals. Pride it is that scatters the Church of
God, pride overthrows all good Commonweals. There was yet never pride in
any City without dissension, nor dissension that continued without destruction
of the whole Common weal. Ye shall never read in any record, either of City,
Kingdom, or Common weal, but that, if pride reigned therein, there
consequently followed dissension, and of dissension insued the overthrow of
the same. In the City of Rome, which was called the Lady of the whole world,
there were two that took upon them the governance of the Empire, Julius
Caesar, and Pompey. Julius Caesar was a man of so haught courage, that he could
abide no peer, Pompey was of such an high mind, that he could suffer no man
to be his egall. And thus for dominion, strove these two together: and thus
thorough their dissension, was not only the whole City, but the kingdom it
self brought to destruction. The state of the Gretians, which then chiefly
above other flourished, because it was divided, came to utter confusion. But
what speak I of these? what speak I of Rome, and the state of the Gretians.
Who is there that has not heard of Jerusalem, Jerusalem I say, that great
City, that same Town that God had chosen to him self, even that same Town
wherein God would have his Temple erected, and his holy name honored, after
that the Rulers thereof began to be divided, after that the Magistrates fell to
discord, and each man would be a Captain, and no man would be ruled: then came
the enemies in, then was it besieged, then was the Mother for very famine
constreined to eat her own child, then was it utterly destroyed, and no one
stone left upon an other; and which was most miserable, there were slain in
that City xj. hundred thousand people, and the very channels in the streets
ran all with blood. Thus miserably was it overthrown, and in such wretched
estate were the whole people thereof: and this only came to pass, thorough
pride and dissension. And this was it that Esaie long time before prophesied
of, and said, Then shall the whole Country be scattered, Esa. 3. 14.
when the people once conspire against their Princes. And therefore also an old
writter, Petrus Lilius says, Discord is the only cause of the overthrow of
Kingdoms; Division is the only cause that great Empires can not stand;
Dissension makes two kingdoms of one; Dissension makes of two Cities one,
and at length it makes of two kingdoms, no kingdom, of two Cities, no City.
This writes Petrus Lilius, of Dissension, this is the end of Discord says he,
and in deed experience has taught that this is most true.

But wherefore speak I of these things? wherefore do I here repeat unto you
these old and ancient histories? why recount I unto you the overthrow of Rome?
the destruction of the Gretians? the desolation of Jerusalem? which all happened
thorough Division. I would to God I saw nothing even now before mine eyes, that
causes me thus to say; I would to God, I say, that I saw now nothing present
before mine eyes, that causes me thus to say. But these examples, (my
Brethren) God has placed before our eyes, that we might take heed by them,
that we might the better look to our selves, and beware of our own
destruction. Christ has said, Christ that is the author of Truth, and truth
it self, Luke 1^.
has said, Ciuitas diuisa, desolabitur, The City that is divided, be it never
so rich, never so strong, never of so great force, yet, shall it be destroyed,
it shall be brought to utter desolation. Rome, that sometime was the wealthyest
City in the world, and called therefore the Lady of the whole world, fell to
division: and therefore was she overthrown, and utterly destroyed. The
Gretians, which were a people of greatest force, fell to dissension: and
therefore was their whole estate pulled down, and cast flat to the ground.
Jerusalem, that holy City, that City that was so strong, fell a sunder, fell
at discord within it self: and therefore was she spoiled of her enemies, and
brought to desolation.

Remember, (good Brethren) remember with your selves, how can that Ship which
saileth in the Sea, be safe in the midst of the waves, if the people within
the same boore holes thorough it, or rent up the ribs of the same? How can that
City be preserved, where no man will hear counsel, where no man cares for
the public state, where no man passes for other, where God is not in the
midst? 1. Ioh. 4.
Deus charitas est says S. John, and qui in charitate est, in Deo man^t, God
is charity, and he that dwells in charity, dwells in God. O, says
Solomon, Turris fortissima nomen Domini, The name of the Lord is a strong
Tower: The name of God saves the City. Psalm. 127.
David also the prophet of God says, Nisi Dominus custodierit ciuitatem, in
vanum laborant qui custodiunt eam: Except the Lord keep the City, except the
Lord defend it, says he, they labor in vain, they watch in vain that are
set to defend it.

These things, (good Brethren) appertain both to our office that are
Ministers, and appointed by God to instruct the people, and they appertain
also unto all Magistrates, yea and unto the whole people. As for us that are
Gods Ministers, and messengers sent unto you, we do stand upon the Tower to
cry, and give you warning that the enemies are coming, to show you before
hand that your foes are approaching: our part is to declare unto you, that your
fight is not against King, nor Caesar, is not against any Prince or power of
this world, but against spiritual enemies, against the Devil and his
adherents: our part is to dissuade you from dissension, to dissuade you from
discord and division. This must we do as well to the Magistrate, as to the rest
of the people: as well to him that bears office, as to him that bears none.
For, we are debtors unto all men, Romans 1.
as well to the rich, as to the poor, to the wise, as to the foolish, to the
good, as to the bad. This is also the Magistrates office, this is likewise his
duty. Therefore has God set him up, therefore has God exalted him above the
rest of the people, that he should guide them in peace, and lead them in love
and unity together. Thus did David, that good king; he found the whole
kingdom left by Saul his predecessor in dissension and division within it
self, he found, I say, the whole country at variance and great debate: but by
his great wisdom and good governance together, he reduced the same into good
order again, and such as before were enemies, he made faithful friends, and
the whole Country he brought to quietness, peace, and mutual unity. And
therefore, when he had this brought to pass, for joy that he had thus of
mortal foes, made loving friends, he sung, O quam bonum, Psalm. 133.
and quam iocundum, habitare fratres in vnum, O how joyful a thing is it, for
Brethren to dwell together in unity. So much it comforted him, so glad was he
when he saw his people agree together. Therefore in the Scriptures the
Magistrates are called Shepherds, Psalm. 78.
for that they ought so to guide the people committed to their charge, as the
Shepherd does his flock. Therefore they are called also Captains, Joshua 1.
for that they ought to have such respect to Gods people, as the good Captain
has regard to his Soldiers. Therefore likewise are they called the Heads, 1.
Pet. 2.
for that, like as the head governs the whole body, so should they rule and
govern the people, as members of their body. Therefore in like are they
called Fathers, for that the people are so in subjection unto them, as the
child is in obedience under his father. But chiefly it is required in them, it
is chiefly, and above all other things required in such as are Magistrates,
that they them selves know God, that they them selves, I say, above all other
men, have perfect knowledge of God, and his Laws; so that the people by that
mean may follow him, and they altogether may follow God. Therefore in the
Book of Deutronomie, God himself gave in charge to all such as should become
Magistrates, saying, He that is called to bear Office, what ever he be that
is appointed to be a Ruler, shall first write out all this Book of my Law with
his own hand. And again, he said, Non recedet liber iste ab ore tuo, Joshua 1.
This Book of mine shall not dcpart from thy mouth, this Book of mine shall
not be out of thy hand. This is Gods charge to all them that bear office, this
is his charge and commaundment given unto them. Therefore that good king David,
when God had appointed him to be king and chief Ruler of his people, Psalm. 132.
he said, Si dedero oculis meis somnum, aut palpebris meis requiem antequam
inn^uero domum Domino meo, and Tabernaculum Deo Jacob. If I shall give my self
unto sleep, or mine eye lids any rest, before that I find out a house for my
God, and a Tabernacle for the God of Jacob etc. as who would say, I will never
study mine own matters, I will never go about mine own business, before I
have established the matters of my God, and the business of the God of Jacob.
Therefore in like manner Ezechias, 2. Chro. 29.
that virtuous king, when he was called by God to bear office, would not go
home to his own affairs, before he had purged the Church of God. Justinian
also, that good and godly Emperor was wont to say, That he as much cared for
the preservation of Gods Church, as he did for the safeguard of his own Soul.
And thus, look what care David the prophet of God had over Gods people: look
what care that virtuous king Ezechias had: look what care that good and godly
Emperor Justinian had, the same, and the like ought every good Magistrate to
have: as David, Ezechias, and Justinian did, so should every good and godly
officer do: he must not give himself unto sleep, nor his eye lids unto rest,
before he has provided a Temple for the God of Jacob: he must not go home unto
his own house, before that he has purged Gods Church: he must have as great
respect to the salvation of Gods flock, as he has regard to the safeguard of
his own Soul: he must remember that his chair is Gods chair, that his sword
is Gods sword. Now (good Brethren) it behooves you of your part, to put away
all hatred, to abolish from him all pride, dissension, all discord, and to
honor the Magistrate, to follow you your Shepherd, as the sheep do their
shepherd: to joy in him your Captain, as the Soldiers rejoice in their
Captain: to be governed by him your head, as the members of the body are
ruled by the head: and lastly, so to be in subjection unto him, as the child
is in obedience and subjection to his father. And so shall there then be, both
a godly Magistrate, so shall there be godly people, and so shall there be a
godly Realm.

Now let us here think that Saint Paul speaks these words unto us (as
indeed he speaks them unto us, if we are, or will be called Christians) unto
us, he says; Be not high minded, unto us he says; Be not wise in your own
opinions: unto us he says; Recompense no man evil for evil: unto us he
says, If it be possible have peace with all men. O then, why are we of such
proud hearts? Why are we high minded? Why are we wise in our own opinions? Why
recompense we evil for evil? Why seek we reuengement? why agree not we
together? O by whose name shall I call you? I would I might call you brethren:
but alas, this heart of yours is not brotherly. I would I might call you
Christians: but alas, you are no Christians. I know not by what name I shall
call you: for if you were Brethren, you would love as Brethren: if you were
Christians, you would agree as Christians. Christ said unto his disciples, and
so by them to all such as profess his name; Ioh. 13.
Mandatum nouum do vobis, vt diligatis mutuo, sicut and ego dilexi vos, I give
you a new commandment, said Christ, that you love together even as I have
loved you. By this token, by this cognusance of mine shall men know you to be my
Disciples, if you love together as I have loved you. Let us look well upon our
selves, let us behold our selves well: alas, this badge, this cognizance is
gone, this peace that Christ left unto us, is not to be found amongst us.

O ye that sometime were brethren, but now mortal enemies, ye that sometime
ware this Badge, this cognizance of Christ's peace, which now ye have cast from
you, O how long will you follow vanity, how long will ye dwell in dissension?
I have done my part, I have called you to peace, I have called you to love, I
have called you to unity: do you now your parts, do you ensue after peace,
love you each other, continue ye in unity together. I have not the keys of
your hearts, I am not able to loose and open those stony hearts of yours: God
make you al one, God mollify you hearts, God make you friends, God grant you
to love as brethren together.

Let us lay aside this pride of our heart, let us not be wise in our own
opinions, let us not requite evil with evil, let us, as much as may be, have
peace with all men. Alas, it is no great thing that I require of you: I require
only your love, I require your friendship one toward another, I ask no more
but that your hearts be joined in mutual love and unity together. Alas, it
is a thing that soon may be granted of such as pray together of such as have
one heavenly Father, of such as are partakers of Christ's holy Sacraments, of
such as profess Christ, and will be called Christians.

O how can we pray our Heavenly father to forgive us, if we will not forgive
our brother wherein he trespasseth against us. How can we with clear
conscience come unto the holy Communion, and be partakers of Christ's most holy
body and blood, if we are not in charity with our own neighbor? Let us
therefore lay aside all discord without hypocrisy, let us lay apart all malice
without dissimulation, let us all join together in brotherly love, let us all
be of like affection one toward another, let us not be high minded, but let
us make our selves equal to them of the lower sort. So shall we make our
bodies a quick and lively Sacrifice, so shall we make them holy and acceptable
unto God, so shall we be reconciled unto God, and God reconciled unto us: and
finally, so shall we which are called Christians, be known to be Gods servants
and such as profess the name of Christ, if we shall be found to have this
peace and brotherly love, which is the badge and cognizance of Christ. And so
shall God be ours, and remain with us for ever.

Amen.

