A devout Intercessyon and prayer, to our savior Jesus Christ.

depiction of a scourged Jesus at the pillar

O Most merciful Jesus, my sweet savior, and most gracyous Lord god, I
thank the hyghly for that thou have create and made me of naught / and for
thy manyfolde benefytes and graces that thou haste given unto me here in this
world before many other / not only preserving me, from all vile and loathsome
syckenes, from shame and many mysfortunes, but also gyuynge unto me most
unworthy many great and inrecompensable gifts. All which gyftes-most sweet
Jesus, I wot verily and knowledge mekely comes of thy goodness only, and
nothing of my deserving, wherefore most mighty lord god, my creator, my
redemer, and most merciful savior Jesus Christ, which when we were lost /
bought and redeemed us again with thine own precious blod have mercy of me
most vnworthyest wretch, which has committed and done many great sins
and trespasces against thy merciful goodness, and has misspe^t thy gifts of
grace, that thou so louyngly did give unto me, and has so vngentylly behaved
my self to the, that surely I am much unworthy to be called thy sone, yet
most benyng lord Jesus, thou art so bountyfull of thy mercy, and pytie that
natwithstandyng my unkindness toward the, yet during my life I will put my hole
trust and co^fyde^ce in thy mercy. For thou co^maundest (I wot) to cry and
call upon the, that thou thereby might have occasyon to give unto us thy most
gracyous gifts. wherefore most glorious Ihesu which forsakest no sinner, but
gladly receyuest to thy mercy all the^ that mekely will call for it. Give me
now and ever grace to dread the, to love the, and to serve, the / with all my
heart and mind, with all my will and reason, with all my might power and
strength of body and soul. And grant me good lord that of all mine acts and
deeds done to thy will and pleasure, I may render all the honor, laud, and
praysynges unto the / as unto whom of very duty it belongs. And now I
beseech the most gracious lord, of thine infynyte mrcy, let all my mysspe^t
life in times paste be forgotten before the that I have consumed and spent very
ill, and send me good perseuerau^ce of virtuous living, that I may now from
hensforthe order my life here in this world to thy pleasure. First with
co^trycion to make a clean and a pure confession. Also my sweet savior grant
me time and space here to do penance and dew satysfaccyon with all their
cyrcumstaunces belonging thereto. And that I may ceceyue thy holy body in
form of breed very God and man, or I depart out of this world in clean
life. For the comfort and salvation of my sinful soul. And most merciful
Jesus I pray the to preserve me from sodeyn death, and send me my right mind at
my departing, with steadfast faith, very true hope, and fervent charity, and
most sweet lord Jesus Christ give me now thy merciful aid and grace to
pursue and follow always thy will and commandments, and to eschew mine own
frail will and desires / and the deuylles false entysementes. So that in thy
sight I may appear to be as I am named thy sone, and a true christen man. And
that after this life I may come to the sight of thy most glorious face in
heaven. Amen. Pater noster Aue maria. Credo.

Jesus nazarenus rex iudeoru^. Titulus triu^phalis defe^dat nos ab omnibus
malis, Amen. Sancte deus. Sa^cte fortis. Sancte et immortalis, miserere nobis.

we worship the Christ with praise and benediction.

For thou redemest the wordle through thy passion. Pray we.

Lord Jesus Christ goods sone of heaven, set thy passion thy cross, and thy
death, betwyxt thy judgment and our souls now, and in the hour of our death.
And vouchesafe to give to living men, mercy and grace, and to dead men
forgyuenes and rest / and to thy Church holy peace and concord / and to us
sinful parsons life and joy without end. Thou that lyuest and raygnest God
by all worlds of worlds. Amen.

The joyful passion of our lord Jesus christ led us to the joys of paradyce.
Amen.

Deus propitius esto michi peccatori.

In manus tuas dn^e co^mendo.
FINIS.
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer.


