THE LIFE OF THE GLORIOUS BISHOP S. PATRICKE APOSTLE AND PRIMATE OF IRELAND.
TOGETHER WITH THE LIVES OF THE HOLY VIRGIN S. BRIDGIT AND OF THE GLORIOUS
ABBOT SAINT COLVMBE PATRONS OF IRELAND.

At S. OMERS, For JOHN HEIGHAM, 1625. With Approbation.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
And the rest of his dear countrymen, the Catholics of Ireland, the
Translator wishes all happiness.
BEING to publish to the view of the world, and by way of dedication to present
to your worthy selves (dear Countrymen) this volume, containing the lives of
the three renowned Patrons of our Country, I deemed it very well befitting the
argument I handled, and the condition of the times we live in, to address the
self same Commonitory to you, that the Evangelical Prophet directed to the
Israelits: Isa. 50.
Attend (says he) to Abraham your Father, and to Sara your Mother that boar
you. For in these turbulent times, wherein the fury of armed heresy has thrust
her violent hands to the stelth of your choicest treasure, the Roman faith I
mean, which you have peaceably enjoyed during the revolution of many ages,
what is more powerful to stir up in your breasts the zeal of Catholic
Religion? What more able to kindle in your hearts the flame of perfect charity?
What more sovereign to scatter the clouds of your afflicted minds? Or what
more potent to breath into your souls the sweet gale of Christian comfort?
Then to offer unto your intellectual view, S. Patricke the Abraham from whom
you descended, and Irland the Sara, by whom you were borne? Truly on whom
soever of them both you cast your eyes, the contemplation of either him, or
her, will enrich your memories with the knowledge of so worthy matters, as are
able to glutt your minds with content, and ravish your souls with delight.

Vouchsafe then (dear Countrymen) to cast a fixed eye on the ancient dignity
of Irland, Lectiones Eeclesiae Tarente^sis de Sancto Cathaldo tractatus
Collegij Conceptionis fol. 8. and 9.
and you shall find, that she has exposed on the theater of the Catholic
Church, such firm pillars of faith, such burning lights of Religion, such
clear mirrours of perfection, such perfect paternes of sanctity, and such rare
miracles of learning, that other Christian Kingdoms are so far from
ouer-peering her, that few peer her in flying so high a pitch of true glory.
And fearing to be branded with the foul note of adulation, to your worthy
selves, or partiality to my dear Country, Thyreus in Panegiri de Sancto
Patricio.
I will keep within compass, so as I mean to produce nothing, but what has
been delivered from the pens of famous Authors, who either for their antiquity
claim veneration, P. Fitzimons in sua Brit^onomachia.
or for their learning deserve credit, or for their sanctity challenge
authority. Every Author I will allege by name speaking in his genuin sense,
if not in his proper words.

And to commence from the splendor of learning, I will not detain you with a
long discourse, touching our domestique Academies, Lupoldus Babarbugius dezelo
veter^ principu^ Germanorum.
Lismor, Dune, Cashell, Magon, Dublin, and Ardmach, the happy nurses, and
fecundious mothers of al human and divine literature, but will remit such as
are curious after fuller content in this behalf, to the perusal of the
lessons of of the Church of Tarentum: The treatise of the College of the
Conception: Bishop Thyrrie, and Father Fitzimons, and will my self pass to
take a Survey of foreign kingdoms, and externe Academies, S. Antoninus 2. p.
hist. tit. 14. cap. 15. 12.
that received from Irland the first beginnings, or at least the increase, and
propagation of learning. Lupoldus Babarbugius says: The French may be matched
with the Romans, by the industry of Clement the Irish man. Sabell. Ae^^. 8. l
9. Nauclerus tom. 2. vol 3. genesis 28.
This Clement to geather with one John a Monk by profession, and an Irishman
by birth, laid the first foundations of the famous university of Paris, which
was, and has been accounted for many Century of years, the flourishing Athens
of Christendom, as witnesses S. Antonine, Sabellius, Baron. to ^0, ad Ann.
876.
Nauclerus, Barronius. The same learned, and grave Authors depose in like
manner. That the renowned university of Padua in Italy, was erected by the
prementioned Irishmen, who were the founders of the universities of Oxford,
Landesfarne, and Malmsbury in England? Who were the erecters of the Academies
of Herbipolis, Cullen, Sengallensis, and Fulda in Germany? Who the authors of
Bobium in Italy, and Luxouium in France? Cambden. in impress. Londinensi fol.
185. 177. 267. 730.
Irishmen, as auerreth Cambden, the renowned English antiquary. What infinite
numbers flocked out of the Neighbor kingdoms into Ireland, to be enriched
with the ornaments of learning and treasures of piety, the foresaid learned
Cronicler consecrateth to posterity, telling us in these words: That his
Countrymen the English Saxons, did throug from all parts into Irland, S.
Adelmus in epi. ad Elfridu^ Regem.
as unto the mart of all good litterature, in so much that it grew to a common
Proverb among them of such as were given to their studies, he was sent into
Irland to be trained up. This we may further confirm from the suffrage of S.
Adelme, who in his epistle to King Elfride speaking of Ireland, says: It
flourished and was stored with as copious a number of Studients, as the heavens
were adorned with the syderiall beams of glittering stars.

These then were the burning lamps of learning, and brightsome lights of
wisdom that shined so gloriously at home, and extended their luster so
spaciously abroad, for the public good, and common benefit of all Europe.
Where you are to observe, that albeit they were men of rare learning, of
profound wisdom, of deep judgment, and subtle understandings, yet did they
submit their understanding, and judgments, and captiuate their wisdoms and
learning, to the obedience of faith: so that in all their number there was none
found to deny the deity of the second person, with Arrius, nor the divinity of
the holy Ghost with Macedonius, nor the truth of the real presence with
Calvin, nor the necessity of good works with Luther, none was found to be a
Manichean, Marcionist, Donatist, Eunomian, Anabaptist, or Puritan: none I say
was found among them to adhere to old sectmasters, or to follow new
Dogmatizers, none to embrace the heresies that grew in former ages, or sprunge
up in these later times; so happy was Ireland by the favor of heaven to live
still in the perpetual sunshine of Catholic Religion, without the
interpositio^ of any cloud of error or heresy. Neither was Ireland our dear
Country happy only, in co^seruing the integrity of faith, without any touch of
disloyalty, and being enriched with the treasures of wisdom and learning, but
she was much more fortunate, and fecundious in producing from out of her womb
miriades of Saints, S. Bern. in vita. S. Malachiae. Henric.
and holy men, whereof we have infinite proofs extant, of which I will, for
your comfort recite a few.

S. Bernard says, Out of Ireland, not only into the forementioned, but even
into foreign regions, Antisidore^. in epist. dedicatoria vitae S. Germani ad
Carolu^ Caluum. Ioselinus infra c. 19.. 4.
as it were after an inundation, such swarms of Saints did break out, of
whom S. Columbanus coming to these our quarters of France, there builded the
monastery of Luxonium, being made into a great nation. And Henricus
Antisidorensis says: What need I speak of Ireland, passing (almost all)
without any regard of the dangers of the sea to these our shores, with whole
troops of Philosophers, and the more skillfull any of them is, so much the
more willing is he to undertake a voluntary banishment, that he might serve our
most sage Solomon at will. And Iocelinus beneath in this volume says: Within a
short space, there was not a wilderness, noe nor scarce any corner, Theod. Ab
in vita S. Rumoldi.
nor place in all the Island, but was replenished with perfect Monks, and holy
Nuns, so that Ireland by a peculiar name was justly called, all the world
over, The Island of Saints. They lived according to the prescript, and tenor of
life, which S. Patricke set the^ down; for contempt of the world, Gaufridus in
vita S. VVironij. Mari^nus Scotus in Cronica l. 2. aetat. 7. anno 614. Guliman.
in vita S. Florent^^. Jonas Ab. apud Surium 21. Nouemb.
desire of heavenly things, mortification of the flesh, abdication of self
will, they matched the monks of Egypt, both in merit and number. Many foreign
regions were by them illustrated with doctrine, and religion. Theodorus Abbot
says: This island, as it surpasses all the world for fertility of soil, so is
it more blessed for the glorious simplicity of Saints. Gaufridus likewise
testifyeth: Scotland, which is also called Ireland, is a fertile I Will of Saints,
and equalling almost the number of stars, with the patronages of Saints.
Marianus Scotus says: Ireland is an Island full of saints, and very wounderfull
men. Gulimanus: Ireland is the shop of most holy and learned men. Jonas Abbot
says: Ireland for faith excels all the Neighbor Countries. Baronius:
Ireland is most constant in the Catholic Religion. Doctor Sanders: The people
of that Country, are far more Catholic, then many other Nations. Flodoardus
says: Ireland for faith, surpasses all the neighbor Nations. Card. Bar. ad
Annum 1503.
Ioannes Maginus: The Irish maint aine the Christian religion purely. Sanderus
descismat. Anglicano. Flodoard. in vita S. Hellani. Ioannes Maginus Patauiensis
t^n. 2. fol. 36.
These then be the testimonies (dear Country men) that learned and grave
Authors give to the sanctity, faith, and learning of Ireland.

But perchance your pious curiosity will not be satisfied with these general
notions, therefore I will descend to some particulers, and give a sight of a
few of the many trompets of truth, Joan. Mol in addit. ad Vsuardum and I^d. 51.
Belgij.
preachers of the gospel, and mirors of sanctity, which Ireland has
dispersed all Europe over, as witness Ioannes Mo^lanus, Antonius Yepes,
Venerable Bede, Wyon, the English martyrologe, Cambden, and others: Ireland
has sent S. Columbe the Great with his twelve holy companions into Scotland.
Yepes in Cron. generalib.
S. Columban with his twelve companions into France. S. Clement with his twelve
companions into Almaine. S. Buan into Island. S. Kilian into Franconia. Ord. S.
Benedicti.
S. Scruan into the Orcades. S. Brendan into the fortunate Isles. S. Aydan into
Northumberland. S. Finian into Marcia, Beda in hist. Eccl.
or the kingdom of the middle Englishmen. S. Albuin into Lorraine. S. Gallus
into Switzerland. S. Virgile into Carinthia. VVion in ligno vitae and appendice
Martyrologium Anglican. Cambden. vbi supra, and alij.
S. Cathald into Tarentum. Ireland has given the Diocese of Cambray S. Etton,
Adalgisus, Mombulus. And the Archbishop of Rhemes S. Abel. She has given to
the Diocese of Mecklin S. Pumold Archbishop of Dubline, and King of Irelands
son, and S. Hiniclin. To the Diocese of Liege S. Moman Martyr, S. Foylan,
Vltan and Bertuin. To the Diocese of S. Omers S. Luglius King of Ireland, and
S. Luglianus Archbishop. To the Diocese of Gaunt S. Liuin, and Columban. To
the Diocese of Antwerp S. Fredegand. To the Diocese of Namures S. Foranan,
and S. Eloquius. To the Diocese of Bruges S. Guthagon. To the Diocese of
Harlem S. Geron. To the Diocese of Ruremond, S. Wiron and Plechelmon. To the
Diocese of Balduke S. Dymphna, and Oda Martyrs, and Virgins of royal blood,
and S. Gereberne. These were the masters of faith, the Ambassadors of Religion,
the Evangelists of peace, Ireland employed in illustrating foreign Countries
(not to speak of Iliades, and millions that shined at home like so many
meridian suns) Pastors and Bishops (to use S. Augustines phrase) who were
grave, Aug. lib. 1. cont. Iuli^
learned, holy, earnest defendors of the truth, who sucked the Catholic faith
with their milk, and took it with their meat, whose milk, and meat they
ministered to the little and great.

Hitherto dear Countrymen, I have exhibited Ireland to your consideration,
giving you rather a transitory sight, then a full vieu of the beauty, and
majesty, the finger of the Almighty has imprinted on her face. Now it rests
that I present to your favorable aspects another no less grateful, and
eysome an object S. Patricke your glorious Abbot, from whom Ireland received
faith, religion, piety, and whatsoever else in this kind she holds glorious,
deemeth dear, or accounts honorable. Plauius Dexter in sua omnicomoda
historia.
I do not deny that S. James the Great came long before S. Patricke to plant
the Christian Religion in Ireland, as Flauius Dexter an ancient Author living
in the same age with Ierom, Ioannes Gill, and Vincentius Bellouacensis teach.
Grant S. Mansuetus an Irish man by birth, and disciple to S. Peter the Apostle,
was sent by S. Peter himself in the year of our Lord 49. to preach the
Gospel in Ireland, Vincentius Belloua. and Ioannes Gill.
as it pleases Fisingre^nsis Admit Palladius, suppose Cataldius, grant
Derlanus, Ytarus, Riaranus, and Hildebertus for the reduction of Ireland from
paganism, this notwithstanding the full reclaim and entiere conversion of
Ireland was reserved for S. Patricke, Fisingresis.
who won her to the detestation of Idols, and worshipp of one true and living
God, and this none will control or gain stand, but such as are possessed with
the spirit of contradiction, and who are more earnest to iangle, the^ desirous
to be informed of the truth. His life which here we offer you, will
abundantly teach how stupendous he was in perpetrating of miracles, how
admirable in all kind of sanctimony, and how enflamed with the zeal of gayning
souls.

He wrote as Pitseus witnesses, many works. Pitseus de illustrioribus
Brittaninae scrip. aetat. 5. fol. 90.
Of the future life of the Elect, one book. Of the three habitacles, one
book. A Iournall of Confession, one book. The history of Ireland, one book.
Offermons, one book. One book of Epistles against the superstitions of the
Gentiles. An epistle to the inhabitants of Aualon. Several epistles to the
Brittons. Several epistles to the Churches of Ireland. Hodeoporicon or
(Itinetarium) of Ireland, one book.

He lived an hundred and two and twenty years, most part of which time he
spent in reclayming the Irish from idolatry to the agnition of one true God:
during the course of so many years so fruitfully spent among us, his pen never
delivered, his tongue never uttered, nor himself never practifed indeed any
thing that might have the least color of favoring or establishing that
Religion, which the preachers of the fifth Ghospel proudly vaunt, and vainly
boast, to be the doctrine and faith of the Primitive Church. And since they
obtrude their new found Gospel on you, under the specious vizard of venerable
antiquity; lo we offer here S. Patrickes life, written by a learned pen 400.
years ago, and extracted out of the several volumes, S. Luman, S. Benignus,
S. Mel, S. Patricke the younger, and S. Leuinus have compiled of his famous acts
and stupe^dious signs. Lo I say we offer them Saint Patrickes life, who lived
in the purer times of christianity, let them examine it, let them search it,
and point us out what they shall find in it to countenance their cause, or to
advance their religion: but sure I am they will shrincke from such a
disquisition, as would turn to their notable prejudice and open confusion, by
discovering the fondnes and nouelty of their religion. For nothing will occure
here but quires of sacred virgins cap. 17.. 2. and cap. 18.. 4. and troops of
holy monks, ibid. etc. 13.. 5. cap. 12.. 3. They will admire at the frequent
mention of holy Vayles cap. 10.. 1. etc. 13.. 5. and Ecclesiastical tonsure,
cap. 4.. 1. Holy water, cap. 16.. 5. Vessels of holy oils cap. 15.. 4.
Hallowed fire, cap. 5.. 2. The sign of the Cross cap. 18.. 2. and alibi,
sound very harshly in Protestants ears. Our wiuing Ghospellers hold no
commerce, or society with a contine^t and chaste Monk cap. 20.. 3. cap. 22.. 1.
The refined Ritualists of Geneua, will never acknowledge our glorious Prelate,
walking in the majesty of a Roman Pallium. These delicate reformers, will
never challenge a religious, consumed with fasts and weakened with hayre-cloath
cap. 1.. 7. cap. 20.. 3. as a disciple of their sensual Palenesse, coming of
long standing in cold water cap. 20.. 3. a thing never practiced by our tender
^olifidians. Short and broken sleeps taken all alone on a hard flint cap. 20..
3. seem strange and absurd in the Theology of our libidinous Ministers, who
lie immersed in beds of down, not alone, but embracing their sweet hearts with
greater devotion, then ever any Genua Bible.

This rigid tenor of life, sauoureth much of Martin, and German, those austere
old men, whom S. Patricke glories to have been his masters and instructors c.
3.. 1. This child of grace glories to have had so worthy educators, whose
lives, if any list to peruse, he shall quickly discern, how far they were from
impressing in his heart, any thing that relisheth to Lutheranisme or Caluinisme.
But what need I run so far into these proportionles parales? When as the
monasteries our glorious Apostle erected; the Churches he founded; the
Cloisters he governed; the Bishops he consecrated; the Priests he ordained; the
Virgins he vayled; the penance he preached; the mortificatio^ he exersiced;
and the progeny from him descended proclaim to the world that he adua^ced no
other colors of religion, the^ those, under which Christ's militant spouse the
Catholic Roman Church marches at this present day. And though the whole body
of the reformed religion lies a bleeding at al her veins (and had been long
since buried in the cenders of obliuio^ did it receive no more support from the
temporal sword, then it does from the sword of the spirit) being so deeply
lanced, and cruelly wounded by the irresistible weapons wherewith Ekius, Castro,
Bellarminus, Baronius, Feuarde^tius, Becanus, Cano, Stapleton, Panagaroll, and
other valiant cha^pions of the Catholic cause, have copiously stored the
Arsenals of their famous writings: yet will I here (to remove all ambiguity in
behalf of S. Partrick) furnish the scrip of your memoryes with five most
bright stons taken up out of the torrent of our glorious Apostles life,
wherewith if you charge the sling of your tongues, the weakest among you shall be
able to encounter, and cast down any temerarious, and Goliah-harted protestant
that should undertake to renew the lost field, or to recover the gained breach,
or to breath life a new into these five (for examples sake) death-sicke members
of the fifth Gospel. Every King, and te^porall Prince is head of the Church
within his own dominions, and signeories. The holy Sacrament of the Eucharist,
is but a bare type and naked figure: no religious worship is to be exhibited to
the sacred relics of Saints: the Mass deserves not the honor or name of a
sacrifyce, it being but a fantastical stage-show, fraught with ridiculous
gesticulatio^s: sole and naked faith is able to tra^port us to the haven of
interminable happiness. What, is this the symbol that Patricke has planted
with infatigable pains, and roborated with stupendous miracles? Is this the
form of belief that has engendered in our worthy Ancestors such contempt of
sublunar felicity, such detestation of sensual blandishments, and such thirst
of heavenly beatitudes? Why then did Patrike seek and accept of his mission
from the Roman chair c. 3.. 2. and 4? Why did he procure her privileges and
indults c. 17.. 2? Why did he not misprize the title of Apostle, the office of
Legate, the Pallium of Bishop she bestowed of him, c. 17.. 33? Where does he
treat with Kings, touching the undergoing this care of preaching? Or where is
the least mention to be found that he was employed by them in this charge? We
find in this volume, c. 10. 2. and 4. that he revoked to life, and enspirited
again, the dead bodies of Kings, but never that he entitled them heads of
the Church, and surely he was no less faithful in designing of these living
under one supreme and sovereign Pastor, then he was fortunate in reviving
them. By S. Patrickes verdict then, not Kings, but Bishops are governors of the
Church and Presidents of faith. The modern sect masters deprive you of the
substance, and substitute but a bare shadow of Christ's body in the holy
Eucharist. But more liberal is Patricke, who confidently teaches (q) the
blood and body of our spouse, to be shrouded under these visible symbols c. 6..
6. etc. 16.. 5. and styles it, a divine Viaticum, c. 10.. 2. These pure
Gospellers daigne not scarce the honor of sepulture to sacred bodies, of whose
cinders S. Patrick delivers magnificent eulogies, and prophecieth gloriously
c. 12. 5. and brought himself from Rome relics of the Apostles and Martyrs,
together with a sheet died with our Saviors blood, causing the^ to be shrined
sumptuously, and worshipped religiously c. 17.. 3. Calum and Luthers progeny,
are so incensed against the holy sacrifice of mass, that they are not only
content to abrogat the use thereof, but they would have the very name
obliterated. But S. Patrike was a most earnest establisher of the Mass, by the
confession of protestants themselves, so that with the bare instruments used in
that misterious oblatio^ he wrought stupe^dious signs, c. 11.. 2. and
delivered many honorable encomioms of it. Now as for salvation attained by sole
faith, the Proto-patriark of the fifth gospel, is so serious to establish this
wicked Theorem, that in favor of it, he shameth not to discard canonical
Scripture; thinking perchance that himself being the Apostle of a god and
gods Bacbus and Venus might by authority down weigh and over the Apostle of
Jesus Christ. S. Patricke was so far from allowing of this exoticall and
unchristian paradoxe, the sluice to all flagitiousnesse, that he terms with
S. James, Faith that is not animated by good workee, a dead, and life-lesse
faith, nay no faith at all, that in any wise auailes toward our final
happiness. By this Antithesis of these five articles in debate between us and
Protestants (not to enterlarge me any more in a cause so perspicuous in any
dispassionate eye) the Antinomy or opposition of the fifth gospel, and S.
Patrickes religion, is rendered so luculent and manifest, that the proudest
Achilles of the Protestant side, unless he be moone-sicke, will never presume
to accept of the combat on the open plain of S. Patrickes life. Now to declare
the trial of so indifferent and impartial a bar, and to flinche from the
vnpreiudicate verdict of Saint Patricke (who lived within the compass of the
five prime ages of the confessed purity of faith and religion) cannot but put
all Catholics, and especially Irishmen, in suspicion of their fraudulent
de^portement, and foul wracking impostures, since it was Patrike that brought
to them the brightsome light of true, and never failing faith, if ever she
blazed her glorious beams on the face of Ireland (and I suppose none will be
so impudent as to deny she did) since it was Patricke that planted Ireland, a
Paradise of pleasures, whether Elias would not disdain to be transported in
his fiery Caoch to glut his mind with her marvelous delights, since it was he
that consecrated her as it were a third heaven, whether S. Paul would willingly
be ravished to contemplate her delightful maruayles, since it was he that
disimpestered her by the sovereign influxion of his sacred benediction, of the
encombrance of serpents, scorpions and other venomous animals, since it was he
that beautifyeth her with the stately structures of religious monasteries,
garnished her with many miriades of renowned Saints, enriched her with copious
treasures of sacred privileges, so that scarce any corner can be found in
Ireland, that is not sanctified with some worthy monument of his holy
benediction. What hitherto we have instanced in a more ample and diffuse manner
concerning S. Patricke our chief patron and Apostle, the same we may avouch no
less of S. Bridgit the second in the number of our holy patrons: how far
she was from houlding with Protestants, or breaking with Catholics, her life
will give ample testimony. The same we may as well auerre of S. Columbe, who is
the third in the glory of patronizing Ireland; for he taught no other religion
in Brittany or the lesser Scotland, then that himself learned in Ireland, or
the greater Scotland. What this religion was, Protestant or Papisticall, I
leave it to the arbittement of any that will with conscience peruse his life,
which here we have compendiously set down. Hear then, O worthy children with
an obsequious ear, the doctrine of your thrice worthy Father S. Patricke, and
of your two other holy Patro^s, bind it on your fingers, Prou, 1.
and write it in the tables of your hearts, to prevent that you sincke not so
deep in the gulf of true misery, as you have soared high in the air of
Christian glory, to prevent that the world, that hitherto has proclaimed your
impregnable fidelity, declayme not against your damnable perfidie: If sinners
entise you, do not condescend to them; for their feet do run to evil. What
greater evil can they run into, then to varnish their nouuell religion, with
the grave colors of venerable antiquity? Or what greater imposture can they
impose on you, then to father their protestant paradoxes, on the primitive
Christians? Can any conceive that our modern sect-masters, after the
revolution of so many ages, see more clearly, or practice more faithfully, the
religion that flourished in the first five centuryes after our redemption, then
S. Patricke who lived within the compass of the said times? O no! This brag
then of their pretensed concordance with the Christians of these purer times,
is a vain flourish, a painted show, a mere collusio^. who is meanly conversant
in the Epistles of Anac. epist. 1. and 2.
Anacletus the first, Sixtus Sixtus epist. 2.
the first, Euaristus Euari. epist. 1.
the first, Alexander Alex. epist. 1.
the first, or in Diony. epist. 2.
Dionysius, Eusebius. epist, 3.
Eusebius Silues. in Council. Romans c. 20
Syluester Dam. epist. 2. ad Stephanu^. and Council. Africae.
Damasus, or Anast. ad Ger. and Burgundiae Episcopos.
Anastasius, but knows what to hold, and embrace concerning the primacy, and
headship of the Roman sea? Who ever perused Tert. de resur. carnis c, 8.
Tertullian, Cyprian. epict. 54.
S. Cyprian, Hylar. lib. 8, de Trin.
S. Hilary, Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 5. cap. 4.
S. Ambrose, Hiero. in Ezech lib. 14.
S. Hierome, August in Psalm. 33.
S. Augustine, but see how patently they confess the real presence of our
Saviors blood, and body in the holy Eucharist. There is none so little versed
in Alex. epist. 1. c. 4
Alexander, Telesp. epist. ad omnes viriliter. c. 2.
Telesphorus, Anac. ep. 1. c. 2.
Anacletus, Cypri. ep. 60. and 68.
S. Cyprian, Eusebius. apud Gra^tanum de consecrat. distinct. 1.
Eusebius, Sylue. in actis Council. Romans
Syluester, Hill. ad Constan. l 3
S. Hilary, Hier. ad Helbidium epist. 150.
S. Hierome, but can tell, that they acknowledge the mass to be a true and
perfect sacrifice. Who is so alphabeticall a Controuertist, but can bear
witness that Basil. erat. 40.
Basil the Great. Greg. Niss. orat. in Theod.
Gregory Nissen, Nazi. in Iulianu^ opostatam
Nazianzen Amb. sermon. de S S. Naza. and Celso.
S. Ambrose, Cyr^l. Hieros. cathe. 18.
S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, Chrysostom. hom. 66. c^p pulum Antioch. and lib. aduersus
Gentiles
S. Chrysostom, Hier^^. aduersus Vigilantium.
S. Hierome, allow of religious honor done to Saints relics? Every
yesterday-reader of the famous momuments of the holy Fathers, can tell you
that(h) Origin,(i) Didimus Alexandrinus,(k) Cyril of Jerusalem,(l)
Nazianzen,(m) S. Gregory Nyssen,(n) Theophilus Alexandrinus,(o) S. Hierome,(p)
S. Austin, (q) Sedulius,(r) Saluianus, openly teach and publikly profess the
necessity of good works, and generally declaime against the Lutheran
justification by sole faith.

By these points insisted upon, and instanced by us, you may learn the
sympathy between us modern Catholics and S. Patricke, and between S. Patrike
and the Primitive Christians: and on the contrary, discover the discrepancy of
the Protestants, not only with S. Patcrike, whom I am sure they will discard
for a very superstitious papist, but from all the current of the ancient
Catholics, having no more alliance with the^, then truth with falsehood, light
with darkness, or Christ with Belial. And to return home, dear Contrymen, it
is not they that converted Ireland, being a pagan Kingdom, but rather
perverted her being a Catholic country, they have not illuminated her
faythlesse, with the light of faith, but on the contrary, obscured her
faithful with the fogge of heresy. For which respect that remarkable censure
of Tertullian may be deservedly pronounced of them: Of the administration of
the word, what shall I say? Since it is their study, not to convert the
Ethnicks, but to pervert ours: and this glory they aim at, if they may procure
the ruin of such as stand, and not the erection of them that are prostrate;
for their work consists not of their own proper building, but of the
destruction of the truth; they dig up our works, to build their own, so it
comes to pass, that they contriue more easily the ruin of standing houses,
then the structure of ruinous buildings. Sinc it is so deer Contrymen, persevere
constantly to the end, in that faith our glorious Apostle S. Patricke has
denounced and preached to you: keep your selves entrenched within the strong
and impregnable fortress of the Catholic Roman Church, which the fraud of
heretics shall never undermine, nor the force of Tyrants could never overthrow,
and to the new and late borne-ghospellers answer with Tertullian. Tertul (...)
Who be ye? Whence, and when came ye? Whence do ye now come abroad? Where
did ye lurk so long? We never hitherto heard any thing of you. And with
blessed Optatus: Optatus,
Show us the beginning of your Chair, ye who claim to your selves holy
Church? And with holy Hilary: You came newly, you rose too late, we have, what
we ought to believe touching Christ, the Church, and Sacraments; for we may
well suspect that it is not long since you began to appear, in regard that the
good corn was sown, and grew before, and not after the darnel. You may
likewise severely admonish them with that holy Doctor S. Hierom. S, Jerome.
Whosoever thou be that art a teacher of new opinions, spare the Romans
ears, spare the faith that has been praised by the Apostles mouth. Why do
you labor to teach us after 400. (now 1500.) years? What we never heard of
before? Why did you bring to light that which S. Peter, and S. Paul would not
preach? Without this your faith, the world has been Christian to this
present day: I will profess being now an old man, that faith wherein I was
borne a child. Lastly you may justly object to the^ the golden trumpet of the
ghospel S Paul, Gal. 1.
thundering out this terrible commination: But although we or an Angel from
heaven, euangelize to you, beside that which we have euangelized to you, be he
Anathema or accursed. By this is most evident with what fear, with what care,
with what solicitude, with what zeal nouelty is to be detested, and antiquity
to be maintained, Protestancy to be avoided, and Catholic religion to be
embraced, since it is not lawful for S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John, no nor the
whole senate of the Apostls, nor yet for all the hosts of Angels, to set down
any form of belief, other then that which has been preached already. Now if
the dissemination of the tares and new dogmats, be liable to this Apostolical
Anathema or curse, and subject to so heavy a ce^sure, questionless the
e^bracement of them is as damnable, and implies no less then wrack of our
souls everlasting weal. The terror of which dreadful menace, I pray God by the
merits of our glorious Patro^s and intercession of their numerous and holy
progeny of Saints, that it may always sound in your ears, and sink into your
hearts to the end, that amidst the swelling billows and boiling waves of
enraged heresy, you may stick fast to the irremoueable rock of the Roman
Church, by the strong cable of true and ancient Religion, and after attain to
that everlasting beatitude, which God of his inexhausted manificence, bestows
of them that never change their faith from him. For this and no other end, have
I undertaken this traduction of our glorious Patrons lives. So wishing you
dear Contrymen, all edification, and furtherance in virtue, by the perusal of
this little Volume, and humbly begging for my self a part in your holy
devotions, I will upon confidence of your favorable allowance, take the quality
of

Your most obsequious servant in all Christian duty, Fr. B. B. one of the Irish
Franciscan Friars at Louain.

ADVERTISEMENTS TO THE READER.
FIRST (gentle Reader) I would have thee understand, that in this Translation
of S. Patrickes life, I have followed Iocelinus of Tornesio, who had written it
in latin above 400. years agone, at the entreaty of S. Malachy Bishop of
Conerthen, of the right Reverend Father in God Thomas, Lord Primate of Ireland,
and of the honorable Knight Sir John de Curcy, as himself signifies in his
Preface, which together with many other celebrious and note-worthy things, I
have willingly left out, contenting my self in this present edition, to
publish a summary abridgment of the matters, that are most remarkable, and best
befitting our times. If I learn that this my labor will prove grateful, I
will God willing, put my hand to an entiere edition.

Secondly, I would have thee know, that in several Chapters and passages, I
have for the latin word Britta^nia, translated England, whereof I would have
none to take advantage. I know the English lay claim to S. Patricke, so do
the French, so do the Modern Scots. Therefore it was not my mind, or meaning
to give a decissiue verdict or suffrage in a matter so disputable on all sides,
or to deprive any of the former nations of the right, or title they have to
him. For S. Patricke is too rich a jewel, to be lost but upon good evidence,
and better then I have alleged.

Thirdly, concerning S. Bridgits life, I have translated it partly out of
Cogitosus her nephew (as some do think) and partly out of Capgraue, and have
my slefe distinguished it by Chapters and Paragraphes otherwise then it is in
the latin, thinking that the method I observed therein, would be more for thy
spiritual profit, the ornament of the work, and perspicuity of the life it
self.

Fourthly, this summary of S. Columbes life, I have abridged out of S. Adamnan,
whom I have preferred before many other authors, supposing that none will be
so impudent, as to deny what has been delivered from so holy, and innocuous a
pen Further for the latin word Scotia, I have most commonly translated
Ireland, in regard that Ireland was anciently called Scotia, by the conspiring
confession and uniform consent of all learned Writers, and especialy, because
it is cleerer then midday, that my Author means by the latin word Scotia,
Ireland, which he calls sometimes Scotia, and sometimes Hibernia, in one and
the self same paragraphe, whereof see clear and vndenidable proofs lib. 2.
cap. 6.. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 2.. 1. Which we have faithfully translated as they
lie in the latin, to show with what sincerity and candor, and upon what
iustifyable grounds, we have proceeded in this matter.

Fifthly gentle Reader, I trust that as the desire of of advancing thy
spiritual profit, made me undertake this translation: so thou will be pleased
of thy curtesy to correct patiently, or to cover charitably, the faults escaped
both in the English, and print. Truly were I able (as I was not) to inuest
these Saints lives in a lofty and magnificent style, yet would I prefer a a
plain and simple phrase. I know that would sound sweetest in the ear, but
this sinketh deepest into the heart, whereof holy Scriptures written in a phrase
plain enough, give abundant testimony. But as for the faults of the press,
they could not but be many, by reason of my own absence from the Print: the
most principal I have noted down in the correctiue table, the rest I leave to
thy favorable correction, Farewell.

THE LIFE OF THE GLORIOUS BISHOP SAINT PATRICKE APOSTLE AND PRIMAT OF IRELAND.
Of S. Patrickes Country, Parents, Birth, and some miracles wrought by him in
his Infancy. CHAP. I.
IN the village of Taburnia in Brittany, hard by Emptor Town, in the South of
England, there lived a man named Calphurnius, who took to wife a french
Damoiselle named Conquessa, Niece to S. Martin Archbishop of Tours in France.
This holy couple, lived together in great sanctity, and perfection, being just
before God, and walking in his iustifications, and commandments without blame.
In process of time, it pleased God to bless them with a holy, and happy
issue, whom they named Patricke, who was no sooner regenerated in the lauer of
holy Baptism, but God began to denounce to the world, his admirable sanctity,
by the voice of stupendous miracles, in manner following.

2. A certain man stricken with blindness from his mothers womb, named Gormas,
heard in his sleep a voice commanding him with the right hand of the child
Patrick (newly christened) to make the sign of the Cross on the ground: The
sign of the cross.
which voice added further, that thereupon would gush out a vain of living
water, wherewith if he washed his eyes, he should recover his sight. The man
obeyed the divine oracle, and found the virtue of Siloe rieterated in that
miraculous fountain: Nay (which is more prodigious) at the same time, his
spiritual eyes were opened, being illustrated with the gift of infused
knowledged, so that of an ingorant blind man, he became a learned Reader, and
understander of holy Scriptures.

3. The holy child Patricke, increasing in years, grew likewise in grace, and
as a shop full fraught with sweet perfumes, breathed forth the fragrant odours
of astonishing miracles. In Emptor Town, where the holy child and his sister
Lupita were brought up, under the care of an Aunt of theirs, after the
dissoluing of the frost, a certain sink, or Va^te, did so swell up with
waters, that it threatened the destruction of many houses, and particulerly the
inundation did ouerwhelme the house wherein the holy child lived, so that all the household stuff was overflowed: the Blessed child being hungry, called to
his Nurce for bread: Who answered, that he was nearer drowning, then getting
any thing to eat. With that the holy child dipped his fingers in the swelling
waters, and sprinckling them thrice over the same with the sign of the holy
Cross, commanded the sink in the name of the most holy Trinity, to retire. It
was a wounder to see, the inundation, ceased, the sink or Vault became
suddenly dry. For from his sacred fingers, it seemed to the^ that stood by, in
lieu of drops of water, sparckles of fire to issue forth, which dried up
those swelling waters.

4. On a certain day in the winter time, the holy child being among a company
of his play-fellowes, gathered up in his lap some pieces of Ice, and carrying
them home, laid them on the floor. To whom his Nurce said, that it had been
better, and much more fitting for the season, to have brought home wood for the
fire, then so to play the wanton with the pieces of Ice. The sweet child
answered wisely, saying: It is easy for the Author of nature, to dispense with
the course of nature, and to make even this frozen water, serviceable for the
use of fire: Then he laid the pieces together, and after praying and making the
sign of the Cross upon them, he blew them: with that they took fire, which
cast out such flammes, and heat, as yielded forth not only the benefit of
warmeth, but also ministered great matter of admiration to all that saw it:
which, what else could the same foreshew, but that this great Saint, should
inflame the cold and frozen hearts of many, and with the word of God, breathed
from his sacred soul, inflame them in the love of so potent a Lord?

5. One time as Lupita, S. Patrickes sister, went to weane the lambs from
their Dames, she fell, and in falling burst her head against a sharp edged
Flint, that wounded her cruelly: many ran to see that great mischance, and
among them the Blessed child Patricke, who by making the sign of the cross on
her forehead, restored her to perfect health. In like manner did the Blessed
child reuine his Uncle, who dyed of suddayne death, by making the sign of the
Cross upon him, and offering his devout prayers for him. S. Patricke was by
his Aunt, deputed to the charge of keeping sheep; One day, as he ledd them out
to their pasture, there rushed out of a wood hard by, a famished wolf, who
carried away one of the sheep: his Aunt missing the sheep, imputed the loss of
it to the Saints negligence, in performing his charge: he supported patiently
her undeserved check, and prayed to God earnestly for the bringing back of the
lost sheep. Behold the next morning, the Woolfe came carrying the sheep in his
mouth, and laid the same before the Saint, and so went his way. The holy child's
Nurce in her sickness longed much for honey, but none being to be gotten, she
fell a greeuing and lamenting: the holy child, blessing a cup of cold water,
converted it into honey, and gave it to his Nurce, wherewith she satisfied her
longing, and recovered her health perfectly.

6. A noble man that lived in Emptor-Towne, forced S. Patrickes Aunt, to
undergo the heavy yoke of servitude, giving her in charge to cleanse or empty
every day, the dirt and filth of a great stable or Ox-stall, where many Oxen
and Horses were stabled. The virtuous woman supporred with great meeknes this
affliction, as coming from the hand of God. But S. Patricke offering his
prayers to God for his Aunt, all the rooms were made clean, and so continued
for a long time without any human help: which great miracle exciting all men to
admiration, was the cause that the woman was set at liberty, and the Saint held
in great veneration.

7. The admirable progress the holy child made in the course of virtue, went
far beyond the number of his years: for his tender breast abounded with
plenty of divine gifts, that pure receptacle was enriched and stored with all
virtues, so that in the slippery course of youth, he slidd not into any lapse
that might ly as a stayne on the spottles robe of his chastity; such was his
care in keeping the integrity both of soul and body unblemished. And albeit
the inward motion of grace did instruct, and direct him in all his actions, yet
when he came to competent years, his parents took care for his trayning up in
learning. The child plied his book very diligently and particularly he gave
himself to learn Psalms, Hymns, Fastes, Watchinges, and other works of
Penance.
and spiritual Canticles, which he got by heart; for eue^ from the prime of his
youth, he was wont every day to say the whole Psalter. His tender body he
chastised with fastings, watchinges, and other exercises of devotion;
exhibiting it a lively host, holy, and pleasing to God, and representing in his
mortal body, the life of an Angel without a body.

Of S. Patricks being carried into Ireland: and of his captivity, and release
from the yoke of servitude. CHAP. II.
FIRE tries gold, and the furnace of tribulation the just: to the end, that S.
Patricks virtues should become more illustrious, and his crown of bliss more
glorious, he was exposed to the assaults of tentation. For some Pirates,
breakinge into England, carried away many captives, and among the rest S.
Patricke, being then sixtene years old, of whom they made sale in Ireland to
a certain Pagan petty-king named Milchoe, who reigned in the North. By
Milchoes appointement, S. Patricke was deputed to the servile charge of keeping
Hogs: the holy youth, embraced patie^tly God dispostition, and omitted not in
the mean season to exercise himself in devotion and in the care of his
salvation. An hundred times a day, and as many more in the night, did he
prostrate himself in prayer before God. As for his fastes, they were
admirable, living on roots, herbs, and such other slight food, and full often
without any corporal sustenance, neither could the rigor of the season, or
sharpenes of the weather, cause him at any time to intermit his exercises of
devotion.

2. After the enduring of six years captivity, the Blessed Saint ceased not
with vnfatigable groans, and fervent prayers, to solicit the divine Majesty
in behalf of his freedom, and return to his native soil, and parents.
Whereupon one day as he was in prayer, an Angel appeared to him, assuring him
that his fastes, and prayers had ascended up in the sight of God, and that his
releaseme^t was near at hand. The Angel added further, that himself was named
Victor, that he was peculiarly deputed to his custody, and that at all
occasions he would be ready to relieve, and assist him. The^ the Angel directed
the Saint to a place which the Swine had dug and rooted up, where he was to
find a sum of gold wherewith to pay his ransom. Moreover the Angel told
him, that at the next haven there was a Ship bound for England, which could not
(God appoynting it so) have a favorable wind without his presence.

3. S. Patricke having paid his ransom to his greedy, and cruel Lord,
hastened to the haven fore showen to him by the Angel, where imbarking
himself in the formentioned Ship, after three days sailing (the winds being
favorable) they arrived safely on the coast of England, where going ashore, in
traueling through a solitary, and baren Country, some four and twenty days
together, they began to feel the extremity of hunger. S. Patricke all this
while ^^ not to preach unto them the kingdom of heaven, and the says of the
most holy Trinity, but they wilfully shut their eyes against the light of
truth, vital that vexation, the mistress of virtue, gave them understanding: for
being pinched with the implacable rage of hunger, the eldest of the broke out
into these words: Thou see, O worshipper of Christ, to what extremity we are
brought, invoke then thy God, whose omnipotency thou blasest to the end, that
tasting of his liberality, we may be ^^cited to a door, and (...) knowledge his
Majesty. Saint Patricke offered up his players to god in their behalf, and lo
suddenly there appeared (...) and wild honey in such plenty, that they (...)
their present distress and were well provided for against their future
necessaryes. And though for the present they both thanked God, and had his
Saint in great veneration; yet the (...) gale of prosperity and plenty
engendered in them an oblivion of their bountiful benefactour, and ingratitude
for his singular benefit, in so much that of that miraculous provision, they
offered victimes and sacrifices to their Idols, and after eat of them, of
which idolatrous victuals S. Patricke would not in any case taste, albeit he
were earnestly entreated thereunto, but by Gods favor, fasted out twenty days
without any kind of corporal sustenance.

4. Least the greatness of miraculous signs or fastes, should extol Godds
chosen vessel Saint Patricke, the Angel of Satan was permitted to buffet him.
One night, the prince of darkness rushed upon the Saint so fiercely, that he
deprived him of the use, and exercise of his members, and senses, and thus
molested him for the space of three days: the Saint in his distress had
recourse to God, his sure, and sovereign refuge, twice inuoking for his help,
The invocation of Saints
Elias the prince of Prophtes: Elias being sent by our Lord, chased away that
diabolical tentation, restored the Saint to the use of his senses, and
members, illustrating him both inwardly and outwardly with immense splendor.
The Saint ouercoming this assault of the adversary, together with some other
difficultyes in the way, returned home to his native soil, to the unspeakable
joy of his Parents, who requested him with tears in their eyes, not to deprive
them any more of the contentment Parents reap of their childre^s presence. The
mirror of obedience Patricke, out of reverence and respect to his Parents,
remaining with them for a while.

Of a vision Saint Patricke had touching the conversion of Ireland: of his
journey to Rome, where he was made Bishop, and of his mission by the Popes
holiness for Ireland. CHAP. III,
WHILES S. Patricke lived with his Father, one night, he saw in a vision as it
were a man of a comely countenance, and carriage, bringing many letters from
Ireland, and giuinge him one to read: which when he began to read, he found
written in the very beginning: Haec est vox Hibernigenarum. This is the voice
of the Irish nation. Having read the beginning, and intending to go on with the
rest, it seemed to him that he saw in spirit, the Irish infants shut up yet in
their mothers wombes, crying to him with a loud voice: We pray thee, O holy man
Patrick, that thou come, and converse with us and set us free. The Saint could
not read any further, but awaking out of sleep, he rendered many thanks to
God, and by reason of the vision, he persuaded himself, that God called him to
convert the Irish nation, that seemed to crave and desire his presence: and
being desirous to know further the divine pleasure touching this affair, he
had recourse to God, who by the Angel Victor, commanded him to repair into
France, there to be trained up in Christian learning, and discipline.

2. S. Patricke, as God appointed him, went into France, and there repaired to
S. German Bishop of Antisiodorum, with whom he lived some eighten years al
which time he employed in studying the holy Scriptures: He was by S. G^rm^n
promoted to holy orders successively, and lastly invested with the sacred order
of Priesthood. Holy orders Priesthood.
Saint Patricks earnest desire of attayning to greater grace of divine
knowledge, made him repayne to his Uncle S. Martin Archbishop of Tours: this
holy Bishop being a Monk himself, clothed his Nepheu Patricke with a monks
weed and instructed him in regular discipline, S. Patricke was a Monk.
and monastical obseruances, which the Saint embraced very willingly, and
according to the tenor of them, directed his life (...). So taking their
leaves each of other, S. Patricke returned to his old master S. Germain again.

3. S. Patricke determined with himself to go to Rome, S. Patricke would not
undergo the conversion without the Popes special leave.
to be better instructed in the Ecclesiastical constitutions, and Canons being
(...) with all that his journey for Ireland might be approved, and ratifyed by
Apostolical authority; which his determination when he opened to S. German, he
liked well thereof, and joined with him the servant of God Sergerius the Priest
as a comfort in his travails, and as a faithful witness of his holy
conversation. Setting himself on his way, by divine inspiration he went to a
certain Ermite of great fame, sanctity, and merit, named Iustus, living in an
I Will of the Tyrrhene Sea, where after charitable saluations, and some spiritual
conference passing between them, the holy man Iustus, delivered to S. Patricke
a little staff, which he said he received out of our Saviors own hands, to
give to him. Saint Patricke after some days abod with the servant of God
Iustus, went on his iourny to Rome, being enriched with that holy staff, that
God had sent him. O singular gift descending from the Father of lights! For as
by Moses Rod, God wrought many prodigious wounders in bringing the Israelites
out of the house of bondage, so by this holy staff, which himself sent to his
true servant Patricke, did he work wonderful miracles in the conversion of
many Nations.

4. After the Saints safe arrival at Rome, he visited with great devotion, S.
Patricke honored the relics of Martyrs, and prayed at their shrines.
and reverence, the memoryes of the Apostles, and Martyrs, and coming to the
Popes aquainta^ce, his holiness admitted him to great favor, and grace. There
sat then in the Apostolical chair (both by name, and conversation) Pope
Celestimus the first, the three and fortith after S. Peeter. The Popes holiness
finding S. Patricke sound in faith, learning, and sanctity, S. Pat. was made
Bishop by the Pope.
consecrated him Bishop, and determined to employ him in the conversion of
Ireland. His holiness had sent before into Ireland for that end, another Doctor
named Palladius his own Archdeacon, on who^ he bestowed store of books with
Relics of the Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, and of many other Martyrs. But
he finding the Irish nation, obstinatly bent against the doctrine of truth,
departed from Ireland, and intending to return back to Rome, dyed in the way.
The Popes holiness being certifyed of Palladius death, S. Patrickes mission.
commanded S. Patricke to succeed him, in that charge of preaching the Gospel
to the Irish nation. S. Patricke, with twenty more famous for learning, and
sanctity, whom his holiness had given him as his coadiutors in that great work
he was to undertake, set himself on his journey toward Ireland: In the way
he repaired to his old master and instructor, S. German, of whose gift he
received chalices, vestements, and other like Church stuff.

5. As S. Patricke took shipping in England for to pass into Ireland, where a
poor leaper besought the Saint most earnestly to carry him into Ireland, the
Saint of the abundance of his piety co^descended to the distressed leapers
request, but the Mariners would not in any case admit him into the Ship: the
Saint full of confidence in God, cast out into the sea a hallowed Altar stone,
Hallowed Altar stones.
which his holiness had bestowed upon him, and made the leaper to sit on it. O
prodigious wounder, that stone set on and laden in that manner, being
supported by the Head corner stone, floted on the waves against its own
nature, and went side by side with the Ship all the seas over, and even with
it came to the shore. When they came in sight of the land, the Saint saw an
host of Devils inuironing the Island, and opposing themselves as a strong
Bulwark, to hinder his entrance into the Country. But the Saint was nothing
terrifyed at the sight of these ugly spirits, knowing that there were more, and
far more potent with him, then against him: wherefore making the victorious
sign of the Cross against them, he chased away all that army of diabolical
fiendes.

Of S. Patrickes arrival in Ireland: of the conuersent^ a noble Man named
Dichum; and of many miracles wrought by the Saint. CHAP. IIII.
SAINT Patricke with his holy family, landed at Inuerds haven in Leinster, and
thence, having first refreshed him after his long nauigatio^, sailed toward
the North: for he had a great desire to bring Milcho, in whose service he was
all the time of his bondage, to the knowledge of the true God, and of his
Religion; but God disposing it so for the greater gain of souls, the Saint
arrived in Vlidia, where being ready to go ashore, a multitude of Pagans stood
there in a readiness to hinder his entrance; for the Magitians, and Divines of
that Region, prophesied of his coming in manner following: There will one come
with his crown shaven, and in his hand a crooked staff, his (...) shall be set
in the East of his house, and his people shall stand behind him, from his table
he will sing blasphemies and all his family will answer, Amen, Amen: This man
when he shall come, will destroy our Gods, overthrow our Altars, and Temples,
seduce the people after him, he will subdue, or cut off our Kings, that will
resist him, and his doctrine shall reign for ever. Which moved Leogarius the
son of Neil being then the Monarch of Ireland, to command his subjects
throughout all his dominions, to watch all the havens, and ports, to the end,
they might drive S. Patricke away, whersoeuer he meant to land.

2. As S. Patricke went to the shore, being all alone, the cruel Pagans
incited a most fierce dog to assail the Saint, but the Dog no sooner saw
Gods servant, but he became mute, and as stiff as a stone, which when a
certain man of great strength, of a huge stature, and fierce spirit, named
Dichu, saw, he drew out his sword, thinking to kill the Saint, but God
opposinge the shield of his divine protection, all his strength failed him, and
such a stifnes grew over al his body, that he could neither stir hand, nor
foot. The noble man seeing this great miracle wrought upon himself, became
another man; for he, and al his house believing in Christ, were baptized, and
Dichu having obtained health both of soul, and body, bestowed upon Saint
Patricke the place where that miracle happened, with all the appartenances for
the building of a church. The place is called, S. Patrickes Barn even to this
day: in process of time, Sauall, that is S. Patricks grange.
the Saint built thereon a fair Monastery, which he furnished with a company of
perfect Monks, over whom he placed S. Dunnius his own disciple, as Abbot.

3. One day as the Saint said Mass in the said Church, S. Patrike said mass.
a sacrilegious Magician, the child of perdition stood without, and with a rodd
put in at the window, cast down the chalice, and shed the holy Sacrament; but
God without delay severely punished so wicked a sacrilege, for the earth
opening his mouth after a most strange manner, devoured the Magician, who
descended a live down to hell: the Saint sorrowed much for the effusion of the
Chalice, and as he afflicted himself with bitter tears, the Chalice by divine
virtue was erected in its own place with the sacrament so entyre, that there
appeared no sign, nor mark of the effusion. The same severe revenge did
almighty God exercise upon another Magitian, for attempting to kill the Saint.

4. S. Patricke leaving his furniture in the custody of Dichu, his first be
gotten in Christ, went himself, as he had purposed often, to visit his old
Master Milchoe, in hope by his preaching to subdue him to the sweet yoke of our
Savior, but the wicked wretch fearing that S. Patrickes efficacious preaching
should soften his stony heart, and withal disdayning to submit himself to the
doctrine of him, who in former times had been his slave, when he heard of the
Saints approaching, being given over into a reprobate sense, and gatheringe all
his substance in a heap together, he set fire to it, and after cast himself
into the midest of the flames, as a sacrifice to the infernal Furyes: But
Milchoes two Daughters, were converted to the faith by Saint Patricke, and
received the grace of Baptism, wherein both were named Emeria. These holy
virgins were endued in their life, with many ornaments both of grace, Miracls
wroght at the sepulcher of Saints
and virtue; and the many miracles wherewith according to S. Patrickes
prophecy God honored their sepulcher in Cluainbron, give evident testimony,
that they are translated to a better life.

5. As S. Patricke passed through the country, sowing the seed of evangelical
doctrine, he became acquainted with a youth named Mochna, whom by divine
inspiratio^ he knew would prove a chosen vessel; the holy youth Mochna,
embraced willingly S. Patrickes doctrine; the Saint himself baptized him, and
taught him his cross row. The youth within the compass of one month learned
all the psalter, and before a year came to an end, attained the understanding
of holy Scriptures. After a while as S. Patricke passed by that place, Mochna
repaired to him, and being both in talk of divine matters, a pastoral staff
sent from heaven, fell just between them: S. Patricke took great joy in that
miraculous gift, and turning to Mochna, said to him: Know my dearest child,
that by this pastoral staff, you are designed to take upon you the charge of
souls, promoting him therefore (though much against his will) to holy orders,
at last he installed him Bishop of Edruim. Holy orders.
S. Mochna did great good in the Church of God, by means of his holy
conversation, and singular doctrine, and ascended to the triumphant, being
endued with the ornaments of rare virtues, and glory of many miracles.

6. Leogarius the Monarch, to keep his subjects in awe, and subjection,
constrained all his Princes, and great Lords, to give him hostages of their
loyalty, among others he had Dichues sons as pledges of their Fathers
fidelity: when King Leogarius, who was wholly addicted to superstition, and
idolatry, heard that Dichu and all his family was converted to the Christian
Religion, he fell into a great rage, and chafe against him, and commanded that
his two sons, who where hostages should be put to death, by keeping all
manner of liquour, and drink from them. The Saint knowing by divine revelation
of that most cruel commandment, had his recourse to his wonted weapons of holy
prayer; and lo the night following, an Angel coming into the prison,
presented to the young noble men a sovereign liquor, that quenched their
present thirst: and which is far more strange, extinguished in them all
appetit of drinking, until within a few days he came again, and released them
at S. Patrickes intercession.

How S. Patricke prophesied that S. Benignus should succeed him in the Primacy
of Ireland, and of many hard conflictes the Saint had with King Leogarius, and
his Magitians. CHAP. V.
THE solemn feast of our Saviors triumphant Resurrection approached, which S.
Patricke determined to celebrat with great solemnity in a fair, and spacious
field called, Breage, and there by euangelizing the Kingdom of heaven, and
administering the sacrament of holy Baptism, to increase the number of the
faithful; for which end he went to a certain noble ma^s house, hard by the
field aforesaid. The noble man, whose name was Sesgnen, entertained the Saint
very courteously, and was himself with all his house, converted to the true
faith. This noble man had a Son, whom at the sacred font, the Saint called
Benignus, a name rightly beseeming him; for in his life and demeanor, he was
most benign and sweet, being beloved both of God and men, worthy of eternal
glory in heaven, and to be reverenced of all men upon earth. This holy child
could not be separated from the company of the Saint; for when the Saint laid
him down to rest, the child stealing from his Father and Mother, fell down at
his feet, embracing the^ very lovingly, and fixing many a sweet kiss upon
them. The next morning as the Saint got up into his Coach, having one foot in
the boot of his Coach and another upon the ground, the child took him by the
feet, beseeching him after a most earnest manner, not to leave him behind: and
returning to his Parents, that labored to detayne him, he said weeping, and
crying out aloud: Get you hence, Get you hence, dismiss me, I pray you, that I
may follow my spiritual Father. The Saint behoulding, and admiring such great
devotion in such a tender breast, gave the child his benediction, and
prophesied, that he should be his Successor in the Primatship of Ireland,
which thing fell out accordingly.

2. The holy Bishop solemnised the Paschall feast in the foresaid field,
Candels used in the divine office.
and according to the custom of holy Church, did light the candells with
hallowed fire. The Idolatrous people celebrating at that time, a great solemn
feast of theirs called Rach, Hallowing of fire on Easter saturday
in which feast (dedicated to the Prince of darkness) the children of darcknes
used no light, for it was the custom with them, to quench the fire in all
places thereaboutes, and it was treason for any to light it, before it were
seen lighted in the Kings palace. King Leogarius with all his nobility, then
kept court at Tarach his principal house, from whence seeing the fire, which
the Saint had kindled, he raged extremely, and diligently inquired who presumed
to attempt such a matter. One who was in the company presently answered, as it
were by way of prophecy; If this fire be not extinguished this night, the
kindler of it with his followers, shall bear rule in all this kingdom. The
King being wholly incensed hereat, hastened with all expedition to quench the
same, taking with him thrice nine, that is 27. chariots, in regard that his
Magicians put him in the head, that that number was fortunate, and prosperous.
Psalm. 19. v. 8.
Upon the sight of all these chariots, the Saint sung that verse of the psalm.
These in charriots, and these in horses, but we will invoke in the name of
the Lord our God. When the King came near the place, he sent for the Saint,
commanding him to make his appearance before him. The divine office being
ended, the Saint came, but none of the Courtiers, as the King commanded,
exhibited him any reverence or honor, except one Hercus, who rose and saluted
the Saint very officiously. The Saint gave him his benediction, and promised
him life everlasting. Hercus receiving the grace of regeneration, and leading a
life conspicuous both for miracles and virtues, being after made Bishop,
departed to a better life in the city of Slane.

3. A certain Magician that was in great favor with the King, and whom the
King honored as a God, opposed himself against S. Patrike, even in the same
kind that Simon Magus resisted the Apostle S. Peter: the miserable wretch being
elevated in the air by the ministry of Devils, the King and the people looked
after him, as if he were to scale the heavens, but the glorious Saint with the
force of his fervent prayers, cast him down unto the ground, where dashing his
head against a hard flint, he re^dred up his wicked soul, as a pray to the
infernal Fiendes.

4. The Magitians death put the King in a great rage, so that with a great
troup well appointed for so cruel a masacre, he attempted to kill the Saint.
Who perceiving their desperate intention, Psalm. 6^ v. 1.
began to sing that verse of the Psalm: Let God arise, and let his enemies be
dispersed, let them that hate him fly from his face. Almighty God, in whose
protection the Saint was, with thunder and lightning stroke some of them down
stark dead, and the rest he put to flight. The King having but four in his
company, hid himself in a close room from the fury of God: the Queen falling
prostrate before the Saint, undertook in the behalf of her husband, that he
would adore the true God, and submit himself to the Saints directions, who
praying to Almighty God, the vehement storm ceased; The King came, as the
Queen had promised, covering with the veil of humility the obstinate malice of
his heart, in show and outward adoration acknowledging the sovereign majesty of
God, he entreated the Saint, that he would be pleased to come to his court,
promising that he would be wholly directed and governed by the St.: whereto he
condescended, albeit he were not ignorant of the Kings deep and wicked
dissimulations

5. But the wicked King being obdurate in his malice, beset all the way, whereby
the Saint was to pass, with armed chariots; for every several passage he
belayd with nine chariots, to the end if he escaped one passage, he should be
intrapt in another. But the malice of man, cannot prevail against the goodness
of God, who conducted his true servant Patricke with eight more, and the holy
youth Benignus invisible through the midst of their blood-thirsting enemies to
Tarach, where the King kept court. When the Saint entered the Kings palace,
none did exhibit him: any honor, or reverence, excepting the Kings Poet, who
with great submission saluted him: which was reputed in him to justice, for he
received the grace of baptism, and the poems, which before he sung in honor of
the false Gods, thence forwards he employed in praising the true and living God.

6. The wicked King seeing he could not by force cut off the Saint, attempted
to make him away by fraud; for by the hand of his Magitia^, he offered the
Saint a poisoned cup, which to the great astonishment of all the company, he
drunk off without receiving any dommage thereby, but the Magitian fearing to
be overcome with his diabolical spells, caused a fantastical snow to fall over
all the adjoining country: in like manner by force of his magical charms, he
ouercast all the land with a palpable darkness, the one or other he was not able
to remove, as himself publicly confessed. But S. Patricke, the child of
light, offering his devout prayers to the Sun of justice, chased away both
the fantastical snow, and diabolical darkness: the people of that Region, who
sat in darkness, now seeing this great light, praised the true God and magnifyed
his holy servant S. Patricke

7. All this could not bring the child of Belliall, the Magitian, to any good;
therefore to discern the light of faith from the darkness of idolatry, and the
verity of true doctrine, from the vanity of magical leuity, a new course of
trial was set down: for by the appointment of all the company, S. Pawicke, and
the Magitian according thereunto, a new house was built after a strange and
extraordinary manner, the one half being made of green Oak, the other of
dry, and withered Timber, then binding both Saint Benignus, and the Magician,
they placed them in the house opposite one against another: S. Benignus attyred
in the Magitians apparel, was placed in the part that was made of dry wood,
and the Magitian with S. Patrickes vestement, was placed in the part that was
built of green Timber: this being done, fire was put to the house. O strange
and unheard event* the fire burnt the Magitian with the green part of the
house, even to ashes, leaving not so much as the least sign of burning in the
Saints vestement. But the holy youth Benignus was not touched by the fire, nor
received any harm by it, the Magitians garment being consumed into ashes.
Behold then the renouation of the miracle of the three Children in the
Babylonian furnace, registered by Daniel in his book of prophecyes.

8. For all this King Leogarius, relented not from his wicked malice, but
rather hardened his heart like another Pharaoe; for in revenge of the Magitians
death, he contrived by all means possible the Saints utter destruction, finding
many of his subjects willing and prompt to execute his blody purpose but
Almighty God the powerful protector of his servant, armed the zeal of senseles
creatures to fight against those senceles idolaters, for the earth gaping
horribly, swallowed down to the bottomless pit of hell those officers of
malice, and many of the Citizens of Tarach, who had any hand in this wicked
design. This severe revenge struck such a terror in their minds, that all
the people of the Country thereabout, fearing to incur the like danger,
became Christians, and received the grace of Baptism, but the wicked King, he
could not reclaim: therefore he thu^dred out his malediction against him,
denou^cing prophetically, that none of his progeny should reign after him in
the kingdom, but that it should descend to his you^ger brother. But the Queen
embraced the Christian Religion, received Baptism at the Saints hands, and
ended her days happily. After this he went over all the country, preaching the
Gospel, our Lord working withal, and daily confirming his doctrine with sundry
miracles.

Of S. Patrickes sisters Tygridia, Darercha, and Lupita, and of S. Patrickes
journey into Mead and Connacke. CHAP. VI.
SAINT Patricke had three sisters of remarkable sanctity and perfection, whose
names were Tygridia, Darercha, and Lupita. Tygridia was the happy mother of
seauentene sons, and three daughters, all the sons were either Bishops of
renowned sanctity, or else Priests, and Monks of great perfection. The
daughters became Nunns, and ended their days in great sa^ctity. The Bishops
names were Brochaduis, Brochanus, Mogenochus, and Lumanus, who came with their
Oncle into Ireland, and labored diligently in cultiuating the field of our
Lord. Darercha his youngest sister was mother to the three holy Bishops Mal^^
Much, and Munis, who also following their Oncle, became diligent work men in
our Lords vineyard.

^. S. Patricke departing Vlidia, came by sea up to Mead, and struck in at
Brine-mouth, where leaving his Nepheu S. Lumanus to keep the ship, he hastened
into the country to preach the Gospel. S. Lumanus added forty days more to
the forty days, which S. Patricke had commanded him to expect his own
return, then being weary of his long abode in that place, one day (the winds
being contrary) he commanded the shipp in the name of God, and of S. Patricke,
to convey him to some commodious place. O miracle, the ship without any pilot,
sailed against the wind and water, and carried him so far as Trim into the
Country, there did he convert to the Catholic Religion, a young noble man,
named Forkernus, and afterward his Father named Feleminus, and baptized him
with many others in a fountain, which in their presence, he produced out of
the earth by his prayers. There by furtherance of Feleminus Gods servant, he
builded a Church some twenty five years before the foundation of Ardmach, where
himself was installed Bishop; his Nephew having been well trained up in
learning, he invested with the holy order of Priesthood, and at his death he
commanded him to take the government of that Bishopric upon him: which he
did for the space of three days of obedience to his spiritual Father, and
then resigned it over to one Cathladius an English man.

3. King Leogarius had two brothers, the eldest (named Coibre) was like
himself in wickedness, and infidelity. The other brother (called Conall) took
no more of his brothers nature, then the fish takes of the salt sea, nor the
rose of pricking thorn. The child of perdition Coibre, would not listen to the
Saints doctrine, but threatened to kill him, and whipped his servants. The Saint
perceauing him to be obstinate in his infideliry, and reproved of God, said to
him by way of prophecy: In regard thou have cast off the sweet yoke of Christ,
none of thy posterity shall enjoy thy Kingdom* but it shall be transferred to
thy you^ger brother. Which afterward fell out to be most true.

4. S. Patricke left the children of darkness, and repaired to the place where
Conall lived, who received the Saint with great joy and exultation, and opening
his ears and heart to the doctrine of life, was incorporated to Christ by the
lauer of regeneration. Conallus the child of grace bestowed his court, with all
the adjoining territory upon the Saint, whom he besought most earnestly, that
for the better enlargeing of Christian Religion, he would be content to build a
city for himself, and for his holy company, in that place. The Saint accepted
thereof, and congratulating much at his charity, yielded to his loving request,
and built the city, which now is called Domnach Phadruig, that is, Saint
Patrickes city, and not far off, appointed a place for the building of a new
palace for Conall, as himself desired. Then giving his benedictio^ by way of
prophecy, he said: Happy and fortunate shall his palace be, and many shall live
happily in it, Gods blessing will bless thee, and will establish thy throne,
he will enlarge thy dominion, and thy Brethrens offspring shall serve thy
posterity for ener.

5. S. Patricke determined with himself to go into Connact, there to preach
the Gospel to the inhabitants of that Province. By the way he went to a
place, where King Leogarius had an Idol, gilded magnificently over with gold
and silver, called Ceancrochie, that is, the head of the Gods. This Idol was
compassed about with diverse petty Gods made of brass, that inclined toward
it in sign of subjection.

6. The Saint seeing he could neither by fervent Sermons, nor great miracles,
reclayme the people from the madness of their Idolatry, had his recourse to his
wonted weapons of holy prayers, no sooner did he then eleuate his pure hands
in prayer, for the subversion of the Idol, and had after a threatening manner
lifted up the rod of JESUS against it, but it fell down upon the left side,
and all the gold and silver dissolved into dust, the little Gods were swallowed
up by the earth, even to their necks. Hervpon many who saw that prodigious
accident, believed in the true and living God, and were baptized in a
fountain, which the Saint by his prayers produced out of the earth.

7. After the subversion of the Idols, the S. held on his intended journey, but
when he drew near the frontiers of Connact, two Magitians their magical
charms over cast all the region with a horrible darcknes for the space of
three days, hoping by that means to debar his entrance into the country; but
the Saint with fastes and prayers, chased away that diabolical obscurity, and
so got into the country. King Leogarius so often spoken of, had two daughters,
one was named Ethne, and the other Fedella, both of them were fostered by these
Magitians. One day that these young ladies walked abroad for their pastime to a
fountain hard by, there they found the Saint with his holy retinue, who
endeavored to bring them into the way of salvation, promising that if they
yielded to his persuasion, they should contract a holy matrimony with the
heavenly spouse: with which divine exhortation, the virgins were so inflamed,
that they embraced without all delay the Christian Religion, and were baptized.
Then they requested the Saint in performance of his promise, to exhibit to them
the sight of their heavenly spouse. The Saint answered, you must first receive
the B. blood, and flesh of your spouse, to the end that being strenghtned by
tasting of that divine viaticum, you may pass to his heavenly mansion. The
holy virgins believing the Saint, craved with great fervor the holy Eucharist,
and received it, with no less devotion, then giving nature her due, they
ascended to their heavenly spouses nuptial feast: the Magitians, who fostered
them, were also converted to the Christian Religion, and received the grace of
regeneration.

Of the Conversion of Connact, and of some miracles wrought by the Saint,
during his abode there. CHAP. VII.
AFTER this, a great and solemn Council of all the province was assembled,
whether came with a great retinue, the seven sons of Amlaic, a potent and
rich noble man, who lived in that province. To this assembly the Saint
repaired, hoping to gain many of that great multitude to Christ: A certain
Magitian opposed himself against the Saint, and labored extremely to dispatch
him out of the way, but Almighty God stretched out his potent arm, and with
lightning of thunder, cut off the child of perdition, in the presence of all
the assembly. This great, and terrible miracle induced the sons of Amlaic,
with twelve thousand more, to embrace the Christian Religion, wherein they
persisted firm, and constant ever after. Here I forbear to treat, how the
Saint converted the two holy Virgins, daughters to Gauranus: how he brought a
Magitian, whom the earth had swallowed up even to the ears, for attempting
some mischief against the Saint, to the detestation of Idolatry: and how by
rolling a stone, which a hundred men could not stir, he drew a great
multitude, to believe in the corner stone, our dear Savior Jesus Christ.

2. The glorious bishop S. Patricke, ceased not in all places to enlighten the
hearts of such, as were blinded with Idolatry, so that the number of the
faithful increased daily. One day coming to a place called Fearta, he found
two women dead, over whom inuocating the name of Christ, he restored them
again to life, who being revived exclaymed against the Idols, and panyme Gods,
and in the hearing of all the company, proclaimed Christ to be the true and
only God: all who were present, gave glory to God, and devoutly received the
sacrament of Baptism. A certain woman named Fidelina, dyed in travail of
child birth, her friends brought her dead corpse, and laid it before the
glorious Bishop, requesting him with tears in their eyes, to restore her to
the number of the living, which the B. Saint did by virtue of his fervent
prayers: the woman after her restoring to life again, was delivered of a
son, and both of them were christened within a few days. The woman relating
what she had seen of the glory of heaven, and pains of hell, excited many
thousands to become Christian: this miracle the Saint reiterated in another
woman.

3. The holy Saint travailed about all Connact, never ceasing from preaching,
or working of miracles, until such time as he brought all the country to
embrace the faith of Christ. In many places he builded Churches, appointed
Priests, and other ecclesiastical persons to direct them in the way of
salvation, and to sing the divine office. In a fair and spacious field far
distant from woods, and quarryes, he built by miracle a fair Church, which
stands to this day. Of two rivers that were in those quarters, one called
Dubh, abou^ding with fish, and another called Drobhois, which wanted that
commodity: the holy Bishop requested some Fishers who drew in their nets full
of Fish, to help him to some, but the Fisher men deuoyd of all charity,
dismissed the faithful servant of our Lord empty: but God the lover, and
author of charity, deprived Dubh of that benefit, and bestowed it upon
Drobhois, which until that time, had been barren. Hereby the prudent Reader
may learn, how meet it is to entertain with all charity, the true members of
Christ, and faithful servants of Almighty God.

4. In regard of the great scarsity of Churches in Ireland, in the infancy of
Christian Religion, the Blessed Saint ordained, that at the sepulcher of every
Christian, who could not be buried in a Church-yeard, a Cross should be
erected, the better thereby to distinguish the faithful sheep, from the
unbelievers, as also to excite the faithful who suruiued, to impart their
charitable suffrages to their deceased Brethren. It happened, that at what time
the Saint departed Connact, he saw the head of one, at the tombs of two lately
interred, a cross standing. The Saint bid his coach man make a stand, then
turning himself to the grave where the cross was, he questioned with the
dead, What sect or Religion he was? Who answered, that he was a Pagan, ignorant
of the Christian Religion. To whom the Saint replied, what then have you to
do with the Cross of Christ? The dead man answered, He that is buried near
unto me, was a Christian: and one of your Religion (bringing a cross by
mistaking) fixed it over our grave. The Saint without delay, descended out of
his coach, to put the Cross over the Christians grave, and after departed.

Of S. Patrickes journey into Leinster, of his prophecy of Dublin, and
conversion of that City. CHAP. VIII.
SAINT Patricke having confirmed the inhabitants of Connact in the Christian
Religion, made a journey into Dalnardia in the North, where with his doctrine,
example and miracls, he brought the inhabitants of that Country, to the
profession of Christianity; thence he departed, and passing through Mead, and
Leinster, in all places he preached the Gospel and kingdom of heaven, and in
places convenient he ordained Bishops. It would be a work able to blunt the
pen of the most eloquent Orator, to set down the stupendous miracles,
which he wrought in that journey; for even like another S. Peter, with the very
shadow of his body did he work miraculous cures, and so many as he received to
Baptism, knowing that our adversary would labor to entangle them in his
snares, he endeavored to confirm in faith, fearing their relapse into
infidelity. And because, as witnesses S. James the Apostle: Faith without good
works is dead, yea which is more, that a dead faith, is not faith. The
glorious Saint labored to excite in them that pure and sincere faith, which
through love performs good works.

2. When S. Patricke came in his journey, so far as Finglas, a place distant
a mile from Dublin, being then but a little village, and contemplating the
place and territory there about, blessing it, he prophetically broke forth into
these words. That village which now is very small, shall be hereafter very
eminent, it shall be enlardged in riches and dignity, neither will it cease to
increase, until such time as it become the principal seat of all the
kingdom. The inhabitants of that village hearing what great miracles, and
signs God had wrought by the means of his faithful servant Patricke, went
forth with great joy to meet him. The Lord of that places only son lay sick,
even ready to yield up his Ghost: the Saint being entreated by his father, and
all the assembly thereunto, went to the place, where the sick was, and by
prayer restored him to perfect health, the people seeing this miracle, believed
in the author of life, our Savior Jesus.

3. In that village, an honest matron, in whose house then the Saint lodged,
complained to him of the penury of fresh water. The B. Bishop taking pity of
her, as also what the whole multitude (newly regenerated) there suffered, and
that he might inkindle their thirst after the fountain of life, our dearest
Savior, he deemed it expedient to mainfest his virtue and power. The next day
in the presence of many, he went to a commodious place, where stricking the
earth with the end of the staff of JESUS, and making his prayer, he produced
thence a fair Well, full of sweet and pleasant water, and sovereign in curing
many diseases, which well to this day is called S. Patrickes Well.

4. Here the course of my history requires, that I declare how the glorious
Bishop S. Patricke came to the famous city of Dublin which he found lying in
the suddes of Paganism and Idolatry, but the Saint washed it with the pure
waters of evangelical doctrine, and that with great facility, by reason of a
memorable accide^t that happened, the which was this. The King and all the
Cittize^s were drowned in sorrow and anguish, for the death of the two
flourishing hopes of the kingdom, the Kings only son, who dyed of a
natural death in his bed room, and the Kings daughter, who was drowned in
the adjoining river; the young ladies body was drawn out of the waters, and
laid by her brothers dead corpse, to solemnise their obsequies both together: In
the mean time news was spread over over all the City; that S. Patricke of
Ardmuch, the potent reuiuer of many dead to life, was seen in the town. The
King hearing thereof, rejoiced much, and caused him to come where his two
children were dead, and full of faith promised, that if God by his prayers did
restore his children to life, he himself with all the City, would become
Christians. The Saint seeing such gain of souls in a readiness, in the sight
of the King, his Nobles, and all the communalty raised from death to life the
princely children, whose corporal resurrection, cooperated much to the
spiritual resurrection of their Father, with the rest of the people. The King
was named Alphinus, his son Cochad, and his daughter. Dublinia, who gave her
own name to the City. The King and all the City being astonished at this
great miracle, abiured the worship of Idols, and were baptized in S. Patrickes
Well, which to increase the belief of the faithful, the Saint made to gush
out, by stricking the point of the staff of Jesus in the earth. From that day
forwards King Alphinus, with all the Citizens of Dulbin obliged themselves by
vow, and their posterity, to the service of Saint Patricke, and the Primates of
Ardmach: moreover as a perpetual gage of their service, ordained that every
company of tradesmen, should pay a yearly annuity to the Primat of Ardmach.
The King, and the Princes offering each of them a talent of pure refined gold
to the Saint, al which liberal gifts, the true professor of poverty bestowed
upon the poor, reserving only a part which he kept for the building of
Churches.

5. The glorious Bishop, gave his benedictio^ to the people of Dublin, and
taking his leave of them, he went to a town called Cnoc, where he sent often
for one named Murinus, a man of Belial, who would not in any wise present
himself before the Saint, whose wisdom he deemed able to conquer the
hardest heart: the Saint sent for him often, but all in vain, for he caused
answer to be made, that the S. should suffer him to sleep. The Saint knowing by
inspiration of the holy Ghost, that he was a child of perdition, adjoined
thereunto saying: Let him sleep, let him sleep, and before the general day of
judgment, let him not awake, or arise. Which being said, the Saint hastened on
his journey, and the wicked wretch dyed a double death, both of soul and body.

6. A wicked man named Foilge, carryinge great malice, and spite to the Saint,
for the destruction of the formentioned idol, called the head of the Gods,
attempted to lay violent hands upon the Saint, and being not able to compass
his wicked intent, he rushed very violently upon Odranus the Saints Coachman,
and murdered him in the Saints sight: the Saint stunge at the heart, thundered
out his malediction against the man of Belial, who being stricken therewith,
yielded up his wicked spirit to be ingulfed in hell fire: But as for Odranus his
soul, the Saint saw it carried up between Angels to heaven, where it was
ranged among the triumphant hosts of Martyrs.

Of S. Patrickes journey into Munster, and of the miraculous refection of 1400.
with many other miracles wrought by the Saint in those quarters. CHAP. VIIII.
THE Saint leaving Leinster, took his journey toward Mounster. The King of
that Country named Oengus, hearing of the approach of the glorious Bishop, went
to meet him, and received him with great honor and exultation. A principal
motive of the Kings joy, and of receiving the Christian faith, was, that
having entered his Idolatrous temple that morning to adore his false Gods, he
found them all prostrate upon the ground: and albeit he did set them often up
in their own place, yet still they tumbled down; for as Dagon could not stand
before the Arc of Gods covenant, so could not these Idols stand in their
place, when the Blessed Bishop Patricke drew near unto them, who deservedly we
may call the Arc of the covenant, seeing in his clean heart, he carried as in
a golden vessel, the divine Manna of contemplative sweetness, the table of the
divine Law, and the Rod of heavenly discipline. The aforesaid King, led the
Saint with great reverence and honor to his Court at Cashell, where, upon the
Saints preaching he believed in the most holy Trinity, and received the grace
of regeneration.

2. As the Saint gave the King his benediction, by laying his sacred hands
upon his head, the King requiring it often, and with great devotion, it
happened that the point of the Saints staff wounded the kings foot, which yet
put him to no pain, in regard that his heart being wounded with ardent charity,
expelled all sense, and feeling of that bodily sore: but when the Saint saw in
what case the kings foot was, blessing it with the figure of Christ's ba^ner,
The sign of the cross.
he cured it perfectly. The king rejoicing, and giving thanks unto God, for so
great a sign wrought upon him, the holy Prelate full of the spirit of prophecy,
spoke to the king as immediately follows: The blood of no King of thy stock,
who shall fit in this place upon thy throane, shall be shed, but of one only.
Which prediction, the inhabitants of that Country constantly auerre to have
proved true, in as much as no king of his posterity was ever killed, unto the
tenth generation but only one.

3. From Cayshell the holy Saint went into Ormand, there to extirpate and root
out the briers of Idolatry, and to sow in steed thereof, the pure wheat of
Evangelical doctrine, where God with sudden death severely punished a wicked
wretch with all his accomplices, for disgorging impious obloquies against the
Saint. At what time the Angel of peace S. Patricke passed through the country
of Ciarragi, he saw two brothers named Bibradius, and Locradius, at mortal
debate about the parting of their Fathers inheritance, in so much that from
high words, they fell to bloody blows, and strokes: the Saint fearing least
so heinous a sin as fratricide, should be committed in his presence, with his
holy prayers he so benumbed their hands, that they hunge stiff and inflexible
in the air; upon sight of that stupendous miracle, the two brethren referred
their cause to be decided by the Saints arbitrament, who not only reneued
between them the league of brotherly love, but also restored to them the
perfect use both of their arms and hands; the place where this miracle happened
the two brothers, was bestowed upon the Saint toward the building of a Church
there.

4. After that the blessed Bishop had confirmed the people of Munster in the
knowledge, and love of the true God, he took his iourny toward the North,
king Oengus being attended upon with twelve of his Princes, and 1400. of his
subjects, followed the Saint, when he came as far as Coiueach a town lying
upon a river Prosnach, where a holy Bishop named Frianus, a Roman by nation
kept his residence, by divine providence it fell out, that noe victuals could
be had for that great company; the blessed Bishop being desirous to give the
multitude a spiritual and corporal refection, commanded a Cow, by whose milk
S. Frianus lived, to be made ready for supper: but what was it among so great a
company? The Saint therefore directed his prayers to the heavenly sanctuary, and
lo there ran out to the adjoining wood, two great Stagges, and two great
Hogs, which presented themselves before the Saint, who commanded that they
should be likewise made ready: so all the company being set to supper, that
little provision was laid before them, which by virtue of the Saints sacred
benediction, served to satisfy all the company so plentifully, that a great
deal of reuersion was gathered up, and carried thence, which need not seem
incredible to any, who will reflect with the eye of their consideration, upon
our Saviors promise: He that believes in me, the miracles that I do, he
shall also do, and greater then these shall he do.

5. This miraculous refection was seconded by as miraculous a sign; for the
holy Saint to remove and root out of their hearts the tares of infidelity, in
presence of that great assembly, restored to life 19. dead bodies at once: all
those who were so miraculously restored to the number of the living, rehearsed
in the hearing of all the assembly, what they had seen touching the torments of
hell, proclayming Patrickes God, to be the true and living God. King Oengus, and
his subjects magnifyed God, and honored the Saint as their proper Apostle: the
men who were revived were christened, and became Monks under the obedience of
S. Frianus.

Of S. Patrickes return into the North, of the resuscitation of King Echu, and
of his prophecy touching the sanctity of S. Columba. CHAP. X.
THE holy Bishop came again unto the North, where King Echu reigned, who had a
daughter named Cynnia, whom he loved most tenderly. This young Princess
embraced S. Patrickes doctrine, and against her Fathers will, and loathing a
carnal wedlock, she resolved to dedicate her virginity to her heavenly
spouse: her Father seeing the love of chastity so deeply rooted in her heart,
sent for the Saint, and spoke to him as follows; The hope I had by my
daughter, to be blessed with a copious posterity of Nephueus, is cut off by
your means; if then for the want of so great a blessing, you promise me the
kingdom of heaven, without compelling me to receive Baptism, she shall serve
her Creator, as you shall think good, otherwise you shall miss of your
desire. The Saint full of confidence in God, leaving all the matter to his
divine disposition, yielded to the Kings request. The young Lady, being
vayled, and consecrated by the Saint, led a life so excelling with many
ornaments of virtue, that she by her example, drew many to the service of
Christ, and both in this life, and after her death, shined abundantly with the
glory of miracles. The Saint commended her to the care of S. Cethuberis, who
was the first of all the Irish Virgins, that received the veyle of virginity
from the Saint: to her being Superior of the Monastry of Druimduchan where a
great number of sacred virgins lived, the Saint wrote a letter of exhortation.

2. Within a few days King Echu departed this life, who before his death
commanded, that his burial should be deferred until such time as the Saint
came, who knowing by revelation all what happened, made al have possible to the
kings court, where arriving he offered his fervent prayers to Almighty God in
the behalf of his resurrection. The King being revived, rehearsed what he had
seen touching the glory of heaven, and the torments of the damned: and further
added, that he saw the place, which the Saint promised him in the heavenly
glory, whereof he could not take possession, because he was not baptized: after
baptism the Saint put the King to his choice, either of prolonging his days
in this life, or going speedily to heaven: the King misprising all the glory of
this world, in comparison of the celestial felicity, did choose to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ: so taking the divine Viaticum of the holy
Eucharist, he was translated to an immortal life.

3. The Blessed Saint by occasion of difficultyes and doubts, which in some
places where he preached the Gospel, were objected against the last, and
general resurrection of the dead, brought to life again men, whose bodies
were resolved into cinders many years before, as himself in an epistle
directed to a dear friend of his beyond the seas, deposes in these terms:
Our Lord imparted to me, his unworthy little one, the virtue of doing such
signs among this Pagan people, as we read never the like to have been
wrought even by the Apostles themselves, so that in the name of our Lord Jesus,
I have revoked from the dead, bodies turned into ashes many years before, yet
notwithstanding I pray that none esteem me, for these or other like miracles,
worthy to stand in comparison with the Apostles, or any men of perfection,
considering I am a wretched sinner, and contemptible. Stay thy self here,
courteous Reader, and observe to what height of perfection this B. Bishop had
attained, who working such, and so great miracles, was so abject, and so
contemptible in his own eyes; for my part I admire more this profound humility
in him, the^ the raising of the cad.

4. My intended course of breuity, makes me not to set down at large, how the
Saint reclaymed from idolatry a petty King called Elelius, with all his
kingdom, by reviving the kings son, who^ swine had torn in pieces. As also
a noble man, who was very hard favored, and contemptible in his person, by
virtue of S. Patrickes prayers, became very fair of complexion, and very
personable of stature, to the great astonishment of all that knew him. A tender
suckeling, found in the tomb where his mother lay buried, was brought to S.
Patricke, who named him Olcanus, and set him to his book, and being come to
riper years, he passed into France, where he attained to great learning.
Afterward coming into Ireland, he taught in public schools, and was master
of many a holy Bishop, and himself became a Bishop of great merit and virtue.

5. A certain Prince named Conallus, sought and obtained S. Patrickes
blessing: his younger brother named Fergusus, came to the Saint with the like
intention: the Saint having first prayed, blessed Fergusus with great
attention; Conallus seeing what diligence and devotion the Saint used in in
blessing his younger brother above him self, was not a little astonished, and
troubled thereat. S. Patricke observing that alteration in the Princes
countenance, declared what moved him to use such diversity in blessing them,
fortelling prophetically: Blessing, I have blessed thy brother Fergusus, in
regard of a blessed son that shall descend from him, for his son Feleminus,
shall beget a son, who shall be called Columba, a name very answerable to his
holy life, for from his Mothers womb, he shall be full of the holy Ghost, and
shall be enriched with the treasures of divine wisdom, and understanding: he
wilhe the shyning, and burning lantern of his generation, and shall be justly
called the Prophet of the highest, and from the time that he comes to years of
discretion, a deliberate untruth shall not escape out of his mouth. How truly
this has been presaged of S. Columba called Columcill, who was the founder of
an hundred Monasteryes, the history of his life, sufficiently declares.

6. Within the compass of seven weeks, which S. Patrike spent in the country
called Turtirini, he builded seven Churches, over which he ordained Pastor S.
Connendus, a man of great virtue, and learning. After a few days S. Connedus
came to S. Patricke, who commanded him to return back to his Church,
fortelling that he need not to fear the effusion of his blood, for that none
should be killed in that place for ever. The event has showed his prophecy to
have been most true. The B. Bishop prophesied of the nativity of S. Treha,
Vayling of virgins.
at whose consecration a veil was sent from heaven, wherewith the Saint vayled
her.

Of the conversion of the I Will of Man, of a strange vision S. Brigit had, and of
the prophecye touching the future sanctity of the Saints, Colmanellus, and
Comgallus. CHAP. XI.
SAINT Patricke seeing that in Ireland the harvest was great, and the workmen
few, took shipping to pass into England, there to gather many coadiutors and
fellow-helpers, in cultiuating our Lords field. In those days the Arrian
perfidy, and Pelagianisme took great rootinge in England, which the Blessed
Bishop labored to extirpate, by reclayming with signs and sermons his dear
Countrymen to their former integrity of faith: so coming back into Ireland,
he brought with him many learned and Religious men, of which number, thirty
were installed by him Bishop in several Episcopal seas. In his return, he
converted the Isle of man, ordayninge a learned and holy person named Germanus,
Bishop over that young flock, the like he did in several other Isles. It was
his custom not only in cities, but even in principal towns, to install
Bishops, to the end the faithful should not be deprived of the sacrament of
Confirmation.

2. After the Saints return out of England, he bestowed upon six Cleargy-men,
that were going in pilgrimage over the seas, a Whales skin, wherein himself
was accustomed to stand when he said Mass; having that gift of the Saints
love, they neuert felt in all the time of their travail, any penury or want.
In process of time they all six became very learned, and were made Bishops,
and ended their days in great sanctity: their names were Lugacius, Columbanus,
Meldanus, Lugadius, Cassanus, Ceranus.

3. Three whole days without intermission, did the Saint preach to infinite
multitudes, that flocked from all parts to hear him, they thought they had not
been there one day, so sweet and attractiue were the Saints doctrine and
discourses. In that assembly, was present the most holy virgin S. Brigit, who
reclyning her head slept, which Saint Patricke perceauing, forbad that any
should awake Gods beloved spouse, till she pleased her self: by the issue it
was manifest, that that passage of the Canticles might be fitly applied to her:
I sleep, but my heart waketh, in regard that her heavenly spouse imparted his
secrets to her. When she awaked, the Saint commanded her to tell in the hearing
of all the people, what she had seen, who obeying him, told that she saw
first a Synod of me^ all in white, with ploughes, oxen, and fields all white:
after that she saw them to be stained with spots, and lastly to become wholly
black. S. Patricke interpreted the former part to his own time wherein good
works and faith, Faith and good works.
were united together, and exercised: the second state to the following
generation, which would indeed persist in the candor of faith, but would
deface it with depraved works: the third state, he referred to the insueing
ages, wherein men would not only give over the exercise of good works, but
also would profane their lives with renouncing of their faith.

4. On a time S. Patricke made a journey into Dalnardia, as he passed by a
place called Mucoomuir, his disciple Benignus saw quires of Angels inuironing
that place with celestial splendor, and piercing the skies with the
harmonious concent of divine praises; the vision disappering, he related to S.
Patricke, all what he had contemplated, who being inspired by God, declared to
his disciples, what that admirable vision pretended: Know then, said he, that a
son of life, whose name shall be Colmanellus, will build a Church in that
place, where he will gather together manny sons of light, who will become
with the Angels, cohabitants of the heavenly city, and he himself shall be the
primate and legate of all Ireland. In process of time all fell out to be true,
as the Saint foretold.

5. Another time S. Patricke with his holy family, ascended a little mountain,
not far distant from the valley, where afterward the monastery of Bangor was
built: from the hill topp they saw all the valley replenished with celestial
brightness, and Angelical quires: which admirable vision, moved all the company
to entreat the Saint to build a Church in that sacred valley, which the Saint
would not do, but prophesying foretold: After the space of 60. years
completely expyred, there will be borne a son of Light named Comgallus, which
is interpreted a fair pledge, who shall be beloved both of God and men, and
shall build in the place a foresaid, a Church of Saints, wherein shall be
gathered innumerable troops of the children of light, that shall dedicate
themselves to the service of Christ. Not one jot of all this did pass
unaccomplished; for in the time fortould, Comgallus being borne, built the
monastery of Bangor, wherein he begot to Christ by means of the Gospel, many
thousands of perfect Monks: in so much, that that holy place, the fruitful
mother of Saints as a vine fructifying in sweetness of odor, did extend its
branches to the sea, and its plants beyond the sea; for it filled Ireland,
Scotland, and many other Islands with perfect Monks, and monasteries, as also
foreign Countries. One of the sons of that Monastery named Luanus founded a
hundred monasteries, another named Columbanus a most holy man full of divine
grace, erected many Monasteries, and was the father of a numberles number of
holy Monks: he builded the famous Monastery of Luxonium in France, and Bobium
in Italy, where he ended his days most gloriously, and happily.

6. A wicked man named Fergus, who lived in Mead, hindered the Saint from
building a church within his territoryes, which the Saint taking in evil part,
prophesied, That none of his posterity should inherit his living, or thrive in
any other Country except the infant yet shut up in his Mothers womb: which
fell out accordingly. As the Saint for the like respect was to give his curse
upon two brothers named Fiechus, and Enda, his disciple S. Secundinus requested
him not to lay his curse upon the man, but upon the stones, that in great heaps
laid hard by, whereto the Saint condescended. A marvelous thing ensued; for
from that time forwards, those stones proved unserviceable for any building,
or structure. Enda did penance for the injury offered to the Saint, and
presented his ninth son named Cormacus, with the ninth part of all his living
to S. Patrike: the child grew up in years and grace, and ended his days in
great sanctity.

How Saint Mell, and S. Lupita, cleared themselves before S. Patricke, and of
some miracles wrought by the Saint. CHAP. XII.
SAINT Lupita, S. Patrickes sister lived in one house with S. Mell her nephew,
by occasion whereof, some suspected the holy Bishop S. Mell with committing of
incest with her, which aspersion the holy Bishop removed by taking many great
Fishes on the dry land in S. Patrickes sight. Lupita in like manner to declare
her innocence, carried hoate embers in her lap without sign or token of any
burning; S. Patricke seeing such great miracles, pronounced them both innocent,
yet to cut off all occasion of scandal, he ordained that the men should live
in houses apart from the women, building for them distinct houses, and Churches.

2. S. Patricke being to pass the Sinny, a deep and vnwadable river, that
runeth between Mead and Connact, could not get a boat to ferry him over, he
prayed therefore to God for help; and lo the earth did rise up so high in the
river, that it gave a dry passage over to the Saint, and all his company. The
Saint thought it expedient for the advancement of Religion, to build a Church
there in a certain field, but the Lord who owed the place, gave him a repulse,
and would not give way to the building, unless the Saint bought it with gold.
The S. offering his prayers to God, went to a place, where Swine had rooted up
the ground, and found there so much as was sufficient to purchase the field.
Another time also did he find in the same place, so much gold, as served to buy
a piece of ground, whereupon he meant to built a Church.

3. In that Church called Ellfin, S. Patricke installed one of his disciples
named Asicus, who was a Monk, making him a Bishop. S. Asicus, as Saint
Patricke had appointed, brought thither a great company of Monks, whom
himself governed as Abbot. This holy man upon a certain time told a lie, when
he should have uttered the truth sincerely, which ouerlashing of his tongue, he
so severely chastised in himself, that he retired himself from the company of
men, and lived in a desert 7. years, unknown, and unseen to any person where
he might be found: at last by his Mo^ks, they requested him, that he would
return home to his Bishopric, but he would not yield to their persuasion,
judging, and pronouncing himself unworthy to exercise episcopal authority,
since his tongue had been defiled with a witting untruth, which in the mouth
of a Priest is, as the holy Canons declare, sacrilege; the foresaid Monks
would not in any case depart from S. Asicus, but lived within that place all
the days of his life, after whose death they builded a monastery there,
wherein they served Almighty God in justice, and sanctity.

4. As some of S. Patrickes disciples came by sea to visit him, there arose a
great tempest, which moved the Saint to great compassion for his beloved
children: some who were with him said, that the ship was not able to sustain
so boisterous a storm. The Saint immediately betook himself most fervently,
to his prayers; and then within a little while, in the hearing of all them who
were present, he commanded the winds and waves to become calm. O stupendous
event! Without delay the wind was allayd, the seas ceased to boil, and there
ensued a great calm: the same day the disciples arrived, and told how they
escaped that eminent danger. Another time the disciples aforesaid, coming to
visit their holy father, and traualing by the sea side, they were encompassed
by the tide before they were aware, which put them in great fear of death. The
Saint knowing in spirit, what danger his children were in, commanded the sea in
the name of God, to give his disciples a free passage: the sea obeyed the
Saints commandment, so that his discipls returned to their father, to their
great joy, and to the unspeakable admiration of all those who heard of so
prodigious a miracle.

5. S. Patricke of his profound humilty and charity, kept always in his
company some leaper or other, whom himself tended most carefully, washing with
his own hands his vlcerous soars, and providing him of al his necessities. A
certain leaper that lived with the Saint, being deprived of his bodily health,
laloured by frequent prayers and other exercises of piety, to procure and
conserve the health of his soul. This leaper fearing to be offensive to
others, withdrew himself from the company of men, living solitary in a great
hollow tree: One day he requested a Christian that passed by, to bring him out
of a place hard by, a bundell of reeds, the man went to the place, and as he
pluckte up the reeds, a fair fountain gushed out, whereof he gave notice to
the leaper, when he brought him the reeds, who replied: Know then my dear
brother, that God sent thee hither to wash me in that fountain, and lastly to
bury me in that place, which said, he gave up the ghost: as the Christian
washed the leaper in that miraculous water, there remained not a spot of
leprosy upon him, and so burying him he departed. It happened that S. Munis, much
about that time, bringing from Rome many relikes with him, was forced to lodge
near that place. In the night he saw squadrons of Angels to descend from
heaven, and to keep watch, and ward about the leapers sepulcher until it was
moring, al which vision he related to S. Patricke, signifying that he intended
to remove that holy body out of that solitary place. S. Patricke forbid him so
to do, fortelling that a son of light, not yet borne, whose name should be
Keranus, would inhabit in that place, which he would furnish with a holy
company of Saints, and that he would exhibit great honor to that leaprous
body, all which fell out to be true in process of time.

6. The foresaid S. Munis, with S. Patrickes leave, made him a cell in a
certain place, where he suffered great distraction, and disturbance of mind,
by reason of the frequent co^course of courtiers, who came often to visit him
from the kings palace, being built over a great water that lay hard by the
place, where S. Munis lived: which difficulty he made known to S. Patricke,
who offered devout and fervent prayers up to God for this effect. And lo the
next night after, God tra^sferred the water and the palace so far of, that
it wrought his servant no annoye, who afterward (though very much against his
will) was ordained Bishop, and departed this life, shining with virtues, and
miracles.

How S. Patricke penetrated S. Fiechus his conscience: of S. Fiecus his
sanctity, and some great miracles wrought by S. Patricke. CHAP. XIII.
A Young gentleman of excellent education, and learning named Fiechus, had
married a wife, which within few days dyed. As this man came where S. Patricke
was, the Saint by inward illustration of the holy Ghost, penetrating his
conscience, said: Behold a man or one wife, who according to the Apostle may
be worthily advanced to the sacred order of preisthood, and Episcopal diginty.
The young gentle man, admiring how he came to see the secrets of his heart,
received the lauer of regeneration, and by virtue of Saint Patricks blessing,
made such progress in learning, that in one day he learned the whole Psalter,
and in a short time attained to the understanding of sacred Scriptures; he was
successively invested with holy orders, and in fine made Bishop in the Church
of Sclepten, Monks.
who in his episcopal sea, erected a fair convent of Monks.

2. Because this holy Bishop, in regard of his many infirmityes, Fastes.
and weakening by long fasts, could not visit his Diocese on foot, or
exercice his Bishop-like function, S. Patricke sent him a Coach, which S.
Secundinus, being overcome by humane frailty took ill, thinking that himself
deserved it better. S. Patrike knowing of the trouble Secundinus was in, said
unto him; fearing that by following of our own judgment we may err, let us
leave the discussio^ of the matter to the arbitreme^t of an Angel. With that
the Saint prayed to God, who sent an Angel, by whose order the horses were put
into the coach, and dismissed without any to drive the^, adding further: that
they were sent to him, with whom they would make a stay. The horses being
harnished, and dismissed in manner as the Angel had set down, the first night
they came to S. Secu^dinus dwelling place, the next night to another Saints
house, and the third night to S. Fiechus house, where they stayed: giving
thereby to understand, that they were chiefly sent to him.

3. Another time the Angel commanded S. Fiechus to build a monastery, and the
Angel himself designed the Refectory, Oratory, and all other houses belonging
thereunto. This holy Bishop was accustomed in the beginning of lent, Fasting of
Lent.
to retire himself to a solitary place, bringing with him for his sustenance
but five barley loaves mingled with ashes. On Palm Sunday, or Maundy Thursday
he would return, bringing with him half of one of the loaves uneaten: this
Blessed Fiechus sent before him to heaven 60. Saints, whom himself followed,
being renowned both for sanctity and miracles.

4. Some wicked men sent the Saint as it were by way of present some poisoned
cheses, which to the great astonishment of many he converted into hard stones,
wherewith they were nothing reclaimed from their malice, but rather became more
obstinate; for conspiring together against him, they sent fifty men to kill
him. As they entered a certain Forde to pass over it, the Saint seeing them,
and knowing by divine instinct, what mischief they intended, said unto them
with a loud voice: You shall neither come hither to us, nor yet return back
to your own people, for your bodies shall remain in that water until the day
of judgment. According to the Saints censure, they were without delay drowned,
neither could their bodies be ever after found, albeit great, and diligent
search had been made after them.

5. Another time, some children of Beliall dug up deep pits and holes, in
the way which the Saint with all his retinue was to pass, covering them over
with green grass. The Saint full of confidence in God, gave his benediction
to his holy family, and so he, and they passed without receiving any hurt or
detriment, the green grass like solid earth yealding them firm passage. The
Saint commanded a young maid, who gave them notice of the ambush laid, for to
call her Father, whom with his ten sons, and three daughters he converted to
the Christian faith: Nuns
the daughters became Nuns, and were vayled with the Saints own hands. Of
the sons, five flourished in the world in great prosperity, Monks.
and the five others, became Monks of great perfection and sanctity, as the
Saint had prophesied of them.

6. A certain man named Domnardus, being blind for a long time, and hearing
that S. Patricke passed by, went forth to meet him, hoping by the Saints merits
to recover his eyesight. As the blind came along in the way, he stunbled very
often, which moved a clergy man who was in the Saints company to laughter,
which when the Saint understood, that none of his company should ever after
presume to do the like, he spoke, as follows to the Clergy man: Amen I say to
thee, that the eyes of this blind shall be opened, and thy eyes excyting to thee
irrilegious laughter shall be stricken with blindness: with that making the sign
of the cross, he opned the blind ma^s eyes, and shut the eyes of the clergy
man. The same day did the Saint erect upon their feet three criples.

7. Nine Magitians co^spired the Saints death, and to have the more free
access to him, they cou^terfeited themselves to be Monks, putting on religious
weeds. The Saint by divine inspiration, knew the^ to be wolves wraped in sheeps
clothing, making therefore the sign of the cross against the children of
Satan, behold fire descended from heaven, and consumed them all nine: The
Saint lifting up his hands anathematized anidolatrous wood dedicated to Idols.
O most strange and remarkable miracle, all the wood like unto the fig tree,
spoken of in the holy Ghospel, withered by and by, and never after was
serviceable for any other use, then the fire.

Of a mountain swallowed down, by the earth, and cast up again at the Saints
intercession: and of several other great miracles. CHAP. XIIII.
ONE of the noble men of Munster, named Coruallus, would not permit S. Patricke
to build a Church within his territoryes. Not far from the noble man's house
was a fair and spacious poole very pleasant to behold, but the house by the
interposition of a great mountain, was deprived of the pleasure of that
gratful prospect: the Saint urged the noble man, very much, to give him leave
to build a church: who answered. If you remove this great mountain, that
depriues my house of the pleasant prospect of the broad and spacious poole that
lies on the further side, I will then yield to your request. The Saint offered
his prayers up to God, and with that the earth swallowed down the mountain,
notwithstanding the wicked man would not stand to his former promise, wherefore
the Saint prayed to God, the second time, and the mountain did forthwith swell
up to its former height, and greatness.

2. A wicked Tyrant named Euchodius, who lived in the country of Vlibia, caused
two holy Virgins to be stiffled, and misprised S. Patricks intercession for
them. Holy Virgins.
The Saint denounced prophetically to him, That none of his posterity should
succeed him, but that his Lordship should be transferred to his younger
brother. The Tyrants wife came, and begged the Saints blessing both for her
self, and for the child, which she carried in her womb, which the Saint gave
her, and foretold that she should be delivered of a most holy issue. The
child being borne, was named Douengardus, and was most renowned both for
sanctity and miracles. Euchodius within a few days, was deprived both of life,
and of his lordship, which his younger brothers posterity inioyed, according to
S. Patrickes prophecy.

3. S. Patricke founded an Episcopal sea in a place called Achadfouiur, where
he made one of his disciples namned Sennachus Bishop, a man of admirable
purity, and innocence. S. Patticke blessed him, and all his family,
prophesying, that many Saints and holy Pristes should spring out of it, in
which place Sennachus ended his days in great sanctity.

4. As S. Patricke passed through a wood in Midernia, he found there a great
company of men, cutting down of great oaken trees, and in regard their axes
were edge-lesse, and that they had no whetstons to whet the^, the poor me^
were quite wearied out of breath, the skin and flesh was torn from their
hands, even to the sinews, and bones. The Saint compassionating their
distress, gave them his blessing, whereupon they recovered their strength,
their hands were healed up, and their hatchets so well edged, that they cut the
solid oak trees with as little difficulty, as if they had been tender
twigges. This prodigious effect of the Saints blessing, did persevere in them,
until such time as the Saint procured their release, for which end, he went to
their cruel Lord named Tremei, but he would not admit the Saints intercession.
Fast and prayer.
The Saint after three days fast and prayer, came again with great submission
to procure their exemption from bondage, but this cruel man he found to be
another Pharao, who presently got up into his coach, with purpose to agg rauate
their yoke of affliction, but God revenged the contempt offered his new
Moses, for lo the horses precipitated themselves with great violence into a
standing water, nere by, and the man of Belial being drowned, the captives were
restored to their long expected and wished liberty.

5. S. Patricke intended to erect an episcopal sea in a place called Luda, but
an Angel wished him to desist from that work, for that S. Micheus; who came
out of England in pilgrimage into Ireland, should there build and inhabit that
place; which fell out accordingly. One day as Saint Patricke and Micheus were
in spiritual conference, an Angel tendered them a letter, wherein S. Patricke
was commanded to bestow that place, with all the appartenaunces upon S.
Micheus, and himself to erect his Archepiscopall sea at Ardmach. The Saint
obeyed willingly the divine commandment, committing to S. Micheus his care of
twelve leapers, whom himself was accustomed to tend, and so departed.

6. Twelve brethren, whose Father was lately deceased, made a meeting for the
parting of their portions, and excluded their younger brother named Fergusius
from any share in that division: who had recourse to Saint Patricke, by whose
intercession he received a competent portion of his fathers inheritance: the
young noble man, bestowed one half of his estate upon S. Olcan, who erected an
Episcopal sea in a place called Derkan. S. Patricke blessed Fergusius, and
prophetically said unto him: Albeit thou seem now humble, and contemptible
in the eyes of thy brethren, yet thou shall be shortly prince over them, and
many good Kings will descend from thee, which shall not only reign in their
own country, but also in foraine Kingdoms. This prophecy of the Saint was
fullfilled; for from him descended Edanus the son of Gabranus, who subdued
Scotland, and whose posterity reigns yet in that kingdom.

How S. Patricke gave Prince Conall his benediction, and the Cross for his
arms, and of many remarkable miracles. CHAP. XV.
SAINT Patricke came to his dear ghostly child Prince Conall, demanding of him
whether he would be content or no, to be clothed with a Monks weed: the
Prince answered, that his heart was ready to perform what the Saint would
inioyne him. The holy Bishop rejoicing much at his devotion, is reported to
have said to him: Thou shall carry a shield, and staff as the marks of
sovereign power, and as the signs of thy great merit: Thou shall represent
the person, and habit of a lay man, but shall enjoy the merit and dignity of a
Monk; many Saints shall spring from thee, and many nations of the earth shall be
blessed in thy seed. Moreover with the rod of Jesus the Saint made the sign
of the Cross upon Prince Conals shield, which he and his posterity, ever after
took for their arms.

2. A certain man named Victor, hid himself in the night, fearing that if he
appeared in the Saints presence, he should be forced by the evidence of his
doctrine, and signs to renounce Idolatry. The Saint coming to the place where
Victor was, so bright and subtle a light issued from him, that the splendor
thereof pierced even to the secret place, where Victor lay lurking. Victor
being convicted, or rather attracted by so evident a sign, became a Christian,
bestowed all his estat upon the Saint, and made himself the Saints disciple,
who in process of time, attained to such learning, and sanctity, that he was
made a Bishop.

3. S. Patricke had a disciple named Volchanusa a man of great virtue, but
specially of most remarkable obedience. The Saint being desirous that his
virtue known only to God, should be manifested to the world, for the
edificatio^, and example of others, commanded Volchan to go and build a church
wheresoever God would vouchsafe to provide him a place: he without delay taking
an axe upon his shoulders, went his way. The Saint seeing the alacrity, and
promptnes of his obedience, said to him: Do not despair, my most dear
Volchan, of finding a place, wheresoever the Axe shall fall, build in that
place; for there thou shall increase into a great nation. After Volchan had
walked on all day long, toward the evening the Axe by chance slipped off his
shoulder, in which place the obedient Volchan builded a Monastery, wherein
himself and many others lived and dyed in great perfection.

4. S. Patricke had a Drouer named Rodanus, who after became very learned, and
a Bishop of great merit, and miracles: the Saint likewise preferred S.
Reuternus to the episcopal sea of Ciocher, and when he had consecrated him
Bishop, he bestowed upon him a Chrismatory, or vessel of holy oils for
extreme Onction, and Confirmation, that was sent him from heaven. A child named
Lunanus by virtue of the Saints blessing, learned all the Psalter in fiften
days, who after led a most holy life, and dyed glorious for virtue and
miracles. The Saint by reviving a noble man's wife named Ethra, gained the noble
man himself, with all his followers, unto Christ.

5. Some wicked men envying the progress of Christian religion, and the Saints
glory, suborned a woman that used to beat and to dress flax, in the way the
Saint was to pass, to hide a great quantity of the flax in a hollow tree not
far off, and when the Saint should pass that way, they wished her to
exclaim against him, and his holy company; as having stolen the flax. The
woman did as she was put in the head by those wicked men, who rushed out of
their dens, when the woman began to cry, and flocking about the Saint, and
his companions, they accused them as thieves, guilty of torments, and of death:
Near the place where this tumult was excited, there was one buried, whom the
Saint revived; the revived man by his testimony, cleared the innocence of the
Saint, and freed him from that slander, showing where the flax was hidden.
The contriuers of this mischief, were by this miraculous event reclaymed from
idolatry, to the acknowledgement of the true God.

6. A man of Iueach, having stolen, and eaten a he-Goate, S. Patricke had, and
thinking by oath to clear himself of all suspicion, swore that he had no hand
at all in the theft; lo the eaten goat by a hideous noise made in his belly,
bewrayed him to be the author of the theft, whose posterity ever after wore
goats beardes. It was S. Patrickes custom to keep company, to love and
frequent the society of virtuous and holy men, which custom, how grateful it
was in the eyes of the Almighty, himself vouchsafed to manifest by this
ensuing miracle. For as he, and a man of a most venerable life named Vinnocus
were in conversation together of divine matters, and having bestowed their
garments upon the poor, behold there came from heaven a cloak, that fell
just between them both. S. Patrickes charity to the poor.
Each of the Saints alleged, that it was sent to the other, they being in
this humble, and charitable debate, the cloak disappeared, and two others were
brought by an Angel, for each of them one.

7. In that part of Britanny which is now called Wales, there reigned a wicked
Tyrant, a cruel persecutour, and ennemy of Christians named Cereticus. The
Saint directed to him a commonitory epistle, hoping thereby to reclaim him
from his wicked courses, but he derided the Saint, and became more obstinate in
mischief, and iniquity, which when the Saint understood, he prayed to God in
manner following: Our Lord God omnipotent cast this foxe-natured man, who is so
monstrous in vices, after a monstrous manner from the face of the earth. Our
Lord inclined his ears to the voice of his servant, for he transformed him
into a fox, who flying away, was never seen afterward.

Of S. Machaldus conversion, and most rigid penance, and of S. Memessaes holy
life. CHAP. XVI.
A Wicked man named Machaldus, the prince of thieves and robbers, seeing S.
Patricke pass by the way, determined to kill him, but after holding it a
disgrace to shed the blood of so poor weak and seeble a man as the Saint was,
he and his ruffian like company thro^ged about the Saint, and by way of
contempt, and derision, requested him to revive again one of his company named
Garbanus, whom they had covered with a cloak, counterfeiting him for dead.
The Saint could them that their jest was turned into a truth, and so departed.
The thieves found their companion dead, and fearing that the like mischance
might fall upon themselves, they rann apace after the Saint, and prostrated
themselves before him, and acknowledging their heinous offense, they became
Christians. The Blessed Bishop at their request, restored again their dead
companion to the number of living.

5. Machaldus having confessed his sins, requested the Saint to set down for
him some course of penance, Penna^ce meritorious of glory.
by which he might purchase eternal life, the holy Bishop being inspired from
above, enjoined him to forsake his native soil, for ever, and to bestow all
his substance upon the poor: then did he attire himself in a course and
despiceable weed, and locked his feet in fetters, casting the key into the sea:
after he commanded him to enter all alone into a boat, whither soever the
boat should carry him, there to live all the days of his life. The truly
penitent Machaldus, followed the Saints direction, and so committing himself to
the sea, he la^ded in the Isle of Man. The two holy Prelates Counidrius, and
Romulus, whom S. Patricke sent to succeed S. German in the government of that
Isle, seeing the man in so miserable a plight, and knowing the cause,
intertayned him very charitably, detayning him with themselves. After the
compass of many years in the belly of a fish, that by divine providence, was
brought to Machaldus, was found a key which unlocked his fetters. S. Machaldus
attained to such eminent sanctity, that after the death of the two
forementioned Bishops, he was created Bishop of the Island, and ended his days
there in great sanctity, being famous both for virtue, and miracles.

3. The glorious Saint by converting stones into milk, and milk into stones,
converted a Magitian from the worshipping of stones, to the service of the true
and living God. Such reverence did the Blessed Saint carry to Sunday, in honor
of our Saviors triumphant resurrection, that he was never accustomed to
travail upon Sunday; for wheresoever he was belated upon Saturday, there did
he stay until Monday morning, giving himself wholly to divine contemplation.

4. One Saturday, he was benighted in a great field far from any shelter, it
began to rain heavily, but not a drop did touch the Saint, or any of his
company. This miracle was seconded with a far greater, for even that night,
the Saint was thus sheltred miraculously from the rain, the plane was ouercast
with so thick a mist, that the Saints coachman could not find the coach
horses which he let out to pasture. The Saint knowing in what affliction his
faithful servant was, of compassion toward him, he stretched out his sacred
hand, and lo an unseen, and never heard of prodigy, his five fingers like
five brightsome Sun beams, illuminating all the country over, converted the
darkness into light, and the night into day. By help of this immense splendor,
the coach man found his horses, and so returned joyful, and greatly conforted
to his good Father. Whiles the Saint preached the Gospel to a certain noble
man, there came a flame out of the Saints mouth, which entered in at the noble
ma^s mouth and ears, heating therewith his heart, and also all his inward
powers.

5. A young Lady named Memessa, daughter to a great Prince in England, by
contemplation of the creatures, attained to such perfect knowledge, and love of
the Creator, that for his love she misprised all the world; her parents
labored very much, but could not nether by fair or foul means enforce her,
ever to contract with any of the great Lords that were suitors to her, so
constant she was in her purpose of dedicating her virginity to her maker,
Profession of chastity.
her parents seeing nothing could prevail with her, sent her into Ireland to
S. Patricke, who instructed her in the Christian religion, and after receiving
the blessed Sacrament, Holy water and a great miracle wrought by it.
being in prayer, she yielded up her pure soul, which was carried between
Angels, into the bed chamber of her heavenly spouse. Holy water made by the
Saint, was no sooner besprinkled upon a noble man named Darius, who lay sick
upon a dead horse, but the noble man recovered his health, and the horse his
life.

Of a vision S. Patricke had touching the building of Ardmuch, and of the cure
of 16. Leapers. CHAP. XVII.
THE formentioned noble man Darius, being willing to gratify the Saint,
bestowed upon him a fair, pleasant, and delightful piece of ground, anciently
called Druimsallac, and now Ardmuch: the next night after, the saint saw the
Angels squaring the form and compass of a fair City, that was to be built,
in that pleasant, and delightful field. One of the Angels commanded him the
next day, to go to a place called S. Patrickes well, where he should cure 16.
leapers, covered over with ugly soars; the Saint did accordingly, and baptized
the leapers in the well aforesaid, which miracle coming to the notice of the
people, was a main help toward the building of the city. At the Saints
request an Angel removed out of his place a great rock, that was like to make
the entrance into the city very cumbersome and difficulte.

2. The glorious Bishop, with Gods help and favor begun, and thoroughly built a
city, fair for the situation, greatness, and compass, and brought many
principal citizens to inhabit therein. The city it self, was adorned with
fair and dece^t churches, wherein were ordained by the Saint, Clergy men for
the singing of the divine office, the government of souls, and instruction of
the people. There were besides, Monasteryes furnished with Monks, and others
replenished with sacred Virgins. In a monastery of holy Virgins lived a virgin
the King of Englands daughter, and nine other ladies which accompanied her:
when she came to S. Patricke, the Saint saw with his own eyes, three of his
holy number ascend up to heaven. In this City did the Saint erect his
Archepiscopall sea, intending to make it the principal and metropolitan Church
of all Ireland, and that this his intention might be established for all
succeeding ages, he purposed to make a journey to Rome, there to have it
confirmed, and ratifyed by Apostolical authority. The Angel appearing, liked
well thereof, and because for the present the Saint wanted horses, he provided
him miraculously of coaches to carry him and his retinue, to the water side.

3. The glorious Bishop, after that with infatigable travail of preaching,
Priests, cleargymen.
and marvelous plenty of miracles, he had converted the kingdom to the
Christian religion, having ordained Bishops, Priests, and other Clergy men in
all places that he thought convenient, blessing and taking his leave of them
all, he went with some of his company to Rome. Coming thither, he acquainted
the Popes holiness with the affairs of Ireland, and the cause of his journey.
S. Patr. the Popes Legate.
His holiness embracing the Saint as the Apostle of Ireland, honored him with a
palle, and constituted him as his own Legate over all Ireland, The antiquity
of a Pallium in Ireland.
confirming with his apostolical authority, all what the Saint had ordered,
disposed, or done in Ireland. His holiness gave him rich presents and precious
gifts, among other his gifts, were relicques of the Apostles S. Peter, and S.
Paul, and S. Stephen the Protomartyr, and that which passes all, his Holiness
bestowed upon him a certain sheet died with our Saviors blood. The Blessed
Bishop after his return, placed all these rich relicques behind the high
Altar in the Metropolitan Church of Ardmuch. It was the custom in that church
every year, Honor done to Relikes.
to expose these relicques at Easter, and at Whitsontide, to be seen, and
honored of the people.

4. It passes our abilityes to set down the innumerable signs, which he
wrought in his journey, going and coming from Rome; for in all places did he
manifest signs of his sanctity. In England his native soil, he made some
stay, where he built many Monasteryes, and repaired many more destroyed by the
Pagans, which he furnished with Monks, which lived according to the form of
religious discipline and life, that the Saint prescribed them: he also
prophetically foretold many adverse and prosperous events, that should happen
in England. In like manner did he forsee and fortell the sanctity of S. David,
being as yet in his mothers womb. After his return from his tedious and
paynefull journey, bringing with him from beyond the seas thirty Bishops, whom
he sent to labor in the field of our Lord, he began in time convenient, to
celebrate solemn counsels in which he cut off any thing he found to be
prejudicial to Christian religion, or contrary to the churches canons: placed
and established such constitutions, as were conformable to the holy Canons, and
made for the advancement of religion, piety, and good life; in the mean space
he daily shined with the splendor of infinite miracles, whereof this ensuing,
as it cannot but be deemed most stupendous, so questionles is to be accounted
most beneficial.

How S. Patricke freed Ireland from the encombrance of Devils, Magitians, and
venomous beasts. And how he fasted 40. days without corporal food. CHAP.
XVIII.
IRELAND since its first inhabitation was pestered with a triple plague, to
wit, with great abundance of venomous beasts, copious store of Devils
visiblely appearing, and infinite multitudes of Magitians, that the like is not
recorded of any other country or kingdom. The glorious, and most holy Bishop
labored by intercession of most fervent prayers, and other exerecices of
devotion, to deliver the Island of that triple pestilence, the most excellent
Prelate taking the staff or wand of Jesus into his sacred hand, and eleuating
it after a threatening manner, as also by the favorable assistance of Angels,
he gathered together in one place, all the venomous beasts that were in
Ireland, Honor done to Relikes.
after he drove them up before him to a most high mountain hanging over the
sea, called then Cruachanailge, and now Cruach Padruig, that is S. Patrickes
mountain, and from thence he cast the^ down in that steep precipice to be
swallowed up by the sea: O singular sign, O magnificent miracle unseen, and
unheard of since the beginning of the world, now known and spoken of by all
nations: after directing his face toward the I Will of Man, and blessing it with
all the other Isles by him converted to Christ, by help of his prayers he
procured them the same singular benefit. Of the Magitians he converted, and
reclaimed very many, and such as persisted incorrigible, he rooted them out
from the face of the earth. By his prayers he obtained of God, that the
apparitions, and illusions should not molest the Christians from thence
forwards.

2. To the end that Ireland never after should be molested with venomous
beasts, nor yet enco^ with the accustomed habitatio^ of Devils, the most
excellent Bishop fasted forty days without any corporal food, imitating in
that holy fast Moses; who observed it in the law of nature, and Elias, who
observed it in the written law, and especially our dear Savior, who
consecrated in his person that mystical fast. The Saint therefore ascended the
high mountain of Cruachanailge, where he disposed five stones in form of a
Cross, and in the midst of them he placed himself, showing as well by the
form, and manner of his sitting, as by the mortification of his abstinence,
himself to be the true servant of Christ's cross. The Devils grieuing much
that their power, and dominion in Ireland had been overthrown and weakened,
thronged about the Saint in the shap of most ugly, and deformed birds,
laboring with their horrid skrikes, to annoy and hinder the Saint in his holy
prayers, but he being prevented by the grace of God, and assisted by his power,
making the sign of Christ's triumphant banner against those foul fiendes, he
chased them away far from him, and with frequent percussion of his cymball,
he drove them out of all the coasts of Ireland, so that from that time even to
this present day, no venomous beasts were seen in Ireland, nor yet are the
inhabitants since molested with illusory apparitions of Devils, as they be in
other countries the Saints cymball being broken with often playing upon it, was
amended by an Angel.

3. By Gods favor, whose wont it is after a storm to cause a calm, the
Devils being chased and driven away, a great multitude of Angels illustrated
the mountain with heavenly splendor, and recreated the Saint with their
sweetest harmony, the Saint after immolating the hosts of thanksgiving and
praises to God, for inabling him to perform so long a fast, and for conferring
such admirable favors to Ireland at his intercession, descended from the
mountain, and played on his cymball, the sound whereof was heard over all the
kingdom: then eleuating his hands, he blessed all Ireland, with the
inhabitants thereof, and commended them to Christ; then did he make glad all
the Church with his presence, solemnizing with great devotion, our Saviors
triumphant Resurrection.

4. The paschall festiuityes being duly, and devoutly accomplished, the Saint
with a great train of spiritual children in his company, made a circuit about
the land, teaching the ways of Lord in all places, and with his efficacious
sermons, stre^ghtning the inahbitants in the faith of Christ. The people being
incited by that admirable, and most prodigious sign of chasing away the
devils, venomous beasts, and Magitians, flocked from al parts to the saint, and
submitted themselves and al they had, to his holy will and pleasure, embracing
with great devotion his doctrine and precepts. The Saint seeing what
disposition our Lords field was in, to yield not only the 30. or 60. but eue^
the hundred fold fruit, caused all the land to be divided, and equally
distributed, and being divided, to be tithed with all the inahbitants of both
sexes, and every tenth head* as well in men, women, as cattle and moueables, did
he separate for our Lords part, all the me^ he made Monks, and all the women he
consecrated Nuns, building innumerable monasteryes for the^, and assigning
them the fifthes of lands, cattle, and other moveable goods for their
sustentation: within a short space there was not a wilderness, no nor skarce any
corner, or place in all the Ila^d, but was replenished with perfect Mo^ks, and
holy Nuns, so that Ireland by a peculier name was justly called all the world
over: The Island of Saints: They lived according to the prescript, and tenor of
life, which S. Patrick set the^ down; for contempt of the world, desire of
heavenly things, morrtification of the flesh, abdication of self will, they
matched the Monks of Egypt both in merit and number. Many foraine Regions were
by the^ illustrated with doctrine, and religion.

How the present, and future state of Ireland, was revealed to S. Patricke: and
of the patronage the Saint affoordeth them, who are devout unto him. CHAP. XIX.
THE B. Saint with great insta^ce of prayers beged of God to know in what
estate Ireland was in his Maiestyes eyes. God did hear the desire of his heart;
for being in prayer, he saw al Ireland on a flame of fire; flaming upward even
to heaven, an Angel telling him, that such was the estate of Ireland in the
eyes of God for that present. Within a little while, he saw mountains as it
were of fire, ascending to the clouds; a short while after he saw brightsome
torches shining* afterward small lights, and lastly a few coals raked in
ashes, but yet alive, to whom the Angel appearing said: That by that variety
was expressed* the several estats Ireland should under go in the succeeding
time. Saint Patricke bathing his face in tears, often redoubled that of the
Royal Prophet: VVil God reject for ever? Or will he not add to be better
pleased? Or will be cut off his mercy for ever from generation to generation?
Or will God forget to have mercy? Or will be in his wrath keep in his mercyes?
The Angel said, look toward the North, and thou shall see the mutation of
the right hand of the highest. The Saint lifted up his eyes, and saw a little
light arising in Vlidia, which striving for a long space with the darkness,
chased it away, and after illuminated all the Country, never ceasing to
increase, until it brought Ireland to its free resembling and flourishing
estate. By the Saints interpretation, the fiery ardour, designed the present
devotion, and zeal of Religion and charity, wherewith the inhabitants were
inflamed in the Saints days. The flaming mountains, the Saints who were
conspicuous for miracles, virtuous life and learning. The diminution of light,
the decrease of sanctity; and the mist ouerclouding all the land, the
infidelity that should prevail in the Country.

2. As some of S. Patrickes disciples discoursed together of his guiftes and
virtues, one of them said, he was the holiest man breathing upon the face of
the earth: to whom S. Secundinus answered. Truly he had been most holy, had he
not been endued with less fraternall charity then it behooves him. Which
coming to S. Patrickes hearing, he asked Secundinus what moved him to utter
such censure against him. Secundinus answered, because you accept not of the
liuinges, and rich presents that are offered you, with which you might
maintain great multitude of holy men. To whom S. Patricke replied: Charity
makes me not to accept of such great charity; for if I did accept of what would
be given me, I should leave not so much as the pasture of two horses for the
Saints who shall live after us.

3. The aforesaid S. Secundinus, being of great learning and wisdom,
signified to S. Patricke, that he had a desire to compose a hymn in honor of
a Saint that yet was living, and because it was S. Patricke himself he meant,
he concealed the Saints name; the glorious Bishop answered, it is just and
reasonable, that people display the virtues of Saints, and that the Church
declare their praises, which yet is more securely done after their deaths, when
all occasion of sinning is cut off: but if you will put in execution what you
entende, do it quickly, lo death is at the door, of all the Bishops that are
in Ireland, you are the first that shall depart this life, Secundinus made the
hymn, and within a few days after he dyed at Donnachseachluin his episcopal
city, showing by frequent miracles, that he reigns with Christ.

4. S. Kennechus, saw a company of Devils, to go fetch the soul of a
flagitious sinner, who for his many misdeedes, deserved to be buried in Hell.
The Saint abiurde them at their return, to let him understand the success of
the matter. After a little respit the Devils coming again, told: S.
Kennechus, how S. Patricke defended the sinners soul from the^, in regard that
he was accustomed upon the Saints day to keep a great feast in honor of him*
and every day to sing some chapter of that hymn: S. Kennechus rejoiced much
thereat, and by telling that miracle, excited many to sing that hymn very
devoutly in honor of the Saint. An Abbot S. Patrickes disciple named Colmanus,
did sing the foresaid hymn very often: being demanded the cause, he answered,
that whilst he sung it, he enjoyed still the Saints presence before him, and
that his eyes could never be satiated with the contemplation of his delectable
face: whereby it is clear how faithful a friend this blessed Saint is, to all
those who frequent his memory, or have him for their patron.

Of the Saints admirable contemplations, revelations, mortifications, and
prayers. CHAP. XX.
OFtentims did the glorious Saint see our Savior, the heavens open, and our
Lord Jesus standing in the midst of the multituds of Angels, and this sometimes
when he said mass, and other times, when he devoutly sung S. John's
reuelatio^s: besides the Angel Victor so often mentioned in this volum, was
wont to appear to him thrice every week for to recreate him with his divine
colloquies, and discourses: Of souls departing this life, our B. Saint saw full
often, some to go to endure the pains of hell, and others to be sent to enjoy
the joys of heaven; one example very remarkable, which the Saint himself for
edificatio^s sake was wont to recite, I will here recount. A great noble man,
who lived in much prosperity, and dyed with no less glory, was accounted by
them that knew his life and end, most happy, and pleasing unto God, whereas a
poor indige^t lazar, who lived al his life in great misery, and after his
death wanting the honor of burial, became a prey to the fouls of the air, was
esteemed most wicked before God, but the B. Bishop seeing the blindness of
humane judgment, told them that he saw the rich man's soul to be buried in
hell, and the poor man's soul to be carried up to heaven, and this which the
Saint saw concerning these two, he was wont to recite of many other.

2. The fame of S. Patrickes virtues, excited a holy man of great merit and
virtue named Vinuualoeus, who lived in Britany in France, to leave his native
soil and to go for Ireland, there to become S. Patrickes disciple, and
scholar. The night before he was to begin his journey, he saw in a vision, a
most venerable man attyred in episcopal robes, who told him that himself was
S. Patrike: know my dearest Vinuualoeus that I am Patricke to who^ you repair,
know that the time of my resolution is near at hand, so that before you can
come where I am, I shall depart this life: it is the will of God that you
forsake not this place; with that the vision disappeared.

3. The course which the Saint held in his devotion, as it was most admirable,
so did he continue it daly without any intermission: every day was he wont to
say devoutly the whole Psalter, with canticles, hymns and S. John's revelation,
besides two hundred other prayers: three hundred times in the day did he
prostrate himself in adoration before God, and in singing every canonical
hour, he was accustomed to bless himself a hundrd times with the sign of
the Cross: moreover it was his wont every day, to say mass with great
devotion and reverence, neither did he omit to preach to the people or to teach
his disciples. The night time, which he divided into three parts, he spent
after a most heavenly manner; the former part he employed in reciting twice
fifty Psalms, and in making two hundred genuflexions: the second part he spent
in saying of the third quinquagenary of psalms, and of other prayers, all
which time he stood immersed in cold water: the third part he allotted to his
sleep, having for his bed a bare stone, and another stone in steed of a
bolster, giving himself in this manner to his rest, he would girde his loins
with a roughe, and course hair cloth steeped in cold watter, to keep his
body in due subjection, fearing it should stir up any dishonest motions
against the spirit: in this manner did the blessed Bishop, offer himself a
holy living and gratfull victime unto God.

Of Saints Patrickes most profound humility, and of his many miracles. CHAP.
XXI.
THE glorious Bishop, over his other attire wore a white robe, repesenting by
the form and color of his attire, the candor of his inward powers, nay he
would accept of no gifts or presents, esteeming it happier to give, then to
receive; and if sometimes rich men did bestow any present upon him, he would
without delay give it to the poor, easing himself of it as of a heavy
burden. In his countenance, in his aspect, in his talk, in his gate, even in
the motion of his members, and deportement of all his body, the beholders might
see and learn lessons of edification, his speech being tempered with sweetness,
and seasoned with the salt of discretion, he accomodated himself to al sexes,
people, and occasions, he was well seen in four languages, the English, Irish,
French and Latin, and attained to good insight in the Greek, he wrote a volume
called S. Patrickes canons, which is furnished with excellent doctrine for all
sorts of people.

2. When any difficulte or obscure questions were put unto him, he was wont of
his profound humility, first to answer: I know not, God knows. He was endued
with the gift of prophecy, and whatsoever he foretold, fell out without any
ambiguity: He did prophecy of the Saints of Ireland, and especially of all the
Saints of Munster and Connact, that were to be borne within the compass of one
hundred years, so clearly, that he fortould their names, lives and places of
their habitation. In giving his benediction, he extended his right hand, and in
bestowing his malediction, he stretched out his left hand: who^soeuer he
blessed, Gods blessing did light upon him, and whomesoeuer he cursed, Gods
curse came upon him.

3. And though in all virtues he did match, or rather surpass other Saints,
yet in humility he did far surpass himself, hence it came, that in his
missiue letters he styled himself: The greatest sinner in the world, the least
and most despiceable among them; and setting little by the signs he wrought,
he deemed himself unworthy to be compared to any perfect man. He exercised
himself in the manual works as S. Paul did of tilling the ground, and
fishing, but especially in building of Churches, three hundred and fifty
Bishops did he consecrate with his own hands, five hundred did he inuest with
the holy function of Priesthood, the number of them, that were ordained in
inferior orders, as also of Monks, and Nuns, is so numberless, that God
alone does know them.

4. The Blessed Bishop living and leading a life of this tenor, shined with so
many, and so great miracles, that in them he was not inferior to any of the
Saints that went before him. It was in a manner a daily exercise with him to
cleanse leapers, cripels, deaf, dumb, to cure palseies, lethurgies,
lunatickes, epilephies, to erect cripls, to restore sight to the blind, speech
to the dumb, to the deaf hearing, and in a word to heal all diseases: he
merited to be the magnificent reuiuer of three and thirty dead persons,
threescore and six treatises were written of his gifts, virtues and miracles,
a great part of them perished by fire under the Pagan Princes Iurmundus and
Turgesius. Four volumes are yet extant written by four of his disciples S.
Benignus, S. Mell, S. Lumanus, S. Patricke the younger, who lies buried in
Glastenbury monastery in England: S. Euinus compiled his acts and miracles
partly in Irish, and partly in Latin, out of which holy authors, we have
extracted what we thought good, and digested it into this volume.

5. The most glorious bishop, being loaded with years, and abounding with
merits, knew by divine revelation, that the dissolution of his earthly
tabernacle was near at hand, which moved him to go toward the city of
Armuch, thinking to enrich that his Metropolita^ Church with the precious
depositum of his sacred body, but the Angel Victor appearing to him, told him
that it was the divine pleasure, he should expect the general resurrection in
the City of Down in Vlidia. The Saint embracing with great resignation the
disposition of the divine providence, returned back again to Vlidia.

6. Within a few days after, as the most holy Prelate S. Patricke preached of
the glory of heaven to a great multitude of religious and ecclesiastical men,
there descended from thence, an immense splendor that illustrated a place in
the east part of the Church-yeard, the pearl of Ireland S. Brigit being
present. The Saint commanded her to declare the mystery of that divine light,
she told in the hearing of all the assembly, how that celestial light,
sanctified and designed the place, where a Saint most glorious, and most dear
unto God should be shortly interred* then rounding S. Ephembria in her ear, she
told it was the patron and Apostle of Ireland, S. Patrik, adding further, that
she would account her self happy, if his sacred body might be wraped in a
winding sheet which she had spunne, and weaued with herown hands, and had
prepared for that purpose.

7. The Blessed Saint knowing by divine inspiration the holy Virgins desire,
commanded her to go, and bring that sheet, wherein for the most tender love he
carried to the most blessed vigin, he would have his sacred body wrapped:
himself went to the Monastery of Sauall, where sickning he expected the end of
this life, or rather the beginning of the other life that has no end: the B.
virgin Brigit was so over wearied with the length and difficulty of the
journey, that she could not come so soon as she purposed. The Blessed Bishop
knowing in what distress the holy virgin was in, he sent his coachman to meet
her, and the sacred virgins that came in her company, so the virgins coming to
Sauall where the Saint lay sick, she presented him with the sheet, which he
received very gratefully, then kissing his feet and hands, she and her virgins
received his benediction.

Of S. Patrickes death, of the Angelical obsequies exhibited to him, and of
his entertainment at Down. CHAP. XXII.
THE Blessed Saint being brought very low by his infirmity, as the Angel had
admonished, received the holy Sacraments at the hands of his disciple S.
Tasach Bishop; and eleuating his eyes, he saw Jesus standing in the midst of a
multitude of Angels; then blessing his disciples, and rendering thanks to God,
he passed out of this life, his blessed soul was received into the joys of
his Lord by the all-immaculate Virgin the Mother of God, and sacred quires of
virgins, with the Patriarchs, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and Angels, no
marvel that he was honored of all Saints, since there shined in him, the
virtue of all Saints; an Angel he was, not by nature but by office, since his
lips did keep science and the law of life: a Prophet, since few of the Prophets
were endued with the foresight of future things so copiously as he was: an
Apostle he was, since Ireland, and the neighbor Islands, are signs of his
Apostleship: a Martyr he was, in regard of the many coflicts he had against
Kings Magitians, Idolaters, and Devils. A confessor he was, since that he
never ceased from the preaching, and confessing the name of Christ. A virgin he
was, for as much as he kept the integriof faith, in body and soul. The
glorious Saint deceased at the age of a hundred and twenty three years: he was
sixteen years old, when he was carried away by the Pirates: six years did he
serve in captivity: eightene years did he live with S. German in France: he
was five and fifty when he came into Ireland to preach the Gospel: five and
thirty years did he employ in the conversion of Ireland, and the adjoining
Isles: afterward for three and thirty years, he gave himself to the sweet
rest of contemplation, either at Ardmuch, or at Sauall monastery, during which
time he never came abroad, unless it were for great affairs, or keeping a
Council once a year for the redress of abuses.

2. After his departure his sacred body was wrapped up in the sheet, which the
blessed virgin S. Bridgit had prepared, and a great multitude of clergy men
and seculers, came to bemone the death of their common father, and Apostle, and
to solemnize his funerals. The night following a brightsome quier of Angels
that kept watch at his body with their sweet harmony, cast all the multitude
into an extaticall sleep, until their departure, the next morning the Angels
left so fragrant an odor behind them, that it continued for the space of
twelve days, whilst the holy body was unburied, during which time in all that
region, they inioyed the brightness of the day light, without the interposition
of any night. By occasion of this stupendous miracle, the Archmachians, and
Vlidians fell into great debate and contention, for the possession of that
sacred treasure, and as they were upon the point of entering into a fierce and
bloody conflict, they heard a voice from heaven, which seemed to be S.
Patricks, commanding them to surcease from the effusion of blood, the sea
moreover passing its wo^ted bounds swole up so high, that it impeached their
mutual fight, and slaughter for the present.

3. The Vlidians put the blessed Saints body upon a new wayne drawn by two
kine, and so carried it away, with great joy and singing of psalms, hymns,
and spiritual canticles, whereat the Ardmuchians fury was so inkindled, that
they intended by force of arms to detayne the holy body of their patron, and
primat: but Almighty God to stint that bloody strife, substituted before the
Ardmuchians eyes a fantastical wayne which resembled so fully the former,
that they being persuaded it was the same that carried the rich treasure of the
Saints sacred body, followed it so far as the river Caulune, in the confines
of the province of Ardmuch, where that imaginary wayne disappeared out of their
sight: in the mean time the Vlidians entered the city of Down, and after
great solemnity of masses, they interred the holy body in the place aforesaid.
S. Patricke departed this life in the year of our redemption 493. Felix being
Pope, Anastasius being Emperor, Aurelius Ambrosius being Governor of England,
and Forchernus reigning in Ireland, and Jesus Christ being sole monarch of all
the world, to whom all honor glory and praise for all eternity. Amen.

Here ends S. Patrickes life.
THE LIFE OF THE HOLY VIRGIN SAINT BRIGIT PATRONESS OF IRELAND.
Abridged out of what COGITOSVS her own nepheu, and IOANNES CAPGRAVIVS have
written more largely of her famous Acts, and Miracles.
Of S. Brigits Country, Parents, Birth, and many virtues; and especially of
her charity to the poor. CHAP. I.
THE glorious virgin S. Brigit, who descended of the ancient, and honorable
family of Etech in the kingdom of Ireland, was borne at Fochart, a village a
mile distant from Dundalke in the country of Louth. Her Father was a noble man
of Leinster, named Dubtacus, who falling in love with a handmayd of his named
Brocseca, a woman endued with singular beauty, and admirable comlines, he got
her with child of this sacred virgin, which when his own wife perceived, being
in great trouble thereat, and taking the matter very greeuily, she said unto
him; cast out this handmayd, fearing her posterity surpass mine. Dubtacus
constrained through his wives importuinty, made sale of her to a certain
Magitian, in whose house falling in travail, she was safe delivered of the
holy child; such as were present at her birth, saw the cloth, wherewith her
tender head was covered, to burn with a flame of fire, whereupon hastening to
quench it, they found no fire at all.

2. So much did the holy virgin loath to feed of the Magitians meats, that she
was constrained every day to cast up what she eat. The Magitian considering
attentively the cause thereof, said: I am unclean, and this holy virgin (full of
the spirit of God) cannot taste of my meat; choosing out therefore a white
merch cow, he bestowed it upon her to live by her milk. The holy virgin
increased in virtue, no less then in years; for she excelled in all kind of
holy conversation and sanctity of life, aed became very conspicuous for her
modesty, chastity and temperance, but above al her charity to the poor is
most remarkable.

3. The sacred virgin being deputed by the Magitian to keep his cowes, gave
all the butter, and milk she could gather to releive the present wantes, and
necessities of the poor. When the Magitian saw but a small quantity of butter
in a great vesel, wherein the butter was to be kept, he chafed extremely. The
Saint seeing what passion he was in, offered her pure prayers up to God, and so
by divine virtue, filled the vessel with butter even up to the topp: whereat
the Magitian was so much astonished and moved, that he believed in Christ,
setting both her, and her mother at liberty.

4. In regard she gave to the poor, all whatsoever she could lay hands upon,
and among othings, her Fathers sword, he purposed to sell her; for which end
bringing her where the King was, he requested him that he would be pleased to
buy his daughter. To whom the King spoke in this manner; what made you to
give away your fathers sword, to the poor man? To whom she answered, I have
given it to Christ, and Sir if my God did ask your majesty, and my father too
of me, I would bestow you both, and whatsoever else you have upon him, if it lay
in my power. The^ the King turning to her father said to him; this your
daughter is of too great worth to be bought by me, and of far greater to be
sold by you, so giving her another sword to give her father, he dismissed her.

Of S. Brigites singular chastity, and of some miracles wrought in approbation
thereof, as also of other stupendous signs. CHAP. II.
WHEN this sacred spouse of Christ saw herself pressed, and importuned by her
freindes to marry, she prayed to God, that he would be pleased to disfigure her
body with some deformity, to the end that men should cease from making further
love unto her; and without delay her eye burst, and melted in her head; then
taking three other maids in her company, she repaired to a holy Bishop, called
Machella, S. Patrickes disciple, to be vayled at his hands* the holy Bishop
saw a pillar of fire appear over her head, and contemplating moreover her
earnest and ardent love of virginal integrity, he gave her the holy veil of
chastity: at which time as she fell prostrate before the venerable Prelate to
offer her self a holy, clean and impolluted host to her heavenly spouse, she
touched the alter postle, which incontinently budded forth a fresh with leaves,
and so continues green and flourishing to this day: Being vayled with the
sacred cognizance of chastity, her bursten eye was restored again to perfect
health.

2. Against Easter the sacred virgin made bear of one only measure or pecke of
malt; fending part thereof to eighteen Churches that were round about, and
besides during all the octaue, that small quantity sufficed abundantly, and
served to satisfy all those who would, and were desirous to taste thereof. At
the same time a Leaper came to the holy virgin, requesting her to help him to a
cow, but she having none said to him; Will you that we pray God to deliver you
from your sickness? who answered, that he preferred his cure before all other
guiftes; whereupon she having blessed water, sprinkled the leaper therewith, and
immediately he became clean: in like manner two sick virgins taking water,
which the holy Virgin had blessed, recovered their perfect health.

3. Two blind men being Brittons, or English men by birth, with a leaper who
was their guide, came to her Church door, and besought the sacred Virgin to
help them to their bodily health; She entreated them to have patience a little,
and to enter into the lodging to refresh themselves, and that she would in the
mean time pray to God in their behalf; which delay they took so impatiently,
that with great indignation they replied; you heal the diseased of your own
nation, but as for us being strangers, you neglect to cure us for Christ's sake.
The holy virgin receiving this reproach, went forth unto them, and casting holy
water upon them, she cleansed the leaper, and restored the blind men to their
sight.

4. A certain woman, brought some apples to the Saint, at which time there
came some leapers to beg alms of her: the^ the said Saint dealt these apples
amongst them. The woman hearing it, co^uayed her aples away saying: I brought
those apples for your self, and your virgins, and not to be given to leapers:
whereat the Saint being not a little offended, she answered; You have done
very ill in hindering us to give alms, therefore your trees will never more
produce any fruit. The woman going forth into her orchard, which she left full
of apples, found none at all, and so it remained fruitles always after.

Of S. Brigits great austerity, and of many admirable miracles wrought by her.
CHAP. III.
ONE night the season being frosty an cold, when al had taken themselves to
their rest; and were fast a sleep, the holy virgin went to a deep poole,
wherein she stood all night long weeping and praying, firmly purposing with
herself to observe the same custom every night: but our dear Savior out of
the abundance of his infinite mercy, would not have her to continue it any
longer, for the next night following, she found the poole dry without any
water, and coming to see it the next morning, she saw it as full as it was
before: the same happened to her the second night, which was a sufficient reason
that she forbore that austere exercise of mortification.

2. Upon a time that some venerable Bishops came to seek lodging at her house,
she being unprovided of all provision, the divine munificence releiued her
wantes by miracle: for thrice in one day did she milk one cow that she had,
which yielded so much milk, as the three best cowes would. Another time a Dog
did fawn upon her for meat, the holy virgin, with whom mercy grew even from
her infancy, having nothing but flesh, that was boiling for some guests that
were to come, drew it out of the pot, and gave the doge a piece thereof. When
the flesh was laid upon the table, it appeared, so entire, as if nothing had
bine cut off, which excited the beholders to great admiration of the miracle,
and veneration of the Saint.

3. The blessed virgin labored very earnestly, to reclaim nine men from
fulfilling their nefarious vow made of killing a man in the Kalendes of July,
yet for nothing that she could, either say, or do, would they relent from
their wicked design: Betaking her self therefore to prayer for the desperate
wretches, lo there appeeared before their eyes a figure, resembling to the
full, the man whom they intended to kill, whom they incontinently assailed
with their swords and lances, and after, as it were insulting by way of
triumph over their slain ennemy, came back immediately to the Saint with
their wepons all imbrued in blood, where learning the truth of the matter, they
did penance for their cruel intent.

4. Upon a time that a certain farmer came with all his family to celebrat
some solemn feast with S. Bridgit, he being there, his Cowes were stolen away
by thieves, who in their way came to a river, which they found so swollen up with
water, that they could not pass over, tying therefore their garments and
arms, to the cowes horns, they made them enter into the water, but they
returning back with great violence, came and ran directly to S. Bridgits
aboade, and the men being stark naked, followed them, doing afterward
penance for their heinous fact, in the Saints monastery.

5. The holy virgin being once benighted in a spacious field in Mead, declined
to a certain poor woman's house, with whom she lodged all night, and albeit
the woman roceiued, her with great joy, rendering God many thanks for the
happy and safe arrival of the most holy virgin, yet her poverty was such, that
she wanted wherwithall to entertain so worthy a guest, but nevertheless of
reverence to the Saint, she broke down a frame she used to weaue in, and
boiled therewith the calfe of one only cow which she had. Supper being ended,
and after resting her self all night, the next morning, to the end the
charitable woman should not sustain any dommage or detriment, by the
entertaynement, or refection of the Saint, she found another calfe like to her
own with her cow, and found likewise a weauing frame, in form and greatness
just alike to her own that she had burnt.

Of the great power S. Brigit had over Devils, and how much they feared her.
CHAP. IIII.
WHEN a certain person, tormented with a malignant spirit, knew that he was to
be led to S. Brigit, he fell down to the ground, saying: You shall not carry
me thither. Do you know said they where she lives? yes said he, and I will not
go by any means. And when they could not remove him from the place, they sent
for the Saint, entreating her to come thither; when the Devil saw the sacred
virgin coming a far off, being terrifyed, he departed from the man out of
their sight.

2. Another obsessed person, who by reason of strange fits of fury and rage,
wherewith he was vexed, bred great annoy and trouble to many, was brought to
the Saint, to whom she said; Preach to me the word of our Savior Jesus
Christ, he answered, O most holy Virgin Brigit, I am compelled against my will
to obey your commandment, saying: Love God then, and all men will love thee:
honor God, and all men will honor thee: fear God, and all men will fear
thee, this being said, the devil fled away with a loud cry.

3. As Saint Brigit sat at the table with a certain virgin whom she had
invited, she saw a Devil sitting hard by her, the other virgin said: I would
feign see him, if it were possible. It is not impossible quoth S. Bridgit, but
first sign your eyes, that they may be able to sustain his sight, and
contemplate his face: having signed her eyes, she saw the ennemy in a most
ugly, and black shape, with a terrible great head, exhasing forth at his
nostrils smoke, and flames of fire. Speak to us Devil, said S. Bridgit. To
whom he answered, O most holy virgin, I cannot speak to you, neither yet can
I contemn your commandments, since you contemn not Gods holy ordonances,
and are so affable to his poor, and little ones. Wherefore came thou hither?
said the Blessed Virgin. I remain with this virgin, said he, and in regard of
her slugishnes, I have gotten a place in her. Behold then said the holy
virgin (turning to the other virgin) whom you have intertayned these many
years? And from that day forwards, the virgin was delivered from the Devil.

4. There assembled together a great multitude of men with oxen and engines to
draw away a great tree, which was cut down that was to be used in some
building, but all in vain, for neither the multitude of men, the strength of
the oxen, nor yet the variety of engines, could prevail any thing toward the
removing thereof. The men were almost ready to depart, thinking it impossible to
stir it out of its place; at last by the help and force of Saint Bridgits
prayers, together with her pregnant faith like to a mustard seed, by which
faith as our Savior says, Mountains are transfered, they carried away that
tree without the asistance of any humane help, and found no difficulty in
bringing it to the place, whither the Saint appointed them to carry it.

Of the obedience that unreasonable creatures exhibited to Saint Bridgit. CHAP.
V.
ONE day as the Saint saw Duckes, sometimes swimming in the waters, and other
times flying in the air, she commanded them to come to her; They as if they
had been trained up under human discipline, flew in great haste with prompt
obedience to the Saint. The blessed virgin touched them gentlely, and embraced
them sweetly, which doing for a pretty space, permitted them after to fly away.
Another time a great wile bore being pursued very eagerly, came in great have
to S. Bridgits heard of swine; she beholding the boar among her swine, gave
him her blessing, and he remained familiar) and without any fear ever
afterwith her heard. By this and the other precedent, example it is clear and
evident, that the fowls of the air, and beasts of the earth, were subject
to her command, and obeyed her will and pleasure, as we may further gather
from these ensuing accidents.

2. A simple country man coming to the Kings court, saw there a Fox, who
being taught for that purpose, made the King great recreation with his many
sleightes, and tricks, and thinking it was not tame or familiar, he killed it
in presence of all the multitude, for which being reprehended, and cast into
fetters, he was brought fast bound to the King, who commanded that he should
be put to death, unless he procured him another Fox like unto the former in all
conditions, and subtle feats, and that his wife and children should be made
slaves. S. Brigit hearing thereof, prayed very earnestly to God for the release
of the poor man: by and by another Fox entering into her coach, sat quietly,
and familiarly by her side, whom when she had presented to the King, and that
he saw it to play tricks, and pranks, and in all things to be conformable to
the other Fox, his wrath appeased therewith, he set the poor man at liberty,
S. Bridgit returning to her monastery, and the Fox remaining as yet amongst the
press of people, fled back again into his den: all those who saw what had
passed, wondered much at the miracle, and honored noe less the Saint by whose
means it was wrought.

3. As the sacred Virgin sat with her virgins in her coach, she saw a man, with
his wife, family, and oxen, toyled very much with carrying heavy, and cumbersome
burdens, even in the extreme heat of the sun, and taking compassion of
them, she gave them her own coach-horses to help, and ease them of their
insupportable pains. In the mean time she sat down by the way side, and
spoke to some of her virgins, bidding them to dig under the adjoining earth,
to the end that water might spring forth, wherewith such as were dry might
quench their thirst. Upon the digging up of the ground, there gushed out a
clear, and fair river. Within a little time after, there came a certain
Captain to the place, who hearing of what S. Bridgit had done with the horses,
he bestowed upon her wild, and madd horses, which became without delay so tame
and gentle, as if they had been always wont to draw a coach. There came
leapers sometimes to Saint Bridgit, who begged her coach of her, which she gave
them without delay, and her horses likewise.

4. A certain Queen came to visit S. Brigit, bringing with her many rich
presents, and amongst the rest a very fair silver chain, which her maids
took away, hiding it, the Saint bestowing the rest upon the poor. Not long
after when a poor man cried to the Saint for alms, having nothing, she took
the chain, and gave it him. The maids seeing it, said, you are the cause that
we loose all that God sendes us, for you give all to the poor, leaving us
poor and needy. To whom she answeaed, seek the chain in the place, where I
am wont to pray in the Church, and peradventure you shall find it there: they
finding the chain, showed it to many, and kept it ever after, as an evident
testimony of her sanctimony, and virtue.

How S. Bridgit protected, and assisted such as inuocated her in their
distress and dangers. CHAP. VI.
SAINT Bridgit came one time, being entreated thereunto by her father, to the
King, saying, Let me have your sword for my Father, and release me one of your
slaves. To whom the King answered, what will you give me for these two great
petitions. She replied, if you will, the life everlasting, and that your seed
thall reign for ever after you. The King answered again; I covet not a life,
which I do not see, neither am I sollcitous in behalf of my children, that
shall live after me: two other things I desire, and covet, the first is, that
I may enjoy this life, which I love; and the second is, that in all places and
conflictes, I get the upper hand over mine ennemies. These two things, said
the Blessed virgin, shall be granted you. Not long after, with a few in his
company, he went to fight with a great multitude, and inuocating S. Bridgits
help and assistance, he saw her go before him, and a pillar of fire to burn
all up even to the skies, so the King having defeated his ennemies, he
returned homewardes, magnifying the glory, and name of the most sacred virgin.

2. A virgin that suffered shipwreck by inuocating S. Bridgitts help, walked
dry foot, upon the liquid waves, escaping by that means the danger of
death. Some of Saint Bridgitts maids having received from a certain rich man,
many measures of meal, could not pass over a water that was in the way, being
therefore destitute of all humane help, and assistance, they inuocated the
powerful suffrages of their their most holy mistress, and they were suddenly
transported to the further side. A man that prohibited S. Bridgits coach to
pass through his feildes, and stroke at her horses, fell down to the ground,
and yielded up his ghost suddenly.

3. A gentleman who was in the country, loned dishonestly a certain woman, and
contriuing with himself how to compass his filthy delights, he gave her in
custody a rich silver pynne, which he stole away privily at unawares from her,
and cast it into the sea, thinking that when she could not restore it, she
should become his slave, and so should glut his wanton desires: all which
wicked plot he put in practice, neither could he be contented otherwise, then
either by getting again the silver pin, or by her bondage. The chaste woman
being driven to this pinche, fled to S. Bridgit, as to a city of refuge; As
the holy virgin was musing with her self what to do in this matter, behold
one brought home fish taken out of the neighbor river, and they vnbowelling
the fishes, the silver pin was found in one of their bellies, so bringing the
pin with her, she went to the assembly, where the matter was to be determined,
where she did show the pin, and it being known by many that saw it, to be the
self same he cast in to the sea, she freed the virtuous woman from her cruel
tyrants hands, who afterward acknowledging his fault, and guiltines,
submitted himself to S. Bridgits pleasure, who having wrought this great
miracle, returned back again to her monastery.

4. It fell out that the King called together an assembly of his subjects, to
make abroad and fair high way in a deep and impassible marsh, through which
a great river ran. The people meeting by their family, and kindreds, they
divided the work, allotting to every family his own share of that laborious
task, that part where the river ran was most difficult, and fell to one of the
families, who being potent and strong forced S. Bridgits kinsefolkes being
weaker, to change with them. They in this their distress, falling prostrate
before the Saint, bemoned their wrong to her: To whom she answered, Depart
in peace, it is the will of God, that the river pass from that place, where
you are put to such heavy works, to the other which they have made choice of.
The next morning, when the multitude rose to begin the work, the river was
found to have left its ancient channel, where S. Bridgits family was
constrained to work, and to be transferred into the part of the potent, and
proud men, who so unjustly oppressed the weaker company: in proof whereof,
the ancient channel where the river took its course in former times,
appears dry without any waters to this very day.

Of many miraculous cures, wrought by the merits, and intercession of the
Saint. CHAP. VII.
THE sacred virgin having delivered many leapers, cripples, and obsessed
persons, from their infirmities, there came two leapers with tears in their
eyes, beging the cure of their disease. Then the Saint praying, and blessing
water, she commanded them to wash one another in that water. One being washed
by his companion, became clean: to whom the Saint said, wash now your fellow;
who seeing himself clean, and boasting of his health, would not touch the
others ulcers; which pride of his God did chastise, for immediately after he
said. I feel sparkles of fire upon my shoulders, and instantly all his body
(his companion being cleansed) was covered over with leaprosy.

2. A certain woman coming of devotion, to visit S. Bridgit, brought her
daughter with her, who was dumb. S. Bridgit seeing the young maiden, said unto
her. Are you content to be a virgin? (but not knowing that she was dumb) The
maid answered incontinently, I will willingly do, what you will command me,
and so dedicating her virginity to God, she to her dying day remained most
eloquent. A blind virgin named Daria, spoake to S. Bridgit saying. Bless mine
eyes, to the end that I may see the world according unto my desire: her eyes
being opened without delay, she said, shut mine eyes again, for the more that
one is absent from the world, so much the nearer, is that party to God; then S.
Bridgit shut her eyes as she requested.

3. One of Saint Bridgits, virgins burnt in the concupiscence of a certain
man, to whom she promised to steal forth in the night: after Saint Bridgit
betook her to her rest, the virgin rose according to her promise; being
inflamed with the fire of se^suality, and likewise vexed with the torment of
conscience, she knew not what to do, but fearing God, and S. Bridgit, prayed her
earnestly, that she would vouchsafe to help and assist her being indistresse.
At last she resolved with her self to make a fire, putting her self therinto,
so by that means, with fire she quenched fire, and with pain, overcame pain;
which S. Bridgit knew by divine revelation, yet nevertheless kept it secret, to
see the event and issue of the virgins combat. The next morning the virgin
acknowledgd her sin to Saint Bridgit, who said to her: because in fighting
courageously this night, thou have burnt thy self, the fire of forincation
shall never annoye thee in this life, nor the fire of hell burn thee in the
next; then the holy virgin did heal her feet, so that no mark of the burning
did appear in them.

4. Neither ought we to omit that great miracle, which this blessed Saint
wrought in imitation of our Savior, by opening the eyes of a man who was blind
from his nativity. A certain Queen that had no children, by the holy Virgins
intercession obtained issue. And as Almighty God for her sake and merits, did
help others in their necessityes, so did he not fail to assist her self in
her wantes: for upon a certain time the holy virgin being in great necessity,
besought God to help her to some honny, and what she sought for, she found it
in great plenty, upon the pauement of her house.

How the holy Virgin for the relief of the poor, wrought many admirable
signs. CHAP. VIII.
SAINT Bridgit said to a certain virgin who begged alms of her; I hear that
there are many afflicted with sickness in your country, take therefore my girdle,
and with it, steaped in water, you shall in the name of our Savior Jesus Christ
deliver them of their infirmityes, and they will give you both meat and
clothes: who taking the girdle, as the Saint commanded, she cured diseases,
getting thereby great gaynes, and becoming very rich, she her self
afterward, dealt great alms to the needy. Another time she converted water
into good bear to give to leapers, who called to her for it. In like manner did
she for the comfort of a needy person, convert a stone into salt. She likewise
divided one garment between two poor men, and by divine virtue, each part
became an entire garment.

2. Among the many stupendous miracles she wrought, this is not to be
accounted the least, nor the least to be admired. To three leapers who besought
her to bestow some charity of them, she gave a silver vessel; and fearing it
should be an occasion of debate, or discord amongst them, if they divided it
themselves, she spoke to the goldsmiths to divide it equally amongst the^. But
he making his excuse, that he could not divide it into three equal parts, the
most holy virgin her self took it into her hand, and stroke it against a
stone, and so divided it just into three equal parcells: in so much that
afterward being put in scales to be weighed, neither part did ouerweigh the
other, not so much as one dra^me, so equal were the deuisions, and so the
leapers departed away joyful with their shares, and without cause either of
envy, or any injury.

3. According to the example of holy Job, she never permitted the poor to
depart from her with empty hands, for she gave them very precious, and rich
garments, which a holy Bishop named Conleath, used to wear in saying the
divine mysteries of the Mass, upon the higher feasts of our Lord, and the
Apostles. Now when the time came, that the venerable Prelate should according
to his wonted manner, use the aforesaid episcopal robes, the holy virgin, who
had given them to Christ in his needy members, received other such robes fully
resembling the former, as well in the weauing, or texture, as in color, which
were brought her in a wagon of two horses, even at the same hour that she
liberally gave the others to the poor.

4. So large and liberal was her charity to the poor, that none ever had a
repulse at her hands, as it is clear and evident by this ensuing narration.
For one time being abroad in the feildes feeding of her flock, one who was
well acquainted with the tenderness of her heart, and largenes of her hand, came
to her seven times in one day begging of alms, and every time she gave him a
weather; and when evening approaching she drove home the sheep, yet being told
over twice or thrice, the flock was found entire, and complete, not one being
missing to the great wonder of those who knew what chanced. It is also
recorded of her, that after prayer made for that intent, she got miraculously a
sum of money, with which she ransommed a guilty person, whom the King
appointed to be put to death.

How the holy virgin, declared the innocence of Bishop Broon Saint Patrickes
disciple, by making a young suckling to speak, and of other no less remarkable
miracles. CHAP. IX.
A Certain malicious woman, without regard of conscience or fear of God,
slandered most wickedly a venerable Bishop of Saint Patrickes disciples named
Broon, by fathering upon him a child, which she had gotten by another. The
Bishop standing upon denial of the fact S. Bridgit calling the woman said, Who
is the father of your child? She answered, Bishop Broon; With that S. Bridgit
signed the woman's mouth with the figure of Christ's banner, and instantly her
head swelled up with a great tumor, after she blessed the young infants
tongue, saying to him; Who is your Father? The child made answer, Bishop
Broon is not my Father, but that vilde and deformed man, who sits last among
the people: then all the assembly rendering many thanks, and praises to God,
constrained the lewed woman to do penance for her folly.

2. There was a certain man named Linguidinus, who was endued with such
admirable strength, and surpassing vigor of body, that he himself alone could
do so much work as twelve men, and who moreover was so great a deuourer of
meat, as to eat at once so much, as might well serve twelve men, for as in
working he did counteruaile twelve men; so likewise in eating did he match that
number. This man came to S. Bridgit, beseeching her to obtain of God, that he
would vouchsafe to temper, and bridle the immoderate appetite of his devouring,
and ravenous stomach, without diminishing or mayning the strength of his body.
The holy Virgin gave him her blessing, and offered up her prayers to God in
behalf of his just petition, which he obtained by her merits, and
intercession, for never after did he take more, then was able to satisfy one
man, being nevertheless able to perform so much work as he was before, when he
did eat most of all.

3. The sacred virgin sent for many workmen, and reapers to cut down her
corn, and having agreed with them for their pay, and appointed a day when they
should come to perform their work, it happened that the day appointed, proved
very rayny, in so much that the clouds powered forth showers in great
abundance over all the province, excepting on S. Bridgits feilds, which were
not wet at all, the rain falling thick upon every side, so that where all the
workmen in the country were constrained to give over their work, by reason of
the wet, and moisty season, S. Bridgits workmen continued from morning without
intermission or impediment, cutting down of her corn, not without the
admiration of all who saw, and heard of that unusual miracle.

4. Another miracle no less stupendous, wherein the Reader may conte^plate the
purity of her heart, the perfctio^ of her soul, the eminency of her merits, and
the prerogative of her virtues we are to recount, which was this. At what time
this sacred virgin fed her flock in a wide and open plain, far from any
shelter, showers of rain fell down so thick, that she was wet to the skin,
who coming home with her clothes all full of water, she saw a Sun beam
pearcing in thorough a chinke, that illuminated the room, and taking it for a
perch (the quickenes of her eyes being hindered, or somewhat blunted) she cast
thereon her wet mantle, or upper garmente, whereupon it hung being supported by
it, as well as by a beam, or post, to the great astonishment of all the
neighbors, who could not sufficiently admire the merits, and virtues of this
holy virgin.

Of S. Bridgits happy departure out of this life, and how she knew thereof by
divine revelation, and of some miracles wrought after her death by her
intercession and merits. CHAP. X.
THE sacred virgin having run out the course of her mortal days, in the
exercise of all kind of sanctimony, and innocence of life, the time of the
resolution of her terrene tabernacle drew near at hand, whose deposition, as
her self knew by revelation, and foretold to one of her virgins, was not
far off. The holy virgin gave up her soul, to her heavenly spouse about the
year of our redemption 518. Her venerable body, was placed in a sumptuous
monument of gould, and silver, adorned with jewels, and precious stones, and
was first interred in her own monastery at Kildare, together with the the
sacred body of the holy Bishop Conleath; afterward it was translated (whereof
we have an authentical record) to the city of Dune in Vlster, where it lies
together with the venerable bodies of S. Patricke, and S. Columbe, the other
two glorious patrons of Ireland. At Kildare and other places, many miracles
have been wrought by the merits of Saint Bridgit, we will content our selves
with the relation of some few, fearing to cloy the Reader with to much
tediousnes.

2. The ouerseer of Saint Bridgits great and famous monastery, sent workmen,
and stonehewers to provide a mill stone, they neither reflecting upon the
difficulty of the way, nor yet regarding that there was no means of getting
down the stone, went up to the topp of a most high and craggy mountain, where
they hewed out a great stone forming it into a mill stone, the Ouerseer came
with oxen and horses to carry it away, but seeing it impossible with oxen and
horses to go where it was, in regard of the steep and craggy ascent, all
begu^ne to despair of ever getting it down, and so were ready to depart. But
the prudent Ouerseer said; Not so, but let us in the name of God, and S.
Bridgit (to whom nothing is impossible) roll it down, and so conceauing a
firm faith of the holy virgins asistance, they cast it down: and lo tho
stone rolling amongst the rocky, and stony cragges, trunled down without any
detriment from the mountain, and thence was carried to the mill. To which mill
a certain pagan sent his corn by an ignorant and simple man to be ground:
when the corn was laid between the stones, the aforesaid stone being the
uppermost, stood irremoueable, neither could the violent current of the great
river, nor yet the paynfull industry of men, whele it about: at last, knowing
that the corn belonged to a pagan Magitian, and therefore S. Bridgits mill,
would not grind it, they removed and put it away, pouring other grain
insteede thereof, and then the stone without any impediment, kept its ordinary,
and wonted course in grinding.

3. It happened within a while after, that the mill by some chance or other
took fire, which consumed the house and the other stone to, that was joined to
this, but as for this stone, that was particulerly dedicated to S. Bridgit, the
fire did not presume to touch, neither was it branded with any sign, or mark
of burning, which made them to bring the stone away, and to place it near to
S. Bridgits church door, where many diseased meeting, by the only touch of
this stone, were delivered from their maladies. Here our author by occasion of
this insueing miracle, enlarges himself in describing the magnificence of
Saint Bridgits church, the sumptuousnes of the oratories, the curiosity of
anticke works, and variety of curious portratures, with many other remarkable
particulers, worthy the reading, which we to continue our intended course of
breuity, do wittingly pass over, and will content our selves with the bare and
succinct relation of the miracle it self, which was this.

4. The gate of Saint Bridgits oratory, thorough which she, and her holy
virgins passed, when they went to receive the delicious viand of our Saviors
sacred and pure body being broken down, and made wider, the carpenters setting
the former door upon the hinges which was found, was less by a fourth part,
or quarter: whereupon they resolved, either to add another piece to the old
door, or to make another al of new; and as they were debating the business, the
principal work master said. We ought this next night to watch and pray at
S. Bridgits monument, to the end that she may direct us in the morning, what is
best to be done in this matter: so passing all the night over at her shrine, and
rising the next morning after, saying some prayers, setting the old door upon
the hinges, it fitted all the gate so just, that it nether wanted, nor yet
exceeded any thing in convenient bigness: and in this manner was the door by
the merits of Saint Bridgit, extended to an equal and commensuratiue
proportion with the gate of the church. Who can express (says our author
here) the admirable beauty of this Church, or how can we declare the marueiles
of this City? Or who may recount the innumerable thronges, and infinite
multitudes of people flocking thither from all countries? Some come to delight
them selves with plentiful diversity of banquets, some to solace themselves
with variety of pleasant shows, and spectacles, others to obtain the cure of
their diseases, and others with rich, and great donaryes to solemnise Saint
Bridgits natalitiall feast, which falls upon the first of February, upon
which day in the year of Christ 518. as we have touched above in the first
paragraffe of this present chapter, the holy virgin passed from the miseries of
this mortal life, to the immortal joys of paradise. Whither God of his
infinite grace conduct us all to him, to his all immaculate mother, and to the
two glorious patrones of Ireland, Saint Patricke, and Saint Bridgit, be all
honor, glory and praise, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
THE LIFE OF THE GLORIOUS ABBOT S. COLVMBE THE GREAT. PATRON OF IRELAND, AND
APOSTLE OF THE PICTS. Abridged out of the Latin: written by S. Adamnanus.
The first book of S. COLVMBS prophetical Revelations.
Of S. Columbs Parents, Navigations into Brittany, and of his prophecy touching
S. Fintenus. CHAP. I.
SAINT Columbe the Great, was borne of noble and illustrious parents, his
Father was named the son of Fergusus, and his Mother Aethnea. The second
year after the war of Culedreiune, and the two and forty of his age, he
passed over into Britanny, being desirous for the love of Christ, to go
thither in pilgrimage. From his youth he was trained up in Christian
discipline, and in the study of wisdom: his integrity of body, and purity of
soul, he kept always unblemished; and though he lived on earth, yet his
conversation was in heaven. His countenance was sweet, and angelical, his
talk clean, and chaste, his carriage holy, and saint-like, his wit quick, and
excellent, and his council grave and mature, no part of his time, not so much
as the space of one hour, did he ever mispend; for he was always employed,
either in prayer, in writting, in reading, or in some good exercise: His
abstine^ce was so great, and his watchinges so long, in which he exercised
himself day and night without intermission, that they went beyond the course
of humane ability, and yet in the midst of all these austerityes, he always
showed a cheerful countenance, representing thereby the Saint like joy of his
heart.

2. S. Fintenus, who after became so famous over all the Churches of Ireland,
conceived in his younger years an earnest desire of forsaking Ireland, and
visiting our Saint Columbe. Being inflamed with this desire, he went to a
certain friend of his, a very wise, and venerable man, named Columbus, to take
his advice in the matter, who liked well of his holy resolution; thither at the
same time came two of S. Columbes monks, who being demanded touching their
journey, answered: We are newly come out of Brittany, and this day from the
monastery of the Oakenfield Roboretum is your holy father S. Colomb well, and in
good health, says Columb. With that they sheding tears abundantly replied:
truly our father and Patron is well; for a few days past he departed to
Christ. Upon knowledge whereof Fintenus, Columbus, and the rest that were
present, falling down prostrate upon the ground, wept bitrerly. Fintenus
demanded further of them, saying: whom did he ordain his successor? they
made answer, his disciple Bathaneus, with that Columbus asked Fintenus what he
meant to do, who answered: I will with Gods grace repair over to the wise and
holy man Bathaneus, and will take him for my Abbot: then taking his leave of
Columbus, he embarked himself without delay for the I Will of Hoy, where he was
entertained with great charity, as an unknown guest.

3. The next day after his arrival, he made it known to Bathaneus, that he
had a desire to confer with him, who presently sent for him. Fintenus being
brought to Bathaneus his presence, fell down upon his knees, but the Saint
made him rise, and sit down with him. Then did Fintenus recount to the saint
his name, country, kindred, conversation, and what had moved him to undertake
that paineful navigations; and lastly closed up his discourse with an humble
request in behalf of his admittance. Bathaneus understanding all, said: My
child I am bound to render many thanks to God for your arrival, but know this
for certain, that you cannot be a monk of ours. Fintenus hearing this, became
very heavy and sadd, saying. Perchance I am unworthy to be your monk. To whom
the old Senior replied: It is not as you say; for albeit I had rather detain
you with me, then otherwise, yet can I not profane the commandment of my
patron S. Columbe, by whose mouth the holy Ghost has prophesied of you in
manner following, saying to me: O Bathaneus, you must listen to these my words
with great attention; for presently after my wished, and long desired departure
out of this life to Christ, a certain brother named Fintenus, will come to you
out of Ireland, and beg earnestly to be received of you among the other
monks, but it is not preordained for him in the prescience of God, that he
become a monk to be subject, for he is preelected for the Abbot of monks, and
for a captain to lead many souls to heaven, do not therefore detain the
foresaid man with you in our I Will, but send him back again into Ireland, that
he may build a monastery in Leynster, on the bancke of the sea, where feding a
flock of Christ's sheep, he may conduct innumerable souls to the joys of
paradise. The young Saint hearing this, and pouring out abundance of tears
with thanks giving to God, said: Be it done to me according to the
prophetical, and marvelous prescience of S. Columbe: so taking S. Bathaneus
his benediction, he returned back into Ireland.

4. About that time, that the holy man was founding by divine inspiration the
monastery of Diarmag, in the middle region of Ireland, he purposed to visit the
holy company that lived in S. Kiaranus monastery at Cluayre. They understanding
of his approach, went all forth in company of their Abbot Alitherus to meet
him, and lead him honorably (singing of Psalms and Hymns) to the Church. At
the same time a certain despicable familiar youth came behind the Saint, and
hiding himself so much as he could, he thought to touch at unawares the Saint,
and without his feeling the hem of his exterior garment; but what the Saint
could not see with his corporal eyes, he saw with his interior, and mental
eyes: for making a stand, he put his hand behind him, and so taking hold of the
youth by the neck, he placed him in presence of all the people. Then all that
were there present, said: Dismiss him, dismiss him, why do you detain that
unhappy boy? The Saint breathing out from his pure breast these prophetical
words, said. Give over now, brethren, give over. And then turning to the
youth, that trembled, and, quaked for fear, he said: O child open your mouth,
and put out your tongue. The youth did accordingly: then the Saint extending
his holy hand, and blessing his tongue, diligently pronounced this prophecy of
him: Albeit this youth seems to you vilde, and despiceable, let none
therefore contemn him; for from henceforth he will not only displease you, but
he will prove very pleasing to you: in virtue, and holy conversation he will
daily go forward, and from hence forth his wisdom and prudence will more and
more increase, and in this our congregation he shall become a worthy member,
and his tongue shall be endued by God, both with wholesome doctrine, and
eloquence. This youth was Ereneus, who afterward was so famous, and well
known throughout all the Churches of Ireland.

How S. Columbe foresaw the danger, and coming of S. Chamnechus, and
Columbanus: the victory of King Aldan, and other remarkable things. CHAP II.
THE saint being in his monastery of Hoy, one day that the seas were very
rough, and the winds blew boisterously, commanded the monks to make ready the
guest-roome, and to draw water for some that were to come. One of the Brothers
asked, who can have a prosperous navigations such a day as this, though the
passage be never so short? The saint answered: God will prepare a calm amidst
this tempest for a Saint, and for one of his elect, that shall come to us
before evening. And lo the expected ship wherein S. Chamnechus was, arrived
according to the saints prophecye. Another time likewise the saint being in his
own great Church, he brook forth after a smiling manner into these words:
Columbanus sailing toward us, is in danger amidst the swelling waves, the
Abbot fitting in the foredecke, eleuateth his hands to heaven, and blesses
the fearful, and swelling sea, whom our Lord does terrify, not that the
shipp shall suffer shipwreck, but to excite him to pray more fervently, and so
to come safe to us.

2. Of Cormarus that holy man, who so often sought for a wilderness in the sea,
S. Columbe prophesied in this manner. This Cormarus hoping to find a desert,
set out this day from that region that lies beyond the river Moda, and is
called Ircos, yet shall he not find what he desires, for no other fault of his,
but that he brought with him in his company a mo^k belonging to a Religious
Abbot without his leave. Another time the Saint commanded his servant to ring
the bell in have, to call the Monks to the Church, where falling upon his
knees, he said: Now let us offer our prayers very earnestly for this people,
and King Alban, for at this present they begin to fight a battle. Within a
little while going out of the oratory, and casting his eyes toward heaven, he
said: Now the enemies are put to flight, for the victory is granted to King
Aldan. Before the beginning of the foresaid war, the Saint questioned with
King Aldan, touching his successor, who answered, that he knew not which of
his three sons should reign after him. The saint consequently prophesied in
this manner: None of these three shall be your successor, for they shall be all
slain by their enemies, now if you have any younger children send for them,
and he whom our Lord has elected to be King, will run suddenly into my
lap. They being called, Euchodius ran unto the Saint, who kissing him said to
his father. This is he that shall survive, and shall be King after you, and his
children shall reign after him. Al which fell out to be true according to the
Saints prophecy.

3. Domnaldus the son of Aydo, being yet but a child, was by his Nurses
brought to S. Columbe, who asked them; Whose son is this you have brought me?
They told him, he was Do^naldus whom they brought, to the end he might be
enriched with his blessing; whom when the Saint had blessed, he presently
adjoined. This child shall ouerliue all his brethren, and shall become a famous
King, neither shall he ever be delivered into the hands of his enemies, but
shall in his old age dye a quiet and peacecible death in his own house. Al
which was fullfilled according to the Saints prophecy. At the same time, and in
the same place, he went to visit Scandalanus the son of Colmanus, being then
detayned prisonner by King Aydus, whom when the Saint had blessed, he said:
Son be not heavy, but rather rejoice, and be of good comfort, King Aydus,
whose captive you are, will depart this life before you, and after your
banishment for a little time, you shall be King in your own country for thirty
years, then shall you again be chased out of your kingdom, and shall live in
exile for a few days, which days being expired, the people will proclaim you
King again, over whom you shall bear rule for three short times. All this
was accomplished in form and manner, as the Saint had prophesied; for after
thirty years reign, he was driven out of the kingdom for a certain space,
being after recalled by the people, he reigned not three years as he thought,
but three months only, and then dyed without delay. Two country men brought
their sons to the Saint in the I Will of Hoy, to the one, he told his son
should dye the same week, and to the other, that his son should live to see
his nephews, and that he should after a good old age, be buried in the same
Island.

4. One of the Saints Monks named Berachius, being to sail to the Island of
Ethica, came to the Saint to crave his blessing, to whom the Saint said:
Beware my son, you hold not your direct course of Ethica, by sailing along
the wide seas, but rather take your course winding about the little Isles,
fearing that otherwise you should not escape by reason of the terror of a
monstrous prodigy. Berachus receiving the Saints blessing departed, and so
getting into the ship, regarding but little the Saints admonition, he sailed
directly through the broad seas, and lo he and they that were with him, saw a
mighty huge Whale, like to a big mountain to rise up over the waters, whose
sight struck a great terror into their minds, whereupon the mariners
struck down their sail, and turning back again, hardly could they escape
that danger arising from the tempestuous agitation of the VVhale, the they
called to mind the Saints prophetical prediction, not without admiration.
Bathaneus being to pass the same morning to the prementioned I Will, the Saint
admonished him of the Whale, to whom Bathaneus answered: I, and the beast are
under Gods power, then the Saint said: Go in peace, thy faith in Christ will
preserve thee from this danger. So Bathaneus took the Saints benediction, and
launced out from the haven, and after sailing forth a good space into the sea,
he and his companions saw the VVhale, which put them all in great fear, only
Bathaneus without any terror lifting up his hands, blessed the seas and the
VVhale, and lo in the self same moment, the VVhale sunk down under the
waves, and never after appeared to them. The saint prophesied of a certain
wicked man, who had committed fratricide, and likewise incest with his own
mother, that he should be slain by his enemies, which happened true within
few days.

How S. Columbe saw a city in Italy to be stricken with thunder: and
admonished Cailtanus, and two other Monks of their emminent death. CHAP. III.
AS one of the Saints Monks named Lugbeus, came upon a time to the saint, he
could not look upon his face, being covered over with a marvelous rednes,
whereat conceauing great fear, he ran away; whom the saint called back,
asking him what was the cause of his running away? he answered, because I was
in great fear. And within a little while dealing with the saint more
confidently, he made bold to ask of the saint, whether any fearful vision
had been manifested to him, the saint then answered: A terrible vengeance
has been now exercised in a remote part of the world. What vengeance was it?
Or in what country did it happen? The Saint replied. A sulphurous flame was
powered down at this hour upon a city of the Roman dominion, within the
marches of Italy, whereby three thousand men besides women and children, were
almost consumed, and before this present year be expired, there will come
merchants out of france, who will tell you the same news. At a placed called
Camprio-Regionis, Lugbeus found a french pilot, of whom he learned all the
Saint had foretold him.

2. Upon a certain very cold winter day, the saint sorrowed much, and wept
exceedingly. His familiar servant Diarmitius, asked him the cause of his
sorrow, who received this answer: O my little child, I do not sorrow at this
present without cause, seeing how Laifranus toyleth my Monks, already weary in
the building of a great house, which disgusteth me much. A wonder to be spoken,
in the self same moment Laifranus living in the monastery of the Oken-field,
being forced in a manner by coaction, and inflamed as it were with fire
interiourly, commanded the Monks to cease from the work, and some recreation
of meat to be prepared, and gave them leave to rest, not only for that day,
but also so long as the hard season coutinued. The saint hearing in spirit
these comfortable words spoken by Laifranus, forbere to weep, and rejoiced
exceedingly, and told the brethren there present, al what passed, and withal
gave his benediction to Laifranus.

3. As the saint sat one day upon the top of an high mountain, hanging over
the monastery, turning to his familiar servant Diarmitius, he said: I marvel
what it is, that stays a ship coming out of Ireland, which carries in it a
wise man, who for a certain sin whereinto he has fallen, does bitter
penance. Within a little while, the familiar Brother looking toward the
South, he saw the sails of the ship approaching to the haven, and showed it
to the Saint, who said: Rise in have and let us go meet the proselite, whose
true penance Christ has regarded. Fechnaus coming a shore, fell down
prostrate, and weeping bitterly, upon his knees, he confessed his sins in
presence of all the company. The Saint out of compassion, weeping with him,
said: Rise my son, and be of good cheer, for your sins are forgiven you,
because it is written: A contrite and humble heart, God will not despise: who
afterward being very lovingly entertained of the Saint, he sent him to
Bathaneus living at a place called Lungefield. Another time the Saint sent two
monks for one of his Monks named Cailtanus, biding him to repair in all have
to him. Cailtanus understanding of the Saints pleasure came speedily in
company with the Monks that went for him. When the Saint saw Cailtanus, he
spoke to him in manner following. O Cailtanus, you have done very well in
hastening to me so obediently, rest you a little. Loving you as a friend I
invited you to come, that you might finish the course of your mortal life
here with me in true obedience; for before this week come to an end, you
shall render your soul in peace to God. Then Cailtanus with thanks to God
kissed the saint, and to receiving his benediction, went to the guest room,
the night following he sickned, and according the saints word, departed the
self same week to a better life.

4. On a certain Sunday some cried from the further side of the often
mentioned sea. The Saint hearing the cry, said to the brethren: Go in all
have, and bring the pilgrims that come from a far Country: they went as the
saint appointed them, and brought them to his presence, whom when he had
saluted, he began to question with them concerning their journey: they told
him, they came to seiourne with him for that year, to whom the saint replied:
You may not live with me a year as you desire, unless you tie your selves to
the observance of the monastical vows. The eldest made answer: Truly we had
no such intention hitherto, notwithstanding we will embrace your counsel
inspired by God, as we believe. To be short, they followed the Saint devoutly
into the oratory, and there on their knees obliged themselves to the
monastical vows. Then the saint converting his speech to the brothers there
present, said: These two proselites exhibiting themselves a living host to
God, and accomplishing in a few days the course of Christian perfection, shall
yield up their souls to Christ before this present month run to an end; and so
it fell out; for both of them fell sick one after another, and departed to a
better life, within the term prophesied and perfixed by the saint.

How S. Columbe foretold the baptism of a certain Pagan: knew by divine
revelation the death of two Irish noble men: and by prayer obtained the life of
Diarmitius his familiar servant. CHAP. IIII.
WHILST the saint for the space of some few days remained in Ireland, being at
a place bordering on the sea, he struck the earth with his staff, saying to
the Monks that were with him. Behold my little children, a certain Gentil,
who al his life time followed the good instincts, and propensions of nature,
shall this day be baptized, dye, and be buried in this place: and lo within
the space as it were of an hour, a ship struck into the same haven, in
whose foredecke sat an ancient Pagan named Geone, whom two young men lifted
up between them and brought him to the saints presence: the old man e^braced
presently the Christian doctrine, the saint preached to him by an interpreter,
at whose hands he received the grace of regeneration. Immediately after the
receipt of holy baptism, he gave up his ghost, and was buried in the same
place by the Saints companions.

2. During the Saints aboade in the foresaid region, he went one Sunday to a
neighbor monastery named Trioint, and seeing the same day a certain Priest
celebrating the holy misteryes of the Eucharist, whom the Monks made choice
of for that purpose, for that they deemed him a man of a very holy and
religious life, he suddenly pronounced this fearful sentence: Clean and
unclean things, are now mingled together, to wit, the clean misteryes of
the sacred oblation, handled by an unclean man, who hides in his conscience
some enormious sin: the party of who^ he had spoken in this kind, confessed
his sin before all the company, which with great astonishement admired in the
Saint this stupendous knowledge, penetrating even to the secrets of men's hearts.

3. Another time the Saint being in the Island of Hoy, he called to him two of
his Monks named Lugbeus, and Silnanus, and said to them: sail over into the
I Will of Malea, and near the sea bank seek out the thief Ertus, who lurketh
there, expecting in the night time to get over to the little I Will, where our
sea-calues breed, to steal some away, and bring them home to his house. They
did accordingly, and found the thief in the place premonstrated, whom they
brought to the saint, as he had commanded. The saint seeing him, said:
Wherefore do thou trespass against the divine commandment, in stealing away
other men's goods so often? when thou art driven to any necessity, come to us,
and we will relieve thy wantes. And with this he appointed that some weathers
should be killed, and given to the miserable thief, that he might not return home
to his house with empty hands. Within a short time the saint knew by
revelation that the thieves death drew near: he sent him therefore a fat Cow,
and seven measures of corn which were spent at his funerailles. In like
manner the saint foresaw and foretold the death of a Scottish poet named
Coronanus.

4. It happened another time in the same Island of Hoy, as the saint was at his
book reading, that he cast out deep and sorrowful sighs: Lugbeus who was
present, began to demand the cause of his sudden grief; the Saint made this
answer: In Scotland two noble men of the blood royal have killed one another, at
a place not far distant from the Monastery of Cellarois, in the Province of
the Magdeni, and the eight day hence, there will come one out of Ireland, who
will report the truth of all this. The man whose coming the Saint foresaw, came
on the presaged day, and among many other news, reported that Colmancanus, and
Romanus had slain one another. After this, Lugbeus the soldier of Christ,
getting the Saint at his leisure, said to him: I beseech you let me know how
and in what manner these prophetical revelations are manifested to you,
whether you know them by an intuition of your eyes, or by the help of your
ears, or after some strange manner unknown of to other men. The Saint
answered: I cannot acquaint you with any thing touching this subtle matter you
inquire after, unless you first take an oath on your knees never to speak of
this obscure sacrament all the days of my life. Lugbeus swore as the saint
would have him: then the saint spoke as follows: There are some, albeit they
be but few in number, that by Gods special grace clearly contemplate with
one single aspect, and in one moment the compass of the whole world the
heavens, the sea, and land, by reason of the marvelous dilatation of their
mind. Though the saint seems to report this of others, for the auoidance of
all vain glory, and self esteem, yet that he meant it of himself indirectly,
is clear to any that has perused the vessel of election S. Paul in his 2. to
the Corinthians. For he discoursing of visions and rapts happening to himself,
wrote not, I know of my self, but I know such a man that he was rapt into
paradise, which though he seem to recount of another, yet none can doubt but
he spoke of himself.

5. It fell out another time, that one of the brothers came to the place where
the faint was writting, and said to him: I beseech you bless this Iron I hold
in my hand: the saint stretched out his hand holding the pen, and blessed the
Iron according to the brothers request, in the mean time, he held his face
toward the book he wrote: the brother being gone away, the saint asked. What
Iron he had blessed for the Brother. Diarmitius his familiar tender, answered.
A knife wherewith Beeues are killed: then the saint replied: I trust firmly in
our Lord, that this weapon I have blessed, will never do hurt to man, nor
beast: The truth of which sentence of the Saint, was showen in effect the self
same hour. For the brother going out of the monastery with an intent to kill a
Cow, endeavored thrice thereunto, and yet could not so much as pierce her
skin. Another time the Saints faithful tender Diarmitius sickened even to
death, the Saint came to visit him in that extremity, and standing by the beds
side, prayed after this manner: I beseech thee O Lord be favorable to me, and
let not the soul of my pious tender, be taken out of this mortal life before I
end the course of my days. After praying thus, he held his peace for a little
space, then opening his sacred mouth, he said: This my loving child shall not
only escape the danger of this present infirmity, but shall moreover live for
many years after my death: Diarmitius was delivered incontinently of his
disease, and suruiued the Saint many a long year.

How S. Columbe discovered a Bishop that would not have himself known: how he
foretold the coming of a Crane out of Ireland: and how by the presents that
were offered to him to be blessed, he knew the sins of the owners. CHAP. V.
THERE came out of the Province of the Numinenses, a certain proselit to visit
the saint, this man being a Bishop, dissembled all that he could his degree and
estate, yet could he not keep it hidden from the saints al-piercing knowledge.
For the proselit being to consecrate the next sunday our Saviors holy body,
the saint said to him: Since you are a Bishop break this dominicall bread
after the manner, and with the same sole^nity a Bishop ought to break it, now
we know full well that you are a Bishop; why did you conceal your self from us,
by occasion whereof we did not demean our selves toward you, with that respect
and veneration your place and calling requires. The humble hearted pilgrim
hearing him speak in this kind, glorified Christ in his holy servant Columbe.
Another time the venerable Abbot sent his uncle Ernanus to govern the
monastery of Humba, of whom at his departure he pronounced this prophecy: This
my friend, whom I now send away, I never hope to see him living again in this
world. Within a few days Ernanus fell sick, and would have himself carried
back to the saint, who was very glad thereof, and went forth to meet him.
Ernanus though he were very weak and sickly, yet would he needs go on his
feet, and lo in the way he gave up his ghost suddenly, before the saint could
have a sight of him.

2. The saint told a certain Peasant that came to his monastery: Lo the
barbarous ennemies sack and spoil all the Province you inhabit. Which
doleful news made the poor fellow fall into pitiful lamentatio^s for his
wife, and children. The saint seeing him drowned in sorrow, and anguish, said
to him: your wife and family, have escaped to the mountains, but you goods and
cattle, the ennemy has taken away: the man going home found all to be true as
the saint had told him. A certain valiant, and strong man named Gorens, would
feign learn of the saint what kind of death himself should die of. The saint
told him: You shall not be slain in the field, nor drowned in the sea, but the
companion of your way whom you lest distrust or suspect, shall be the cause of
your death; within some years after the foresaid Gorens, seeing men fighting,
and at mortal debate, ran in haste to separate them, in the mean time by some
chance or other he let his knife fall carelessely, which wounded him in the
knee, of which wound, after the sickness of some months, he dyed: and so
the prophecy of the Saint was fullfilled.

3. Another time likewise, the saint being in the often mentioned Island of Hoy,
he called one of the monks to him, and commanded him as follows: The third
day next ensuing, you shall go to the Weast part of this I Will, and shall expect
the coming of a certain Crane from the North part of Ireland, which Crane
being driven by the force of the blustering winds through the spacious Regions
of the air, all weary and turmoyld, shall arrive there after the ninth hour,
and having all her forces and vigor consumed, she will fall down on the
shore before you; forget not to take her up mercifully, and to bring her to
the next house, where you shall entertain her liberally, and feed her
carefully for three days, by which time her strength shall be well repaired,
and her self being unwilling to soiourne with us any longer, will return
back to Scotland her sweet country, where she was borne, and my motive of
commending her so seriously to your care is, because she is of one country with
us. The brother obeyed willingly, and the third day at the place and time
appointed, expected the arrival of the new guest, whom he took up of the
shore, and brought her weak, and faint to the lodging, where he fed her
carefully: to whom after his coming to the monastery in the evening the Saint
said: Gods blessing have you my child for tending so carefully the strange
guest, who will make no long delay in her pilgrimage, but will return back to
her native soil after three days abode. What the saint pronounced the event
showed to be true: for the Crane after three days charitable entertaynement,
winded her self gently up into the air in presence of her officious ministre,
and after kept her course directly toward Ireland.

4. On a certain time many presents were laid in the street that leads to
the Saints monastery to be blessed of him as he passed by, where poynting at the
gift of a rich man, and naming the party, he said. The mercy of God
accompanies the bestower of this gift, given for the relief of the poor:
after he poynted likewise at the present of a wise, but covetous man, saying: I
can in no wise taste of this gift, unless the giver do penance for his
avarice, which word being published among the people, Columbus the son of
Aidus came in haste, and falling on his knees did penance, and promised ever
after to abjure covetousness, and withal to amend his life, and to become more
liberal. The rich and liberal man named Brendanus, hearing in like manner
what the Saint spoke of him, came likewise, and fell down at his feet,
beseching him to pray for him; Brendanus being rebuked for some offenses,
promised amendment from that time forwards, and so it came to pass, that
both of them amended their faults.

The end of the first Book.
THE II. BOOK OF SAINT COLVMBES MIRACLES.
How S. Columbe, converted water into wine: how corn sown in June by his
appointment, was ripe in the beginning of August: And of a sovereign remedy he
provided against the infection of a pestiferous cloud. CHAP I.
WHILST the holy Saint lived in Ireland with S. Findbarrus, to be trained up in
the study of holy Scriptures, it happened one day, that no wine could be found
for the sacrificall mystery. The holy young man being then a Deacon, taking
the cruet, went to the fountain for water, and by inuocating the name of our
B. Savior, who at the marriage feast of Cana, converted cold water into good
wine, merited to work the same stupendous sign: all who knew of it rendered
many thanks to God, but the holy young man declining all self esteem,
ascribed the operation of that great sign, to the holy Bishop Vinnian. And as
by this admirable miracle, our Savior made this the beginning of the many
miracles, which himself wrought, so did he by it give the first manifestation
of the sanctity of his Blessed servant S. Columbe. Hard by the monastery of the
Oaken-field, was a very fruitful apple tree, but so bitter, that no good came
of it: the Saint knowing so much, went forth in the harvest to the place, where
the tree was laden with fruit, and eleuating his sacred hand blessed it,
saying: In the name of Almighty God, O bitter tree, let all this bitterness
depart from thee: and thy apples, that hitherto have been most sour, let them
now become most sweet, and pleasant to the taste. And without delay the apples
suddenly became marvelous delightful to all those who tasted of them.

2. The holy Saint sent some of his Monks to fetch out of the fields of a
certain countryman, some rods, and twigges for the building of a cell, they
brought their boat well laden, and withal signified to the Saint, that the
farmer conceived great grief at the matter, in regard of the loss he
sustained thereby. Then the Saint said; Fearing the man should be scandalized
at us, let there be nine measures of barley carried to him, and let him sow
them in his fields, even at this present time. The corn being sent, and
delivered with the former errand, the man received it gratefully, but said; How
can corn grow against the nature of this country, being sown after Midsommer?
To whom his wife answered. Do as the Saint has commanded, to whom our Lord
will grant what thing soever he shall demand. The country man out of obedience
to the Saint, fell a ploughing the land, and sowing the corn: which in the
midst of June, grew so fast, and ripened so soon, that to the great
astonishment of all the Neighbors, he cut it down in the beginning of August.

3. Another time the Saint saw a thick, and misty cloud to come from the
South, which when he perceived, he said to a Monk of his named Syluanus, that
sat with him: This cloud will prove very noisome, both to men and beasts; for
flying away hence, it will extend it self over a part of Ireland, and shower
down toward the evening a contagious rain, that will engender in men, and in
the duggs of beasts pestilent vlceres, and with these pestilent soars, men
will sicken even to death, but we ought of compassion to provide some remedy
against their disease: Descend therefore with me, O Syluanus, and make your
self ready to cross the seas; for men and beasts shall recover with Gods
grace their health, if the water, wherein you shall steep holy bread of my
blessing, shall be sprinkled on them. In which Syluanus obeying the Saint
promptly, and having by Gods favor a prosperous passage, came spedily to the
prementioned part of the country, where he found all the people struck down
with that contagious disease: and first of all, six men, that dwelled in a
house bordering upon the sea, being sprinkled with the water, wherein the bread
was steeped, recovered their health the self same day, the report of which
sudden cure being blown over all the region consumed with that pestilent
sickness, invited all the diseased people to hasten to S. Columbs Legate, who
according to the Saints commandment, cast the water, on them, wherein the holy
bread was steaped, and both men and beasts, were delivered of their infirmityes
without delay.

How S. Columbe saw in spirit the holy virgin Mugina inuocating his aid, and
cured her. Of the cure of many infirmityes, and production of a fountain out
of a rock. CHAP. II.
ANOTHER time the Saint called upon a Brother named Lugaidus, and spoke to him
in this manner. Put your self in readiness to pass spedily into Ireland; for I
must send unto the monastery of Chilnocherum. For this last night the holy
Virgin Maugina, coming after mass out of the Oratary, by chance stumbled, and
broke her huckle bone into two parts; she by inuocating often upon my name,
hops by my intercession, to receive comfort from God* Lugaidus being ready to
depart, the saint gave him a box made of Pine, with a certain hollowed thing
within it, and said: This benediction, when you arrive where Maugina is, you
shall steep it in water, and the water you shall will be to powered on her huckle
bone, and with that the broken bone will be joined together again, and the
virgin shall receive her health, and I will write in the cover of this box, the
number of three and twenty years that she shall live in this world after the
cure of her hurt. Lugaidus left nothing unperformed, that the Saint gave him in
charge to do, and so the holy virgin recovered her health, and lived out the
number of three and twenty years in the exercise of good works, according to
the Saints prophecy.

2. The venerable Prelate, as we have learned by the tradition of them that
knew it, cured the languors of many sick persons, during the little time he
made aboade in the place called in latin Dorsum Cetae, whither he went to be
present at the meeting of Kings, for with the touch, either of his holy hand,
hemme of his garment, or with salt, bread, water, or any thing else blessed by
him, did he restore me^ to their perfect health. A woman that had an
inflammation in her eye, used a Petrasalis, which the Saint had blessed. It
fell out after some days, that the house wherein the Petrasalis was, took
fire, all the house was consumed into ashes, excepting the perch, whereon the
Petrasalis hung, and a part of the wall that sustained it. A young man, that
carried about him a leaf written by S. Columbes holy hand, was drowned in a
river: his body after twenty days being extracted out of the waters, the leaf
was found as dry, and uncorrupted, as if it had been locked up close in a
casket.

3. As the Saint was one time travailing, the parents of a young infant,
brought the child to the Saint to be christened, and in regard no water could be
found in the adjoining places, the saint declined to a rock hardby, where
after praying a little upon his knees, he blessed the rock, out of which
gushed a stream of water, wherein he baptized the young suckling, of whom also
he prophesied, that in his youth he would loose the raines to lust, and
sensuality, but afterward that he should give himself to the study of
christian perfection, and should dye in a good old age. All which fell out to
be true. The Saint being in Pictland, he heard great report of a pagan
fountain, which the foolish people being blinded by the Devil, held in great
veneration; but whosoever tasted of the water, or washed their hands or feet
in it, became by diabolical fascination (God permitting it) blind, leaprous,
or weak with some infirmity. The saint came to the fountain, whereat the
Magitians whom he often confounded and overcame, were very glad, hoping that
he should receive some mischance. The saint first inuocating upon the name of
Christ, washed his hands and feet, and after blessing the water, drunk of it,
which from that day forwards, bred no hurt or annoy to any, and which is more
admirable, by virtue of the Saints benediction, the water of that fountain
became a sovereign remedy, for the cure of many diseases.

How S. Columbe did with his prayers, allaye tempest. And how S. Cahinnechus
did the same: and of other miracles wrought by S. Columbe. CHAP. III.
UPON a certain time, the Saint was in danger at sea, for the ship was soar
shaken with huge waves, the raging violence of the blustering winds beating
upon it, the Saint in that distress helped them what he could in pumping out
the water, whereupon the mariners said, What you do now, auailes us but little
in this extremity, it is more fitting for you to pray for us, being ready
almost to be cast away. With that the Saint began to power out before God a
sweet and fervent prayer. O great wonder! No sooner did the Saint, standing in
the foredecke of the ship, address his hands in prayer to the Omnipote^t, but
that the tempest of the air, and boiling of the sea ceased, whereupon followed
a most serene and pleasant calm, they who were in the ship being stricken
with admiration, glorified God in his blessed servant.

2. Another time the Saint being in great danger, by occasion of a fearful
and vehement tempest, his companions cried to him to pray for them, but he made
answer: That belongs not to me to do; for it is the holy Abbot Cahinnechus
turn to pray for you this day. Cahinnechus being then in his own monastery
called Cowfield, heard the foresaid speech of S. Columbe by revelation of the
holy Ghost; for when he had begun after the ninth hour to sit down to dinner,
he arose quickly from the table, and having one shoe on, and leaving the other
for have, he ran to the Church, saying all the way, It is not time for us now
to dine, when S. Columbs ship is in imminent danger at sea, who calls often
upon the name of Cahinnechus, desiring him to pray for him, and his companions:
having spoken these words, Cahinnechus entered the oratory and prayed a little
upon his knees, and lo our Lord heard incontinently his prayer; for the
tempest ceased, and the sea became calm. S. Columbe seeing in spirit S.
Cahinnechus his preparation, and promptnes in running to the Church, he
pronounced out of his pure breast, this marvelous saying. Now I know, O
Cahinnechus, that God has heard your prayer, for your hasty running to the
church with one of your shoes only, auayles us much.

3. Bathaneus and other holy men came to the Saint, entreating him to obtain
the next day from God a prosperous wind for them, being to pass to contrary
places. The Saint answered: Bathaneus shall have in the morning a prosperous
wind, until he arrive at the haven of Lungefield: which God granted him
according to the Saints words. Then at nine of the clock the Saint sent for
Columbanus the Priest, bidding him to make himself ready, and telling him that
the south wind that favored Bathaneus, should turn to the north, so Columbanus
e^barked himself for Ireland. This stupendous miracle was wrought by virtue
of the saints prayers, because as it is written: All things are possible to him
that believes. After Columbanus his departure, S. Columbe pronounced this
prophecy of him: The holy man Columbanus, shall never more see me in this life.
So it fell out, for S. Columbe departed to our Lord the self same year.

4. A certain young man named Columbanus, brought a vessel full of milk to
the place where the saint was, requesting him to bless it, as he was
accustomed. As the Saint made the victorious sign of the Cross in the air,
the vessel began to shake, the cover fell to the ground, and the most part of
the milk was shed; the youth laid down the vessel, with the little milk
that was left upon the ground, and fell humbly on his knees, to whom the Saint
said: Rise up Columban, for you have been negligent in performing of your duty,
this day, because you did not chase away with the sign of the cross the
Devil, that lurcked in the bottom of the empty vessel, before you powered in
the milk, the virtue of which sacred sign, he being unable to sustain, he is
now fled away. Then the Saint blessed the little milk, that was left, and lo
the vessel that was almost empty, under the benediction of his sacred hand,
became brimfull.

How by virtue of S. Columbes benediction, five Cowes increased to the number
of 105. How the Saint foresaw the death, and damnation of a certain man: and
of other no less remarkable miracles. CHAP. IIII.
THe Saint having lodged one night at the house of one Columbanus, a very poor
and die man, in the morning he questioned with him concerning the quantity, and
quality of his substance. The poor man answered: I have five Cowes, which if
you vouchsafe to bless, I doubt not, but they will increase to a greater
number. The saint commanded him to bring them to his presence, where blessing
them, he said: You shall by Gods grace have a hundred and five cowes, and this
benediction shall remain to your children, and nephews. Which prophetical
prediction fell out to be most true, the cowes being multiplied to the foresaid
number, and how many soever exceeded that number, perished by several
mischances, excepting those he spent in maintenance of his family, or gave by
way of alms.

2. The saint loved entirely the foresaid man for many kindnesses, and pious
offices he had done him. A certain wicked man descending of the blood royal,
persecuted Columbanus the saints dear friend, and robbed his house three
several times, and took away all his goods: the third time it was his
fortune to meet with the saint, who rebuked him for his wickedness, and
persuaded him to restore the goods unjustly taken: but he regarding nothing
the saints prayers, yea rather laughing and scoffing at him, the saint followed
him even to the sea side, and entered into the salt water up to the knees, and
in that place offered his prayers most fervently to Christ, who glorifyeth his
elect that glorify him; having made an end of his prayer, he returned to the
dry shore, where sitting down with his companions, he pronounced these
fearful words: This miserable wretch, who has this day misprised Christ in
his servants, shall never return to the haue^, whence he departed, nor yet
arrive to any other, but shallbe drowned in the midst of the Ocean waves,
together with his wicked accomplices. Which dreadful, though just prophecy of
the saint, was fully accomplished in the presence of them all.

3. The glorious saint commended a banished noble man of Pictland, to the care
of a certain wealthy man, entreating him for his respect to entertain him as
a friend for the space of some months. The cruel man, notwithstanding the
saints entreaty and commendations, put the noble man to death within a few
days, which grievous sin when it came to the saints hearing, he spoke in
this manner* That unhappy man has not lied to me but to God, his name shall be
blotted out of the book of life. This I say now in summer but, hefore he taste
in Autumn of porke, that has been fed with accornes, he shall dye suddenly,
and be buried in hell. The cursed wretch laughed to scorn the Saints
prophetical threatening: the harvest season being now come, the wicked man
commanded a hog fatted with accornes, and kirnelles of nuts to be killed, and
ordained that a piece thereof should be roasted, so that by tasting of it he
might frustrate, and make void the oath of the Saints prophecy. The flesh being
roasted, the wretch stretched out his hand to take a morsel of it, but before
he could put it into his mouth, he fell down dead, exhaling out his wicked
soul to be buried in hell, they who heard, and saw this prodigious effect of
Gods justice, honored Christ in his holy prophet.

4. During the Saints abode in Pictland, he preached by an interpreter to a
certain country man, who embraced the Christian religion. Within a few days,
one of the countreymens sons fell sick to death, whereupon the Magitians
began to deride the man, to extol the power of their own God, and to hit him
in the teeth with the weakness of the God of the Christians. When these things
were made known to the Saint, being inflamed thereat with the zeal of Gods
honor, he went together with his companions to the house, where the
comfortless parents, celebrated the doleful funeralles of their dead son.
The Saint seeing them drowned in sorrow, animated them with comfortable
speeches, and after went himself all alone into the place, where the dead
corpse lay, where falling prostrate on his knees, and bathing his face in
tears, he offered his prayers to Christ, afterward he rose up, and
converting him to the dead, he said: In the name of our Lord Jesus, return to
life, and stand upon thy feet. With that venerable voice of Gods true servant,
the soul returned to the body, and the dead man opened his eyes, whom the
Apostolical saint took by the hand, raising him upon his feet, and so brought
him forth in his company, and restored him living to his parents: then did the
people give a great shout, because sorrow was converted into joy, and the God
of the Christians was glorified.

Of the cure of Brochan the Magitian. And how the Saint sailed securely,
notwithstanding the tempest raised by the Magitian: as also how he opened the
gates, which the King shut against him. CHAP V.
AT the same time the venerable Prelate made earnest suite to Brochan the
Magitian, for the release of an Irish mayde^-slaue, but he would not yield to
the saints merciful request, wherefore the Saint spoke to him as follows.
Know, O Brochan, that unless you dismiss, and forsake this strange captive,
that before I depart this province, you shall dye. This he said before King
Brudeus, and so departed toward the river Neyse, out of which he took a white
stone, saying to his companions: Keep this stone, by which God will work many
cures of diseased persons in that pagan people. Having spoken this, he added:
Now Brochan is smitten grievously; for an Angel sent from heaven striking him
cruelly, broke the glass, out of which he drunk into many pieces, and left
him even ready to die, let us expect here two messingers sent us from the King,
for to relieve in have Brochan being at the point of death; now Brochan is
willing to dismiss the maid slave. As the Saint was yet talking, lo the Kings
messengers came, who reported all what happened in manner and form as the
Saint foresaw them: they added further, that the King, and his Nobles sent us
to you, Vt subuenias nutritio eius Brochano mox morituro, to help his nurse
Brocha^, being ready to dye. With that the Saint sent two of his companions to
the King with the stone, which he had blessed, saying: If Brochanus promise to
release the captive, and after shall drink of the water, wherein this stone
shall be dipped, he shall recover his health, but if he do not set the woman at
liberty, he shall dye without delay. Brochanus dismissed the woman free, and
drank of the water wherein the stone was steeped, and so was restored
perfectly to the health of his body.

2. After these things had passed in this kind, Brochanus said to the glorious
Saint. Tell me, O Columbe, when do you intend to sail. The Saint answered: I
purpose with Gods grace, to go to sea within these three days. But you shall
not quoth Brochanus, for I can cause a contrary wind, and besides, I can induce
a dark, and obscure mist. To whom the Saint answered: The power of God
ouer-ruleth all, in whose name all our actions are directed. The Saint went the
same day to the River Neyse, whither he was attended upon by a great company.
The Magitians began to rejoice at the spreading abroad of the thick mist, and
boisterous contrary wind. The holy Saint seeing the elements to be stirred up
against him, called to our Savior for his help; then ascending the ship he
caused the sails to be hoysed up, which being done in sight of all the
company, the ship sailed extreme swiftly against the wind, and within a little
space the contrary winds, to the great astonishment of all, turned to serve the
saint in his voyage, so that having a pleasant gayle of wind all day, the saint
came toward evening to the wished haven.

3. When the saint went first to King Brudeus court, the King being puffed up
with pride, and arrogance, caused the gates of his Palace to be shut against
him. Gods true servant Columbe understanding thereof, came to the gates, and
first in drawing the figure of Christ's victorious sign or cross upon the
doors, and then after pulling them with his hands, lo they opened of
themselves, and so the saint, and his holy family got in. The King perceauing
what had passed, went forth to meet the holy man, and ever after had him in
great veneration. Another time being in Ireland, he went to visit the Monks
living in the monastery of the Holy-field, the monks conducted the Saint to
the church door, where the keys could not be found, the Saint said: Our Lord
is able to open the doors of his house for his servants. And lo suddenly the
leaves of the door opened wide, and so the Saint entered not without
admiration of all the company.

4. Another time a very poor and needy man came to the Saint, bemoning
himself that he had nothing wherewith to sustain his wife and children: Go
(said he) and cut in the next wood a long pole, and bring it unto me in
haste. Which he brought without delay, and sharpened it with his own hands,
forming it into a sharp poynted spit, and blessing it likewise he delivered it
to the poor man, saying: Keep this spit, for so long time as you enjoy it,
your house shall never want copious provision of venision. The poor man
rejoiced not a little thereat, and returned home to his house, then bringing
the spit with him, he fixed it in a place where wild beasts haunted, and
coming the next morning to see it, he found a great stagge pierced therewith.
Every day he found a stagge, Roe, or some other wild beast stuck on the spit,
by means whereof he got such store of that he was glad to sell great quantity
thereof to his neighbors; at last the man being seduced by his wives council,
cut the spit in pieces, and burnt it, whereupon he fell into his former want,
and misery.

How S. Columbe succored a woman in trauaill: how he reconciled a married
couple: and foresaw the danger, Cormarus was in. CHAP. VI.
THE Saint being in the often mentioned Island of Hoy, he interrupted suddenly
the studdy of holy reading, and after a smilling manner, said: I must now
hasten to pray in behalf of a poor kinswoman of mine, who existing in
Ireland, calls often on the name of Columbe, hoping confidently by his
intercession to be delivered from the bitter pains, and griping conuulsions of
childbirth wherewith she is cruelly tormented. After making an end of this
speech, the B. Prelate of tender pity to his poor distressed kinswoma^, ran
to the church, and falling o^ his knees, directed his fervent prayers to our
sweet Savior for the ease of the woman's distress. After finishing his prayer,
he went out of the Oratory, saying: Our Lord Jesus who daigned to be borne of a
woman, has been favorable and propitious to this woman, whom he has eased
of her anguishes; for she is safely delivered of a son. At the self same
hour, the saint prophesied in this kind, the afflicted woman recovered her
health, as it was after reported by some that came out of Scotland.

2. When the holy man lived in the Island Rechrea, a certain Peasant came to
him, complaining that his wife would not lie in bed with him. The Saint hearing
thereof, sent for the woman, and spoke to her as follows. Wherefore woman do
thou strive to put away thine own flesh, since our Lord says: They shall be
two in one flesh? The woman made answer: All things you please to command
me, how painful soever they be, I am willing to perform, this only excepted,
that you will not compel me to lie in bed with Lugneus (so her husband was
called) I do not refuse to take on me the care of all the house: or if you will
have it so, I am content to cross the seas, and live in a Monastery of holy
virgins. What you propou^d (replied the saint) cannot be lawfully done, as long
as your husband lives. And added further: This day will we three, your husband,
your self, and I, fast and pray, for the happy success of this affair. So
they all three condescended with one accord to fast and pray. The night
following, the Saint offered his prayer devoutly for them: the next morning he
called for the woman, saying: Tell us, o woman, whether this day you be of the
same mind you were yesterday, of going to live in a monastery of women? I know
your prayers have been heard, for whom I hated yesterday, I love most
tenderly this day, my heart I know (by what means I know not) is wholly changed
in me. From that day forwards to her last gasp, her soul was linked with
indissoluble affection to her husband, so that she never after refused to
discharge the behoofes of a wife.

3. The holy man Cormacus, of whom we spoke in the first book, labored the
second time to find a wilderness in the Ocean, whom S. Columbe commended to the
King of the Orcades in presence of King Brudeus, with whom the Saint was at
that time, and requested King Brudeus to do the same. This the Saint did,
because he knew by revelation, that Cormacus after a long and painful
navigations, should be driven to the Orcades, and so he was, and for respect of
the former commendation, he escaped the danger of death. As some of the Saints
Monks fell in talk of Cormarus, saying it was not known, what issue good or
bad his navigations had. The saint ouerheard them talking in this manner, and
said: Cormacus of whom you speak now, you shall see this very day. And so
within one hours space, Cormacus arrived to the great joy and admiration of
all the company.

4. The third time that the said venerable man Cormacus, attempted to find out
a wilderness in the sea, he fell into great dangers; for being driven by a
strong south wind that blew for fourteen days without intermission, he sailed
into the North seas, beyond the course and limits of human navigations, and in
these unknown seas, there arose most fearful, and unsupportable
affrightments, certain unseen and terrible beasts assailed the ship
furiously, and were even ready and like to pierce it through. With the sight of
these and other monsters, Cormacus and the Mariners were so amated, and amazed,
that with tears trickling down their face, they addressed their prayers to
God, who alone is the most sure and sovereign refuge in all distress. At the
same time, S. Columbe was present in spirit with Cormacus, he caused therefore
a sign to be made for to call the Monks to the Oratory, where prophesying
after his wonted manner, he said: Dear brethren, pray most earnestly for
Cormacus who now sustaineth monstrous affrightments never seen before, we
ought therefore to conceive a tender compassion on our dear commembers, being
in such manifest danger, and to pray to God for their comfort and safety. After
speaking this and much more in this kind, he fell down prostrate on his knees
before the Altar, and with a pensive heart and doleful voice, besought the
Omnipotent moderator of winds, and waves for them: After prayer, he rose up,
and refrayning tears he joyfully said: Let us rejoice with our dear brethren,
for God has converted the south wind into a Northren gale, that will deliver
them out of all danger, and bring them safe hither. And incontinently the
south wind ceased, and the north began to blow. After many days Cormacus
arrived safe, and gladded all the company with his presence. By this the Reader
may conjecture, how great the holy Abbot was in Gods eyes, who could by
inuocating on Christ's name, command the blustering winds, and swelling
billows. Let this much suffice touching the miracls the Saint wrought in this
present life. Let the Reader further know, that we have omitted many more to
avoid tediousnes.

THE III BOOK OF S. COLVMBES ANGELICAL APPARITIONS.
Of the apparition made to S. Columbes mother before his birth. Of the visions
S. Bredan, and S. Finnian had touching him: And how according to a vision he
had, he ordained Aydan King. CHAP. I.
IN the first book, we have treated succinctly of S. Columbes admirable
revelations. In the second, we have discoursed of his stupe^dious miracles. In
this third book, we mean to set down the Angelical visions that appeared to
him, or to others of him. One day betwixt the conception, and nativity of the
Saint, an Angel appeared to his mother, who brought her a wounderful rich
robe, and took it away presently: she being very pensive thereat, said to the
Angel appearing in the likeness of a very grave and venerable man. Why do you
so soon withdraw this delightful mantle? Because, answered he, that it
appertains to me whom you cannot long detain with you* with that the woman
saw the robe to be drawn longer and longer from her, and to stretch so out in
breadth, as to surpass the latitude of the fields, and with its ouerlarge
dimensions, to cover mountains and forests: and heard moreover such a voice as
this, directed to her. Woman, be not agrieued, for you shall bear your
husband so happy a son, who as one of the Prophets of God, shall be ra^ked
among them, and is predestined by God, to be the captain to conduct infinite
souls to heaven. With which voice, the woman awaked. Another night the child's
foster-father, a Priest of a very Religious life, coming after mass out of
the church, found all the house illustrated with an immense splendor. For he
saw a globe of fire standing on the holy infants face, at which strange sight
he trembled, and was stricken with astonishment; at last he understood thereby,
the copious effusion of the grace of the holy Ghost, on the sweet suckling.

2. When the saint had been excommunicated by a certain synod, for light and
pardonable causes, as it was evident in the end, he came to the foresaid Synod,
whom when S. Brendan the founder of the monastery of Birra, saw coming a
far of, he rose up in haste, and embraced him. For which being reprehe^ded by
some of the ancientest of the assembly, who asked him: Why do not you fear to
rise to honor an excommunicated person, and to embrace him? He answered: Had
you known the things our Lord has vouchafed to manifest to me touching this
his faithful servant, you would never have excommunicated him, whom our Lord
does not only not excommunicate, but does always magnify him more and more.
And added further: I saw a fiery and brightsome pillar going before this man of
God, whom you contemn, and the Angels accompanying him along the fields. I
dare not therefore to contemn this man, whom I see preordayned by God, to be
the Captain of many that shall attain to the immortal life of glory. These
things being said by him, all the assembly honored the Saint very much. As S.
Finnian the Saints master, saw him one day approaching to the place where
himself resided, he said to some that were present: Lo you see S. Columbe
coming, who has merited to have an Angel for the companion of his journey.
About the same time the Saint, with twelve of his disciples sailed into
Brittany.

3. Whilst the Saint lived in the Island of Himbria, he fell into an extasis,
wherein he saw an Angel of our Lord sent to him, who held in his hand the
book containing the ceremonies of the enstalling of Kings, which he offered
to the Saint, commanding him to read it: but when he would not ordain Aydanus
King as it was commended and commanded in the book, in regard he loved
Iogenan, Aydans younger brother better, the Angel suddenly stretching out his
hand, struck the Saint with a whip (whose blew print, or whaile, remained on
his side all the days of his life) and added further: Know for certain, that
I am sent to you, to cause you according as is set down in the book, to
ordain Aydanus King, and if you do not not obey, I will strike you again.
The Saint thereupon obeyed the iniunction of our Lord, Commeneus Albus in libro
quem scrip^it (...) S. Columbe.
and for that end, embarked himself for Hoy, where he crowned Aydanus King,
who came thither about that time; of whom and of his posterity, the Saint
prophesied in manner following, as records Commeneus Albus. I believe without
all question, O King Aydan, that none of your enemies shall be able to make
head against you, until you use some fraud, and unjust deportement toward me
and my posterity: commend you this seriously to your sons, and let them do
the same to their sons, and nephews; fearing otherwise that the scepter of
the kingdom should be wrested out of their hands. For at what time soever
they shall work any harm to me, or to my kinsmen in Ireland, the scourge I have
sustained for your sake, shall be turned on them by the hand of our Lord, and
they will leese the hearts of men, and their enemies shall insult over them.
This prophecy has been fullfilled in our days by Belleroth, Daniel, Breco,
Aydans nephew, who without any just cause wasted, and destroyed O Doainails
country.

How the Saint saw the soul of one of his Monks to be saved. How with a word
he killed a wicked man. How he fought with the Devils, and chased them away by
help of the Angels. CHAP. II.
ONE of the Saints monks, a Britton by birth, a man much given to the exercise
of good works, fell sick to death, and dyed. The Saint saw the Angels, and
Devils fighting about the possession of his soul. At last the Angels
prevailed, and conducted the soul to the joys of Paradise. All this the saint
told one of his Monks, charging him not to reveal it all the days of his
life. Whilst the Saint lived in Leinster to be trained up in wisdom, and
learning, it fortuned that a wicked man, a cruel persecutor of the good,
pursued in a certain place a young Damsel who fled from him: she by chance
espied her brother an old man, who was master to S. Columbe, to whom she made
all haste possible for rescue. The old man called on S. Columbe, to the end
that they might both jointly defend her from the cruel persecutors hands; who
came no sooner to the place, but in their eyes he slew her without regarding
them any whit: whereat the good old monk was so grieved and struck with
anguish, that turning to S. Columbe he said: How long, o holy youth Columbe,
will God the just judge suffer this wickedness joined with our dishonor, to
pass unpunished? The Saint pronounced this just, though dreadful sentence
against the flagitious murderer: The self same hour that the maidens soul
shall ascend up to heaven, his soul shall descend down to hell. And lo
without delay, the wicked man fell down dead. The report of this fearful and
sudden vltion, was blown over many Churches of Scotland, to the great honor
and veneration of the holy Deacon.

2. A certain pilgrim came to seiourne with the Saint in the I Will of Hoy for
some months, to whom the Saint said: This day a certain clergy man of
your province, whose name I know not, is now a carrying between the Angels to
heaven. The brother hearing this, began to muse with himself, and to call to
mind the man's name, so after a little while, he said to the saint: I know a
servant of Christ named Diarmitius, who built him a little monastery in the
self same territory, wherein I kept my residence. It is the self same party
you name, answered the Saint, whom the celestial spirits bring to the joys
of Paradise. Neither is it negligently to be observed, how that the glorious
Saint kept from the notice of men, many secrets that were revealed to him, and
this for two reasons, as himself signified to a few of his monks. First to
avoid ostentation, and self esteem: secondly to avoid the molestation that
the multitudes would put him in, inquiring after several affairs, and matters.

3. Another time the saint sought in the woods, a solitary place unfrequented
by men, and commodious for the exercise of holy prayer; when he began to pray,
suddenly he saw an ugly and deformed army of Devils, to fight against him with
Iron spits, who intended, as the Saint knew by the inward illustration of the
holy Ghost, to assail his monastery, and to kill with their pointed stakes,
many of his monks. But he albeit all alone, took S. Paul's armor, and fought
courageously against the whole host of his infernal adversaries: and so the
conflict continued for the most part of the day, neither could they overcome
him, nor yet he drive them out of his I Will, until the Angels came to his
help, whose terror made the Devils depart. After their departure, the saint
prophesied, how they would invade the monasteryes of Ethica, and inflict
pestilent diseases on the inhabitants, whereof many would dye. Within two days
likewise the saint foretold, how Bathaneus by the help of prayers and fasts,
preserved his monastery from their invasion, in so much, that none dyed but one.

4. In the middle region of Ireland, lived a certain Smith, a man much
addicted to alms deeds, and other good works: when this virtuous Artizan came
to the final period of his mortal life, the Saint spoke to a few that were
about him in this manner. The Smith did not labor in vain, who with the
labor of his hands, has purchased everlasting rewards, his soul is now
carried by the Angels, to the joys of the heavenly Country. Another time did
he see the soul of a poor, but very holy woman, coming in company of the
Angels to meet her husbands soul at his decease, and this he made known to
one of his Monks named Genereus, a Saxon by birth.

How S. Columbe knowing by revelation of the death of S. Brendan and S.
Columbanus, the Bishop said mass in honor of them, and how a certain Monk,
saw him conuersing with the Angels. CHAP II.
ANother time likewise, whilst the saint siued in the I Will of Hoy, in the
morning very early, he called upon his familiar tender Diarmitius, and said to
him: Let the sacred misteryes of the Eucharist be made ready in all haste; for
this day is the deposition of S. Brendan. Why (quoth Diarmitius) do you
command such solemnityes of masses to be made ready this day, seeing none came
out of Ireland that might bring us news of that holy man's death? Go, said the
Saint, and obey my word, for this last night I saw the heavens open, and quires
of Angels descending down to meet S. Brendans soul, with whose bright and
incomparable splendor, the compass of all the world was enlightened and
illustrated.

2. Another day also, as the monks put themselves in a readiness for the
several works of the monastery, the saint commanded them to rest that day, and
to make ready the furniture of the sacred oblation, and their portions to be
increased as on Sunday. For said he, albeit I be altogether unworthy, yet must
I this day celebrate the sacred mysteryes of the Eucharist, in honor of that
soul which this night has been carried among the holy quires of Angels, to
the interminable joys of Paradise. These things being spoken, the Religious
obeyed very promptly, and all things for the celebrating of the divine service
were prepared. After they went with their holy Abbot to the Church, where after
singing part of the office, they came to the Hymn where mention is made of S.
Martin. The Saint said to the singers: This day you must sing of Columbanus the
Bishop. Then all the Monks who were present, understood Columbanus the
Bishop of Leynster S. Columbs dear friend, to be translated to a better life.
Within a few days, there came out of Leynster, who reported that he departed
the self same night, that his death was revealed to the Saint.

3. Another time, when the Saint sat writing in his cell, his face was
suddenly altered, and he pronounced this voice from his pure breast: Help,
help: two brothers who stood at the door, to wit, Colgus and Lugneus,
demanded the cause of that sudden voice? To whom the venerable Abbot made
this answer: I commanded an Angel of our Lord, who stood with you, to succor
one of the brothers falling down from the top of a great house that is now
building in the monastery of the Oakenfield. The Saint added further: Very
admirable, and scarce ineffable is the quickness of the angelical motion; for
that heauen-dweller, who flew away from us when yonder man began to fall, as it
were in the shutting of an eye, prevented him before he touched the earth,
neither could the party that fell, feel ane bruise or pain. O how stupendous
is this most swift, and oportune subuention, that could so speedily be
performed, such spaces of sea and land lying in the way?

4. The Saint on a time, called all the company together, and straightly
charged them in this manner. I mean to go out all alone to the western field
of this I Will, let none therefore presume to follow me. They all obeyed excepting
one brother, who went another way, and hid himself on the top of a little
hillocke, whence he might espy the cause of the Saints solitary retire, whom
the prementioned brother saw standing on a little hill with his hands and eyes
cast toward heaven: and lo suddenly a strange thing appeared, for the holy
Angels the inhabitants of the heavenly city, being all white, flow down, and
environed the Saint as he prayed, and after some conference with him, that
heavenly squadron returned soon again to their heavenly mansions. The Saint
likewise after that angelical meeting returned to the monastery, and calling
all the company together again, not without a severe reprehension, he began to
examine which of them had trespassed against his commandment. The guilty party
being not able to conceal what he had done, fell prostrate before the saint,
acknowledging his fault, and begging pardon very humbly. The saint brought him
aside, and with great commination charged him not to reveal the matter all the
days of his life. By this we may well conjecture, the many apparitions, and
angelic all visitations, the glorious saint had at other times, especially in
the long winter nights, which for the most part he spent all alone, without
taking any rest.

How S. Brendanus saw a fiery pillar, ascending fro S. Columbes head as he said
mass: how for three entire days he enjoyed heavenly visions, and of other
miracles in this kind. CHAP. IIII.
FOUR holy founders of monasteryes, whose names were Congellus, Cahinnechus,
Brendanus, and Cormacus, coming out of Ireland to visit the Saint, found him
in the I Will Himba: these holy men with one accord, did choose, that S. Columbe
should confecrate the holy mysteryes of the Eucharist in their presence; who
yielding to their pious desire, entered the church at once with them, and
whilst the masses were celebrating, S. Brendan saw a very brightsome globe of
fire shinning over the head of S. Columbe all the while he consecrated the
sacred oblation, and ascending like a pillar of fire, until he had made an end
of the most holy mysteryes.

2. Another time in the said I Will of Himba, the grace of the holy Ghost so
copiously descended on him, that remaining the space of three entire days
locked up in his cell, he was so replenished during that time with divine light,
that he did neither eat, or permitted any to come at him, In the night two
beams of immense brightness, issued out at the chinckes of the door, and holes
of the lock: he was likewise heard to sing, most sweet and ineffable verses;
many secrets that were hidden from the knowledge of men, since the beginning of
the world, were manifested to him; the eyes of his most pure heart, pierced into
the difficultyes of the most obscure and abstruse passages of holy scriptures:
and he complained of the absence of Batthaneus his disciple, who had he been
present during those three days, should have described touching the
forepassed, or future ages, many mysteries unknown to other men.

3. A Monk named Virgnous, a man fervent in the love of God, entered the Church
one night all alone, and sat him down to pray in one of the oratories. Within
the space as it were of an hour S. Columbe likewise entered the said holy
house, together with him, and a golden light descending from heaven, was seen
to replenish all the house: and as none can contemplate the meridia^ sun with
steadfast and vndaseled eyes, so could not Virgnous sustain that heavenly
splendor that blunted the quickness of his eyes, where with he was so
astonished and terrifyed, that no strength remained in him. The next morning,
the Saint called on Virgnous, speaking these comfortable words to him: O my
little child, you have pleased almighty God much yesternight by casting your
eyes on the earth; for had you not done so, your eyes had been blinded with
the luster of that divine light: beware you never bring this divine visitation
to the knowledge of men during my life. Another brother named Colgus, coming
that night by chance to the Church door, saw the same glistering light* whom
the saint admonished the next day, not to speak of it to any, all his life
time.

4. Another time the saint charged one of his disciples named Brochanus: Beware
my son, you approach not this night to my cell, as you are wont. Who
notwithstanding the saints forbidding, went to the door, and looked in at the
keyhole, thinking with himself, as it fell out, that the saint had within
some heavenly vision; for at that time the saints little lodging was
replenished with divine light, which the disobedient young man being not able
to sustain, fled way in haste* The next day, the Saint called Brochanus aside*
and he reprehended him with great severity, speaking to him in this manner: My
son, you have sinned before God, this last night, in thinking it possible to
conceal your crafty prying, for if the holy Ghost did not, yet I behold you
coming and returning from the door of our lodging: had not I then offered my
prayers in your behalf, you would either have fallen down dead before the
door, or else your eyes had fallne out of your head: and know this, that in
your own country of Ireland, for living lasciuiously, you shall sustain shame
and reproach all the days of your life, yet I have obtained from our Lord,
that in regard your are our disciple, that you shall do bitter penance before
your death, and obtain mercy. All which happened to him afterward, according
to the Saints prophecy.

How S. Columbes life was prolonged by the prayers of many Churches: How he
foresaw his death, and revealed the time to Diarmitius his familiar tender.
CHAP. V.
THE glorions Abbot being in Hoy, a marvelous sweetness and pleasantness
appeared on his countenance, and casting his eyes to heauenwardes, he was wholly
replenished with joy: but within a little space, the sweetness of his face, was
converted into heaviness, and his joy into sorrow; which when two of his monks,
named Lugneus, and Pilu* saw and perceived, they obtained of him not without
great entreaty, and a faithful promise of never revealing it in his life time,
the cause of that sad, and strange alteration, to whom he spoke in this manner:
Lo to this present day; there are run out, thrice ten years of my
peregrination in Brittany: in the mean time these many days I have devoutly
begged of God, that he would be pleased in the end of this 30. years to finish
my earthly pilgrimage, and to call me to his heavenly mansion, and this was the
cause of my joy; for I saw the Angels sent from the throne of glory, to meet my
soul after its departure out of my body: and lo being now suddenly stayed,
they stand on the rock at further side of our sea, and would come in have for
my soul, but they are not permitted to approach nearer; for what our Lord has
granted, he has now sudde^ly altered, hearing the prayers of many churches
for me: who have obtained a thing against my will, that four years more may
be added to the term of my mortal pilgrimage: this sorrowful delay, is the
cause of my present grief, which four years, when they shall come to an end,
I shall without any precedent sickness of body, pass to the everlasting joys
of Paradise.

2. The term of the prementioned years, now drawing on, the true Prophet, and
very noble Abbot, being laden with years, went forth in a wagon one day to
visit the Brothers, that were at work, to whom he said: I conceived an
earnest desire to go to our Savior (who granted it me, if my self would) on
Easter day, which we have lately celebrated, but because I would not have the
joy of that festiuity converted into heaviness, I chose rather to diferre my
departure out of this world a little longer. With this the Monks fell into
great heaviness, whom their pious Father begone to animate with very
comfortable words, and sweet exhortations as much as he could. Then co^uerting
his face to the Orient, he blessed the Island with all the inhabitants. From
that time forwards, the Island was never molested with the annoy of vipers:
within a few days after, whilst the masses were a celebrating, as the Saint
elevated up his gracious countenance, it was suddenly dyed with a most
delectable and lively rednes; for at that hour, he saw the Angel of our Lord
flitting up and down in the Oratory, and in regard the admirable aspect of an
Angel instilleth joy into the hearts of the elect, the Saint therefore here
abounded with joy: and when some that were present enquired after the cause of
his joy, he answered: Lo an Angel of our Lord, sent to require a certain
depositum very dear to God, came into the Church, and after looking down over
us, and blessing us, departed. None of them that were present, understood what
depositum was that the Angel came for. But our holy Patron called his own
soul which God committed to his charge by the name of depositum, which he
rendered up within six days after.

3. On the next Saturday, the holy Abbot, and his faithful tender Diarmitius,
went out to bless a Barn, where the Saint seeing two heaps of grain, said: I
congratulate much with my monks, for if I must needs depart; this year, they
have sufficient provision. Diarmitius hearing this sentence, became very heavy:
you constristate us so often this year, because you speak so often of your
departure: to whom he said. I will acquaint you with a secret touching my
death, so that you promise faithfully not to disclose it before I dye.
Diarmitius gave him his faithful word and promise. Then the glorious Saint
added: This day in the sacred volumes, is called Sabbath, that is interprettd
rest, and truly this day is a Sabbath to me, because it is the last of my
laborious life, wherein after the pains of my travails, I sabbath, and this
next ensuing midnight of the venerable Sunday, I shall be gathered to the holy
Fathers; for now our Lord Jesus vouchsafes to inuit me, to whom I shall
depart at night, as himself has revealed to me. After this he returned back
toward the Monastery; In the way he ascended a little mountain ouerlooking
the monastery, and standing on the top of the hill, and eleuating his hands,
he blessed his monastery, saying: The Kings not only of Scotland with their
subjects, but even the Kings of foraine nations with their vassalls, will
honor much this place, though it be now narrow and despiseable: and the Saints
of other Churches, will give no small veneration to it.

How S. Columbe approaching to the hour of his death, made a mystical division
of the Psalm Inquirentes Dominum: Lastly of his death, burial, and some
visions of his happy passage. CHAP. VI.
AFTER he had bestowed his sacred benediction, he returned to his monastery,
and sat him down to write the Psalter, and coming to that verse of the 33.
Psalm: Inquirentes Dominum non minuentur omni bono. They that seek after our
Lord, shall not be diminished of any good. Here must I pause in the end of this
page. Let Bathaneus write what follows: The last verse which the Saint wrote,
befitteth him very much, since he shall never be deprived of the interminable
riches of heaven, and the subsequent verse: Come children hear me, I will teach
you the fear of our Lord, becomes his successor Bathaneus, as being his
successor, not only in the office of teaching, but also in the charge in
writing. After the Saint had given a stop to his pen at the foresaid verse,
he entered into the Church, to hear sundays evening mass, which being done,
he came back to his cell, and sat in his bed, where he had instead of a bed,
a bare stone, and another stone in lieu of a bolster; sitting in that place he
bequeathed to his ghostly children, these his last precepts in the hearing only
of Diarmitius. I commend to you my children, these my last words: conserve
true and unfeigned charity and peace among you, and if you observe this,
according to the example of the Saints, God the comforter of the good, will
help you: and I being with him will intercede for you, and he will affoarde
you, both what you all want in this life, and likewise the joys which are
prepared for them that keep his Commandments.

2. After finishing these sacred documents, the glorious Saint held his peace:
at midnight when the bell rung to matines, he rose, and going sooner then any
of the company to the Church, he fell down on his knees before the Altar.
Diarmitius following slowly after, saw all the church illustrated with
Angelical splendor, which at his approach disappeared; entering in therefore
into the Church, he called often to the Saint with a weeping voice, saying: O
father, where are you? And so groping up and down in the dark, he found him
lying prostrate before the Altar. Diarmitius sat him down by the Saint, and
laid his head in his sacred lap, in the mean time the Monks came, who
seeing their holy Father ready to dye, began to lament: even at the very
instant of the separation of his soul, as we heard from some who were
eyewitnesses, he looked about him with a viuacious and pleasant countenance,
contemplating the holy Angels that came to fetch him. Then Diarmitius took
up his holy hand to bless his mo^ks: the Saint himself did what he coule to
move his hand to give them his blessing, with the motion thereof since he could
not perform it with the voice of his mouth: after this his sacred benediction
given in this kind, the Saint yielded up suddenly his happy soul. The
Angelical sight left such a cherfulness remaining in his countenance, that
it seemed rather the sweet aspect of one cast in a pleasant slumber, then the
ghostly sight of a dead corse. Here we will relate some visions, which
certain holy men had at that very hour of the Saints happy passage. In a
certain Irish monastery, there lived a very holy and venerable servant of
Christ, named Lugildius, who was both wise and just: this holy monk not
without great sorrow, related to a dear companion of his, a man of no less
holy conversation, a certain vision he had: This last midnight S. Columbe, the
pillar of many Churches, departed to the immortal joys of heaven, and I saw
in spirit, all the I Will of Hoy where I never was in person, illustrated with
celestial and angelical brightness, and all the spaciousnes of the air was
to the skies, enlightened with the splendor of Angels. Angels were sent that
descended to conduct his holy soul to everlasting rest. I heard likewise most
sweet hymns and harmonious canticles, that resounded melodiously at the same
time: this angelical manifestation Virgnous learnt from the mouth of the
foresaid holy old man.

3. Another ancient and religious servant of Christ's, and a holy monk named
Ferrelus, related to me Adamnanus, with no small protestation and asseueration
of the truth thereof, this ensuing vision. That night of S. Columbes happy
passage out of this life, I, and others with me being fishing in the fishy
river Fend, we saw all the region of the air suddenly illustrated: being much
moved with the suddenness of the miracle, we converted our eyes to the East,
and lo there appeared as it were a great fiery pillar, that ascending to
heaven wards, seemed to illuminate all the world, as a summers day, or meridian
Sun: and when that pillar had penetrated the heavens, then darkness ensued
as after the Sun set, neither did the vision appear to us alone, for many
other fishers that were up and down about the river, beheld it: these visio^s
appearing at the very hour of our Patrons departur, make remonstrance of the
glory he inioyeth before God. Now let us return thither, from whence we have
digressed.

4. The matins office being ended, his holy body was carried back with sweet
symphony of psalms to his little lodging: his obsequies were solemnized with
no less honor then devotion, for the space of three days, and three nights;
which time being spent in the divine praises, the body of our glorious Patron,
wrapped in clean syndons, was interred in a decent tomb, with great
veneration. Here we think not amiss to tell what the Saint had prophesied
touching the foresaid three days of his exequies. On a time one of the Monks
after a simple manner, said to the venerable Abbot: It is thought, that all the
people of these provinces will sail hither to this Island of Hoy, to celebrate
your funerals. My son, answered the Saint, it shall not be as you say; for
the vulgar sort, shall not be able by any means to come to my obsequies, only
my own familiar monks shall accomplish my funeral rights and duties. Which
prophetical prenunciation, the divine Omnipotence, put in execution; for
during the three days of his holy funerals, so boisterous a wind blew, that
it was not possible for any to go to sea: but immediately after the Saints
sepulture, the wind ceased and the sea became calm; such then was the end of
our glorious Patrons life, such were the happy beginning of his merits, who is
admitted into the society of the glorious Patriarchs, of the holy Apostles, of
the sacred Martyrs, and immaculate Virgins, by the favor of our sweet Savior
Jesus. To whom together with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all praise,
honor, virtue and glory, world without end, Amen.

Finis vitae Sancti Columbae.
Nos infrascripti legimus has Sanctorum nostrorum vitas, scilicet PATRICIj,
BRIGIDAE, and COLVMBAE a quodam ex nostris Patribus Anglice redditas, in quibus
nihil moribus aut fidei Catholicae contrarium inuenimus.

Datum Louanij 29. Augusti, 1625. Fr. Thomas Strange Diffinitor, and
Commissarius prouinciae Hiberniae, nec non Sacrae Theologiae lector. Fr.
Robertus Chamberlinus Sacrae Theologiae lector in Collegio Sancti Anthonij a
Padua, Louanij. Fr. Ioannes Barnew allus S. Theologiae lector in Collegio
Sancti Anthonij de Padua, Louanij.


Licentia Reuerendissimi Domini, Domini PAVLI BOVDOT, Episcopi Audomarensis.
NOs PAVLVS BOVDOT Dei, and Apostolicae sedis gratia Episcopus Audomarensis,
has vitas Sanctorum PATRICIj, BRIGIDAE, and COLVMBAE, a quodam Patre
Franciscano Collegij Sancti Antonij a Padua Louanij in linguam Anglicanam
versas, typis mandari ac diuulgari permittimus: cum ex Patrum Lectorum praefati
Collegij fide digno testimonio habeamus, nihil in ijs aut fidei orthodoxae, aut
probis moribus aduersari.

Actum Audomaropoli in Palatio nostro episcopali 10. Octobris 1625.
Licentia Reuerendissimi Patris nostri Fratris Iosephi Bergaigne, super
Prouincias Belgicas Commissarij Generalis, and totius Ordinis Seraphici
diffinitoris Generalis.
VISA censura and approbatione Venerandi admodum Patris Viceprouincialis
Hiberniae, and Patrum Lectorum sacrae Theologiae nostri Collegij S. Antonij A
Padua permittimus, vt Typis mandentur hae vitae SS. Patricij, Brigidae, and
Columbae, obseruatis ijs quae statuta generalia nostri ordinis circa
excussionem librorum obseruari praecipiunt.

Datum in nostro conuentu Dunkercano, 16. Augusti, 1625. Fr. Josephus
Bergaigne, Commissarius and Diffinitor generalis.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Faults Correction. Page 4. Century read Centuryes Page ibid. Sabellius
Sabellicus Page 7. Saint Soruan Seruan Page ibid. Marcia Mercia Page ibid.
Saint Pumold Saint Rumold Page ibid. Saint Hiniclin Himelin Page 8. S. Patrick
your glorious Abbot S. particke your glorious Bishop Page ibid. Derlanus
Declanus Page ibid. Itarus Ybarus Page ibid. Riaranus Kiaranus Page 9. of their
sensual of their sensually school Page 12. now to declare now to decline from
the trial Page ibid. foul wracking soul wracking Page 8. Vbique for England
Brittany Page 13. Sergerius Sergecius Page 16. Dichum Dichu Page 30. Mal Mel
Page ibid. Brine mouth Boyne-mouth Page 31. nephew neophit Page ibid. Coibre
Coyrbre Page 42. and vbique for Ardmuch Ardmach Page 44. 1400. 14000. Page 46.
Ormand Ormond Page 47. Prosnach Broisneau Page ibid. Frianus Triamus Page 49.
nephueus nephews Page 53. Connendus Connedus Page 57. and vbique Bangor
Benchor Page 69. Coruallus Cearuallus Page 70. Vlbia Vlidia Page 72. Micheus
Mocheus Page 74. Volchanusa Volchan Page 75. Reuternus Kertennus Page ibid.
Ciocher Clochor Page 81. plane plain Page 92. free resembling fire resembling
Page 98. and alibi for English British Page 100. five hundred five thousand
Page 103. entertainment enterment Page 105. Ardmuchians Ardmachians Page 106.
Caulune Caucune Page 108. greeuily grievously Page 110. Machella Machillas Page
112. then the said Saint dealt. then the Saint said deal Page 125. impassible
impassable Page ibid. family families Page 137. trunled tumbled Page 145.
Cluayre Cluayne Page 148. Cormarus Cormacus Page ibid. Ircos Irros Page ibid.
Alban Aldan Page 192. it appertains to me it appertains to one Page 201. ane
any Page 203. being all white being all in white, Page 206. prying, for if the
holy Ghost did not, yet I behold prying, from the Holy Ghost, did not I
behold you Page 213. coule could Page ibid. ghostly ghastly Page ibid.
Lugildius Lugudius Page 214. Ferrelus Ferreolus

FINIS.

