A RELATION OF THE LATE IOVRNEY of the IESVITES, BANISHED Out of the Kingdoms
of Bohemia and Hungaria.

Anno Dom. 16^0.

A RELATION OF the late Journey of the Jesuits banished out of the Kingdoms of
Bohemia, and Hungaria.
FAme (as I suppose) has sufficiently declared how all the Jesuits were sent
and banished out of the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungaria, that they might
never attempt to come again into those Kingdoms hereafter: and this
banishment of theirs was after this manner, that if any of those Jesuits be
found in the two foresaid Kingdoms, wheresoever, with whom soever, of what
condition soever he be; and under what pretense soever; according to the
definition of the Statutes of either Kingdom, he should pay the just reward of
his fact. The poor wretches are excluced, that neither intercession, nor any
way devised by art or friend should prevail to bring them in again for ever.
Now I come to their going out, why do they go? Being once constrained to
depart; they went away willingly, bona voluntas non est agitanda calcaribus, a
willing mind needs not the spur. Constrained say you? namely, they would depart
for the time of anger willingly. This banishment and casting forth of them,
although it brought exceeding much grief and sorrow to their whole Society,
even as that same Bore sent by Diana into the corn of Callidonia: yet did it
not altogether cast away the spear, but rather followed that same most Godly
sentence, (when they shall persecute you in that City, fly into another.) But
who do you ask? this was their recreation whereby these wretched students
distinguished the intermissions of their studies.

They do too too much earnestly think that they are to search into these
cares, where they may recover a secure, and (as I may say) a healthful place;
such as they had left at Bohemia and Hungaria: and see, the event was contrary
to their purposes.

While they went thither in this Bohemian. Hungarian banishment, that at length
they might embrace fair Germany, they come, they see, they salute their
fellows and brethren. O Germany, how great a wonder were thou to these
banished men at there first entrance, how did thou yield an allurement to
those greedy eyes! they see the goodness of the land: it is most wonderful
and remote from all danger: they see the temper of the air; it is most
wholesome. There is all sound and perpetual healthfulnesse.

What should I speak of the flourishing fields, the high hills, and the
unhurtful chases? I will not speak of the little brooks sliding with a
pleasant brinke, and the stately kinds of woods and groves. These, these seemed
to the Fathers the Jesuits most full of a pleasant sweetness: the very
midnight, which is wont to be pleasant to all, they made unquiet to
themselves. And what would it be (say they) if so precious fleeces of sheep,
so many fertile Cities, villages and monasteries; and so good great a plenty of
corn, olives, and vine-yards should appertain unto us? Oh brethren, let us
make trial, let us use our best cunning: that we may be received first in
Germany: afterward that we may become Lords of it. Behold o Germany, how
thou strikest without a bruise, how thou woundest without blood! how quickly
and lovingly thou do drink to these Fathers the cups of their desire and
wish! how thou smilest on them! O brethren, these men about to touch the matter
to the quick, do put on them (as they are wont,) the prepuce of impudency;
they solicit fair Germany with earnest and daily entreaty; that it would
afford them a most safe defense against these clouds of banishment.

They cry out, thou o Germany art the only anchor, which art able to preserve
this company, to chase away storms amongst the waves and tempests. India would
most bountifully defend us; neither would Italy deny us any thing: but it is an
exceeding long iourny thither; here the air is most dangerous, that which way
soever we turn us, an exceeding great burden of this difficulty is laid upon
us.

We have no small cause to reside elsewhere: but now seeing our passing over
has a little tasted of this land (in which these that are addicted to our
fellowship do not live in want) we conclude, that this thing is not done
without the divine providence. Also this Germany being better known through a
process of time, has deserved to be a longer time loved of us; and is
accounted worthy to be adorned with the garland of our piety, and most
faithful instructing. Walk over and over it. O Germany, what is it, that our
so many companies do watch in thy towns and houses for thy safety? other
lands being let go, we desire thy helping hand, o Germany (say they.) Let the
holy Scripture move thee; Succor the needy: Let it move thee, that thou may
follow mercy; exercise mercy. Neither do we request any great matters, nor
things too high, only some monasteries in which we may have meat, drink, and
apparel. In these monasteries we will live religiously; we will show our
devotion and love toward Germany; and also our especial care in instructing
youth. And we, and others with us shall fly with these wings, and shall exceed
all humane matters. In the mean time although our innocence shall bring us
into a narrower room and fame, yet shall it fly again through all the coasts
of Germany; and stain Bohemia and Hungary, unless they become better.

Of which their wonderful fair persuasion after that the brethren had made an
end; the Lords the Delegates of Garmany not long meditating, at last do answer
thus. Neither do they dissemble that they also are stirred and heated with
that same untimely heat. We have been very attentive to your request (o
Fathers): Also we have attentively heard (as is fitting) your causes and
reasons, provoking us to provide you settled places amongst us, which truly
have been acceptable to us. We would that our answer to you be plain and
without color. For that you extol our beautiful Country, Germany, with all
kind of praises, we do take it acceptably: only this we dislike, that you
desire to rest with us in this bosom which is proper and belonging to ours.
And truly we do very much wonder, that you do not seek out and desire other
places fuller of our miracles. For although the air might be most dangerous in
Italy, by your saying, perhaps it might be more temperate in Spain, where
there be more of your companies; and more of your brethren. Yea there you have
your Mecanas himself, who as a Minerua does preserve you on water, and as an
Ulysses does defend you being in danger of life.

Do you say that the journey into India is too long? It is shorter into
France, where (if your apology may be believed) your companions are of late
preferred with new privileges. If you have there so good opportunities, why
do you strive to forgo them? Do you say it will be good for us, hurtful to
you, to profit us by your piety and information in our studies? It is not
expedient for you (o Fathers) if ye determine any thing to be done of you in
our right. And if we be not deceived, Germany has more certain assertions of
liberty to think well, then Trecensis heretofore in France (which is commonly
called Troy.)

But we do exceedingly marvel what the cause should be, why in so short a
time ye should be cast out of so many stately commonwealths and Kingdoms?
Truly all their fields are large books, which we cannot thrust upon you by
turning them, but for conference sake only show them as true to the whole
world, and of you as yet not refuted We desire that some of you would behold
your acts done in England: Certainly the acts of Garnet and of all of you would
breath out some other thing then Innocence: namely, treason, and innovation, of
which you were all guilty.

This one thing you object, (o Fathers) but know this, a deep wound retains a
scarce: Ye did not bid farewell to the Venetians against your wills; but
perhaps unconstrained.

You had never gone away by the decree of the Venetian Lords, had not the
commandment of Paul the fifth Pope caused you, to whom being the head of the
Church, you yielded all humble obedience with due observance: and in this
intermission from Religion you adored his Surplice: So obedience alone is the
virtue which works the other virtues in the mind: and what were it of ye
should call him Lord, Lord, and would not do what he says? Ah how impatient
were the Venetian Lords of your departure? How willingly would they have
detained you longer, if good words, honors, if moreover new privileges could
have prevailed any thing.

But in sailing we must give ear to our Pilot, in war to our Captain: So
that fidelity due to the Pope by the Venetian title has made you wretched men
banished. It is written: He that believes shall be saved.

We now talk alone (o Fathers Jesuits) and are weakened: we could wish that a
Venetian were here who might affirm these things.

We do add nothing here but what your selves had in your Apology: that the
will of God may be done, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; from whom
as you expect salvation, so also expect just judgment. We do willingly pass
over with silence the Belgicke fame, declaring what reproachful things,
contentions and wicked deeds you have there committed: If in others there be
any disgrace and wickedness, in you it is praise and comeliness (as it is in
your Apology.)

We know not what to say, only this we hold, that God lives, who causes his
Sun to shine upon the good and bad, and raineth upon the just and unjust, and
will reward every one according to his works: We do also willingly pass
over, why we saw your honest company banished out of France for their faults:
we are full of writings to this purpose.

In brief, ye are accused of treason and slaughter intended against Kings:
whose life and blood how you laid in wait for, would have been manifest (more
clear then the noon day) had not that same Carmelitane work covered it upon
your Martyrs. Hereupon a Catholic within these three years (if I be not
deceived) objected fairly unto you that you teach and write commonly, that any
man of what condition soever he be, may and ought to kill or slay a King
(suppose any King you will) for a certain stipend or pension of money, if he
be a Tyrant, or disobedient to your will and sayings.

This is your practice whereby you prevail much with bad men: whereupon you
deservedly worship Henry Garnet, as a Martyr for that his wicked and savage
deed, who for it was executed in England.

We ingeniously confess that which is proper to all Garmans, that our
Gallows, Iibbets, prisons and all instruments of torture, are full of such
Martyrs.

Let us not cherish a thought of the feyned and lying miracles of such most
false martyrs. We do even tremble (as God shall help us) that the Catholic
religion should cover such Barbarous, Savage, and most devilish facts; and
that it can call and worship such wicked and filthy men as Saints. So much
evil was religion able to persuade. Neither were the winds the cause of their
expulsion out of those most famous Cities of Hungary, and Bohemia, (we will not
speak of Polonia, and Swetia:) These things shall never be forgotten, so long
as that winged chariot of Fame shall pass through countries and ages. Yea
have been shunners of peace and concord: yea have brought in dissensions,
braules, and treacheries into these kingdoms. All these you do under color
of religion; as that your practice wrought by most fraudulent wiles, and most
wicked attempts does witness. This is it by which you wring your selves into
high places; you flatter the ears of the chiefest men; being most skillful in
that matter: And so you cover your indirect going and sitting amongst these
Peers with the mantle of religion and piety (with a mischief.) We also
understand (o fathers unless you have some other religion then the Catholic)
that you also, after your manner do attempt the same: just after the manner of
Sorceresses; which while they can do no harm to others, do hurt themselves.

Amongst these excellent Estates of Commonwealths, you bring in also an
innovation: where those same good Catholics are Atheists, Libertines, and
simple men, they are commonly called: ye do all for this end, that
treacheries and brawlings might be brought in, whereby you might fish in safety
for your company. And truly, not the Bohemians, and Hungarians only, but even
your Catholics, from elsewhere do object the fame things unto you. Where we
certainly suppose this to be in the better part of you; grant us o Lord to
speak forth peace in our times: All the turmoiles which you cause (your
accusers allege) are made for religions sake (under this color you affect
your monarchy amongst the Catholics;) yet notwithstanding they must not be
said to be undertaken of the professors of the Gospel at any time, for the
cause of religion: O misery; we suffer not our cisterns to be drawn for all,
whom we understand you run into.

For to what end is that plenty? But above all we set before us the present
estate only of the Bohemians. The seducers of the common people, say, that
here is no talking of religion: o blindness! Let them believe that will; they
shall find to their own cost, that religion is our beginning, midst, and
end: by which all things done, or to be done, are ruled; or rather in which
they are all contained, your following, severe, and harsh proceedings with
Clostargrab and Braunaro shall afford you one lively example of six hundred.

Hereupon the Emperor Matthias wrote very precisely in his late letters to the
Earl of Bucquoy; Thou shall deserve excellently well of us, of out Princely
house, of religion, and of the Commonweal; if thou would admit of this
religion, o Bohemia, and would entertain friendship with the Jesuits, thou
could not have war: The Pope would bless thee; the Spaniard would salute
thee, and all the whole Clergy would visit thee. But all these things o
Fathers, are vain; unless more weighty matters be behind. For ye proclaim
and condemn all for Heretics, which do not obey the Roman Church, and ye
teach openly that no credit is to be given to them. In the mean time ye
stir up the Peers of this Realm one against another by your diverse ways
and devises: ye sow discord between the magistrates and the subjects; and by
your unspeakable subtilty ye cause variances in this Empire. By which your
deceiptfull stratagem ye have showed your companions to be most deceiptfull;
that your promises are esteemed as rotten nuts; yea a rusticke honesty is
better than this your learned malice.

You promise all things upon oath, but in the end you keep none. And good
reason: for what religion does bind them to the law, whom their own religion
and the Popes Bull do free from all bonds of Law? You make a politic mixture
of those things which belong to the honor of God and his word, by saying; As
though conscience were not so much to be kept in politic matters. Do not we
know these things (good men) we do altogether think with him, That there is no
greater deceit in all injustice then is in them, who then, when they most
deceive, do it, that they may seem to be good men. And truly, they seem most
strange to us enquiring, why faith amongst the Jesuits should want followers:
Afterward it was told us that it was provided amongst you long ago by a
special edict, that any man may provide for other good men by his last will;
that faith cannot be said hereditary. All the true professors of the Gospel
in the Sacred Roman Empire shall for ever endanger their lives and safety
unless they be careful, provident, and watchful in these and such like
matters. Good God, was it possible that these things should come to our cares?

Believe it (o Fathers) even your instruments and means by which you do these
things; much more your wicked deeds themselves are known to us.

You have Sermons; this is a great matter; which like a canker spread abroad:
by which also you aim at the end of the Orator, which is, to persuade, and
draw others into his own opinion. To these are added your actions and most
strange variations in your behauiours and carriages, by which you allure the
wayward common people; which do become the seller of victuals a iuggler or
baud, beter then they become a Pulpet. As the Trecensian judgment in France is
of Father Binet.

Neither have you Sermons only (o Fathers) but confessions also, this is
greater: by these the condition of every private house, and of the goodmen of
the houses, the secrets of the whole commonwealth or Kingdom, where you live;
yea the secrets of the Roman Empire and their neighbors are known to you. By
these (we say again) you deservedly domineere over the consciences of men, and
by compelling whom you will to unlawful things, you moderate all things by
your own reason: because it is written: Whose sins you shall remit, they
are remitted; and whose sins you retain, they are retained.

By this place iniust contracts are made with you, commandments, or wicked and
turbulent counsels are enjoined with a gentle buzzing, things iniustly gotten
are kept still: loves and unlawful marriages are not only not broken off, but
oftentimes are contracted: In a word, the court is kept here.

To these truly (that I may speak with you) penetent men may be compelled by
the priest. For neither was power granted in vain to the Apostles and their
successors by Christ, as well to bind as to loose.

Lastly, (o Fathers) this is your chiefest device: you have two sorts of
disciples here; all for your own use and profit: one of them, murderers of
heretic Kings and Peers, as you call them. whom you never cease to incense
and animate with all diligence and care, as also with promises of getting
perpetual glory, and of escaping Purgatory. Who can here resist so many armed
men?

The other sort of your disciples are the sons of great men, whom while you
teach so, that when the perfection of wit in them shall come at length to the
top and height of knowledge, you so bind unto you, together with their
parents, that you may have sufficient by the help of these, wherewithal you
may live, and increase your companies and religion. You instill Logike and
Rhetorike into them, that they may be Sophisters. This, that they may defend
any doubt, persuade false things, and open the doors to your companions
amongst all men. There the truth is overwhelmed with deceiptfull distinctions
sophistications, equivocations, and mental euasions; here it is overwhelmed
with a trimnesse of words, and with a Ciceronean eloquence. And I gave my heart
(says the Preacher) that I might know Wisdom and Learning, and my Errors and
folly.

And not to omit the divinity, which we hear that you reach, you have a
singular method therein, (as becomes singular men) by which all of your
teaching do expound the Bible philosophically, and Philosophy like Divinity;
so that Aristotle may feed on the flower of their youth, Satan may rightly
challenge to himself the rest thereof.

O good Jesus, how these wicked men do pretend with their Atheism thy most
holy name to the destruction of all mankind? But what boldness and rashness
is it of yours (o Fathers)? we will not say impudency, that you should come
out of the Pulpit (which was bestowed upon you in Bohemia,) into the Court, and
attempt to adminish the weight and worth of his Majesty's letters, by a diverse
interpretation, and wrested explication of the words? that you read Elias
Donat, Catoes Dislikes, the Compendium of Logic, or the Epitome of
Rhetoric: when ye disputed the Letters not confirmed by the Pope; wrested
from Rodolphus, by the urging and constraining of the Bohemians, that you
taught the sum of Phisicks, the extract of Metaphisiks, a breuiary of the whole
world; when you said that these letters were not subscribed of all: Lo we
swear unto you, that you had still remained in your rest and quietness, if
omitting these public, you had contained your selves in your own private
matters, and in the mean time (being so busied) had better indoctrinated the
children: So it falls out as often as any transgresses the limits of his
profession, and so, I know not by what destiny he is justly punished for his
curiosity: Nature has given to all men to be happy, if any knew how to use it.
Who also had this saying, Let every one remain within his own fortune.

Moreover, O Fathers, you have drawn to you wonderful goods: and that you
might be still daily more wealthy, you were come to that height, that leaving
your priestly function, you were not ashamed to intrude your selves into the
secular government. Hereupon you are proclaimed the subuerters of the common
good, the enemies and destroyers of the kingdom, which custom of yours seems
very feeble. For the Kings of the gentiles bear rule: and they which have
power over them are liberal: But you not so, it is your part not to reign,
but to use the rod, and to shake the feruloe within the territories of your
kingdom. This we think belongs to you (o Fathers) that we may speak
truly. It is one thing to weaken, another thing to entreat, this belongs to
you. It is one thing to obey, another thing to command; that belongs to you.
It is fitting to keep priests in the state of humility and obeisance. We (o
good Fathers) but that you go in an outward show and title of holiness, which
has a shadow of virtue; would by these relations call your vile company,
wicked, adulterate, to whom it is pleasant to deceive: they had rather have a
great name, then a good name: while they cannot be known by their virtues,
they desire to be known by their wickednesses. The end of your actions does
declare that, which is, to bring in subjection not only these two Kingdoms,
but the whole Roman Empire; yea all the whole world to the Spanish and Romish
bondage.

YEa it is not the least amongst the greeuances of the Hungarians, for which
you are driven out of that Kingdom, namely that by your helps and persuasion
truce is made between the Turks and our men: only that the strength of the
house of Austria might be kept whole and sound for the rooting out of all
Heretics (as you term them) out of Gremany. And hereupon you stir up a
Bishop elsewhere in the City, that he would build a fortress or tower, to the
hurt of his potent neighbor; and to the disprofit of all professors of the
Gospel. The love of the Dublines elsewhere keeps no measure amongst the
counsailers, whom you disgrace and stain with a Portugallike liberality.
Whereupon one professor of the Gospel is exceeding mistrustfull to another:
and although they seem to incline to friendship, we know not what hand
oftentimes does cause contention. O strife, o cruel strife; o strife sprung
from the furies and hell it self. All excellency of true professors of the
Gospel is by you trodden down, and (behold the Authors of discord) is come to
nothing. This (o Fathers Jesuits) is your crafty device; by which you might
give from hand to hand the sacred Roman Empire to the Pope and Spaniard as
perpetual dictatours, but that Mercury the governor of sleep had lately
(although too too late) stirred us up.

This is your end; who can hope for better means by which you atchiue your
end? Lucius Mummius taking Corinth reserved not so much as an halfpeny to
himself of so many inestimable spoils: you do not thirst after our goods, or
liberty, but even after our very blood. Your letters proclaim this, your plots
and stratagems in Commataw, and elsewhere do proclaim it. For your auncienter
wickednesses in France, and Spain, are odious unto us. Have you not yet heard
how some blood-sucker of your own order in the year of our Lord, 1582. spoke?
but that we knew it was one of the Emperors house, we should have sworn it
had bin written in Caucasus.

How Germany may safe be held,
Take my advise (thou Reader mild:)
O Caesar use thy power, the servants all of Luther,
With sword, with wheel, with sea,
With ropes, with fire, eke bemurther.
We tremble to repeat your filthy Spanish exploits (which is your praise)
surely you have thought of that same old saying of yours; If I cannot move the
gods above, I will trouble the devils below. So your works are unprofitable,
and the work of iniquity is in your hands: your feet do run to mischief,
and do make have to spill innocent blood. These are the things which have
caused you to be banished.

For what would it have been, if the Bohemians or Hungarians, should have
contended any longer with words? They said with Cato, moved with the
reproaches of a certain man; we have an unequal condition of striving with
you: for as it is most easy for you to speak ill, and to hear ill; so it is
unpleasant to us to speak ill, and unaccustomed to hear ill. But get ye gone
rather ye Jesuits, never return into these Kingdoms. So the days of the
wicked shall be shortened. And what other remedy is there? Agar and her son
Ismael attempted to stir up strife, dissensions and contentions, also to sow
the greatest discord between Abraham and Sara. Can a wise father of a family
wink at these things? he can never do it: rather let him cast out the
bondwoman with her son. Which thing is done; who can say it is ill done?
furthermore the Bohemians are not privy to any fault in your setting forth of
shows: unless happily passing by, they appoint a popular action against the
act of eiection and banishment: which those crafty and nimble actours, and able
knaves do (we speak these things again (o Fathers) lest we too much smart
for them) not retained and kept in darkness; but openly restored into the City
Prague; and so the air is a fresh infected. In the mean while (not nimble in
relating) the Bohemians do wonder at your nimblenesse in dancing, accusing
nature that she made not you actors and tumblers. The report goes (for what
do we standing any longer upon these) that in times past chastity and
continency were amongst the Catholic brethren: we believe it, but in that
age: when innocence was honored, simplicity extolled; and poverty esteemed: now
what sink is not more clean then this state of Priests? ye are truly the
Fathers of your country: the Bohemians have found your key which you have lost
or laid aside: they now behold your effeminate apparel and household stuff.
Thus they see, and thoroughly see now that which so many religious men of you
have locked up, who are whoremongers, adulterers, lewd persons, Sodomiticall,
Parricides, murderers of Kings, disdainefull, warre-makers, Atheists,
Epicures, malefactors, truce breakers, tyrants, in a word, who are all
wickedness. Ye shall know them by their fruits, as it is written. Where you
intrude your selves, you make your selves Lords; these, servants, which the
Preacher foreseeing, says; I saw the servants riding, and the Princes walking
on foot, like servants. Marriages also are contracted amongst some (of which
you are the authors) without the consent of parents: they talk of this in
every town, village, and company in Flanders, Italy and Germany. You steal
away their eldest sons; France does witness this. You take away their only
sons from their Parents, that ye may afterward be possessors of their goods,
and so relieve and help your own companies. And this is your sure Vulcans
shield; by which you were so noted, that Spain did urge you to change these
your wicked practices; that the elders of the families might be secure from
your inuations.

Pliny (I believe) foreknewe this your religiousnesse; saying, Many do fear
an ill report, few an ill consience. But you deal warily, in that you are not
ashamed to teach openly, that you are subject to no government in the world but
to the Sea of Rome. Who therefore shall judge you in these coasts? Shall the
Pope? Unless the Bohemians and Hungarians by chance do come between: You
teach the youth for nothing; but for nothing? This appears by your Religious
houses; by the most Princely and stately Theaters in them: on which you have
Comedies acted, full of a poetical or Heathenish delights; How faith is not to
be kept with Heretics; How Evangelical faith is to be rooted out with Luther
and Calvin, and such like things, that you may be the better emboldned, you
spend whole days with your Scholars in these delights and pleasures; and the
nights also do you pass over on this wise: you are become so brazen faced
through these your doings, that shortly you may learn to be quite shameless.
Hence it is no marvel that you are Winebibbers, Effeminate, stately, and full
of money. Your Scholars bring you Gold as much as they can; that they may
never ouerloade you. Is virtue to begotten after money? We let pass to speak
of your companions in certain well ordered Cities; that one example of Father
Swares shall suffice you, which we commit to your moist memory in these things.
But who are they whom you teach for nothing? Are they poor? truly no; they
are Heirs of great riches and large Possessions. These will not suffer your
Society to want for riches. We wonder that you know not these things. You know
many things, and do you not know your selves? The sum of Philosophy bids;
Know thy self. So no man knows how much he knows not. You read Danus in
Terence, but you do not see how you disturb and confound all things. You
read of the Giants in Virgill; but how you your selves do wage War with
heaven and all the gods, you do not know. You read of the Cyclops in
Euripides; but you see not how you fear neither God nor man. Truly it is more
then Cymmerian darkness you are in; unless you happily imitate Socrates, who
knew only this, that he knew nothing. But why do we prosequte these things
with style and words? One thing we add of those huge ones, before we bring in
the Conclusion. You Jesuits were mere Aeoluses, who sent your boisterous
Northern and Eastern winds upon this age, and the whole Roman Empire: that
you might only obtain the most cursed end of your Sect; namely, the
Monarchy of the whole world, and subject all the Kingdoms of the World to the
Sea of Rome. Hence do troubles compass us about like unto Numida, and new
waves amongst the surges. O when shall we be in that pure and certain calm,
which you have covered with clouds, that shortly will cause a tempest. The
ashes which you spread abroad seem to return to you, ready to burn up your
Society. The holy Scripture says, In the multiplying of the wicked,
wickedness shall be multiplied, and the just shall see their falls. But that
we may make an end of these things which we say by the report of others, do
not think (O Fathers Jesuits) that we would hurt any of your Society hereby;
for they are not ours: but such as long since were objected against you by the
whole world: which things, because you have not answered; I thought good to
move, not for vpbrayding, but for conference sake.

It is not possible (me think) that Religion and so many wickednesses should
dwell together in one College: which if you should suffer to reside upon you,
surely we would say that you are the worst of all that go on two feet: whose
bodies are hardened with so many skarres of villainy and wickednesses, that
there is no room for another stroke. But, though we know no other by you, yet
we hope better. For whither you go; you immitate the Nouensilian gods. Do you
make speeches? your lips are besmeered with Ciceronian eloquence. Do you
laugh? the Graces seem to be in your eyes. Do you pray? All the Martyrs are
beheld in your countenances. Do ye line? you are chaster then the Monks of
Syria, called Escenor: so that if you should chance to see dogs and bitches
together in the street you would turn away your faces like Clotomicus; for
they that have honest minds have tender foreheads, as Simocus writes. You are
more abstinent from Wine, then Fulgentius, sometime Bishop of Ruspanary: you
do almost go beyond Elias who lived in the Wilderness near the Brook
Carith. What are Paul the first Hermit, Antony, Hillarion, Patroclus; and
others, in their austere solitary lives, which are marriages in respect of your
austesterity? Will the world needs be deceived? Let it be gulled, we speak
sparingly of your praises, lest those truths we tell should be blotted with a
suspicion of flattery: we could not choose but set down the things
forementioned that it might appear what opinion Germany has of you, and that
we might hold you no longer pining in suspense of expectation, if you be not
guilty of the aforesaid knaueries, surely there must be some secret
auersation, or contrariety of nature which made these Countries spue ye out,
as some men's stomachs do Cheese, or Fish, or Oil, which proceeds not of any
known cause, but from a certain Antipothy of nature: whereof in imitation of
Marshial the Poet we may say: I love thee not O Jesuit,
The cause thereof I cannot write:
But this I wot, I love thee not.


Grave Fathers we can say no more to this unless there be some strange and
hidden disease in ye: it is wonderful what should be the reason why all true
Germans should openly profess, that all Cities and Towns are desperately
sick where there be any nests of Jesuits: surely there must be some contagious
diseas that sticks to your Companies, or else you are tormented with some other
maladies of the Stone or burning Feauers, or turmoiling of your loins, else why
are found in your Coleges, such groaning chaires as women use in Childbirth.
Homer tells of of one that was angry because Thirsites sat in council among the
Princes, and shall we be so patient to suffer those to dwell among us that are
ouerrunne with I know not what scuruy foul evil? Surely, it were fitter that
all of your rank were swept out of al Germany, then be let in adores where
they have bin once fairly rid of ye. Why should Germany let ye set footing in
more places then ye have already, the Monistary which you seek are profitable
for our Churches and schools which are not to be robbed that you might enjoy
them. It should go very hard with us if your Lettine should be song amongst
us, we mean that Letany by which ye song to death two Popes, Clement the 8. who
in the disputation concerning Grace did set you out in your colors; and Sixtus
the fifth who was your professed enemy: if ye will not deal so with us, we will
afford ye our counsel and help, but upon this condition, that ye keep your
selves within the limits of your Schools, and affect not hereafter the
intermedling of State matters.

Augustus Caesar might be your Prtrone, who though he were a man made of the
best moulde, yet often wished his own quiet and desired to be vacant from the
affairs of government, that he might live to himself, and to the Muses: why
should not your great spirits do so? and let Kings handle their own Scepters:
whilst ye strive to clime thus high, ye make your selves ridiculous. Keep
your selves in the middle course, hold ye to your own station; that is, read
Grammar to young youths: It was good advise given of old; That which thou art
desire to be,
And wish not other lotte (...) to thee.


The place which ye are to be sent, must be suitable to your religious Sect,
such a one we commend unto you, being very fit for your Confession and whole
course of life. We have found a place where you may have your School, your
Innes, your Hospitals, your Prisons, your Chayres, your Churches and places of
Confession: here ye may exercise your fasting and seuerest discipline, or
rather a temperate and medecinall diet; if your iollity here be over clowded
some time with sorrow, you must remember how brave a thing it is to bear
stripes manfully, but you will ask where this religious holy place is, whither
we would send ye, it is in Amsterdam in the Low countries, the Saint that is
worshipped in this religious and miraculus place is called Saint Rorspine, and
his College that is joined with them is Saint Ponus, the place is sittuate in
the way nere the holy street, and because you love wholesome Air well: here is
that admirable good temper of the Air which can never be expressed, though a man
hard as many tongues as there be flies in Armenia, at Amsterdam, by reason of
the sea incompassing and interlacing, there is perpetual traffic, so that
hereby ye may have opportunity to do that which Jesuits much busy themselves
withal; namely to send and receive daily intelligence from far Countries,
this is a fair pull for you, but yet there is more behind: our Masters of
Amsterdam are somewhat ouerhonest, and easily taken with men that make
profession of religious order, and by reason of the monstrous miracles that are
daily performed, they give very large offerings to this saint Rorspine and his
fellow; they cease not every day to offer up most precious Francomscence to
this god, and to account his Priest the top of their friends, and because
they know that ye love fair and large houses, they promise that if this house
be to little for you, they will enlarge it, and add other houses to it; and
all for Saint Rorspine sake, and Saint Ponus, and for the Brotherhood of the
Jesuits: and here might ye have good opportunity to spread your Religion and
instructions, for that many that have a Catholic vain are brought daily to
Amsterdam by wooden horses, who would acount it great gain for them that you
are received into Saint Rorspines sanctuary, and there ye should be rid of the
daily fear of being banished or being torn asunder like Acteon with his
Dogs. If ye have any secret disease which ye would be ashamed to confess in
the Temple of Esculapius, ye may be bold with this Saint, who will be willing
to heal your sores if ye shall do thus, and ply the people as they shall be
sent to your school, ye may laughe at the great Statse-men that are
endangered by the factions of the people, and are feign to fish with a golden
hook, whilst your selves sit quiet in the midst of all storms. And now
there shall be no more Pilgrimages taken to our Lady of Loretto, or of Hales,
saint Rorspine shall take up all the custom, that shall rob all other
shrines of miracles, there shall we hear how many has been healed by the
power of saint Rorspine, by the intercession of saint Ponus, here was one freed
from a burning Ague, there another bursten guts healed: John Fuks a soldier of
Scotland recovered his health by singular devotion and ceaselesse prayer.
Francis Rosse at Anwerpe was in the like manner cured of a dangerous
melancholy disease by the same intercession: Another likewise of a lame
Creeple was made as nimple as a dauncer: Another voyded a worm out of his body
of a huge length. And this same saint Rorspin in the year 1610. did cure a
certain Irishman of the Falling sickness, and cast a Devil out of a woman at
Lewarden. Nay, the very name of saint Rorspine being uttered in the hearing of
the sick will make them as whole as a Fish. In the year 1602. when the plague
was so ripe in Amsterdam, it never touched this holy place, the inhabiters
thereof were in so good health, that their skins were so full as they could
hold for cracking: Besides these, many Miracles are done in France, Italy, and
Spain, but there a man must believe them, and make himself blind to see
them. But our Saints Miracles does bulk up a Gods name, though a man has no
belief in them, there remain visible evidences of them which hang up in the
Church of Fame. And that we be not silent of the houses provided for our
Fathers the Jesuits, the house provided for them is a fair Palace, the Roof
of it is covered with Brass, the Pauement of Marble and Porfree Chechered in
diverse colors, wherein are artificially engraven the story of all their
Miracles, a stately Veil is sustained with three Pillars, between which
runs a Fountain whose water gusheth out through the throat of a seven
headed Hydra. Here may the Jesuits enjoy all those recreations and pleasures
which their minds or bodies incline unto: haste your selves hither Jolly
Fathers, the Amsterdamians do earnestly look for your coming, St. Rorspine
and Saint Ponus expect your service, make no delay to hoise up Sail for
Amsterda^, good fortune will blow a full gale in the poope of your fervent
desires.

They ended their speech, and the good Fathers the Jesuits, would have bin
weeping ripe at these words, but that there faces are made of Bell-mettell,
they set a good face on it, and devour their grief, and with a seeming good
courage proclaim that they are all for St. Rorspine; they trusse up their
Trinkets, and provide for Amsterdam, three days hence they take Wagon where
they sit fix of them, by two and two; their most nimble and officious Waggoner
is Arnold the Advocate of the Parliament of Paris, he that made the famous
Oration in the behalf of the University of Paris, he gets up with the whip in
his hand, and lays about him so lustily, that he flies with his luggage
through the country, the people that see this Chariot scour along so fast,
give many reasons of this gallopping; the wisest among them say, that Arnolt
makes this haste with his carriage, lest perhaps these Fathers should sneake
away and go into France, and there not only swarm in the Jesuit Colleges,
but also creep into the Kings Court and Counsel, and so domineere that no man
dare open his lips against them. Thus the Jesuits flew out of the country
as it were with the wings of Peggasus, and no marvel, for no man would hold up
his finger to stay them, whether Papist or Protestant. The Superior Commanders
among the Jesuits rid thus in pomp, but the ordinary frye of them did laky it
out on foot, and carried every one his pack at his back, and these were as
proud as their masters that rid, and would be thought to imitate the
Apostles: and as they went in Procession, they chaunted a Letany to saint
Rorspine making the faberdum of their song, Nunc dimittis Seruos tuos Domine:
whereto Germany sung an Ecco, Iusta sunt iuditia tua Domine.

Thus I have delivered in brief, the relation of the sending of the Jesuits
of Bohemia and Hungary on a long arrante to Saint Rorspine; whereto I add
nothing else but that it is hoped that all Germany will furnish their Wagons
with all their Jesuits to follow their Fellows on this journey: the eyes of
great many of the greatest have been long time hoodwinked, and the dark night
cast over them, but now that veil vanishes and clear light appearing,
discovers the danger which hangs over the Empire, so that now small
brabling controversies being laidaside, the Princes of the Empire will have an
eye to the public, and forasmuch as they see that all this danger and
mischief does arise from the Jesuits, why should not they begin at the right
end with casting them out, and it being evident, that these are spies and
underminers for the advancing the Spanish Monarchy? Why should they not be more
jealous of them then of the Ottoman Empire. Spain boasts that the Empire of
the West is due to them by destiny, upon this hope, they which had their
beginnings from the Mores and Sarizens, go on to work their own ends by
their bloody Inquisitions. This creeping Gangreine must be cut off lest it grow
to far in the Low Countries, in Italy, France and England. What Privy
Counsels of State are there in Germany unrevealed to the Spaniard? Where has
he not in other countries his Pensioners for intelligence, and his party among
the Counselors of State linked to him with a golden chain? What Diets or
public meetings have we, the secrets whereof are not known to the Spaniard,
as well as to them that sit in those Parliaments? A thing most pernicious to
our States, and dishonorable to the name of Germany.

What Prince or people is there of the reformed Religion, whom the Spaniard
does not think he has as just cause to ruin, as to quell the Turks or
Pagans? Nor is this just fear to be found in Protestants, but it concerns
them also that are pure Roman Catholics. Were not the Fredirankes, Othoes, and
Henry's, think you, good Catholics? yet drunk they of this cup. They that
will not believe that all the Bishoprics in the Empire were promised by the
Spaniard to the Jesuits. They that would rather have the Spaniard rule over
them then a Caluinist, or Lutheran Prince, let them expect the reward which he
gave to the Neopolitans and Portugales: Vestram animam pertranscibit gladius:
the Jesuits Creed is, that there is one God, one Pope, and one Catholic or
Universal King.

Be wise O ye Kings, ye have an enemy as full of gold as Midas, who has in
readiness, in diverse Garrisons, for any exploite thirty thousand Spaniards,
all old beaten Soldiers. Moreover he sends out his Firebrandes into Europe,
Africa, Asia and America, and into the East and West Indies also. He
commands Lucitanta, with the most fertile Isles and Kingdoms of Oceanus:
besides Italy, and he thirsts after your prosperity: Your prosperity? That
suffices not, but he thirsts after your blood: he is potent. But he will
never disturb you, if these his grounds be broken by united forces. But O good
God! How men are most secure in their dangerousest and most hazardablest
matters? O ye Lords and Princes of the Empire, if all the Spaniards hear me,
let them view with a curious eye the Lands situated with long distance of
place, to which they deny passage; they cut off aid, and do waste all places:
this is a hard matter, but he will put to his hand again that the Spaniard may
bring forth the extremest of his cruelty and tyrranny, that the Subjects
lamentably should see the last Act of the Tragedy: whose heart does ache through
the fear and horror of the Spaniard, that they can desire nothing but occasion
how they may get out of this bondage into their former liberty.

Let us see the Belgie destitute of all hope, they shaked off his yoke they
retained the Field: let us see the Prince of Auratia: the huge number of
Soldiers he derideth and explaudeth them and their mad attempts. And that I
may go no farther (o Princes and Peers) who are ye? are ye not Germans?
surely altogether the same. Now the dignity and power of the German Empire
is not to be measured, by the greatness of Countries and people but by the
united faith, power and fortitude; by these (but what do I stand to say it)
you shall overcome the Kingdoms of the whole world if ye be of one mind; I
say your dignity (oh ye Peers of the German Empire) and power are mighty
if they be united. Oh ye States of the Empire, do not suffer that Heroycall
virtue and those divine forces to be extinct in the Germaynes: by which ye
have tamed the whole World, but exercise your valiant breasts and unconquered
strength against these Massing Priests; and do ye all meet and agree in one
holy league against your professed and sworn enemies, if any generositie or
courrage remain in you, show it, but if otherwise, I, like another Cynicke,
will laffe at your sluggishnes and Lethorgie: and will say, that I cride out in
vain to this age, which has a great number of sleepers and very few wakers:
hear a parradox, I will give you a great precept if you will remain great,
Cauete, Consulite, Vigilate, this is only nescessary in this age, Hoc agite.

Thou in the mean while good and courtious Reader be favorable, and fare thou
well, if there be any pleasant speech let it redound to our loueing Country,
and also to thy pleasant and favorable judgment, in the mean time do not
esteem and think it my purpose to speak of any Classicke thing to wheet one
and stire up the Professors of the Gospel against the Catholics; to add
fuel to that public fire; I have another mind that the sweetenes of concord
might shine between the Professors of the Gospel and the Catholics in this
Empire: which the Iesuitticall and Spanish Clouds have not only obscured but
almost extinguished, these Iesuitticall and Spanish wickednesses, have drawn
the speeches from me against my will; we unfeignedly embrace these sincere
affection of the rest of the Catholics in this Empire, and with our united and
conjoined forces (as it becomes brethren in one Land,) we do seek remedy
for these public evils; I did write with a troubled pen, in a troublesome
year: wherein we see that good men are pressed down and evil men set up, and
wicked men pressed down and good men set up.

FINIS.

