THE Opinion, Judgment, and Determination of two reverend, learned, and
conformable Divines of the Church of England, concerning bowing at the name, or
naming of JESUS.

The one sometime a member of the Vnivertie of Cambridge, in a letter to his
Christian friend: The other sometime a member of the University of Oxford, in
a Treatise to his Brethren the Ministers of the Church of England.

To the most Reverend, GEORGE, Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. and to the right
reverend the rest of the Orthodox Bishops of the the Church of England: This
twofold Tractate is inscribed and commended.

Printed at Hambourgh, 1632. Reprinted Anno 1634.

Mr. H. B. Bachelour in Divinity to his Christian friend H. D. residing at H.
concerning bowing and doffing at the name of JESUS.
LOving and beloved friend, being pressed by your Christian importunity, to
declare my opinion in a poinct, which though it may seem to be of small
importance, and less consequence, yet has proved matter of no small
controversy, and fuel to set on ^ire some tongues, of those that would
^eeme and affect to be some great Clerks; ^o as they have not spared in the
Pulpit ^like proper Squires, but improper Preachers, to break forth into
bitter invectives, and have, as it were with the finger pointed at some, who
have crossed the opinion herein; I thought it my duty t^ satisfy your desire,
for your self, and you^ Christian friends; not to justify my self but the
Truth of God, whose Children and Scholars we profess to be, so as w^ ought to
speak nothing against but for that Truth; herein having our Maste^ Christ for
our Precedent, who says: For this cause came I into the World, Ioh. 18, 37
that ^ should bear witness to the Truth.

The poinct in question is, about bovv^^ing the Knee at the name or naming o^
Jesus.

They that are for it, and tooth an^ nail do urge it, press us with
Antiquity, and Authority. Antiquity is venerable^ indeed, if grounded on
Verity, Antiquity is Ancient. Else, as Tertullianus says, Consuctudo sine
veritate vetustas erroris est Tertull.
Custom without truth is but an old moath-eaten Error. But this Custom (say
they) is grounded upon, and backed by a double Authority: the one of the
Church, the other of the express syllables of the Scripture. The authority of
the Scripture is to be adored, the authority of the Church to be obeyed, when
grounded ^n the Scripture.

First then, let us see what Antiquity ^n say for the poinct. Hinc non dubito
quin profecta sit illa antiquissima co^suetudo in Ecclesijs, ut cum nominatur
Jesus, omnes apperiu^t caput, in testimoniu^ revere^tiae and adorationis, etc.
Zanch. in Phil. 2. 10
Zanchius is spe^ally here alleged, who says, Hinc non abito, etc. Hence I
doubt not, but that most ancient custom sprang up in Churches, that ^hen Jesus
is named, all uncover their heads, ^ token of reverence and adoration. Zanchy
^ubts it not, but with all he proves it ^t. Only he adds, This Custom (says
(...)) was confirmed against the Arrians, ^^d other Heretics, who affirmed
this Ie^^s to be a mere man. And this Custom ^as not to be disliked, but
afterward it ^as turned into Superstition, as also many ^^her pious and holy
institntions. So he.

Now, it had been well, if this learned ^uthor had distinctly set down, both
^hen this Custom was instituted and ^nfirmed, and when turned into super^tion,
that so we might be resolved, whe^er the capping or crowching now in (...) be
not the Relic of that superstition mentioned. Perhaps he fetches the first
^^stitution from the Counsel of Mentz, under Charles the Great Anno 813. cap.
Pari religione ad nomen Salvatoris nostri D. Jesus Christi, similiter ad
Eua^gelium, Magnificat, Benedictus, Nunc dimittis, Gloria in Excelsis, Gloria
Patri, ceteras que id genus divinorum officiorum parts, sic genuum flexione,
apertione Capitis, ac totius corporis gestu se component, ut ad ea, quae ibi
aguntur animum intendere videantur. Synopsis Pap. 9. General controversy
concerning the saints departed.
59. as set down by our reverend Doc^^tour Willet, in his Synopsis Papismi,
Par^^ religione, etc. Let men with the like devotion at the name of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, as likewise at the Gospel, the Magnifica,
Benedictus nunc dimittis, Glo^ria in Excelsis, Gloria Patri, and other part of
the Divine Service, so commpose themselv^ by bowing the knee uncovering the
head, an^ the like gesture of the whole body, as the may seem to have their
mind occupied (...) those things that are done. So the Counsel whereupon Dr.
Willet says this: I no^ out of this Decree 3 things; First, that the should
bovv at the name of Christ, as well a when Jesus is named; Secondly, that the
lik^ reverence should be used, when as other psalms are sung, and when
mention is man of the Father, and the Holy Ghost, as in the Gloria Patri;
Thirdly, that this gestur^ should not be done in reverence to name Words, or
Syllables so pronounced, but on^ to declare our attention.

Thus then we see, that this Superstitions Custom, in bowing to the name of
Jesus only, ^s contrary even to their own Popish Ca^ons and Decrees. The like
thing also was decreed Synod. Augustens. cap. 23. So he.

This then happily being the institution mentioned by Zanchy, let us enquire
out the time, when it began to be ^e turned to superstition. In the 13.
Centurie, about Anno 1273. at Lions in France was a General Counsel held,
where Pope Gregory the 10. instituted this Superstitious Custom, now in use
in the Popish Synagogues. Genua cunctoru^ fidelium ad mentionem S. Sti. nominis
Jesus, non solu^ corpore, sed, mente etiam flecti ibidem decernitur. Epitome
mundi Cent. 13. ca. 9. de Synodis. Convenientes ibidem nomen illud, quod est
supra omne nomen, a quo aliud subo caelo non est datum hominibus in quo salvos
fieri crede^ tes oporteat, nome^ vid. Jesus Christi qui salvum faciet populum
suum exhibitione revere^tiae specialis attollant, and quod generaliter
scribitur ut in nomine Jesus omne genu flectitur, singuli sin gulariter
inseipsis imple^tes, precipue dum agu^tur Missarum sacra mysteria, gloriosum
illud, Nome^quoties cunque re colitur fl^ctant genua cordis sui, quod vel
capitis sui inclinatione testentur.
The Centuriatours set down the Counsel words: Convenientes ibidem, etc. Let
the people, assembling in the church, with an exhibition of special reverence
honor that name, which is above every name under Heaven given to men, whereby
believers must be saved, to weet, the name of Jesus Christ, who shall save his
people from their sins; and which is generally written, that in the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, every one performing it for himself in particular,
and especially while the sacred mysteries of the Mass are in hand, so often as
that glorious name is named, let them bow the knee of their hearts, testifying
it with the bowing down of their heads. So the Counsel. And these very words
of the Counsel are recorded also in the Decretales of Boniface the S. in Sexti
lib. 3. De immunitate Ecclesiae Tit. 23. cap. 2. Decret.

Now, hereby the way, it will not be impertinent to note some coincident
circumstances of the time of this superstitious Institution. Pope Gregory, the
Author of it, was he, who of an Archdeacon was chosen Pope, after 3 years
vacancie of the Popedom, such was the dissension and ambition of the
Cardinals, each aspiring to make himself Pope, (...) that being assembled at
Viterbium, to elect the Pope, and invocating the coming down of the Holy
Ghost, one of the Cardinals said: O Lord, let us uucover the roof of this
House, because the Holy Ghost cannot come down amongst us, through ^o many
roofes and seelings. And when ^his Archdeacon was chosen Pope, the same
Cardinal made this Distick; Papatus munus tulit Archidiaconus unus: Platina in
vita Gregorij Papae 10.

^t Patrem Patrum fecit discordia fratrum,
The Papal Throne befell an Archdeacone, An. 1230.

Whom breth'rens jarre made Father of Fathers one.


This may note the corruption pride and ambition of that Age, wherein this
superstition obtained a Papal Institution. The superstition, if not Idolatry,
is palpable: Note.
for we see honor and adoration ^oth of mind and body, is given to the ^ery
Name Jesus, whenever it is named, and that especially during the Mystery of
the Mass; as if this name had some singular virtue, when mentioned in the
Mass, more then out of all the Mass. And who doubts, but this superstitious
Institution was a notable means to mask the abominable Idol of their
transubstantiate breaden God, not long before decreed by Pope Innocent 3. in
the Counsel of Lateran; the adoring now of the very name of jesus, making the
adoration of the corporal presence of Christ (as they imagine) the less to be
stuck at; For if the very name be to be adored, much more the body it self.
And by this bowing in the Mass, I take it, our ignorant people, in the
beginning of the Reformation, had learned to make legs at the naming of Jesus
in the time of the Gospel, especially when the Gospel was not preached. But
this may suffice briefly to have showed the Gibeonitish, See Sr. Edwin Sa^dye
his Europae speculum, 1629. pa. 16. This pope lived about the year 103.
mouldie and hoary Antiquity of this superstitious Institution, set up by
Antichrist, not above 355 years ago.

Not but that this superstition was in use long before. As, Pope John the 20.
gave Indulgence of 20 years pardon so often as any bowed at the name of Jesus;
not unpractized in Italy at this day.

Now, to the avouched for this adoration; and 1. of the Church. For this the
15. Canon is alleged. The words are, When in time of Divine Service the Lord
Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly reverence shall be done of all persons
present, as it has been accustomed. Now first, who will understand that this
due reverence is to be done, only in time of Divine Service, and not also of
the Sermon? This might seem to come too close at the heels of Popish
Superstition.

Secondly, it is not said (as in the Papal Canon) When the name of Jesus is
named: but, When the Lord Jesus is mentioned* Now, the Lord Jesus is the person
of Jesus (and not the name of Jesus) to whom all due reverence is to be done,
by what name soever he is in Scripture made known unto us. For do we
reverence the person for the namesake? or the name for the person-sake? If the
person for the namesake, that were flat Idolatry: but if the name for the
person-sake, then every name of the Lord Jesus, as Christ, Immanuell, etc.
should draw from us reverence to our Lord Christ.

Thirdly, the Canon wills due reverence to the Lord Jesus, and who so
imprudent, so impious, as to deny it? But this due reverence is such as is
grounded on Gods Word; Else, it is no due reverence, but will worship rather.
Now, Note.
Gods word putts no such difference between Jesus and Christ, as that we
should more worship the Lord Christ by the name Jesus, than the Lord Jesus by
the name Christ; as we shall see anon.

Fourthly, the Canon commands such reverence, as has been accustomed. Now, I
hope no good Protestant will say, that here we are sent to the superstitious
custom of the Synagogue of Antichrist, taken up from that Papal Institution
above named. For as for superstitious Ceremonies our Preface to the Communion
Book: of Ceremonies, why some abolished, some retained.
Church has long ago professedly abolished, and sent them packing to their
mother and inventer at Rome. But if any former custom founded upon the
Institution at Mentz (fore-specified) be there meant in the Canon, then this
due lowly Reverence, whatsoever it is, is to be done to Christ, whenever by
any of his names he is mentioned: as the Learned Doctor Willet (now with God)
has before observed.

In the second place, they press us with the Authority of the Scripture; what
Scripture? Phil. 2, 10. And has given him a name above every name, that at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow. But our comfort is, that the Canon
expresses no such thing, as grounding any such reverence upon this Scripture:
which is a thing well-worth our noting. Yet because many ground their bowing at
the Name of Jesus upon the said place, therein concurring with the Papal
Institution, forementioned: Let us a little examine the place.

First, our Church in all her Translations of the Bible, has by her judicious
collations, and marginall quotations of other places of Scripture with that
(Phil. 2. 10.) clearly interpreted the place to mean, the supreme and
Sovereigne Power of Christ over all Creatures, men and Angels, which shall be
fully accomplished at his coming to judge the quick and the dead, when all
knees shall bow unto him the knee of subjection, receiving at his mouth their
sentence, either of Absolution or Condemnation: For these purpose, one place
quoted in the margent, is Romans 14, and 11. the other Isai. 45, and 23. Both
which places show that the bowing of the knee is taken metaphorically,
betokening subjection and acknowledgement of Christ's supreme Authority over
all Creatures in Heaven, Earth, and under Earth, as sole Judge of all; So as
the name of Jesus is taken for the Power of Jesus Christ over all Creatures, as
Mark. 16. 17 Act. 3, 16, and 4, 10, Prove. 18, 10, and infinite places more, and
(...) in the original, in the vulgar Latin, and our eldest English
Translations render. In the name of Jesus. Not, at the name of Jesus. And
though revereud Beza render it, Ad nomen Jesus, yet in his Annotations he
interprets it of Subjection of all creatures to Christ, taking bowing of the
knee methaphorically, or in a borrowed sense.

Besides, this giving to Christ a name above every name, is not any addition,
but a manifestation of Christ's supreme Authority in the full execution of it,
as Mediator, now after his resurrection in the state of glory: as Matthew. 28,
18, and Ioh. 5, 21. His Godhead now shining forth in its full brightness (as
Romans 1, 4) Which had been cloweded under the veil of his flesh, in the State
of his humiliation, Phil. 2, 7, 8. Theoph: Filius Dei vocabitur, quae
appellatio universoru^ nomen excedit.
Theophylact by this name above every name, understands, the Son of God, which
Title surpasses all names. And Nullus nomen illud super omne nomen existe^s
populus Christi in hunc usque diem, praeterquam ad sanctam viuificantem
Trinitatem retulit. Naz. in Epist Germani Episcopi Constantinop, ad Thoma^
Episco. Claudiopollos. In Synodi Nycaenae 2. arti. 4.
Gregory Nazianzen understands it of the Holy Trinity, and says, that the
people of Christ to this day never understood it otherwise.

And Nomen super omne nomen est nomen explicans ineffabile^ potestatem and
naturam. Greg. Nyss. in Ecclesiastem homil. 7.
Gregory Nyssen says, that this name above every name does signify an
unspeakeable power and nature. And Nomen quod est supra omne nomen and cui n.
Angelorum dixit filius meus tu es.
S. Hierome in this place understands this name above every name of the Son
of God. Thus the old Interpreters.

To these I might add many more: as Hilary, Biblioth. Sacta. lib. 5. Annot.
150. to. 2.
cited by Sixtus Senensis; who expounds that in the second Psalm: I will give
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, etc. by Phil. 2, 10. So Tertullian; So
Origin. Genu. flectere, non est carnaliter accipie^du^, sed subjecta esse omnia
and cultui Dei obedire declarat.
Origin; So Cyril. Thesauri lib. 3. cap. 2. So Chrysostom de Iona Propheta;
Super verbis Zachariae, Ecce vir, Oriens nomen ejus. So Cyprian, expositio in
Symbolum Apostolorum. Christus tria pariter regna subjecit: hoc judicat, ubi
ait, Quia in nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur caelestium, etc. So Athanasius, de
incarnatione Christi. Et contra Arrianos lib. 2. Nomen super omne nomen: ut
regnaret in Coelis, and potestatem haberet judicij cu^ faciendi, etc. So Ambr.
in Phil. 2. So Augustine. in Psalm. 109. So Gloss. in^rlin. and Ordinar. Quia
Christus ostendi^r post Resurrectionem esse Dominus Caele^^stium, and
terrestrium, and infernorum, etc.

And all the Fathers ^nanimously runn (...) this strain. And among Popish
in^^rpreters, let the testimony of Aquinas ^^d Anselme suffice, understanding
it (...) the subjection of all Creatures. And ^^^uno: Donavit nomen, id est,
honorificen^^m, ut ad honorem Jesus, omne genu flecta^^^ ^d est, omnia ipsi
plene subjiciantur, Ho^ ^t in die judici^. And that this is the ^^e sense of
the place, according to o^^er Scriptures, the Church of England (...) testify,
which in the margent of the ^^glish Translations conferreth, Phil. (...) 10.
with Romans 14. 11. and Isay 45. 23. ^sal. 2. 10.

For the latter, let Beza speak: This name ^aith he signifies dignity, and
renown, ^t joined with the thing it self; as Ephe. (...) 21. For that
Osiander refers this to (...) very name of Jesus, which he confounded ^^th
Jehovah, is the mere doctage of a mad ^^utheran. So he.

Again, the Holy Ghost himself expounds the name of Jesus here, of (...)
person of Jesus, as Isa. 45. 23. and Rom* 14. 11. to which this place has
speci^^ reference; as also Mal. 1. 1. and Ioh. 12. ^* as also of the power of
Christ, Exodus 2^* 21. For my name is in him; that is, my ^^vine power is in him
(that Angel of (...) Covenant) to protect or punish.

To this purpose, the late Revere^^ Bishop Babington (one of the late
G^vernours of our Church) on the Lo^^ Prayer, the first Petition expounded
these words, [ that at the name of Jesus ^^^ry knee should bow] thus: that is
(says (...) not when the word is pronounced, we sho^^ make a courtesy, but we
shall all and ev^^ creature be subject to his power, authority, (...) dominion.
The place is worth the r^^ding at large: also in his exposition upon the Creed,
where confuting the Pop^^^ superstition about this name Jesus, as among the
rest, how by this name a so^^diour was helped out of S. Patricks P^^gatorie,
and the like: He says, I thi^^ the place to the Philippians is not well
und^^stood has and does deceive them. Indeed ^hey are easily deceived, that
will not ^earch ^o^ truth, and they are justly given ^ver to strong delusions,
that delight in ^rrou^, and have not a love of the Truth: (They lies do love
that ertours do defend,
And he is virtues fo, that is errors friend.)


Otherwise the place to the Philip^ians would not be so grossly mistake^, if
^^e ma^ke whence the Apostle took it, ^^d compare spiritual things with
spiri^uall things. The place is borrowed from the Prophet Isaih, and therefore
by ^onsequence evide^t, that the word name, ^ignifieth Power glory, honor,
and autho^itie, above all powers, glories, honors, and ^uthorities, and bowing
the knee, signifies ^ubjection, submission, and obedience of all Creatures to
his beck, rule, and Government.

This knew the ancient Fathers, S. Origin, (Non est carnaliter hoc
accipiendum, quasi caelestia, ut Sol, Luna, Angeli, genu^ aut lingua habeant:
Sed genu flectere significat, cuncta subjecta esse, and cultui Dei obe^ dire.)
who upon Romans 14. 11. where these words be again says, These words are no^ to
be taken carnally, as though things in Heaven, as the Sun, Moon, Angels,
etc. ha^ knees, or tongues: but to bow the knee signifies, that all things
shall be subject and obedient to the service of God. So he; where he also
alleges Jerome, Theophylact, Ambrose, The Imperij ejus subjici fateantur
Angeli, Homines Demo^nes, Gloss. so Anselm. so Bruno. Carthurianus.
Gloss, Beda, and some Popis^ Authors of the same mind. And Gre^gory Nyssen
in his disputation, de Anim^ and Resurrectione, says, that this bowing ^ the
knee signifies the unanimity of men an^ Angels, in confessing Christ.

Hereunto let me ad what Synopsis 9. general controversy, Qu. 5. Appendix,
concerning the name of Jesus.
D. Wille^ has said of this matter in an answer to the Rhemists cavil against
Protestants about it. The name of Jesus, say they, ought to (...) worshipped by
capping and kneeling there unto, by wearing it in their capps, vnd setti^ it up
in solemn places: alleging for the^ purpose that of S. Paul, that at the nam^
of Jesus every knee should bow, Phi. 2, 10 Yea, they say, that Protestants, by
abolishing the name and image of Christ, do make a way for Antichrist. Rhem.
Annot. Phil. 2, Sect. 2, and Rev. 13. 7.

To this he answers in the Protestants name, saying: The bowing at the name
of Jesus, as it is used in Popery, to bend the knee at the sound thereof, is
not commanded ^n this place; which shows especially the subjection of all
Creatures, of Turks, Jews, Infidels, yea of the Devils themselves, to the
power and judgment of Christ.

Secondly, Protestants have only taken away the Superstitious abuse of the name
of Jesus.

Thirdly, the kneeling at the name of Jesus is Superstitiously abused in
Popery: For the people stoop only at the Sound, not uuderstanding Thus is
Idolatry committed.
what is read, and so make an Idol of the Letters and Syllables, adoring and
worshipping the very name, when they hear or see it: And again, in sitting,
and not v^illing at the name of Christ, Immauuell, God the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, and bowing only at the name of Jesus. Dis Fulk ibid.

Fourthly, due reverence may be used to our Savior, without any such Ceremony
of capping and kneeling says Fulk: neither doc we bind any of necessity to
use this Reverence to the Name of Jesus, as the Papists do, which think
Christ cannot otherwise be honored; neither do we judge and condemn those
that do use it, being free from Superstition, and grounded in knowledge, and
careful not to give offense; for superstitions and offensive ignorance is not
in any case to be defended.

Fifthly, this outward reverence at the name of Jesus was taken up amongst
Christians, because of all other names it was most derided and scorned of the
Pagans and Jews: and therefore they did the more honor it. But now there is
greater danger of Popish Superstition, in abusing holy things, Note.
than of Paganism, in utterly contemning them, and therefore there is not such
necessity, and just occasion of using this external gesture, as was in former
times: it was not used of necessity ^hen, much less now. So he. D. Fulk also
in his answer to the Rhemists on that place, (besides that alleged by Dr.
Willet from him) says, in particular, to the Jesuits. You complain that to
remove such impiety, as the Image and name of Jesus, is to abolish all true
Religion out of the World; and to make men plain Atheists. The same was the
complaints of the Pagans against the Christians. But to worship God only,
according to the Prescript of his Holy Note this well.
Word, is true Religion, and to teach men to worship contrary thereunto, it
makes men either Idolaters, or altogether Atheists. And when you say the
Popish Church does not honor those things, nor count them holy, for their
matter, color, sound, etc. but for respect and relation they have to our
Savior; it is too short a Cloak to cover your Idolatry. For the same was the
persuasion of the Israelites, in their Golden Calfe, which they did not honor
for the matter, color, fashion, but for the relation it had to God, that
brought them out of Egypt, Exodus 32. 4. 5. The like of Ieroboams Golden Calves,
1 King. 12. 28. So he. Yea, we may note also from the Rhemists own confession,
that they place all their Religion in such superstition, as the adoration of
Images, of the Cross, and of the name Jesus, etc. Seeing they charge
Protestants, with abolishing all true Religion out of the world, by their
abolishing Popish Superstitions. And howsoever, they would salve and color
over the matter, that they worship no^ the very syllables, and name simply
Rhemes Annot. on this place.
of Jesus: yet in Revel. 13. 17. they bew^ay their Hypocrasie and Idolatry, in
charging Protestants, for taking away the honor and reverence of the name of
Jesus: which name, as the Jesuits Characterize in capital Letters, so they
do not obscurely ascribe honor and reverence to the very name JESUS. But
whereas they charge the Protestants by removing the worship of Images, Crosses
of the name Jesus, and the like, together with the things themselves out of
their Churches, to make room for Antichrists Here is the decript of Satan to
bring in false worship.
Image, Mark, and Name; We answer, that these superstitions and idolatries of
the whore of Babylon have been the fittest Vshers, to make room for the
Antichrist of Rome, and the fairest colors to painte the whores face wath all,
specially this seemingly pious word innocent bowing at the name of Jesus. And
of all other, the Jesuits have most need to advance the adoration of the name
Jesus, they having nothing of Christ, but bare Jesus, to make them Bar
Iesusses, to bewitch the World with this name, that when men either hear the
Societate Jesus, they may bow to this Jesuitical Society, or when they see
I^HS in the fro^t of their Books, they may believe all to be Gospel written
therein.

Thus we have sufficiently with a Cloud of witnesses cleared the Scripture from
being any ground of superstitious adoration of the name of Jesus: to which
might be added a Catalogue more both of old and new writers, and that both
PROTESTANTS and Papists, but it were both needless, and would make an Epistle
endless, as this already has passed the bounds of an ordinary Letter. And
chiefly needless, to heap up more testimonies, seeing the Canon alleged does
not allege this, or any other Scripture, as has been observed.

How far then reaches the command of the Canon in this case? Surely, not to
any superstitious adoration of the name Jesus. Superstition we all disclaim.
If to cap or knee, bow or doffe, at the naming of Jesus, be superstitious, the
Canon charge it not. Worship to Christ it commands, spiritual, and
corporal, Right and reason. This command is Apostolical, Corinth. 16. 20.

But corporally or spiritually to worship Christ at the naming of Jesus, rather
than at the naming of Christ, is to prefer the name Jesus before the name
Christ, a^ of higher account; whereas the Apostle Peter says: Let all the
House of Israel Act. 2. 36.
know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified,
both the Lord and Christ. So that, to be Lord and Christ, is that name above
every name, seeing that Jesus, in his humiliation is now made Lord and Christ
in his exaltation. Wherenpon it is, that Believers are called Christians, of
Christ the Lord, though the Antichristian Society* affect to be called
Jesuits, as the more honorable Title. When therefore the Canon says, When
^he Lord Jesus is mentioned, etc. it means plainly the (...) of Christ by any
of his Name, Titles, or Attributes, and so by a Synechdoche, a part for the
whole, commands all due and lowly reverence to Christ, yea, to the whole
Trinity; whenever they are solemly mentioned by other of their Names.

For the purpose, the person of Christ the Mediator, is expressed by sundry
nams, not only by the name Jesus, but by the name Christ, Immanuell, by the
Titles of Mediator, Savior, (which is but Jesus in English) David our King,
the Lord our righteousness, This is the name whereby he shall be called, The
Lord our righteousness: Ier. 33. 6.
also Isa 9. 6. His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty
God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; Also Revel. 19. 13. His name
is called the Word of God, and the like.

Now then, we being commanded, to give due and lowly reverence when we hear
the Lord Jesus mentioned, to weet, when we hear his sacred Person mentioned:
we are consequently enjoined to give due and lowly reverence to Christ,
whenever by any of his sacred names whatsoever made known unto us in
Scriptyre, he is mentioned unto us.

Obj.
But this, will some say, will be an infinite labor, for then in time of
divine service we should do nothing else almost, but be bowing or doffing, or
the like.

Answ.
Why? who prescribes bowing or doffing, or the like particular reverence, or
gesture?

Would they force or streine the CANON beyond the due limits? It prescribes
only due and lowly reverence in general, How is that? Is not the general
external reverence expressed in having our Heads uncovered in time of Service
and Sermon? Is not this a token of our subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ? See
Corinth. 1. 11. 3. 4.

So then we being in the Church with our heads uncovered, in time of prayer and
preaching; Is not this a due and lowly reverenca? Yea, I say, during the time
of prayer and preaching; For, is it not all done in the name of Jesus Christ?
Do we not pray in his name? Do we not preach in his name?

Christ's name then being the sum and subject of the sacred ministration, who
shall deny all due and lowly, not only internal, but also external reverence
to the Lord Jesus, and to God the Father in his name, while all along and
throughout the name of Christ is celebrated in the sacred Ministration? And
this seems to be the sum of the CANON.

Obj.
But some may object: That the Canon enjoyneth reverence in general, as
uncovering of the head, and also some special reverence over and above when
the Lord Jesus is mentioned.

Answ.
I answer; first, this special reverence is not expressed what, or how, but as
has been accustomed.

But the Superstitious custom of the Synagogue of Rome, our Church
disclaimeth, as before.

Again, saying, when the Lord Jesus is is mentioned (not when the name Jesus
is named:) If there be a special outward reverence to be done, when the person
of Christ, or the Lord Jesus is mentioned: then, by the very words of the
Canon, this reverence is to be done, wheu the Lord Jesus is expressed, or
mentioned by any one of his names, titles, or attributes, as we showed before;
which agrees with the Institution at the Council of Mentz, according to Dr.
Willets judicious observation, fore-noted. Otherwise, to bo^ or do some other
special outward revetence when Jesus is named, and not as well when Christ is
named, or Immanuell, or the like, or the Father, or the Holy Ghost, is
superstitiously to prefer Jesus before Christ, Thus do men committ Idolatry.
if not to make an Idol of the name Jesus, in the very syllables and lettres
of it, seeing those that bow at the name Jesus, do not bow at the name Savior,
which is the English of Jesus; This is to do reverence to Jesus in Greek or
Latin, but not in English. Or, is there more virtue, than in the name Christ?
To think so, is popish superstition and sottish ignorance, like that of the
Jews, in the scrupulous naming Jehovah.

Or, if a man will stiffly hold to the Letter of the Canon, then he must not
simply do reverence, when Jesus is mentioned, but when the Lord Jesus is
mentioned. And this were a more safe way to prevent the peril of bowing to any
other Jesus, as Jesus, which is Iosuah, or the like; Into which error, the
vulgar easily and usually run into; (yea, and some great men in mine own
observation,) If men bowed only at the mention of the Lord Jesus, (as the
Canon has it) which title of Lord, distinguishes this Jesus from all other
Iesusses in Scripture.

Here let me set down some form of Arguments, proving, that the CANON cannot
mean, that external Adoration is to be used at the naming of Jesus.

Whatsoever is spoken of the Lord Jesus, is spoken of the person of Jesus, and
not of the name of Jesus.

Obj.
But the Canon speaks of the Lord Jesus. Ergo, the Canon speaks, and so
means the person of the Lord Jesus, and not of the name Jesus, where it
says, when the Lord Jesus is mentioned.

The Minor is plain. The Major is no less plain.

Answ.
But it is answered, the Lord Jesus is mentioned under the name Jesus. I
answer, not only the name Jesus, but other names are aequall expressions of the
person of the Lord Jesus. If therefore the person of the Lord Jesus be to be
adored, when he is named, or mentioned, then as well when he is named Christ as
Jesus. But the Canon mentions no Adoration at the name of Christ; Ergo,
neither means any at the naming of Jesus.

Or thus:

Whatsoever is spoken of the Lord Jesus, is spoken of his Person. But the name
of Jesus, is not the Person of the Lord Jesus; Ergo, the mention of the Lord
Jesus, is not meant of the name of Jesus.

Or thus:

He that says, that when the Lord Jesus, which is the Person of Jesus, is
mentioned, the name Jesus only of all his other names is meant, he denies and
excludes all other names, whereby the person of Christ is expressed.

But the CANON does not deny other names of Christ, whereby he is mentioned or
expressed. Ergo, the Canon does not mean by the mention of the Lord Jesus the
name Jesus only of all his other names.

Or thus:

He that says, that by the mention of the Lord Jesus, is meant the name or the
naming of Jesus, Observe this.
confounds the name Jesus with the person of Jesus, and so makes the name Jesus
an Idol, as all one with the Lord Jesus.

But the Canon does not confound the name Jesus with the Lord Jesus. Ergo, the
Canon, by the mention of the Lord Jesus, cannot mean the name Jesus, when it
is mentioned. Else it must necessarily command the Creature to be worshipped.
If any reply that the adoration at the name Jesus has relation to the Person
of Jesus: The Jesuits say as much for this adoration, and for all other Idol
worship. But the Canon speaks not of the name Jesus, but of the Lord Jesus
personally.

Or thus:

He that worshippeth the Lord Jesus, when the name Jesus is only mentioned, and
not when he is mentioned by any other of his names, (because the Canon says,
when the Lord Jesus is mentioned, etc.) preferrs the name Jesus before other of
his names, as Christ, etc.

But the CANON does not prefer the name Jesus before the name Christ.

Ergo, the Canon means not by the Lord Jesus the name Jesus only.

Or thus:

If the CANON be taken and meant o^ the name Jesus, when it says when the
Lord Jesus is mentioned, then the name Jesus is the Lord Jesus.

But the name Jesus is not the Lord Jesus.

Ergo, the Canon cannot be taken and meant of the name Jesus, when it says,
when the Lord Jesus is mentioned.

Or thus:

All Adoration must be grounded on the Word of God. But this Adoration at the
name Jesus, or naming of Jesus, is not grounded upon the Word of God.

Ergo, the Canon cannot mean adoration at the name Jesus, or the naming of
Jesus.

The Major is proved, Isai. 29. 13, and Mar. 7. 7.

For the Minor, if it have any ground in Gods Word, then, Phil. 2. 10. But that
is no ground, as has been proved. For it is not said there, In or at the name
Jesus, but in or at the name of Jesus; so as Jesus there is plainly meant of
the person, not of the name. And therefore all our Translations have it,
either, In the name of Jesus, or, At the name of Jesus, and not, in, or at the
name Jesus.

But here I am pressed by some (me thinks) to declare my conscience, whether in
good sadness I do not think it was the mind of those that compiled and cast
the Canons, that an outward special reverence, as capping, or kneeing should
be done when the name Jesus is named. I answer, first, we are to make the most
charitables construction, and such as is agreeable to Truth, of the words,
especially of our Forefathers, as far as they are capable.

Secondly, suppose some one or two of them had any such meaning, as so^^ would
pin upon them, yet were it the duty of good Children to cover their Fathers
naked meaning with the mantle of filial charity, and of a favorable
construction.

Thirdly, howsoever, some perhaps in their meaning suffer as men, yet herein
were they wise men, in not expressing more in words than Gods word does
warrant. And in a word, for my part, I have a good hope, that their meaning was
no worse than their saying.

But at length, Note this well.
to shut up all: Let me tell you what I have observed in those that are most
superstitiously observant of bowing or doffing at the naming of Jesus: They are
commonly ignorant, or very prophan persons, that with the Jews will singe
Hosanna to Jesus, and cry crucify Christ. So these will deifie Jesus with
their head, and crucify him with their hands and tongues, by their lying and
swearing and wicked living. Or else, such are couzening Papists, or popishly
affected, combining and complying with Popery, placing all their Religion in
external Rites, and Superstitious Ceremonies, and abandoning the power and
substance of true Religion, feeding Hypocrasie, with a vain opinion, that they
have done God good service, when they thus honor this name Jesus, being
mortal ennemies to Christ and his Gospel, and the true professors of it.
Such are they that would set up Antichrist again, that are so ready to bow,
cap, cring, or kneel to this Superstitions, Phil. 3, 18, 19.
being ennemies of the cross of Christ; Whose end is damnation, whose God is
their belly, which mind Earthly things.

Now, the Lord purge us more and more from all Antichristian Superstition and
Idolatry, and establish our hearts in his saving Truth, to our eternal
salvation AMEN.

Your true loving friend in Christ Jesus.

OF Doing reverence, and particularly of bowing the knee at the name of JESUS.
By the Reverend I. H. Bachelour, in Divinity:
Who sometimes having erred, and gone astray from the Church, afterward at a
public place, preached, and by command published a Testimony of his hearty
reunion and humble submission to the church of England, his acknowledged dear
Mother.
To his reverend Brethren, the Ministers of the Church of England.
IT is certain, that the Christians, who lived in the best Ages of the Church,
did aunciently observe the Ceremonies of uncovering the Head at the Name of
Jesus, as learned Zanchy does manifestly confess, in his Comment* upon Phil.
2, 10. A custom (says he) not to be dissalovved; for it was a testimony of
reverence and adoration of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was introduced
Originally, in regard of the Jews and Gentile, who despised him; and retained
afterward against Arrians and other Heretics, impugning the Divinity of
Christ.

This reason of the said Ceremony now ceassing, the Ceremony it self might
cease with it: for so it is in the Law, the soul thereof, (namely the reason
of it) being gone, the Law does consequently cease with it. Notwithstanding,
because Mr. Hooker, lib. 5. Sect. 50. and many learned men do observe some
other reasons for the continuance of the Ceremony of bowing the knee at the
name of Jesus, as a thing Lawful, yea lawdable, in some sort, but in no wise
necessary, (as it shall afterward appear,) I will co^f^sse with that famous
Divine Doctor Fulk, on Phil. 2, 10. that it may be well used. Howbeit, as
Zanchy notes of uncovering the Head; so I may say of bowing the knee at the
name of Jesus, that it has been perverted to a superstitious practice* For,
as many abuse this Ceremony in the Church of Rome, so some abus^ it in the
Church of England.

Now, the reasons why Christians did use reverence at the name of Jesus, by cap
or knee, or both, rather than at any other name, (though it and they importing
one and the same thing so their understandin) are many.

First, Reasons of the ancient use of this gesture.
because this name above all other Names, was in great detestation and
contempt, as Festus speaks of him, Acts 25. 19. The Jews had question
against Paul, touching one Jesus. This name also by the ignominy of the
Cross, upon his title Jesus of Nazareth was placed, became more execrable to
the unbeleevinge World.

Secondly, it was his proper name, or the name of his person, appointed by God,
foretold by the Angel, Luke. 1, 31. imposed in his circumcision, Luke. 2, 21.
where he had his peculiar and distinct appellation, and yet this is his
personal Name, not only as he is Man, but as he is one Christ, and subsisteth
in two natures, Divine and Humane.

Thirdly, because of the signification, for it does express the Office of the
Redeemer, in the work of Salvation, Matthew. 1, 21.

Fourthly, men took occasion of this complementall reverence from the very
Text it self, Phil. 2, 10, as sounding to that purpose.

The question is therefore, whether or how far forth we are bound to this
external act of reverence, either by force of the said Scripture, or by
authority of any constitution of the Church? Of both which I will treat in
order.

1. Of the true meaning of the Scripture, Phil* 2, 10.

At the name of Jesus shall every knee bow, both of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and thiugs under the Earth. If it be the true proper and
literal sense of this Text, that we must bow the knee by external reverence
at the name of Jesus, then it is a precept binding us to the necessity of this
practice by indispensable obligation. If it be not the true proper and literal
sense of the said Scripture, to bow the knee at the name of Jesus, by such an
external act of reverence, then are we not bound to the practice of this
Ceremony, by the force and virtue of the Scripture.

To enter therefore into a more exact and sound discussion of this point, we
must observe 3. rules, which serve to open this particular, and sundry other in
the sacred Scripture.

1. Whereas no point of Religion can be demonstrated out of the Scripture, but
as the Scripture is taken in the true, proper, and literal sense (which the
learned in the church of Rome do also confess) we must acknowledge, that the
Scripture has but one true, proper, and literal sense; the sense of it being
the very form of it, and every thing has but one form, as reason and
Philosophy do dictate to our understanding, so that all other senses, (so
called) as, Tropilogicall, Allegorical, Analogicall, Keckerm. syst. theol. li.
1. c. 9.
are inded not properly senses of the Scripture, but an accommodation of the
Scripture, to the use of the Readers and Hearers.

2. Secondly, that is the true, proper, and literal sense of the Scripture,
which the intention of the speaker, and the nature of the thing it self do
importe to our understanding, by what words soever (proper or unproper) the
said sense be expressed in the Scripture.

3. Thirdly, we must therefore observe that the true, proper, and literal
sense of the Scripture, is not always that which the words do bear
immediately in their grammatical signification; but that the words of the
Scripture are sometimes proper, as, Christ is the Son of God; sometimes
improper, or methaphoricall, as, Christ is a vine, a Door. Now, if the words be
improper, and metaphorical (as we shall see anon) we must note that (as D^s
Whitakers did truly advertise Bellarmine) the improper words carry not in
them the literal sense of the Scripture immediately (for then great absurdity
would follow) but mediatly, that is to say, as they are reduced unto proper
words, as here bowing the knee at the name of Jesus, is an improper or
methaphoricall speech, and is reduced to this proper speech, viz. a subjection
of the Creaturs to the Son of God; which being the true, proper, and literal
sense of that Scripture, is contained in an improper and metaphorical speech.

I come therefore punctually to the thing in question, and say; that the true,
proper, and literal sense of the Scripture does, (according to the intention
of S. Paul, and the nature of the thing it self) represent unto our
understanding, not an outward Ceremony of bowing the knee of the body, but a
real subject on of all the Creatures in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, unto the
Son of God, even as he is the Son of Man also, now exalted unto Glory.

Whereas therefore S. Paul says: God has given him a name above every name,
Phil. 2, 9. The clear and evident sense whereof is this, that Christ, (so
humbled before in the assumption of our nature, in the course of this life, in
the manner of his death, etc. is now advaunced and honored by his Father, first
by the public manifestation of his Divinity, which before seemed obscure; and
secondly by exaltation of his humanity. So that now he having a name above all
names, in Glory and Power, all Creatures voluntarily, or necessarily, are
subject to his Dominion; which subjection is expressed by a metaphorical act,
as Esther 3, 2. The Servants of Ahashuerosh the King bowed the knee unto Hamon,
and reverenced him, which Mordechai refused to perform, and therefore incurred
his indignation, verse. 5.

That this sense is the true, proper, and literal sense of the Scripture,
according to the intention of the writer, and according to the nature of the
thing it self, you may clearly discern by all the circumstances of the Text;
and amongst many, to evince the same, I present these 5. ensuing to your
consideration.

First, 5. Circumstances, to prove it to be understood not of bowing the bodily
knee.
because it is not the very name of Jesus (literally and syllabically taken) to
which reverence is here due, and should be performed by every Creuture, but the
person signified by this Name, and so in other of his Names. For when we hear
this Name of Jesus, and thereupon do an Act of reverence, either inwardly in
the mind, or outwardly in the body; it is by mediate inference of it in our
understandings, unto the thing or person it self signified in and by tha^ Name;
otherwise this Act were a literal or syllabicall Idolatry, by restraining it
to the Name, and not extending it to the Person Wherefore when I hear any
other of his Names, as Immanuell, Christ, etc. I am (by virtue of the said
reason) bound to do the like reverence at the sound of these other names, if I
be bound unto it at the name of Jesus, because the same person is in every name
imported to my understanding; Else in regarding one Name of his person, more
than an other, I show that I regard the Name more than the person, or the name
without the person; the first being wicked, the second a foolish conceit, And
yet nevertheless that these Ceremonialists, entertaining Jesus with reverence,
dismiss Christ with neglect.

2. Again, if the Text bind us (in the true, proper, and literal sense) to
this external act of adoration, in bowing the knee at the name of Jesus, then
those Ceremonialists (who say so, or must say so, or else they say nothing)
must perform this Act of adoration at all times, and in all places whenever,
and wheresoever they hear the sound of this name; for the text speaks
absolutely, generally, and definitely of bowing the knee, without any imitation
or restreint: And yet these Ceremonialists (either wanting judgment in what
they would affirm, or conscience, in what they should perform) do not
exercise this Act of Adoration, at all times, and in al^ places, at the sound
of this Name. Yea, which is more, they ought by force of their own reason (^f
it had any force) ^o practice this act of reverence, whenever they read this
name of Jesus in the Scripture, or any other Author. Nay ought they not,
whensoeyer they think of this Name, bow the knee? For their ^eason (if it
enforce what obey pretend) enforces all this which I allege.

3. Thirdly, these grave and supercilious Ceremonialists, as when they sit,
they can ^ot do this peculiar act of reverence (or ^t the least not with due
co^plement, which ^n all things they effect,) so some times though they stand,
yet they bow not their knees, but only uncover their heads upon the sound of
the Name. But now where ^s their Science? Or where is their conscience? For if
they bind us so strictly ^o the Letter of the Text, we will bind them also as
strictly to the same: An^ therefore we say, that, though by uncove^ring their
heads, they do an act of reve^^rence; yet this act answers not precisel^ to
the letter of the text; and though ther^ be often a Commutation of Penance i^
the Bishops Court, yet we cannot allo^ them (and the Scripture will not her^
allow them) this Commutation of rev^^rence in the Court of Christ. First,
because the knee, and not the Cap, is here strict^ prescribed. Secondly,
because the Ca^ is a lesser duty than the knee. Either therefore observe your
own rule, (...) discharge us from the necessity there^of.

4. Fourthly, we may observe by a pe^^spicuous and forcible reason, drawn
(...) impossible, that this Ceremonious-act (...) bowing the knee at the name
of Jesus, is n^ the true, proper, and literal sense of the Scripture; for
whereas we have here a d^^stinction of 3. sorts of Creatures, which must bow
the knee at the name of Jesus; vi^ Angels, things in Heaven; Men, thin (...)
^n Earth? and Devils, things under t^ Earth; We know that the first and the
last have no knees to bow, and so it is two to one, that this external act of
bowing the knee at the name of Jesus, is not the true, proper, and literal
sense of this Scripture, and that, by force of it, we are not obliged to this
external act.

5. Lastly, you must observe, that S. Paul in this place, Phil. 2. 10, alludeth
to the word of God, Isai. 45. 23. Every knee shvll bow to me; which is properly
and literally understood, not of corporal genuflexion, but of actual
subjection unto God. This very place in Isai, the Prophet understands to be
verified in the person of Christ at the last Judgment, when every knee shall
bow to him, as the great Judge of all the world: For, to this purpose, S. Paul
produces that place Romans 14. 11. namely, by the subjection of all Creatures,
voluntary in some, involuntary in others, but necessarily to the Lord Jesus,
sitting on his Tribunal seat of Justice; not that all shall do this outward
act of reverence; but that all shall be in subjection, which is signified and
intended in the same. For God descends often unto Man, to speak after the
manner of Man, because Man cannot immediately and freely assent unto the things
of God.

To conclude therefore, you may easily perceive, that S. Paul understands
this bowing of the knee no otherwise, than he understands it, Romans 14, 11.
and no otherwise in either place, than the Prophet Isaiah before him, Isai. 45,
23.

And so much of the Scripture, by which the Ceremonialists enforce the external
act of Courtlike Complement at the name of Jesus.

Of the Canon, viz. 18.
I come therefore from the Sripture to the Canon, which runs in these words:
When in the time of Divine Service the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due and
lowly reverence shall be done by all persons present, as it has been
accustomed.

But if the Scripture be not against us, in that which the Ceremonialists
pretend, we shall the less fear the shot out of this CANON; and therefore we
answer briefly unto them.

1. First, we dislike not simply the practice of this external reverence at
the Name of Jesus (for we condemn not the Church of England, much less the
ancient and Universal Church in this behalf,) it being done upon good and
sufficient knowledge without superstition, and without opinion of necessity,
according to the purpose of the Church. Hence it is that Mr. Hooker lib. 5, 5,
30. confesses in express words, touching this external act of reverence at
the name of Jesus; No man is constrained to use it by auy Obligation of Divine
Law or Humane.

2. Secondly, I observe, that the external act of reverence at the name of
Jesus, has bin usually practiced in the time of Divin Service, not whenever
men do staud, and when in the time of their standing the name of Jesus is
sounded forth, (for we do stand at the recitation of the Cr^ed, where mention
is made of Jesus (with no bowing of the knee) but at the reading of the
Gospel; and therefore the CANON must be understood peculiarly of that custom,
when it requires a reverence, as it has been accustomed

If any Ceremonialist will contend with me in this point, let the same Mr.
Hooker in the same place, be an Arbitratour betwixt us, to decide the
Controversy.

Because the Gospels, which are weekly read, do all historically declare,
something which our Lord Jesus Christ did, or suffered in his own Person, it
has been the custom of Christian men, then especially, in token of the
greater reverence, to stand, to utter certain words of acclamation, Glory be
to thee, O Lord; and at the name of Jesus to bow. It was therefore a Custom
aunciently so to do.

But I find in Antiquity no CANON to establish it, (and verily general
custom was not sufficient in this behalf by the rule of S. Austin. Ep. 118.)
much less was it a matter of necessary observation, by the literal sense of
the Scripture. And to declare this point yet more plainly. Zozomen. Hist.
Eccl. 7. c. 19. relating sundry different Customs of the ancient Church,
writes thus: It is a new custom in the Church Alexandria, that the Bishop
there does not rise up at the reading of the Gospel, which custom I have
neither found nor read of in any other place: So that leaving the Bishops of
Alexandria to their own reason herein, and defense, for this diversity of
their practice, contrary to the general action of the Church.

I may conclude, that neither the scripture bound any, nor that the Canon or
Custom bound all to the observation of this Ceremonial act, which the profound
Ceremonialists, partly by virtue of the Scripture, and partly by authority of
the CANON would enforce upon their Brethren. And this might suffice concerning
the C^NON in this behalf.

But if I shall not offend them, I could press them further with the Relation
of an ancient and very Learned Bishop, Note this well.
who being present at the making of this CANON, did freely and confidently
protest, that neither he, nor any of his Colleagues, did ever condescend unto
it, when it was first concluded, nor when it came afterward to the birth, it
being, as he said, a matter carried, he knew not how, by the power and policy
of a few, without the consent or approbation of all, or of the greatest part.
He added further, wherereas S. Paul speaks of the name of Jesus, that it is a
name above all names, he conceives the word name to be putt there for Person,
as in Acts 4, 12. There is no salvation in any other name under Heaven, whereby
we must be saved, Quasi diceret; God the Father has now declared the
excellency of this Person Christ Jesus, that he is the Lord of all Creatures,
and that they must be in subjection to his power So he.

Well, I will leave this particular, (as perhaps offensive, though true) and I
will confirm it, if need were, by sacred Oath, that such was the resolution of
the said Bishop, and shutt up all the whole with 3. observations, which I wish
men to weigh well, in the Balance of a true judgment, and of an upright
conscience.

1. First, though I have often and curiously noted the behavior of the
principal Authors of this Canon in time of divine service, and especially in
the reading of the Gospel, yet I could never see them perform any external
act of reverence at the name of Jesus.

2. Secondly, though many good Christians bow not their knees, or bend their
bodies at the name of Jesus, in the time of Divine Service or Sermons, yet this
omission of outward Complement, proceeds not from a want of due and hearty
reverence to our Lord Jesus Christ, but because the Ceremonialists would impose
it upon them, by a plain misconstructio^ of the Scripture, therefore they are
not willing by such an act of revere^ce to give testimony and approbation to
such a plain ignorant misconstructio^ of the text; Though otherwise they may be
tractable to perform it, according to knowledge,, and to show their obedience
to the order of the Church, which yet does not compel men to the practice of
this Ceremony. For as it has been intermitted in many Congregations, and by
disuse is wholly laid aside; So we do not hear, that, by virtue of this CANON,
either any Minister is brought into question for not stirring and provoking the
people unto it, nor any of the people presented in the Spiritual Court, for
neglect thereof. But if the Scripture enforce it, and the Canon require it, why
is neither the Pastor, nor the Parishioner, more sharply entreated in this
behalf?

3. Thirdly, N. B.
many, yea most that perform not this Ceremony of bowing the knee at the name
of Jesus, do appear by the best effects of Religion, and in all due
Circumstances thereof, to have more true zeal, devotion, and love unto the the
Lord Jesus, than many, yea the most of these Ceremonialists, who seeming to
honor him with Cap and Knee, do by their Superstition rather than Religion,
herein, prepare a way for Jesuits to creep in with the Serpent by such holes
into the Gardeu of Eden, the true Church of God in this Kingdom.

Let us therefore, not so much affect the outward form of Religion, as make
true demonstration of our love, honor, and obedience unto the Lord Jesus, by
the most essential and proper effects thereof: Lest, when we have reverenced
him with so many Capps and Knees (whereby we please our selves rather than him)
he turn us away with a Non novi vos, in the great and fearful Day.

A Postscript Question.
When any man sweateth by Jesus (as some men do in passion or glory) whether
the stander by hearing the oath, be bound, to bow his knee at the name of Jesus?

FINIS.
The Publisher hereof to the Christian Reader, of what rank or degree soever.
BEloved, I ( qualis quisque sum) travailing and residing, ef^soones, about my
lawful negotiations in diverse Transmarine places, both in France, Germany,
and the Netherlands, have done, and do observe in the truly Reformed Churches
in all those Countries, That they all, as it were with an unanimous consent, do
abandon in their Congregations, this external bodily bowing, capping,
crowching, oringiug at the Name or naming of Jesus, and their Ministers do hold
it to be an ignorant practice, and impious Ceremomonie: Yea, I dare be bold to
say, all the rest of the purely Reformed Churches in Christendom are of like
unanime Judgment and practice. And I having, not without Divine Providence,
obtained the Manuscript, which by the same Providence have passed the Press,
do here communicate and present unto your view the Opinion, Judgment, and
Determination of a Pair of reverend and learned Divines of our own Church,
members of our two famous Universities, (the one of Cambridg, the other of
Oxford) concerning the same bowing, capping, crowching, and cringing at the
nam of Jesus: which letter and Treatise I confess and profess, have given me
and some Christian friends of mine abundant satisfaction in the point. Our
latter learned Author calls them that so much use and plead for it, not
unproperly, Ceremonialists you may easily know them; They are all for
Ceremony, naught for sincerity; like the Apples of Sodom, all show, no
substance; somewhat like unto painted sepulchers, glorious without, rotten
within; Not much unlike a fantastical Picture, which this Age has produced,
all belly, Nobody; nor much unlike the Datestone, all shell, no-kernell; Even
so are these men, (like Baalls consening Priests) all for external
vvillworship an adoration, preferring it before internal and spiritual true
worship and devotion: though the Holy Ghost has plainly said: God will be
served in spirit and in truth.

Yea, some of their Lives and Doctrines do declare, as if (we may doubt) they
wished that that and other sacred Texts of Holy-writ for inward sincerity were
obliterated, and as if they drew all their doctrines and devotions out of the
large volume, entitled Ceremoniale Romanae Ecclesiae. O Fearful! O Tempora!
O Mores!

And has indeed my learned Author t^rmed them Ceremonialists? I hope, I may,
without offense, change two Letters in the word, and theu they are just
Ceremoniall-astes, or asses rather. All which so much use and advocate for the
superstitious use of this Ceremony of bowing, capping, etc. (and are ready to
cry down preaching, alleging it is no part of Gods Worship, with other gross
erroneous points; and, squaring the word with the crooked squire of their own
Inventions, Mat. 15. 9
teach, indeed, for Doctrines the Traditions and Precepts of Men.) I challenge,
charge, and adjure them, or any of them, whether Bishop, Doctor, Parson, Vicar,
Priest, Curate, or Chaplain, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, (which they so
superstitiously abuse) as they will once answer at his Tribunal, either
punctually to answer (with the spirit of meekness, letting Gods Word be their
Warrant, Touchstone, or Vmper) these precedent Tractates; (They need not doubt
of lawdable License at London House) Or else, to recant their Superstitious and
Erroneous Doctrines, and practices; or, at leastwise to leave pleading for
Baall: And I desire all other moderate minded Christians to be satisfied in the
controverted point: But, if any list still to be contentious, 1 Cor. 11, 16.
I must answer them, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God.

And besides the Opinion, Judgment, and Determination of these two reverend
Divines, doubtless you may have seen already published, the learned and
accute Layick of Lincoln's Inn (that has Mr. W. P.
stood so stoutly, and written so piously and profoundly in defense of the
Orthodox Doctrine of the Church of England, against Papists, Arminians, and all
other Eunemies of the Church,) his opinion, judgment, and discussion, also in
this point of bowing, capping, crovvching, and cring at the name of Jesus: And
a threefold Cord (I trow) is not easily broke: I cannot but equallize his
writing with these two Divines: And though I have, I think I need not
challenge an answer to them or him, seeing now my second cogitations tells me,
that both theirs and his, are altogether unanswerable (for I hold Widows nor
Page, to be any direct answers to the point but the one a Raylar, and the
other a Sophister. And they not answering, I say, directly and punctually, to
the Premises, I profess (whoever I am) if ever I be called from the Hagh in
Holland to Paul's Cross, will there proolame: That all those Ceremonial asses
are silenced, gravelled, and can not answer, and therefore ought to subscribe
to the Premises. But me thinks I hear still some of them mumbling, that these
precedent Authors, nor the others by them cited, are sufficient to stop their
mouths, and stay their practice; Then let me have leave to propose to them,
That, That if the matter may be putt for the voices or hands to the
Clergymen, I dare pawn my dearest life, that most, or the greatest part of
Bishops, Doctors, and other Divines of the Church of Enland will subscribe to
our-learned Authors: And that will be doubtlasse satis superque.

The superstitious Ephesians we know cried Great is (the Goddess) Diana of the
Ephesians: So we may say, Great is the Goddess Dotage of these Ceremonial
asses. Whom therefore we must leave to S. Paul's Doom, alleged by our first
learned Author in his Conclusion.

Yet for all this, let me not be mistaken, that I do by the promises, in
approving these learned and pious Authors, Judgments and discussions out of
Gods Word, in this point, disapprove or dislike (altogether) the Ceremonies of
our Church; For, as they are conformable to the lawful Ceremonies, so I am
persuaded there is a moderate laudable use of them, so a^ they that use them,
do them for decency and in order, according to S. Paul's Precept.

Our last learned Author, at the Conclusion of his Treatise, asks the
Opposites a Question: In like manner, if these Ceremoniall-asses would give me
leave, I would ask them an other; and that is: whether our Common Beggars,
when they ask, beg and iterate for Jesus sake, which sacred Name they take in
vain (though many of their numberless number know neither God nor Christ
Jesus his Son) perhapps 100. or 1000. times in a day, whether, I say, we that
hea^ them, be bound to bow, cap, crowch, cring, or no?

And so, beloved reader, if thou reapes^ any contentment by this twofold
Treatise, give God the Glory, the Authour^ their merited praise and thanks,
and m^ the Publisher hereof (if thy Charity wi^^afford it) thy Prayers at the
Throne (...) Grace.

And so I betake you to God and the Word of his Grace, which is able to build
you up, and give you an Inheritance among them that are sanctified.

Magna est Veritas
Et praevalet Et praevalebit.
Tuus in Christo Jesus H. D.

The second Publisher to indiffernt Reader.
I Do judge these Reverend Devines faithful, and therefore one occasion I will
hold communion with them in the worship of God, and although they do in some
things practice some superstitions, which I dare not partake in, yet I do
profess to hold communion with them in all holy parts of Gods worship, and
because we do thus practice: Here is one JOHN CAN have published a spiteful,
if not railing book, against al^ that do complain of the superstitions, used
in our Land. And yet hold communion See his book 55. 56. 57. Folio.
with them in holy graces o^ Gods Worship. For this cause he chardgeth us to be
pervertours of the truth, saying: Dr. Ames, of famous memory* who utterly
denies, that the calling of ou^ He says, the best Ministers have no other call
then the ignorant asses, and idols have
Minister do essentially depend on the Bishops call, yet otherwise have a
lawful calling. Against this he does parentorily affirm the Ministers in our
Land by the Laws of our Land, does certainl^ depend on the Bishops, calling
holy, an^ no men's else. Herein he does affirm, th^^ this pretense is worse then
the family o^ Love, which are the grossest Heretick^ risen in this Adge. In the
most con gregatio^s the patarn do first chose before the Bishop can ordain.


Therefore we will examine his accusation; For, if he be false in this, then
let all, that fear God, judge him a false accuser, like his Father the Devil
is. And I de here call all discret men to witness, that b^ the Laws of our Land,
the Bishop, cannon send a Minister to be made in the church* till the Patron do
first choose him, an^ send him with his Letters to the Bishopp, John Can proved
a false acuser.
to ordain him. And it is well known, there are sundry Congregations, which
have agreed with their Patrons, that they choose and call their Pastor. And
sundry Gentlemen, fearing God, which are Patrons, and do use to advise with the
most discret in that Church, about the choice of one, wherein they do take the advice of learned Devines, approvin him, and he is choosen by that Church,
before the Bishops see him; and therefore Dr. Ames Fol. 234.
his sentence is true, allthough John CAN revile him for it; and he after in
the same book does justify this course of choosing by the Congregation, to be
good, according to truth; Therefore his own mouth do give sentence against
himself See Mr. Padgets arrow against the Brownists and the reprove of John
(...) and May, An. 1632.
to be a false accuser.

IF John CAN would have triyed and defended his cause of Separation from all
the Godly Ministers and Professors in the Church of England, against Doctor
Ames, he should have answered his first and second Manuduction against M.
Robinson, and tried, if he cold have don more the^ M. Robinson have don, for
there is his cause proved erroneous, and it is in other books proud falls, in
denying the Grace of God, given us in Jesus Christ. He does know, there are
books have been published this 16 years, which have proved sundry artikels of
their faith false and erroneous, yet John Can dare not write against till the
Authors be dead.

It appears unto me, John Can knows not the right calling of a Teacher into
the Church, because he putts no difference betwixt Election, Approbation, and
Ordination, which the Word of God does distinguish, yet in his book he count
them all one thing.

He writes, they practice nothing, but that the Teachers of our Church have
affirmed to be truth, which I manifest, is not so: for, we affirm, God has
ordained Schools, to educate and fit men to be teachers in his Church, and
such are necessary instruments, to increase heavenly graces. This we hold, is a
work of Faith, for us, to hear them preach, which John Can do condemn, Act.
13. 15.

We do believe the communion of Saints, and thus the Church have believed
since the Apostles days, and though John Can does confess, they were first
converted by our Ministry, yet he condemns those that does partake in that
holy worship, contrary to the Counsel of the Holy Ghost, in dispising
Prophe^ie, These. 5. 20.

He writes himself Pastor of the ancient English Church, Yet those that chose
him, and ordained him, did depose him, they say, for that he deceived them.
and he does condemn all the divines of our nation, that there is not one a
lawful teacher in this age, but himself, yet it appears, he is ignorant of
the grounds of Religion. Hebr. 6. 2.

Whereas John Can do command all those which do deny his grounds, to set
down their names, and the place where they dwell, I desire of him to show his
commission, for I think he is vainly consaited, and one that does not know
himself, therefore fare unfitt to reprove those, which have labored more
years in study then he has monts. See his Book Folio 60.

The Publisher, Post-scripe to the Reader.
IF any will worship or Ceremonialist say: that this bowing and ducking at the
name or naming of Jesus, is justified in Mr. Widows his Answer to Mr. Prin: I
reply, first let us observe what a brand of an evil conscience he have, which
do defend this Superstition; It is certainly known, that Mr. Widows is
known* and detected to be but a drunken Divine, a kind of mad-fellow and
pot-companion: and though ^e uses often, (as is credibly or reported) to
swear by the sacred name of Jesus, yet his answer for bowing at it, was
nothing but a Sottishe mad, railing Pamphlet; replied unto, and utterly
confuted by Mr. Prin, and he putt to a limping silence, and a non plus.

But some of you, Advocates for Baal, will happily say, that Mr, Page
(forsooth) has hard, and killed the Cow, in justifying Widows and defending
of bowing and cringing at the name or naming of Jesus, which his pretended
gravitie, seeming grave style, and colloguing Dedication to his dear Mother
the University of Oxford. But whosoever reads his book with a single and
impartial eye, must ^eeds say, that it is, likewise, farced fuli of idle
impertinencies, sophistications, and not free from absurdities, falsities, and
blasphemous comparisons; and revilings toward the person, and junioritie of M.
Prion: though upon my certain knowledge the learned Laick, being betwixt 30
and 40 years old, is of sufficient age, and ambilitie, to encounter with any
Jesuits, Priest, Arminian, Anti-puritane, or Collegelubber in Christendom; as
his learned Labors do sufficiently testify to the World: And herein I will
not decline, but dare and do appeal to all that are Orthodox, Learned, Godly,
and Wise-hearted of the aforesaid famous Universities: And that the first of
these above^named Advocates babbleth, and the other blattereth.

They are already fully confuted by these Pair of Orthodox Divines, before in
the twofold Treatise: And therefore my premised Challenge stands good. Let
therefore any opposite Reader, in the name and fear of Christ Jesus, forbear
further scoffing, railing or giering, and in stead thereof, if he be able, take
pen in hand, and see what he can say to to the Challenge. Iterum vale.

I have thought it not impertinent, but very pertinent, to annex hereto the
Copy of an Arminians Character, which I received from a friend, as follows:
An Arminian or mere Mountaguist,
IS an Animal, scarce rational, His study.
whose custom is, before he has well con^'d his Catechism, to read (and
applaud) Peter Lombard and John Duns, rather than Peter Martyr, and John
Calvin: and for more modern Polemicks, he preferres Bellarmine above Chamierus.

His garb or fashion, when he comes from the University, His Garb*
with affectation, is to wear a long Cloak; and a correspondent Cassock, short
no where, but in the w^st which is girt up with a girdle and a knot or rose,
almost up to his nose: commonly a falling-band; because Procisians wear small
set-ruffs.

His Religion, is (like a Confection,) His Religion.
compounded of many, the least ingredient, being Protestantisme, and to believe
as the Church does.

His first ambition, is to address himself to be some great-mens
Trenchers-Chaplaine; His Ambition.
that so he may not be out of the Pathway to preferment, not an Ignoramus in
Court-curtesies, nor a sot in State affairs.

His Devotion, is so conformable to the Ceremonies of the Church, His Devotion.
that he thinks it impiety to decline the least particle thereof: and yet he
declines the Doctrine of the Church so much, that he wishes with all his
heart, the Prayer in the Letanie of our English Liturgy, From all false
Doctrine and Heresy, good Lord deliver us, were oblitera^^d. And he is so bent
to external bowing at the name of Jesus, that he cannot forbear to do the
like at the Picture of Jesus crucified, alias a Crucifix, if it stand in his
way.

He is a mungreel Divine, who, as it were betwixt Hawke and buzzard, His
Divinity. N. C. his Acnitophes.
see nicely to distinguish betwixt a Puritan in opinion, and a Puritan in
discipline: and has taught the nam, which was contrary to the first
institution, so far to enlarge it self, that a Protestant must make hard
shift, to save himself harmless. And he is one that makes the Grace of God
lackey it after the will of men, I. R. his speech in Parlame^t 12. Ianua. 1628.
His politik part.
the Sheep to keep the Shepherd, and a mortal seed of an immortal God.
Also, he holds not Perseverance, but Apostasy of the Saints.

He is the spawn of a Papist, and if there come the warmth of favor upon him,
you shall see him turn into one of those Frogs, which arose out of the
bottomless Pit: And if you mark it well, you shall see him reaching out his
hand to a Papist; (a Papist to a Jesuit, and a Jesuit gives one hand to the
Pope, and another to the King of Spain:) And so we leave him to get more
Grace, profess, and practice more goodness.

His Motto Orthodoxus. CONCORDIA DISCORS.

Where as John Can does plead for the Antiquity of their Separation, and
says, it was in King Edwards days, but I answer him such a Separation, as
they do practice, was not known 55 years since, and the first Authors of
these were Henrison and Robert Brown, which they did partly recall, there was of
their Disciples, that were apprehended in suffock, 3. at Nayland, for
distributing of their Books, and condemned, after the Judge offered them
pardon, if they would live obediently, as the book of Common Prayer did direct,
but they answered, that the book of Common Prayer was the great Idol of the
Land, on which the Judge was exceedingly offended against them, Judge Anderson,
Lord chief ^ustus of (...) common pleas An. 1583. or 1584. at Berry in Suffock
and says, he would hang them, before he went out of the town, if they did
maintain this. Then they did desire of him a conference with some Ministers
there present, which they had granted, and the next day the Judge called them,
and demands of them, what they said to the book of Common Prayer? And they
affirmed it Idolatrous, and on this they were hanged in the presence of the
Judge. Sundry others I knew in the Contry, that would not be present at the
worship of the book of Common Prayer, yet they would and did diligently
frequent the hearing of the zealous preaching the word; therefore in some
Parishes they had a bell d^d ring when the Service was ended, and the^ they
would com into the Congregation. And I knew 3 preachers, which fled in Queen
Maryes Reign, and they were zealous preachers; yet I perceived some difference
betwixt them, the one (Mr. Brodish) he took a living near where I lived, and
he was a zealous preacher. The other was a Gentleman, (named Larrans) he did
usually preach in diverse parts of the contry, In Nor^fock.
and kept a Lector at a market town (called Harlston) the other (namd Simond
Harlson) who was a Minister at Sto^num (in K. Edwards days) he was in t^^ble
then, (...)
because he would (...) wear the Surplus, he did preach in the Country, and
these 2 were proferred benifices sundry times, but they would not accept there.
This l^tter did use a Lector every 14 days in his house, at which I have been
sundry times present, he was very old, I take it, he lived to the year 1591.
I have conferred with him sundry times, and had speech with him concerning
Brown, and he disallowed Brownes Separation, from the hearing of the zealous
preachers in our Land. I desired of them to know why they would not use the
Book of Common prayer in the worship of God? and they answered, and said:
because Idolatours did so worship, and they were forbidden to worship after the
manner of Idolaters.

This is a true Relation.

S. O.

FINIS.

