A Sermon made in latin in Oxenforde, in the reign of King Edward the sixth,
by the learned and godly Father John Iuel, late Bishop of Sarisburie, and
translated into English, by R.V.

DEDICATED UNTO the Bishop of London, as appears in the Commentary of Ma.
Calvin, upon the Galathians, in English.

1. Cor. 9.16. Woe is unto me if J preach not the Gospel. Jmprinted at London,
by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in S. Nicholas shambles, within the Nevv-rentes,
at the sign of the Lucrece.

M. Doctor Humfrey in his Book which he writes of the life and death of Iuel.
Pagina. 49.
QVam autem in templo Diuae Mariae concione^ habuerit, quam latin, qua^
compte, quam Theologice, me sile^te ipsa loquetur Oration, cuius exemplu^
mutilum, vt potui, aliquantulum recognitum and correctius exhibere malui, quam
omnino supprimere, quae and Concionatores multa vtiliter co^monefacit, and
progradu Baccalaureatus suscepto recitata videtur, verbis ex 1. Pet. 4.
desumptis, dominica intra Octau. Ascensionis.

But what manner of sermon he made in S. Mary's Church, in how excellent Latin
he made it, how finely and how like a Divine he did it, his matter shall show
notwithstanding I hold my peace; the imperfect example whereof, being as
well as I could somewhat perused and amended, I had rather set out, then
altogether suppress it or keep it back, which profitably puts in mind and
warns preachers of many things, and seems to have been preached when he
took his degree of Bachelaure in Divinity, the words being taken out of the
first Epistle of Peter the 4. Chapter, upon the Sunday within the Octauois of
the Ascension.

A learned and Godly Sermon, made in the Latin tongue, in S. Mary's in
Oxenford, upon the Sunday after the Ascension, in the reign of King Edward the
sixth, by the famous and excellent Clearke Master Iuel, late Bishop of
Sarisburie, and done into English by R. V.
The text If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God. 1. Pet. 4.11.
BRethren beloved in Christ I have chosen these words chiefly out of that
Epistle of S. Peter, which are accustomed to be read unto the people this
day, because, that whereas I must preach in Latin according to the custom of
this place and time, the same in mine opinion seemed to belong properly to this
assembly. The which, that they may be plainlier and better understand of you
all, I must repeat a few words from the beginning of this whole Epistle.
Wherefore we must call to mind, because in those first times, christian
Religion was shut out every where, as pernicious to men's souls, and an
infection of common wealths, and that it seemed great godliness to root
out the bringers in of new Religion, least (I say) that Christian men and
those that were Godly, should in that season utterly be discouraged, and
cast away all hope: Saint Peter does so instruct them with this Epistle,
that they should consider no new or unwonted thing to have happened, that
Christ himself has suffered far bitterer and vnworthyer things, that they
should not be faynte hearted, lastly that the way to glory is by afflictions
and crosses.

And to that purpose he warns the people by themselves and the Bishops
also, what belongs to each of them to take heed of. Concerning that which
belongs unto the people, he says, that they have spente time enough before
upon wickedness, and that now they ought to change their life with their
Religion.

That godliness is placed, not in outward show and titles, but in soundness
of life, and innocence of manners. That it is an ill thing with mouth and
tongue only to worship GOD, and to give our mind and soul to (worship)
the Devil, and to disagree from Idolators, not in life and manners, but in
words and profession (only.) And because they had departed from the most
aunciente Ordinances and laws of their forefathers, and that they being but a
few had stirred all kind of men against them, he warns them that they
yet would in all kind of duetyes practyse charity among themselves, one
toward another, least they should be divided at any time by any dissension
of minds or studyes. That this is only the token of Jesus Christ, whereby
the bondestaues of the Devil may be known from the Children of GOD. That so
it shall come to pass shortelye, that all the whole world shall embrace the
Gospel and the heavenly doctrine, and that the enemies and the haters of the
cross of Christ, whom godliness could not moan, may through shame be
overcome, and return to themselves. And the Bishops he warns that in those
most hard times, they see to their office with all diligence and care, and
that they look about them diligently that ye Congregation take no harm. And
that it is not a sporting matter, but a very great burden that they have
taken upon them. And therefore if they preach at any time to the people, that
they speak as the words of God, and that they so behave themselves, that
others which hear the^, may think that they hear not men, but the messengers
and interpreters of the word of GOD. This is the portion of scripture that I
judged most fit for this time and place. For because therefore that partly we
are entered into the holy ministry, and partly, as I hope, we have already
directed the course of our studies to that point, we shall be taught in this
place, how this heavenly office is to be garnished, that our labor may in time
to come be very profitable to the church of God, and the holy Gospel be
most largely spread abroad. But that this may be done the more orderlye, and
least I should wander or go out of course in my speaking, I think it good to
touch these three points in few words: First, That a Preacher should speak:
secondlye, What he should speak: Thirdly, How he should speak: that it may
be understood. First, that he is scantly a good preacher, which never
speaks any thing to the Congregation, secondly, that a Preacher must set
forth unto the people, not old wives fables, but ye word of God, and last of
all that that same word of God must be handled reverently, and worthilye,
according to the dignity of the matter. But that God almightye would lighten
all your hearts and my voice with his holy spirit, and that some fruit may
come hereof unto us all, I desire of you that you will help my weakness with
your devout prayers.

First of all I commend unto your devotion, the universal Church of Christ
dispersed throughout the whole world, and as now it falls out, in many
places miserably afflicted, and namely this our Church of England and Irelande,
and in the same for our noble King Edward his Majesty, his most noble Sisters
Marie and Elizabeth, the privy Counsel, the rulers ecclesiastical and
political, and all the people of England, both Universities, and chiefly this
University of Oxenforde, the Chauncelor, ye Vicechaunceler, the Proctors,
Robert Noruent President of Corpus Christi College, Doctor Raynald, Master of
Merton College, and all the scholars in both these Colleges. Ye shall give
thanks unto God almighty, for King Henry the seventh and Henry the eight,
Kings of noble memory, for Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, etc. that of his
infinite goodness he has kindled those lights to the nourishing of good
letters and spreading abroad of Religion: And ye shall pray that it would
please him to raise up others hereafter like unto these, and to gather us all
to their society into the bosom of Abraham.

Let him that speaks speak as the words of God. To the end that the pith of
these words may be the better understood, because I must entreat both of
Pastors and before Pastors, I have used this division, To show first that a
Pastor should speak often, next of all that he should speak out of the holy
scriptures, last of al, That he should speak gravely and modestly according to
the worthiness of the matter. And surely concerning the office of Pastors, as
yet I see not sufficiently what I should speak or not speak. For to speak that
which has been before so often spoken, were not only hateful, but out of
season: and to speak nothing of so great sloth, and dastardie of our times, I
am much afraid might seem to show a sluggard and a dastarde. Truly, in this
case if the voice of the immortal God might be heard, there were no need at
this time of my voice. For that I may say nothing beside, all the scriptures
do sufficiently warn us of our duty, God himself has commanded nothing
at any time, either more often, or else with more weighty words, than that
his people should be instructed to know him, themselves, and godliness. Thou
son of man, says God, in Esaias, Cry and cease not, cry out aloude, lift up
thy voice as a Trumpet, and show unto my people their wickedness. How often
does Christ cry* Go ye, Teach ye, Preach ye the Gospel to every creature.
Woe unto me says the Prophet, because I have kept silence. Woe unto me, says
Paul, if I preach not the Gospel. But such is either our security or
daintiness, beside that we have stopped our ear against wholesome counsel,
that we account it as a reproach, if a man warn us of our duty. Nevertheless
whatsoever it seems to us, this has seemed to God a help both very firm
and very great to the making up of his Church. For so has GOD brought us out
of darkness into light, so has he restored us being dead unto life, so has
he brought us being prisoners and captives out of hell into heaven, so has he
broken the powers of the Devil, so has he brought us back again into his
own power and dominion, so has he spread abroad the fame of his name into
all lands. For if Christ, if the Apostles, if the Prophets had held their
peace, in what case had we now been in? what religion had there ben any where?
what worship of God had there been? That we behold the light, that we have
escaped out of bondage, that we are accounted, and be, the sons of God, all
that (I say) we owe unto the preaching of the word of God. Let us not
deceive our selves brethren, let us not deceive our selves. Our matters are not
so firmly established, that they cannot fall. Except we take heed, except we
look about, except we put to study and diligence, all things will easily
slide and fall into their former estate. A lamp, except you put oil often in
it, will soon be out. The victory is kept even by such means as it is
gotten. For what engines does not the devil now use, what crafts does he not
practice, what way does he not take, to overthrow the Church of God? He
keeps scoutwatch always, he is never weried, he has brought in so many
vices, so much ignorance, so great blindness, that there is no place in
which a Preacher ought to be idle. And as, if the sun were taken away from
the world, all things should be left dark, disparkled and confounded, so if
the voice of the Pastor be taken out of the Church, religion is left at six
and seven, it is left blind, troubled, all things are mingled with error,
susterstition and Idolatry: of so great weight is it to be a steward of the
house of God. The Gospel, religion, Godliness, the health of the Church
depends of us alone. This is our office, this we take upon us, and this we
profess. And except we do this, we do nothing, we serve to no use. It is
not enough to know I wot not what learning. The Devils perhaps know more
then any of us all. It belongs unto a Pastor not so much to have learned
many things, as to have taught much. Let it shame us, that the basest
kind of men, even Coblars and Porters do that which belongs unto them, and
we which ought to give light to al other are idle and do nothing. For God
would not have us idle bellies, but he would have us both be interpreters of
his mind, ministers of Jesus Christ, Atturneyes of the people before the
Lord of Sabbath, the light of world, salt, Angels, and the sons of GOD,
and so to be called: And we are appointed to govern, not dumme Cattle, not
wild Beasts, but the flock of the Lord, but the sons of GOD, but the
brethren of Christ. If any of these shall perish through our default, his
blood shall be required at our hands. If these things alone were still set
before us, in our eyes and minds, we would not so cast from us careleslye
and unadvisedly the safegarde of our Brethren and of our selves, we would
not so cast from us the blood of Christ. There is no cause why any should
say: We speak to them that are deaf, the people give no ear, we labor
for them which are unthankful, we prevail not, we cast that which is holy
unto Dogs, We give Pearls to Swine. We know that otherwhile these things
are truly spoken, and it greeueth me exceedingly, that they may be so truly
spoken against those that be Christian men. Yet for all this we may not
therefore hold our peace, but speak so much the oftener, so much the sharper,
so much the hotter. For look how much the disease is more perilous, so much
the more needs there a Physician. Neither can we justly complain of the
peoples stubbornness, while we our selves do all the while nothing. Let us do
our indeauor, and leave the success unto the Lord. Then shall they, if they
be of so froward a mind, that they will not hear, die in their own sin.
But there is no cause why we should be in despair of the peoples salvation.
God himself husbanded the Vine, which for Grapes brought out wild Grapes.
GOD himself has all the day long stretched out his hands to a rebelious and
ouerthwarte people. How often has Christ himself said: Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
how often would I have gathered together thy Children, as the hen gathers
together her Chickens, whereas they turned away their ears and would not
hear? This malady will easily be taken away, if the medicine therefore be
used. Let us bring forth the light, and God will open their eyes: let us beat
at their ears, and god will give them a heart of flesh: Let us give the
word, and God will give the spirit: let us plant and water, and god in due
time will give the increase. For as it is our duty to instruct the people
with words, so it belongs to God to join unto his words, faith and force.
Such is the strength of the word of God that to work nothing or to profit
none, it is not possible. Much will fall into the bushes, into the beaten way,
and among stones, yet some will fall into good ground and bring forth fruit.
For look as the rain comes down from heaven, and returns not thither
again, but moystneth and waters the earth, and makes it bring forth, and
gives seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats: so my word, says the
Lord, which goes forth out of my mouth, shall not return empty unto me, but
shall do whatsoever I will.

But because it is not enough to speak, let us now consider that which in the
second place I have promised, namelye, what is to be spoken. For some
otherwhile speak, who had been better have held their peace, othersome while
they make a noise and cry out with great contention, speak to no purpose.
Wherefore regard must be had, that we neither speak vnfruitefullye ne yet
hurtfullye. For all things are not to be hudled out in a sermon before the
multitude. We must take care what the Religious silence of the people, what
the reverence of the place, what the greatness of our office do require. The
truth must be spoken, not lies: the Scriptures, not fables: the precepts of
the highest God, and not the dreams of men: For religion is to be ordered not
by our judgment, but by the word of GOD. Wherein if we shall hearken to
Moses, or to the Prophets, or the Apostles, or Christ, or the Father himself,
we shall not much go out of the way. For Moses, whatsoever was to be said
or done in so great a wilderness, when he led the people being banished and
wandering, by a savage and desert region, alwais asked counsel at ye Lord, he
never brought the^ any thing of his own head. The Prophets always say, the word
of ye Lord, the vision of ye Lord, the voice of ye Lord: this says the Lord,
hear the Lord. I, says Paul, have received my Gospel not of man, neither by
man: and again, I know nothing but Jesus Christ, and the same crucified. And
again, If an Angel from heaven shall teach another gospel then yt which you
have learned, let him be cursed, christ says, al things which I have heard of
my father, I have delivered unto you: and, preach you, says he, not whatsoever
shall come in your head, but ye Gospel to al creatures: and, when as ye Pharisees
and Saduces had moved the questions of diuorcement, and the resurrection of the
dead unto life, he never had recourse unto the Rabins, but always to the word
of the Lord. God the father crying from Heaven, This, says he, is my dearelye
beloved Son: He says not, Hear your Fathers, your Graundfathers, or your
great Graundfathers, but he says, Hear him, even him. For our heavenly
Father would have his son and his word to be taught, and to be beat into
men's heads in all places. And certainly it may not be douted of by any man,
but that that, which the most excellent, most wise, and most living father
has given unto us for our cause, is most excellent, most wise, and to our
reasons most profitable. This is that river of water flowing abroad into life
everlasting. This is that flesh, this is that blood of Jesus Christ, this is
that only both most delicate and most wholesome food of our souls, with this
only sword the devil is overcome, with this only stone Goliath is laid
along, with this only Maule the roughness and hardness of hearts is
softened and overcome. And were it not for this, neither could religion
flourish, nor faith be confirmed, or the Church kept within the limits of
her duty. Call to remembrance, I beseech you for the Lords sake, that as often
as the word of the Lord languished, how often and into how many grievous
errors, and how great a breakenecke evil did the whole people fall into, how
often despised they the mightiest and most loving God their preserver and
Father, how often worshipped they Astaroth, Beliall, the Son, the Moon,
Calties and beasts, and turned away themselves from all religion and
godliness, and put their whole hope and confidence in things most vain and
filthy. For when as every one hatched out of his own mind a religion and
holiness unto himself, superstition and such a multitude of new Gods,
increased so suddenly, that the Prophet was enforced to cry out, your Gods are
in number as many as your cities. For when as they had forsaken the truth,
life, and religion, what remained, but that they should fall hedlong into lies,
into destruction, into ungodly worshippinges? I had rather make mention of
these old things, than to bring in examples which are fresh and in memory.
There is none of us that ever was so blind, that he saw not, or so blockish
that he understood not the calamity of former times. We have far gone beyond,
not only the superstition and vanity of the Jews, but also of the Egiptians
and Grecians. For when the authority of Councels, and the conspiracy of a few
Bishops and Monks, was placed above ye scriptures, when it was douted whether
ye Romish bishop were a man or a God, and whether he could sin, when all
things were referred to the constitutions of men, and nothing to the knowledge
of Christ, when sales of pardons, vows and masses, were made openly and
without al shame, when ye sacraments were miserably torn in pieces, when the
word of God was condemned of fraud and heresy, when nothing was left found
and pure from superstition, when error possessed all things, and the truth
could not be heard, where then, or what Church of God was there? It was heresy
in those days, not ye disagreede from the scriptures, but from that which
liked a few Bishops. For the gospel was thrust into corners, nothing was left
to the judgment of Christ. Our gods were not then according to the number of
our cities, but they were as many as we had streats, yea almost houses. So
were all things utterly out of frame, for that religion depended not on the
word of God, but on the will of man. These horrible cases, brethren, may warn
us, that we never unadvisedly depart from the word of God. And thereof it is
that all the scriptures do move us so often and so diligently, that we neither
ad any thing to the word of God, nor take ought therfro^, nor that we bow to
the right hand or the left. Neither would the Lord yt we should be Princes and
Judges, but messengers and ministers of his word. For look what serves to
our salvation, and unto godliness all that has God himself set down in his
laws. For the holy scripture, as Paul says inspired by God, is profitable to
doctrine, to reprove, to correction, to instruction, yt the man of God may be
perfect, instructed to every good work: yt the man of God says he, may be
perfect and sound, and as far as is requisite either to godliness or manners,
yt he should in every respect be perfectly furnished* and now I pray you what
should God his ambassador bring forth unto god his people, rather then the word
of God? He that is an Ambassador in civil affairs, if perhaps he say any thing
beside yt which is commanded him, he is accused that he has not don his
embassade rightly, he is called to his trial he is araigned upon life and
death, and why do not we with like fidilitie handle the word of God? But too
too, good God, too too secure a mind, my brethren, too too secure a mind be we
of. And as though men alone could not be deceived, so do we hold so do we
defend that alonely, which is come from our forefathers. There were among the
Jews many Murderers, thieves and adulterers, and yet did not Christ enuey
either more often or more bitterlye against any than against the Phariseis
and Scribes, you break, says he the commandment of God for your own
traditions. In vain do you worship me, teaching doctrines and the precepts
of men. They are blind guides of the blind Harlots and sinners shall go into
the kingdom of God before you. How often* and with what words, does the
Lord in the Prophets complayn of this? Be astonished ye Heavens, says he, My
people have done two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living
water, and have dug unto themselves broken Cesternes, which can hold no
waters. What is chafe compared with Wheat? what is the rashness of men
compared with the eternal will of God? For Basil does say, that that man,
which dares put to or take away any thing from the scriptures of God, is
either a feeble Christian, or a notable arrogant fellow. To put to the word of
God the inventions of men, what other thing may it seem, tha^ to mingle new
wine, not with old wine, but with wine that is dead, and with lees or
dregs? and to join light with darkness, a wild beast with a man, a man
with God? My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor my ways are not your ways,
says the Lord: for look how far the heaven is from the earth, so far
are my ways from your ways, and my thoughts from your thoughts. Nay rather
look how far a man is distaunt from God, so far is the understanding of
man distaunte from the word of God.

For although very much by the judgment of all men is to be given to the
Fathers, yet were they men, and also might err, Truly, to speak nothing
else of them, they did oftentimes very ill agee mong themselves, about very
great and weighty matters. But the word of god is sure, and firm, and certain,
and appointed for every time. Peter would have this kind of learning to be
delivered unto ye people in a sermon. And he yt will have doings (her in) with
the people, must first be instructed himself with the word of God, yt he may
utter the word as inspired with an heaue^lye power. O if Peter were now alive.
What would he say, or rather what would he not say, seeing that religion,
godliness, the scriptures, are all passed into the inventions and dreams of
men? That is only in question at these days, whether the customs of me^ are
rather to be retained, or ye laws of God: That alone has moved these
turmoiles, that has stirred the whole world, whether more credit is to be
given unto a man, or unto god. I know yt these things seem new to the most of
you, and not to be believed: but put from you, I beseech you, your affections,
and ye opinion of things which you have already conceived, and you shall well
perceive, yt I feign nothing for the times sake, but that I speak the thing it
self. Christ has ordained the holy Communion in remembrance of himself: men
do neither retain any remembrance of Christ, nor yet Communion, but have
changed all the whole matter into a gay show, and almost a stage play. Christ
says, Ye shall have the poor always with you, but me ye shall not have
always, I leave the world and go to my father: It is expedient for you that I
go away: and Christ spoke this, not of his Godhead, wherewith he was equal to
the father, or of his heavenly nature, but of his body: Men say, that Christ
neither has with his body left the world, nor yet gone from hence to his
father. Paul says that Christ is in heaven at the right hand of the father,
Peter says in the Acts of the Apostles, Heaven must hold him until the time
that al things are restored: Men say, That the body of Christ is in heaven and
in earth both at once, and is dispearced into an infinite multitude of places
at one time. Paul says, yt Christ has once entered into the holy places, and
has with one only sacrifice, and one oblatio^, made perfect al things: Men
say, that they can sacrifice christ himself again every day, not only for
remembrance sake, but in very deed, and that in infinite places. Christ
says, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: Men
worship the Eucharist, alack the while, being neither Lord nor God, but a
sacrament of the Lord, without authority of the scriptures, or example of the
Apostles, and that as God. For, by the living God I beseech you, consider in
your minds brethren, who ever, I will not say of the Apostles, but of the
holy fathers has either worshipped the Sacrament himself, or has showed it
forth to be worshipped of others? I see that I speak these things not before
the common sort of men, but before them who are profoundly learned, I appeal
to all your consciences, I will use in this matter your own testimony.
Christ has commanded ye Sacrament to be delivered whole: Men have torn the
same after a miserable manner, Christ willed that nothing should be added to
his law: Men do not only add many things, but ye same they prefer before
the word of God. But why should I reckon up more? This only will I speak,
and that in a word, they which brought in transubstantiations, masses,
calling upon saints, sole life, purgatory, images, vows, trifles, follies,
bables, into the Church of God, have delivered new things, and which the
scriptures never heard of. Whatsoever they cry or crake, they bring not a
jot out of the word of God. And these, as I have said, are the things
wherewith the Church of God at these days are disquieted. Upon these lies
the watch and ward of the Church. These they honor in steed of the
scriptures, and force them to the people in steed of the word of God: upon
these: men suppose their salvation, and the sum of religion to be grounded.
And yt which is much more grievous, notwithstanding at this present by the great
goodness of God, religion is restored almost to her former dignity and light,
yet poor and pitiful souls they set great store by these things, they to
them again, and teach them, as though without the^ the Church could not be in
safety. O if the word of the Lord might be heard, among so mamany clamours,
and in so great a hurlye burly. If we would suffer God himself, to sit as
judge in his own case, the matter would be passed over with less tumulte a
great deal, and more easilye might we agree about the whole matter.
Wherefore if all the worship of GOD, all godliness, all religion, be to be
sought out of the word of GOD, If the institutions of men, have miserably
perverted all things in all times, let us, my brethren, unto whom the office
of teaching is allotted, consider how dangerous a thing it is to speak more:
and let all, who will be, and will have themselves accounted to be
Christians, remember how dangerous a thing it is to believe more. And if there
be any of this whole number, which has given himself to any other kind
of life, yet let him consider that these things belong unto him, so that if he
neither can, nor will teach, yet let him diligently and attentively, hear him
that speaks, and give God thanks yt he has happened on those times, in
which he may hear the word of God freely and purely. Let us not be wedded
to much to our own wit, let us not be wedded too much to the Fathers and
forfathers. Let us not unadvisedly think that men are so luckily borne, that
whatsoever they say, they cannot err. When we shall be placed before that
dreadful judgment seat, when all things shall burn, and the Angels of God
shall tremble, to what Fathers, to what decrees of our forefathers, shall we
wretches than appeal? We shall than have refuge to Christ alone, than shall
we use the aid and word of Christ alone. Wherefore let us not be of so
secure a mind in so great a matter. Our life, our soul, our salvation is the
thing in hand. The heavenly father offreth himself unto us, and of his own
accord meets us, Jesus Christ cries out, and calls every one of us: Come
unto me all ye which are grieved and I will refresh you. How blind be we if
we see not, how blockish if we understand not, how miserable if we run from
this? Where shall the word of Christ be heard, if it cannot be heard among
Christians? If it cannot be heard among Christians where shall it be heard?
Let us once yet open, brethren, let us open our eyes, that it may not be
spoken against our stubbornness, therefore you hear not, because you be not of
God: and that that saying of Esayas be not conveniently applied against us, The
heart of this people is waxen gross, and they have hardlyheard with their
ears, and they have closed their eyes, least they should at any time see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
they should be converted, and I should heal them. And what I should speak
more, before christian men and the Children of God, concerning the word of
GOD, I see not.

Now remains that which was put in the last part, namelye how the
scriptures are to be taught. For not only wisdom and fidelity, but also
wisdom and foresight is to be used. Therefore says Peter, let him not
speak only, but let him speak as the words of God. Nor yet is it
sufficient to profess only, and outwardly to show, that it is the word of
God which we teach, and with a fair face and earnest countenance sing. The
word of the Lord: For the Jews and Turks and false Prophets do so, they al
cry out that Christ is theirs, and they all restrain true religion (as
belonging) unto themselves. The Phariseis and Scribes of these days, when they
confirm their own inventions, and refer all things to the Apostles as
their authors, and do wreste the word of God, yet do they cry nothing
either oftener, or more importunately, than, The word of the Lord. But Christ
has not taught dissimulation and hypocrisy. He rather teaches this, that
Pastoures may have in mind that they represente the person of Christ* yt they
being induced through the greatness and worthiness of ye thing it self, may
so reverently do their office, that all men may perceive, that it is a heavenly
business which they have taken upon them* For the image of God himself must
shine in him that is the minister of God. And if the Apostles had not so used
themselves, they had never laid the foundations of Religion: there would never
any have left their alters, their Sacrifices, their Fires, and their Gods
themselves, to have been of the opinion of a few fishers. They counted all
that they had as nothing, in comparison of Christ Jesus. When they were
taunted, they taunted not again, when they were condemned to Prisons, and
Fyers, they never ceased to give thanks, they always greatly rejoiced. for
that they were afflicted with all manner of punishments, for Christ his sake.
There was in them such vprightenesse of heart, such modesty, such virtue,
that whatsoever they said* others were ashamed to speak against it. Even so
brethren our life ought to ^yue, that as often as we speak, we may seem to
speak the words of GOD. For we are the salt of the earth, we are the light
of the world, we are that City set upon the Hill, all men's eyes are fastened
on us, whatsoever we do, straight way example is taken to do the like. It is
a burden of great difficultye and weighte that we have taken upon us. Which
if we would all well weighe, the course of the Gospel would not be so
hindered, the word of God would not be so much neglected. For when as we
profess God with our mouth, but deny him with our deeds, we fraye away the
unlearned multitude by our example from religion, and the thing that of all
other is most divine, we defile, not with vnpure hands, but with vnpure
manners. So for our sakes is godliness despised for our sake is the truth
contemned, for our sake is the majesty of God empayred. These things,
brethern, are diligently to be considered, and earnestly to be regarded of us.
For if we live filthily and wickedly, and bring into the pulpit nothing but a
rolling of the tongue and impudency, whatsoever we speak, we speak it not,
either as it should, or else as the words of God. But to the end the word of
the Lord may be handled according to the worthiness thereof, two things
principallye are by us to be taken heed of: the one yt we be not weakened nor
feebled by fear, ye other, that out of the Gospel we reap no jot or piece of
praise unto our selves. A preachers mind must be prepared and diligently
fens^^ against either of these. For the Gospel and the word of God, except it
be stiflye and manfully vpholden and mainteyned, neither will serve the gospel*
nor the word of GOD. For error is fearful, base, and quaking, it fears all
things it dreadeth all things, it flies sight, and light: but the truth, and
the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, never abaseth it self, never
flattereth any, dissembleth nothing* fayneth nothing, is unfearful, free,
bold to show her face, and high. Wherefore as long as we speak the truth, let
not the force or authority of any man make us afraid. Let us call to mind
that we are the messengers and Ambassadors of God, Let us call to mind that
God has given us power to speak. For what courage does not Christ make us,
when he promises that he will be the revenger of the injury done unto us? he,
says he, that despises you, despises me, he which hurts you, hurts the
sight of mine eye, wherefore let us speak, not dissemblingly, not darkely, as
did the Phariseis, but freelye and plainly as having authority, as meet it
is that the Words of God should be uttered. But nevertheless moderation must
be used, that we do not unseasonably touch or spot the good name and fame of
others For then we shall seem to taunt or rail, and to handle our own cause,
rather then to teach the word of the Lord. But it becomes tht servant of
the Lord to be modest and circumspecte, not to blabbe out any thing rashly or
cockishlye: least we may seem to speak not out of the holy pulpit, but out
of the carte, neither yet to have cited the Gosple, but to have brought up
again the old manner of Commodies.

The next thing is that a preacher have not to great a conceit of him
self, but that he think that that function and office hapened unto him from
above from God, that he should discharge his duty diligently and with very
great fear, and that he should think that he is occupied not in his own
business but in Gods business. So Paul says he is nothing: John cries
that he is unworthy to pull of the shoes of Messiah: And therefore to abate
arogancie, they are in the holy scriptures called not Princes, not Magistrates,
not Rulers, not Kings, but stewardes, bailiffes, preachers or cryers,
ministers, servants, to the end that for as much as we do this gear in the
behalf of another, we should not grow proud for another bodies praise. For the
Lord has not therefore committed his talent unto us, that we should convert
it to our own commodity. For he would not have us preachers and criers of our
own wit and skill, but of his will, nether do we for any other cause carry
about this treasure in Earthen vessels, than for that it should be the
brightness and clear light of the power of God.

I will not stay you with any more words. Ye have heard that a Preacher must
speak both often, and out of the word of God, and also grauelye and modestlye.
We brethren, either are Preachers or will be Preachers: let us bear in mind
that these things belong to us, and that saint Peter says to us, He that
speaks let him speak as the words of GOD. There is need not only of our
diligence but also of prudencie and fidelity. Wherefore whatsoever we are able
by nature, whatsoever by counsel, whatsoever by wit and cunning, let us
bestow it all to serve the Church of God. We are ye stewardes of the house of
God: let us not dissipate and scatter the household of God. If we be the
Apostles of God, let us show Apostolic minds. If we be the brethren of
Christ, let us hear Christ, let us feed his Lambs, let us feed his sheep,
let us go, let us preach, let us teach. The universal world seems a good
while since to travail of Christ, let us cast about our eyes brethren. How
great is the Harvest every where, how few be the Reapers? And this I speak
unto them of whom there is some good hope. If there be any that laugh at these
things, or mock them, why should I hope that they will hear me, who will
not hear Christ himself. Let the calamity of our brethren move us, let the
curse of God move us [namelye] Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligentlye. let that most grievous threatening move us (namely) Their blood
will I require at thy hand. Let us prepare our selves to that most sweet voice
and speech of Christ (namely) Well done servant, Go in. Let us speak in
season and out of season, let us speak the word of the Lord, let us speak as
the words of the Lord, that Gods praise may be set forth in all things by
Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory and imperie for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

