HERE begins a merry Ieste of a shrewde and curste Wife, lapped in Morrelles
Skin, for her good behauyour.



JMPRINTED AT London in Fleetestrete, beneath the Conduite, at the sign of
Saint John Euaungelist, by H. Iackson.



LYsten friends, and hold you still,
Abide a while and dwell:
A merry Jest tell you I will,
And how that it befell.
As I went walking upon a day,
Among my friends to sport:
To an house I took the way,
To rest me for my comfort.
A great feast was kept there than,
And many one, was thereat:
With wives and maidens and many a good man,
That made good game and chat.
It befell then at that tide,
An honest man was there:
A cursed Dame sat by his side,
That often did him dear.
His wife she was I tell you plain,
This dame ye may me trow:
To play the master she would not layne,
And make her husband bow.
At every word that she did speak,
To be peace he was full feign:
Or else she would take him on the cheek,
Or put him to other pain.
When she did wink, he durst not stere,
Nor play where ever he went:
With friend or neighbor to make good chere,
When she her brows bente.
These folk had two maidens fair and free,
Which were their Daughters dear:
This is true, believe you me,
Of conditions, was none their pere.
The youngest was meek, and gentle ywys,
Her Fathers condition she had:
The eldest her mothers withouten miss,
Sometime frantic and sometime mad.
The father had his pleasure in the one always,
And glad he was her to behold:
The mother in the other this is no nay,
For in all her curstness, she made her bold.
And at the last she was in fay,
As curste as her mother in word and deed:
Her mischievous pageauntes sometime to play,
Which caused her fathers heart to bleed.
For he was woe and nothing glad,
And of her would feign be rid:
He wished to God that some man her had,
But yet to marriage he durst her not bid.
Full many there came the youngest to have,
But her father was loath her to forgo:
None there came the eldest to crave,
For fear it should turn them to woe.
The Father was loath any man to beguile,
For he was true and just withal:
Yet there came one within a while,
That her demanded in the Hall.
Another there came right soon also,
The youngest to have he would be feign:
Which made the fathers heart full woe,
That he and the youngest, should part in twain.
But the mother was fell, and might her not see,
Wherefore of her she would have been rid:
The young man full soon she granted pardy,
Great Gold and silver, with her she bid.
Saying full soon, he would her have,
And wedded they were short tale to make:
The Father said so god me save,
For heaviness and sorrow, I tremble and quake.
Also his heart was in great care,
How he should bestow the eldest ywys:
Which should make his purse full bare,
Of her he would be rid by heavens bliss.
As hap was that this young man should,
Desire the eldest withouten fail:
To marriage he said full feign he would,
That he might her have for his avail.
The Father said with words anon,
Gold and silver I would thee give:
If thou her marry by sweet saint John,
But thou should repent it all thy live.
She is conditioned I tell thee plain,
Most like a Fiend, this is no nay:
Her Mother does teach her, withouten layne,
To be master of her husband another day.
If thou should her marry, and with her not gree,
Her mother thou should, have always in thy top:
By night and day, that should vex thee,
Which sore would stick, then in thy crop.
And I could not amend it by God of might,
For I dare not speak my self for my life:
Sometime among be it wrong or right,
I let her have all for fear of strife.
If I ought say, she does me treat,
Except I let her have her will:
As a child that should be beat,
She will me charm the Devil her kill.
Another thing thou must understand,
Her mothers good will thou must have also:
If she be thy friend, by sea or by land,
Amiss with thee, then can it not go.
For she does her love with all her mind,
And would not see her fare amiss:
If thou to her dareling could be kind,
Thou could not want by heavens bliss.
If thou to the mother, now wilt seek,
Behave thy self then like a man:
And show thy self both humble and meek,
But when thou haste her do what thou can.
Thou wotest what I said to thee before,
I counsel thee mark my words well:
It were great pity, thou werte forlore,
With such a deuillishe Fend of Hell.
I care not for that the young man said,
If I can get her mothers good will:
I would be glad to have that maid,
Me thinks she is withouten evil.
Alas good man I am sorry for thee,
That thou will cast thy self away,
Thou art so gentle and so free:
Thou shall never tame he I dare well say.
But I have done I will say no more,
Therefore farewell and go thy way:
Remember what I said to thee before,
And beware of repentance another day.
How the young man departed from the Father, and sought to the Mother, for to
have the Maid to marriage.
Yongman.


Mother.


Daughter.


NOw is the young man come to the Dame,
With countenance glad, and manners demure:
Saying to her God keep you from blame,
With your dear daughter so fair and pure.
She welcommeth again the fair young man,
And bid him come near gentle friend:
Full courteously he thanked the good dame than
And thought her words full good and kind.
Then he began I shall you tell,
Unto the Mother thus to say,
With words fair that become him well,
For her dear daughter thus to pray.
Saying good Dame now by your leave,
Take it for none eueli though I come here:
If you to me good leave would give,
With you right feign would I make good chere.
The dame said sit down a while abide,
Good chere anon then will we make:
My daughter shall sit down by thy side,
I know well thou come only for her sake.
You say full true forsooth said he,
My mind is steadfastly on her set:
To have that maiden fair and free,
I would be feign if I could her get,
The Mother thanked him for his good will,
That he her daughter so did desire:
Saying I hope you come for none evil.
But in good honesty, her to require.
For if ye did, I will be plain,
Right soon it should turn you unto grief:
And also your coming I would disdain,
And bid you walk with a wild mischief.
But surely I take you for none of those,
Your condistions show it in no wise:
Wherefore me think you do not gloss,
Nor I will not counsel you, by mine advise.
For I love my Daughter as my heart,
And loath I were, I will be plain:
To see her suffer pain and smarte,
For if I did my heart were slain.
If that thou should another day,
My daughter have and her good will:
Order her then unto her pay,
As reason requires it is good skill.
In women sometime great wisdom is,
And in men full little it is often seen:
But she is wise withouten mis,
From a young child by she has so been.
Therefore to her thou must audience give,
For thine own profit when she does speak:
And than shall thou in quiet live,
And much strife, thus shalt thou break.
How say thou young man what is thy mind,
Would thou her have my daughter dear,
Than to her thou must be kind,
And always ready to make her good chere.
For an.C.li. of money have thau shalt,
Of Silver and eke of Gold so round:
With an.C. quarters of Come and malte,
And.xl. acres of good ground.
If thou will live with her like a man,
Thou shalt her have, and this will I give:
And ever after while I can,
Be thy good Mother as long as I live.
And I will speak to my daughter for thee,
To know if it be her will also:
If she be content, my daughter free,
Then together may ye go.
The mother demanded, her daughter than,
If that she could find in her mind:
With all her heart to love that young man,
So that he to her would be kind.
She said yea mother as you will,
So will I do in word and deed:
I trust he comes for none ill,
Therefore the better may we speed.
But I would have one that has some good,
As well as I good reason is:
Me think he is a lusty blood,
But gooddes there must be withouten miss.
The young man was glad these words to here,
And thanked the mother of her good will:
Beholding the Maiden with right mild cheer,
And prayed her heartily to be still.
Saying to her then in this wise,
Mine heart, my love, my dearling dear:
Take no displeasure of my enterprise,
That I desire to be your pear.
I am not rich of Gold nor fee,
Nor of great merchandise ye shall understand:
But a good Craft I have pardee,
To get our living in any land.
And in my heart I can well find,
You for to love above all other:
For evermore to you to be kind,
And never forsake you for none other.
Like a woman I will you use,
And do you honor, as ye should do me:
And for your sake all other refuse,
As good reason is, it should so be.
By my troth, but well you say,
And me think by your countenance ywis:
That ye should not another day,
For no cause deal with me amiss.
And in you I hope pleasure to take,
If ye would be gentle as ye should:
And never none other for your sake.
To marry for a.M. pound of gold.
But sometime ye must me a little forbear,
For I am hasty but it is soon done:
In my fume I do nothing fear,
Whatsoever thereof to me become.
And I cannot refrain me in no wise,
For I have it by nature a part ywis:
It was wont to be my mothers guise,
Sometime to be master withouten miss.
And so must I by God now and than,
Or else I would think it should not be well,
For though ye were never so good a man,
Sometime among I will bear the bell.
And therefore tell me with words plain,
If ye can be pacient what time it is:
To suffer with me a little pain,
Though that you think I do amiss.
Or else say nay, and make a short end,
And soon we shall asonder depart:
Then at your liberty you may hence wend,
Yet I do love you with all my heart.
The yongman was glad of her love in fay,
But loath he was master her for to make:
And bethought him what her father before did say,
When he on wooing his journey did take.
And so cousented to all her will,
When he advised him what he should do:
He said ye may me save or spill,
For ye have my love sweet heart and no more.
The mother hearing this, for the father sent,
Showing to him what was befall:
Where with he was right well content,
Of all their promises in general.
Upon this greement they departed then,
To prepare all things for the feast:
Glad was the bride and her spouse then,
That they were come to this beheast.
How the Bryde was married with her Father and Mothers. good will.


THe day approached, the time drue near,
That they should be wedded withouten misset
The Bryde was glad and made good cheer,
For she thought to make great joy and bliss.
As that day to tryumphe with games and sport,
Among her friends a rule to bear:
And eake with his friends that thither should resort,
Thinking that no body might be her pear.
The Bridegroom was glad also in say,
As man might be upon the molde:
And to himself thus began he say,
Now shall I receive an heap of gold.
Of pounds many one, and much goods beside,
To rejoice my sorrows, and also my smarte:
I know not her pear in this country so wide,
But yet I fear always her proud heart.
She is so syb to the mother withouten fail,
Which has no pear that I know:
In all mischief she dare assail,
The boldest Archer that shoots in a bow.
But no force I care not, I wot what I think,
When we be wed and keep house alone,
For a small storm I may not shrink,
To run to my neighbor, to make my moan.
Soon to the church now were they brought
With all their friends them about:
There to be married as they ought,
And after them followed a full great rout.
With them to offer as custom is,
Among good neighbors it is always seen:
Full richly deckte withouten mis,
And she thought her self, most likest a Queen.
Incontinent when the Mass was done,
Homeward forsooth they took the way:
There follows after them right soon,
Many a tall man and woman full gay.
The fathers and mothers next of all,
Unto the Bridgrome and Bryde also:
As to them then, it did befall,
With them that tide, so for to go.
How the Bryde and her friends came from the Church, and were of the
Brydegroome at their feast honestly served.


WHen they came home the bordes were spread,
The Bride was set at the hye dysse:
Every one said, she had well sped,
Of such a fair husband as served her mysse.
The friends sat about her on every side,
Each in their order, a good sight to see,
The Bryde in the midst, with much pride,
Full richely beseene, she was pardye.
The mother was right glad of this sight,
And fast she did her daughter behold:
Thinking it was a pleasant wight,
But always her Fathers heart was cold.
When he remembered what might befall,
Of this young Daughter, that was so bold:
He could nothing be merry at all,
But moned the young man full many a fold.
Behold how often with countenance sad,
Saying to himself alas this day:
This young man proves much worse then mad,
That he has married this cursed may.
Where I have counsayled him by heavens bliss
That he should not meddle in no wise:
Least he repented withouten miss,
That ever he made this enterprise.
But seeing it is thus, self do self have,
He is worse then mad that will him moan:
For I will no more so God me save,
But God send him joy, with my daughter Ione.
She is as curste I dare well swear,
And as angry ywis as ever was waspe:
If he her anger she will him tere,
And with her nails also him claspe.
What avails it to say ought now,
The deed is done, no remedy there is:
Good cheer to make I make God auowe,
Is now the best withouten miss.
For now is the time it should so be,
To make good game and sport in fay:
In comforting all this company,
That be assembled here this day.
The father and mother, were dilligent still,
To welcome the friends both more and less:
The yongman did also his good will,
To serve them well at every mess.
Wherein the mother great pleasure took,
And so did the father eake truly,
The Bride gave a friendly look,
Casting on him a wanton eye.
Then was the Brydegrome reioysed sore,
Always our Lord thanking of his great grace:
Having in mind times many a score,
That his Bryde showed him such a fair place.
The mynstrelles played at every board,
The people therewith reioysed right well:
Giving the Bridegroom their good word,
And the bryde also that in bewty did excel.
The time past forth the dinner was done,
The tables were taken up all:
The Brydegroome welcomed them every echone,
That were there in the hall.
They thanked him then and the Bryde also,
Of their great cheer they had:
And swear great oaths so mote I go,
They were never at feast so glad.
Now we will remember you or we depart,
As use and custom does require:
He thanked them with all his heart,
So did both dame and sire.
The Bryde to the Table again was set,
To keep countenance than in deed:
The friends that were together met,
Be gyfted them richely with right good speed.
The father and the mother first began,
To order them in this wise:
The Brydegrome was set by the Brydes side than,
After the country guise.
Then the father the first present brought,
And presented them there richly in fay,
With deeds of his land in a box well wrought,
And made them his heirs for aye.
He gave them also of malte and corn,
An hundred quarters and more:
With sheep and oxen, that bare large horn,
To keep for household store.
And then came the mother as quick as a be,
To the Brydegrome with words smart:
Saying son so mote I thee,
I must open to thee my heart.
She gave them also both carte and plow,
And bid them always to do well:
And God should send them good ynow,
If they did mark, what she did tell.
Before the people in this Hall,
I will say and to thee rehearse:
An hundred pound now give thee I shall,
But harken first unto my vearse.
Thou haste here my daughter dear,
A pleasant thing it is:
In all the country I know not her pear,
So have I part of bliss.
For she is wise and fair with all,
And will nothing cast away:
I trow there be now none in this hall,
That better can save all thing in fay.
Nor better does know what does behoue,
Unto an house or huswiuery:
Then she does, which causes me to move,
This matter to thee so busily.
She can card, she can spin,
She can thresh, and she can fan:
She can help thee good to win,
For to keep thee like a man.
And here is an hundred pound in Gold,
To set thee up, thy craft to use:
Wherefore I am plain I would thou should,
In no manner of wise thy self abuse.
To strive with my daughter or her to entreat,
For any thing that she shall do:
Here after my child, therefore to beat,
It should turn plainly, to thy great woe.
O my dear mother take no displeasure,
Till you have cause what so befall,
But use your self always by measure,
For other cause none have you shall.
My wife and I full well shall gree,
I trust to God in throne:
She is my love and ever shall be,
And none but she alone.
O my dear son thou make me glad,
Which before was full of sorrow:
For my dear daughter, I was full sad,
But now I say our Lord to borrow.
Thou geuest me good comfort now farewell care
Here is thy hundred pound,
I pray God give thee well to fare,
And keep thee whole and sound.
I thank you dear mother the young man said
Of your good gift and daughter dear:
Me thinks she is the worthiest maid,
In all this Land withouten pear.
I hoape to live with her always,
So gentelly that she shall find:
And you her mother I dare well say,
In every season gentle and kind.
The people standing them to behold,
Regarded the words of the Brydegrome than,
And said he answered with words cold,
Which become full well the good young man.
And then they pressed forth each after other,
With gold and silver, and rich gifts eake:
And many a scorn they gave the mother,
But ever they praised the young man meek.
To whom he gave thanks with all his might,
As honesty requires him to do:
He ordered himself always aright,
Yet they thought all he should have woe.
For he was matched so ywys,
That he could not want for sorrow in fay,
But always hampred withouten miss,
Of mother and daughter, forever and aye.
When all was done they began depart,
And took their leave full friendly thoe:
Thanking each other with all their heart,
And on their way home they began go.
The Father and mother thanked them all,
The Bryde and Brydegrome, also without mis,
Did thank the company in general,
Departing from them with joy and bliss.
Then they went home while it was day,
And left the Bryde and Brydegrome there,
And they that did abide there in good fay,
They made at even again good cheer.
And after supper they did make good sport,
With dancing and springing as was the use:
Young people by other there did resort,
To no man's hinder nor confuse.
After that all sportes were ended and done,
And that the bryde should go to bed:
About the hall they daunced soon.
And suddaynly away the bryde was led.
To take her rest with her dear spouse,
As reason would it should so be:
Even as the cat, was wont with the mouse,
To play forsooth even so did he.
The next morning if that ye will hear,
The mother did come to their bedsyde:
Demanding them what was their cheer,
And the Bryde began her head to hyde.
Saying to her as one ashamed,
Iwys dear mother I would ye were gone:
Or ye came hear I was not blamed,
For being in his arms hear all alone.
Mine own dear daughter, be not displeased
Though I do let you of your desport:
I would be loath ye were diseased,
But you shall have a Cawdell for your comfort.
A while I will go and let you alone,
Till ye be ready for to rise:
And sodaynely the mother was from them gone
To make the Cawdell after the best wise.
When that the mother departed was,
The dallyed together and had good game,
He hit her awry, she cried alas,
What do ye man, hold up for shame.
I will sweet wife then began he say,
Fulfill your mind, both loud and still:
But ye be able I swear in fay,
In all sportes to abide my will.
And they wrestled, so long beforne,
That this they had, for their great meade:
Both shyrt and smock was all to torn,
That their vprysyng had no speed.
But yet the mother came again,
And said to her daughter how do thou now,
Mary mother between us twain,
Our shyrtes be torn, I make God auowe.
By Gods dear mother, she swear than,
This order with us may not continue:
I will no more lie by this man,
For he does me brast both vain and sinew.
Nay nay dear mother this world goes on wheels,
By sweet saint George ye may me trow:
He lies kicking with his heels,
That he is like to bear me a blow.
My own dear daughter if thy smock be asonder,
Another thou shalt have then by this light:
I pray thee heartily do thou not wonder,
For so was I dealt with the first night.
That I by thy father lay by the roode,
And I do thee, with words plain:
Me thought never night to me so good,
As that same was, when I took such pain.
Why mother were ye then glad,
To be thus dealt with as I am now:
Me think my husband worse then mad,
For he does exceed I make God auow,
I could not lie still nor no rest take,
Of all this night believe ye me:
Sometime on my side, and sometime on my back,
He rolde and laid me so mote I thee.
And from the beds head unto the beds feet,
A cloth we had not us for to deck,
Neither our couerlet nor yet our sheet,
That I pray God the deuell him check.
For I am ashamed my mother dear,
Of this nights rest by God in throne:
Before our friends I dare not appear,
Would to Gods passion, I had layne alone.
Nay nay dear daughter be not ashamed,
For here is nothing done amiss:
They be more worthy to be blamed,
That hereof thinks shame ywys.
For this is honesty for thee and us all,
And a new smock I will thee fet:
And eke for thee my son I shall,
For thy true labor, a new shyrte get.
And soon of these, they were both sped,
The daughter and eake the son also:
Full quickly they rose out of their bed,
And with their mother, they began go.
Abroad among, their friends all,
Which bid them good luck, and eake good grace,
The cawdell was ready there in the Hall,
With mirth and glee for their solace.
Thus ended the feast with sport and play,
And all their friends each with other:
Did take their leave and went their way,
From bryde, and Brydegrome, with father and mother.
Which right heartily did thank them tho,
So did the Bryde, and Brydegrome eke:
Yet when the friends were all ago,
This young folk abode with the mother all the week.
The father was glad to see them agree,
So was the mother by heaven queen:
And said each to other so mote I thee,
I thought not so well it should have been.
Between them twain as it is now,
And therefore alone here shall they bide:
We will leave them all I make God auowe,
And go to dwell in our house hard beside.
At short conclusyon they went their way,
Leuing their children all that was there:
And come not again of many a day,
For their dear daughter to inquere.
Thus they bode together than,
He set up his shop with haberdash ware:
As one that would be a thriuing man,
To get great goods for his welfare.
And after that he took great pain,
To order his plowes and cattle also:
He kept both boy and also swayne,
That to the carte and plow did go.
And some kept neat, and some kept sheep,
Some did one thing, some did another,
But when they came home to have their meat,
The wife played the deuell then, like her mother.
With countenance grun and words smart,
She gave them meat and bad them brast:
The pore folk that come from plow and carte,
Of her lewd words they were aghast.
Saying each to other what dame is this,
The devil I trow has brought us here:
Our master shall know it by heavens bliss,
That we will not serve him another year.
The good man was fourth in the town abroad,
About other things I you say,
When he came homeward he met with a goade,
One of his carters was going away.
To whom he said Lob whether go thou,
The carter spyde his master than:
And said to him I make God auow,
No longer with thy wife abide I can.
Master he said by Gods blist,
Our dame is the deuell thou may me believe:
If thou have sought her thou haste not miste,
Of one that full often thee shall grieve.
By God a man, thou can not have,
To go to carce, ne yet to plow:
Neither boy, nor yet knave,
By Gods dear mother I make God auow.
That will bide with thee day or night,
Our Dame is not for us for she does curse:
When we shall eat or drink with right,
She bannes and frowns, that we be all the worse.
We be not used where ever we wend,
To be sorely looked on, for eating of our meat,
The deuell I trow us to thee send,
God help us a better may^^res to get.
Come on thy way Lob, and turn again,
Go home with me and all shall be well:
An Ox for my meyny shall be slain,
And the hyde at the market I will sell.
Upon this together, home they went,
The good man was angry in his mind:
But yet to his wife with good intent,
He said sweet heart you be unkind.
Entreat our meyny well always,
And give them meat and drink enough:
For they get our living every day,
And theirs also, at carte and plough.
Therefore I would that they should have,
Meat and drink to their behoue:
For my sweet wife, so god me save,
Ye will do so, if ye me love.
Give them what thou will I do not care,
By day nor night man believe thou me:
What ever they have or how they fare,
I pray God evil mote they thee.
And specially that horeson that does eomplayne,
I will quite him once if ever I live,
I will dash the knave upon the brain,
That ever after it shall him grieve.
What my dear wife for shame be still,
This is a pain such words to hear:
We can not always have our will,
Though that we were a Kings pere.
For to shame a Knave what can they get,
Thou art as lewd for God as they:
And therefore shall thou serve them of meat,
And drink also, from hence always.
What wife ye be to blame,
To speak to me thus in this wise:
If we should strive folk would speak shame,
Therefore be still in mine advise.
I am loath with you to strive,
For ought that you shall do or say:
I swear to Christ wife by my live,
I had rather take Morell and ride my way.
To seek mine adventure till your mood be past
I say to you these manners be not good:
Therefore I pray you that this be the last,
Of your furious anger that seems so wood.
What can it avail you me for to grieve,
That loves you so well as I do mine heart:
By my troth wife you may me believe,
Such toys as these be, would make us both smarte,
Smarte in the twenty fayning Deuelles name,
That list me once well for to see:
I pray God give the evil shame,
What should thou be werte not for me.
A ragge on thine arse thou should not have,
Except my friends had given it thee:
Therefore I tell thee well thou drunken knave,
Thou art not he that shall rule me.
O good wife cease and let this ouerpasse,
For all your great anger and hye words eake:
I am mine own self even as I was,
And to you will be loving, and also meek.
But if ye should do thus, as ye do begin,
It may not continue no time ywys:
I would not let for kyth nor kin,
To make you mend, all things that is amys.
Make me, mary out upon the dreuill,
Say thou that, will thou begin:
I pray God and our Lady that a foul evil,
Lyghten upon thee and all thy kin.
By Gods dear blessed vex me no more,
For if thou do thou shalt repent:
I ^aue yet so (...), ^t for thee in st^re,
And with that a staff in her hand ^he hent.
At him full soon then she let flee,
And wholled about her as it had been a man:
Her husband then was feign perdy,
To void her stroke and go his way than.
By Gods dear mother then began she swear,
From henceforth I will make thee bow:
For I will trim thee in thy gear,
Or else I would I were called a Sow.
Fie on all wretches that be like thee,
In word or work both loud and still,
I swear by him that made man free,
Of me thou shalt not have thy will.
Now nor never I tell thee plain,
For I will have Gold and riches ynow:
When thou shalt go iagged as a simple swain
With whip in hand at carte and plough.
Of that my dear wife I take no scorn,
For many a good man with mind and heart:
Has gone to plough and carte beforne,
My time ywys with pain and smarte.
Which now be rich and have good at will,
Being at home and make good cheer:
And there they intend to lead their life still,
Till our Lord do send for them hear.
But now I must ride a little way,
Dear wife I will come right soon again:
Appoint our dinner I you pray,
For I do take on me great pain.
I do my best I swear by my life,
To order you like a woman ywys:
And yet it cannot be withouten strife,
Through your lewd tongue by heavens bliss.
Ride to the Deuell and to his dame,
I would I should thee never see:
I pray God send thee mickle shame,
In any place, where ever thou be.
Thou would feign, the master play,
But thou shalt not by God I make thee sure*
I swear I will thy Peticote pay,
That long with me thou shalt not endure.
How the good man rode his way till he thought her anger was past, and then he
returned home again.


THe good man was sorry and went his way,
About his busynes, as he was used:
And to himself thus began he say,
Lord God, how was I thus abused.
When I took this wife I was worse then mad
And yet can I blame my self and none other,
Which makes me sigh and often be sad,
Repenting full sore by Gods dear Mother.
Fie upon goods withouten pleasure,
Between man and wife that cannot agree:
It is a pain far passing measure,
Such strife to see where as love should be.
For there was never man ywys,
So hampred with one wife as I am now,
Wherefore I think withouten miss,
She shall repent it I make God auow.
Except she turn and change her mind,
And eake her conditions euerichone:
She shall find me to her so unkind,
That I shall her coil both back and bone.
And make her blew and also black,
That she shall groan again for woe:
I will make her bones all to crack,
Without that she her conditions forgo,
I was never so vexte this time beforne,
As I am now of this wife alone:
A vengeance on her that ever she was borne,
For she makes me often full woe begone.
And I cannot tell, where me to turn
Nor me to wend, by God in faye
Which cause me often for to mourn
Or yet to know what for to say.
I am worse, then mad or wood,
And yet I am loath with her to begin,
I fear me I shall never make her good
Except I do wrap her in black Morels skin,
That can no more draw at plough ne carte,
It shall be to late to call for her kin,
When she begins once for to smarte,
For little ease thereby she shall win.
Morell is old, he can labor no more,
Nor do no good but always eat,
I trow I have kept him thus long in store,
To work a charm that shall be feate.
The horeson is blind and lame also
Behind and before, he cannot stere,
When he from the stable to the steeete should go,
He falls down, right than in the mire.
Yet I am loath him for to kill
For he has done me good service or now,
But if my wife fulfill not my will
I must him flea by God I trow
But at this point now will I be,
I will be master as it is reason,
And make her subject unto me
For she must learn a new lesson.
Her father did warn me of this beforne,
How I should it find in every degree:
But I did take it for half a scorn,
And would not believe him then perdee.
But now I perceive it very well,
He did it for good will ywis:
Wherefore I think that Morels fell,
Must mend all thing that is amiss.
Thus he that will not believe his friend,
As her dear father was unto me:
He is worthy for to find,
Always great pain and misery.
But I may not choose him to believe,
For the deed does prove himself in fay:
Ever she is ready me for to grieve,
And thinks to continue so always.
But now I will home to prove her mind,
And see what welcome I shall have:
She may be to me, so unkind,
That she shall repent it, so God me save.
For if I should of her complain,
Folk would me mock, and give me scorn:
And say I were worthy of this pain,
Because it was showed me so well beforne.
How the goodman was welcomed, when he returned home again.


THe good man came ryding to the gate,
And knocked as he had been wode:
His servant right soon did meet him thereat,
And bid him welcome with right mild mood.
The master said what does my dame now,
Is she as frantic yet as she was:
Than will I tame her I make God auow,
And make her sing full loud alas.
Where art thou wife shall I have any meat,
Or am I not so welcome unto thee:
That at my commandment I shall ought get,
I pray thee heartily soon tell thou me.
If thou do not serve me and that anon,
I shall thee show mine anger ywis:
I swear by God and by saint John,
Thy bones will I swaddle so have I bliss.
Forth she came, as brym a bore
And like a dog she rated him than:
Saying thus I set no store,
By thee thou wretch thou art no man.
Get thee hence out of my sight,
For meat nor drink thou gettest none hear:
I swear to thee by Mary bright,
Of me thou gettest, here no good cheer.
Well wife he said thou doste me compel,
To do that thing, that I were loath:
If I bereave Morell of his old fell:
Thou shalt repent it by the faith now goath.
For I see well that it will no better be,
But in it thou must, after the new guyse:
It had been better so mote I thee,
That thou had not begone this enterprise.
How the good man caused Morell to be flayn* and the hide salted, to lay his
wife therein to sleep.


NOw will I begin, my wife to tame,
That all the world shall it know:
I would be loath her for to shame,
Though she do not care, ye may me trow.
Yet will I her honesty regard,
And it preserve where ever ye may,
But Morell that is in yonder yard,
His hyde therefore he must leese in fay.
And so he commanded anon,
To flea old Morell his great Horse:
And flea him then, the skin from the bone,
To wrap it about his wives white coarse.
Also he commanded of a byrchen tree,
Rods to be made a good great heap:
And swear by dear God in Trinity,
His wife in his seller should skip and leap.
The hyde must be salted then he said cake,
Because I would not have it stink:
I hope herewith she will be meek,
For this I trow will make her shrink.
And bow at my pleasure, when I her bed,
And obey my commandments both loud and still,
Or else I will make her body bleed,
And with sharp rods beat her my fill.
Anon with that to her he began to call,
She bid abide in the diuelles name:
I will not come what so befall,
Sit still with sorrow and mickle shame.
Thou shalt not rule me as pleases thee,
I will well thou know by Gods dear Mother,
But thou shall be ruled always by me,
And I will be master and none other.
Will thou be master dear wife in fay,
Then must we wrestle for the best game:
If thou it win then may I say,
That I have done my self great shame.
But first I will make thee sweat good Ione,
Read blood even to the heels adowne,
And lap thee in Morels skin alone,
That the blood shall be seen even from the crown.
Say thou me that thou wretched knave,
It were better thou had me never seen:
I swear to thee so God me save,
With my nails I will scratch out both thine eyes,
And therefore think not to touch me once,
For by the mass if thou begin that,
Thou shalt be handled for the nonce,
That all thy brains on the ground shall squat.
Why then there is no remedy I see,
But needs I must do even as I thought:
Seeing it will none otherwise be,
I will thee not spare by God that me bought.
For now I am set thee for to charm,
And make thee meek by Gods might,
Or else with rods while thou art warm,
I shall thee securge with reason and right.
Now good Morels skin,
Receive my cur^t wife in.



How the cursed wife in Morels skin lay,
Because she would not her husband obey.
NOw will I my sweet wife trim,
According as she deserves to me:
I swear by God and by saint Sim,
With Byrchen rods well beat shall she be.
And after that in Morels salt skin,
I will her lay and full fast bind,
That all her friends, and eake her kyn,
Shall her long seek or they her find,
Then he her met, and to her began say,
How say thou wife will thou be master yet:
She swear by Gods body, and by that day,
And suddenly with her fyst she did him hit.
And defied him dreuill at every word,
Saying precious horsesone what do thou think
I set not by thee a stinking torde
Thou shall get of me neither meat nor drink.
Say thou me that wife quoth he than
With that in his arms he began her catch
Straight to the seller with her he ran
And fastened the door with lock and latche
And threw the key down him beside,
Askyng her than if she would obey
Than she said nay for all thy pride
But she was master and would abide always.
Then quoth he we must make a fraye
And with that her cloths he began to tear
Out upon thee horesone than she did say
Will thou rob me of all my gear
It cost thee naught thou arrant thief
And quickly she ga^ him by the head
With that she said God give thee a mischief
And them that fed thee first with bread.
They wrestled together thus they two
So long that the clothes a sunder went
And to the ground he threw her tho
That clean from the back her smock he rent.
In every hand a rod he gate,
And laid upon her a right good pace:
Asking of her what game was that,
And she cried out horeson, alas, alas.
What will thou do, will thou kill me,
I have made thee a man of naught:
Thou shalt repent it, by Gods pity,
That ever this deed thou haste y wrought.
I care not for that dame he did say,
Thou shall gi^e over or we depart
The maystership all, or all this day
I will not cease to make thee smarte.
Ever he laid on, and ever she did cry,
Alas, alas, that ever I was borne
Out upon thee murderer I thee defye
Thou have my white skin, and my body all to torn
Leave of betyme I counsel thee,
Nay by God dame I say not so yet,
I swear to thee, by Mary so free
We begin but now, this is the first fyt.
Once again, we must dance about
And then thou shall reast in Morels skyn,
He gave her than so many a great cloute
That on the ground the blood was seen.
Within a while, he cried new rods new
With that she cried full loud alas,
Dance yet about dame, thou came not where it grew,
And suddenly with that in a sown she was.
He spyed that and by he her hente,
And wrang her hard then by the nose:
With her to Morels skin, straight he went,
And therein full fast he did her close.
Within a while, she did revive,
Through the gross salt that did her smarte:
She thought she should never have gone on live,
Out of Morels skin so sore is her heart.
When she did spy that therein she lay,
Out of her wit she was full nigh:
And to her husband then did she say,
How can thou do this vilany.
Nay how say thou, thou cursed wife,
In this foul skin I will thee keep,
During the time of all thy life,
Therein for ever wayle and weep.
With that her mood began to sink,
And said dear husband for grace I call:
For I shall never sleep nor wink,
Till I get your love whatso befall.
And I will never to you offend,
In no manner of wise, of all my live:
Nor to do nothing that may pretend,
To displease you with my wits five.
For Father nor Mother whatsoever they say
I will not anger you by God in throne:
But glad will your commandments obey,
In presence of people and cake alone.
Well on that condition thou shall have,
Grace and fair bed to rest thy body in:
But if thou rage more so God me save,
I will wrap thee again in Morels skin.
Then he took her out in his arms twain,
And beheld her so pitteously with blood arrayed,
How think thou wife, shall we arrayne,
Have such business more to her he said,
She answered nay my husband dear,
While I you know, and you know me,
Your commandments I will both far and near,
Fulfill always in every degree.
Well then I promise thee by God even now,
Between thee and me shall never be strife,
If thou to my commandments quickly bow
I will the cherish all the days of my life.
In bed she was laid and healed full soon,
As fair and clear as she was beforne,
What he her bid was quickly done,
To be dilligent ywys she took no scorn.
Then was he glad, and thought in his mind
Now have I done, my self great good,
And her also, we shall it find,
Though I have shed part of her blood.
For as me think, he will be meek:
Therefore I will her father and Mother,
Bid to guest, now the next week,
And of our neighbors, many other.
How the good man did bid her Father and Mother to guest, and many of his
neighbors that they might see his wives pacyence.


GReat pain he made his wife to take,
Against the day that they should come:
Of them was noue that there did lack,
I dare well say unto my doom.
Ye Father and mother and neighbors all.
Did thither come to make good cheer,
Soon they were set in genera^l,
The wife was dilligent as did appear.
Father and mother was welcome then,
And so were they all in good fay:
The husband sat there like a man,
The wife did serve them all that day.
The good man commanded what he would have,
The wife was quick at hand,
What now thought the mother, this arrant knave,
Is master as I understand.
What may this mean then she began think,
That my daughter so dilligent is:
Now can I another eat nor drink,
Till I it know by heaven bliss.
When her daughter came again,
To serve at the board as her husband bad,
The Mother stared with her eyes twain,
Even as one that had been mad.
All the folk, that at the board sat,
Did her behold then euerichone:
The mother from the board her gate,
Following her daughter and that anon,
And in the Kitching she her fand,
Saying unto her in this wise:
Daughther thou shalt well understand,
I did not teach thee after this guyse.
A good mother ye say full well,
All things with m^is not as ye ween:
If ye had been in Morels fell,
As well as I it should be seen.
In Morels fell what devil is that,
Mary mother I will it you show:
But beware that you come not thereat,
Lest you your self then do beshrew.
Come down now in this seller so deep,
And Morels skin there shall you see:
With many a rod that has made me to weep,
When the blood ran down fast by my knee.
The Mother this beheld and cried out alas.
And ran out of the Seller as she had been wood,
She came to the table where the company was,
And said out horeson I will see thy heart blood.
Peace good Mother, or so have I bliss,
Ye must dance else as did my wife:
And in Morels skin lie, that well salted is,
Which you should repent all the days of your life.
All they they that were there, held with the young man,
And said he did well in every manner degree,
When dynner was done, they departed all than,
The mother no longer durst there be.
The Father abode last and was full glad,
And gave his children his blessyng ywys,
Saying the young man full well done had,
And merely departed wythouten mys,
This young man was glad ye may be sure,
That he had brought his wife to this,
God give us all grace in rest to endure,
And hereafter to come unto his bliss.
Thus was Morell flayne out of his skin.
To charm a shrew so have I bliss:
Forgive the yongman if he did sin,
But I think he did nothing amiss.
He did all thing even for the best.
As it well proved then,
God save our wives from Morels nest,
I pray you say all amen.
Thus ends the jest of Morels skin,
Where the cursed wife was lapped in,
Because she was of a shrewde leere.
Thus was she served in this manner.
Finis.
quoth Master Charmeher.

JMPRINTED AT LONdon in Fleetestreate, beneath the Conduite, at the sign of S.
John Euaungelist. by Hugh Iackson.

He that can charm a shrew de wife,
Better then thus:
Let him come to me, and fetch ten pound,
And a golden purse.



