An Exposition upon the two Epistles of the Apostle S. Paul to the
Thessalonians, By the reverend Father JOHN IEVVEL, late Bishop of SARISBVRIE.
Whereunto is adioined a very necessary table of the principal matters
contained in this Exposition.



AT LONDON, Printed by Ralfe Newberie: Anno salutis, 1584.

Cum privilegio regia maiestati^.

TO THE RIGHT honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, Knight, principal Secretary
to the Queens Majesty, and one of her H^nesse most honorable i^ie Counsel.
IT is now some long time sithe^ce that learned reverend father bishop Jewel
delivered unto the people of his charge the Exposition upon the epistles of S.
Paul to the Thessalonians: when many his hearers thought it worthy to be made
common, and besought him earnestly (even as since his blessed departure out of
this life they have often required me) to publish the same. It is very likely
that he would, if he had lived, have perused these his travails, and some
others, and have drawn them to the use and benefit of the Church: and rather
have spent his time in setting forth matters profitable for all me^ to
understand toward the attainement of salvation, than in following their humor
any longer, whom neither the weakness of their own cause, nor the force of
the truth, nor the defense thereof by so weighty autorities of the holy
Scriptures, of the ancient catholic fathers, and of general councels; could
content or persuade them to forsake the way of contention, whereunto they were
entered, and of troubling the Church of God, with their writings against the
truth.

This his purpose he partly declared in giving his last answer to a book
written by Master Harding, entitled, A detection of sundry foul errors,
etc. For answer whereof, he thought not good to charge with number of books,
or to encomber the world with needelesse labors: but only by a short
augmentation of his former defense of the Apology of the Church of England, to
discharge Master Hardings quarrels. For reason whereof he says: I cannot
imagine, that any my poor labors shall be able to end these quarrels. For a
contentious man will never lack words. I have endeavored for my simple part,
to say so much as to a reasonable man may seem sufficient. If any thing be
left unanswered, either it was nothing, or nothing worth. Wherein he was of
like mind unto that famous learned man Master Bucer, who speaking of the new
and fresh supply that is made among the adversaries of our Christian religion,
said thus: Veteribus respondimus, novos quotidie legimus, nihil adferunt novi,
quid ergo faciemus? Answer has been made by us to their old Writers: we
read their new Writers which come forth daily, which yet bring no new
matter or proofs with them. What then shall we do? What else, but (as he
gives counsel) lay down al affection and favor of parties, and peruse
that has been said in matter of controversy on both sides, and judge justly
of that is alleged, and with fear and reverence be careful of our own
salvation. For, after the truth is once found out, whosoever seeks farther,
seeks not for the truth, but for error. The Apostle wills Titus, to stay
foolish questions and genealogies, and contentions, and brawlings about the
law: for they are unprofitable, and vain. And also to reject him that is an
heretic after once or twice admonition. In like cafe he said unto Timothy:
If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is
puffed up, and knows nothing: but doateth about questions, and strife of words,
whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, froward disputations
of me^ of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, which think that gain is
godliness: from such separate thy self.

Now, because he himself had some good liking to publish this exposition, and
the matter thereof is so fit for our time, as nothing may be more: and there
is not (as I can learn) any interpretor upon these epistles, in the english
tongue: and his Sermons upon them, were the last fruits, and travails he
bestowed in the cathedral Church of Sarum: I made choice of it among many
other excellent momuments of his pains taken in the Church of God, and gave my
best diligence to peruse his notes thereupon, and to draw them to some such
perfection, as might carry to the Reader the whole weight of his matter,
without any diminution, even as fully as he declared it, so far forth as the
notes, which remain under his own hand, might direct me. The which I most
humbly commend to the favorable protection of your Honor: whom I beseech so
to accept my simple endeavor herein, as I have been careful to answer your
Honors commandment, in giving forth some part of his labors to light.

In this discourse, as there are many good things fruitfully declared, the use
and practice whereof is common to your Honor with all Christians: so are there
two matters, the one of Usury, the other of Antichrist: that is, of the bane
and poison of the common wealth, and of the infectio^ and decaie of the Church:
wherein he bestowed more pains to open them, and make them manifest, that all
men might know and abhor them, and beware of them. What has been wrought by
these two mischiefs to the undoing in conscience and substance, and to the
utter destruction of the souls and bodies of many thousand subjects of this
realm, within these late years, it is to the grief of all good men, too well
known.

If therefore in the duty of a good Bishop, he standing in his watch, has
discried these enemies to al civil and christian estates, and if now so many
years after his entrance into rest by these means he call upon your good Honor,
to step forth in fresh courage into the battle of the Lord of hosts, and to
use and employ the great gifts of wisdom and authority which God has
bestowed upon you, and to excite and stir up others the worthy and notable
captains set over the people, to be a fenced wall between them, and these so
perilous monsters, and dangerous enemies: what remains, but that your Honor
put to your hand, and do that for the comfort of Gods people, which, besides
her excellent Majesty, and her honorable Counsel, no other can do, in giving
life to al such laws, which have been devised by men of great godliness and
experience, and have been confirmed by high authority to the suppression of
Usury, and to the setting forth of Gods glory? The God of glory, and of
power, who has called your Honor to his service in high place, strengthen you
to do his will, and grant you many and prosperous days, to the comfort of his
Church and his common weal.

Your Honors most humble to command,

JOHN GARBRAND.

A TABLE CONTAINING THE principal matters in this exposition.
A
ANtichrist contrary to Christ. 283 Antichrist his coming foretold. 281
Antichrist hated of them, that embrace his doctrine. 281 Fond tales of
Antichrist. 281, 320 Antichrist not any one man 282 Antichrist a Bishop. 320,
330, 379 Antichrist an universal king. 329 Antichriste by what marks known.
283, 316, 334 Antichrist comes in show of serving Christ. 285, 341 Antichrist
rules by pretense of religion. 287, 349 Antichrist subtle and cunning. 305,
308 Antichrist taught of Satan. 340 Antichrist proud and pompous. 289, 332
Antichrist exceeding cruel. 263 283 Antichrist wherein his strength stands.
363 Antichrist his place or seat. 290, 326, 379 Antichrist how taken as God.
291 Antichrist whom he deceives. 207, 351, 381 Antichrist in what time
reucaled. 304 Antichrist not to be converted. 364 Antichrist by what power
overthrown. 361, 363, 381 Apostasy from the faith. 94, 388 Persuasions to
Apostasy. 97 Retentiue from Apostasy. 98 Appearaunce of eu^, avoid. 219
Astronomers pass bounds. 182
B
Babylon wherein rich. 376 Babylon fallen. 373 Babilons fall causes joy in
heaven. 377 Battle between Christ and Antichrist. 369 Bishop of Rome,
servant of servants. 296 Bishop of Rome rich by the spoil of the Empire. 328
Bishop of Rome his privilege. 292, 296, 349 Bishop of Rome lawelesse. 334
Bishop of Rome called God. 293 Busy bodies. 155
C
Children how to be nurtured. 62 Children how they wax ill. 69 Church of the
faithful. 9 Chnrch of the wicked. 6 The name of the Church and fathers
deceivable. 234, 359 Church compared to weak things 279 Churches particular
decay in faith. 270 Church primitive how ordered. 266 Church of Rome has no
special promise. 236 Church of Rome may err 275, 277 Church of Rome unlike
the primitive Church. 268, 274 Christ overcomes. 372 Cities well governed. 32
Single communion. 311 Conscience. 103 Constancy in the truth. 214, 240 244,
388, 412 Covetousness hinders the Gospel. 56, 85 Cross of Christ of whom
esteemed. 218
D
Dead in Christ. 176 Deceit in bargaining enricheth not. 111 Decrees and
decretalles forged 256 Disciples of Christ are humble. 316 Departing from the
faith. 263, 375 Doctrines contrary to the word of God. 48
E
Election how known. 384 Empire large sometimes. 323 Empire decayed a sign
that Antichrist is come. 327 3^4, 380 Emperor has not any one city of the
Empire. 328 Increase in holiness. 154, 239 Enemies to the gospel raise nobles.
41, 188, 214, 224, 339 Excommunication what it is, 413 Excommunication
dangerous. 416, 418 Excommunication why ordained. 402, 413
F
Faith grounded on the word. 384 Faith without the truth, no faith 369, 385
Faith is not idle. 12, 109 Faithful men examples of godliness. 28, 30, 148
Faithful man has three badges 205 False brethren. 396, 397 False brethren
avoid. 401 False miracles of two sorts. 343 Fathers how careful for their
children. 60 Fathers or multitude no rule to warrant religion. 359 Filthiness
cloaked under pretense of single life. 310, 405 Flesh of Christ how eaten. 261
Foolish faith hurts. 360 Fornication. 109
G
Gospel what it works. 79 Gospel no cause of tumults. 40 Gospel often
refused. 40, 80, 351 Gospel not quailed by cruelty. 75, 77, 242, 262 God
makes his gospel fruitful. 16, 30 37, 391, 393 God opens his truth to the
simple. 19, 292 God makes the^ love the truth that sometimes hated it. 37 God
delivers the faithful. 205, 366 Godly men are persecuted. 13, 22, 73, 92,
188, 179, 242, 261 Goods not free for il uses. 128 Grace what it works in us.
11, 238, 380
H
Hearers of the word. 69, 209, 352 Hypocrisy a high point of wisdom. 396
Hope of the faithful. 14, 157, 383
I
Idleness the teacher of mischief. 156, 407 Idle bodies not to be relieved. 410
Ignorance, cause of wickedness. 116 Ignorance, cause of despair 158, Image
worship. 347 Images in steed of preaching ^46. Infidels shall rise again. 169
Interest, and V^urie differ. 135 Invocation of saints. 346 Joy of the godly,
or wicked. 200 Joy in tribulations. 23, 91, 190 Day of judgment unknown.
181, 261 Day of judgment comfortable. 174, 176, 179 Day of judgment dreadful.
174 243, 365
K
Keys of the Church abused. 312 Kissing ofreliques. 347
L
Labor required in every vocation. 156, 157 Laborers in the gospel worthy
maintenance. 58, 147, 405 Later day as days of Noah. 170 Latin service a
cloak for ignorant priests. 46 Law necess^ie. 151 Law may be followed
between filendes. 150, 151 Love, the fruits thereof. 12, 147, 152, 191, 200
Love persuades to godliness. 191
M
Man of sin revealed. 337, 363 Marriage in ministers. 217 Mass, no teacher of
godliness. 216 Minister, his office. 12, 20, 35, 43, 49, 50, 52, 80, 87, 410
Ministers painful worthy maintenance. 58, 147, 405 Ministers unprofitable to
be removed. 85, 194, 196, 407 Miracles wrought by Antichrist. 348 Mourning over
the dead. 160
N
Natural corruption of man. 237 246 New birth, or regeneration. 259
O
Oblations, and enriching of abbeys. 347 Office of Apostle and Bishop diverse.
300
P
Pardons. 337 Peace in the Church the gift of God. 223.423 Peace, wherein it
consists. 225, 423 People ought to read the sc^ptures. 82.84, 228 Peter no
bishop of Rome. 301 Pilgrimage. 347 Pleasers of men. 55.57 Pope no sollower of
Peter. 216 Pope above Emperor. 330 Prayer continually needful. 204 Prayer how
to be made for the wicked. 402, 422 Prayer abused to covetousness. 313
Preachers are Gods instruments. 390, 399 Preachers most needful. 194 Primacie
the fountain of vain presumption. 314, 337 Primitive Church. 266 Princes and
Magistrates labor. 410 Purgatory impropried to the bishop of Rome. 3^3
Purgatory a shop of mar^. 314, 337
R
Reason, the husband. 226 Reformation of Rome past hope. 364 Refusers of the
word. 72, 195, 210, 352, 357 Religion what it is. 32 Religion by who^
established. 39 Religion of whom received. 81, 352, 358 Religion forced, or
diffemoled. 350 T^th of religion how tried. 212, 250, 359 Relics. 347 R^tion
of the body. 165 Resemblaunces of resurrection. 163 Resurrection of infidels.
169 Rock wherein the Church is built. 258 Church of Rome may err. 275 277
Church of Rome unlike the primitive. 268, 274 Rome departed from the faith. 265
Rome the seat of Antichrist. 323, 380
S
Satan's sleights against the gospel. 86, 254. Scriptures what they teach. 34
Scriptures forged. 255 Scriptures wrested. 257 Sin punished by sin. 82
Sin which shall not be forgiven. 359 Spirit of God our guide. 208, 252, 386
Superstition zealous. 78
T
Teachers examples of godliness. 403. False teachers deal deceitfully. 46, 51,
56, 253 Thanks due to God in all things 205 The ssalonica once beloved, now
forsaken. 236 Torments strange and cruel against the godly. 75 Translation of
Scriptures. 47
V
Usury what it is. 113 Usury whence it grows. 115 142, Usury what good it
does. 116, 129, 130 Usury defended. 124, 128, 138 Usury and interest differ.
135 Usury forbidden by scripture. 121 Usury disproued by learned fathers. 118
Usury condemned by laws. 138 Cases for Usury answered. 131 Usurer worse than
a thief. 138 Usurer excommunicate by his own conscience. 145
W
Walkers inordinately to be reproved. 198 War how terrible. 369 Will and
power to do well is of God. 202, 226, 239 Will likened to the wife. 226 Wisdom
of man no rule in religion. 211, 358 Wise men not always best inclined. 358
Word of God now taught is the same which the Apostle did teach. 72, 195
FINIS.
The first Epistle of S. Paul to the Thessalonians.
CHAP. I.
PAVLE and SYLVANVS, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the Thessalonians, which
is in GOD the father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace be with you and
peace, from GOD our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
THe Apostle Paul preached the Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ unto the
Thessalonians, as he did also in other places from Jerusalem, round about to
Illyricum. But his travail had not like success in all places. For, in
Damascus the governor of the people under King Aretas, laid watch in the city
(...). Cor. 11.
of the Damascenes, and would have caught him. At Lystra they stoned Paul, and
drew him Act. 14.
out of the city, supposing he had been dead. At Act. 16.
Philippi, he and Sylas were drawn into the market place unto the magistrates,
and accused, that they troubled their City, they were beaten with rods, and
cast into prison. The Corinthians received the doctrine of the gospel, and made
much of the professors thereof. But, they fell soon from their good beginning.
They walked like men in envying, in strife, in divisions. Some called
themselves after Paul, some after Apollo, some after Cephas, and some after
Ghrist. They stirred contention about meats: they abused the Lords supper:
and they were doubtful of the resurrection of the dead. In like manner the
Church of God which was gathered at Rome grew proud and high minded, and
boasted themselves over the Jews. The Galathians forsook the good way of the
gospel, whereunto they were called, and wherein they did walk. They gave ear
to false prophets. Therefore the Apostle tells them, I am in fear of you,
least I have bestowed on Galat. 4.
you my labor in vain.

But, the Thessalonians, after they had heard the glad tidings of the Gospel,
they received it greedily, and laid it up close and safe in their hearts. Albeit
the Jews withstood them and beted them fore, albeit false brethren used diverse
secret means to draw them from the love of the truth: yet they kept still
their steadfastness: and could not be driven from their faith, neither by
cruelty of persecution, nor by subtlety of crafty persuasion. Paul being at
Athens, a place far distant from thence, sends Timothy to know in what case
they stood. So careful was he for that house which he had built: for, the
fire which he had kindled: for the graffes which he had planted: and, for the
children which he begot among them. When Timothy made report of their
constancy, that they continued steadfast in those things which they had
learned: he writes this Epistle, to commend them, and to exhort them to abide
steadfast in their faith: that they become not like the foolish Israelites,
which longed after the flesh pottes of Egypt, and were unmindful of their
deliverance from bondage under Pharao: that they return not like filthy dogs
to their vomit, and like unclean swine to their puddles of-mire: that they
look not back again after they have put their hands to the Lords plough, and
so make themselves unworthy the kingdom of God.

He gives many lessons and instructions to godliness: that they would walk
worthy of God, and bring forth the fruits of the gospel. There were among
them that lived idly, and did trouble the church without a cause: whom he
reprooueth, willing them to be quiet, and to meddle with their own matters,
and works with their hands. Others mourned over the dead without measure, even
as if they had no hope: whom he instructs in the resurrection, and comfort
with the speech of the blessed coming of our Lord, when we which live shall be
caught up to meet him, and so we shall ever be with the Lord. Others reasoned
fondly of the later day, when it should be, when the son of God should
appear, and when the world should have an end: as if man might reach to the
knowledge hereof. But them also he reprooueth, and warns that they take care
rather to watch, and look for the Lords coming, that they may be found
ready, having their loins girded, and their lamps burning.

Many are desirous to see the countenance of Saint Paul, to see his sword, or
the relics of his blood, which was shed at his death, or of his upper
garment, or of his coat, or of the hair of his head: and for purpose to see
such things, many take painful pilgrimage to far places, where they are
dereiued. How much better may they be satisfied by reading the story of his
life set do^ne in the Scriptures? In these his Epistles written to the Churches
of God, he is to be seen in more excellent show, than when he was yet in
body. For here is to be seen his heart filled with the holy Ghost, and the
care which he had for all Saints: how he did travel in birth of them again,
that Christ might be formed in them, and how he did wish himself separate
from Christ for their sake. The matter of this Epistle is plain, and treats
not of deep and profound mysteries. The manner of utterance which the Apostle
uses, is open and cuident. So that the whole Epistle is full of sweet and
wholesome doctrine, wherein the simplest may find great comfort.

Paul, and Syluanus, and Timotheus. These two were companions unto Paul in his
iournets, and in the work of his ministry. Whom here he ioineth in his letter
to the congregation at Thessalonica, to witness their consent and agreement
with him, that they al with one mouth, and with one hand and heart set forth
the glorious Gospel of our Savior Christ. And, that therefore they also which
are called to the fellowship of the Gospel, should be like minded, being one
body and one spirit in Christ Jesus: and the children of one father in whom
there is no dissension, but al peace and consent, and unity.

Unto the Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God the father and in the
Lord Jesus Christ. There are sundry sorts of Churches. There is a Church of
the wicked, whereof the Prophet says, I have hated the assembly Psalm. 26.
of the evil, and have not companied with the wicked. Two hundred and fifty
Captains, Number. 16.
men of renown, and famous in the congregation, joined themselves to Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram. But Moses said unto Korah, thou and al thy company, are
gathered together against the Lord. The builders of the great tower Genesis 11.
of Babel were many in number, and consented to that they had imagined to do,
thereby to get them a name, but the Lord did confound their language, and
scattered them upon the face of the earth. The Scribes and Pharisees and high
Priests held a c^uncel, and Act. 4.
conferred among themselves. But, against the Lord, and against his Christ.
John is commanded ^eue. 2.
to write unto the Angel of the church of the Smyrnians, These things says he
which is first and last, which was dead, and is alive. I know the blasphemy
of them, which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan.
They revile you, and speak al manner of evil against you for my names sake.
They charge you with teaching false doctrine, and say you have departed from
the Church: that they are the seed of Abraham, the children of promise, the
true worshippers of God, and which walk in the steps of their forefathers.
But, their boast hereof is vain. It profits them nothing, that Abraham was
their father, that the covenant was made with them, that they were circumcised,
that a law was given unto them. Let them not trust in their fathers: let them
not trust in lying words, and say the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, this is the temple of the Lord. If they were Abraham's children, they
would do the works of Abraham. If God were their father, then would they
love Christ his son, and seek to set forth his glory. If they were of the
sheepefolde of God, they would hear his voice. They are of their father the
Devil, and the lusts of their father they will do. They are in name the
servants of Christ, but serve Antichrist: they call themselves Jews, but are
the Synagogue of Satan. For (says the Apostle) he is Romans 2.
not a Jew, which is one outward: neither is that circumcision which is outward
in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one within, and the circumcision is of
the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but
of God. Of those which are such Leo says, Ecclesiae nomine armamini, and
contra Ecclesiam dimicatis Ye arm your selves with Le^ epi. 83. ^d Palestinos.
the name of the Church and yet ye fight against the Church. And Chrysostom
says, The name only of Christ, does not make a Christian, but Hom. 19 in Mat.
in opere imperf.
he must also have the truth of Christ: for there are many which walk in the
name of Christ, but few which walk in his truth. It is therefore manifest, as
Lyra says, That the Church Lyra in 16. M^.
is not among men, by reason of any Ecclesiastical or secular authority or
dignity: because many princes and high priests, and others of the inferior
sort have forsaken the faith. Though they pretend show of holiness, though they
draw to themselves credit by long continuance, though their numbers be great,
and they consent together: yet if they have forsaken the faith, if they hold
not the truth of Christ, if they fight against and persecute the Church, if
their circumcision be not the circumcision of the heart, and in the spirit, if
they hear not the voice of ye shepherd, if they love not Christ Jesus the
son of God, and set not forth his glory, if they seek to stop the course
of the gospel, if they seek to get name among men, if they resist Moses and
Aaron: they have only a painted visard, and carry only an empty name of
the Church: they call themselves so, and are not.

But, the Church of God is in God the father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: it
is the company of the faithful whom God has gathered together in Christ by
his word and by the holy ghost to honor him, as he himself has appointed.
This Church hears the voice of the shephearde. It will not follow a stranger,
but flies from him: for it knows not the voice of strangers. Of this Church
Saint Iherome says, Ecclesia Christi in toto orb Hier^n in Mich. lib. 1. cap.
1.
ecclesias possidens, spiritus vnitate coniuncta est, and habet vrbes legis,
prophetarum, euangelij, and Apostolorum. Non est egressa de finibus suis, ^d
est, de Scripturis. The Church of Christ which contains the churches through
all the world, is joined together in the unity of the spirit, and has the
cities of the Law, of the Prophets, of the gospel, and of the Apostles. This
church goes not forth, or beyond her bounds, that is, the holy Scriptures.
It is the pillar of the truth: the body, the fullness, and the spouse of
Christ: it is the vine, the house, the city, and the kingdom of God. They
which dwell in it, are no more strangers and forreiners, but Ephe. (...).
Citizens with the Saints, and of the hoshould of God, and are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head
corner stone, in whom all the building coupled together, grows unto an holy
temple in the Lord. This Church Christ loved, and gave himself for it, that he
Ephesians. 5.
might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word,
that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrincle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy and without blame. Such
a Church was the Church of God at Thessalonica, such a Church are they who so
ever in any place of the world fear the Lord, and call upon his name. Their
names are written in the book of life: they have received the spirit of
adoption, by which they try Abba Father: they grow from grace to grace, and
abound more and more in knowledge and in judgment: they cast away the works
of darkness, and put on the armor of light: they are made absolute, and
perfect unto al good works: they are evermore comforted in the mercies of God,
both by the holy scriptures wherein God declares his gracious goodness
toward them, and by the sacraments, which are left unto the Church to be
witnesses, and assured pledges for performance of the promise of Gods good
will, and favor toward them.

Grace be with you, and peace, etc. God give you the forgiveness of your sins,
and the peace, and comfort of your conscience. God let al his bl^ssings fall
upon you, that you may see the riches and the treasures of his mercy: that you
may be filled with all fullness in the spirit: that you may behold the glory
of the kingdom of God: and those things may bie revealed unto you by his
spirit, which he has prepared for them that love him. Without this grace you
can do nothing, you can neither feel the burden of your sins, nor seek to
be eased of the^, nor perceive when they are forgiven: you cannot rent your
heart, and set apart from you the vanities and lusts of the flesh which does
evermore fight against the soul: you cannot discern the word of God, and by
it enter the way to everlasting life: you cannot abhor that which is evil,
and cleau^ unto that which is good: without the grace of God, you cannot
continue steadfast and constant in faith, and in hope of the mercies of God
through our savior Jesus Christ.

2 We give thanks to God always for you al, making mention of you in our
prayers.

3 Without ceasing, remembering your effectual faith, and diligent love, and the
patience of your hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God even our
Father.

4 Knowing, beloved brethren that ye are elect of God.

5 For our Gospel was not unto you in word only, but also in power and in the
holy ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know after what manner, we were among
you for your sakes.

We give thanks, etc. Paul teaches what is the office of a good minister. He
must ever carry in remembrance ye estate of the congregation over which the
Lord has placed him. He must give thanks to God in their behalf, and pray
for them that God will bless that which he has begun, and con^rme them unto
the end, that they may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: that
he will behold them from above, and bless his inheritance, and guide the
sheep of his pasture. Your effectual faith: Faith is not idle, it works and
is forcible, it breaks out like fire: it is always fruitful through love.
Faith without works is no faith, it is dead and bringeeh death. And diligent
love: Love is paineful, and full of trainaile: it thinks not evil: it seeks
not her own things: it is bountiful. This love had the Thessalonians to the
saints of God, which suffered affliction in all places for the Gospels sake.
Many were spoiled of their goods, cast out of their houses, and banished from
their country. Even as at this day for the like cause many of our brethren
the good servants of God are driven into banishment, cast into prisons, put to
the sword, or consumed in fire, in those places, where the God of this world
has so blinded their eyes, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
should not shine unto them. It is high time in such cases for charity to show
her self. She can not dissemble, nor despise the tears of her brother. It
shows forth as the morning light: it takes from her self, to relieve them
which are in need. It deals bread to the hungry, and brings the poor
that wander unto her house, and covers the naked, and hides not her face
from her own flesh. Unto them that have this love the Lord gives his
blessing. Blessed is he that considers the poor and Psalm. 41.
needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. And Christ says,
Blessed are the merciful, Matt. 5.
for they shall find mercy.

And the patience of your hope. How many are the troubles which the children of
God suffer in this life? let us behold the times which were before us. Abel
was innocent and just, yet was he slain by the hands of his brother, and
without a cause. The Prophet Psalm. 44.
David says of the Prophets, and holy men of God: and the same words says
the Apostle of the Church of Christ under the Gospel, For Romans 8.
thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. Jeremy says, Thy word is unto them as a reproach, Ierem. 6.
and again, For thy sake I have suffered rebuke. Ierem. 15.
What vilanies were wrought against our savior Christ? They reproched him in
speeches, brought false accusations, and false witness against him, and killed
the innocent in whose mouth there was found no guile. When S. Paul 2. Tim. 3.
appealed to the witness of Timothy who did fully know his doctrine, manner of
living, purpose, faith, long suffering, love, and patience: and that he knew
also the persecutions and afflictions, which came unto him, and which he
suffered at Antiochia, Iconiu^, and at Lystra, after he had thus remembered his
persecutions, and his own innocence, he says, All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

What then has the godly to lean unto, but hope? the prophet David therefore
said, Though Psalm. 23.
I should walk through the vallie of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for thou art Job. 13.
with me. Therefore said Job, though he flaie me, yet will I trust in him.
For he that puts his trust in the Lord shall never be confounded. In this
hope spoke S. Paul, Christ is Phil. 1.
to me both in life and death advantage. Again, Whether we live, or die, we
are the Lords. And Romans 14.
again, God forbid, that I shoule rejoice, but Gala. 6.
in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. And to ye Romans he says, There is no
condemnation to Romans 8.
them that are in Christ Jesus. This is the foundation of faith, even a strong
rock which shall continue for ever. Neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor
persecution, nor famine, nor any danger can remove the faithful from his hope.

But the wicked and unstable fall from their hope, and their fall is miserable.
They have hard the word of God that teaches unto salvation, but did not
regard it, they have forgotten the works of the Lord, and received his grace
in vain. For when they have heard the word, the Diue^ comes, and takes
away the word out of their hearts, least they should believe, and be saved.
And the end of these men, is worse than the beginning.

It was not so with the Thessalonians. They received the word of God
willingly, and it was fruitful in them, so that thereby they increased in
faith, in love, and in hope. Their faith the Apostle calls forcible or
^ffectual: their love diligent and painful, their hope mighty through
patience, whereby they overcome al manner of dangers: and rejoices on their
behalf, because he found so great success of his travail in the Gospel
amongst them.

Knowing that you are elect of God. You were blind, ye children of wrath,
without understanding, without God, and without hope. But God has had mercy
upon you, and has given you grace to know your calling. Herein it appears yt
you are the chosen of God, and of the flock of Christ. My sheep (says he)
hear my voice, ^oh. 10.
and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand.

For our Gospel was not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the
holy ghost, and in much assurance. That you have yielded obedience unto the
word, and that my ministry has been effectual amongst you, it comes not
of any power in your selves, or in me, it is the work of God. He has blessed
my ministry, he has blessed your hearts. It is the gift of God, least any man
should boast thereof. Hereof he speaks to the Corinthians, Who is Paul
then? and who is Apollos, 2. Cor. 3.
but the ministers by whom ye believed, and as the Lord gave to every man.
I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. It is he which has
the key of David, which opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man
opens. Without him we can do nothing. He guides us and al our cou^sailes,
and leads us into al truth. No man John 6.
can come unto me (says Christ) except the father which has sent me draw
him. And by ye Prophet Ezechiel God says, I will give you Ezech. 36.
a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you. I will put my spirit
within you, and will cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my
judgments and do them. And by the Prophet leremie, I will put my law in Iere.
31.
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. Psalm. 1^9.
Therefore David makes his prayer, Teach me O Lord, give me understanding and
I will keep thy law.

The words of the Preacher enter in at the ^are. The spirit of God conueyeth
them into the heart. Augustine says, Auditur euangelium, De praedestinat:
Sanctorum. c. 8.
Auditur credunt, quidam non credunt: qui credunt, intus a patre audiunt and
discunt, qui non credunt, foris audiunt, intus non audiunt, neque discunt. Hoc
est, ill^ dat^r vt credant, illis non datur. The Gospesis declared. Some there
are which believe, some there are which believe not. They which believe hear
it inwardly by the father, and so learn it. They which believe not, hear it
only with their outward sense, and not with inward feeling, and therefore
learn it not. As much to say, to them it is given to believe: to the other it
is not given. In the Acts of the Apostles Lydia a woman of the City of the
Thiatirians heard the preaching of the Apostle Paul: But it is said, Whose
heart the Lord oponed, Act. 16.
that she attended unto the things that Paul spoke. The people which said unto
Peter, and the other Apostles, Men and brethren, Act. 2.
what shall we do? did hear all the words of Peter: but they had another
teacher, that gave force unto the word and made it fruitful in them, and
therefore it is said, They were pricked Luke 24.
in their hearts. This also appeared in the Disciples which walked toward
Emaus: they heard Christ open the Scriptures unto them, they reasoned with him,
yet until their eles were opened they knew him not. His word crept into their
ears, but it was the spirit of God which wrought within them, which inflamed
their hearts, and made them to know him.

Thus God blesses his word, and makes it yield fruit in such measure, as his
wisdom has appointed. His blessing appears greater, when many are
converted: yet is his word al one, and the power thereof no whit shorter when
it is utterly refused, or received but of Esaie 55.
few. Surely (says God) as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven,
and returns not thither, but waters the earth and makes it-fruitfull, that
it may give seed to the sower, and bread to him that eats: so shall my word
be that goes out of my mouth. It shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent
it. It is the word of the living God, which is blessed for ever. And blessed is
that heart which can receive it, which GOD instructs, and to which he gives
knowledge of his word, which does so learn it, that he is assured of the
truth thereof, and nothing doubts, but it is indeed the word of life: which
says thereof, this is the way, in which if I walk, I shall certainly go
forward to the City of my GOD: this is the truth, if I hearken unto it, I
shall never be dereiued. Whosoever finds himself endued with this grace, he
does as plainly and evidently judge of the words of God, and try out the
truth thereof, from the devises and doctrines of men: as a man of clear eye
sight, is ahle to judge of colors, and to know one col^ur from an other. Yea,
in this is the knowledge of that more certain, because color does fade and
alter, and many times one color thereby waxes like an other: but the truth
of GOD does never alter: it continues one throughal ages: it is the word of
everlasting life. Heaven and earth shall perish, but one title thereof shall
not be lost. The truth of God shall be established for ever. The humble shall
hear it, and be glad.

As ye know after what manner we were among you for your sakes. You know how
I behaved my self, and after what manner I have lived among you. You know my
first coming and entry unto you. You know what doctrine I have taught, and
what has been my conversation of life. I never deceived any, nor offered
wrong unto the simplest. I sought not you, nor yours, but those things which
are Jesus. I have lived by the labor of my hands, in watchings, in hunger, in
cold, and nakedness. God has ordained, that they which teach the gospel,
should live by the gospel. Who seedeth a ^lacke and eats not of the milk of
the flock? But I have not used this liberty. For I have a great care least by
any means I should offend you. Yet would I never flatter any in that thing
they had done amiss: I never spared to rebuke ill. If I should fear, or seek
to please men, I were not the servant of Christ. I seek not mine own glory,
but the glory of him that sent me, who also has made me a minister of his
gospel. I have forsaken al things, my goods and life, my flesh and my body:
and am daily in perils, compassed daily by persecution, and seedeath death
daily before mine eyes, for the love. I be are to you, and for the care I have
of the Church. You are the Lords sheep, I am your shaepeheard: you are the
house of God, I am your builder: you are Gods orchard, I am your ouerseer and
workman. I shall give an att^mpt for your souls. You know how ^ly I have.
loved you in the Lord. Your griese has been my griese, your joy has been
my joy. I have prayed for you day and night, and have given thanks to God for
you, and reio^ced in your behalf. What is more dear to a man than life: yet
have I desired to yield up my life, that you might live. I have been ready to
suffer death, if thereby I might do you good. These things you cannot but
remember, your conscience bears me witness, that I have thus lived among
you for your sake.

V. 6. And ye become followers of us, and of the Lord, and received the word in
much affliction, with joy of the holy ghost.

He commends the godly for the practice of that which they have learned and
seen in him, in that they have received the gospel, and framed their lives
accordingly, and have continued steadfast in the same in the mids of
persecution. Herein he does not only lay out himself and the other Apostles
for an example: but tells them that this way is also ^roden out by our Lord
himself. Who as he is the way, and the light that lightneth every man which
comes into the worloe, so did he hear his cross, and did lay down his
life for his sheep. Therefore he said to his Disciples, The disciple is not
above his Master; Mar. 10.
nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough for the Disciple to be as his
Master is, and the servant as his Lord. If they have called the master of
the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household?

But this is reckoned unto them for happipinesse. Matthew. 5.
Blessed are you when men revile you, and persecute you, and say al manner of
evil against you, for my sake, falsely. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your
reward in Heaven. For so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.
They slew them, and drowned them, hewed them with swords, and cut them in
pieces Matthew. 16.
with sawes. If any man (says our Savior) will follow me, let him forsake
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. So far must the children of
God be from the love of this world: in such sort must he forsake his own
life, and endure affliction that will come unto Christ.

In the old law, the Priests went on, and carried the Arc before, and the
people came after: In token that they should give good example, and the people
should follow them. The Priest was appointed to be a shril trumpet sounding in
the ears of the people: and the people were commanded to prepare them selves
for the battle of the Lord of hosts. Therefore, says S. Paul, so have I
followed the Lord, and so have you followed me: and received the word (not in
affliction only) but in much Affliction. Where he much describes the
unmerciful hearts, and tyrannous hate of the wicked against al those that
follow the lamb, and receive the word of God with gladness. No torment so
cruel, no devise so strange, no manner of death so horrible, which has not
been, or which is not laid upon them. Their babies be cast into prisons: they
are stripped out of their houses, and spoiled of their goods. Thus do the
enemies of God work tyranny and much affliction unto the godly. They consume
their bodies in fire, shed their blood without measure, throw out their bones
and scatter them upon the face of the earth, and this do they, not as against
murderers, robbers, adulterers, or such like, but ^nelie because they receive
the word, and bear a love to the truth, and cannot deny the power thereof.

With joy of the holy ghost. This is that which passes al natural sense and
wisdom. Many seem to take in good part, and abide patiently afflictions,
loss of goods, imprisonment and loss of life. But no man can rejoice in the
suffering of these things, but the child of god: no man but who^ Christ has
chose^ out of ye world: but whose name is written in the book of life, but he,
in whom ye spirit bears witness with his spirit that he is the child of God.
He knows that through many tribulations he must enter intorest. He knows,
the wicked could have no power over him, ^nlesse it were given them from above:
he knows that al is done for the best to them that love God: and that God
could dispose means, if it were so ^dient, to bring to naught all the devises
of the ungodly.

When the ^ernantes of God were rast into the hot burning furnace, because
they would not worship the golden Image, that the ^ing Nabuchodonosor had set
up: who would have thought, that the fire could not burn. D^ that their bodies
should not have been consumed^ yet did God in the midst of the fire prefer^
them so, that not one hair of their head was Dan. 3.
burnt, neither were their coats changed, nor any smell of fire came upon them.
Let us never forget this notable example of Gods power to deliver his servants,
that we may ever be earnest and careful to profess our faith in him, and to
^riue unto the death for the setting forth of his glory.

It ^areth even so with the children of God in the persecution of this world:
troubles, miseries, and aduer^tie compass them, as the ^rie ^nace compassed
those three men of God. But God covers them with his mercy, as with a
cloud, that nothing shall hurt them. I say not, all that stand in lik^ defense,
shall in like sort be so preserved, that their bodies ^al not be peirced. For
God suffers the wicked to destroy and kill his servants, and to consume
their bodies to dust and ashes. Yet are his servants warned not to fear
them. When the Apostles were beaten because they had spoken in the name of
Jesus, They departed Act. 5.
from the counsel, rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke
for his name. We rejoice (says Saint Paul) in ^bulations, Romans 3.
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience,
and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost which is given unto us.

The comfort which is given in this case to the godly, is hidden within them.
For to him that over comes shall be given a white stone, and in the stone a
new name written, which no man knows saving he that receives it. The
afflictions of this present time are Romans (...).
not worthy the glory, which shall be showed unto us. When our saniour did see
the time of his passion draw near, he said to his Disciples, You are they
which have continued with Luke. (...).
me in my temptations. Therefore I appoint to you a kingdom as my father has
appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and
sit on seats, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And in his sermon upon
the mountain, he says, Blessed are they which suffer persecution for
righteousness Mat. 5.
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven. The case shall be altered. It shall
be between them and their persecuters as it was between Lazarus and the Rich
man. When the wicked and cruel tyrants shall see them in the presence of the
throne of God, because they came out of great tribulation, and have Reave. 7.
washed their long robes, and have made them white in ye blood of the lamb:
the god of Abraham shall say unto the wicked: sons, remember that you in your
life time received your pleasures, and like wise these men pains: now therefore
are they c^orted, and you tormented. They are taken out of affliction into
rest, from their bonds into liberty, out of prison into a kingdom, out of
misery unto glory, from life unto death. The promise of this comfort is often
renewed. The prophet David says, They yt sow Psalm. 126.
in tears, shall reap in joy. Our savior tells his Disciples, Ye shall weep
and lament, and John 16.
the world shall rejoice: and you shall forrowe, but your sorrow shall be turned
to joy. S. John heard a voice from heaven, saying: Blessed be Reu. 14.
the dead, which hereafter die in ye Lord. Even so says the spirit, for they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. He is commanded to write
unto ye Angel of the Church of the Smyrnians. Fear none of those things which
Reave. 2.
thou shall suffer, Bohold it shall come to pass, that the devil shall cast some
of you into prison, that you may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten
days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
Thus god suffers his servants to be sifted, and to be tried as pure gold in
the furnace, and receives them as a sweet smelling savor of burnt sacrifice.
And this is it whereof the Apostle puts the Thessalonians in remembrance,
that they are strengthened by the holy ghost not only to abide such afflictions
as they suffer because they have received the gospel: but also to rejoice,
because they are assured, whatsoever shall happen unto them, they be the
children of God.

V: 7. So that you were as ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and
Achaia.

8 For from you sounded out the word of ye Lord, not in Macedonia and Achaia
only: but your faith also which is toward God, spread abroad in all quarters,
that we need not to speak any thing.

9 For they themselves show of you what manner entering in we had unto you, and
how you turned from idols to God, to serve the living and true God.

10 And to look for his son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead,
Jesus which delivers us from the wrath to come.

The countries round about them were drawn by the example of the
Thessalonians, to believe the Gospel preached unto them. You are (says he) as
ye bright sun beams. They behold you, and rejoice of you, even as of the
morning light. You are an holy City set upon an hill, you cannot be hid,
your says is a pattern of says, your life is a pattern of life unto them. They
have learned of you how to guide their ways. You have called them back from
error, and from vngodi^nesse, to serve the true and living God. You are made
unto them a sweet smelling savor of life unto life. For so it has pleased
God to make his Gospel known in all places through you, and to make you the
builders of his church. When they behold your godly conversation which is in
Christ, they are ashamed of themselves. When they behold your light, they find
fault with their own darkness. O say they, this is a holy people, this is a
people that fears God. Let us hear them what they teach: let us lead our
lives in holiness and righteousness as they do.

Let us by hearing these words enter into our selves. God has given his light
to ^hine upon us, he has blessed us with the knowledge of his Gospel. Let us
take heed, we turn not the light into darkness, nor the truth of God into
lies. Many thousand eyes are set upon us, to look upon and behold us. Let
us be an example of godliness. Let us be as a light to them that yet abide in
darkness. Let not the name of GOD be evil spoken of through us. His name is
holy. Woe be unto Mat. 1^.
the world (says Christ) because of offenses: for it must needs be that
offenses shall come, but woe be unto that man by whom the offense comes.
Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, it were better for him, that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the sea. It were better for that man, if he had never been borne. For the
blood of them that perish by his offense, shall be required at his hands. The
wrath of God is reueiled from heaven against those that are such, because they
withholde the truth in unright con^sse. The kingdom of God shall be taken away
from them, and given to a nation that will bring forth the fruits thereof.

It follows, From you sounded the word of the Lord, not in Macedonia and
Achaia only, etc. If a man carry in his hand a light burning candle, it
gives not light to him only that carries it, but to al those which be in the
house, and they also see it which are without. Even so, if any be the child of
knowledge, and carry about him the light of-God, he does not only taste of the
comfort thereof himself, and work comfort to those that appertain to the
Church of God: but lightneth also the hearts of Paganes and J^dels, which are
abroad. Such as are bathed or persumed with precious ointments, or pouders,
have not only the pleasure to themselves, but the savor thereof casts if
self out, and is pleasant to al those which stand by. The Gospel is the light
of God: It shines in the darkness of this world. It is the sweet incense
and savor of God: Wheresoever the breath thereof is received, it brings life.

But your faith also, which is toward God, spredde abroad in all quarters. As
the lightning is seen from one part of the air to the other, and as the
sound of great noise spreads it self far and wide, so deeth the light of
good conversation in the godly show if self forth. And therefore he tells
them, they have filled all the Country of Macedonia with knowledge, and with
wonder at their faith, and ^nesse in the truth. As if he had said, great is
the renown of your king Alexander, and your country is famous. He has
ouerrun the whole world and subdued it. He has conquered Graecia, Asia,
Arabia, Phrygia, Armenia, Scythia, and India. Kings and princes sell down
before him. The whole world stood in awe of his name. Yet Alexander had but
the power, and force of men. He had great treasures of gold and silver. He had
numbers of horses, and camels, and Elephants. He had sword, bills, spears, and
darts, and such like artillery and armor. These were the things wherewith he
overcame his enemies. Hereby both he and his people were renowned.

What then may be said of the battle which you have fought? or of the
victory which you have gptt^ you have won, ye Alexander could never win. You
have overcome your selves. You have overcome the world. He conquered the bodies
of many, and had them at commandment. But their souls stood out, and would
not be conquered, You have subdued your souls, and brought them to the
obedience of the Gospel. You have ouerrun all the country and triumphed among
the people. And all this is brought to pass, without force, without policy,
without ar^ur; without artilerie, only by your patience, and suffering for the
Gospel sake.

That we need not to speak any thing. To make the commendation of their
faith more evident, he tells then^, the same of their zeal and constancy is
kno (...) in all places. Whither seener I go (says he) they know you, and
speak of you, and bearken to you. Hereby appears how needeful it is, that
chief towns and cities he well governed, that vice in them be senerely
punished, that ^tne and godliness be maineteined, and the people instructed,
because the examples of such places spread abroad in all quarters nigh them.

They themselves show of you, what manner of enteraunce we had unto you: After
what sort you received me, and ginedeare I was unto you. Al places were laid
and beset for me to seek my life, but you enlarged your selves toward me, and
took me in, When I was in prison, you came to me, and feared no man, you were
not ashamed of my bonds, you were ready to loose your own lives to save me.
This is spoken of to your great praise.

And how you turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true God. Here
are set down in few words the sum and parts of Christian religion. The
first is to forsake at ^ols to turn from them: then to turn unto God, and to
put alout trust in (...) to serve the living and true God. The ^nice of God,
and idols can not stand together. No man can turn unto God, that turns not
from idols. This is a wonderful effect of the gospel, to forsake idols, and
serve God: to leave customs, and the usage of forefathers, and give ear to
the truth. To love from the heart, that which thou did sometimes hate: and
to detest from the heart, that which thou didbest sometimes love, is strange
and wonderful. But to do this for Christ which was borne of poor Marie, whom
the wise and learned, and mighty men of this world despised, which was
crucified, and hanged between two thieves, whom they scorned upon the Cross:
to follow, or believe, or put trust in him: to call him the power and the
wisdom of God, to confess him to be, in whom al Israel shall be blessed,
and in whom all the world shall be saved: to give body or life for his sake is
a strange miracle. No King, no Prince, no law, no wisdom of man can work
this and bring it to pass. This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in
our eyes. And this does he in those only which receive the word of the
gospel with joy of the holy ghost.

And to look for his son from heaven, whom he raised, etc. The holy
Scriptures do not only teach us to turn unto God, but also what it is, that
god gives unto al them which seek him, even that they be delivered from the
wrath to come: and for whose sake he delivers us, for Jesus his son whom
he raised from the dead. Therefore he tells them, howsoever they be rejected,
or despised as foolish among men, if they continue in the things which they
have learned, they shall be wise unto salvation. That therefore they lift up
their heads, and look for their redeemer: That they say, thy kingdom come,
and, Come Lord Jesus: because he is appointed by God to be the Judge of the
quick and the dead: and he shall come in the glory of his father, and
delivers from the wrath to come, al those that trust in him. For among men
there is none other name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved. This is
the depth of al knowledge and the comfort which passes al understanding, that
against al temptations, and afflictions which oppress our conscience, or bear
and trouble our bodies, we may grow strong by faith in the son of God
Christ Jesus, and assertaine our selves of his coming from heaven for our
delinerance.

CHAP. 2.
FOr you your selves know, brethren, that our entrance unto you was not in
vain.
HE takes witness of them, of his diligence and pains taken in the
fulfilling of his ministry: seeing it has so good success among them, that
they by the preaching of the gospel have forsaken superstition, and are turned
unto, and do now serve the true and living God, and do b^leeue for giuenes of
their sins, and deliverance from the wrath to come by Jesus Christ.

It is a great and deadly smart to the faithful servant of God, to see the
people wilful, and to despise the word of their salvation. Hereof Esaie
complains, I have spread out Esai. 65.
my hands all the day long to a rebellious people, which walked in a way that
was not good, even after their own imaginations. They stopped their ears, and
would not hear, nor be reclaimed, nor return that they might be saved. And
Jeremy, O that my head Iere. 9.
were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep
day and night for the stain of the daughter of my people, for they be
adulterers, and an assembly of rebels. Sword and destruction comes upon
them, and they will not see: Oh that they would give ear and repent in time.
Again, My people is foolish, they have not known Iere. 4.
me: they are foolish children, and have no understanding: they are wise to
do evil, but to do well, they have no knowledge. David cries out: O ye
sons of men, how long Psalm. 4.
will ye love vanity and seek after lies? Why forsake you the truth of GOD,
and have no regard to his mercy? So our Savior mourns over Jerusalem, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Luke 13.
which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent to thee, how often
would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen her brood under her
wings, and ye would not? how carefully and tenderly have I sought for thy
salvation? how often have I called upon thee, sent unto thee my servants, and
powered out my blessings before thine eyes? So bitter and mourneful a thing is
it to al those that seek the glory of God, to see no fruit follow of their
labors, to see the people continue ignorant, and wilful, and to seek their
own destruction.

Therefore they turn themselves unto GOD, which is the father of lights, and
God of all comfort, in whose hand are the hearts of the people, that his word
may have free passage, and be glorified: that God will open unto them the
door of utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, and publish the secret of
the gospel boldly: that he will give power to his word declared by them, and
assist them with his holy spirit: that he will open the eyes of the people,
that they may see: and turn their hearts, that they may be converted. So
did David make his prayer, Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show
Psalm. 51.
forth thy praise. Albeit my month is simple, and rude, and barbarous, yet if
thou will it may be an instrument to declare thy glory. Then shall I teach
thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. Be
favorable unto Sion, build the wales of Jerusalem. Thus do they lift up
their hands, and call unto GOD, that he would send down his light into the
hearts of the people, that what they hear, they hear not in vain, but may
receive it, and understand it, and keep it. For unless GOD direct the heart,
and make it fit to receive instruction, the preacher, though he be never so
desirous to do good, does labor in vain.

God one lic disposes the ways of men, it is he which tries the corn from
the chasse: he knows whom he will bring to he of his fold, and make to
hear his voice. Many times he blesses his word with great increase among
them, which at the first despise it, and entreat cruelly the preachers, and
messengers thereof. When Paul disputed, and exhorted the Jews and the
Graecians at Corinthus, and found little fruit of his labor, and that there
were few or none that liked his doctrine, and many enemies which resisted and
blasphemed it: he purposed to depart and go away from them. Then the Lord
said Acts. 18.
unto Paul in the night by a vision, Fear not, but speak, and hold not thy
peace: for I am with thee, and no man shall lay hands on thee to hurt thee:
for I have much people in this city. They shall hear thee: if not now, yet
they shall hear thee at some other time. They shall bear thy sayings in
mind. I will be with thee, I will open their hearts, and make them obedient to
the Gospel, and they shall be turned unto me. Thou shall see the fruit of thy
labor, and that thy coming unto them has not been in vain.

Verse 2. But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully
entreated at Philippi (as ye know) we were bold in our God, to speak unto you
the Gospel of God with much striving.

The story of these his persecutions is written in the 16. of the Acts. He was
stripped naked, and scourged with rods, and cast into prison, and put in hazard
of life. Yet notwithstanding he were thus evil entreated at Philippi, when he
came to Thessalonica, he was nothing discouraged, but proceeded more boldly
than before, and went into the Synagogue of the Jews, and disputed three
Sabbath days, Act. 17.
and taught them, that Christ is that Messiah, even the son of God.

But, that we may the better conceive how mightily GOD works, and what
great strength he gives to weak creatures, when he appoints them to set
forth his glory, let us behold this boldness of the Apostle in speaking the
Gospel unto them. To whom did he speak? To the Jews, the enemies of the
cross of Christ. Where? Not in hucker mucker, and in corners: but openly, in
their synagog, for he feared no man. What time those he? The^ when all the Jews
were assembled together. How often? 3. sabbath days together. In what city?
In Thessalonica, ye greatest and most famous City of all that Country. How
was he entreated? There arose great trouble and contention. They resisted him,
spoke against him, and sought to destroy him. For what cause? what had he
deserved? what had he taught? the gospel of God, and of Christ, of the
kingdom, and of the life to come: the gospel in which God offers his grace,
and reconciliation, and comfort, and peace, and salvation.

Who would think such ioifull tidings should not be welcome? what eye would
not willingly open it self to behold the brightness of the sun? what ear
will refuse to hear God speak? but it has always bin so. There have ever
been some that have loved darkness, rather than light. The world shall never be
without some Annas, or Caiaphas, or Judas, or Pilate. The children of the Devil
shall always set themselves against the children of God.

The cause of tumults and troubles, proceeds not from the Gospel. The
Gospel of Christ is the Gospel of peace. But the enemies of the Gospel, are
stirrers of ^quietnes, and inflamers of war. Abel was simple, Caine spiteful:
Jacob smooth, Esau rough and hairie: David gentle, Saul cruel: Joseph innocent,
his brethren wicked, and fell upon him. The Apostles humble in heart and
peacemakers, the Pharisees bloudthirstie, and sought to put them to death. The
like examples are before us this day. The whole world is in an vproare, and
great troubles and afflictions are in all places. No man is able to declare the
misery thereof. Let no man therefore slander, or forsake the Gospel. It has
been so from the beginning, and from time to time.

Such troubles, confusion, and misery, are wrought not by the gospel, or them
that receive the gospel: but by those which resist it. they practice all
means, and turn all things vpside down, rather than it should take place.
The wicked are angry there with, they gna^h their teeth, and consume away.
This is the cause, for which, the children shall rise against Matthew. I^
their parents, and shall cause them to die. Cain murdered Abel, because God
had respect unto Abel, and to his offering. Esau could not abide Jacob, because
Isaac had given him his blessing. The brethren of Joseph sought to make him
away, because God had a favor unto him. Saul was wrothfull against David,
because God gave him great gifts of courage, and strength, and wisdom. The
Egyptians loathed the children of Israel, because they were Gods people. The
Galathians resisted Paul, because he preached the truth. Therefore (says S.
Paul) we labor and are rebuked, because we 1. Tim. (...)
trust in the living God, which is the savior of al men. Specially of those
which believe. Likewise says our savior, They shall excommunicate Ioh. 16.
you, yea the time shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think he does God
service. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known
the father nor me.

Even so stands it with the Church of God this day. There is nothing new that
is under the sun. Whatsoever is done now, has been done before. Who will
lift up his eyes, and look to the dooinges of men, shall see Cain rise up
against Abel, Esau against Jacob, the cruel brethren against Joseph, Saul
against David, Pharao against Moses, the Egyptians against the people of God,
the High Priests and the Pharisees, against Christ, and all that will be his
disciples: they change peace into war, they turn judgment into gal, and the
fruit of righteousness into wormwood, they resist the truth of God, to
establish devises and doctrines of men. But blessed be God, they shall not
prevail. He gives us peace. He has made us turn our swords into mattocks.
He has taught us altogether with one mouth, and one heart to praise him, even
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. His truth is mighty, and shall prevail.

V. 3. For our exhortation was not by deceit, nor uncleanness, nor by guile.

4. But as we were allowed of God, that the Gospel should be committed unto us,
so we speak, not as they that please men, but God, which tries our hearts.

God (says he) has chosen me from my mothers womb, and set me apart to the
office of an Apostle. He has appointed me to carry his name before the
Gentiles. Therefore as he has given me charge to preach the Gospel, and to
bring the people unto him from the power of Satan: so I speak, truly,
faithfully, sincerely, not as the words of men, but as the words of God. I
have used no deceit, nor taught you to follow traditions of men in ^de of the
commandments of God. In like sort says he to the Corinthians: I have
received of 1. Cor. 11.
the Lord, that which I also have declared unto you. And again, We are
ambassadors for 2. Cor. 5.
Christ, as though God did beseech you thorough us. For this cause he says
unto them: Seeing that we have this ministry, as we have 2. Cor. 4.
received mercy, we faint not, but cast from us the cloakes of shame, and
walk not in craftiness, neither handle we the word of God deceitfully: but in
declaration of the truth, we approve our selued to every man's conscience in
the sight of God. In these speeches he asks credit, because of his upright
handling of the word: and charge the false prophets for marring the word of
God with unclean and deceitful corruptions and glose^

In foreign countries, women that have no natural beauty of their own, use to
paint and color their faces, that whereas they lack beauty in deed, yet they
may seem beautiful. Even so is it oftentimes in matters of religion. Such as
hold not the true religion, as it is taught by the word of God, and has been
practiced in those Churches, which the Apostles planted, and among those
Christians which lived nighest unto that time, when the Apostles preached:
because they know, their religion which they profess now will not agree with
that: they deal deceitfully and with guile. These be false Apostles, and
deceitful workmen. They beguile our senses, and blind our eyes. They call us to
worship an Idol, in steed of the true and living God. They lead us out of the
light into darkness, from the truth into error, from knowledge unto
ignorance. They forbid laweful matrimony, and call it filthiness, and allow
open stews and harlots as a thing which nothing empaireth their holiness.

I will not speak all that I might, nor in such sort as the matter occasioneth.
Yet can I not but say somewhat of their spiritual craftiness in abusing and
beguiling the people of God.

The Egyptians furnished richly, and decked their churches beautifully, and al
in the honor of a ^t. Many things among these men carry great show of
holiness, which are nothing else, but cloakes of their shame, and manifest
proof that they are not allowed of God, but are crept in by deceit, and by
guile.

Single life carries a fair show. But O merciful God what shame and vilanies
have been covered with this cloak? Pius secundus Platina, i^ Pio 2.
saw somewhat, when he said, as marriage was taken away from priests upon
great considerations, so now upon other greater considerations it were to be
restored to them again. Hierome saw somewhat when he wrate thus, Vide as
nonnullos accinctos renibus, pulla tunica, Ad rustic^ Gallum.
barba prolixa, a mulieribus non posse discedere, sub codem manner tecto, simul
inire conuiuia: ancillas ^uuenes habere in ministerio, and praeter vocabulum
nuptiarum omnia esse matrimonij. You may see some (that pretend gravity) are
girded, and go in black, and have long beardes, who can in no wise leave the
company of women, but keep house with them, and banquet with them. They take
young maidens into their service, and do al things as if they were married,
save that they lack the name of marriage. Castitatem Orig. tract. 24. in Math.
docent, and castitatem non servant, says Origin. They teach chastity and yet
keep not Epiph. cons. Origenia. h^ref. 42.
chastity. And Epiphan. They refuse marriage, but not lust or pleasure.

Images are fair and beautiful. The churches are decked and beset with them:
but they are a cloak of shame. They are set in place of teachers. The Priests
are ignorant, and live in idleness, and send the people to learn at
pictures. They call them lay men's books: yet, What profits the Image (says
Ab^) for Abac. 2.
the maker there of has made it an image, and a teacher of lies? And Jeremy
says, The stock Ierem. 10.
is a doctrine of vanity.

What is their meaning to speak, and pray in the Church in a strange tongue?
This is a cloak of their shame. Their priests be so unlearned, they can
scarce understand english, yet they save their credit, seeing they are able to
read latin. And hereby they cover al their blasphemies, and superstitions:
because the people can not understand, and therefore not reprove them.

I speak nothing of their relics, pilgrimages, purgatory, and such other
cloakes of shame, which they use to hide their covetousness, and thereby draw
unto themselves the riches of the whole world. They cannot say with the
Apostle, our exhortation was not by deceit, nor uncleanness, nor by guile.

I know there are some, that lay it unto our charge, as the false Apostles did
unto Paul, that we use the word of God deceitfully: they find fault with our
translations of the Scriptures. They spare not to say, there be a thousand
faults in the new Testament. Yet would they never set down 500, or 100, or 50,
or 25, or 5.

If there be errors in the translation, I know they were men which translated
it, and might err like men. May no translation be allowed that is not
altogether perfect? As if the greek translation were without fault, or as if
many faults were not in the common vulgar translation in latin, or in the
translation of Hierom. What then? Must the greek translation be forbidden?
Must Hieromes translation, or the vulgar translation be forbidden? As for the
old latin common translation, though many learned men have showed the gross
errors thereof: Yet have they well provided for it in the counsel at Trident, Ne
quis veterem vulgatam editionem reijcere quouis praetextu audeat, vel
praesumat. Let no man dare, or presume (say they) by any manner of color, to
refuse the old common translation of the Bible. Yet is no translation of ours
so corrupt, as that which they have thus privileged. But if it were true which
they falsely report: reason would, they did correct the errors, and so set it
abroad. But thus they bear in hand, that they may bring you in hatred of it,
and pull you from the reading of the scriptures. I will not say in what sort they
abuse the word of God. What speak I of abusing? Nay they do manifestly
against, and contrary to the word. The word of God teaches us forgiveness
of our sins by the blood of Jesus Christ once offered. They teach contrary,
that the same blood is daily offered, and Christ as often new borne, as
pleases the priest to say mass. The word of God forbids to make any graven
Jmage, to bow down to it or worship it. They teach contrary, that Images
are to be worshipped, and even with such honor, as is due to the paternes
themselves. The word of God teaches us to pray in a known tongue: they teach
the contrary, and account it for heresy to pray in a known tongue. The word
of God charge al states of men to be subject to their Prince or higher
power: They withdraw their obedience unto civil Magistrates, and teach the
people to resist authority. Erasmus says in his notes upon these words of
Christ: Let these go their way. Nou: quendam magni nominis theologum, In Eras.
an^. 18. Ich.
etc. I know a Divine of great fame and account for his learning, which did
wrest these words of Christ, to defend the immunitie or lawelesse estate of
clergy men. but this did he ridicule, fondly or peeuishly, says Erasmus.

It would be over long to declare unto you the foolish or rather blasphemous
applying of the Scriptures, to approve their gestures at mass, and the
soueraintie and chieftie that they challenge. One of their Bishops in ye late
counsel as Trent, said of Paulus 3. then Pope, Papa Cornelius Episc. Bit^
lux venit in mundum, the Pope which is the light is come into the world. Which
are the words of the Evangelist, declaring the Godhead of Christ.

By these few, it may appear how unjustly they charge us with corrupting the
word of God. And how truly this fault is to be laid (...) to them, which
either abridge the sense of the Scripture, or reach it further than it
yields, or utterly refuse to stand to the authority thereof, and in no
case can like that the people of God should read the Scriptures: and have
adjudged them heretics, and consumed their bodies in the fire, which have
defended in speech, and sought to maintain the doctrine of truth set down in
ye holy scriptures.

The Apostle says, He was allowed of God. They that enter into the ministry,
must be allowed not of men only, but of God. Therefore, whosoever takes that
charge over the people, must look narrowly into himself, and see whether his
calling be of God. If be have not a testimony that God has called him
inwardly, al other outward calling is to small purpose. God is a righteous
judge. He will say to the conscience and to the heart of such a one, friend
how came thou in hither without thy wedding garment? Who brought thee in?
Give an account of thy stewardship: thine account is great.

And because some are this date to be admitted into this office, let us pray
unto God for them that god will allow them, that he will give them hearts to
conceive, and tongues to speak the truth of God, that they may be the
servants of Christ, and disposers of the mysteries of God: that they may be
the salt of the earth, and the light of the world: that they may lay out the
Lords money to his advantage: and Matt. 25.
so it may be said unto them: Thou have been faithful in little, I will make
thee ruler over much, enter into thy masters joy.

V. 5 Neither yet did we use flattring words, as you know, nor colored
covetousness, God is record.

6 Neither sought we praise of men, neither of you, nor of others.

The servant and messenger of God must so speak, as God speaks. God speaks
deeply, and to the heart. He launceth the spirit, and wounds the inward
parts. He bids Esaie them the people their transgressions, and the house of
Jacob their sins: God himself says, I visit the sin of the fathers upon
their children, Exodus 12.
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. Again he says, If
ye shall Leuit. 26.
despise my ordinances, either if your soul abhor my laws, so that ye will
not do al my commandments, I will set my face against you, and you shall fall
before your enemies, and they that hate you shall reign over you. But unto
those that repent them of their sins, and turn (...) to him, God says, Turn
unto me, and ye shall Esaias 45.
be ^aued. Again, Thou disobedient Israel, return, Ierem. 3.
says the Lord, and I will not let my wrath fall upon you. So must the minister
of God, he must show forth the mercy of God, and not hide his judgments. He
has the Lords business in band, he may not do it negligently. A flatterer
makes it his greatest care to please men, he seeks their favor, he fears
to displease, and dares not speak that that will be evil taken. When he
sees a thief, he runs with him, and is partaker with the adulterers: he
sows pillowes under the arms of sinners. Whosoever says, nay, his nay is
ready: and if any say yea, he is ready to say, yea: he cha^geth often as ye
weatherecock: he dares not strive against ye stream: his heart is at the will of
others: he seeks some gain, he seeks his own glory, and not the glory
of God. They which are such, are called in the Scriptures, hirelings, dumb
dogs, that cannot barhe. They deny God, betraie his truth, and deceive the
people. They lock ^ppe the truth in lies. Of such the spirit of god says: Woe
unto them that have a double heart, and Eccle. 2.
to the wicked lips. And, A double minded man, is inconstant in all his ways.
And, He that James. 1.
is not with me is against me: And, He that gathers Luke 11.
not with me, scatters. And, How long halt ye between two opinions? if the
Lord 1. King. 18.
be God, follow him: but if Baal be he, then go after him. And again, What
communion 2. Cor. 6.
has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? Cursed is
he which ^attereth the people, and is unfaithful in the Lords work.

Nothing is so requisite in the steward of God, as that he be found faithful,
and that he speak those things whereunto the Lord has sent him, boldly. That
they keep not back the message given them of God, nor fear to do their
errand, for any malice of men. Who is it (says Saint Peter) that will harm
you, if you I. Pct. 3.
follow that which is good? notwithstanding, Blessed are ye, if ye suffer for
righteousness sake: yea, fear not their fear, neither be troubled. If the
Apostle speak this comfort to all Christians, which have a care to serve God,
and thereby erhorteth them to stedfastnes, and to sanctify the Lord in their
bearts, and to ^e ready to give an account of their faith, and of the hope
that is in them: how much more ought ^reachers and they which are appointed to
the ministry lay aside al fear, and flattery of men? Woe unto them that go
down Esai. 3^.
into Egypt for help. The Aergyptians are men, and not God, and their horses
flesh and not spirit: and when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, the
helper shall fall, and he that is helped shall fail, and they shall altogether
fail.

Christ ^leth his di^iples, they are salt, and they are light. Salt must needs
be sharp to a rotten wound. Light must needs be painful to a (...). A good
Ph^ution must needs trouble and disguiet his sick patient, before he can
heal his disease: and a good surgion must needs trouble and rip up ^tered
wounds. We are Sur ^eous, we are ^tions. The word of God is committed unto
us, that by us it mi^ be applied to season the earth, and that the light there
of shonl^ shine forth in all the wor^. Cr^put aloud, lift up ^hy voice as a
trumpet. If Esai. 58.
the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who wa^ prepare himself to the battle?
When God had called ^eremie to the office of a Prophet, and said, Thou shall go
to all that I shall send thee, Ierem. (...).
and whatsoever I command thee shall thou speak: he said further, Fear not
their faces, least I destroy thee before them. For behold this day, I have
made thee a defenced city, and an iron pillar, and walls of brass against
the whole land. Thou shall not bend, thou shall not yield. Thou shall be a
consuming fire: they shall be stubble before thee. Likewise says God to
Abraham, Fear not Abraham, I am thy buckler, Genesis 15.
and thine exceeding great reward. When Mo^es sought to refose the message, and
th^ught himself over simple to go unto Pharao, God answered, Certainly I will
be with thee. and Exodus 3.
after he says, I have made thee Phara^ God, Exodus 7.
he shall tremble and quake at thy voice So says Christ, What I tell you in
darkness, that Matthew. 10.
speak you in light, and what ye he (...) the care, that preach ye on the
houses. And ^are ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul: but rather fear^ him which is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell.

The consideration hereof ever moved the Prophets and Apostles to warrant
their sayings with authority from God, and to set apart al fear when they
spoke in his name. When Ahab reproved Elias, Art thou he that 1. King. 18.
troubles Israel? He answered, I have not ^ubled Israel, but thou and thy
fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and
thou have followed Baalim. The Prophet Esaie is bold with the Princes of Judah
and Jerusalem, and says, Hear the word Esaias 1.
of the Lord, O Prince, of Sodom, hearken unto the law of our God, O people
of Gomorrha John the Baptist nothing feared to tell Herod a mighty Prince, It
is not lawful Matthew. 14.
for thee to have her to wife. If Balaac would Numb. 24.
give me his house full of filuer and gold, says Balaam, I cannot pass the
commandment of the Lord to do good or bad of mine own mind: What the Lord
shall command, that same will I speak. Moses was bid to tell Pharao, The Lord
God of the Hebrews has Exodus 7.
sent me unto thee. Christ calls James and John the sons of Zebedeus
Boanerges, which is, the sons of thunder, because they should not flatter,
but raise tempest, and lighten, and thunder in the ears and hearts of their
hearers.

Saint Paul says, I am not ashamed of the Romans 1.
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one
that believes. It is the word of God, and shall endure for ever. He has not
given us the spirit of fear to flatter, but the spirit of might and of power
to speak roughly and courageously, where occasion so requires. And therefore
says, If I would please men, I were not the servant of Christ. But I preach
Gods doctrine, and not the doctrine of men: I seek to please God, and not men.

The Pharisees sought to please men, and to deceive the people. They taught them
to walk in the ways of their forefathers, to beleetie as they believed, to do
as they had done. They flattered them, and said you are the Church of God, you
are Gods people, you are the sons of Abraham, you can not err, you can not
be deceived. They that in this sort flatter the people and deceive them, they
serve not Jesus Christ, but their belly, and through flattery and fair
speech seduce the hearts of the simple.

Nor colored covetousness. The Scribes and the Pbarises devoured up widows
houses under pretense of their long prayers: they prayed, and made money of
their prayers: they gave alms, and made money of their alms giving: they
fasted, and made money of their fasting. This did the Scribes and the Pharisees:
their doings continue still: they be dead, their name is taken away, but their
prosessio^ abides. As they made gains of their prayers, and alms, and fasting:
so do some now make great gains, and war rich under pretense of holiness. They
have brought in a profession of wilful chastity, and forbidden marriage in some
whole estate of men. No doubt ^astitie is a holy thing. But they have given
license for money, to such as would, to forsake their vow of chastity. They
have forbidden to eat certain meats, upon certain days. God left meats
as free to the choice of every man, as he left his sun to shine freely to the
use of al men. And they make free liberty for money, to eat what every man
likes. They make money of Purgatory, money of pardons, and money of their
Masses. They make money of Peter, and of Paul, of the Apostles, and Martyrs,
and of Christ himself. These are they of whom Saint Peter speaks, 2. Pct. 2.
Through covetousness shall they with fained words make marchaundise of you.
One says of them, Curia Romana non captat ouem sine lana. The court of Rome
cares not for that sheep, that has no fleece. I will not lay forth at large,
how they do^ al things for covetousness. I have no pleasure in speaking it. God
grant us, so to deliver the gospel aright, that we use not the truth of God,
for a cloak of covetousness.

Neither sought we praise of men, neither of you, nor of others. This is an
other hinderaunce of the course of the Gospel, when the ministers thereof love
the praise of men more than the praise of God. How can ye believe John. 5.
(says Christ) which receive honor one of an other, and seek not the honor
that comes of God alone? how far the Apostle was from this ambition, it
appeared. For he was reviled, and evil spoken of, and counted the filth and
outcast of the world.

V. 7. When we might have been chargeable, as the Apostles of Christ: but we
were gentle among you, even as a nourse cherishes her childrem.

8. Thus being affectioned to you, our good will was to have dealt unto you, not
the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto
us.

9. For ye remember, brethren, our labor and travail: for we labored day
and night, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, and preached
unto you the Gospel of God.

10. You are witnesses, and GOD, how holilie, and justly, and vnblameablie
we behaved our selves among you that believe.

I might have required meat and drink, and other things necessary, at your
hands. For who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? who
planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? who goes a warfare
at any time of his own cost? who mousleth the mouth of the ore, that treads
out corn? we plant the vineyarde of the Lord of hoastes. We feed Christ's
flock. We go to warfare, and stand in the watch and defense of your safety.
We are the poor oxen, that tread out the corn, which will feed you to
salvation. We are your servant, we labor to do you good, we are ordained to
minister in the Church of God. It were great reason we should reap your
carnal things, which have sown to you spiritual things. The workman is
worthy his wages. Yet taught I the Gospel freely, and without reward, and
was ready to give my blood, my life, and my soul out of my body for your
sakes. What could you ask of me more^ what greater gift could I bestow
upon you?

V. 11. And ye know how that we exhorted you, and comforted, and besought
every one of you (as a father his children)

12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you to his kingdom
and glory.

I took care of you as of mine own soul, and dealt with you by always of
comfort, and erhortation, that you would take heed unto your selves, and your
calling. I did put you in mind, that you were placed in the midst of the
unfaithful people, which knew not God: and that they watched you and your
doing: that their eye was upon your household, your wives, your servants, and
your children: upon your selves, and your words, to epsy if they might find
any occasion to speak evil of you. I did beseech you by the glorious coming
of our Lord, and savior Jesus Christ, that the name of God might not be il
spoken of through you. You can not deny this. You must needs confess, you
have thus been taught. Ignorance can not be your excuse. What remains then?
but that you perform it? For the servant that knows his masters will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

As a father his children. What manner care is it that the father takes of his
children. Many men are fathers of children: but what man takes the care, he
ought to take for them? pastors, or teachers of the people should be affected
toward their people, as fathers are to their natural children.

Let such as are fathers, and have children, know in what sort they must be
careful. Your children are a good blessing of God, they be members of the
body of Christ, and the sons of God. The kingdom of heaven belongs to
them. God has appointed his Angels to guide and lead them, and to ^ield them
from evil: and their Angels be in the presence of God and do behold the face
of their father which is in heaven. They be fresh plants of the Church. Who
knows what necessary instruments they may be in the common wealth, and in
the house of God? It is not enough to feed them, and to nourish their bodies,
with necessary sustenaunce. For this do the heathen that know not God: and
the savage and brute beasts, and the birds which have no understanding. They
breed up their young ones, and are tender and paineful to provide for them.
The ass though she be dull, the Bear, and Lion, though they be wild and
cruel, yet seek they far and near to get wherewith to help their young.
Therefore if there be any, or can be any which does forsake and leave his
own, he is more beastly than the foolish Ass, and more unnatural than most
cruel Bears, and Lions, and Tigres.

But in this part men are for the most part over careful. For this cause many
build their houses with blood, and seek possessions by iniquity: they join
house to house, and field to field, and will dwell alone upon the earth: they
oppress the poor and needy, and do wrong to the widow, and the
fatherless: they make money their God, and spoil one an other: and al to
provide for their children. This is the cover and cloak for all their
misthiefe, they may not leave their children unprovided. Unhappie are the
fathers, which in this sort care for their children, by the ruin and spoil of
the needy and innocent, and so break the commandment of God: because their
portion shall be with the wicked in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone. And unhappy are their children, because they are partakers of their
fathers wickedness, and therefore shall also be partakers of punishment with
them. The Prophet David says, I have seen Psalm. 37.
the wicked strong, and spreading himself like a green Bay tree. Yet he
passed away, and lo, he was gone, and I sought him, but he could not be
found. His root was deep, his stock strong, his branches broad, he spread
over and shadowed the whole country, yet he passed away. He departed, his
sons died, his house soon decayed, and his name was in little time quite
forgotten.

Oh how much better then is it to furnish the minds of your children, and to
instruct them in godliness, to teach them to know God, to lead their life
virtuously, and to rebuke them, and correct them for dealing il.

The beginning of wisdom is the fear of God. Let them then learn what that
good and acceptable will of God is. Show them the way in which they should
walk, that they go neither to the right hand, nor to the left. The word of
God is pure and gives understanding to the simple: it is a light to their
footesteps: it teaches those that are young to amend their ways.

When Christ came into Jerusalem, the young children received him. They cried
Ozanna Matt. 21.
to the son of David: Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.
Christ gi^eth witness of them, By the mouth of babes and sucklinges, have thou
set forth thy praise. The words of the little and simple children were able
to confound the wisdom of the Pharise is. Thus were they taught from their
cradle, so careful were their godly parents for them.

Contrariwise, they can not have any wisdom, that despise the law of the
Lord. They become blind, and wicked, and abominable in all their ways. They
have no sense, nor feeling of the will of God. They cannot know light from
darkness, nor God from Belial. Such were the little children that mocked the
Prophet Elizeus, and said to him, Come up thou baulde 2. King^.
head, come up thou bauld head. Their bringing up was no better. Their wicked
fathers had taught the^ nothing el^ but wa^tonnes. But the wrath of God fell
upon them, and there were destroyed by two Bears two and forty of them.

An other care, which a father ought to have of his children, is to lead them
up in the study of virtue, and of godly life. Blessed are the Matthew. 5.
pure in heart, for they shall see God. They which keep not this way, are the
children of wrath. Herein stands the whole profession of a Christian life.
For God has not called us 1. These. 4.
to uncleanness, but unto holiness. This is the will of God and this is our
promise made unto him, that we serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, that we increase in virtue, and grow from grace to
grace.

A good and loving father, which sends his son to a dangerous journey,
either by sea or land: first instructs him with advise, and tells him in
what sort he shall avoid perils. Take heed, says he, the way is perilous,
which thou must pass. The sea is terrible. The waves rise up as high as
heaven, and by and by thou shall see a pit as low as hell. The sands may
swallowe thee, the rocks may destroy thee. Thou shall pass by huge
mountains, and through wilderness, where thieves will assault thee. Thy heart
will quake. Thou shall cry for succor, and find no man to help thee. In
these and these places has many a good man's child been cast away. Oh take
heed my son, thou art the staff and the comfort of mine age. If aught come
to thee otherwise than well, I shall soon after end my dai^ in sorrow.

If a father be thus careful, that his child should escape worldly dangers:
he must be more careful of spiritual dangers, in which whosoever is lost,
is lost for ever. Therefore, thus will he say to him: Oh my son, understand
what GOD has done for thy sake. Take heed to thy self: the world is al
over ^rewed with snares. The dinel ran^ and seeks whom he may devour. Give
^round to him, but resist him, and he will (...) (...) thee. Be strong in says.
The name of the Lord, is a strong Tower of defence-Call upon him in the day
of thy trouble, and he will deliver thee. He will give thee of his spirit.

Take hee^ my son, and be not deceived: let (...) wilfulness cast thee away.
If sinners entire thee, be not a companion of them in wickedness. Fashion not
thy self to the likene^ of this world: for the world passes away, and the
lust thereof. He that loves this world, the love of God is not in him. Be not
like unto them that perish. Thou wast conceived and borne in sin, thou art
by nature the child of wrath. But God made thee meet to be partaker of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, and has delivered thee from the power of
darkness, and has translated thee into the kingdom of his dear son.
Receive not this grace in vain. Cast a^aie the works of darkness and put on
the armor of light. Be renewed in thy heart, and in thy spirit, that it may
appear I have been careful for thee. Thus a good father seeks to train up
his son, and to nurturs him.

Besides these, fathers must also be careful for their children, to give them
correction and chastisenient. God knows the mould of man's heart. He sees
our inward parts. Genesis 8.
He has said it in the beginning, The imagination of man's heart is evil from
his youth. He Genesis 5.
did see that all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only
evil continually. Behold man's nature, and consider it even from our first
birth. How full of affections, how waiward in the young child, which lies
in the cradle? His body is but small, but he has a greatheart, and is
altogether enrlined to evil. And the more he wareth in reason by years, the
more he grows proud, froward, wilful, unruly and disobedient. If this
sparckle be suffered to increase, it will rage over, and burn down the whole
house. We are not borne good, but by education we are changed, and become
good.

Therefore the wise man says, Foolishness Pro. 22.
is bound in the heart of a child: but the ^odde of correction shall drive it
away from him. And again, The rod and correction Pro. 29.
gu^e wisdom: but a child set at liberty man his mother ashamed. And in the
same Chapter, Correct thy son and he will give thee rest, and will give
pleasures unto thy soul. He that spares the rod hates the child. (...),
If thou bring up thy son delicately, he Eccle. 30.
shall make thee afraid: and if thou play with him, he shall bring thee to
heaviness. Bow down his neck, whiles he is young, and beat him on the ^tes
while he is a child, least he wax stubborn, and be disobedient unto thee, and
bring sorrow to ^hine heart, says Salo^

(...) Who has not heard the story of E^, and of his sons. It is worthy to
be re^mbred for ever. He had shrewd children, they feared not GOD, but brake
his commandments, and offended the people. Their father heard of their
doings, but took no care for it: he suffered them, and let them alone, so
long, that God grew displeased thereat, and called unto Samuel, and 1. Sam. 3.
said, Behold I will do a thing in Ifrael, whereof whosoever shall hear, his
two ears shall tingle. In that day I will raise up against Elie al things
which I have spoken concerning his house: when I begin I will also make an
end. And I have told him, that I will judge his house for ever, for the
iniquity which he knows, because his sons ran into a slander and he
stayed them not. And it came to pass shortly after, The Ark of God was taken
by the Philistines, 1. Sam. 4.
and the two sons of Ely, Hophni, and Phinees died. And Ely also when he
heard the report thereof, fell from his seat backward, and his neck was
broken. Such shame and confusion came upon him. This was the hand and judgment
of God, in sparing his children, he cast away his children and himself
altogether.

But Job dealt far otherwise with his children, his eye was upon them, and
he took care least they should offend God. He sanctified them, and offered
burnt offerings for them daily. For Job thought, it may be Job. 1.
that my sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts. Therefore he
prayed for them. My sons (says he) are young and tender, and lack
discretion. The wages wherein they walk are slipperie, they may soon be
dec^iued and run into danger. O Lord be thou their guide, be unto them a
tower of defense, let thy holy spirit go before them to direct them in all
their ways. So mindful was he of his children.

Infancy is the first part of our life, and as it were the foundation thereof.
Where a virtuous and godly childhood goes before, there a godly and virtuous
age follows after. Contrariwise, when the fathers are not careful to teach
their children to know God, and to know themselves: when they do not breed
them up in virtue: nor reprove them when they do amiss: they become
corrupt in their understanding, and abominable in their doings, void of al
knowledge, and grace, and of reverence, or feeling of nature.

V. 13. For this cause also thank we God, without ceasing, that when you
received of us the word of the preaching of God, ye received it not, as the
word of men: but as it is in deed, the word of God, which also works in
you that believe.

As the Ministers duty is to teach the word of God, and divide it aright,
without deceit or guile: so ought the people to receive it with reverence, and
to give obedience unto it. But herein have we not power of our selves, our
readiness comes of God, un, less it please God to work within us, and to
remove the veil, and to mollify our hearts, whatsoever we hear, it moves
us not, it helps not our unbelief, it brings us not to the obedience of
Christ.

If an earthly Prince speak, or send message unto us, we give al show of
reverence, and hear him with all diligence. This word is not of flesh and
blood, it proceeds not from Kings or Emperors, or from parliament, or from
councels of men: but from GOD the father and from Jesus Christ. When this word
is read, Princes and Emperors stand up, and lay down their sword, and
uncover their head, and bow their body, and do reverence, because they know
it is the word of GOD, which God himself uttered, that it should be as the
deaw of heaven to moisten our souls, as a well of water springing up to
everlasting life: as a savor of life unto life: and the very power of God
unto salvation to every one that believes. Without this word we can receive
no comfort, we can not see the light, nor grow in says, nor abide in the
Church of God. It is the word of reconciliation. By it God makes atonement
between himself, and the sons of men.

Therefore when the Epistles, the Psalms, the Chapters, and the Gospel are read
in our hearing, let us remember whose word we hear. Let us think thus with
our selves. These are the words of our gracious GOD. My God opens his mouth
from heaven above. He speaks to me, that I may be saved: he speaks to me,
to keep me from error: to comfort me in the adversities and troubles of
this life: and to lead me to the life to come.

What is the cause why so many so little regard the word of GOD? Why they
doubt it, and suspect it? Why they are so soon weary of it, and bear it not
that reverence, that belongs to it? Because they think not, neither from
whom it comes, nor with whose blood it is sealed, nor to Inhose benefit it
is written. Let us not be ashamed to give place to the word of GOD, to awake
our senses, and to submit them, and our wisdom and learning, and bodies, and
souls unto it. Let us not harden our hearts, Let us humble our selves before
God, and say, Behold, 2 King. 15.
here am I, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes.

Which also works in you that belceue. Whosoever hears the words of God,
and does them not, shall be likened to a foolish man that builds his house
upon the sand. If ye know these things (says Christ) blessed are John 13.
ye, if ye do them. The same word of God which Paul taught the
Thessalonians, which was preached by Peter, and the rest of the Apostles to the
faithful, which Christ received of his father, and delivered to his Church, is
this day by the mercy of God purely, and truly set down unto you. By it you
are required to amend your lives, and comforted in the promises of GOD to the
forgiveness of your sins. If there he any, in whom it works not this
effect: if there be any, which (though they hear it) believe it not, nor are
thereby renewed in their minds: it is a token, that they have not received the
lous of the truth of the Gospel: they despise the word of salvation, and it
shall i^dge them in that day.

V. 14. For brethren, you are become followers of the Church of GOD, which in
Judea are in Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same things of
your own country men, even as they of the Jews.

15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us, and God they please not, and are contrary to al men.

16. And forbid us to preach unto the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to
fulfill their sins always. For the wrath of God is come on them to the
utmost.

Wherein became they followers? In suffering as they did. This is the badge, and
cognizance of the sons of God. Christ says: If Luke 9.
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
daily, and follow me. They followed others, not in pleasure and glory, but in
trouble and persecution. For that was the way of the prophets, and Apostles,
and of Christ himself.

Esaias the Prophet, was cut in sunder with a Saw. What more cruel death? His
body was rent, his bowels torn, and yet he not quite dead. In such sort it
liked the cruel tormentors to sport themselves. Why? what had he done? he was a
prophet. They needed no other matter against him. It was enough, that they
found him to be a prophet. Hieremie was stoned to death. Wherefore? because he
called the people to repentance, that they might be saved. Because he was a
prophet. Amos was slain with a bar, poor old man. No reverence given to
his gray head, no regard or pity was taken of him. Wherefore? because he
rebuked iniquity. Because he was a Prophet. Zachary was s^aine when he was in
his prayers, and doing sacrifice in the holy place, between the entrance and
the alter. Wherefore? Because he declared the truth: because he was a prophet.

This has been the malice and hatred of the Devil. The Prince of the
darkness of this world has raged so even from the beginning. By this means
he has sought to deface the truth and glory of God, and to establish his own
kingdom in shedding the blood and murdering the saints of God.;

The Churches of God in Judea were miserably bered and afflicted, they were
hated of al men, and counted unworthy of life. Wherefore? because they turned
to the true and living god, and did believe in the name of Jesus Christ.
Therefore they were stripped, spoiled, headed, quartred, drowned, burnt, and put
to most reprocheful death. Who would become their ^ollowers? Who would
willingly learn to be so persecuted, and made gazing stocks to all the world
is discouraged not the Thessalonians. They were a thousand mile^ distant from
Judea, but were joined in fellowship of the Gospel, and in brotherly love unto
them. They heard of their mildness and of their constancy, and were stirred
up by their example. They did hearken after them, and were careful for them as
for their brethren, and the members of the same body.

You have heard what numbers of late have been persecuted and put to death
among us. Wherefore? because they turned from idols to serus God as he has
commanded, and did put their trust in him. You have heard how patiently and
meekely they went to their death, and what a plentiful harvest God has raised
of their blood. For the death of his saints is precious in the sight of the
Lord. Their blood cannot be spent in vain. We must remember their patience
and zeal, and the cause why they suffered. We must not despise, or set light by
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for which they so joyfully gave their lives.

And it is not enough that we be mindeful of such examples as we have had at
home. We must also carefully consider of other Churches abroad. God has
kindled a fire: he will have it burn. O what formentes do our brethren daily
suffer? What cruelty is devised daily against them? I speak not of death
only but of rackings, and wonderful extremities, more painful than death.
Wherefore are these things done unto them? Because they are turned to the true
and living God, and beleene in the name of Jesus Christ. Some they hang by the
hands, and draw up with a pullie, and bind great weights of lead at their
heels to rent them, and tear their bodies asunder. Some they have tied unto
great pieces of timber, and have put fire at the soales of their feet. They
have opened their mouths, and made them draw in Lawne into their body. A
thing most cruel, and yet which they have practiced, the manner whereof has
been thus reported. They lay it so far in the mouth, that a man's breath
easily draws it into his body, and so it is conueighed into the stomach.
When it is well settled, then comes the tormentour and takes the Lawne by the
other end, and rasheth it suddenly with such a force, as it seems, he does
pluck out the very heart and entrails: such a rare and strange kind of
cruelty as is not practiced upon most notorious rebels and traitors. As for
death, 40 or 50 at one time have been heaped together, and burnt in one fire.
They have set upon the servants of God, and compassed the Church where they
have assembled together to pray unto God, and murdered them in their
innocence, whiles they lifted up pure hands unto God. The French king, by the
counfaile of such as hate the Gospel of Christ, sent his cruel soldiers, and
murdered his subjects at Valois. He overthrew their houses, burnt their Town,
destroyed man, woman and child: spoiled their corn, and turned their trees
vpside down. He wasted, defaced, and unpeopled it, not for that they were
thieves or rehels: but because they believed in the name of Christ. Consider
how many are murdered in Flaunders, and in the kingdom of France. They are
not so far from us, as Judea from Thessalonica. They join next unto us. God
is blessed in his saints, and holy in all his works, no cruelty is able to
quench his truth. There is no counsel, which shall prevail against the Lord. He
gives increase, and places children in freede of their fathers. The more are
slain by the enemies, the more spring up by the working of his spirit. The
more are hewne down, the more multiply. We may not be strangers in this case.
It beboueth us to consider the afflictions of our brethren. They belong unto
us: We must pray to God for them, that he will put an end to their misenies:
otherwise, we have not the spirit of God, we bear no love, nor care for his
bause.

Of your country men. This was the greatest, and beauiest part of their
troubles. For what a hearts grief is it to the father, if his son rise up
against him? or to the son to see his father ready to betray him, and to
seek his blood? Where this is done, he will say, O father I am thy son, alas
what have I done to have thy displeasure? death is bitter, but thy displeasure
is more bitter than death. It were a cruel thing, that any man should kill an
other: what is it then, if thou should kill thine own child? yet if thou be
so bent, take my life and spare my conscience: spare my soul, that I may
deliver it up into his hands that has given it me. I would be obedient unto
thee, thou art my father, but I may not disobey God. He is the father of
fathers. He has said. He that loves father or mother more than me, Mat. 10.
he is not worthy of me. It is a miserable case when persecution grows so
hot, y^ the child is driven to forsake his father, or the father his child: yet
so does the world blind many, and Satan so possesses their hearts, y^ he
turns their love into hatred, and shuts their senses, and thoaketh and
dammeth up the springes of nature. They become so blind, and so unsensible,
that they neither feel their own flesh, nor know their own blood. They
think in so doing they do God good service. They are enemies to the truth.
They are ye enemies of the cross of Christ: their end is destruction.

And forbid us to preach unto the gentiles, that they might be saved. This is
the end whereunto the Gospel is given, that the people should be saved. S.
Paul says, God will 1. Tim. 2.
that al men shall be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. Therefore
our Saniour appointed his Apostles to this office of preaching his word,
saying: Go and preach the gospel unto al nations. Go unto the lost sheep of
Israel. He says, It is not the will of my father that one of these little ones
should perish. Whosoever believes and shall be baptized, shall be saved. S.
James exhorts the faithful, Receive with meekness the word Iam. 1.
that is graffed in you, which is able to save your souls. By it we hear the
sweet voice of our Savior, Come unto me all ye that Matt. 11.
travail and be heavily laden, and I will refrosh you. By it, we hear the
merciful calling of God: Turn unto me and ye shall be Esa. 45.
saved: By it we are warned to depart from the company of such as are enemies
to the truth: and to have no fellowshippe with the unfruitful works of
darkness, Save your selves, says, S. Peter, from this froward generation:
Act. 2
By it we are taught to believe that Jesus Christ is the son of GOD: that ^is
name is Jesus, because he shall save his people from their sins; and that
there is not salnation in any other besides him. For faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. This is therefore the duty of the preacher, to
preach unto the people: that so they may be saved: that they may know the
ways of GOD, that they may repent them of their sins, and be renewed unto
godliness.

Who would think there were any that would hinder the course of the Gospel^?
or forbid to preach it unto the people? The Apo^e here lays that fault to the
Jews, That they forbid him to preach to the Gentiles. The same fault Christ
found in the Scribes and Pharisees, Woe be to you, interpreters of Luke. 11.
the law: for ye have taken away the keye of knowledge: ye entered not in your
selves, and them that came in ye forbad. S^ there have been always, and such
there are now. O say they, why should y^ people know these things what should
they meddle with the scriptures? let them do their business, and apply their
occupations. It is not reason, not fit, that every one should be learned. When
they think they know somewhat, they become proud, and denise heresies and
maintain them: as if God had not left them to enstruct the people: or, as if
the holy scriptures, and not the malice at S^tan, were the cause of heresies.

But God has said, Gather the people together: Deur. zi.
men, (...) women, and children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates,
that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and
keep and observe all the words of this law. The Prophet David thought it meet
ye people should know the scriptures, therefore said, Blessed is that man whose
delight is in the law of the Lord, and in that law does exercise himself day
and night. And again, Wherewith shall a young man redress his ways? In keeping
thy words.

When Christ himself came first into the world to plant his Church, he
vourhsafed the poor and simple the knowledge of his truth, and the wed it
first unto them. The first that had tidings of his birth, were not Scribes and
Pharisees, out a company of poor sheepheards. The first that received his
gospel and taught it in the world, were not doctors or learned men, bar^rs and
tol-gatherers, and of base condition. The first that met him with triumph at
Jerusalem, and sang Ozanna, were not Bishops and priests, but babes and
infants. They that followed him most, and believed, were not the greatest men
of power and policy, but such as the Pharisees termed, a cursed people, which
knew not the law. The first that told the Apo^les the resurrection of Christ,
were not the sagest and wisest men, but two or three seely women. The first
that were ^nuerted to the faith after his resurrection, were not any of the
great learned or other wise esteemed, and known among the people, but about
3000. poor, seely, simple men, so base, and so out of knowledge, that not one
of their names could ever be known.

Why should any man resist the wisdom of God? and deny the people the bread
whereon they should feed: the light by which they may safely walk: the
hearing and reading of the word, by which they may be turned to GOD from idols,
to serve the living and true God? they have cruel hearts, and are enemies to
the glory of God, and to the salvation of his people, which in such sort
deny them the knowledge of the Scriptures.

To fulfill their sins always. They have resused the word of reconciliation,
they are not contented that they have stoned the prophets, and killed them that
were sent to the, but they yet resist the holy Gospel, and devise means to
keep al others from the comfort thereof. This is a token of Gods heavy
displeasure upon them, that they repent not of their former ^uils, but grow
worse and worse. When the Scribes and Pharisees seemed to ^ike the cruelty of
their fathers, and said, if they had been in their days, they would not have
been partners with them in the vloud of the prophets: our savior makes their
hypocrisy known, that herein they should be like to their fathers, for they
should kill and crucify the prophets and wise me^, and scourge them in their
sinagogues, and persecute them from city to city, and said to them: Fulfill ye
also the measure of your fathers. The cause of Mat. 23^
this indgement of God in giving over the wic^ed to increase the heap of their
sins, the Apostle sets down to ye Romans, As they regarded Romans 1.
not to know God, so God delivered the^ up unto a reprobat mind to do those
things which are not convenient. For so he sometimes punishes our sins, and
suffers the wicked to heap sin upon sin, ye so their damnation may be ye
greater.

For the wrath of God is come on them to the utmost. Though GOD he patient, and
long suffering, because he would have all men come to repentance: yet in whom
his mercy takes no place to work their amendment, upon them he pours out
his wrath and indignation to the utmost. He means not, that all the whole
nation of the Jews were so ca^ out of the favor of GOD, that never any of
them shall be saved: for in an other place he faith, Has God cast away his
people? God Romans 11.
forbid. For I my self am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe
of Benjamin. God has not cast away his people, which he knew before. But
miserable shall be their end, and a terrible damnation shall they have,
whosoever withstand the truth of God, and to the rest of their wickedness,
join such a hatred, and dispitefull contempt of the poor, and simple sort of
the people: that they keep them from the wholesome words of doctrine, and
forbid such as are willing to preach unto them. This is their condemnation,
that light came into the world, and they loved darkness better than light.
They persecute us (says Saint Paul) and forbid us to preach unto the
Gentiles, that they might be saved: to fulfill their sins always: for the
wrath or God is come on them to the utmost.

V. 17 Forasmuch brethren, as we were kept from you for a season, concerning
sight, but not in heart, we enforced the more to see your face with great
desire.

18 Therefore we would have come unto you, (I Paul, at least once or twice)
but Satan hindered us.

He told them before how dearly and tenderly he loved them, exhorting,
comforting, and be seeching every of them, as a father his children. He takes
care, least by any means they should doubt of his great good will to ward
them. And therefore does both witness the same, and show them through what
cause he has stayed from them. Such a zeal and care had he over the people.
O in what case then are they, that are carlesse and make no regard of the
people of God: which hunt after many livings, and bend not themselves to do
good? which serve their own belly, and seek to be rich, and eat up the
people of God, as if they were bread? They cannot say they have a desire to
see the face of their flock, and that their heart is with them. Howsoever they
find time for other matters, they can never take time to know their sheep,
and to do the work of their ministry among them. They care not for them,
they think not of them. They plant not, they water not, they watch not, they
give no warning of the dangers at hand: they teach them not to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously, and
godly in this present world.

It were happy if al such were removed out of the Church of GOD. They destroy
the souls of many, and lead them to destruction by their negligence. What
account shall they give unto GOD for the souls of their ^rethren? where shall
they stand, or what will they say, when he shall bid them make a strait
account of their stewardship? this is the practice of Satan. He uses al
means to snare us, and withdraw us from that blessed hope. Sometimes he
lets the increase of the Gospel, by raising up tumultes, and disquieting
the Church of God, and stirring the hearts of such as are in au^tie to
perfecute by all means the teachers of the Gospel of Christ. Again, when God
gives peace and quietness to his Church, he leads the overseers of the
people to a forgetfulness of their duty: to seek the pleasures and delights
of this life, and to have no regard of the work of the Lord. Such occasions
the Devil seeks, to hinder our salvation, and to withstand the truth and
glory of God.

V. 19 For what is our hope or joy or crown of reioicing? are not even you it
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?

20 Yea, ye are our glory and joy.

The greatest comfort to him that laboreth, is, to see that his labor comes
to good effect, and works that which he purposed. ^e has before ayprooued
his diligence and wed the mercy of God in making his word fruitful, by
opening their hearts that it might sincke into them, and take root in them.
Therefore now he erhorteth them to continue stodfast: that so he may present
them unto God, and be partaker with them of everlasting glory. This ought to
be the care of al such which are ministers, they should seek above al things
to bring the people to such perfection of understanding, and to such godliness
of life, that they may rejoice in their behalf, and so cheerfully wait for
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 3.
WHerefore since we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to remain
at Athens alone.

2 And have sent Timotheus our brother, and Minister of God, and our labor
fellow in the Gospel of Christ, to stablish you, and to comfort you, touching
your faith.


I Know your faith in Christ Jesus is many ways assaulted. The envious man
will take al occasions to sow darnel among the Lords corn. He will seek to
take away the good seed that is sowed in your hearts. You are dear unto
me. Your wounds are my wounds, and your grief, my grief. Therefore, since I
my self am hindered that I can not come unto you, to be with you in your
afflictions: I send unto you my fellow labourer in the Gospel. I have but one
with me, whom I love tenderly, and trust him as mine own soul: him I send
unto you. I leave my self destitute, and without a companion, among the
Infidels, here at Athens in a city much given to idolatry, and which can not
abide the name of Christ. Thus have I burdened my self to relieve you, and
taken from my self to comfort you. I have been careless of my self, and
careful for you, and for the Church of God, which is among you.

The Apostle had sent Timothy to other places, to the Corinthians, and to the
Philippians. He always found him constant in faith, and zealous to do good
unto the Saints. And now commends him to this congregation, and calls him
brother, a minister of God, and his labor fellow, that so they might conceive
of his great care for them, which sent so worthy a man unto them: and also
that they would esteem him, and have him in reputation, to hearken unto
Timothy, and to do in all things as he should direct them.

Such as S. Paul names Timothy, should al they be, which are sent unto the
people. They must hold the faith of Christ unfeignedly, and profess it boldly:
they must be called, and allowed of God to his service: and must not be idle,
but paineful, and laboring to build up the house of God, and to gather in his
harvest: that they may truly be called the ministers of GOD, and laborers in
the Gospel.

They that are called to this service, must not think it enough, that they
serve God, as men of other trades do. For princes, and al sorts of people owe
service and homage unto God, to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. This service of godly conversation, and obedience,
must ministers also most carefully perform. But the especial service, which
belongs to their calling, is to carry the arc of the covenant before their
people, to do their message truly when they are sent. To teach, to instruct,
to erbort, to comfort, to rebuke in season and out of season: to plant, to
weed, to graffe, to shrid, to hold up their hands and to pray for the
people. To do this service for kings, for subjects, for rich, for poor, for
the wise, for the simple: for the godly, and for the wicked: to establish them,
and comfort them touching their faith.

Paul call^th himself often, The servant of God, the servant of our Lord Jesus
Christ. He rejoices in this service, and reckons it in part of his glory.
If we consider the pains and travails, which he took, we shall know, what
diligence al others that are called to the same service ought to show. Thus he
writes of himself. I am debtor both to the Graecians Romans 11.
and to the Barbarians, both to the wise men, and to the unwise. Therefore as
much as lies in me I am ready to preach the Gospel to you also that are at
Rome. Again, Though I be 1. Cor. 9.
free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto al men, that I might
win the more. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I may win the
Jews: to them that are under the law, as though I were under the law, that I
may win them that are under the law. I am made all things to all men, that
I might by all means save some. Again, We preach not our selves, 2. Cor. 4.
but Jesus Christ the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake.
Again, We 1. Cor. 4.
are reviled and yet we bless: we are persecuted, and yet suffer it. I serve
not my self says he, but GOD. I serve not to seek mine own affections,
but in set smith his glory. Thus in his own example he teaches us that in
the service of the Church of God, we must endure al pains, and (...) refuse to
follow our calling for any reprothe or shame, or vilanie, which may be
wrought against us by men.

V. 3. That no man should be moved with these afflictions, for ye your
selves know, that we are appointed thereunto.

Think not that you shall enjoy the pleasures of this world, if you he the
faithful servants of Christ. Christ shed his blood for thee, that thou
should not refuse to give thy blood for him. Drink the cup of bitter gal,
whereof Christ began to thee. And carry thy cross, that thou may follow
him. If thou be ashamed of the cross, thou art ashamed of Christ: if thou be
ashamed of Christ, he will be ashamed of thee before his father in heaven. The
cross can not hurt thee, for Christ has sanctified it in his blood. Behold
not the sword which strikes thee, but think on the crown of glory, which
thou shall receive. Gold is clearer after it has been put into the fire. Be
thou gold, and the fiery persecution shall not hurt thee. Let not the fear of
death put out thy faith. Trust in the Lord, be strong, and he shall stablish
thy heart. Be roofed and built in Christ, and stablished in the faith. Then
shall thy heart re^oyce, and no man shall take thy joy from thee.

V. 4. For verily when we were with you, we told you before that we should
suffer tribulations, even as it came to pass, and ye knew it.

God gives us warning to be ready to suffer afflictions for his name. My
son if thou Eccle. 2.
wilt come into the service of God, stand fast in righteousness and fear,
and prepare thy soul to temptation. And in the Proverbs: My son refuse not
the chastening of the Prou. 3.
Lord, neither be grieved with his correction. For the Lord corrects him
whom he loves, even as the Father the child in whom he delights. As many
as I love, I rebuke and chasten, Reu. 3.
says Christ. Therefore the Apostle tells the Hebrews, If you be without
correction, Heb. 12.
whereof al are partakers, then are ye bastardes, and not sons. In the tenth
of Matthew, our savior warns his Disciples hereof, Matthew. 10.
Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of Wolves. Thus God schooleth,
and nourtereth his people, that so through many tribulations, they may enter to
their rest. Frankencense when it is put in the fire, gives the greater
perfume: spice if it be punned, smells the sweeter: the earth when it is
torn up with the plough, becomes more fruitful: the seed in the ground,
after frost and snow, and winter storm, springs the rancker: the nigher the
vine is pruned to the stock, the greater grape it yields: the grape when it
is most pressed and beaten, makes the sweetest wine: fine gold is the better
when it is cast in the fire: rough stones with hewing are squared, and made fit
for building: cloth is rent, and cut, that it may be made a garment: linen is
buckt and washed, and wrung, and beaten, and is the fairer. These are familiar
examples to show the benefit and commodity which the children of God receive
by persecution. By it God w^sheth, and scoureth his congregation. We rejoice
(says Saint Paul) in tribulations, Romans 5.
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience,
and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed. The power of God is made
perfect in weakness. And al things turn unto good to them that fear the
Lord.

V. 5. Even for this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent him that I
might know of your faith, least the tempter had tempted you in any sort, and
that our labor had been in vain.

6 But now lately when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good
tidings of your faith, and love, and that ye have good remembrance of us
always, desiring to see us, as we also do you.

7 Therefore brethren we had consolation in you, in all our affliction, and
necessity thorough your faith.

8 For now are we alive, if ye stand fast in the Lord.

9 For what thanks can we recompense to GOD again for you, for all the joy
wherewith we rejoice for your sakes before our God?

10 Night and day praying exceedingly, that we might see your face, and
might accomplish that which is lac^g in your faith.

The Apostle continues in declaring his earnest affection toward them, and
how greatly he reioyted to hear of their consta^ie in the faith, and of their
love and agreement together. For he feared it might have happened to them, as
it had done to others. He preached to the Galathians, but they gave care to
fail Apostles, and went back from that he had Gal. 4.
taught them. I am in fear of you (says he) least I have bestowed on you
labor in vain. And, ye did runnewel, who did let you, that Gal. 5.
you did not obey the truth? it is not of the persuasion of him that calls
you. The Devil has bewitched you, and beguiled your eyes. Such is the
sutfeltie and the power of Satan in the children of disobedience. Judas was an
Apostle, equal with Peter, and the other Apostles. The Devil entered into his
heart, and bewitched him, and then he became the child of destruction. Julian
the Apostata, was a Christian, and a reader in the Church, but became an enemy
of Christ, and when he was stricken in the field by miracle from Heaven, he
threw up his blood in defiaunce of Christ: so had the Devil bewitched him,
and changed his heart to wickedness. It might have been that their weakness
should in like sort have been overcome, when the tempter tempted them. And so
the gold which he had left with them might have been turned into dross, and
the light into darkness, and the kingdom of God taken away from them. For then
had his labor been in vain, and they had received the word to their own
damnation. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto them.

The Devil is the tempter. His strength and practice is not always by force of
arms, but by subtle persuasions and other sleights. He reasons with Eve, why
she would not taste of ye apple, which was sweet, pleasant and delicate.
Tells ye poor woman: god did nothing but mock her. For God knew, what day
they should eat^ thereof, their eyes should be opened, and they should know
as much as God. He came to Christ, and said, Command that these stones be
made bread, and cast thy self down, if thou be the son of God: then thou
shall be worshipped, and taken for a great Prophet. He tempted David after this
sort, why will thou serve God? he has advanced thine enemies, and has
forsaken thee, and left thee in misery, I fretted (says David) at the
foolish: Psa. 73.
These are the wicked, yet prosper they always and increase in riches.
Certainly I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence, for daily have I been punished, and chastened every morning. Mine
heart was vexed: so foolish was I and ignorant. I was a beast before thee. He
tempted Job the faithful servant of God, and told him, that he was righteous
and holy, and gave alms in vain: that God had no regard to his prayers, and
would not hear.

This tempter waits al occasions to draw us from our faith, and
steadfastness in the Lord. Yet is he never so busy, as when any persecution
is raised against the truth. Then is he in his ruff. Then plays he his
part, and leaves nothing undone, whereby he may move us to forsake the
truth. Will thou (says he) be so foolish to loose their life, and know
not wherefore? art thou wiser than thy forefathers? Why should not thou be
contented to do as thy father, and mother, and friends, and kinsfolks?
think thou they have not as good care of their souls, as thou have of
thine? will thou make them Pagans and Infidels? do thou think they are
damned? be wise, and cast not thy self away. Flesh is frail, life is sweet,
death is dreadful, but to die in the fire, to be burned alive, to see thy
arms, and thy legs quite burnt from thy body, and that yet thou can not
die, this is most terrible, thou can never abide it.

Behold so many Kings, and Princes, Noble men, Cardinals, Bishops, Doctors,
and learned men, and whole kingdoms and countries of the contrary opinion. Be
not wilful. Think not thy self wiser than all the world. What were it for
thee to come to the Church, and to show thy self obedient, and to do, as
others do? It is a small matter to look up, and hold up thy hands at the
sacring. If it be an offense, thou shall be excused, because thou art forced
to do it by authority. GOD is merciful, he will forgive thee. Thus and thus
does Satan ^empt us, and sifteth us, to lead us from our steadfastness. These
devises he practiced of latedaies before our eyes, with many constant
professors of Christian religion, but through the mighty power of GOD, they
quenched all his fiery darts, and through many tribulations entered into
glory.

Thanks be to God, which does make us able through his grace, not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. He is faithful, and will not
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will even give the issue
with the temptation, that we may be able to bear it. He has bidden us call
upon him, in the day of trouble, and he will deliver us. Commit thy way unto
the Lord, Psalm. 37.
and trust in him (says the Prophet) and he shall bring it to pass. I have
set the Lord always Psalm. 16.
before me, for he is at my right hand: therefore I shall not slide. And
again: The Psalm. 118.
Lord is with me: Therefore I will not fear what man can do unto me. It is
better to trust in the Lord, than to have confidence in princes.

When our savior foretold his Disciples of the troubles to come, he also
makes comfort to them of the strength, and the help which they shall receive
of GOD, saying: When they deliver you up, take no thought how, or what ye
shall speak: for it shall be Mat. 10.
given you in that hour, what ye shall say: he tells them by whom they
shall be persecuted: Luke 21.
Ye shall be betrayed also of your parents, and of your brethren, and
kinsemen, and friends. And in what sort: They shall lay hands on you, and
persecute you, and deliver you to the Synagogues, and into prisons, and bring
you before Kings and Rulers. And for what cause: For my names sake. Then what
the godly in this case must do: Fear Mat. 10.
them not. He that endures to the end shall be saved.

Last of all, he promises to be with them and to strengthen them. This shall
turn Luke 21.
to you for a Testimonial. Lay it up therefore in your hearts, that you
premeditate not what ye shall answer. For I will give you a mouth and
wisdom, whereagainst al your adversaries shall not be able to speak, nor
resist.

Thus were the things spoken of long before, which we have seen lately done.
Whosoever will set down the story thereof, now they are passed, must
needs declare it in the manner as it was forespoken. Their own kinsfolks,
and friends betrayed many, and brought them to the Bishops, who delivered
them into prisons, for the name of Christ, and for the love of his truth. The
blessed witnesses or martyrs of God, feared not, but endured. Many were
simple, young men, young maidens, men and women of great age, laboring men, and
men of occupations. Yet God gave them such a mouth, and such wisdom, as al
their adversaries were not able to speak against it, nor resist it. Who
reads that Scripture diligently, and considers this story of our time
advisedly, can not but confess that the light of Gods Gospel is come among
us, and that we are they upon whom the latter end of the world is come, and in
whom he does show forth the great might of his power.

Therefore such temptations as Satan uses can not make the name of GOD fall
from his ancker hold. His hope is safely laid up in his breast. He knows in
whom he puts his trust, and therefore says: I presume not of knowledge.
I esteem not to know any thing, save Christ Jesus, and him crucified. I
believe not in my fathers, I reverence them and love them, but I believe only
in GOD. I fear not the sword, I fear not what man can do unto me: but I
fear him, that can kill my body and soul. It is better for me to abide the
fire, and lose my life, that I may live for ever, than to deny GOD for
safegarde of my life, and be cast into hell fire. If there be so many
partakers of their errors, and so few that cleave to the truth: the
multitude of them shall not save me: and it is no trial of Gods truth,
whether it be received of many, or of fews. Cardinals, and Bishops, and
do^ours may be wise, and learned. So were Annas and Caiaphas, the high priests,
and Scribes and Pharisees which did put to death the Lord of glory. I dare not
do ill, because other men do it. I may not tempt God. My conscience is truly
assured by Gods word what is idolatry, and the dishonor of God. If I should
come into the Church, and make such show as you advise me, and be partaker with
Idolaters, I should do hurt to others in mine ill example: I should do against
mine own conscience, which would be a heavy witness against me, both whiles
I live in this world, and in the dreadful day of judgment.

V. 11. Now God himself, even our father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, guide our
journey unto you.

12. And the Lord increase you, and make you abound in love one toward an
other, and toward al men, even as we do toward you.

13 To make your hearts stable, and unblameable in holiness before God even
our father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with his Saints.

I have planted you, you are my children, whom I have begotten in Christ. I
love you, and have care over you. I have an erceeding desire to see your face.
But Satan has withstoode my purpose, and found means to keep me from you. I
commit my voyage to God: if it please him, that I may come unto you, to rejoice
with you, and comfort you. He knows what is good for me, and what is
profitable for you. The cause is his own. He will do all things to his
glory. He will tread Satan under our feet. We can not purpose, and dispose
of our selves. I know, Iere. 10.
that the way of man is not in him self, neither is it in man to walk and to
direct his steps.

The Lord increase you, in all godliness, that you may abound more and more,
even as you have heard of us, how you ought to walk. You are but a little
flock, God increase your number, and make all them partakers of his kingdom
with you, which hear of your faith and conversation in Christ.

To make your hearts stable and unblameable. That nothing move you or trouble
you^ that your hearts and consciences be quiet: that you may stand upright, and
show your lelues in great confidence before his judgment seat: that when you
shall see Gods haud stretched out, and his plagues prepared against the wicked,
you be not afraid. This is the haven of rest, whereto no man comes but he
that has a quiet conscience, this is the tabernacle of the highest, wherein
they shaldwell, this is the holy mountain, wherein they shall rest, that
walk uprightly, and work righteousness, and speak the truth in their heart.

Here let us consider the rages and tempests of a troubled mind, and of an
unquiet conscience: which knows that GOD is an auenger of all wickedness,
and that death is the due reward of sin: which acknowledges him self to be
a sinner, and finds no way how he shall escape Hell fire. This man when he
thinks with him self of these things, he can not but be amazed and
disquieted above measure. The sound of the Trumpet is ever in his ears, he
hears the voice of the Judge, saying: stand forth sinner: now declare how
thou have used thy body, give a reckoning of thy whole life. Then his
conscience begins to quake and tremble. Then he needs no witness to
accuse him, nor judge to condemn him. He is both witness and judge against
himself.

The danger hereof may somewhat appear, in those which are taken, and
prisoned, and arraigned before a Judge. When he knows him self guilty,
hears the evidence prwued against him, sees the Judge severe to deal
justice without mercy, and therefore is assured of death: what grief and
torment feels he at heart? what would he not give? what would he not do to
escape the danger?

But the danger whereun^ God judges us is greater. And the manner of his
judgment is straighter. Here the Judge may be deceived, he is but a man: but
there GOD is the Judge, who is the searcher of the heart and raines, and no man
shall be hid from his heat. Here nothing can be done without evidence,
without witnesses, and proof: before God, he that has offended shall accuse
himself. This is the case of conscience. It self is witness, it self ca^eth
for judgment to condemnation. His conscience shall make the sinner say, I have
offended against God: I have despised his word, and would not give care to
learn it. I would not know the time of Gods mercy, and of my visitation: I
lived in fornication: and committed theft: and kept wrongfully other men's
goods: I was disobedient to parents: nourtered not my children in the fear of
God: kept not my heart from doing iniquity: I abused my goods, my wits, my
senses, and the good grace of God: I have sinned against heaven, and against
God, and am not worthy to be called his son: the wrath of God is worthily
fallen upon me: hell fire is my meede: the mercy of God can not save me, for my
sin is greater, than that it can be forgiven. Mine own heart and conscience,
heaven and earth, the angels and archangels, God himself, and Christ the
redeemer of them that believe in him, are against me: I can not cast mine eyes
to any place, but ever I see my damnation before me. Then does he tremble with
agony, and stand in fear. His heart dasheth and beats, as the waves of the
sea. He s^leth uproar, war, lightning, tho^der, death, and hell in his heart:
he shall flee when no man follows him. He shall say^ to the hills and rocks,
fall on me, and hide me from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb. Such is the terror of an unquiet mind^. Though all the princes in the world would join themselves to do it. The wicked can never
enjoy peace. God keep us far from such agonies, and give us pure hearts, and
clear consciences.

CHAP. 4.
ANd furthermore we beseech you brethren, and exhort you in the Lord lesus,
that ye increase more and more, as ye have received of us, how ye ought to
walk and to please God.

2. For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus.


WE command you not, nor use any force, but entreat you with all patience and
meekness, that ye will love your own souls, and think and do those
things which please God. You are they to whom the promise was made. God has
called you out of darkness into his maruailous light. He has not dealt so
with every nation, neither have they known his judgments.

We come not to you in our own name. We have charge to preach ye gospel to
al nations. Therefore we speak unto you in ye name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We show you the way that you may walk in it: we declare unto you the will of
God, that you may be saved. For yet will the Lord wait that he may have Esa.
30.
mercy upon you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have compassion
upon you, says the Prophet Esaias. We have opened unto you that whole treasure
of Gods mercy. We have lead you to the throne of grace, and made you see the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. We have preached unto
you remission, and forgiveness of your sins through his name. If you have
heard us, and believe, you shall be saved. If any man preach unto you
otherwise, than that you have received, let him be accursed.

How ye ought to walk and please God. It is not enough, that ye believe: Ye
must also walk and live according to knowledge. This is the will of God. For we
are his workmanship Ephesians. 2.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which GOD has ordained that we
should walk in them. For the grace of God has appeared, Tit. 2.
that brings salvation unto al men, and teaches us that we should live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this life. Looking for the blessed hope,
and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ.
In this sort has our teaching been among you. That you might show forth
your faith by your works: That it avails you nothing to say you have faith,
if you have no works, because the faith that has no works, is dead. This we
are taught by the words of our Lord Jesus, he says, Not every one that says
unto Matthew. 7.
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does my
fathers will that is in heaven. Again, Every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. The servant that knows
his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Thus
has our Lord commanded us to be like our father which is in heaven: to let
our light so shine before men, that they may see our good works. Thus the
Apostle taught: Thus the church of God this day teaches. It requires faith,
as the instrument, and means to apply the merits and passion of Jesus Christ
for our salvation: and good works as fruits, and witnesses of our faith.
Whosoever learneth aright and beleeneth the gospel as he ought, grows, and
goes forward from virtue to virtue. If be were ignorant before, he comes
thereby to knowledge. If he were weak, he grows in strength. If he were
wicked, he turns unto gedlinesse.

V. 3. For this is the will of God, even your holiness, and that ye should
abstain from fornacation.

4. That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor.

God requires true and unfeigned holiness. Wash you, says the Prophet Esaias,
make you Eza. 2
clean, take away the evil of your works, from before mine eyes, cease to
do ill. This is the commandment of God, that so we should be partakers of
his heavenly nature. As he which has called you is holy, so be ye 1. Pet. 1.
holy in all manner of conversation, says Saint Peter.

Abstain from fornication. Nothing so much hinders true holiness as
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, and such like. Every sin that a man
does, is without the body, but he that commits fornication, sins against
his own body. God is the auenger of such. He will judge the adulterers, and
fornicatours. Be not deceived: Neither fornicatours, nor adulterers, nor
wantons, nor buggerers, shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.

Know to possess his vessel. That is, his body. And the body is the temple
of the holy ghost, as he says to the Corinthians. And therefore 1. Cor. 6.
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit: for they are Gods. In this
body we shall rise out of our grave, and appear before the judgment seat of
God: in this body we shall sit upon the twelve seats, and judge the twelve
tribes. God shall crown it with glory and honor. Keep this vessel clean, it
is precious, keep it in honor, keep it in holiness. Make not the member of
Christ, a member of the devil. Shame not your bodies, shame not your selves.

V. 5. And not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know
not God.

Give not your selves over to filthy affections, as the horse and mule which
have no understanding, and, as the Gentiles which have no fear of Gods
judgment. Their heart, and mind is unclean. They know not God, they know
not themselves. They know not the difference of this life, and of the life to
come. Therefore they know not sin, or if they know it, they refrain it not,
but follow the lusts of their corrupt nature, and give themselves to
wantonness, to work al uncleanness, even with greediness. Thus the Apostle
sets down, what is the fruit of ignorance, and whereto a man grows,
that knows not God. That devotion therefore, which some say is the daughter
of ignorance, has no likeness with true holiness. For this is life eternal,
John 17.
says Christ, that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have
sent, Jesus Christ.

V. 6. That no man oppress or defraude his brother in any matter, for the
Lord is an auenger of al such things, as we have also told you before time,
and testified.

Let no man defraude his brother, neither by false weight, nor by false
measure, nor by lying words. Let your measures, and weights, and words be
true: let your gains be just and true, that God may bless them. His blessing
will make you rich, and whatsoever he blesses not, shall wast and consume, and
do you no good. Do unto others as you would they should do unto you. This is
true dealing and upright.

If thou speak more than is true, if thou take more than thy ware is worth,
thy conscience knows it is none of thine. God will destroy all the workers of
iniquity. He that delights in sin, hates his own soul. The mouth that
accustometh to lie, slays the soul.

Defraud not thy brother: he is thy brother, whether he be rich or poor: he is
thy brother, and the son of God. Will thou do wrong to thy brother? will thou
oppress the son of God, and ye even in ye sight of god? God is his father, he
will not leave it unpunished in thee. If he be simple and unskillful, abuse not
his simplicity. God is the God of righteousness. Deal justly, that thine own
conscience accuse thee not. Teach not thy sons nor thy servants to deceive
others, and to gain by wickedness. After they have learned of thee to deceive
others, they will deceive thee also. Job prayed daily for his children. Be thou
also careful that thy children and servants deceive no man, nor hurt any.
Their sins shall be laid to thy charge. Why ask thou of God, that he will
feed thee and give thee thy daily bread, and waitest not upon his will, but
seedest upon the bread of iniquity? This meat will not nourish thee, this
wealth will not stand by thee, for God will not prosper it. The wise man says,
The bread of Prou. 20.
deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with
grauel. I gotten goods have an il end. God has said by the prophet Aggeus, Ye
have sown much, but you Agge. 1.
have brought in little: Ye brought it home, and I did blow upon it. We have
examples hereof daily. We have seen great heaps of wealth suddenly blown
away, and consumed to nothing: great houses decayed, and the hope of the wicked
quite ouert^ne.

Here will I speak somewhat of the unhappy trade of ^surie, because therein
stands the most miserable, and shameful deceiving of the brethren. I will not
speak all that may be said, for it would be too long and over wearisome. I will
have regard of that shall be agreeable, and profitable, and behooueful for you
to hear. And that you may the better consider hereof and see the whole matter
of Usury, I will show you first, what Usury is: then, whence it springs,
and what are the causes of Vsarie: thirdly, what comes of it, what hurt it
works to the common wealth: and I will lay soorth such reasons, as may make
any good man abhor it: Then I will declare what the holy fathers, and the
Apostles, and Martyrs, and Christ, and God himself have thought and spoken of
usury.

Many simple men ^nowe not what is Usury, nor never heard of the name of it.
The world were happy, if no man knew it. For evil things do less harm when
they be most unknown. (...), and plagues are not known, but with great
misery. But that you may learn to know it, and the more to a^horre horre
it, this it is.

Usury is a kind of lending of money, or corn, or olle, or wine, or of any
other thing, wherein, upon covenant and bargain, we rereiue again the whole
principal, which we delivred, and somewhat more, for the use and occupying of
the same. As, if I lend 100. pounds, and for it covenant to receive 105. li. or
any other sum, greater than was the sum, which I did lend. This is that which
we call Usury. Such a kind of bargaining as no good man or godly man ever
used. Such a kind of bargaining as all men that ever feared Gods judgment
have always abhorred, and condemned. It is filthy gains, and a work of
darkness. It is a monster in nature: the overthrow of mighty kingdoms, the
destruction of flourishing states, the decay of wealthy Cities, the plagues of
the world, and the misery of the people. It is thest, it is the murdering of
our Brethren, it is the curse of God, and the curse of the people. This is
Usury. By these signs and tokens you may know it: for wheresoever it
reigns al those mischiefs ensue. But how and how many ways it may be
wrought, I will not declare. It were horrible to hear: and I come now to
reprove Usury and not to teach it.

Let us see then what is the cause hereof and whence it grows, who is the
mother, the nurce, or the breeder of Usury. For it grows not every where,
nor among al men. Many hate it, and detest it, and had rather die, than live
of such spoil. It is not of God, for God straightly forbids it. Neither is it
found among the children of God: for love seeks not her own profit, but to
do good to her neighbor.

Whence then springs Usury? Soon showed: even thence whence theft, murder,
adultery, the plagues, and destruction of the people do spring. Al these are
the works of the Devil, and the works of the flesh. Christ tells the
Pharisees, You are of your father the Ioh. 8.
Devil, and the lusts of your father you will do. Even so may it truly be
said to the Usurer, thou art of thy father the Devil, and the lust of thy
father thou will do, and therefore thou have pleasure in his works. The Devil
entered into the heart of Judas, and put in him this greediness, and
covetousness of gain, for which he was content to sell his master. Judas
heart was the shop, the Devil was the foreman to work in it. Saint Paul
says: They 1. Tim. (...).
that will be rich, fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and
noisome lusts, which drown men into perdition and destruction. For the desire
of money is the root of evil. And Saint John says, Whosoever commits 1.
Ioh. 3^.
sin is of the Devil. Thus we see, that the Devil is the planter, and the
father of Usury.

Covetousness, desire of money, insatiable greediness, deceitfulness,
unmercifulness, injury, oppression, extortion, contempt of God, hatred to the
brethren, and hatred of al men, are the nurces and breeders of usury. It
springs from Satan, and grows, and is watered, and fed and nourished by
these cruel and damnable monsters.

Let us see farther, what are the fruits which come of Usury. For perhaps it
does some good, and you may think, that many are the better for it. These
therefore are the fruits. It dissolueth the knotte and fellowship of mankind:
it hardens man's heart: It makes men unnatural, and bereaueth them of
charity and love to their dearest friends. It breeds misery, and provoke
the wrath of GOD from heaven. It consumes rich men, it eats up the poor, it
makes bankerupts, and undoes many housholdes. The poor occupiers are driven
to flee, their wives are left alone, their children are helpless, and driven
to beg their bread, through the unmerciful dealing of the covetous Usurer.

When David lays out the wickedness of the country where he was persecuted,
he says Psalm. 54.
of them, Non defecit Vsura and dolus in plateis eorum, Usury and deceit
departs not from their streets, one seeks to spoil and eat up an other.
These are the commodities and the fruits of Usury. Such is Usury in the
midst of a City, and such good it works, as fire does, when it is set to
the roof of a house, or as the plague does, when it is taken to the midst of
the body and touches the heart.

We have heard whence Usury springs, and what hurt it does. Which, whosoever
considers, may find cause enough to loath it, and forsake it. One asked of
Cato, What it was to commit Usury. What is it (says he again) to kill a
man? He that is an Usurer is a murderer. The same Cato says, Our fathers
punished a thiese, with payment of the double of that he had taken, but the
Usurer was always condemned to pay four times the valewe. They were wise
men. They thought that an usurer was much worse than a thief.

For a thief is driven by extremity and need: the Usurer is rich and has no
need. The thief steals in corners, and in places where he may be unknown:
the usurer openly and boldly at al times. and in any place. The thief, to
relieve his wife and children: the Usurer to spoil his neighbor, and to undo
his wife and children. The thief steals from the rich, which have enough:
the Usurer from the poor that has nothing. The thief flees and will be
seen no more: the Usurer stands by it, continues, and steals still: day
and night, sleeping and waking, he always steals. The thief repents of
his deed, he knows he has done wrong and is sorry for it: the Usurer
thinks it is his own, that it is well gotten, and never repents, nor
sorroweth, but defends, and maintains his sin impudently. The thief, if
he escape, many times becomes profitable to his country, and bestows him
self painefully in some trade of life: the Usurer leaves his merchandise,
forsakes his husbandry, gives himself to nothing, whereby his country may
have benefit. The thief is satisfied at length: the Usurer has never enough.
The belly of the wicked will never be filled. As the sea is never filled with
water, though all the streams of the world run into it: so the greediness of
an Usurer is never satisfied, though he gain never so unreasonably. The sea is
profitable: the usurer is hurtful and dangerous. By the sea we may pass and
come safely to the haven, but no man passes by usury without less or
shipwreck.

Now hear what the godly and learned fathers of the Church have thought of
usury. No doubt they were godly men, and wrate hereof, as God had inspired
them, and as others before them had done. Augustine says: Quid Aug Mace^
Epist. 54
dicam de Vsuris, quas ips^ leges, etc. What shall I speake^ of Usury, whereof
the laws and Judges require that restitution be made? is he more cruel which
steals something away from the rich man, or he that kills a poor man
with Usury? Mark this, an usurer, says Augustine, is cruel. Why? he kills.
Whom? the poor man, whom in charity he is bound to relieve.

Ambrose hereof says, Vsur as solvit, qui victu Lib. de To^. cap. 3.
indiget, an quicquam grauius? etc. He that lacks wherewith to keep life,
pays you Usury. What heavier case may there be? he seeks to be healed,
and you poison him: he asks you bread, and you give him a knife: he desires
you to set him at liberty, and you bring him to further bondage. And again,
Thou Usurer growest wealthy by other men's Ibid. cap. 15.
heaviness: thou make gains of their tears and weeping: thou art fed with
their hunger: thou coinest thy money of the skins of those men whom thou
destroyest: how think thou thy self to be rich, and yet beggest an alms
of him that is poor? And the same Father says further, Ab hoc Vsuram exige,
quem non sit crimen occidere. Whomsoever it is lawful to kill, thou may lend
him thy money to Usury. For he that takes usury, kills without a sword.
These be holy Fathers, and worthy of credit: they show us, that Usury is as
badde as to kill and murder a man wilfully.

Chrysostom likewise, In his sensibilibus pecunys Him. 41. in 18. genes.
prohibuit ne quis vsuram acciperet, etc. God has forbidden that no man shall
take Usury, in this sensible, or common money. Why? because either of them is
much hindered. He that owes money is made poorer, and he that lends it, by
this kind of enriching himself, increases the number of his sins. Again
he says, Sicut fermentum modicum quod Him. 12. in 5. Mat.
mittitur in multam farinam totam consper sionem corrumpit, etc. Even as a
little leaven leaueneth the whole lump of dowe, even so Usury, when it comes
into any man's house, draws all his substance, and changes it into debt.

He that is an Usurer, wishes that al others may lack and come to him and
borow of him: that al others may lose, so that he may have gain. Therefore our
old forefathers so much abhorred this trade, that they thought an Usurer
unworthy to live in the company of Christian men: they did excommunicate him.
They suffered not an Usurer to be a witness in matters of Law. They suffered
him not to make a testament, and to bestow his goods by will. When an usurer
died, they would not suffer him to be buried in places appointed for ye burial
of christians. So highly did they mislike this unmerciful spoiling, and
deceiving our brethren.

But what speak I of the ancient fathers of the Church? there was never any
religion, nor sect, nor state, nor degree, nor profession of me^, but they have
disliked it. Philosophers, Greeks, Latins, Lawiers, Divines, Catholics,
Heretics, al tongues and nations have ever thought an Usurer as dangerous as
a thief. The very sense of nature proves it to be so. If the stones could
speak, they would say as much.

Therefore our savior says, Do good, and Luke. 4.
lend, looking for nothing again. He says not, lend and look not for
your principal again. But look for no gain thereby, look not to receive
more than thine own for the use and occupying of it. Defraud not another: thou
would not an other should defraude thee. Dppresse him not, have pity on
his wife and children: thou would not have thy wife and children undone. In
Leuiticus God says, If thy brother be impouerished and fallen Leuit. 25.
in decay, thou shall take no Usury of him, nor vantage, but thou shall fear
thy GOD that thy brother may live with thee. GOD says thou shall take no
Usury. And he has power and authority to command. And in Exodus, If thou
lend money to my people Exodus 22.
to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as an Usurer unto him, ye shall not
oppress him with Usury. Show them mercy for my sake, they are my people. I
can enrich him, I can impouerish thee. I set up, and throw down whom I will.
When thy neighbor needs thy help, and seeks comfort at thy hands,
afflict him not as an enemy, oppress him not like a tyrant.

Ezechiel the Prophet sets down the Ezech. 18.
wrath of God against Usurers, He that has given forth his money upon Usury,
or has taken increase, shall he live? he shall not live says the Lord. He shall
perish in his own sin, his blood shall be upon his head. Therefore when he
reckons the offenses of Ierufalem, and declares the heavy plagues that are
prepared against that wicked City, he says, Thou Ezech. 22.
have taken Usury and increase, and thou have defrauded thy neighbors by
extortion, and have forgotten me says the Lord God. Behold therefore I have
smitten mine hands upon the covetousness, that thou have used. Thou have
done injury to my people, that thou might make thine own gain. Thy
wrongs and oppressions done by Usury rise up into heaven, therefore I will
gather thee, and blow the fire of my wrath upon thee, says the Lord.

Thus has GOD spoken, even the Lord of heaven and earth, which can scatter
thy gold in the wind, and blow it to nothing. Thus he speaks to thee, that
hear, and read his word, which know that his will is, thou should
not lend thy money to Usury. Thou do oppress (says he.) Who^? thy
brother for whom Christ vouchsafed to shed his blood. And what brother? him
that was poor, which came to thee for need, to seek thy help. How?
wickedly, closely, falsely, craftily, deceitefully, like an hippocrite, under
color to do him good. Wherewith? with thy money, thy gold, and silver, which
God has given thee to relieve the poor and needy withal.

God has said, thou shall not take Usury, and what art thou that despisest
the voice of the Lord? whose words will thou hear, that wilt not hear the
words of God? remember the words, you can not forget them. Thou shall not take
Usury of thy brother, he is poor and fallen in decay: thou shall not be an
usurer unto him: thou shall not oppress him with usury. For it is cruelty,
and abomination in the sight of God: therefore will God power ^ut his wrath,
and consume the Usurer: he shall not enter into the Tabernarie of the highest,
he shall have no part in the kingdom of Christ, and of God, but shall be cast
into the vtward darkness.

But some will say, al kinds of Usury are not forbidden. There may be cases
where Usury may stand with reason and equity. And herein they say so much as
by wit may be devised, to paint out a foul, and ugly Idol, and to shadow
themselves in manifest and open wickedness. What so ever God says, yet this
or this kind of Usury, say they, which is done in this or this sort, is not
forbidden. It profits the common wealth, it relieueth great numbers. The
poor should otherwise perish, no man would lend them.

By like good reason, there are some that defend theft, and murder, they say,
there may be some case, where it is laweful to kill or to steal: for God willed
the Hebrews to rob the Egyptians, and Abraham to kill his own son Isaac. In
these cases their robbery and the killing of his son were laweful. So say
they. Even so by like reason do some of our Countrymen maintain Concubines,
Curtizans, and Brothel houses, and stand in defense of open Stews. They are
(say they) for the benefit of the Country: they keep men from more
dangerous inconvenience: take them away, it will be worse. Although God say,
There shall be no whore of the daughters Deuteronomy. 23.
of Israel, neither shall there be a whore keeper of the sons of Israel: yet
these men say al manner of whoredom is not forbidden. In these and these cases
it is not amiss to allow it.

God said to Saul, Go and strike Amalek, 1. Samu. 15
and destroy ye all that pertains to them, and have no compassion on them, but
slaie both man and woman, both infant and suckling, both ox and sheep, both
camel, and ass. So strait, and precise was Gods commandment. Forth marches
Saul, sets upon his enemies, God assisteth him, and gives him the
victory. When he took Agag prisoner, and saw him to be a goodly tall
gentleman, he had pity on him, and saved him alive. And the best and fairest
of the sheep, and oxen, and other rattel, he did not destroy, although he
knew well, that GOD had commanded him to kill man and beast, every one without
exception. Then came Samuel unto him, and said, oh why have thou not done as
thou were commanded? Here let us mark the wicked answer of Saul, in defense
of his wilful disobedience. It had been great pity to have hau^ slain Agag
so comely, and tall a gentleman. I have taken him, and keep him prisoner. And
if I should have destroyed this goodly cattle, they had come to nothing. It
was better to save them, for the vitailing of my soldiers: and the fairest of
them may be offered in sacrifice. So brake he the commandment of God under
pretense of doing h^nor to God.

But Samuel said, has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offeringes and
sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? behold, to obey is better
than sacrifice. And to disobey his holy will, is to renounce and forsake him.

So may we say to the Usurer. Thou have devised cases, and colors to hide thy
shame, but what regard has God to thy cases? what cares he for thy reasons?
the Lord would have more pleasure, if when thou hear his voice thou
would obey him. For what is thy devise against the counsel, and ordinance
of God? What bold presumption is it for a mortal man to control the
commandments of the immortal GOD, and to weigh his heavenly wisdom in the
balaunce of human foolishness? When GOD says, thou shall not take usury,
what creature of GOD art thou, which can take Usury? When GOD makes it
unlaweful, what art thou, oh man, that say, It is laweful? This is a token
of a desperate mind. It is found true in thee, that Paul said, the love of
money is the root of al il. Thou art so given over unto the wicked Mammon,
that thou carest not to do the will of God.

Wilfulness, and presumption, are tokens that such men are impudent, and past
shame. He that offends of simplicity, may find mercy. But they which of
pride and boldness go against the known truth, and do that thing which
they know to be ill, and devise shifts to color that, which all reason, and
learning, of God, and men, and nature it self have condemned, they are fallen
into temptation and snares; and into foolish lusts which drown them in
destruction.

GOD is the Lord. We are but servants: he has made us, and not we our
selves: we are but as claie in his hands: we can not repeal the law that
God has established: we must obey it. We may not do the things that seem
good in our own eyes, they may deceive us: but we must do whatsoever GOD
bids us to do, and forsake to do those things which he forbids.

Thus much for an entry to those, which can bring so good reasons, for so il a
matter.

Many defend their Usury, by that liberty which they think they have, to
use their goods in such sort, as seems best to themselves, and is most to
their advantage. May I not, say they, do with mine own goods what I will?
this would they not say, if they were of him, which has said by his holy
Apostle, Let every man, as he has 1. Pet. 4.
received the gift, so minister the same one to an other, as good disposers of
the manifold grace of GOD. It is the law of nature, that no man abuse the
things that are his, to the hurt and hinderaunce of an other. May a man take
his own dagger, and therewith commit murder? or may a man take of his own
fire, and therewith burn his neighbors house? He that said, Thou shall not
kill, has also said, Thou shall not steal: thou shall not commit Usury: thou
shall not defrande thy brother in bargayning. He is not unrighteous, that he
will judge the murderer, and will not condemn the Usurer. In that day the
Usurer shall know, whose money it was, wherewith he defrauded his brother. His
money shall not help him, he shall have no shift to conueigh himself from the
wrath of God: he and his money shall perish together.

But the Nsurer will say. The poor man came to me, I was not in haste to
seek him. He ^ued his case to me. I took pity of him, and lent him money.
Since then he and al his have been the better. Here you shall see the great
kindness and pitiful heart of this rich Usurer. He draws his purse, gives
out his goods, and helps the poor, and the poor is much eased by him. But
alas what help is this? even such as he finds, that in the midst of his ^it
of an ague drinks a great draught of cold water. No doubt he is refreshed
and cooled, and for that present time much the better. But after a while when
his heaues renew the heat increases: his heart pants, his pulse beats,
his mouth is dry, his tongue burns: he is more terribly tormented, than ever
before. So fares it with him that borrows money upon usury. He looks in
his hand, and sees somewhat. It is not his own; ^t is he refreshed therewith,
and much eased. The year passes, the day of payment draws on, the
creditour calls for money: then, then the heates and fittes, and agonies
begin to grow. Thou must pot and pan trudge to redeem this body. Then
he ^leth cruel torments than ever before.

Thus does the gentle usurer help to relieve the poor in time of his
necessity: as if a man would cure a sore finger by cutting off the arm: or
as if he would cure the blemishe of the eye sight, by the pulling out the
eyes: or as if he would quench thirst by giving poison to drink: or as if to
save one from drowning in a boisterous tempest, he would cast him over the
boat into the sea.

The Scorpion embraces a man sweetly with his legs, but in the mean while
strikes him deadly with his tail. His face looks amiably, his tail
poisoneth. So an Usurer looks fair, and gives good words: but at the end
he undoes.

Who is st^ng by an Adder, he perceives no hurt: but feels a gentle beating
of his veins with some delight, whereat he reioiceth. After this he falls
into a slumber: then the poison works, overcomes him, and kills him. Even
so he that borrows upon Usury, finds himself wonderfully amended, and
reioiceth: but he is st^ng, and has a deadly stroke. The poison will grow over
him, he shall die in a slumber, and be undone before he is aware. So necessary
is an Usurer for to relieve the poor and needy, as rust is to help iron, and
as the m^the is to help a garment: it eats him through from one side to an
other. Therefore says Ambrose, Talia sunt vestra divites beneficia. Minus
Lib. de Thobia. ca. 13.
dat^s, and plus exigitis. Talis humanit as, ut spobetis etiam dum subvenitis.
Such are the benefits that you rich men bestow: you give oue little, and
require much again. Such is your kindness, that you undo them whom ye
help. And thus much of the ease that poor men find in borrowing upon
Usury. They are bitten, and st^ng, and eaten up and devoured by it. Most men
confess that this kind of usury is forbidden, because it relieueth not, but
spoileth and consumes. God take the liking of it out of all men's hearts,
then shall they be the better able, to judge of the other sorts, which they
yet think allowable.

What if one rich man lend money to another? What if a Merchant take money to
usury of a Merchant, and both be the better, and both be gainers? Here is no
sting, nor biting. What shall we think of this? What if a thief or a pirate
take usury of a pirate or a thief, and both be partakers of the gain, and be
both of them helped? Let no man mistike the comparison. For, as I said
before, a pirate or a thief is not so noifull, as an Usurer. Here, say you,
he that lends is a gainer, and he that borrows is a gainer. It does good
to both. If both be gainers, who is the looser? for usury never passes
without working less. Take this as a rule, there is never Usury without loss.

Here, I pray you to lend me your minds, and consider what I say. A Merchant
takes up of his neighbor a hundred pounds, and must answer again a hundred
and ten pounds He bestows it al in corn, and buyeth for his hundred
pounds, a hundred quarters of corn. He sends it to the market, the people
have need of it, and buie it. If he sold it for eight groats a bushel, he
might make up his hundred pounds, and be a gainer. But unless he make up a
hundred and ten pounds to discharge his usury, he must needs be a looser and
undone. But undone he will not be: he will rather undo many others. Therefore
he sefteth price at three shillings the bushel, and and so makes his money,
and pays the Usurer, and saves himself, and is no loser. Who then pays
the ten pounds? who is the loser, any man may see. The poor people which
buie the corn, they find it, and feel it in every morsel they eat. Thus,
if the Merchant borrower be not hindered by the Usurer: yet the people that
buie his wares are plagued. Thus it is no hard matter to find, that howsoever
Usury be used, it is always dangerous, and beguileth the people, and is
therefore the destruction and overthrow of the common wealth.

But, says he, why should I not make money to yield me gains, as well as my
wares? I lend my shop for a year, or two, or three, so many pieces of
Velvet, Sattins, Taffata, Grograine, Chamblet, Hollandes, etc. And for the use
he shall pay me by the year forty pounds, and in the end restore me my
shop, so many pieces of Velvet, etc. so long, so broad, of the same making,
so good, so fine as were the other. This says he is lawful, therefore the
other is lawful.

No, no, this is not lawful. It is not lawful so to set out thy shop. It
is Usury, it is forbidden. But he that takes the shop shall be a gainer:
who shall be the loser then? they that buie the wares must needs buie at the
dearer price. We may not allow one ill thing by the allowance of another. He
should rather say, Usury taken upon wares, is not lawful, therefore Usury
for bare money is less lawful. Hierome upon Ezechiel says: Putant quidam
Vsuram tantum esse in pecunia, quod praevidens lib. 6. in 18. Ezech.
Scriptura divina, omni rei aufert superabundantiam, ut plus non accipias, quam
dedisti. Some think there is no Usury, but in money. This did the holy
Scripture foresee, and therefore takes away the increase or gains in any
manner of thing: and requires that thou receive no more, than thou did
deliver.

An occupier wareth old, his occupiyng is done. He has in stock two hundred
pounds: he comes to a yongman, wise, of good credit, and of honest dealing,
and says, I give thee this money freely, it shall be thine for ever, upon this
condition: that thou give me twenty marks by the year during my life. This
may be done, it is no Usury. Wherefore? It is a plain gift with a condition.
The principal is gone from me for ever: I have no right unto it, it is none of
mine. If I die to morrow before I receive any penny, my erecutors can not
claim any thing. But in Usury it is otherwise. The Usurer requires his
whole sum again, and somewhat more for the use and occupying. Therefore this
is a gift, and not Usury.

Again, I lend my neighbor twenty pounds until a day. He has it freely,
and friendly without any usury. Yet I say to him, neighbor you must needs
keep day, for the next day after I must discharge a pain, I stand bound
for payment. I have no more but this, which you borrowe. If I miss, I forfaite
five pounds. I pray you be careful for it. The day comes, my neighbor
comes not: I lack my money, and because I lack it, I loose five pounds. He
comes afterward and offers me mine own money. Then say I, neighbor, I
have lost five pounds by your negligence and slackenesse, I hope you will not
suffer me to be a looser for my gentleness. This is Interest, it is no v^rie.

Here by the way, you may learn wherefore it is called Interest, because he
may say, Interfuit mea habuisse. It behooued me, it stood me upon to have
it, and now by your default I sustain loss. It is good to know the one from
the other. This kind of dealing is Interest, and not usury. In usury I seek
to be a gainer: in Interest, I seek only to be no looser, gain or profit I
seek none. And hereof I may lawfully seek to be answered: it stands with
equity and conscience, and good reason. This is interest, and no usury, that
a man who requires no gain, sh^nlde seek to save him self harmless.

Bear patiently with me, if I be long. My desire is, you should understand
this whole matter, and be able to know one thing from an other. That so no man
may accuse his Usury by name of interest: and others be not offended, nor
reckon all men to be Usurers, which lend ^rth their money, or any ways
dispose of their stock.

A poor Orphane left in his Cradle has a hundred pounds stock. This stock
may be put out to Usury. And the Usury is allowed. This is a deed of
charity, it is no Usury, as shall appear. For, if the hundred pounds should
lie still without enerease, and be bestowed from year to year to the v^e of
the child, the whole stock would be spent, before the child should come to
years. But if the stock be put to occupying, and into an honest man's hands,
something will grow to the relief of the Orphane, and yet his stock remain
whole. This is charity to relieve the infant, that can not relieve himself.
The like is, in ^ing the stock of a man that has not his wits, and is not
able to dispose of his g^des. Or if a Merchant by sickness, or maime, or any
other hinderance, be not able to follow his business, he desires an other to
use, and occupy for him, and to do with his stock, as it were his own, only
to maintain him with the increase thereof. This is not Usury. Why? because he
that takes the stock of the Orphane, or of the mad man, or of the diseased
merchant, is not bound to answer al adventures, and casualties that happen.
As, if to like use I take a stock in cattaile, and they die without my
default: or a stock in money or wares, and the wares be burnt by fire, or the
money stolen without my default, I am not bound to answer the principal:
therefore it is no Usury.

But he that takes money to Usury, whether he gain or loose, or whatsoever
happen unto him, he must answer the whole stock he borrowed. And this is it
that undoes so many, and makes them banquerupts. But this happens not in
this case. He that occupies the Orphans money or stock, is charged only to
use it as his own, and no otherwise. If it perish, or decay, or miscarie
without his fault, he is not bound to answer it. Therefore, as I said, it is
no Usury.

Yet say they further for defense of Usury. It is suffered in other countries,
in France, Spain, Italy, Rome, etc. the laws permit it. And what law does
suffer it? I trow, not the law or God, for that law straightly forbids it.
But what speak I of the law of God? the civil law condemns Usury, the
canon law condemns it, the temporal law condemns it, and the law of
nature condemns it. And how is that sufferable by any law, that by so many
Laws is condemned? or how is he worthy to live among men, that despises the
authority of so many laws? or what will you judge of that man, that will be
tempered and ordered by no law? neither by civil, nor by canon, nor by
temporal, nor by law of nature, nor by law of men, nor by law of God. I say
not, how may we think him to be a man of GOD? But, how may we think such
a one to be a man? for it is the part and duty of a man to be ruled by law
and reason.

But it is every where, and therefore to be suffered. Too true that it is
common every where. Would God it were false. It undoes all the world. So the
Devil is every where, and suffered: so are the Stews suffered in France,
Spain, Italy, Lombardie, Naples, Venice, and in Rome. Rome is called the
holy City, the most holy has his seat there, and yet suffers he the
stews in Rome. So were the Canaanites among the people of God and suffered.
But they were as goades in their sides, and as thorns in their eyes. As these
were suffered, and as the Stews are suffered, and as the Devil is suffered: so
and no otherwise are Usurers. Such good, and no better do they. For they are
the children of the Devil: their houses be the shoppes, wherein the Devil does
his work of mischief. They be Canaanites, and enemies of Gods people. They
be goades in our sides, and sharp thorns, and prickles in our eyes. God
grant that the law may epsy them: and the people abhor them: and they may
repent and loath their wickedness.

Some other are bold to take authority for Usury from Christ himself. He
says, The kingdom of Heaven, is as a man that going Matt. 25.
into a strange country, called his servants, and delivered to them his
goods, and unto one he gave five talents, and to an other two, and to an other
one. And said unto them, occupy until I come. The first did so, the second
accordingly. They increased his stock, and are commended for their Usury. The
third wrapped his talent in a Napkin, and kept it together. His master returned,
and chid him and said. Wherefore gave not thou my money into the Luke 19.
bank, that at my coming I might have required it with vauntage? Therefore
Usury is allowed by the mouth of Christ. The two first are commended, not for
any thing else, but for the gain they made by Usury. The third is rated and
rebuked, not for theft, nor adultery, but because he laid not out his stock to
Usury.

What? and is Usury allowed? and allowed by the witness of Christ? how can
that beefor Christ, as we heard before does plainly forbid it. How is it
then? what is the meaning of this parable? This it is. When Christ delivered
his gospel unto his Disciples: he gave them charge to be diligent, and to
multiply, and increase the number of them that should believe. To this purpose
he says, be as careful in this business for the glory of GOD, and the
salvation of your brethren, as worldly wise men show themselves in seeking
wicked Mammon. Behold the Usurers, they occupy their stock, and make it
grow, and so of five pounds make ten, and of ten make twenty pounds, and so
they become rich. So deal you in the gifts, and knowledge, that God has
bestowed on you, give them to the exchaungers, put them out to Usury, increase
the Lords stock. If they be diligent and faithful in the things of this
world, how much more ought you to be so, in heavenly things?

This therefore is the meaning. Covetous men, and the children of this world be
wise in their generation. You are the children of light, be you also wise, and
do you so likewise in your office and service, as you see them do. So he
says, Behold the fowls of Heaven, learn Matthew. (...).
how the Lilies of the field grow. What of this? the Lilies are but grass:
the Fowls of the air are but Birds. The mercy of God in his providence and
care, wherein he gives us al things needeful, is made plain by example of
these, and thereby our distrust and overmuch carfulness reproved. So does
Christ speak this parable of the Usurer, that as he is diligent in doing il,
so we should be painful and ready to do well.

But shall Usury therefore be lawefull, because Christ draws a comparison, or
makes an example by an Usurer? if it were so, we should do many things
otherwise than well. For in the scriptures we are oftentimes required to take
example of those things which are il. In the sixteenth of Luke, Christ bids
his Disciples take example of the unfaithful steward, James. (...).
to be provident and careful as he was. Does he therefore commend the
falshoode of the Steward? or shall falshoode therefore be lawful? S. Paul
says, The day of the Lord 1. These. (...).
shall come, even as a thief in the night. Is theft therefore lawful? S. James
says, The Devils believe, and tremble, take example of the Devils. They
believe, but their bare, vain, and dead faith, in which they can do no good,
can not serve them. Even so shall not your faith if it be dead, and void of al
good works, save you. God himself to reprove the unthankfulness and
forgetfulness of his people, which did so often forsake him, and followed Baal
and Astaroth, says in this manner unto them. What nation did ever forsake
their Gods? Does he in this speech approve, that the Idols of the heathen are
Gods? or because God takes example of idolatry, shall idolatry therefore be
laweful? he bids his servant to be as faithful and willing, and ready to
serve him the God of heaven and earth, as the gentiles were in service of their
Idols, the works of their own hands. As God did will the Israelites to take
example of the Ido, laters: And as Christ bids take example of the false
steward, and as James of the Devils: so is this parable an example of that
which is commendable: that is, the diligence of the servants: Usury is no
more allowed by this, than idolatry and falshoode and the devil is by the
other. Some will say, I have no trade to live, I must needs give my money to
Usury, or else I must beg. This is it that I spoke of. This shows that
despair and mistrust in the providence of God, is the mother of Usury. If
this were cause why he should be an usurer, if this be well spoken for defense
of his wickedness, why may not the thief, or ye bawd, or the enchanter by like
answer excuse themselves, and stand in defense of their doings? Augustine
therefore says, Audent etiam fenerarores In Ps. 128.
dicere, non habeo aliud vnde viuam. etc. The usurers are bold to say, they
have no other trade whereby to live. So will the thief tell me, when I take him
in his theft. So will he say that breaks in to other men's houses. So will the
baude say, that buieth young maidens to use them to filthiness. So will the
wicked enchanter, that sells his sin. If we reprove any of al these they
will answer, that this is their mainteinance, and that they have not any other
way to live. But August. says, Quasi non hoc ipsum in illis maxima puniendum
est, quia artem nequitiae dele^runt vnde viuerent, and inde se volunt pascere,
vnde offendant eum a quo omnes pascuntur. As if they were not therefore most
worthy to be punished, because they have chosen a trade of wickedness to live
by: and will mainetaine themselves by that thing, wherewith they displease him,
by whom al are mainetained. How much better would it be with them, if they did
serve God truly in such place and calling, wherein they might most set forth
his glory, and do such things as should be profitable to themselves and
others?

The servant of God knows, there is no want to those that fear him. He
knows the Lord has care over him, and therefore casts his care upon the
Lord. He says as the Prophet, The Lord is my shephearde, I shall want Psalm.
23. Psa. 27. Psalm. 31.
nothing. And, The Lord is the defender of my life, of whom then shall I be
afraid? I trusted in thee O Lord, and said, thou art my God. My times are in
thy hand.

Thus much I thought expedient to speak of the loathsome and foul trade of
Usury. I know not what fruit will grow thereby, and what it will work in your
hearts. If it please God, it may do that good that I wish. I have done my
duty. I call God for a record unto my soul, I have not deceived you. I have
speken unto yo^ ye truth. If I be deceived in this matter, O God thou have
deceived me. Thy word is plain. Thou say, Thou shall take no Usury, thou
say, He that takes increase shall not live. What am I, that I should hide
the words of my God, or keep them back from the hearing of his people? the
learned old Fathers have taught us, it is no more laweful to take Usury of our
brother, than it is to kill our brother. They that be of God, hear this, and
consider it, and have a care that they displease him not. But the wicked that
are no whit moved, and care not what God says, but cast his word behind them:
which have eyes and see not, and ears yet hear not: because they are filthy
they shall be ^lthie still. Their greedy desire shall increase to their confusion,
and as their money mcreaseth, so shall they increase the heaps of their sins.
Pardon me if I have been long, or vehement. Of those that are usurers I ask
no pardon.

I hear, that there are certain in this city, which wallow wretchedly in this
filthiness, without repentance. I give them warning in the hearing of you all,
and in the presence of God, that they forsake that cruel and detestable sin.
If otherwise, they continue therein, I will open their shame, and denounce
excommunication against them, and publish their names in this place, before you
all: that you may know them, and abhor them, as the plagues and monsters of
the world: that if they be past all fear of God, they may yet repent and
amend for worldly shame.

Tell me thou wretched wight of the world, thou unkind creature which art past
all sense and feeling of God, which know the will of God, and do the
contrary: how dare thou come into the Church? It is the Church of that GOD,
which has said: Thou shall take no Usury. And thou know, he has so laid.
How dare thou read, or hear the word of God? it is the word of that God,
which condemns Usury. And thou know, he does condemn it. How dare thou
come into the company of thy breth^? Usury is the plague, and destruction and
undoing of thy brethren. And this thou know. How dare thou look upon thy
children? Thou make the wrath of God fall down from heaven upon them. Thy
iniquity shall be punished in them to the third and fourth generation. This
thou know. How dare thou look up into heaven? Thou have no dwelling
there: thou shall have no place in the tabernacle of the highest. This thou
know. Because thou robbest the poor, deceiuest the simple, and catest up
the widows houses: Therefore shall thy children be naked, and beg their
bread: therefore shall thou and thy riches perish together.

But Christ says, The hour shall come, and John 5.
now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that
hear it shall live. Zacheus was a receiver of tribute, and was rich, when he
received Jesus to abide in his house: He stood forth, and said unto the Luke
9.
Lord, Behold Lord the half of my goods I give to the poor: and if I have
taken from any man by forged cauillation, I restore him four ^olde. Then Jesus
said unto him. This day sal^ation is come into this house for as much as he
also is become the son of Abraham. God may make his word work so in the
hearts of Usurers, that they may also receive Jesus and forsake Usury, and
restore f^ure sold, if they have deceived any, and so may also receive
salvation. Let us increase in that Usury which is to the glory of God. He
has given us knowledge, and many excellent graces. Let us put them forth,
let us occupy that talent which he has left us. He will return: the day of
his coming is at hand. He will require his talents, we must answer them: Let
us restore them with increase that our service may be allowed, and we received
into his tabernacle.

V. 7. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

8. He therefore that despises these things, despises not man, but God, who
has even given you his holy spirit.

Let every man possess his vessel in holiness and honor, for this is the
will of God: hereto are ye called. I am the Lord your God, Leuit. 11.
says he, be sanctified therefore, and be holy, for I am holy. So our savior
to his Disciples, Be ye merciful as your father also is merciful.
Unmercifulness, Luke. 6.
cruelty, uncleanness, fornication, Usury, and such like, are not of GOD.
They auns were not their calling that commit any manner of sin. If any
(...). Tim. (...)
man therefore purge him self from these, he shall be a Vessel unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the Lord.

It behooves every man when he is in secret and alone, to bethink himself
whereto God has called him. The Magistrate, thus, I am called to do justice,
to be merciful to the widow, to have pity upon the fatherles. I am the
Minister of God for the wealth of them that do well: and to take vengeance on
him that does evil. The minister and preacher thus, I have charge given me to
lead the people of God to the way of righteousness, I am called to do the work
of an Evangelist, to preach the word in season and out of season, to show the
people their offenses, and to reprove them with all earnestness, to teach
them that they deny all ungodliness, and turn wholly unto God: for
necessity is laid upon me: and woe is me if I 1. Cor. 4.
preach not the gospel. The subject must thus think with himself, I owe
obedience to my sovereign, I must be subject, not because of wrath only, but
also for conscience sake. If I resist, I resist the ordinance of God, and shall
receive to my self damnation.

It behooves all men, when they feel them selves led to any evil purpose, to
bethink them selves: Alas, what mean I? Why should I do it? This is not the
will of God: God has not called me to uncleanness, but unto holiness. God is
my God, I am his creature, I must serve him with my heart. The eyes of the Lord
are over the righteous, and his ears open to their prayers: but the face of
the Lord is upon them that do evil.

He therefore that despises these things, despises not man, but God. Alas,
what are we? We are but unprofitable servants: we are the voice of a crier in
the wilderness: by us it has pleased God, to make his name known through all the world: we are your brethren and your ^rua^ts for Christ's sake: we are your
helpers, by whom you are called to the faith. We preach not our selves, but
Jesus Christ. We speak unto you in the name of God. If you despise us in
doing this service toward you, you despise not us, but you despise God, who
has sent us, and God can in due time avenge your unthankfulness. Who has
given you his holy spirit. You have received the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, You know these things are true, you cannot deny them. If you
shall now offend, you shall offend against Gods spirit, which is given unto you.

V. 9. But as touching brotherly love, you need not that I write unto you: for
ye are taught of God to love one an other.

Love is the bond of unity, of perfection, of knowledge, of wisdom, and of
al godliness. Paul the more to set forth the sweetness, and comfort thereof,
calls it, brotherly love. Brethren are bound to love one another. God, and
nature, and bringing up, do bind them. Many brethren have endangered
themselves, to save their brethren. It were a monster in nature, that one
brother should kill an other. You are all brethren, and have one father, even
God. How then can you hate and trouble your brethren? Hereto Christ calls us,
A new commandment Ioh. 13.
give I you, that ye love one an other: as I have loved you, that ye also love
one another. By this shall al men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to an other. Hereof the Prophet David says, Behold, how Psalm. 133.
good and how comely a thing it is, brethren to dwell even together. There is
peace, there is comfort, there is heaven, there is God himself among them.
This is the duty of the children of God, taloue together, as the parts and
members of one body, as brethren, and as the sons of one father.

Here let us consider one great disor^ among us that are Christians. If an
action or matter at law grow between man and man, then forthwith is the bond
of brotherly love broken. They are no longer friends. If he stand against him
in suit of law, he will have no more to do with him, will not pray with him,
nor drink in his company, nor talk together with him. Whenever he ^eeth
him, his heart rises at him; as if he did see his enemy. This should not be
so, it is a disorder in Christian behavior.

Next after the Gospel, the law is the greatest comfort that god has given to
the sons of men. It remedieth injuries, and gives to every man, that is his.
He that goes to a Judge, goes to him that is the minister of ^ice, and that
sits in the r^me of god to do right. For the seat of justice, is the seat
of God. If there were no law to be ministered, but every man might do what he
would, and reckon al his own, whatsoever he could get or come by: what a lift
would it be. How should any man be master of that he has Who can imagine what
in^ries, cruelties, others, and streams of blood would follow? thanks be unto
god, who in mercy has given us a law, and justice to guide us by.

Let us be content to seek help at this (...) without wrath or malice, let us
come to it as we would come to our father. Let us ask counsel at it, as we
would at the mouth of GOD. As every man thinks it lawful to use his own,
or to require his own: so let every man be content to leave that he ho^eth,
when law says, it is none of his. The law is no breach of charity, it is the
bond and knot to keep men in love. A son may attempt law with his father, yet
do it in such duty as becomes a son. A subject may attempt law with his
prince, and yet love and reverence his prince, as becomes. Who v^ seth the
law otherwise, does abuse it. All strife and contention must be sa^ aside.

Love may ancide wrong, love may require right, love may stand ^rth, and seek
defense, before Judge. Love is patient, and gentle, it enuieth not, it does not
boa^ it self, it is not puffed up, it disdaineth not, it seeks not, her own
things, it is not ^ked to anger, it thinks not e^ill, it rei^ceth not in
iniquity. but it reioiceth in the truth. It ^uffereth all things, it believes
all (...) it (...) all things, it mdureth all things. Such is the nature of
love, such it is, where^ it is, inben it seeks right, wh^ it defends it
self against challenge of doing wrong.

V. 10. Yea, and that thing verily you do unto all the brethren which are
throughout all. Macedonia: but, we beseech you brethren, that you increase more
and more.

You love the brethren, not only ^ose that are with you, and whom you know:
but al, whatsoever they be, and in what place soever, though ye know them not.
Some love none but such as are of their sort, and devotion, and sect, and
fellowship. If any be of an other mind, than they are of, they can not love
them. This love is not of God, it is carnal, and proceeds but from the flesh.
Whosoever caryeth the name of Christ, is our brother, we must love him for
Christ's sake. Christian love does love those that are enemies, and do not
love us: it blesses them that speak ill of us, and prays for them that
persecute us.

Oh that these ^rdes of Paul might truly be spoken of us, As touching
brotherly love, we need not write unto you. Oh that God would touch our
hearts with his holy spirit, that we were all so knit together, and loved
(...) another, as he has commanded us. Then should we feel ye peace, that
passes all understanding: then would it appear, how joyful a thing it were
for brethren to dwell together in unity: then should we taste of the comfort
of the sons of God. And alas, what is our life, or what is our profession
without love? what is the sun without light? what is the fire without heat?
Though I speak with the 1. Cor. 13.
tongues of men, and of Angels (says the Apostle) and have not love: I am as
sounding brass, or as a tinckling Cimball. And though I had the gift of
prophecy, and knew al secrets, and al knowledge, yea, if I had al faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and had not love, I were nothing.

That you ebcrease more and more. Men of this world seek to increase in their
wealth and riches. They never think their store so great, but it may abide to
have more laid to it. Wicked, men stand not at a stay, they cease not to do
it, they hea^e sin upon sin, and draw iniquity with cords of vanity,
and sin with Cart roapes, until they come to the height, and extremity of
wickedness. Do you increase in every thing that is good. The kingdom of God
is not in word, but in 1. Cor. 4.
power: A child that stays at one stature, and never grows bigger, is a
monster. The ground that ^th not, and is not fruiteful, is tur^ed. The tree
that is barren, and proves not, is cut down. This must al know, men, and
women, and babes, and infantes. They must all walk on still in the way of
godliness, and increase, and go forward therein. Unless we go for^e, we
slip back. If we ware weary to do the work of God, God will forsake us.
(...).

V. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you.

12 That ye may behave your selves honestly toward them that are without,
and that nothing be lacking unto you.

Let no man among you, be a busy body in other men's matters. Be not caves
droppers, and harkening what is said or done in your neighbors house. Wide
ears and long tongues dwell together. They that love to hear all that may be
told them, do also love to blab out al they hear.

Study to be quiet, and meddle with your own business. The Church of God, is
as the body of man. In a man's body every part has his several office, the
arm, the leg, the hand, and foot do that, whereto they are appointed: and
doing the same, they live together in peace. But, if the arm would take in
hand to do that is the duty of the leg: or the foot, that is the part of
the hand, it would breed great disorder in the whole body. So if every man
in the Church of God, seek to do that to them belongs, the Church shall
flourish, and be in quiet. But when every man will he busy, and take upon him
to look into other: when every private man will govern, and the subject take
in hand to rule the Prince: all must needs come to wrack and decaie. Busy
bodies ever find fault, with their brethren and neighbors, with the State,
the Clergy, the Common wealth, the Church, the Government, and with the
Prince. They are an unquiet kind of men, ever looking, for that they may
mislike, and never contented. From these men come privy whisperings, slander,
backbyting, mutinies, conspiracies, treasons, deposing of Princes, and utter
decay of common wealths. These are the fruits of curiosity.

And to work with your own hands. God has ordained that all sorts of men,
should labor, and eat their bread in the sweat of their brows. And here
the Apostle does not only charge them to work, but that they work with-their
own hands. Thou that have hands, and set them not to work, thou that
abusest the grace of God by thy idleness, shall give an account thereof. What
fills your prisons? what dubbeth and enricheth your ga^wes, but idleness?
when your children come to these places, and see they must li^e no longer,
whereof complain they, but of idleness? then they curse the time, and their
Father and Mother that brought them up in idleness.

Though Kings, and Princes, and counsaylours, and preachers, and magistrates
dig not, and plough not, nor do any handy work, yet they break not
therefore the commandment of God, they break not this rule of the Apostle.
The head walks not as the ^eete nor trauaileth as the hands: yet is it not
idle. There is no labor comparable to the labor of a Prince. Day and night,
sleeping, and waking, he is full of cares, and full of paincs. The noble man and
magistrate, if he regard his country, be careful for the laws, aid the
poor, redress tyranny, comfort the weak, punish the wicked: is not idle. The
Minister if he apply his book, be diligent in prayer, exhort, and teach
publicly, and privately: is not idle. These labors are greater, than all the
labors of the body.

V. 13. I would not, brethren, have you ignorant concerning them which are
asleep, that ye sorrow not even as other which have no hope.

14 For if we believe that Jesus is dead, and is risen, even so them that
sleep with Jesus will God bring with him.

Herein stands the comfort of Christian religion. Were it not for the hope of
the second life, the godly in this world were in worse case than the dumb
and brute beasts. When Christ appointed his Disciples to go and preach, he
said, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves, They will scourge you,
you shall be hated of al men. As the Gospel increased in any place, these
words were fulfilled. The godly were put to death for the name of Christ. The
father did see his son stain before his face, and the son his father
cruelly tormented. Hence grew great mourning and heaviness. Oh said they, he
was a reverend sage father: oh he was a wise young man, learned, zealous, and
a great stay in the Church. Why would God take him before his time? there is
not now any one left, whom we may behold, or hear, or follow. We are left
comfortless, and without hope. After this sort it is likely the Thessalonians
mourned, when they beheld the persecution of the Church of God among them.
Herein they grew toward mistrust, and to be like the heathen, which had no
hope. Saint Paul thought good to refourme this error. And because this abuse
grew of ignorance, for that they knew not the happy estate of such which die
in the Lord: he says, I would not have you ignorant, what is become of
them, and what GOD has done for them. He has tried them, as gold, and has
made them worthy for himself. Therefore you ought rather to rejoice, there
is no cause at al of mourning. When Christ saw his disciples heavy and sad
because of his departure, he said, If ye loved me, ye would John 14.
verily rejoice, because I said, I go to the father: for my father is greater
than I. I shall sit at the right hand of my father in glory, then shall every
knee bow unto me, and enerie tongue shall confess my greatness. Therefore if
ye loved me, you would rejoice in my behalf. It is ignorance that makes you
heavy, because you know not whither I go.

When Joseph was sold into Egypt, good father Jacob thought he was dead, and
therefore mourned day and night. Nothing could comfort him. Alas says he,
that I have lived to see this day, O Joseph my son, my son Joseph, oh that
I might give my life to redeem thee. Now shall my hoarie head go down to the
grave in heaviness. But when he heard that Joseph lived, and did see him with
his eyes: when he did see that he was a Prince, next in place to the King, and
had all the Country at commandment: then he knew he had mourned without a
cause. Then his heart leapt within him, his eyes gusht out with water, he wept
for joy. Ignorance, as we see, made him heavy, knowledge of the truth as it
was, rejoiced his halt, and made him glad.

There is great error, and darkness, and ignorance, in man's life. We
rejoice when we have cause to mourn, and mourn many times when we have
cause to rejoice. Therefore he says, I would not have you ignorant. Be not
deceived. God has given you eyes to see the right ways God has given you
ears to hear counsel: and a heart to know reason, and to understand, and
judge. God has given you the Scriptures, and by them the knowledge of his will.
He has given you a face to look up to heaven, and the spirit of life has he
poured into you: that you should not by any means be deceived.

That ye sorrow not as other that have no hope. He does not forbid natural
affection. Our parents, and our children are dear un to us. They are our
flesh and blood, and the chief and principal parts of our body. Any part
of our body can not be cut off, but we shall feel it. The father if he feel
not the death of his son: or, the son if he feel not the death of his
Father, and have not a deep feeling of it, he is unnatural. David mourned for
Jonathan. The whole land mourned for Josias. Paul says, God have mercy upon
Epaphroditus, (he was sick, very near unto death) and not on him only, but
on me also, least I should have sorrow upon sorrow. If God had taken
Epaphroditus out of life, no doubt Paul would have sorrowed. What need more
examples? Christ mourned for Lazarus, and shed tears for him. Then said the
John (...).
Jews, behold he loved him.

We are not therefore forbidden to mourn over the dead: but to mourn in such
sort as the heathen did, we are forbidden. They, as they did neither believe
in God, nor in Christ, so had they no hope of ye life to come. When a father
saw his son dead he thought he had been dead for ever. He became heavy,
changed his garment, delighted in no company, forsook his meat, famished him
self, rent his body, cursed his fortune, cried out of his Gods. Oh my dear
son, (says he) how beautiful, how learned, and wise, and virtuous wast
thou? why should thou die so untimely? why have I offered sacrifice, and done
service to my Gods? they have made me a good recompense. I will trust them no
more, I will no more call upon them. Thus they fell into despair, and spoke
blasphemies.

Therefore, says Paul you may mourn, as did the holy men of GOD: but in such
sort as the unfaithful sorrow for their dead, you may not mourn. You are
the sons of the holy fathers: fashion not your selves therefore like to the
heathens, do not as they did, neither in feasts, nor in marriages, nor in your
attire, nor in your mourning, nor in your pastimes. But behave your selves as
becomes the children of the most highest.

But why may not Christians mourn, and continue in heaviness? because it is
no new thing, for a man to die: because he goes the way of al flesh. Again,
they that depart this life, are not dead, they are not gone for ever, as the
heathen imagined. They are laid down to take rest quietly for a time. The death
of a godly man is nothing else, but a sleep. So says our savior of Lazarus,
Our friend John 11.
Lazarus sleeps: howbeit Jesus spoke of his death. So it is said of Steven.
And they stoned Act. 7.
Steven, who called on God, and said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And he
kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge, and when he had thus spoken, he slept. Whosoever dies in the peace of
conscience, he may say, I will lie down and take my rest. Thus does the man
of God repose himself. For Christ is unto him both in life, and in death
advantage. He says with the Apostle, Whether we Romans 14.
live, we live unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the Lord:
whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords. He goes into his grave,
as into a bed: he forsakes this life, as if he lay down to sleep: he shall
shake off his sleep, rouse himself, and rise again. As we wake out of
sleep, we know not how: so shall we rise again, though we know not how. As
we are much refreshed, and our bodies strengthened by sleep: so shall we rise
again in much more strength, and our corruption shall put on incorruption, and
our mortality, immortality. So often then as we go to our beds, let us
think of our resurrection from death. Who is sorry to go into his bed? what
father lamenteth to see his child lie quietly, and take his rest? why then
should he so mourn for his death? wherein GOD deals mercifully with him,
and does translate him to the glory of the sons of God, where is no death,
nor fear: but we shall be made like to the Angels of God.

The body rotteth in the ground: yet God preserves it, that it shall not
perish. His spirit shall return to it again, and it shall live. God is able
to bring this to pass. He has promised so to do. He has done it already,
and will do it again. When Christ came near Luk: 7.
to the gate of the City of Naim, there was a dead man carried out, the only
begotten son of his mother, which was a widow, and much people of the City
was with her, and when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said
unto her, weep not. And he went and touched the coffin, and they that bare it
stood still, and he said, I say unto thee, young man, arise. And he that was
dead sat up, and began to speak, and he delivered him to his mother.
Lazarus was laid in his grave, he had been four days dead, his body did
stincke, Yet when Christ cried with a loud John 11.
voice, Lazarus come forth: then he that was dead, came forth bound hand and
foot with bands, and his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus said unto them,
loose him, and let him go. Saint Matthew says, The graves Mat. 27.
did open them selves, and many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose, and
came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy City,
and appeared unto many. These few stories witness unto us the rising again
of our bodies unto life. But what do I speak of the bodies of men? they are
the houses of GOD, the temples of the holy Ghost, God has appointed unto them
a kingdom.

Who considers not the swallows and other birds? they sleep all the winter
long. But when the spring comes, they come to life again, and are seen
abroad. What creature so little, so vile, and so little worth, as the stie? Yet
by those so base, and contemptible things, does God teach us to know our selves
and our estate. The greatest part of the winter, they are as dead. They creep
into chinks and corners, as into their grave, and lie there without life,
without feeling. Prove it who list, he shall see it so. The body is dead, the
wings moulted. Yet the very same fly so little and so vile shall be refrozed
again at the spring, and shall live in the warm weather, and have the same
wings, and the same feet, and the same body. If we be hard of belief, to
give credit to the word of God, these are manifest proofs to teach us the
resurrection of our bodies. If GOD do so much for the flies, which are so vile
a creature: how much rather will he quicken us again, whom he has chosen out
of this world to live with him for ever?

The word of GOD is almighty. He shall but speak, and it shall be done. The
Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall return to life. I am sure, says Job,
that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the ear^h in the latter
day, and shall be covered again with my skin, and shall see God in my
flesh. Whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other
for me.

This is my hope laid up in my bosom. Saint Paul wills Timothy never to
forget this doctrine, Remember that Jesus 2. Tim. 2.
Christ made of the seed of David, was raised again from the dead according
to my Gospel. This is the foundation, the beginning, and the ending of
religion. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead Romans 8.
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
your mortal bodies, because that his spirit dwells in you.

This is an article of our faith. We believe the resurrection of the body, even
of this body in which we live, and which we carry about with us. All flesh
shall see the salvation of our GOD. This is the hope of Christians, the
resurrection of their flesh. Set your affections Colos. 3.
on things which are above, not on things which are on the earth. For ye are
dead, says the Apostle, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ
which is our life shall appear, then shall ye appear with him in glory.

Therefore let not your hearts be dull through unbelief. As God was able to
save the bodies of his servants, that they were not hurt in the fire, as he
was able to keep Jonas safe, in the whales belly: so can he preserve our
bodies safe in the earth. Yea, much better, because the fire naturally
consuineth, and the fishes belly destroieth those things which they rauine:
but the earth naturally preseruoth that which is earthie.

As our GOD is of power, to divide the waters, to make the sea stand like a
wall, and give passage to his people: as he can change the course of the
heavens, and make the sun go back, as he can draw water out of the hard
rocks: so is he of power to raise our dead bodies again unto life. If he made
the earth, the water, the air, the heavens, and all creatures in them of
nothing: he is much more able to restore again those bodies which have been.
We look says Paul, Philip. 3.
for the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body,
and make it like his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is
able to subdue al things to himself. The Prophet Esaias comfort the people of
GOD in their affli^ions: Thy dead men shall live: even with my body shall
Esaias. 26.
they rise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust: for thy deawe is as the
deawe of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Again, The earth
shall disclose her blood, and shall no more hide her slain. Therefore says our
savior, This is the fathers will, John 6.
which has sent me, that of al which he has given me, I should loose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. Again he says, The
hour shall come, in the which John 5.
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice. And they shall come forth
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life: but they that have done
evil unto the resurrection of condemnation. And again, I am the resurrection
John 11.
and the life: he that believes in me, though he were dead shall live, and
whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die.

For if we believe, that Jesus is dead, and is risen: that he was delivered to
death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification: if we believe
that he is ascended up into heaven, and sits at the right hand of GOD his
father: he will also raise up our mortal bodies, and bring us with him. Now
Christ is risen from the dead, and was 1. Cor. 15.
made the first fruits of them that sleep. He is our head, we are his
body: We are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. He has given us his
Spirit to dwell in us. But if any man has not the Romans 8.
Spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Christ our head lives. His body then
can not he dead, Where I am, says he, there shall Ioh. 12. Romans 6.
also my servant be. Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall live also with him.

What then shall become of the infidelles, which have no faith, which have not
the spirit of God? Shall not they rise again? Yes verily. They shall rise, but
not with Christ. They shall not rise the resurrection of the just. Some shall
rise unto life, some unto death: some to salvation, others to damnation: some
to glory, others to shame. We must al appear before the 2. Cor. 5.
judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things which are
done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
evil. The wicked shall rise up again with their bodies, and their portion shall
be with the Devil and his Angels: they shall come forth of their graves, to the
resurrection of condemnation, their body and soul shall be cast into hell fire.
Their worm shall never die: their fire shall not be quenched. It had been better
for them, they had never been borne.

V. 15. For this say we unto you, by the word of the Lord, that we which live,
and are remaining in the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them that
sleep.

16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with
the voice of the archangel, and with the trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ
shall rise first.

This that we declare unto you is not of our selves. It is the truth of God, it
shall stand good and be found true for ever. God will raise our bodies out of the
grave, (...) restore the^ from death to life. You may not reason how, or in
what order this shall be done: or, who shall be the first or the second, or the
third, that shall rise up in the resurrection. Such questions are unfit and not
to be moved. We shall al be changed in a 1. Cor. 15.
moment, in the twinkling of an eye. At that hour, some shalve alive, and
some shall be dead. For he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. We
that are remaining, in the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them that
sleep. Neither is their part better in the resurrection, that shall then be
found alive: nor their part worse, that have been dead manis years before.
For they which were dead shall as soon be partakers of the glory of the sons
of God, as the other.

Touching the state of men that shall live in the end of the world, Christ
says, As the days of Noe, so likewise shall the coming of the Matthew. 24.
son of man be. I doubt not but you remember the story, what dreadful plague
of rain and tempest fell, when all the world was drowned, and destroyed with water
Vice and ungodliness increased, and al flesh had corrupt his way upon earth.
They had no shame, there was no fear of God before their eyes. Gods wrath was
kindled against them. He sent Noah a preacher of righteousness to reform them,
to tell them of the destruction at hand, that they might repent, and be saved.
But they regarded it not. They laughed Noah to scorn, and grew desperate, and
continued in sin. Suddenly all the fountains of the great deep were broken
up, and the windows of heaven were opened. As they were eating and drinking,
buying and selling, building, purchasing, stirring and travailing: as they were
in the midst of their joys, and travails, and pleasures, the rain came
upon them, and the floods grew so great, that it destroyed the whole world,
except Noah and a few of his company. Their lands, their goods, Cities.
Castles, nor any other their pleasure or wealth could save them: so shall it be
in the coming of Christ.

As it was in the days of Lot and as it betel to Sodom, and Gomortha: they
lived and increased in filthiness. Their hearts were blind and regarded no
counsel. Their bodies were filthy: their souls, their lives, their houses and
cities were full of filthiness. The Angel of God departed from them, Loath went
out from among them: and fire came down from heaven and consumed them to
ashes, and carried them down quick into hell. There was no father left to lament
his child, no child left to lament his father. So shall it be at the coming of
Christ. He shall come as a thief, suddenly, when no man looks for his coming:
he shall come at such season, when men's hearts will be asleep, and think not of
him.

S. Peter says, There shall come in the last 2. Pet. 3.
days, mockers, which will walk after their lusts, and say, where is the
promise of his coming? for since the fathers dyed, al things continue alike
from the beginning of the creation. They skorne the threatninges of Gods
indgement. When shall the world come to an end? We have winter and summer,
rain, snow, day and night as before. The son keeps his course: the fioudes
run: the fr^ bear fruit: al things are as they have been. O, says Peter,
know this, that god has made the heaven and earth, and all the furniture in
them. They are his creatures: he does hold the^ up, and preserve them by the
power of his word. When God shall withdraw his word, they shall decay, and have
an end. As for our Lord, he shall come, and not tarry: at his coming heaven
shall depart away as a scrol that is rold, the element shall melt with heat, and
the earth with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up and consumed before
his face. Deceive not your selves with lying words. For when you say, peace,
peace, and al things are safe: then shall sudden destruction come upon you.
Then two men shall be in the fields, the Matthew. 24.
one shall be received, and the other refused. Two women shall be grinding at
the mil: the one shall be received, and the other refused. So shall also the
coming of the son of man ^ee.

The number of the faithful that shall remain at his coming, shall not be many.
So says Christ, When the son of man comes, Luke 18. (...)
shall he find faith on the earth? S. John prophesying of that day, says, The
sun was as Reu. 6.
black as sackecloath of hair, and the Moon was like blood. The beauty of
the Church shall be defaced: the light of the Gospel shall be put out. Then shall
few be left of those that shall behold the glory of God. These shall give
witness unto the truth. And albeit they be but few, yet are they enough to
condemn the ungodliness of the wicked. We shall not go in rowtes: for we shall
be but few, we shall then be in the body, and live in this world, and look up,
and see these things: yet when the Lord shall come, we shall not prevent them
that sleep. Although we live, and they were dead, yet shall they be as ready
as we.

Why? For the Lord himself shall descend with a shout, etc. Here is laid
before us, the true manner of the terrible judgment of God. For our better
understanding, let us compare heaven with earth, and the judgment of God with
the judgment of men. The Judges sit on high, accompanied with noble men, and
Justices, attended on with Constables, and baylifes, and the state and presence
of the country: the thief is brought forth piniond, and bound in chains and
fetters. The poor wretch stands in great fear: his conscience accuses him,
and says, thou did steal, thou art worthy to die. The boyce of the Judge
is as a blast of thunder: the face of the Judge terrible to him, as hell fire.
But the innocent that is wrongfully imprisoned, and has not offended, he sees
himself clear, his conscience ercuseth him, and therefore rejoices at the
coming of the Judges. He thought it long before they came. These, says he,
will strike off my shackles, and set me at liberty. Their voice unto him, is as
the voice of life: he beholds them, and they are as the angels of God.

Such shall be the show and sight of the son of GOD, he shall come down with
majesty from heaven: the Trumpet of God shall sound, and be heard from the
one end of the heaven, to the other: and whosoever shall hear it, shall quake
for fear. Then shall he be the judge over al flesh. Then be shall show him self
to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Then shall he not come in humility,
meek nesse, and mercy: but with dread and terror of judgment, and justice.
Not with twelve poor Apostles: but with twelve thousand Angels to attend
upon him. Not in the preaching of the Gospel, and calling sinners to
repentance: but in the sound of a Trumpet, wherewith all the corners of the
earth shall be amazed. Then shall he not say, come unto me al ye that travail,
and be laden, and I will refresh you: I am sent to the lost Sheep of Israel.
He shall not say, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. But, you
have been ashamed of me, and of my word, before men: therefore now will I be
ashamed of you before my heavenly father.

Then shall they that despired ye word of God, know what they despised: and the
blasphemers shall reap the fruit of their blasphemy. Then the careless
Sheaphearde which has not fed the Lords sheep, but neglected them, and left
them at al adventures: which has betrayed his flock, and given them to be a
pray unto the Woolfe: shall receive a just reward for his treason. Then the
adulterer, oppressor, and Vsnrer, shall have their life laid open before them.
Then shall every eye see him. They shall see him, whom they Reu. 1.
pierced through: they shall see his wounds, which they did not regard. They
shall see his Sword ready drawn to slaie all his enemies and shall fall down
for fear of him that sits upon the throne, and of the Lamb.

But the hearts of the righteous shall rejoice. They shall lift up their heads,
and see him in whom they have trusted. Then they shall say, this is the day
which the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it. Come, let us
rejoice unto the Lord: let us come before his face with praise: let us sing
loud unto him with Psalms. Such shall be the state and countenance, and
honor, and majesty of our God, when he shall come down from heaven for our
deliverance.

And the dead in Christ shall rise, first. The earth shall open and yield forth
her dead bodies: that so they may be ready with us that remain, to go before
the presence of our judge. Which are dead in Christ. Who are they? They whom he
chose out of this world: and which have chosen God for their portion: whom God
has sealed unto the day of redemption. Which have said, Christ is to me both
in life, and death, advantage. And, I live, not I now, but Christ lives in me.
And again, whether we live or bie we are the Lords. Which say I have bound my
self to serve the Lord, all the days of my life.

They are dead in Christ which commend them selves wholly unto him, and say, O
Lord in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded. I desire to be losed,
and to be with Christ. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit, thou have
redeemed me, O Lord of truth. To be short, whosoever lives in the Lord, he
dies in the Lord. He in whom Christ lives, which has a taste and feeling of
Christ in his heart: he that reioiceth in Christ, and looks for that blessed
hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our savior Jesus
Christ: he is a sheep of his pasture, he is a member of his body, he is the
apple of his eye: he lives and dies in Christ. Blessed is he that so lives
and so dies, for he shall rise with Christ in the resurrestion of the
righteous, and shall have his part in the land of the living.

V. 17. Then shall we which live and remain, be caught up with them also in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

18. Wherefore comfort your selves one another with these words.

We which shall see al these things, shall also be caught up our selves. But
here you must note, that Paul speaks not this of his own person, and of them
that lived in his time, as if they should continue alive until the end: or
that the world should have an end, before they should die: but he shows what
shall be the state of such, whosoever shall then remain alive. And again,
mark, that he says not, we which live and remain, shall die soorthwith, or,
our bodies shall be turned into dust, and so our souls alone go to meet the
Lord: but, whether we be standing or sitting: doing well, or ill occupied. We
shall be caught up. For the Trumpet shall suddenly blow, and then the dead
shall rise, and we shall be changed. So says Saint Paul: Behold, I show you 1.
Cor. 15.
a secret thing, we shall not al sleep, but we shall al be changed. In a
moment, in ye twinkling of an eye shall they that are dead arise and we shall be
changed. This our mortal body shall be changed, and shall put on immortality:
this corruptible body shall be changed, and put on incorruption. Christ will
change our earthly bodies, to the likeness of his glorious heavenly body.
Then shall our flesh be pure, and heavenly, and spiritual, and we shall be
able to behold the glory of God. Then shall be 1. Cor. 15.
brought to pass the saying that is written, death is swalowed up into
victory. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?

To meet the Lord in the air, etc. This is a comfortable end of al troubles
and persecutions which the godly suffer in this life, that they be received
into the glory of God, and that both their body and soul does live with him,
and enjoy his presence for ever. Then shall they eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the paradise of GOD. They shall hunger no more, nor
thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. God shall
wipe away al tears from their eyes. Then shall they feel those ioies, which
eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor has entered into the heart of man.
Such an end shall they have, whosoever fear the Lord.

Comfort your selves one another with these words. You see the turmoiles, and
troubles of the world, what vexations and afflictions Satan raises up against
al those that will live godly. Open and notorious sinners are ^borne. Theft,
adultery, usury, extortion, wilful murder, rebellion, treason, are many
times pardoned and unpunished, but true religion which is the turning from
idols to serve the true and living God, and faith in Jesus Christ, that by him
we shall be delivered from the wrath to come, finds fe^e friends, and seldom
escapes without strange and most cruel torments. What is this but to crucify
the Lord of glory, and to set Barrabas a murderer at liberty? David says,
The Kings of the earth Psalm. 2.
band themselves, and the Princes are assembled together against the Lord, and
against his anointed. They seek to spoil the vine of the Lord, and to
destroy his little flock. They use al means to put out the light of the
Gospel. But be you of good cheer, continue you steadfast in the truth, your
redemption is even at hand. You shall be caught up in the clouds, to meet the
Lord, and so shall abide with him for ever. Let every neighbor comfort his
neighbor, and every father his child: let us al one comfort an other with
these words.

CHAP. 5.
But of times, and seasons, brethren, you have no need that I write unto you.

2 For ye your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord shall come, as
a thief in the night.

3 For when they shall say, peace and safety, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction, as the travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape.


WHen the Disciples came unto Christ a part, and said, Tell us Mat. 24.
when these things shall be, and what sign shall be of thy coming, and of the
end of the world, he answered, Take heed least any Act. 1.
man deceive you. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the
father has put in his own power. For of that day and hour Mark. 1^.
knows no man, no, not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the son
himself, save the Father. vere not your spirit in vain. Seek not for that
you may not know, you shall not be able to find it.

Therefore says Paul, I need not write of times and seasons, in which these
things shall be done. Your selves have been taught the word of God, you have
learned what his will is: you know the day of the Lord shall come upon you as a
thief. And how comes a thief? not in the day time, not when a man has
company about him, not when he is watched: but in the night, in the darkness,
when al light is out, when the good man of the house takes his rest, when the
servants are asleep. Even so when the light of the truth is taken away, when
the heart of the goodman of the house is at rest, and his eyes are darkened,
that they cannot see: and al his senses drowned in worldly pleasures, when we
care for nothing, and think of nothing, when we say, peace and safety: then will
the son of man come to judgment, then shall destruction suddenly fall upon us.
Therefore let us be ready, for in the hour that we think not, will the son of
man come.

Mark that Paul says, ye have no need that I write unto you of times and
seasons: and that our savior says, it is not for you to know the times or the
seasons. What may we think then of them that write books and almanackes, and
say, such a year, and at such a time, Christ shall come, and with these
speeches fray and mock the world? Paul was the Apostle of Christ, an elect
vessel of the holy ghost, he said, I have no need to write of it, you cannot
know it. What need is there now that such books and pamphlets should be
written? why should the world be troubled with such vanities?

Spare me your patience, and give me leave a little to deal with these
wisards. Tell me, thou that do measure and behold the compass of heaven,
and markest the coniunoions, and oppositions, and aspects of the stars: and
by that wisdom can foretell the things that shall be done hereafter: where
learnest thou this skill? how come thou by this deep knowledge? Paul was
taken up into the third heaven, and heard words which cannot be spoken, which
are not lawful for man to utter: yet he knew not this secret, nor might not
know it. What art thou then? art thou greater than the Apostle of Christ? have
thou been taken up into some place higher than the third heaven? have thou
heard such words, as are not lawful to utter? if it be so, why do thou
utter them? will thou take that upon thee which the holy Apostle dares not?
art thou of Gods privy counsel? the angels and archangels know not hereof:
and shall we think that thou know it? Art thou wiser than an Angel? Consider
thy self, thou art a miserable man, thy breath fades as the smoke. Thou art
nothing but dust and ashes: thou can not attain to the knowledge hereof.

And what is that which thou boastest? the knowledge of that terrible day,
when all flesh shall appear before the Judge. Even of that time, which God
has put in his own power. O vain man, thou know not thine own ^aie, thou
know not when thy soul shall be taken from thee. By what helps, and means
came thou unto this knowledge? by reading the writings of the Apostles? by
reading the Gospel of Christ, or any part of the word of GOD? No GOD wot,
thou have no great skill in this learning. Thou have it from Manilius,
Maternus, Albumazar or Haly. What is Manilius, Maternus, Albumazar and Haly?
What are they but Heathens, Painims, and Jnsidels? Were they not void of all
knowledge of God? were they not the enemies of the cross of Christ? these
never believed in God, how could they then know that day, when he would judge
the world? Let thy common reason reform thee. Can Saturn and Mars know this,
when the Angels of God cannot know it?

To what end write they thus? to give a token of their knowledge? nay, hereby
they proclaim and publish their sollie and want of knowledge. These two
hundred years, there have ever been some, which have adventured to tell such
news, and to say, in this year or that year, you shall have doomes day.
Such a day will Christ come to judgment, and the world shall have an end.
They have appointed many such years, and days, and hours. The years be
gone, the days be past, and the hours be slipped away, but the world abides,
and gives witness of their folly.

But the meaning of these men is good. Hereby they move the people to
repentance. For, when men think the end of the world is at hand, they will
bear the less affection of the things of this world. This is not the way to
teach repentance, and amendment of life. The people may not be taught by lies
and fables. If this had been good for the^, God himself would have used it.
God grant them grace to repent, which thus presume of knowledge, and reach so
high and yet know nothing.

Let us yet reason further with them. How have they this knowledge? of
certainty, or by conjecture? if of certainty, then it must needs be so, it
cannot fail, nothing can let it. But you will say, it is a conjecture, it may
so be: and it is likely, for such a day, shall be a Conjunction of Saturn and
Mars in a fiery house: and therefore al things shall be consumed with fire.
Alas, what has Saturn or Mars to do with the day of the Lord? They are but
creatures, they are no Gods. They are stars made to give us light, why
should they lead us into darkness? in the day of the Lord they shall be
melted and perish with fire. Why then trouble they the world with such
vanities, and set those things down for truth, whereof they have no
certainty, but only a guess and conjecture?

And what time chose they to cast abroad these news? the same, in which the
Gospel through the mercy of God, is well known of most men. Even now tell they
these tales, when all men know, that Christ says, the Angels in heaven know
not of that day and hour. The Angels behold the face of God, and stand in
his presence, yet know they not the day of the Lord. This is a secret, which
God reuealeth not unto any.

Children can reprove this folly in them, and say, Mitte arcana dei,
caelumque inquirere quid sit, Seek not to know the secrets of God, nor what
manner thing the heaven is. Know thy self, that thou art but a mortal man
crawling on the ground like a worm. He that will stare upon the sun, may be
blind and loose his eyes. God has given thee knowledge in measure: thou can
not know, as much as thou would. Know that is fit for thee to know, and
speak that is laweful to be spoken. Think of the commandments of God, to
follow them. Search not into his works, to be curious in them. For he that is
curious in searching the majesty of God, shall be oppressed and confounded by
his glory.

Thus much we may well know, that the Lord will come, that al flesh shall
appear before him: that the world, the heaven, the earth, the sun, and the
moon shall have an end: that the day of the Lord shall come suddenly, as a
Thief in the night. This warning GOD has given us, that we should not be
taken unawares, but that we repent, and stand in readiness, and watch, and
pray, that we may be caught up into the clouds to meet our redeemer.

V. 4. But you brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should come on
you, as it were a these.

5 Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day, we are not
of the night, neither of darkness.

6 Therefore let us not sleep as do other: but let us watch and be sober.

7 For they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be drunken, are
drunken in the night.

8 But let us, which are of the day, be sober, putting on the breaste-plate of
Faith and Love, and the hope of salvation for an helmet.

9 For God has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by the
means of our Lord Jesus Christ.

10 Which dyed for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live
together with him.

Your conversation is in heaven, from whence you look for the savior, even
the Lord Jesus Christ. Ye were once darkness, but now you are light in the
Lord, walk as children of light, approouing that which is pleasing to ye
Lord. That day shall be dreadful, and come suddenly upon the wicked: but to you
it shall not seem sudden, which fear the Lord, and put your trust in him,
and take al care to be in readiness at his coming. Arm your selves strongly:
the enemy seeks to overthrow you. Your enemy is the Devil with all his
force. Your strength stands not in your own prowes, or manhood, but in the
mighty power of God: put on therefore the breast plate of faith and love, he
that believes shall be saved, he that abides in love, abides in God, and
whosoever puts his trust in him, shall not be confounded.

Here I may take occasion to say somewhat of the troubles of war, how Satan
seeks by it to disquiet the Church of God. Who has not heard what force is
this day raised in this realm? who has not heard of it? but let it not
trouble you. God will turn al to his glory. I love not to speak of such things.
Yet somewhat I must speak thereof, the time enforces me.

This is the first disturbance and breach of that blessed peace in which God
has so long and so quietly preserved this realm since the time that her
Majesty came to the Crown. It gives great occasion to the enemy, to break
in upon us: it is the spoiling of our Country. The barbarous soldiers rush
into men's houses, and take out what they list. They draw their sword, bend
their force, join themselves to war against the Lord; and against his
anointed. They have ^orne and defaced, and burnt in fire the holy Bible, the
Gospel of our salvation: and would set up the loathsome service of the Mass.

What has the word of God offended? why should it be torn in pieces? why
should it be burnt? what word is in it, which is not the word of life? it is
the power of God unto salvation, to them that believe. And where should the
word of God have place, where should it be heard, but in the Church of God? O
cursed hands that so dispitefully rent it. Woe worth that unhappy fire that
burnt it.

As for the Mass, would God they that so much desire it, knew what it is.
Would God they knew how the people of God are mocked by it, and how the
precious blood of our savior Jesus Christ is blasphemed by it: would God they
knew how greeuoustie God is offended with them in this thing, wherein they
think, they please him so highly. But the Mass, and Gods word can not dwell
in one house together: the one is so contrary to the other.

God forgive it them, and lay it not to their charge. For they know not what
they do. They are drawn on to work the things which others have most wickedly
devised. There is no doubt, but God will confound their enterprise. For this is
his own cause, this quarrel is picked against his Church, and against the
knowledge and setting forth of his Gospel: and therefore against the setting
forth of his glory. Only let us lift up pure hands into heaven, and call for
help from above. Let us say unto him, Rise up for our succor, and redeem us
Psalm. 44.
for thy mercy sake. Let us say, They have cast Psalm. 74.
thy sanctuary into the fire, and rased it to the ground, and have destroyed
the dwelling place of thy name. Arise oh God, maintain thine own cause:
remember thy daily reproach by the foolish man. Let us say, save oh Lord,
Queen ELIZABETH, thy servant, establish that good thing which thou have
begun: open the eyes of al people, that they may see thy saving health, and
enjoy it through hearing thy Gospel, which thou have made known unto us: save
thy people, which trusts in thee, and break the cords of the wicked in
sunder. Let us comfort our selves with these words, that God has not
appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation, by the means of our Lord
Jesus Christ. He has overcome the world: let us be of good theere. And let
us walk as the children of light, let us walk honestly, as in the day. Then
whether we wake or sleep, whether we live or die, we shall live together with
him.

V. 11. Wherefore exhort one an other, and edify one another, even as ye do.

This is the bond of true love and Christian friendship, that every man be
careful of his brother as of himself: that every man ^hort, and teach the
things that are good, and rebuke others in il: that every man seek to bring
home the lost sheep, and to restore him to his master. Therefore Christ
says, If thy Matthew. 18.
brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his faults, between him and
thee alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother. For what know
thou, whether thou shall save thy brother? Brethren, says Saint James, If any
Iam. 5.
of you has erred from the truth, and some man has converted him, let him
know that he which has converted the sinner, from going aftray out of his
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

Therefore says the Apostle, Exhort one an other and edify one an other. Let
the father exhort his scnne, oh son, walk uprightly before God, live honestly
and virtuously in the sight of al men, do those things, that are good: thou
art the child of God, be holy in spirit, and holy in body, because he is
holy. Say to the adulterer, oh brother be not deceived. Whosoever is an
adulterer has no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God: God has
said of them that are such, they shall not enter into my rest. Say to the
swearer, oh take not ye name of God in vain, for GOD will not hold him
giltlesse that takes his name in vain. He that swears, and Eccle. 23.
names God continually shall not be faultlesse. A man that uses much swearing
shall be silled with wickedness, and the plague shall never go from his house,
nor from his cattle, nor from his corn, nor from his servants, nor from his
children, nor from himself. His house shall be full of plagues.

Say to the Usurer, oh hear the voice of the Lord, thus says the Lord, before
whom thon shall stand to give an account of those things which thou have done
in this life: Thou shall not give thy money to Usury. He that cares not for
these words, but does otherwise, shall not escape unpunished. Say to the rich
man: oh put not your trust in riches. Lay up your treasure in heaven: lay it up
in the bosom of the poor, and it shall make intercession for thee. Put thy
trust in the living God, which gives us abundantly all things to inioie. Thy
house, thy land, thy money, thy gold and silver shall not continue: thou
shall go the shall of all flesh, and thy riches shall not be able to deliver
thee in the day of wrath.

Say to the learned man, to the wise man, and to the man whom God has endued
with worldly power: what have thou, that thou have not received? be not high
minded. It is the gift of God. It is not thine. Thou shall give a reckoning of
all that thou have received. Abuse it not to the dishonor of God. It is of
charity that I speak unto thee. Thou art my brother, God has a care over
thee: it is his will, that one of us should exhort an other. Oh why should thy
life give offense to any man? why should ye name of God be il spoken of
through thee? He has made thee to be a vessel of honor, thou belongest to
his fold, why should thou be lost, and perish in thy wilfulness?

V. 12 Now we beseech you brethren, that ye know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

13 That ye have them in singular love, for their works sake: be at peace
among your selves. They which exhort you, and warn you, and are over you in
the Lord: they be sheepeheards, and husbandmen, and watchmen for you. They
feed the Lords flock, plough the Lords ground, and watch the tower of the
God of hosts. You are Gods sheep, ye must be fed, else you cannot live. You
are a field, you must be ploughed, else you will be ouergrowen with brambles,
and stand unfruitful, and lie waste. You are the Lords tower, you must be
watched, else the enemy will break in upon you, and so you should be
destroyed. They labor and travel in your behalf: they must give an account
for your souls: they are ambassadors sent from God: they come to tell you the
truth: they preach not themselves, but Christ Jesus: they speak to you in the
name of the Lord. Although you reckon them fools, unlearned, and simple, they
are the messengers of the great King: even of him that is Lord over all. Saint
Paul says: It pleased God (...). Cor. 11.
by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. The heavenly
treasure is brought to you, in poor, broken, earthie vessels. The vessels are
simple, but the treasure is heavenly. The messenger is weak, but his word is
the word of life, which can cast down every high thing that is exalted
against the glory of God. Whatsoever they ^eeme to you, they are the eyes of
the Church, and the mouth of God. Christ says unto them, whom he appoints
to this ministry, As my father sends me, so send I you. They Ioh. 20.
have the same commission be they never so poor. He that hears you, hears
me, and Luke. 10.
he that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me, says Christ.

Some there are, that thus say: O that I might hear Christ, or Peter, or
Paul, I would verily believe what they should preach. This is fondness, and
curious vanity. For whenever thou do hear the minister of GOD break
unto thee the word of life, and teaching thee the truth of the Gospel: thou
hear Paul and Peter, and Christ himself. If thou despisest the word of God
spoken unto thee by him, and the grace which God offers thee by him: thou
despisest Christ him self, and heapest up the heavy displeasure of God
against thee. God will give thee over into a reprobate mind: thou shall have
eyes, yet shall not see: thou shall have ears, yet shall not hear: thou shall
die in thy sin. It shall be easier for Sodom at that day, than for thee.
Therefore acknowledge them, give credit to their message, they watch, and take
pains for you.

What shall we say of them that labor not? that do neither teach, nor exhort,
nor reprove, nor correct: that have no care to do their message, and no
regard to the people? What may I say of such? God himself says, They are
dumb dogs, and can not bark: Esa. 56.
they lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping: they all look to their own
way: and to their own advantage, and every one for his own purpose. Christ
calls them thieves and robbers. They are unsavory salt, profitable for
nothing, but to be cast forth and trodden under feet of men. Woe is unto me,
says Paul, if I 1. Cor. 9.
preach not the gospel. Woe to the servant that wrappeth his talent in a napkin,
and increases not his masters gain. God grant such idle and slothful
ministers, grace to know their office, and to do it. If not, God give the
people grace to know them, and shun them, and to flee from them.

That ye have them in singular love, for their 1. Tim. 5.
works sake. He tells Timo^hie, The elders that rule well, are worthy of
double honor, specially they which labor in the word and doctrine. Reverence
them, and love them. Love them for your own sakes: you have life and comfort
by them. Honor them for their office sake. They are your fathers, they have
begotten you in Christ, they carry the keys of the kingdom of heaven. They
are the Stewards of Gods house, and the disposers of his mysteries. Honor them
and love them for Gods sake. He has sent them, and has put his word in their
mouth. He has said to them, go ye into all the world, preach the gospel unto
every nation. Go speak to the heart of Jerusalem, that they may feel the
weight of thy words, and repent. Love them therefore. For they love you in
Christ, and are ready to give their lives for your sake. The Galathians so
reverenced and loved Gal. 4.
Saint Paul, that he says, Ye received me as an Angel of God. For I bear
you record, that if it had been possible, you would have plucked out your
eyes, and have given them me.

Be at peace among your selves. You are the sons of God. God is the God of
peace. Discord, contention, and unquietness are fit for the children of
Satan. Live in godly unity, as becomes the children of peace.

V. 14. We desire you brethren, that ye admonish them that are unruly:
comfort the feeble minded: bear with the weak: be patient toward all men.

15. See that none recompense evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow
that which is good, both toward your selves, and toward al men.

There are some which walk among you inordinately: they break the bond of
peace, they sow divisions, and discord between the brethren: they draw
disciples after them: and disquiet the Church of God: they command that has
been forbidden by God, and forbid that God has commanded. Warn them that
are such, say unto them as did Saint Paul to the Corinthians, We have no such
custom, 1. Cor. 11.
neither has the Church of God. Woe to him by whom offense comes. Say unto
them as Iosuah said to Achan, In as much as thou Iosuah 7.
have troubled us, therefore God will trouble thee this day. After this sort
admonish them and lay open their wilfulness, and blasphemy before their
eyes, that they may see the blindness of their hearts, and in what sort
their life is disordered, and so repent, and be saved.

But what greater disorder can there be, than that of theirs, who have this
day assembled them selves in force and in armor? which have lifted up their
sword against their sovereign, and disturbed the peace of this realm, and
have misted the people, and sought ^o overthrow the Church of God? Let us
admonish them, if we may speak with any that are so ill disposed, and show
them the danger that hangs over their heads. Let us say to them, thou have
done wickedly in the sight of God: thou have resisted the ordinance of God,
because thou have resisted the power which he has ordained: thou have
stricken with the sword, therefore thou shall perish by the sword: thou have
disquieted the Israel of God, therefore God shall disquiet thee. Such rebels
are unruly. They rise up against their Prince, as did Dathan and Abiram against
Moses: they advance themselves against God, as did Lucifer, therefore shall
they be cast down alive into hetl.

Comfort the feeble minded, and those that be heavy in heart: which suffer
imprisonment, and live in poverty, and are grieved and cannot help themselves.
Say unto them, as Saint Iam. 1.
James, Blessed is the man, that end^reth temptation: for when he is tried, he
shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised them that love
him. Say unto them, as Saint 1. Pet. 2.
Peter: this is thank wo^hie, if a man for conscience toward god endure grief,
suffering wrongfully. Comfort them with the words of the Psalm. 126.
Prophet, They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Comfort them with the
words of Luke. 6.
Christ, Blessed are ye which weep now, for ye shall laugh.

See that none recompense evil for evil to any man. Though you suffer many
things at the hands of the wicked, yet you may not be followers of that evil,
which is in them. Avenge not your selves, but give place unto Romans 12.
wrath: for it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.
Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink.
Herein shall it appear if we love our neighbor as our self: if we patiently
abide injuries and seek to do good unto them that grieve and oppress us. I
say unto you, says Christ, love your enemies: bless them Mat. 5.
that curse you, do good to them that hate you: and pray for them that hurt
you, and persecute you. That you may be the children of your father that is in
heaven: for he makes his sun to arise upon the evil, and the good, and
sends rain on the just, and unjust.

V. 16. Rejoice evermore.

The joy of the wicked shall have an end. They rejoice in their goods, in
their wisdom, in their peace and worldly safety, and in the multitude of
their children, or descent of their petidegree. This joy is transitory, it
fades and abides not. The world passes (says Saint John) 1. John 2.
and the lust thereof. They rejoice in their wickedness, the Lute and the
Harp, Tabret and Pype, and wine are in their feasts, but they regard not the
work of the Lord: They eat up the people as it were bread: they do
whatsoever they can devise against the servants of God: but the later end of
their joy, shall be heaviness, as it is said, Woe be Luke 6.
unto you that laugh now, for you shall weep and lament.

But the joy of the righteous is everlasting. Their heart shall rejoice, and no
man shall take their joy from them. They comfort in this, that their names are
written in the book of life. They know the Lord is at hand, therefore they
are careful for nothing, but rejoice always in the Lord. S. Peter therefore
says: You are kept by the power of God through 1. Pet. 1.
faith unto salvation, which is prepared to be showed in the last time:
wherein ye rejoice, though now for a season (if need require) ye are in
heaviness, through manifold temptations. Again, Ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious, receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation
of your souls. This is the happiness, the joy, and the comfort, that the
godly have, and shall continue with them.

V. 17. Pray continually.

It is the part of a good Christian, and a wise man, to know himself: and to
know the nature of this flesh, which we bear about with us, which fights
always so mightily against the spirit: to know the waiwardenesse, and
^rokendnesse of our heart, and the weakness and vanity of our mind. Many
are so far from this, that they think all their ability is of themselves. I
have, says he, judgment, I have the light of reason, I have sense, I have
understanding, and counsel, and the ordering of mine own way. Thus say they
that neither know GOD nor themselves.

But we must humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and acknowledge
that we are nothing. We must confess with S. Paul, I know, that in me, that
is to say, in my flesh, Romans 7.
dwells no good. And again, It is not in him Romans 9.
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Our
savior says, That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: and Ioh. 3.
that that is borne of the spirit, is spirit. And God says, The imagination
of man's heart is evil, Genesis 8.
from his youth. He has made us, and not we our selves: he knows us, and not
we our sel^s. This is his saying, and his judgment of us. This we find true.
For our will is froward, and our understanding blind. Therefore says the
prophet O Lord, I know, (...). 10.
that the way of man is not in him self, neither is it in man to walk and
direct his steps. And Solomon, The steps of man are ruled Prou. 20.
by the Lord: how can a man then understand his own way? And the prophet
Jeremy, Behold Ier. 18.
as the claie is in the potters hand, so are you in my hand, O Israel. I mould
you, and form you to my glory.

When the Apostle puts the Corinthians in mind of that good success which
God gave unto his ministry among them, he says: Such 2. Cor. 3.
trust have we through Christ to GOD: not that we are sufficient of our selves
to think any thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. Christ
shows this to his disciples, I am the vine, you are the branches: he that
John. 15.
abides in me, and I in him, brings forth much fruit: for without me ye
can do nothing. To the Colossians says Paul, It is God Colo^. 2.
which works in you, both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure.
It is God that disposes our goings, and turns our hearts, as seems best to
him. He is able to make of the stones in the streets children unto Abraham, he
is able to take away our stony heart, and to give us a heart of flesh.

The consideration hereof leads us to seek help and comfort by prayer at
the hand of God. And then because we stand in continual need of Gods help,
either to give us something that is good, or to deliver us from that is evil,
the Apostle bids us pray continually. The ears of the Lord are open to the
prayers of the righteous. Therefore Christ says, Ask, Matthew. 7.
and it shall be given you: Seek, and ye shall find: knock and it shall be
opened unto you. God will give you your hearts desire. Let us therefore go
boldly to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.
that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

David prayed unto God, Open thou mine eyes, lighten my darkness: direct my
feet into the way of peace: incline my heart O Lord unto thy testimonies:
stablish O God that which thou have wrought in us: take not thy holy spirit
from us: be thou our helper in troubles, O forsake us not utterly. He found no
way to attain unto knowledge of the will of God, unless God would open his
understanding, and endue him with his spirit. Faith is the gift of God, or
else was the Apostles prayer in vain. Increase our Faith. Luke. 7.
Our Savior teaches us to pray in this manner, Hallowed be thy name, thy
kingdom come, thy will be done: because without the grace and mercy of God,
we can do nothing to the setting forth of his glory.

V. 18. In all things give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus toward you.

These three are the badges or cognizance of a christian soldier: to rejoice
in the mercy of God: to be fervent in prayer: and to give thanks to God in
all things. The heathens which have no part in the kingdom of Christ, are
thankful for their life, and liberty, and wealth, and glory, and worldly
prosperity. But Christians ought to be thankful in persecution, in thraldom,
in adversity, in shame, in misery, and in death it self. Who would think
that a Lion which by nature is fierce and cruel, should yield forth Honey? yet
Sampson Judges 14.
found Honey in the body of a Lion. Who would think it likely that a man
should be preserved in the belly of a fish? Jonas was swallowed up of a
Whale, and yet not hurt. Who would think that a man might be saned in the
midst of burning fire? yet ye three servants of God walked in the fire
safely, and came safe forth again. We know, says Romans 8.
the Apostle, that all things work together for the best, unto them that love
God. The Apostles rejoiced in their persecution that they were counted worthy
to suffer rebuke for Christ's sake. And Paul speaking of this perfection in
the godly, says, We rejoice under Romans 5.
the hope of the glory of God. And not so only, but also we rejoice in
tribulations.

Who has not heard of the patience of Job his heardes of Cattle were driven
away: his houses consumed with fire: his children slain: his body stricken
with a scurfe or manginesse: his wife loathed him, and his friends for sooke
him. What did Job in all these miseries? what thought he? or what spoke he?
let his patience in suffering, and his words of thanksgiving teach us how to
bear adversity, The Lord (says he) has given, and the Lord Job. 1.
has taken it: blessed be the name of the Lord: Again, Though he slay me,
yet will I Job. 13.
trust in him. Who is able to express the manly comfort of his heart? which
said, I will trust in him though he kill me. He is my God, I am his creature.
His will be done. I will always give him thanks, and praise his holy name. By
these we are learned to give thanks in poverty, in afflictions, in misery,
and in all things, though they are heavy and grievous unto us.

What are we then that are neither thankful for riches, nor for health, nor for
our pleasures, nor in the abundance of al things? yea, which abuse the good
gifts of GOD to dishonor God, who has given them unto us? the earth is the
Lords, and all that therein is: the world, and they that dwell therein. He opens
his hand, and fills al things living with his good blessing. Let us look up
into the heavens: there is God the Father of lights, from whom every good and
perfect gift comes: there is our redeemer Jesus Christ, in whom are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge-When we turn in our beds: when we
see our fare, and the furniture of our ^able: when we see our servants, and
children about us: when we see our money and houses, and lands: let us think
with our selves, how many good men, and faithful servants of God lack the same,
and have not received these blessings in such measure, as we. In all these
things God speaks to us, and says, I have given them thee, thou have them
at my hands: use them well, and be not unthankful.

If I would stand herein, and declare what rauses we have to give thanks unto
God, I should never make an end. There is no beast on the ground, no fish in
the Sea, no bird in the air, no star in the heavens, no leaf of the tree,
no corn of the field, no sand on the shore, no drop of water, no sparckle
of fire: but GOD has created them all for the sons of men. So much are we
bound always to give thanks to God, and to say as the Prophet, O Lord, our
Lord, Psalm. 8.
how excellent is thy name in all the world? Let us confess before the Lord
his loving kindness, and his woonderful works before the sons of men.

But who is able to render thanks sufficient to God, for that he gives us ye
knowledge of his Gospel, and makes us know the secrets of his will? this is a
great blessing, and far above all the other comforts of this life. They that
have not this, are in darkness, and in the shadow of death. To be short:
even in death, we have to praise God: we must say, I thank thee O God, for
thou have delivered him from the bodyof this death, thou have translated him
unto thy self, that so he may remain with thee in thy glory. Thus whither
soever ye turn, what state or part of life or death soever ye consider:
whether it be trouble or peace: things present, or things to come: heaven or
earth: life or death: you shall always find causes to be thankful.

V. 19. Quench not the spirit.

He means by the spirit, the gifts and graces of the spirit. The spirit
of God is the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit of truth. No man, says S.
Paul, can say that Jesus is the 1. Cor. 12. Romans 8.
Lord, but by the holy Ghost. Again, The spirit helps our infirmities: and
again, The Ibid.
same spirit bears witness, with our spirit, that we are the children of
God. It is he that leads us into all truth, that opens our hearts to
understanding, and guides our feet into the way of peace. O says he,
despise not the wisdom of the spirit: refuse not his help, but seek it that
you may be strengthened: comfort your selves in his testimony of your
adoption: quench not the light, he has kindled in your hearts: disdain not
his leading: abuse not his mercy: abuse not the time of your visitation: let
not so great mercy of God be bestowed on you in vain: fulfill not your own
wills, abstain from fleshly lusts: walk in the spirit: desire the best
gifts, and let every 1. Pe^.
man, as he has received the gift, so minister the same to another, as good
disposers of the manifold grace of God.

V. 20 Despise not prophesying.

Prophecy, is the preaching, and expounding of the word of God: and he is
called a Prophet and does prophecy, that opens unto us the will of God. This
is not meant of fond, and vain, and lying prophecies, as were those of Merline,
and such like which tell you tales of lions, and bears, and goats, of the
sun, of the moon, and many strange devises. Such prophecies must be
despised: they are works of darkness: and forged by the Devil to make
vproares, and to beguile the people.

But, despise not prophesying. That is, despise not to hear the word of GOD:
turns not away thine ear from understanding. God gives power to his word,
that it may work according to his good pleasure. It will let thee see the
weakness of thine error, and settle thee in the way wherein thou should
walk. If it had been dangerous for the people to hear the preaching of the
Gospel, he would not have sent his Apostles into all the world. If Lidia
should not have liked to hear Paul prophecy, how might she have known
GOD? If those great numbers, which heard Peter, and were connerted, had
despised prophesying, and would not have heard him open the G^pell unto them,
they had never considered the great mercy of GOD, nor sought to be instructed
in their salvation. Faith comes by hearing. This has been the means by
which Christ has given knowledge to Kings, and Princes, and al nations. It
has pleased God, says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 1.
by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Despise not then
to come to the Church of God, to pray in the congregation of the faithful, to
hear the Scriptures of God read and erpounded, it is the blessing of God
offered unto thee. Where there is no prophecy, the people perishes. He that
despises it, shall be despised of the Lord: he shall be cast into darkness,
because he would not delight in the light.

V. 21 Try al things and keep that which is good.

Try al things. God has given you the spirit of discretion, and of
judgment. Be wise, and know what is that good and acceptable will of God. He
not deceived with words of man's wisdom. Let not the baseness or simplicity
of any, cause you to refuse the message which he brings: and carry not your
selves to liking of all that whatsoever shall be told you of such as bear great
show and countenance. This was it that deceived the people of GOD, they gave
ear to false teachers, which lead them to worship the works of their own
hands. Therefore, they said unto the stone, thou art our father, thou have
delivered us: they sell down before it, worshipped it, believed in it: they
slew the Prophets of God, and stoned to death such as were sent unto them.

The Scribes and Pharisees seemed so grane and wise, that the people thought
nothing good but what they allowed. They were altogether appliable to believe,
to do, to speak, and to think, whatsoever the Pharisees willed them. Christ
says unto them, Beware of Mat. 7.
false Prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening wolves. S. John therefore says, Dearly beloved, 1. John 4.
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: for
many false prophets are gone out into the world. And further directs us,
how we should try them, hereby shall ye know the spirit of God: every spirit
that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God. Again,
hereby may you try them, Whosoever transgresses, and abides 2. Ioh.
not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God. He that continues in the
doctrine of Christ, he has both the father and the son. If there come any
unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him
God speed. Hereby S. Paul required the Galathians to try between him, and
the false Apostles. If any man preach unto you otherwise Galat. 1.
than that ye have received, let him be accursed. For now do I preach man's
doctrine or Gods? the Saduces erred touching the resurrection, because they
searched not the scriptures. God teaches us by the prophet Esaias, to make
trial of teachers and doctrines. When Esai. 8.
they shall say unto you, enquire of them that have a spirit of divination,
and at the soothsaiers, which whisper and murmur, should not a people enquire
at their God? from the living to the dead? to the law, and to the testimony,
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. Paul puts Timothy in mind wherefore he left him at Ephesus, 1. Tim.
1.
to command some, that they teach none other doctrine: And to warn both the
teachers and the hearers, that they give no heed to fables and genealogies,
which are endless, which breed questions, rather than godly edifying, which
is by faith. Thus are the people of God called to try the truth, to judge
between good and il, between light and darkness. God has made them the
promise of his spirit, and has left unto them his word. They of Berea, when
they heard the preaching of Paul, searched the scriptures daily, whether
those things were so, as he taught them, and many of them believed. So do you:
give heed to instruction, and yet receive not al things, without proof and
trial, that they are not contrary to the wholesome doctrine of the word of God.

Keep that which is good.

When you have tried, and found out the truth, be constant and settled in it. A
wavering minded man is unstable in all his ways. Follow the truth, and be not
carried about with every wind of doctrine. The devil will come in the name of
God, and change himself into an Angel of light. Let him not take the love of
the truth from you: let him not remove you from faith and a good conscience:
return not like swine unto your mire. God has purged your hearts, and made
them clean. Except they be preserved and kept occupied, the unclean spirit
will return, and enter in, and dwell in you: so the last state of you shall be
worse than the first.

We have great cause to harken diligently to the Apostle, to keep that is
good. We see this day great confusion in all places. Satan would feign
entangle us again with the error of the wicked, and seeks to draw us from
our steadfastness. Now is the time wherein God makes some trial of his
servants: now iniquity seeks to have the upper hand. They seduce the
people, and say, here is Christ, there is Christ: here is the Church, there is
the Church. God give us his holy spirit to guide us in judgment, that we
may discern the truth from falshoode, and know the blessed and gracious will
of GOD: that we may walk in his ways, and serve him in reverence and fear
all the days of our life.

In this world, as there is a Jacob, so is there an Esau: as there are many
that love Christ with an unfeigned heart, so are there many that serve
Antichrist: and as there be many true professors of the truth of God, so are
there many despisers of the same. This we may see here at home within this
realm. We may see it, and mourn and lament for it in our hearts.

Their practices are opened: they have broken out into open rebellion, to the
breach of the peace both of GOD and man. They say with their lips, GOD save
Queen Elizabeth: yet they hold up their sword against her. Alas, what has
she deserved at their hands? she has always dealt mercifully, without
cruelty, without shedding of blood. God preserve her that she may long reign
over us, and bring al her enemies to confusion.

What pretense make they for this their doing, that hereby they seek to have
religion reformed? Thanks be to GOD: religion is reformed far better than
our fathers knew it these many hundred years. If those which lived before us,
might have seen and heard as we see and hear, they would have reioiced, and
thought themselves happy.

But they would have the Mass. What find they or see they in it, wherefore they
should so desire it? Try things says Paul. Therefore examine and try the
mass. What do we learn by it? what doctrine, what godliness in life, what
comfort for salvation? It is a dumb and deadly service. The people are forced
to be at it, it is the very kay of their religion: the people are bound to be
present at mass: yet they neither receive any thing, nor eat, nor hear, nor
understand any thing. You are wise, you have reason, you are the children of
GOD: be you judges herein, and judge uprightly, for it is Gods cause. Will they
call this the Lords supper? Is this the sacrament of our redemption? Is this
that which Paul received of the Lord, and delivered unto the Church? Is this
the showing forth of the Lords death until he come?

They would have the Popes authority restored. What is the Pope? they say
he is the successor of Peter. What does the Pope as Peter did? or what did
Peter as the Pope does? He is a mortal man. And cursed are they of God, that
put their trust in man. He feeds not the flock, he teaches not the simple,
he strengthens not the weak: I will say no more. GOD make him a servant of
Christ, and a faithful disposer of the mysteries of God.

They are offended at the marriage of the ministers of the Church. Yet Gratian
their great master says, Copula sacerdotalis, nec legali, 26. Quae. 2. Sors.
nec Euangelica, nec Apostolica authoritate prohibetur. The marriage of
Priests is not forbidden by any authority, either of the law, or of the
Gospel, or of the Apostles. The holy fathers that lived in the Apostles time,
and shortly after, report that Peter, and all the other Apostles excepting only
John, were married, and had wives: the Prophet Esaias was married, and yet he saw
the Lord sitting upon an high throne. Moses was married, and yet saw God face
to face. Will they reform the Prophets, and the Apostles? Will they account
that to be unholy, which the Apostle calls honorable in all men? Ignatius the
scholar of Saint Ignat. ad Philadelphienses.
John said, I wish to be found meet for God, as was Peter and Paul, and the
other Apostles that were married.

They paint their banner with the Cross, and five wounds. Why bring they
those arms against us? Do not we believe the cross of Christ? do not we
rejoice and comfort our hearts by the remembrance of his wounds? do not
we read, and she we forth to the people the story of his passion? GOD
knows it, and you can bear us witness, and they can not deny it, that we
make this work of our redemption, wrought by the passion of our savior
Christ, the chief and principal rock and foundation of our faith. Therefore
say we with the Apostle, GOD forbid that we should rejoice in any thing,
but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Nay rather, they are become our
enemies because we believe in Jesus Christ crucified. Because we say, as Gods
word teaches, that Jesus Christ is the only advocate to the Father for our
sins: and that he has with one offering consecrated Heb. 10.
for ever them that are sanctified: and that the blood of Jesus Christ his
son cleanses us 1. John. 1.
from al sin. For this cause are they become our enemies.

Let us nothing fear their treacheries and attemptes: let us keep that is
good: and hold it fast until death. Now we have tasted the word of God, and
have received the comfort of the Gospel, let us not despise it, nor be weary
of it. Let us pray unto God, that he establish the love of his truth in us:
and that he will open the eyes of their hearts, and bring them to be partakers
of those mercies which yet through ignoran^ce, they have despised.

V. 22. Abstain from al appearaunce of evil.

Keep your selves not only from doing those things which are evil: but also
from al appearaunce of evil. Offend not the conscience of thy brother: that he
may have no occasion to think evil of thee. Commit not adultery, and
withdraw thy self from the company, of such unthrifty, and light, and
suspected persons. Be not like to them that are such. Lay not out thy money
to Usurie, nor do any thing, whereby others may think so of thee. Beware of
uncharitable conueya^ce of thy money. Be not Idolaters. And leave off to do
any thing that may bring you into suspicion of Idolatry. Give not that
honor unto any creature, which is proper to GOD. Have no felloweshippe with
their works, bear no appearaunce of liking their evil. Go not as they go:
live not as they live. Saint Paul repr^ueth the Galathians. Ye Gala. 4.
observe days and months, and times, and year. I am in fear of you, least
I have bestowed on you labor in vain. So does he the Colossians also. If
ye be Col. 2.
dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why as though ye lived
in the world are ye burdened with traditions? as touch not, taste not, handle
not. So do the Idolaters: you should not be like unto them. They are the
children of darkness, you are the sons of light. They will not be like unto
you, and forsake their false Gods. Why should you become like unto them, and
forsake the God that made the heavens, and the earth? You can not make them
ashamed of their errors, and embrace the truth. Why then should you betray the
truth, and be partakers with them in error?

The Christians in old time began to wear Garlandes made of Bay. What harm
might be in that? What is a Garlande but a furniture for the head? What is
Bay, but a little tree, or bush? Yet the Fathers that lived with them to teach
them, said it was not lawful: not for ye the thing it self was il of it self,
but for that they would not seem to follow Idolaters. It had some appearance
of evil. It was a ceremony, and solemn fashion among the heathen: they
would not be imboldened: and it would offend the hearts of many of the
faithful, to see Christians follow the fashion of the Heathen.

When king Antiochus sent unto Jerusalem, and to the Cities of Judah, that they
should Machab. 1.
follow the strange laws of the Country: many chose rather to die, than to
be defiled with unclean things, and to break the holy covenant, which God
had given them.

Darius made a decree, whosoever should Daniel. 6.
ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of the King, he
should be cast into the den of Lions. Daniel would not be kept so long from
the service of God. He would not dissemble: he would not hide his zeal: nor
show any appearaunce of it. He prayed and praised God, as he did before, and
opened his chamber windows, that it might be seen.

Policarpus might have saved his life, if he would have dissembled. He would
not, he could not. He saw it would have been an appearaunce of evil, and a
discourage unto the brethren: therefore spoke boldly, Christianus Eusebius. lib.
4. cap. 15.
sum, I am a Christian. And being required to speak il of Christ, said,
Octoginta and sex annos seruio ei, and nihil me laesit vnqua^, quomodo possum
maledicere ei, and blasphemare regem meum, qui salutem mihi dedit? I have
served Christ these fourscore and six years, and he did never any thing
hurt me, how may I speak il, and blaspheme my king, which has given me
salvation? This is my faith, Christ is my God: this is my religion: I am not
ashamed to suffer death, rather than I will deny him, who suffered death in his
own body to sau^ me.

It is good says S. Paul, neither to eat flesh, Romans 14.
nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or is made weak. Again he says, Now when ye sin so against 1. Cor.
8.
the brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye offend against Christ.
Wherefore if meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, least I should offend my brother. He that has once made a
shipwreck, stands watchful ever after not only to escape that rock, or
sand, whereat he had lost before, but al other the like rocks, and sands
whatsoever.

Therefore, Abstain from al appearaunce of evil, be not like the wicked of
this world. You are the salt of the earth. You should not be parteners of
their corruption, but powder and season them. You are the light of the world:
you may not be parteners of their darkness, but lighten and guide them.
Dissemble not. Serve God in the simplicity of your heart, and in the sight of
all the world. Let it be written in your forehead what you think in your heart.
Why should any man be ashamed of Gods truth?

V. 23. Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout: and I pray God,
that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Our God is the God of peace. He gives peace and quiet to his Church. He does
mussel the Lion, amaze the tyrant, make blunt the sword, and quench the fire
prepared against his servants. He gives his sons peace and quietness,
among themselves. He abhors discord and malice between brethren. God is
love, says Saint John, And he that dwells in 1. John 4. 1. John 3.
love, dwells in God, and God in him. He that loves not his brother, abides
in death. God has made us al members of one body. There is no respect of
persons with him, no difference of learned and unlearned, wise or foolish, rich
or poor. His will is that we al should be as one, of one mind, and that we
should al think one thing, and speak one thing: that we should be one fold
under one shepherd, and with one month glorify the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. For this peace Christ prayed, sanctify them through thy truth. Bless
them, take away al ^itternesse, and swelling from among them. Make them
Citizens of thy heavenly Jerusalem, that they may live in peace, and love one
an other, and delight one in other. That John 17.
they al may be one, as thou, o father, art one in me, and I in thee.

God is the God, and giver of peace. Whence then comes division and
dissension of minds? What is the cause that the whole world is so shaken with
sects and troubles? Al are not the children of peace. Christ himself ye lamb
of God, in whose mouth there was no guile, came into his own, and his own
received him not. Cain is always against Abel. Esau will never love Jacob. The
darkness and the light can never agree. This is the cause of al unquietness
and trouble. These things, Job. 16.
says Christ to his Disciples, have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might
have peace: in the world you shall have affliction. The wicked shall not only
hate, but betraie, and cause them to die, which prosesse the name of Christ.
Whosoever kills you, will Ibid.
think he does God service. And these things will they do unto you, because
ye have not known the Father, nor me. The setting forth of the Gospel of
Christ, is that which the world can not abide. It reuealeth things that were
hidden, it discloseth the covetousness of those, who kept the people in
ignorance, to make gain and marchaundise of their souls: it overthrows
mighty buildinges and holds of Merits, of pardons, of Masses, of Purgatory,
which by the policy, and wisdom, and power of this world were exalted
against God. This is the only cause of all this strife and trouble.

We have need of peace, of the peace of conscience within our selves: of
peace, from the rage and fury of the world: and of peace and love among those
that are of Gods honsholde. Let us seek peace at the hands of God, and he will
stablish us in the peace of his gospel, and so give us the rest and peace of
our souls.

Sanctify you throughout. The God of peace, bless you, and keep you vnoer the
shadow of his wings, that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Here mark, that the
Apostle divides man into three parts, The spirit, the soul, and the body.
So that he seems to make the spirit one thing, and the soul an other. How
is it then that we divide man into two parts, the soul and the body, and say
that he does stand but of two parts? There is no difference, the matter is al
one. For Paul divides the soul into two parts. The first is reason and
understanding, which he calls the Spirit. The other is, will and affection,
which he calls the Soul. For as God has given us reason to see what is
good: so has he given us will to seek after that which is good. Reason has
eyes: Will is blind, and cannot see the way. Therefore will must be led and
guided by Reason. Reason must go before. Will must follow after. Therefore Reason
is compared to the husband, and Will to the wife. If Will take in hand to rule
Reason it is no less disorder, than if the wife will adventure or take upon
her to rule her husband. Therefore in this place Reason, which is the principal
part of our soul is called, the Spirit, and Will which is the other part, is
called the Soul. So the spirit is not a several substance, but the soul and
the spirit are one soul, even as the body and the flesh are one body. Thus
therefore Paul prays for the Church, the God of peace sanctify you
throughout, that your spirit, your reason, and understanding: your soul, your
will, and affection: your body and your flesh, may altogether be pure and
holy: that they may be found innocent and upright in the day of the Lord.

V. 24. Faithful is he which calls you, which will also do it.

He has begun a good work in you, he will finish it. He will lead you
from virtue to virtue, from strength to strength, from glory to glory. He
has called you, he will also keep you faithful until the day of the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. You are Christ's sheep. No man shall take you
out of his bands. He has not lost one of al them, whom his father had given
him. He knows his sheep. None shall be confounded that put their trust in him.
There is no condemnation to them that be in Christ Jesus. He is faithful, he
will perform this unto you, not for your merits, but for his own name, and
for his mercy sake. Because he is faithful, he will not despise the work of
his own hands.

V. 25. Brethren, pray for me.

I wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with the prince and power of
darkness. My enemies are strong, they are the enemies of the cross of
Christ, I am weak, and of no resistance. Our sufficiency is of him. Without
him we can do nothing. Pray for me, that he will put his word into my mouth,
that I may be a vessel of his glory to preach forth the glad tidings of his
Gospel: that I may be a faithful minister of the new Testament: that I may
disclose the mystery of our redemption: that his holy spirit will assist me,
and make my travels fruitful.

V. 26. Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.

27 I charge you in the Lord, that this Epistle be read unto all the brethren,
the Saints.

Salute one another in token of true and unfeigned love. And withholde not this
Epistle from any of the brethren. It is written for their sakes. Let them
hear it, that they may take comfort by it. How agrees Paul in this charge
with them, that in no case would have the people read the Scriptures? That
say, Ignorance is the mother of devotion. It is the word of God the father:
why should not the people of God understand it? It is the water, that springs
out to everlasting life: why should the people of God be driven away, and not
suffered to drink thereof? It is the light of the world: why should the
people be hoodwinckt, and kept that they should not look up and see it? Why
should they sit and perish in the darkness of death? It is the will of God,
that all the people should know him, from the least to the greatest among them.
Saint Paul says, Whatsoever things are written aforetime, Romans 15.
are written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. Christ says, This is John 17.
life eternal, to know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ. Let us not forget these words of Paul. I charge you in the Lord,
by his death, by his cross, by his blood, by the day of his appearance, that
this epistle be read to the learned, and unlearned, to the wise and simple: to
the Masters and to the servants: to al our brethren, to all the sons of God.

V. 28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

God open your eyes, that you may behold the way of righteousness, and
direct you, that you may walk in it. Through his grace you have received the
word, and it has been fruitful in you: and by the same grace, you shall
continue in it ever. His grace, and blessing, and mercy be with you al.

AMEN.
FINIS.
The Second Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul to the Thessalonians.
CHAP. I.
Paul, and Syluanus, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the Thessalonians which
is in God our father, and in our Lord Jesus Christ.
IN the former Epistle, he wrote somewhat touching the latter day and the
coming of our Lord to judgment, and said, that that day shall come as a
thief in the night: and therefore arborted them to watch, and pray, and to
prepare themselves to be in a readiness. The false Apostles did fondly and
maliciously mistake his words: and devised means thereby to disquiet the
minds of the faithful, and to trouble the Church of God. Thus could the
Prince of darkness, the old Serpent, and deceiving spirit, turn the truth
of God into occasion of slander. In the mean while the Apostle was far off
from them at Athens. But when he heard of their case, he sent unto them this
other Epistle, wherein he declares more plainly that matter which before
seemed doubtful, and seeks to satisfy their hearts, and to remove them
from that error, which they had conceived.

In discourse hereof, he takes occasion to speak of Antichrist, of whom we
hear much, and have had warning often. He tells us, that he shall come in
working of signs, and wonders: that he is the man of sin which shall thrust
himself into the place of Christ. He shows who is Antichrist, and how we
may know him, what things he shall do, what credit he shall have in the
world: and by what power he shall be overthrown and confounded. After this
he speaks of idleness, and of bodily labor, and requires every man to
live in the sweat of their brows, and in painful travel, as God has
ordained. Other comfortable, and necessary doctrine is del^uered in this
epistle, as will appear. The whole matter of the epistle is so fit for these
days in which we live, as if it were purposely written for us. For we live in
the later age of the world: and it cannot be but the end of al things is at
hand, and that the glorious appearing of our Lord shall b^ shortly.

Paul, and Syluanus, and Timotheus. This Epistle was sent, not only from
Paul, but also from Timothy, and Syluanus. These three were al guided by one
^pirite, and had al one like care for the Church of GOD. Therefore he writes
thus, Paul, and Syluanus, and Timotheus, the servants of God, chosen from
our mothers womb, and appointed to publishe the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to
carry his name before Kings, and Princes: and especially, I Paul, which am
your father, and hau^ begotten you in Christ: which was sometimes a blasphemer,
and did persecute the faithful: whom it pleased GOD to make a chosen vessel for
himself: which am also hated of my brethren and kinsmen after the flesh for
the Gospels sake: and which am ready to give my life for your behalf.

Unto the Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God our father etc. You are
(says he) the beloved of God, you are his people, and he has assured his
mercy unto you: you have the promise, and the earnest of the life to come.
Here let us mark the state of that country, as it was then, and compare it
with it self as it is now. Then it was the church of God: for otherwise S.
Paul would not so have called it, according to the grace of God given unto him
he laid the foundation, he planted and watered their hearts, and God gave the
increase. So that they received the word in much a^tion: and the word of the
Gospel sounded from them not only in Macedonia, and Achaia, but their faith
toward God was spread also abroad in all quarters. In such sort were they a
Vessel sanoified unto honor, full of blessing, and full of the mercy, and grace
of God.

But what is become of that country? In what case stands the church of
Thessalonica at this day? It is now the Sinagogue of Satan, under the tyranny
of the Turk, and such as are enemies of the cross of Christ. Such a change
has the right hand of the Lord wrought in that place, which has sometimes
been his holy Tabernacle. I thought good to mark this, that we might
understand how vain a thing it is, to put confidence in cities or churches, or
in ye names of our fathers.

The Church of Thessalonica, whose foundation was surely built by S. Paul
himself, for which he was so careful, unto which he wrate special letters to
commend their increase in godliness, and their steadfastness in the Gospel,
is forsaken, and laid wast. If the work which the spirit of God wrought by
the Apostle, be decayed, whose work may we think shall stand? Jeremy spoke
unto the people of the Jews, saying, Trust not in lying words, Ierem. 7.
saying, the Temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, this is the temple of
the Lord. That temple GOD himself commanded to be built, the form and
fashion thereof God himself devised, and appointed, therein he placed his
Tabernacle, and set up his mercy seat, therein he showed forth his
majesty, and the glory of his countenance. Yet, all this notwithstanding, God
said by the prophet, trust not in these words, they be lying words, and will
deceive you.

As the Prophet spoke of the temple at Jerusalem so may it be said of any
other church throughout the world. So may it be said of the Church of Rome.
We may say, trust not in lying words, saying, the church of Rome, the Church
of Rome. Say not thus with your selves, the Church of Rome is built upon a
rock so surely that it can not be moved, or that no wind can shake it: say
not, the faith of that Church can never fail. These be lying words, trust not
in them, for Christ never spoke any such thing of ye church of Rome. It never
had promise of more special privilege, than was given to the Church at
Thessalonica. Read the Scriptures, behold the words of our Savior, and
consider them, yen shall find no speech made of the Church of Rome, nor any
promise, nor piece of promise, wherein he binds himself more to ye church of
Rome, than he has done to other churches, or to this of Thessalonica.

Thessalonica was beautiful in the sight of God, the Lord of hosts had
pitched his tents round about her, the name of the most bolie was placed in
the midst of her, she enjoyed like spiritual peace and prosperity, as did
the Jerusalem of the almighty: she was as a City fenced within it self: but
the Lord has taken away the light of his countenance from her, she has
forsaken the ways of righteousness, she has left off to serve the Lord, and
is become the place which the Lord has forsaken: there is scarce any remnant
left there of those which call upon the name of our salvation, and love the
Lord Jesus with an unfeigned heart. This is the Lords doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes. And is his hand shortened, that he cannot, or is his
zeal abated that he will not, in like severity deal with such as forsake him?
If he spared not the natural branches, if Jerusalem were overthrown because
of her iniquities, it cannot be that he will spare other places, that do the
like, but that they shall also be cut off. This is it that our Savior has
said in the Gospel by S. Mathewe, Therefore say I unto you, the kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a nation, which shall bring
forth the fruits thereof. Such terrible, and dreadful examples has God laid
before our eyes, to keep us in his fear, and in a^e of his judgments.

V. 2. Grace be with you, and peace, from GOD our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.

This is the salutation of Paul, in all his Epistles: to say, I wish that the
blessing, and fanour, and love of God may light upon you. But for the better
consideration hereof, and that we may know how earnestly we ought to pray unto
God for this grace and peace, which the Apostle wishes to the Churches: let us
look into our selves, and see how miserable we are, if we be left void of
this grace, and if God take his holy spirit away from us. By nature what are
we other, than the bond slaves of sin? We are not able to lift up our eyes
into heaven, nor to believe in GOD, nor to praise him, nor to call upon his
name. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves. Unless he open our lips, we cannot show forth his praise:
Unless he heal our deafness, we cannot give care to his word: Unless he
give us understanding hearts, we cannot take ^owledge of his will.
Destruction, and unhappiness, says the Prophet David, are in Psalm. 14.
their ways, and the way of peace have they not known there is no fear of
God before their eyes, speaking of such as had not received the favor and
grace of God to guide and direct them. And by the Prophet Malachie God utters
his displeasure against them, saying, I have no pleasure in you, says the
Malac. 1.
Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hands.

Therefore the Apostle prays, that they may receive such measure of Gods
grace, as may quench in them the fiery darts of the wicked, and enhable them
to hold fast that worthy thing, that is committed unto them, and may keep
them holic and undefiled, against the glorious coming of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

V. 3. We ought to thank God always for you, brethren as it is meet,
because that your faith grows exceedingly, and the love of every one of you
toward another abounds.

4. So that we our selves rejoice of you in the church of God, because of your
patience, and faith in all your persecutions, and tribulations, that ye suffer.

God has wrought this good work of faith, and love, and patience in your
hearts: he will make it prosper, and increase. It is he which has put this fire
in you, and he will make it burn. He has laid his leauine in the dough or
meal of your heart, and will make it heavy, and work, until al be leauined.
He will make you abound more and more, and will bring to a good end the thing
he has begone.

Your faith grows exceedingly. This is the will of God, that we ware and
increase in all holiness. Hereby we know, whether we be of God or no. We may
not stand at a stay, but must be renewed. One says, in via virtutis qui no^
proficit, deficit. Whosoever mendeth not him self in the practice of virtue, he
grows worse. God has placed us in a race to run: we must so run that we may
attain the price. We are graffes of ye Lords planting, we must grow to the
heigh and breadth of a tree, and bring forth fruit. We are pilgrims and
strangers, and pass by the wilderness of this world, into our heavenly
resting place: we may not stay by the way, but must remove our tents, and
continually march on forward, until that day come, when we shall enter into
the land of promise.

So that we our selves rejoice of you in the Church of God, etc. Your faith is
not only true, and pure, but settled, and constant. For you continued steadfast
in the midst of persecution: you have been tormented, and iuffred
afflictions in your body, by the hands of tyrauntes: yet could they never
remove you, from your faith in our savior Jesus Christ, nor from your
obedience to the will of God. You know, that al which will live godly in I. Tim.
3.
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Yet are you comforted, and say as the
prophet David, The Lord is with me, therefore I will not fear, Psa. 118.
what man can do unto me. You cannot forget who it is that said, Whosoever
shall confess Matthew. 10.
me before men, him will I confess also before my father which is in heaven.
But whosoever shall deny me, I will also deny him before my father which is in
heaven. He that loses his life for my sake, shall find it. He that endures
unto the end, he shall be saved. And ^gnien, Blessed shall ye be, when men
reuite you, Mat. 5.
and persecute you, and say al manner of evil against you, for my sake,
falsely. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For so
persecuted they the Prophets, which were before you.

V. 5 Which is a manifest token of the righ^eous judgment of God, that ye may
be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for the which ye also suffer.

6 For it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation, to them
that trouble you.

7 And to you, which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels,

8 In flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them, that do not know, and which
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9 Which shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.

10 When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made marvelous
in all them that believe, because our testimony toward you was believed in
that day.

Many are the troubles which the righteous men do suffer, but the Lord will
deliver them. After-Paul and Barnaba^ had preached the gla^ tidings of the
gospel, they confirmed the di^ples hearts, and exhorted them to con^inue in
Act. 14.
the faith, and said, that we must through many afflictions enter into the
kingdom of God. We must not therefore be afraid for any terror of them which
trouble us for righteousness sake: but rather looking over, and beyond them, we
must rejoice, and give thanks to God, who has made us worthy not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake, For we (...) Cor. 5.
know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a
building given of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens. These persecutions and tribulations, which you suffer, are a manifest
token (says the Apostle) of Gods love toward Heb. 12.
you. For, whom the Lord loves, he chastneth: and he scourges every son that
he receives. The Prophets, and Apostles, and Martires, which were not only
reviled and scourged, but beheaded, cut in pieces, drowned in the waters,
consumed in the the fire, or by any other de^ises of tyrants, cruelly put to
death, did by this way receive the manifest token of their happy and blessed
estate, and by this way did enter into the kingdom of God. Athanasius an
ancient father teck^neth the suffering of persecution, to be a special note of
a Christian m^ saying: Cad^ Christianoru^ proprium est: c^dere au^ Athanas. ad
solitariam vitarn agentes.
christionos, Pilati and Caiphae officia sunt. It is the part of Christians to
be persecuted: but to persecute the Christians, it is the very office of
Pilate and Ca^aphas.

The Lord is not unjust, but al his works are righteousness and truth. Their
little and short tribulation in this life prepares an eternal, and exceeding
weight of glory unto his servants. Though they sow in tears, they shall reap
in io^e. They shall be taken up into heaven, and shall see God face to face, and
shall be crowned with glory and honor. As for the ungodly, it is not so with
them, they may flourish for a time, and have great power and authority in this
world, but the lamb shall overcome them, and their and shall be according to
their works. David says, Upon the ungodly, he shall rain Psalm. 11.
snares, fire, and brimstone, storm and tempest: this shall be their portion to
drink.

When the Lord Jesus shall show him self from heaven. There are many which
are ashamed of Christ, and of his word, in the presence of such as are enemies
to the Cross of Christ, and have countenance and authority in this world.
But a time shall come, when Christ will show himself from heaven accompanied
with his holy Angels. Then will ^e also be ashamed of them, and put them from
his presence: then will he render bengeaunc^ to them that have hated his
truth: they shall then know whose members they have killed, and whose word and
gospel it was, which they so despitefully reproched. Then the s^ake of their
torments shall ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest day, nor night. In
this manner shall God triumph in victory over the wicked, by judging them to
everlasting destruction: and will show himself wonderful in giving rest, and
joy, and glory, and everlasting blessedness to all those which love his
truth, and believe in him.

V. 11 Wherefore we also pray always for you, that our God may make you
worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and
the work of faith with power.

12 That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and you in
him, according to the grace of our God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

God bless that good thing which he has begun in you, and keep you steadfast
in the truth, that you look not back now, after you have put your hand to
the plough, and that you give no place to their dangerous and subtle
persuasions, who persecute you: take heed to your selves, and beware, that you
put not the word of God from you. He has showed you his goodness and mercy,
in that he has delivered you from the power of darkness, and has tran^ you
into the kingdom of his dear son. I make my prayer to God without ceasing,
for you always, that he will make you worthy of this ^eauenly calling, and
that he will ever more and more fill you with the riches and abun^nce of his
goodness and mercy: that through him you may be made perfect in all good works.

CHAP. 2.
Now I beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by
our assembling unto him:

2 That ye be not suddenly moved from your mind, nor troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as it were from us, as though the day of
Christ were at hand.


YOu are the children of those fathers, which have fallen from their
steadfastness, and have been led into error: beware least you also be carried
away with every blast of false ^rine. The Devil is subtle, his baits are
pleasant, you are weak and simple, he will soon deceive you. Here let us
consider how easily man may be deceived, that so we mai^ know the corruption
and weakness of our nature, and therefore what cause we have ever to walk
warily, to take heed to our steps, and to pray unto GOD that he ^line our
hearts unto his testimonies. When I say, man may be deceived: I mean not
baies or children, or fools, or the simpler sort of men: but the learned, the
wife, the politic: the ^ga and Princes of the world: the teachers, and rulers
of the people.

When Adam was yet in Paradise, and made the ruler over all the bea^s of the
^ld, and was full of the graces and blessings of God, he soon departed from
the ecunt^ll of God, and gave ear to the serpent: so easily was he ^eceiued.
Israel was as the apple of the Lords eye, a people whom the Lord loved, and to
whom he gave their hearts deure. He delivered them from Pharao, and with an
outstretched arm led them through the red sea. Who would think si great
^cies would ever be forgotten? or that such a people, so well instructed in the
knowledge of God, and so often put in mind of their duty, should either most
part, or al of them turn from GOD? Moses was absent but a while: he went
aside to receive the tables of covenant, in the mean time they made unto
themselves a molten calfe, and worshipped it, they offered unto it, and said,
These be thy Gods, O Israel, Exodus 12.
that have brought thee out of the land of AEgipt. So easily were the wisest
of them and Aaron, and the whole multituted deceived.

Their children after them forsook the Judges. (...).
Lord, and served Baal, and Astaroth, They said to a tree, thou art my father,
and to a stone, thou have begotten me. They have turned their Ier. 2.
back to me, and not their face, says god by the prophet Jeremy. And was
this ye offense but of some small number of them: were they but few or of the
baser and simpler sort, whom the wicked spirit had thus seduced to make them
forsake the true and living GOD, and to give the glory due unto him, to dombe
creatures, and to the works of their own hands? No, they departed from GOD in
great multitudes, with full consent, and unity, they warranted their doings
by antiquity, and by the custom of their fathers before them. The Prophet
says, According to the number Ier. 1 (...).
of thy cities were thy Gods, O Judah: and to the number of the streets of
Jerusalem have ye set up altares of confusion, even altares to burn incense
unto Baal. And in an other place, he says, A great multitude, even all the
Ierem. 44.
people that dwelt in the land of Aegipt in Phathros answered Jeremy, saying:
the word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of thee. But we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth,
as to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings
unto her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings and our Princes etc.
Thus, even among that nation, which God has chosen unto himself, the
Apostacy was so great, the departure from true holiness was so universal,
that not only every citio, but every street was defiled with their
Idolatry. And besides the women which burnt incense unto other Gods: a great
multitude, yea all the people with one consent cried out against their
preacher, refused to hear the word of God, and maintained their super^tion.

The lilie may be said of the Scribes and Pharisees. They were wise, they were
learned, and carried great them of holiness: yet they loved darkness better than
light: they were blind leaders of the blind, they despised the commandemits of
god, for their own traditions: and not on lie they, but Herod, and Pontius
Pilate, with the gentiles, and people of Israel gathered the salues
togitherngainst against the Lord, I against his Christ. What should I speak
of those Churches which the Apostles of Christ planted, and watered, and
confirmed in the truth: at Corinth Paul preached the Gospel, they received it
gladly: he thanketh GOD on their behalf, That in all things they were made
rich in him, in all kind of speech, and in all knowledge. Yet soon after they
abused the holy mysteries, they denied the resurrection of the dead, they
became carnal, and had envying, and strife, and contention among themselves.
The Galathians reioy^h so much in him, that he writes thus of them, I bear
you record, that if it Gal. 4.
had been possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given
them to me. Yet they did not abide in the truth, but gave ear to false
Apostles, and were deceived. Therefore he reprooueth them, saying: O foolish
Galathians, who has bewi^ched Gala. 3.
you that you should not obey the truth? are ye so foolish that after ye have
begone in the spirit, ye would now be made perfect in the flesh? ye did
run well: who did let you, Gal. 5.
that ye did not obey the truth? I am in fear of you; least I have bestowed
on you labor Gala. 4.
in vain.

This frailty, and weakness of our corrupt nature, has showed it self
forth, and has appeared in all ages. (...), and our Fathers, have gone
astraie, and have solowed after lies. The Lord has looked down Psalm. 14.
from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that would
understand, and ^eoke God. Al are gone out of the way: they are al corrupt:
there is none that does good, no not one, says the Prophet David. Therefore
the Apostle besee^heth the church at Thessalonica, that they settle themselves
upon a sure foundation, and that they be not remo^d from the truth. He
puts them in mind what they have heard, and of whom they have heard it, and
e^horteth them to continue steadfast therein.

Neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as it were from us. Let no
man enti^e you from the love of the truth, nor withdraw you, or remove you
from that blessed ^pe unto which you becalled, neither by pretense of any,
which any would seem to receive of the spirit of God: nor by pretense of any
words of mine, as if I had so spoken: nor by any letter, given unto you in my
name, as if I had so written. In these words, he docth not only strengthen
them against such practices of crafty, and false teachers: but gives them
there withal a testimony of their constant abiding in the truth of the Gospel.

Otherwise, if the seducers had prenayled: and if the Thessalonians had yielded
unto them, and received their error: h^e would then have framed his speech
unto them after this manner. Oh suffer your selves to he advised. You (...)
not run well, you have lost the high way. Give place to the spirit of God,
submit your selves under his mighty hand, refuse not the calling whereby he
has called you. I could speak such things, wherewith you would be better
pleased: but your case is such, it requires rather fr^, and planie, and ^arpe
reprehension whereby you may be brought to consider, and amend your errors:
than fair, and smoothed speech, which might hold you still in your folly.

Seek therefore the kingdom of GOD, and the glory thereof, and seek not
your selves. Weigh truth and fals^de in an indifferent ballaunce, so sh^l the
heavier weight of the one soon bewray the lightness of the other. What thing
in the world so Massy, and so weighty, as is the truth? Harden not your
hearts, as did your Fathers in the Wilderness. It is no sin to yield unto
GOD: it is no shame to lay a part al affection, and to change your mind to
the denial of al ungodliness, and embracing of true holiness. The wise man
says, There Eecle. 4.
is a shame that brings sin, and a shame that brings worship and
favor. In this sort it is likely the Apostle would have spoken, if need had
so required. But now, seeing them forcibly assaulted, and that yet they
striued with such good courage against the persuasions of the wicked: he
commends their steadfastness, and exhorts them by these words, not to
yield unto their persecutours, nor to go from their faith in Christ Jesus.

Neither by spirit: that is, by revelation of the spirit. The spirit of God
wrought mightily, and bestowed sundry and great gifts upon men. Christ said
to his Disciples, When they deliver you up, take ye no Ma^h. 10.
thought, how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same
hour, what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of
your father, which speaks in you. And again, says he, I will pray the
father, John 14.
and he shall give you an other comforter, that he may bide with you for ever.
The spirit of truth, whom the world can not receive, because the world
feeth him not, neither knows him: but ye know him: for he dwells with
you, and shall be in you. The holy Ghost shall be with you, to assist you, to
teach you al things, to direct your counsels, to lead you into al truth, and
to preserve you from al error.

Now, as the spirit of God was among the faithful, and distributed to every
man several gifts, as it seemed best to profit withal: so did the spirit of
Satan wait upon the wicked, and possessed their hearts and bodies, and caused
them to imagine, and to do those things which were unseemly. He used them as
instruments to disquiet the Church of God, and to cast into it the seed of
error, of untruth, and dissension. Of such spirits Saint John gives warning,
saying, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they 1.
John. 4.
are of God: for many false Prophets are gone into the world. At what time
Achab would not believe the answer which the Prophet Micheas made him: there
came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will go out,
and be a false spirit in the mouth of al his 1. King. 2^.
prophets. This spirit ever walks up and down, seeking whom he may
devour, and blinds the minds of many, that the light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ may not shine unto them. Take here, that you be not deceived by any
such, which shall seek to abuse you, by pretense of revelation. Though they
shall take upon them to tell you of the day or hour of the coming of our Lord,
beloeue them not: for the false spirit is in the mouth of such prophets.

Nor by word: or, if any shall report, and go about to persuade you, that I
have so spoken, or taught in the congregations: or will boldly countenance
out such matter, and tell you, saring, I was present, I heard his words and
remember them, this was the doctrine which Paul preached: refuse him that is
such a one, for he brings not the truth unto you, but deceives you with
lying and vain fables. Nor by letter, as it were from us. Again, it may be,
they which lie in wait to destroy you, for their better way, will counterfaite
letters, and send them unto you in my name. This is a token in them that they
be past shame, be not you carried away by any such pretense from that which
we have preached unto you. We have not taught you, that the day of Christ is
at hand. Oh then be not so soon removed away unto an other Gospel, by them
which trouble you, and intend to pervert the Gospel of Christ.

Many such s^eightes and false devises have been used by deceiving spirits,
to blind the eyes of the simple. There have been some, which have ^etie
abroad their own fantasies under the names of Adam the first man, that GOD
created upon the face of the earth, and of Cain and Seth. Others have called
their own dreams, the Gospel of Thomas, and of Bartholemewe and of Barnabee
and of the Apostles of Christ. Saint August. says of the Manichees.
Manichaeilegunt seripturas Aug. contra Fauflum lib. 22. cap. 80.
Apocryphas, nescto a quibus sutoribus fabularum, sub nomi^e Apostolorum
Scrip^as. The Manichees ^ead secret hidden Scriptures, written, I know not by
what cobblers of fables, under the name of the Apostles. Such writings were
never written by them, whose name they brare: but were wickedly and falsely
counterfaited under their names by sundry heretics.

This is that, whereof our savior gave us warning, Take heed that no man
deceive Matt. 24.
you: for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ: and shall deceive
many. Again, he says, If any shall say unto you, l^e here is Christ, or
there, belecue it not: for there shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets. Into what shape can not he transform himself? in whose name will
not he crastilie set forth his errors, which dares falfelie set him
self in the place of the ^onne of GOD? This has evermore been the practice
of that old Serpent, to change himself into the likeness of an Angel of
light: and under the credit of holy men, to deceive the world with unholy
and unwholesome things. Since the time that the Church of God has departed
from her first faith, and would no longer be guided by the voice of the Gospel:
what, and how great forgeries have there been wrought? What Epistles, and
Canons, and decretals have been devised to maintain several parts of false
religion, and published under the name of Clemens, Cletus, Anacletus, and of
others, whereof these holy fathers never thought? Thus have they cioked
themselves under the covert of the Apostles, and of the fathers of the
primitive church, and have thought to win credit in the world, by false
show of antiquity.

It is certain, that the son of man shall come with his holy Angels, and
shall reward every man according to that he has done in this life. Then will
he give sentence against the wicked, and will place the faithful at his right
hand. In that day the heavens shall pass 2. Pet. 3.
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the
earth also and the works that are therein, shall be utterly burned. In that day
we which live, and remain, (...). These. 4.
shall be caught up together with them (that are dead in Christ) in the clouds,
to meet the Lord in the air. But, of that day and Mat. 24.
hour knows no man: no not the Angels of heaven, but my father only,
says our savior Christ.

Now it remains, that we see, by occasion of this practice of the false
Prophets, or false Apostles of whom Saint Paul here warns the
Thessalonians, how the wicked abuse the holy Scriptures, and understand them
contrary to their meaning. Saint Peter said, The 2. Pet. 3.
day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, even as Paul had written
unto this people: as also it is spoken in the words of Christ, They ^all see
the son of man come Mat. 24.
in the clouds, with power and great glory. The false Apostles use the same
words, and wrest them to evil purpose: and take upon them to judge of the
end of the world, and at what time the coming of Christ should be.

Christ said, Destroy this temple and in John^
three days I will raise it up again. There arose certain that did bear
false witness against him, saying, we heard him say, he would destroy this
temple made with hands. Then remembered, that Temple was forty and fire years
a building, and thought it impossible that he could rear it in three days.
They took his words otherwise than be meant. They thought of the material
temple of stone in Jerusalem, and he spoke of the temple of his body. Matthew.
16.


Again, Christ says, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church. These are the words of Christ spoken unto Peter, after he had
witnessed of him that he is Christ the son of the living God. Hereof, they
say, Peter is the rock: and the Bishop of Rome is Peter's successor: he is the
rock upon which the church is builded, and shall stand steadfast for ever. But
they understand the words contrary to the meaning. For, alas who would
conceive, that God would build his Church upon a man, or upon any creature?
Christ only is that rock whereupon his church is settled. Other foundation can
no man lay, tha^ 1. Cor. 3.
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Therefore Chrysostom expounds those
words, Super Chrysostom. hom. 55 in Mat.
hanc Petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam. id est, super fidem atque confessionem.
I will build my Church upon this rock: that is, upon this faith, and
confession. Likewise Saint Augustine: Super Hom 13. de verb. dom. sec. Mat.
hanc petram, quam consessus es, etc. Upon this rock which thou have
confessed, upon this rock, which thou have known, saying, thou art Christ
the son of the living God, will I build my Church. That is, I will build my
Church upon my self, which am the son of the living God. I will not build my
self upon thee, but I will thee upon me.

Christ says, Except a man be borne again, Ioh. 3.
he can not see the kingdom of God. These words are most true. For, by our
own nature, we be the vessels of Gods wrath, and the children of danmation.
Unless we be regenerate, and borne a new of water and of the holy ghost, we
cannot be saved. Yet Nicodemus a wise man, a Pharisee, and a ruler of the Jews
mistook this speech: it seemed strange unto him, how a man might be borne,
when he is old. Can he enter (says he) the second time into his mothers
womb, and be borne? how can these things be? Jesus answered, and said unto
him, art thou a master of Israel, and know not these things? This new
birth must be from above: even by the working of the holy ghost.

Again, Christ says, Except ye ^ate the John 6.
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. The
Jews heard him, but mistook his words. They did not understand his meaning.
Therefore they said, This is an hard saying, who can abide the hearing of it?
They reasoned among themselves how it might be, that either he could give the^
his flesh to eat: or, that they could take his ^esh and eat it, or take his
blood to drink it. but when Jesus knew, that his Disciples murmured at it,
he said unto them, Does this offend you? It is the spirit that quickneth,
the flesh profits nothing. Hereof Augustine says, Acceperunt illud suulte,
etc. They took ^g in Psalm. 98.
the saying of Christ foolishly, they thought of it carnally, and imagined that
the Lord would cut off fmall pieces from his body, and give it to them.
Therefore they said, This saying is hard. They were hard, and not the saying.
For, if they had been meek, and not hard, they would have said to themselves:
this is not spoken without some cause: there is some mystery hidden under his
words. And again he says, Spiritualiter intelligite quae loquutus sum. Itid.
Non hoc corpus, etc. Understand those things spiritually, which I have spoken
unto. You shall not eat (with the mouth of your body) this body that you
see, nor shall you drink that blood which they shall shed, that shall crucify
me. I have commended unto you some sacrament: understand it spiritually, and it
shall quicken you.

Thus we see the true meaning of Christ's words, and after what gross manner
the Capernaites understood them. Let us beware we fall not into like error.
Christ spoke truly of his body, when he called it a Temple. The Jews
destroyed it, and in three days, he did raise it up again. Mistake not his
words, be not deceived. It is true that he said, Upon this rock. will I build
my Church. Mistake him not: Christ himself is the rock, and not Peter. It is
true, that a man must be borne a new, or else he cannot be saved. Mistake not
this: hereby is meant not a bodily birth, but a renewing of the soul of man. It
is truly said, that Christ's flesh, is that bread that came from heaven, and
gives life to the world: but mistake it not, for this bread fills not the
body, but the mind: it requires the hunger of the inner man. Even so is it
true that the Apostle says of the day of the Lord. Take heed you mistake
him not, and fall into the error of the false Apostles, which take upon the to
appoint the time and hour, when the son of man shall come unto judgment.

V. 3. Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come,
except there come a departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed,
even the son of perdition.

The Church of God has ever been under persecution, and afflictions, as may
appear by the stories of al ages: but GOD has not failed to comfort them, and
work their deliverance. Israel was in great bondage under Pharao. They were
put to great stauerie to ^hoppe straw, and to bake brick, etc. Their male
children were slain before their faces. This was done unto them, that so they
might be rooted out, and their name quite put out from the ^arth. It was high
time for the Lord to put to his hand. They called upon him in their troubles
and he heard them. Then sent he Moses and Aaron, and delivered them: he opened
the red sea, and gave them passage.

When the Phili^ines oppressed them, GOD sent them Gedeon, Barac, Iehu, Debora,
and Sampson, whom he endued with wisdom, and courage, and power to overcome
their enemies, and to set them at liberty. What should I speak of
Nabuchodonosor, An^ochus, Nero, Julian, and other tyrants? They oppr^ssed the
servants of GOD, and kept them in great misery. But God looked down from
heaven, and was their helper in the time of need: he brake the ^ords asunder,
and delinered them. The more ^ie was extended or practiced against them, the
more glorious did GOD shei^ himself, in the (...) of Antichrist. By him the
Church of God shall suffer great tribulation, such as was not from the
beginning of the world. And then shall his surie increase, and his tyranic be
the greater, when his kingdom shall decay, and the days of his desolation
shall be at hand. Primasius says, Tunc cadet Babylon, quando nouis sime
potesta^em Primas in apoc. ca. 16.
persequendi sanctos acceperit. Then shall Babylon come to the ground, when she
shall last of al take power to persecute the Saints of God. For then will God
arise, and will judge his own cause, he will deliver the af^icted, and will
slaie Antichrist with the breath of his mouth. Hereof S. Gregory says thus,
The Greg. in 10. ca. 29. lib. 19. ca 9.
Church after these days of her affliction, shall afterward notwithstanding
be ^rengihned with great power and might of preaching.

Except there come a departing first. There must first be a departing from
faith in the Church of God, and then shall be the coming of the Lord. There
was one general departing in the days of Noah. Al flesh had corrupt their
ways: there was not ani^ that did seek after righteousness. Then came the
day of the Lord upon them: he powered out the water^, and they prevailed upon
the earth, so that both man and cattle, and worm, and the soul of the heaven
were destroyed. There was a general departing of the Jews, and people of God
at Jerusalem. They made the house of God a den of thieves: they saved a
thief, and crucified the Lord of glory. God had no delight in them, neither
regarded their sacrifices. Christ said unto them, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
Mat. 23.
that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which have been sent unto thee,
how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Behold, your house
is left unto you desolate. They shall not Luke 19.
leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou know not the time of thy
visitation. Such a departing it shall be, whereof the Apostle speaks, and so
general, that the son of man when he comes shall hardly find faith upon
the earth.

But this departing is diversely taken. Some understand it of the empire, that
the kingdom^ and countries which were before in subjection to that estate, shall
depart from it, and that then Antichrist shall spring up. Others think that
this is spoken of that departing wherein the godly have carried themselves
from the obedience of the church of Rome. But others more truly say, it is the
departure from the doctrine, and religion, and love, and obedience of the
gospel of Christ: whereof in another place he says, In the latter times some
shall depart from the Tim. 4.
faith, and shall give heed to spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with giving thanks of them which believe and know the
truth. These men shall have a form of godliness, but shall deny the power
thereof. They shall turn their ears away from the truth, and will incline
their hearts to hear fables.

The words of the Apostle are plain, to show that there shall be a departing.
But, as we see it is not agreed upon, what manner of departing this shall be,
nor by whom it shall be wrought. Our adversaries lay it unto us, saying, you
have wrought this departing: you have departed from the Church of Rome, you are
they of whom S. Paul has spoken: you are the founders of Antichrist: so say
they. But would to God, they and their fathers, and the Church of Rome had not
wrought this departure. Bernard beheld the state, and pride, and disorders of
the Church of Rome in his time, therefore said, Superest vt reueletur homo
Bern. Sermon. 6. in Ps. 91.
pe^cati, filius perditionis: non modo demonium di^, sed and meridianum: quod
non solum transfiguratur in angelum lucis: sed extollitur supra umne quod
dicitur Deus, aut quod colitur. It remains, that the man of sin, that is,
the son of perdition, be reueiled: even the devil which flies not only in
the day, but destroys in the noone day: which is not only changed into an
angel of light, but is exalted above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped. And Gregory did see who they were that should work this
departing, and make way for Antichrist: therefore said, Ego fidenter deco,
Greg. lib. 6. epist. 30.
etc. I speak it boldly: Whosoever calls himself the universal priest, or
des^reth so to be called (as does the Pope) in the pride of his heart, he is
the forerunner of Antichrist.

Now, that we may yet better know what manner of departure that shall be, let us
consider, what Saint Paul speaks of the Church of God, which was in his
tune. Unto the Cori^thinans he says, If al prophecy, and there 1. Cor. 14.
come in one^ that believes not, or one unlearned: he is rebuked of al men, he
is judged of al men, and so are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so
will he fall down on his face, and worship God, and say plainly, that God is in
you in deed. How is it then brethern? When you come together every one of you
has a psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an
interpretation: let al things be done unto edifying, etc. For God is not the
author of confusion, but of peace, as we see in all the churches. Blessed were
they of God. Al things among them were done to edifying. The holy scriptures
were read openly in the presence of the people: the people rcuerently kept
silence, and gave ear, and understood the will of God, and submitted themselves
unto it. The prayers were in a known tongue, to that ^e unlearned might
understand them, and say, Amen. The holis mysteries were duly ministered. The
people received the sacrament of the Lords supper under both kinds, as Christ
had instituted: and did al communitate together. Chrisostoine writing upon
that chapter says, Vere tum Ecclesia coelum fuit, Chri. ho. 36. in 1. ad Cor.
etc. Verily the church then was a heaven, the spirit of God ordring al
things, and directing all the heads of the church.

In the time of Tertullian, the Christians still kept this manner. Therefore he
says, Co^mus Tertul in Apologetics
ad diui^arum literarum commemor ationem, fidem sanet is vocibus pascimus, spem
erigimus, fiduciam sigimus, We meet together at the reading of the holy
scriptures: we nourish our faith with those heavenly words: by them we raise
up our hope, and settle our affiance and trust. Augustine, Chrysostom, Origin
and other ancient and godly fathers commended the reading of the scriptures
unto the people, called upon them to read them themselves, or to get others to
read unto them. And that they would hear them not only in the Church, but
also at home in their houses. They taught them, the hurt and danger of
ignorance, that ignorance of the scriptures has been the cause of her
esies, and that it has brought in corruption of life, and of manners. This was
the order and usage of the Church in the time of the holy Apostles, and of our
first fathers. The people were guided by the word of God, they were made
partakers of the holy mysteries, and al things were done in the Church to
edifying. And the same order is this day restored, and practiced in our
churches.

Let us look into the church of Rome, and behold the usage and behavior
thereof. Where shall we find that heavenly comeliness which S. Paul requires?
Where is the comfortable reading of scriptures? Where is the people taught
their salvation in Christ Jesus? where is the brotherly meeting of all the
congregation at the communion of the Lords supper? May we say of Rome that it
holds fast the form and fashion of that church which Christ and his Apostles
left unto us, and which the holy ancient fathers continued? nay, rather, we may
say of them with Chrysostom: they may have the chestes and cofers wherein the
treasure was sometimes kept, but the treasures they have not. We may say, it is
not now a house of prayer but a den of thieves. We may say, it shall no more
be called Bethel, the house of God, but Bethauen, the house of vanity, or of
lying.

Jupiter and Bacchus, and the Idols of the heathen, were not so dishonored of
their worshippers, as the almighty and everlasting, and only true God is
dishonored in that sinagogue. I speak of it, as it is now, and as it has
been these many years. For in the time of our elder fathers, it had great
testimony of true holiness. Ignatius called it castissimam, most chaste.
Tertullian said, it was a happy Church, because the Apostles of Christ
suffered martyrdom in it, and left their whole doctrine unto it. And in like
sort did others give unto Rome, as it was in those times reverent and worthy
commendation. But now, says he, O Roma, a Roma, quantum mutata vetusta es?
nunc caput es scelerum, quae caput orbis eras. O Rome, how much art thou
channged from the old Rome? thou, which have been the chief in all the
world, art now the chief in all naughtiness. They have forsaken the trade of
life, and the love of the Gospel, which they of old time had in Rome, and
therefore cannot be inheritours of their commendation.

When Chrisostme considered the state of the Church as the Apostle speaks of
it vnt^ the Corinthians, and did see how far the church in his time swarued
from that: he said, Nunc Chris. in 14. 1. Corinthians.
vero vestigia tantum rerum illarum tenemus. We have now the only bare signs
of those things. Again, Videtur ecclesia hodie, mulieri quae mansuetudine
veteri exciderit similis, quaeque Symbola tantum, etc. The church which is now,
may be likened to a woman, which has forsaken her wonted modesty. And has
only certain outward shows of that first felicity, and keeps still the
hutches and boxes of precious things, but lacks the treasure which was in
them. To such a woman may the church this day be likened. I speak not this of
the gifts: (for the matter were not so great, if we wanted them only:) but of
life and of virtue. And again he says, Scrinium aliud paternt the sauri
exinanitum body dicam etc. I will tell you of one other box of that treasure
which our father left unto us, which is empty, and has nothing left in it at
this day. In times past they did sing altogether, so do we also: but then they
were al of one mind, and of one heart: at this day you shall not find one man
that agrees with himself, there is such war and discord in all things
every where. The name of peace is common in all places, but peace it self is
no where to be found. Then men did use their houses like churches: now men do
use the church, as they use their house, nay, more profanely than any house,
Thus Chrysostom blamed the church in his time, and lays out their departing
from the faith. He lived about 411. years after Christ.

What may we think, he would say of the church that has been of later years,
if he had lived to see the desormitie and abuses thereof? where, besides that
they are not of one mind and of one heart, they suffer not the people
altogether to sing the praises of God: where they have not only emptie^ such
boxes or hutches, wherein Christ left great treasures unto his church, but have
made light account of them, and have cast away the very patterns and images of
true godliness. They drive away the people from reading the scriptures, and
reckon that as unlawful, as to cast the bread of the children unto degges, or
pearls before Swine. They lead men from trust in the blood of Christ, and
teach them to believe such things, and to put confidence in those creatures,
which cannot profit, or help them at al. You may remember what prayers they
used. But bless your ears: for they are words full of horrible blasphemy.
They said to the holy and blessed Virgin Marie, the mother of our redeemer and
savior. In te virgo Maria confidimus, in te speramus, nos defendas in
aeternum. Our trust and hope we put in thee. O Virgin Marie, defend us
everlastingly. They say, O faelix puerpera nostra pians scelera. O happy mother
which do purge us from our sins. And, Sanctae Mariae merita ducant nos ad
regna coelestia. The merits of holy Marie bring us to the heavenly kingdom.
Again, Tu mediatrix dei and hominum, aduocata pauperum, refugiu^ peccatorum.
Thou art the mediator between God and man, the advocate for the poor, the
refuge of al sinners. O merciful Christ, what is become of thy passion? where
is the price of thy blout: how are we lead away from thee to seek redemption
in a creature? Again they say unto her. Thou art the Lady of Angels: thou art
the Queen of heaven. Command thy son: show thy self to be a mother. He is
thy son, thou art his mother: the mother may command, the child must obey.
Again, they turn all that is spoken in ye whole book of the Psalms of the
prophet David, either of God, or of Christ, and apply it to the Virgin Marie,
and call that Psalter, Psalterium beatae Mariae, the Psalter of blessed Marie.
Who will take the pains to peruse it, shall find that comfortable speech of our
savior, Come unto me al yeo Matt. 11.
that are weary and laden, and I will ease you, Psalm. Bea^e Mariae ps. 2.
thus blasphernously abused in ye second psalm. Venite ad eam omnes qui
laboratis, and tribulati estis: and refrigerium and solatium dabit animabus
vestris. Come unto her al ye that travel, and be heavily laden: and she will
give rest and comfort to your souls. An other says the kingdom of god is of
two parts, of justice and of mercy. He reseructh justice to himself: and the
other part, that is mercy, he has yielded unto his mother. Therefore one of them
plaieth the Proctour, and takes upon him to show the difference of those
Bernardinus in Mariali.
two courts, saying: A foro iustitiae dei appellandum est ad forum
misericordiae matris eius. You must appeal from the court of Gods justice, to
the court of his mothers mercy. And is there not good cause, he should give us
this counsel, if it be true that he has written? Nulla gratia venit de coelo
ad terram, nisi transeat per manu^ Mariae. Est enim meaiatrix saluationis,
iustificationis, reco^ciliationis, communicationis. No mercy comes from
heaven to the earth, but it must pass by the hands of Marie. For she is the
mediator of our salvation, of our justification, of our reconciliation, and of
our participation. What is blasphemy, if this be not blasphemy? They which
will seem somewhat to blush at these things, will perhaps excuse this, and
call it spiritual daliance. Unhappy are they, and heavy judgment shall abide
the^, that in such sort dally and scorn the price of our redemption. O let us
open our eyes: we are the sons of God. God has given us eyes to see, and
ears to hear, and hearts to understand. Let us judge uprightly. It is gods
cause. Whosoever considers these and such other great errors, must needs
confess that ye church of Rome, has wrought that departing whereof the
Apostle speaks. In the late council of Trident, Cornelius the Bishop of
Bitonto did something plainly acknowledge the great Apostasy, and departing of
the church of Rome, both in matters of faith, and in conversation, and life.
These be his words, Vtinam a religione ad superstitionem, etc. Would God they
were not gone wholly with general consent, from religion to superstition: from
faith to infidelity: from Christ to Antichrist: from God to Epicure: saying
with wicked heart and filthy mouth, there is no God. Neither has there been
this great while any pastor or Pope, that regarded these things. For they al,
both Pope and Cardinals and other sought their own: and not so much as one of
them, sought for the things that pertain to Jesus Christ. Yet, say they, there
can be no departing from faith in the Church of Rome, the faith thereof cannot
fail: for Christ has said, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith Luke 22.
fail not. And again, The gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
Therefore in that place M^tth. 16.
there can be no decay. This is the saying of some, who humble not themselves
to know their error: who love the praise of men more than the praise of God:
whose glory is their shame, which mind earthly things.

The Apostle says, there shall be a departing that it shall be, not among the
Jews, and Jnfidels, but among those which were reckoned to be of the household
of faith, and the children of God. What is it from which they shall depart, or
wherein the decay shall be? does he mean their riches, their gold, and silver,
and bread, etc. No, but the doctrine of the gospel, and faith in Christ. The
pure words, which as silver from the earth are tried, and purified seven times
in the fire: the well of water which springs up into everlasting life, shall
decay in the house of God. The people shall shut their ears that they may not
hear the truth, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of
devils which speak lies through hypocrisy.

And let them not say the church of Rome can not err. For, where did Christ
ever give, or where have the Apostles ever m^de mention of any such privilege
granted to that Church? S. Peter says, There were false Prophets also among 1.
Per. 2.
the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you: which privily
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord, that has bought them,
and bring upon themselves swift damnation, and many shall follow their damnable
ways, by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. Paul warned the Act.
20.
Church of God at Ephesus, not only that after his departing grievous woolues
should enter in among them: but also, that of themselves should men arise
speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them. When Christ said, When
the son of man shall come, shall he Luke 18.
find faith upon the earth? And when he told his Disciples that the
abomination of desolation shall stand in the holy place: when he warned them
in this sort, Then if any shall Mat. 24.
say unto you: Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not. For there shall
arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders, so that if it were possible the very elect should be deceived: It is
most evident, he spoke of that departing which should come, and should appear
in the church of God: which departing our forefathers did behold, and mark in
their times: and which has of late years appeared so manifestly, that no man,
who is not wilfully blind can doubt thereof.

S. Paul knew not any such state of the Church of Rome, or any especial
grant made unto it, in such forte, that it should never err: for unto the
church of Rome he writes, Boast Romans 11.
not thy self. Be not high minded, but fear. For if God spared not the
natural branches: take heed least he also spare not thee. Through unbelief
they are broken off, and thou stand by faith. Behold therefore the
bountifulnes and severity of God. Toward them which have fallen, severity:
but, toward thee, bountifulness, if thou continue in his bountifulnes: or else
thou shall also be cut off. That is, if he spared not the Jews his own
people, how will he spare thee that art but a stranger? If thou continue not,
thou shall be cut off. It may be thou shall also depart from the faith, as the
Jews have done: then shall thou be as a withered branch, and shall not draw
any moisture from the root: then will God also forsake thee: and thy end shall
be worse than the beginning. I trow in saying thus: he said not, Thou shall not
err. If the Church of Rome cannot err, what need have they of that church,
either of the Scriptures, or of the fathers, or councels? Perhaps through this
pride, they grew first to despise the holy Scriptures, and would not direct
their ways by them. They are high minded, and boast themselves, that they are
as mount Sion, which shall not be moved. Yet our Savior likeneth the Church
sometimes to sheep, as in the 15. of S. Matthew, I am not sent, but unto the
lost sheep of Israel. Sometimes to children, which are simple, and soon
beguiled. Sometimes to a Vine, which is weak, and easily thrown down:
sometimes to the moon, which waxes and is also in wane, and many times gives
no light. The ancient fathers compare the church of god to no one thing so
usually, as to a ship. And who knows not how a ship is tossed hither and
thither? how it is in danger of sands and of rocks, and of pirates, and in
danger of drowning by leaking? If the sheep were not a straying kind of
cattle, what should they need a shepherd? If little children could guide
themselves, what need had they of a guider? If the vine did not hang down, and
lie on the ground, what need were there of proppes or of one to set it up? If
there were no fear for the passage of a ship, if it could not miscarie, what
should it need a Pilote? Let no man therefore say: the church is safe for
ever, it cannot err, it can not decay. Such words are deceiuable, and lying
words. For, false Prophets shall come. There shall be a desolation: there shall be
a departing, even in the house of God: and that day of Christ shall not come,
except there come a departing first. And that, that man of sin be disclosed,
even the son of perdition.

V. 4 Which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called
God, or that is worshipped: so that he does sit in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. This the Apostle speaks of Antichrist. He is the
man of sin, and the son of perdition. It will be somewhat hard to treat of
this matter, and to open the words of this scripture. Whatsoever I shall
speak, it will be ill taken of many, and many will doubt of the truth of my
speeches, such affection they bear to him whom the Apostle disciphereth to be
Antichrist. Albeit whatsoever I will utter in opening the Apostles words shall
be such as the holy scriptures and learned writings of the holy fathers have
left unto us, and the church of God has proved, and at this day does prove
to be true. God promised, that Christ should come into the world, even the
Shiloh, unto whom all the people should be gathered: and that he should be the
hope of Israel and deliver his people from their sins. God made promise of him
to Adam, and to Abraham, David, etc. The scriptures are full, and the prophets
make often mention of this promise. Old men, and young men, and all the people
waited for the fulfilling Exodus 4.
thereof, and said: Send him whom thou will send. Esaie. 45.
And again, Ye heavens send the dew from above, and let the clouds drop down
righteousness: let the earth open, and let salvation and justice grow forth. And
again, God will come and Es^i. 35.
save you. Thus was every eye bent upon him and every heart waited for his
coming. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent Galat. 4.
forth his son made of a woman, that we might receive the adoption of the
sons. He was in John 1.
the world, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not. Light came into the world, and men loved John 3.
darkness better than light They to whom the promise was made, and which
wished for him, and made al their common talk of the hope of his coming, when
he came knew him not, they reviled him, and said, Behold a Mat. 11.
glutton and drinker of wine, a friend unto publicans and sinners. They called
him Beelzebub: and a false prophet, and a seducer of the people. Him they did
take by the hands of the wicked: they betrayed him, they denied the holy one
and just: they hanged on a tree, and killed the lord of life. Such was the
receiving of Christ. This did they to him through ignorance. It was not given
them to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven. They have not ^nowen the
father, nor whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. Therefore says he, I confess
unto thee Luke 10.
father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the
wise and learned, and have revealed them to babes: even so father because it so
pleased thee.

Now, as the coming of Christ was, such is the coming of Antichrist. God has
foretold of his coming. Daniel has foretold. Christ, and his Apostles Paul
and John have foretold it, the Scriptures, and o^de Fathers make often mention
hereof. There is none, neither old nor young: neither learned nor unlearned,
but he has heard of Antichrist. They hate his name, and detest him, before
they know him. But here you may mark the wonderful slight and sutteltie of
Satan. The world shall look after the coming of Antichrist. He shall not fail
but come. Al men shall carry hatred against him, and reckon him abominable, and
yet their eyes shall be blinded, and their hearts deceived, so that they shall
not know him. They shall hate his name, and embrace his doctrine: he shall cover
himself with a cloak of holiness. They shall think they do good service unto
Christ, but shall therein do service unto Antichrist.

The diverse fantasies of men, have devised many sundry fond tales of the
person of Antichrist. Some say he should be a Jew, of the tribe of Dan. Some
that he should be borne in Babylon: some, that he should be bred up in
Bethsaida and Corazin: some, that he should rise up in Syria: some, that
Mahomet is Antichrist: some that he should overthrow Rome: some, that he
should build up the City of Jerusalem: some, that Nero was Antichrist: some,
that he should be borne of a Friar and a Nonne: some, that he should continue
but three years and a half: some, that he should turn trees vpside down,
with the tops in the ground, and should force the roots to grow upward,
and then should flee up into heaven, and fall down, and break his neck. These
tales have been craftily devised to beguile our eyes, that whilst we think
upon these gesses, and so occupy our selves in beholding a shadow or probable
conjecture of Antichrist, he which is Antichrist indeed may unawares deceive
us.

Except that man of sin be disclosed. The Apostle seems to teach us of
Antichrist, as if he should be one man, because he calls him, The man of
sin. But we may not so take him. The manner of the scripture is oftentimes,
and in diverse places it speaks that of many, which seems to be-spoken but
of one. So does Daniel set forth the kingdom, Dan. 7.
and all the kings of Persia, in the name and likeness of a Bear, and so
describes the state of other whole kingdoms in such particular names. And so
does the spirit of GOD in the Revelation set down under the name of Reave. 13.
the Beast, the succession and continuance of many. He means not therefore,
that Antichrist, shall be any one only man, but one estate or kingdom of
men, and a continuance of some one power and tyranny in the Church.

We read of Pharao a cruel tyrant, that he did persecute the people of God in
Egypt. And, of Nabuchodonoser that he oppressed them, and brought them
captives into Babylon. And of Antiochus, that he likewise fought against them,
and did overcome them, and led them captives into Macedonia. They al were
mighty and cruel tyrants. Yet one other shall come, whose cruelty shall be
heavier, and whose continuance shall be longer than was the cruelty or
continuance of any of these. Who shall work his purpose not in Egypt, nor in
Babylon, nor in Macedonia, But in the holy place, even in the Church of
Christ, and in the house of God. And this state, and continuance of persecution
in the church, is the state of Antichrist.

But what shall he do whereby he may be known? Paul says, Which is an
adversary. This shall be the mark whereby you may know him, he shall set
himself against God, and against Christ, for he is an enemy of the Cross of
Christ. Why then (say you) are not the Jews, and Mahomet, and the Turk
either al, or the most wicked of them so called, seeing they utterly refuse al
Christian religion? because none of these sit in the temple of God: which is
the place, where Antichrist shall advance himself: and because Antichrist shall
not in open show set himself against Christ as does Mahomet, and the Turks:
but suttlelie and craftily like an evil and ungracious servant. He will not
openly speak his blasphemies, or spit at the Gospel of God, or defy the name
of Christ: but he will call himself, The servant of God: perhaps the Vicar of
Christ, and perhaps the servant of Gods servants: or perhaps the head, or
the chief member of the Church. He shall say, he is led with the zeal of
Gods house, and shall do nothing less: for, he shall seek himself. He shall say,
he seeks the glory of God, when all that he does is for the enriching and
ambitious enlarging of his own worldly pomp and vanity.

In matters of Princes, if any man take upon him the name of an ambassador, or
deputy to a prince, having no commission thereto, and in this boldness
presume to levy and raise a power, and force the subjects to follow him:
although he work all this under the name, and by the color of the princes
authority (as is the manner of rebels to do) yet he is a traitor, and his
doings are not well thought of because he deals in the Princes matters
without warrant from the Prince. Eu^n so Antichrist, he shall come in the name
of Christ, yet will he do al things against Christ, and under pretense and
color of serving Christ, he shall devour the sheep and people of Christ: he
shall deface whatsoever Christ has taught: he shall quench that fire which
Christ has kindled: he shall root up those plants which Christ has planted:
he shall undermine that house which Christ has built.

He shall be contrary to Christ. His faith contrary to the faith of Christ:
and his life contrary to the life of Christ. Is any man desirous to know
Antichrist? his coming shall be notable, it shall astonne the world. By this
mark you may know him. He shall be contrary to Christ. To show you at large
this contrariety by comparison of things contrary in Christ and Antichrist
would ask long time. It shall be sufficient, we consider only some few
wherein they are manifestly contrary, that by them, judgment may be made of
the residue.

Saint Paul says, With one offering has Heb. 10.
he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. And again, We are
sanctified by the offering Ibid.
of the body of Jesus Christ once made. What is he then that says, I make
priests to offer a daily sacrifice, for the sins of the people: by whom the
offering up of the body of Christ is made every day? he is contrary to
Christ, he is Antichrist. Saint Paul says, God Ephesians. 1.
has appointed Christ over al things to be the head of the Church. What is
he then, which says, I am the head of the Church? which says, All the
Churches of God are knit in me. You must understand as I understand: you
must hear with mine ears, and see with mine eyes: I will govern, and direct
you. He is contrary to Christ. This is Antichrist. Christ ordained that the
Communion Matt. 26.
should be ministered under both kinds. What is he then that delivers it to
the people but under one kind? he is contrary to Christ. He breaks the
first institution of the Lords supper: he is Antichrist.

Christ says, My kingdom is not of this John 18.
world. What is he then which says, I am Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
I have right to both swords: my power and authority reaches over all the
kingdoms of the world? he is contrary to Christ, he is Antichrist. Christ
washed his disciples feet. What Ioh. 13.
is he then, that gives his feet to be kissed of Kings and Emperors? He is
contrary to Christ: he is Antichrist. Christ paid tribute to Caesar. What is
he then, that exempteth himself, Mat. 17. Mark 10.
and his clergy from the temporal sword and authority? he is contrary to
Christ, he is Antichrist. Christ allowed marriage, and reproved fornication.
What is he then that allows fornication, and forbids marriage? he is
contrary to Christ: he is Antichrist. Christ says, Search the Scriptures. What
is he then, which John 5.
says, give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast pearls before
swine: ye may not search the scriptures? he is contrary to Christ: he is
Antichrist. These be the certain and undoubted marks of Antichrist.

So that he does sit in the temple of God. That is, he is bold, and without
force of any dannger. He is not driven to hide himself in a corner: he is
exalted in the eye, and in the heart of the world. He bears rule in the
conscience of men. He has the keys to open and shut at his pleasure. He
makes Kings and Princes become his subjects. He rules them: not by sword or
spear only, but by pretense of religion: he tells them, al things are put in
subjection under his feet: that he is the vicar of Christ: that his word must
be taken as the word of God. So, he sits in the temple of God, as if he
were God.

The godly preachers, sit also in the temple of god: they are ye ministers of
Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. There they expound the
Scriptures, and she we the good and acceptable will of God. There they exhort,
and teach, and reprove, and correct, and instruct the people in righteousness.
Antichrist sits not in the Church after this sort. He teaches not, nor
exhorts the people. He makes that no part of his office. How sits he
then? What shall he say, what shall he do? The Apostle tells us, He exalts
himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped. He shall be
honored with the honor that is due unto God. He shall shine and glitter in
gold and precious stones. He shall be carried upon the shoulders of men, and
waited upon by kings, and princes, and great estates. So shall he be contrary
to Christ.

Christ was humble and lowly. The prophet in his own person speaks of him, I
am a worm, and not a man: a shame of men, Psalm. 22.
and the contempt of the people. And the Apostle says, He humbled himself,
and became Phil. 2.
obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. Behold his parents,
his birth, his cradle: behold his life, his disciples, his doctrine, and his
death. Al were witnesses unto his humility. He says of himself, The son of
man has not whereon to rest his Matt. 8.
head. And to his Disciples he says, The kings of the Gentiles reign over
them, and Luke 12.
they that bear rule over them are called gracious Lords: but you shall not
be so. And again, Learn of me, that I am meek and lowly Matthew. 11.
in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

Now on the other part take view of Antichrist. Behold his birth, his
place, his thaire, his estate, his doctrine, his disciples, and al his life.
You shall see nothing but pomp and glory. Gregory calls him the King of
pride. He is proud in life, proud in do^trine, proud in word, and proud in
deeds. He is like unto Lucifer, and sets himself before his brethren, and
over nations and kingdoms. He makes every knee to how down to him and
worship him: he makes Kings to bring him water, to carry his train, to hold
his cup, to bear his dish, to lead his bridle, and to hold his stirrup: he
claims power over heaven and earth: he says, he is Lord over all the
world, the Lord of Lords, and the King of Kings: that his authority
reaches up into heaven, and down into hell: that he can command the Angels
of GOD: that he condemns whom he will condemn: that he makes Saints at
his pleasure: that whatsoever he blesses is blessed: and that it is cursed
whatsoever he curses.

He sells merits, the forgiveness of sins: the sacrifice for the quick
and the dead. He makes merchandise of the souls of men. He lays his
filthy hands upon the Lords anointed. He remooueth kings, and deposes
the states and Princes of the world. This is Antichrist. This is his power.
Thus shall he work and make himself manifest. So shall he sit in the temple of
God. The people shall wonder at him, and shall have him in reverence. They
shall say, who is like unto the beast? Who is so wise, so mighty, so godly,
so virtuous, so holy, so like unto God? so intolerable and monstrous shall be
his pride.

It were much for him to sit in the seat, and to occupy the room of an
earthly King or Emperor. But he shall take upon him the authority and the
name of GOD, the name of the living Lord, the name of GOD which has made
heaven and earth, even the name of GOD the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
in this pride he shall exceed al others that have been wicked. The Pharisees
and the Scribes were wicked: yet none of them did sit in the temple of God,
showing himself that he was God. Arius, Nestorius, Montanus, Valentinus were
wicked heretics, yet they never ^ooke upon them the name of God. What
should I say of this blasphemy? or in whom may we find the like? Mahomet
was a Turk and a false Prophet, and a deceiuer of the people, yet he tooks not
upon him the name of God. This point and reach of ungodliness belongs
only to Antichrist. He shall sit in the place of God in judgments: he shall
show himself out of that place as if he were God. Irenaeus says, Quum sit
servus, tamen Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. p^timo.
^dor ari vult^ut deus. Whereas he is but a ser^ant, he will be worshipped as
if he were God.

But some will say, Antichrist shall be mortal as other men, borne of a
mortal father and mother: he shall know, that he shall die: and that he is
but dust, and shall return again into dust: that he can not make himself, no
that he can not make the least, and ^ilest of al creatures. How then will he
proclaim himself to be an immortal God? How will he call himself God that
made heaven and earth? or, God which had no beginning, nor shall have any
end? no, this is not the meaning of these words. He shall not so think of
himself, nor so say. I will tell you after what sort he shall sit in the
Temple of GOD, and how the world shall receive him and reverence him as GOD.
He shall take to himself that supreme authority, and prerogative, which
appertains only to GOD by nature. Although he be but a man, yet in office
he will be accounted as GOD. He shall compare his laws, with the laws of GOD.
He shall say, his word is the word of GOD. Whatsoever he says, he shall
say it is the voice of the spirit of God: of the same authority, that is
gospel of Christ: no man may break it: no man may touch the credit thereof:
if ani^ man with stand it, he must think he does sacrilege, commits
blasphemy, and sins against the holy Ghost. Again, he shall break the
laws of God to uphold his own, and shall pull down GOD to set up himself.
Such shall be the power and authority of Antichrist: so shall he possess the
consciences of the people: so shall he sit as an Idol in their hearts: so
shall he stand in the place of God, and shew-himselfe that he is GOD. The
people shall receive his doctrine and believe his word. They shall sall down
before him and worship him. They shall say, Who is like unto the beast? What
creature is Reu. 13.
so beautiful as he? They shall honor him as God.

But what is he, which has suffered himself to be so called? Who is he
which has been called by the name of GOD? Of all the creatures which have
professed the faith of Christ, of all the Kings, or Bishops, or Priests, or lay
people that ever were in the Church of GOD, who ever required to be called by
the holy name of GOD? Or, who ever liked well of them which so called him? Who
has been so wicked? Who has ever so much forgotten himself? In what place
has he dwelt? Or what has he been?

Here me thinks I see the secret motions of your heart. You look that I
should name the Bishop of Rome: that it is he which has suffered himself
to be called by the name of GOD. I will not tell you in mine own words.
Unless the Bishop himself so speak, I will not tell you. Mark then, and
witness of my indifferency, whilst I speak hereof, that I follow not
affection, but deal uprightly. Therefore, I say again, unless the Bishop
himself, suffer himself to be called by the name of GOD, I will not so say
of him. Then let us see what he has written of himself, and what he has
suffered others to write. Pope Nicholas says, Constat summum pontificem a pio
principe Did. 96. satis cuideter.
Constantino Deum appellari. It is well known, that the Pope, of the godly
Prince Constantine was called God. And therefore Pope Pius in his Bull says,
Nemo audeat Bulla Pii V. contra Eliz.
obedire. No man dare obey her, or her will, or commandments, or laws upon
pain of our curse.

The Pope was well content to suffer Christopher Marcellus, one of his
Parasites in the Council of Laterane, to say unto him, Tu In concilio Later.
sess. 4.
es alter deus in terris: Thou art an other God in earth. The Pope is content
in such sort to have a division of tenures made between him and God, as the
Poet sometime flatteringly wrote, Divinsuni imperium cum Jove Caesar habet. The
Emperor parts his rule, and holds half with Jupiter. In the Extrauagants
Extravag. Ioh 22. cum in^er in glosa.
it is set down. Dominus de us noster Papa, Our Lord God the Pope. Mark these
words. Our Lord God the Pope. In them the Pope is called Lord, and is called
God. Oh merciful Lord God, which from thy heavens beholdest this vanity, how
great is thy mercy in suffering this? I devise not this. His own books, his
own doctors, his own decrees and decretals speak it, and set it down.
Credere dominum deum tid.
nostrum Papam non potuisse statuere, prout statuit, Hereticum censeretur. To
believe that our Lord God the Pope might not decree as he decrecd, it were a
matter of Heresy. It is so written there, he has heard it, he has seen it,
he knows it is so, yet he suffers it to go abroad, and thereby suffers
himself to be called God.

He has burnt many Saints of God, and holy men for no other cause, but for
the profession of the Gospel. He has in many places burnt the holy Bible,
and such books as teach nothing but godliness. Where did he ever burn? what
speak I of burning? where may it appear that ever he controlled any for so
writing, or called in such speeches?

One of them seems to take shame of this shameless, and blasphemous style or
title. He seeks friendly to temper, and qualify, and take up the matter. Nec
deus es nec homo, clemen^. in prooemio, in glosa.
quasi neuter es inter vtrumque. Thou art neither God nor man: in a manner
thou art neither of both: but rather a mean between both. That is, thou art
not so high as God, nor yet so base as man: Whom then shall we imagine him to
be? Is he an Archangell, or Angel, or a spirit of the air? God give him grace
to see his own vanity: that he may know, he is but a miserable and mortal
man: that he may know that a time shall come when his hypocrisy and
dissimulation shall be disclosed. GOD give him grace to become godly, as
becomes the man of God. That he may indeed be the minister of Christ, and a
disposer of the secrets of God: that he may serve God in truth, in holiness
and righteousness all the days of his life. But you say, the Pope at this
day is not called GOD. He rather abaseth himself, and writes himself by a
title of humility, and is called so, Servus servorum, The servant of servants.
Be it so, that he is so called, and so written: yet he is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. Extra. de Mayor. and obedientis.
This servant says, I do make holy the unholy: I do i^stifie the wicked:
I do forgive sins: I open, and no man shuts. This servant can say,
whosoever obeys not me, he shall be rooted out. This servant may dispense
Summa ang^i in dictione. Papa. Extra de con^. statuta canonun: Felinus. 9 Qu.
e. 3. c^ncta. Pit de paludede potest. Pp. Artic. 4.
for any commandment of the old and new Testament. This servant has
Christ's lieftenantship not only over things in heaven, over things in earth,
and over things in hell: but also over the Angels both good and bad. No man
may judge this servant. For they say, Papa solutus est omni lege humana: The
Pope is exempted from all law of man. And again, Nec totus clerus, nec totus
umndus potest Papam iudicare aut deponere. Neither all the Clergy, nor all
the whole world, may either judge or depose the Pope. Such a power this
servant of servants claims to himself. What greater power may be given
unto GOD? What Angel, what archangel ever had the like power?

And this power even at this day Pope Pius chalengeth as proper to his seat.
That he has the authority which is due to Christ over his Church that no man
may judge him, nor say he does err, nor ask why he does so. He is invested in
the privilege of his Church, and loses no one jot of his dignity. It is yet
good at this day which has been set down: Sacrilegij Distinct. 40. non no 1:
in glos.
instar esset disputare de facto papae. It is sin, as great as sacrilege, or
Church robbing, to reason of any the Popes doings. These be their own
words. God knows, before whom we stand this day, they be their own words,
and not mine. Thus does he sit in the temple of God, showing himself that he
is God.

And therefore may we say, as sometime said Eusebius, Hoc est argumentum, eos
odisse deum, Eusebius. de praepara. li. (...)
quod ve^nt seipsos appellari Deos. This is an evident token, that they hate
God, because they will have themselves called by the name of God. Or as Gregory,
who speaking of Antichrist, said, Cum sit damnatus homo, and nequaquam Greg.
in Job. lib. 25. cap. 14.
spiritus, Deum se esse mentitur. Whereas he is a cursed man and not a spirit,
he faigneth himself, by lying, to be a God.

V. 5. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told ye these things?

Before I departed from you to go farther, to plant the Gospel in other
churches, I told you that Antichrist should come, and that he should oppress
and confound the Church of Christ. Paul was chosen to be an Apostle. The
office of an Apostle was not to rest in any one certain place, but to pass
from country to country, from land to land, and to fill all the world with
knowledge of the Gospel, and therein appears the difference between an
Apostle and a Bishop. A Bishop had the charge of one certain Church, an
Apostle had the charge over all the churches.

But Paul was not tied to any one city, or Island, or country. He had
authority to preach to al cities and countries: to al lands and Islands from
the east to the west. So did Christ appoint his Apostles: Go ye into all Mark
16.
the world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature. They were not sent to
Jerusalem, nor to Samaria, nor to Ephesus, nor to Rome only: but into all the
world. The whole world was their dioces, and their province. So speaks the
Prophet David of them: Their sound is gone forth through the earth: and Psalm.
19.
their words into the ends of the world. This was the commission which our
Saniour gave unto John, and to James, to Paul, and to Peter, and to the rest
of the Apostles: that they should go into all the world. Therefore if any of
the Apostles should have staide in one only place, and have gone no farther, he
had offended, and done otherwise than Christ commanded.

Here we see how foulie they are deceived which say, Peter was Bishop of Rome,
and did sit there five and twenty years. They that say so, know not what
they say. It is an error. Christ made Peter an Apostle, and not to sit as a
Bishop at Rome. He said unto Peter, Go into all the world: thou shall be a
witness unto me, unto ye outmost coasts of the earth: I send thee unto all the
churches, and not to one alone. The like charge received Paul: he travailed
from Damascus to Arabia: from Arabia to Jerusalem: from Jerusalem to Illyricum:
from Illyricum to Rome, and so from country to country, and from coast to
coast, to make a pleasant perfume of the Gospel of God, in all the world, that
it might be unto them a savor of life unto life. Therefore says he to the
Thessalomans. Ye remember that when I was with you, I told you these things.
The spirit of GOD warned me to go farther. Other churches required my
presence: I was debtor unto the^ as unto you. Yet before I left you, I told you
what dangers should ^nsue. It was mine office, I was bound so to do, least
you might be deceived. I told you Antichrist should come, even that man of sin,
the son of perdition, which should destroy himself and others also. I told
you he should be an adversary of the Gospel of Christ: that he should advance
himself over all the kings and powers of the world: that he should sit as God
in the holy place: that the people should give him place to sit in their hearts,
and in their consciences.

This warning the Apostle gave to the Thessalonians. The like warning he gave
to other Churches where he taught the Gospel: and the same is also spoken unto
us. They knew by his teaching that Antichrist should come. We know by the
marks which he has given to know Antichrist, that he is already come: and
that, the very same is come, which the Apostle describes: that he is grown
unto his fullness, and has stalled himself in the place of God.

V. 6. And now ye know what withholdeth: that he might be reueyled in his
time.

Paul seems not in these words to say, what lets the coming of
Antichrist: but what shall stay the coming of Christ. For so be makes entry
into his matter: I beseech you, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
ye be not troubled as though the day of Christ were at hand. Let no man deceive
you by any means. For the day of Christ shall not come, except there come a
departing first, and that Antichrist be disclosed. Even so here he says, ye
know what withholdeth Christ, and why he comes not. Even this, that
Antichrist might first be reueiled in his time. His time is appointed. The
spring comes not, until the winter have gone before: the night goes before,
and then the day comes. And so shall not the glorious majesty of Christ's
coming appear, before the dreadful and dangerous days of Antichrist shall
come. There shall be no delivery, unless bondage go before.

Antichrist shall bring the world into bondage: he shall do violence to the
saints of God: he shall be as a continual storm, and darkness in the church.
The godly shall look up to heaven, and call for aid: they shall cry unto the
Lord, and he will hear them. They shall say, O come Lord Jesus, thy kingdom
come, confound thine enemies. Then will he not stay: he will appear, and she
we himself in glory. In the mean while this is the cause of his stay, this
lets his coming: Antichrist must first come. This I take to be the Apostles
meaning. It agrees with the beginning. It is simple, clear, and plain, and
without danger of error.

Antichrist shall appear, not when he will: but he shall be revealed in his time.
His time is the time of darkness: when shepheardes and the guides of the
people shall be careless: when the word shall be loathed: when the light shall
be put out: when superstition shall reign: when ignorance shall have the upper
hand: when the creature shall not be known from the creator: when there shall be
no fear of God, no regard of godliness: when the people shall not know
neither wherefore they pray, nor whom they worship, nor in whom they believe:
then shall it appear that Antichrist is come, then he shall show himself: this
is his time.

V. 7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work, only he which now
lets, shall let til he be taken out of the way.

The mystery of iniquity does already work. Let us not be deceived.
Antichrist shall certainly come, and shall draw many into error. As it was with
Christ, at his coming, he was in the world, he did the works of his father,
yet few knew him: So shall it be with Antichrist, he shall be in the world,
he shall work his iniquity, and few shall know him. Paul lived more than
fifteen hundred years past. Yet then he said the mystery of the iniquity
does already work. The devil is not idle, says he, Antichrist even now
works, when as the blood of Christ was fresh: when as yet the Apostles and
many other witnesses of our redemption by Christ were living. And S. John
says, Even now are there many Antichrists 1. Ioh. 2.
come already. So soon was his foundation cast, his plot laid, his way
prepared, and his work begun. So long since did Paul see some which delited
in the works of darkness: which were the enemies of the cross of Christ,
which served their belly and not the Lord, even then did he see ye grievous
wolves not sparing the flock, should enter in among them. Al these were the
forerunners and the harbingers of Antichrist.

We may not think ye Antichrist shall come as a robber by the high ways, or
like a murderer, or like a tyrant that burns our houses, or sacketh our
cities, or destroys our fields, or pulls down all that is before him. We
may not look that he should say I am Antichrist, I am that man of sin, I am
the son of perdition, I am the adversary, and am contrary to Christ. He
shall not show forth himself in such a sort, he shall not so speak of himself.
He is subtle and cunning, he shall deceive the learned and the wise: he shall
cast himself into a color of holiness: he shall fast, he shall pray, he shall
give alms and show mercy: he shall walk as if he were a disciple of Christ:
he shall counterfeite an Angel of light. He shall go before, and the world shall
follow him. So shall the mystery of iniquity work. His life, his religion,
his doctrine shall be close and hid, and secret. Antichrist works in mystery.
Hierome says, Ingemuit totus orbis, Hieron. dial. cont. Luciferian. ca. 7.
and Arianum se esse miratus est. The whole world mourned, and did marvel
that they were possessed with the error of Arius: that they denied the
divinity of Christ before they were ware. This was a mystery. So shall the
learned and wise be deceived. They shall honor Antichrist unawares. They shall
say, we defye him, and detest him, and yet shall fall down and worship him. This
is a mystery. So secret shall his dealing be, it shall not be known to many.

He shall walk in craftiness, and handle the word of God deceitfully: he shall
mingle his lies with the truth of God: he shall mingle his poison with the
wholesome food of our souls; so closely and suttlely, that it shall hardly be
espied: he shall go forward by little and little, and so win credit, and
conueigh him self into the hearts of the people. This is a mystery. Christ
says, A man sowed good Matthew. 13.
feed in his field, but while men slept, there came his foe, and sowed tares
among the wheat, and went his way. They grew together, and had both one like
color. The householder willed them to let both grow together til harnest come,
least with the tares, they pluck up the wheat also. So shall be the coming
of Antichrist. He shall come whiles men sleep, in the night of blindness, and
of negligence, and of ignorance: and shall so we his tares with the Lords
wheat. They shall both grow up together. The day of the Lord shall reveal them
and set each part by it self. This is a mystery, and as it is secret, so is it
long in working. This mystery began in the d^ies of the Apostles, and
continues on still unto our time. It is still in work.

But who be they, which follow his loare: which yield themselves to him, and
which shall be dereiued? are they poor men, or artificers, or laborers? or are
they unlearned and ignorant men? No, no, he shall deceive Priests, ^ops,
Archbishops, Princes, Kings, Emperors, the grauest, the best learned, the
wi^est, the mightiest men in the world. He shall and their eyes, and amaze
their hearts. They shall run to him out of al parts of the earth: they shall
fall down before him: they shall ask council of him: they shall say, thou
art the Doctor of Doctors, thou art the father of fathers, thou art the
comfort of the Church, thou art the light of the world, thou art most holy:
al law, and al knowledge is hid in thy breast: we beseech thy holiness, show
us thy way, expound thou the law unto us, teach us how we may be saved:
thou have the key of knowledge, thy word is the word of truth. So shall they
creep to Antichrist, so shall they pour out their souls before him, so shall
they seek counsel at his mouth, so shall they fetch light at the Prince of
darkness.

This mystery, says S. Paul, does already work, it shall increase and go
forward and grow to a perfection. A thorn when it is young is soft and gentle,
ye may thrust at it with your finger, it will not hurt you: but after, it waxes
and grows hard and stubborn, it will pierce to the flesh and draw blood. A
Bear when he is young is harmless and innocent, ye may dandle it, and dally
with it, as with a whelp, it has not chambers to gripe, no teeth to bite, nor
paws to tear: but after it will grow, and become fierce and cruel like the
sire. A serpent when it is young, is little and pretty: it has no sting nor
poison. You may take it in your hand and lay it in your lap, it will not burt
you. After, it will increase in benime, and grow in mischief, and be like it
self: then it will shake the sting, and cast poison, and prove dangerous.

Such a thorn, such a bear, such a serpent is Antichrist. At the first he
shall seem soft and gentle, and pretty and innocent. After he shall grow
fierce, and arm himself with sting and poison. But a thorn though it be
soft, is a thorn: a bear though he be little is a bear: a serpent though it
be pretty is a serpent. Even so Antichrist, though he seem gentle, mild, and
simple, yet is he Antichrist. He grows by degrees, he will be like his sire,
his paws will be dreadful, his mouth will be deadly.

Whosoever know the nature and working of an earthquake, how it grows and
how it works, know, that at the first it is some little wind, gathered and
kept in some hollow places of the earth: there it lies closely sometimes for
many years, without giving forth any noise, without stirring or shaking.
One may walk over it and perceive nothing. After it grows strong and
violent, it seeks a may out, it forces it self, it gathers Srength and
comes abroad, it will stay no longer. Out it breaks, and teareth the
earth, and renteth rocks, overthrows mountains, shakes down towns and
cities, swalloweth by whole rivers: it inflameth the air, raises thunder,
roareth up into Heaven, and astonieth the world. Such is the working of an
earthquake: so great and mighty at the end, so little and simple at the
first. Such shall be the mystery and coming of Antichrist. At the beginning
he shall be like a little wind, and shall enter into the hollownesse and
darkness of the Church, but after, he shall shake the whole world. He shall
show forth himself at the first with countenance of devotion and holiness,
that he may closely and privily, and secretly wreath in himself. Few shall be
able to understand the mystery of his dealing. After, he shall be opened, and
appear as he is.

Who would think there were any evil in forcing of virginity, chastity, or
single life? He that is unmarried, cares for the things of the Lord, how he
may please the Lord, that he may be holy both in body, and also in spirit.
Would God it were so with all, that have taken the profession of single life.
But the color is fair. Hence has it grown, that Bishops, and Priests, and
young men, and maidens have continued single. This see^med strange, and a
miracle, and a matter of great holiness. But this is a mystery: this is a
way to bring in Antichrist. Mark what Saint Paul speaks hereof, They shall
forbid to marry. Of whom (...). Tim. 4.
speaks he? Of Antichrist, and his Disciples. They shall forbid lawful
marriage, as unholy, and as a state of life unfit for their holiness. Yet
Christ Jesus the son of God did never forbid it. His Apostles were married
and had wives.

This, says Saint Paul is a mark of Antichrist, by this shall he be known.
Forbidding of marriage is a doctrine of Diuelles: not of Christ, or of God, but
of devils. It is a gulf, it is a sea, it is a world, it is a hell of iniquity:
and the vilest vilanie that ever crept into the Church of GOD. Hierome
expounding the words of Daniel, He shall have no regard to the desires of
women, says, Facili^ Hieron in 11. Dauiel.
interpretatio est, de Antichristo, quodideo simul^ castitatem vt plurimos
decipiat. The better exposition here of is to apply these words to Antichrist,
for that he shall pretend chastity, that he may deceive many. This is the
mystery of iniquity. This is the practice of Antichrist. Heshall come with a
cloak of counterfaited chastity, not with true chastity has in body, and
also in spirit, but with counterseit chastity, and so shall deceive the
hearts of many.

Who would think there were any evil in single communisn? D^ why may not
every body follow his own devotion, and receive the sacrament when he will?
what harm is herein? It may seem to be done for the reverence unto the
sacrament, least it should grow in contempt, if it were used often. These
reasons are fair and fresh, but this is a mystery, and a practice of
Antichrist. For, by this means have they shut out the faithful people of God,
and made them negligent and carlesse for the receiving of the Lords supper:
they abused the Church of the living God, they turned the remembrance of the
death of Christ into a Maigame: they made the people commit horrible and open
idolatry, to worship the creature in stead of the Creator, which is God
blessed for ever.

Who would think there were any evil in the keys of the Church? They are the
expounding of the law, and the disclosing of the will of God. They are the
chiefest comfort of our conscience. But Antichrist shall take those keys unto
himself, and shall build up his own kingdom with them. He shall shut, that
God has opened: and shall open that God has shut. This is also the mystery of
iniquity.

Who would think there were any evil in godly prayers of the Church? Christ
says. Watch and pray, for you know not in what Mat. 24.
hour your Master will come. And again, Mat. 6.
Pray thou to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which sees thee
in secret shall reward thee openly. And again, Ask and ye Matt. 7.
shall receive, seek and ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened unto
you. Saint Paul says, Pray without ceasing. The Prophet David 1. These. 5.
Psalm. 145.
says, The Lord is nigh unto al them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him faithfully. For the Lord will hear the prayers of his Saints, and deliver
them when they call upon him. These prayers shall Antichrist take to work his
iniquity. And under pretense of them shall devour widows houses, and shall
make a net of them to fish and drag for all the riches of the world. This is
also the mystery of iniquity.

Who would think there were so great evil in the doctrine of Purgatory? What
if one thought that his father or friend died in some beniall sin, and were
chastised somewhile in purgatory ^ire, and that he might be relieved by
prayers? For this iolie pretense and imagination have they thereof. What if one
should so think? what hurt were it? Brethren this is the mystery of al
mysteries, and the secret of al secrets. In this stands the countenance, and
all the welfare of Antichrist. He has impropried the whole kingdom of
Purgatory to himself, and has made it more gainefull, than heaven and earth.
There he sells prayers: there he makes port sale of bulls and pardons: there
he sells forgiveness of sins, a culpa and poena. He sells the mercies of
GOD, the blood of the Martyrs, the works of supererogation, the merits of his
fratries, the blood of Christ. There he sells paradise, deliverance or
assurance from hell, and entrance into heaven, he makes merchandise of the
souls of the people. This is the alonelie mystery above al other mysteries.

Who would think there were any evil in the name of the Church? It is the
witness bearer unto the gospel. It is the pillar of truth. It is the spouse of
Christ. Yet says Christ: Antichrist shall come in my name. He shall seems
holy, he shall talk of the gospel, he shall carry the face of the church, and
deceive many. This is a mystery.

Who would think it a matter of so great inconvenience, for a man to call the
Bishop of Rome the greatest Bishop, or the chiefest Patriarch, and the highest
Judge: and to say that al appeals lie unto him? what hurt may this be? It
seems a small matter, a matter of nothing. But it is a practice, it is a
secret, and a mystery. Hence flowed all the streams of vanity and presumption
wherein he aduaunceth himself. Hence it is, that he says, I am above Kings
and Emperors. I am above general counsels. I am above the whole Church of
Christ. I am above the Angels of God. I have power to command and to
countermaunde them at my pleasure. I am the succssour of Peter. I am the vicar
of Christ. No man may judge me whatsoever I do. I can not err. General
councels might err, the Apostles might err: the Angels of God might err: but
I can not err. I have the fullness of power. The whole world is my dioresse.
Whosoever is saved, is under me. Who so ever is not under me is cursed of God.
I am the light of the world. I can in a manner do whatsoever God can do. Al
these speeches are written, are printed, are published, and proclaimed abroad.
This is a mystery of iniquity, this is a deep secret. These are the very
ways and steps of Antichrist. God give us eyes to see them, and hearts that
we may discern them.

Paul did see this mystery working even in that time he lived. John says,
Diotrephes Epi. 13. Ioh.
loves to have the preeminence. To lift up himself above his brethren, to be
the head of the Church, and to bear a maisterie. So Paul espied contentions
in Corinth: Every 1. Cor. 2.
one of you says, I am Paul's, and I am Apollos, and I am Cephas, and I am
Christ's. These were the beginnings of Antichrist. But Paul says, We preach
not our selves, but Christ (...). Cor. 4.
Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. So the true
Disciples of Christ reckon not themselves any thing, but the members one of an
other, but the ministers by who^ the people believe, but witnesses chosen
before of God, but such as are commanded to preach, but Gods laborers.

Now let us consider these marks of Antichrist. Was there ever any, which
has forbidden laweful marriage? and accounted it a state of life which is
unclean, and not meet for his holiness? and deceived the world with
counterfaite chastity? the same is Antichrist. For Hierome tells us,
Antichrist shall pretend chastity, that he may deceive many: and Paul calls
forbidding of Marriage, the doctrine of Devils.

Was there ever any which has shut soorth the faithful from the holy
Communion, and has made them careless for the receiving thereof? which has
defaced the sacrament, abused the Church of God, and caused the people to give
the honor of God unto a creature? this is the working of the mystery of
iniquity: he is Antichrist.

Was there ever any, which took the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
wrought to himself therewith a principality or kingdom in earth? was there
ever any which has shut them out from the kingdom of God, to whom God has
opened it, and has set free the consciences of those sinners whom God has not
loosed? he is Antichrist.

Was there ever any which beguiled the people, which devoured widows houses
under color of long prayers, and has used them as a net to fish for the
treasures and riches of all the world? he is Antichrist.

Was there ever any which sold bulls, and pardons, and forgiveness of
sins, and the mercies of God, and the merits of men, and the blood of the
Martyrs, and the passion of Christ the son of God? Was there ever any that
sold Paradise, and Heaven, and mad^ sale of the souls of the people, and al
for money? the same is Antichrist.

Was there ever any which came in the name of Christ, with the show of
holiness, with the countenance of the Church, and has showed himself in all
his life and doctrine contrary to Christ? he is Antichrist.

Was there ever any which has said? I am above Kings and Emperors, and the
states of the world: I am above Councels, I am above the whole Church of
Christ, and above the Angels of God. No man may judge me: I can not err.
Whosoever shall be saved must be under me. If any shall not obey me, they are
cursed before God: God and I have one judgment seat, we sit together, I can
do, whatsoever God can do. He that thus says is Antichrist. The mystery of
iniquity does work already, says the Apostle. He shall not open himself.
What so ever he does, he does it in secret. So shall he auaunce himself: so
shall he speak great things and blasphemies against the highest: so shall he
prevail and prosper: so shall he darken the heavens, and draw the third
part of the stars after him: so shall he sit in the holy place, even in the
seat of God and all this shall he work under pretense of humility, and shall
call himself the servant of servant.

Only he which now withholdeth, shall let til he be taken out of the way.

Now the Emperor holds the whole power and authority over the world: but
it shall be taken away from him, and then shall Antichrist come, when al stoppes
and lets shall be removed. Who is he that does stop him and let his coming?
The Emperor of Rome. So says Tertullian, so Augustine, Ambrose, and
Chrysostom. Antichrist shall possess a great part of the Roman Empire: yet
so long as the Emperor shall stand and prosper, he will not suffer any part of
his empire to be abated. So long as the Emperor shall be able to bear
himself, Antichrist shall never be able to grow. But a time shall come when the
Empire of Rome shall be rent asunder, then the authority of the Emperor shall
decay, then Antichrist shall gather strength, and shall place himself where the
Emperor was. A traitor can not usurp the crown so long as the right king is
able to stand and maintain his state. Antichrist is a traitor. A traitor
both to God and man. When the Emperor shall fall and decay, then he shall rise
up. When the Emperor becomes weak, then he shall grow strong. Therefore
Paul says, Antichrist shall not come yet, for the Emperor lets him. The
Emperor shall be removed, and then shall Antichrist come.

But before I proceed to say more of this division of the Empire. That we may
come to the bottom of this matter, and so see the mea^ng of this prophecy
evidently laid open before us, I will show more plainly, and particularly of
Antichrist, who he shall be. It is a hard and doubtful thing, as are al
prophecies, but mark well, that shall be spoken. I will speak nothing without
good warraunt and authority of the old writers and fathers. I will tell you the
conditions of Antichrist, and where he shall dwell: that known, it shall be no
hard matter to know the rest.

Who shall he be then, or of what condition, that we may know him? Some have
said, he should be a Jewe of the tribe of Dan: some that Nero the bloody tyrant
should rise again and he should be Antichrist: some that he should be a
mighty persecutour, which should rage and range over the whole world, raze
towers and castles, set on fire the Church and oratories, and kill whom so ever
he meets: Hyppolitus says he shall be begotten by the Devil, and himself
shall be a devil. These devises were imagined and written many hundred years
sithence, as every body were best able to devise. But these are fables, and
have no ground. To say the truth, Antichrist shall neither be a Jew, nor Nero,
nor one begotten by the Devil. He shall be a Christian, he shall be a Bishop,
and a holy father, and a Bishop of great show and countenance in the world.
Mark, he shall not be a King, nor an Emperor, nor a tyrant, nor a temporal
Prince, but a Bishop.

But how may this be known, that we may be certain of it? For you will
charge my sayings with partiality, as if what should be spoken by me, might
proceed of displeasure and malice. Who then has so spoken or written, that we
may believe him? Hear Gregory himself a Bishop of Rome, what he recorded
of this matter well nigh a thousand years ago. Rex superbiae prope est, and
quod dici Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
nefas est, sacerdotum est praeparatus exercitus. The king of pride (that is,
Antichrist) is even at hand, and an army of priests is prepared: which is a
wicked, or horrible thing to be spoken. Lo, both the king, which is
Antichrist: and his guard to wait upon him: a company of priests and
clerks: of Monks and Friars to attend upon him. And upon whom shall an army
of priests attend, but upon a Bishop?

If you say, this is no plain proof, but forced, and wrested, because he
names not a Bishop, but a king of pride: hear him again, Fidenter dico, quod
quisquis se vniuersalem sacerdotem Greg. lib. 6. Epist. 30.
vocat, vel vocari de siderat, in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit. I
speak it boldly, whosoever either calls himself the universal priest, or
desires so to be called (as does the Pope) in the pride of his heart, he is
the forerunner of Antichrist. In this place, he does not only tell us,
Antichrist shall be a Bishop, but also what manner of Bishop. He shall be a
Bishop, and that Bishop, which shall claim universal authority. Such a Bishop
as shall say, It is of the necessity of salvation, that every soul be subject
to me. Which shall say, it is plain, that the church is one, because in the
universal church, there is one supreme head, that is, the Pope.

Sybilla says, this king, shall be (...), Oraeulorum cap. 8.
that is; shall have a white head: and shall be called by a name much like to
Pontus. In which two marks of his head and name, whom can we find but a
Bishop? Who wears solemnly a white myter of silver, and adourned with
precious stones, and in Latin is named pontifex. Again, Ioachimus Abbas
says, he shall exalt himself above all that is called God: for he only shall
be called holy Lord, and most holy Pope. So that for our direction, we hear
not only of a King of pride, and his guard of priests: but we are learned that
this king shall have a white head and a name much like pontus, that is, shall be
pontifex, a Bishop. Gregory morcouer has said he shall call himself, or
desire to be called an universal priest: and Ioachimus an Abbot has told us,
Antichrist shall be called, ^ly Lord, and most holy Pope.

But where shall Antichrist be resident? In what place shall we seek him? for,
if we look for him in one place, and he be in an other, we shall not find him.
Where then is he stalled, in what City? in what Church? Some say, in Babylon,
some in Syria, some in Chaldea, some in Jerusalem upon mount Sion, some in one
place, some in an other. These are but gesses, and bear no weight. Paul
tells us, he shall creep into the Empire of Rome. So says the Apostle, and
so the fathers. The Empire shall be made waste, and then Antichrist shall come,
and invade the Church. But the Empire was great and wide, it reached thed over
a great part of the world. It did contain England, France, Spain, Germany,
Poland, Denmark, Italy, Illyricum, Macedonia, Thracia, Graecia, Asia,
Armenia, Egypt, Mauritania, and the rest of Africa. Al these were parts of
the Empire of Rome. In what part, or in what City, or in what Church of al
these shall he sit?

Saint John says, The seven heads, are Revel. 17.
seven mountains on which the woman sits. Antichrist shall sit in a City
built upon seven hills. Where shall we find such a City in the whole
world? is it Jerusalem, or Athens, or Constantinople, or Antioch? Where we
find a City so built, that City is the place of Antichrist. There is none
but one. The spirit of God cannot lie. But which is that one? Al writers as well
old as new, call that City Rome. Rome is built upon seven hills. They be
yet standing. The names of the hills are known to be these, Palatinus,
Quirinalis, Auentinus, Caelius, Viminalis, Exquilius, Ianicularis. The Poet
speaking of this City says, Septemque vna sibi muro circundedit arces. And
this one city has compassed in to it self with a wall seven high places.
Therefore Plutarch calls it (...), of seven hills. They have used in Rome,
in their general processions in gang week to go to these seven hills, and
to do some solemn piece of service at every of them. Rome is the City of
seven heads: Rome is the City built upon seven hills: therefore the City
which John describes: and therefore it is the tabernacle, and stal, in which
Antichrist shall sit.

Sybilla wrote two thousand years sithence, Syb. oracul. cap. 8.
That the greatest terror and fury of his empire, and the greatest woe that
he shall work, shall be by the banks of Tyber. And who is there that has
heard any thing of the situation of Rome, that does not know it is built on
the banks of Tyber? Irenaeus, who Iraen lib. 5. cap. vltimo.
lived welneare fifteen hundred years ago, says, the name of Antichrist,
expressed by that number shall be Latinus, that is, he shall sit in a city
called Latium, that is, Rome. Ioa. chimus Abbas says, Antichristus iam pridem
natus est Romae. and altius extolletur in sede Apostolica. Antichrist is long
since borne in Rome, and yet shall be advanced higher in the Apostolic see.
Bernard says, Bestia illa de Apocalipsi, cui Bern epist. 125.
datum est os loquens blasphemias, and bellum gerere cum sanctis, Petri
cathedram occupat, tanquam leo paratus ad praedam. The beast that is spoken of
in the book of Revelations, unto which beast is given a mouth to speak
blasphemies, and to keep war against the Saints of God is now gotten into
Peter's chair, as a Lion prepared to his pray. These words are clear as the
sun beams.

Saint John says, Antichrist shall sit in a City built upon seven hills.
That City is the City of Rome. Dame Sybilla says, his greatest work shall
be by the banks of Tyber. That City so built, is the City of Rome. Ireneus
says, the name of Antichrist shall be Latinus: this name belongs to the
Bishop of Rome. Bernard says, the beast that is spoken of in the Revelation,
is gotten into Peter's chair. John lived 1560. years since. Sybilla 2000:
Irenaeus about 1500: Ioachimus Abbas 300: Bernard lived about four hundred
years sithence, and by the testimony of all these, Antichrist shall be a
Bishop and placed at Rome.

You marvel at this, how it should be possible that Antichrist should sit in
Peter's chair, you hear who has said it: and no wonder at al, for he shall sit
in the place of God, in the holy place, in the Church of Christ. So does
Augustine gather upon the Apostles words: Non De ciuit. dei li. 20. ca. 19.
enim templum alicuius idoli, aut daemonis, templum dei Apostolus diceret. For
the temple of an idol, or of a devil, the Apostle would never call the temple
of God. And Hierome says, Antichristus Ad Algasia. Hieron. Quaest. 11.
sedebit in templo dei, vel Hierosolymis (vt quidam putant) vel in Ecclesia (vt
verius arbitramur) ostendens setanquam ipse sit Christus and filius dei.
Antichrist shall sit in the temple of God, either at Jerusalem (as some
imagine) or in the church (as we more truly think) showing himself as if he
were Christ, and the son of God. Again he says of him, Antichrist shall
tread under Ibid.
his feet al approved and true religion. And Saint Hilarie says, Anne
ambiguum est Hill. contra. Auxentium.
Antichristum in ijs esse sessurum. Is there any doubt but Antichrist shall sit
in the same houses? He shall sit in those houses and buildings, with which you
are in love, and which you honor. And again he says, Sub specie euangelicae
pradicationis Ibid.
Christo contrarius erit: vt dominus noster Jesus Christus denegetur, quum
praedicari creditur. He shall be contrary to Christ, under the color of
preaching the gospel: so that our Lord Jesus Christ shall then be denied, when
a man would think he is preached. Thus we we have seen who shall be
Antichrist, and in what Church he shall be: that he shall be a Bishop, and
shall be stalled or placed in Rome.

Now to return again to the words of the Apostle, Only he which now
lets, shall let till he be taken away.

Now the Emperor has the rule over the world. Let him keep it. There shall
a time come when he shall loose his possessions: then Antichrist shall appear.
When the Empire shall be dismembered, and the kingdoms belonging to him shall
depart from him, then shall be the coming of Antichrist. Who will look into
the story of things and times past, shall perceive the meaning of the Apostle:
and how the empire of Rome, being so great, is consumed and brought to nothing:
and in what sort Antichrist, which was once so poor and simple, so little
regarded and obscure, might grow to be so great, and auaunee himself above
Kings and Princes. The empouerishing of the one, was the enriching of the other.

I told you, that the empire of Rome contained sometimes a great part of the
world, as England, France, Spain, Germany, etc. Where is England now? It
is divided from, and is no part of the Empire. Where is France, Spain,
Italy, Illyricum? where is Rome it self? They are taken away from it, and
are now no part of the Empire. Where is Macedonia, Thracia, Graecia, Asia,
Armenia, etc. We can not think of them, but with heaviness. They be now
under the Turk: they are taken awate, and are no part of the Empire. What is
become of the great countenance which the Emperor had in all the world? He is
now in comparison no body. What part of all the Empire is left unto him? Not
one. He has not left him one City, or town. What is become of al which did
belong to him? They are dissolved, taken from him, and his estate is brought to
nothing.

In the mean while Antichrist increased, and grew to wealth by spoil of the
Empire. The Bishop of Rome has at this day many Countries and Lordshippes,
Poor Peter had none. How then came he by them? By the spoil of the Empire.
He has the title of Forum-Iulium. Where has he it, but of the spoil of the
Empire? Where has he so many countries beginning at Luke, and onward to the
Alps, but by the spoil of the Empire? He has Rauenna Forum Sempronij,
Beneuentum and Spoletum. Al these he has by the spoil of the Empire. He
claims the kingdom of Naples, and of Sicile, he is the Lord Paramount. King
Philip is his vassal, and paieth him tribute. He has Rome it self. It did
belong unto the Emperor. How grew it to the Bishop? whence has he it? By
the spoil of the Empire. We see then, that the Emperor is abated: that the
Bishop is increased, and so increased, that he has made the Emperor to be
his man, to bear his train, to wait upon him, to kneel down, and to kiss
his foot. This could he never bring to pass, whiles the Empire stood whole,
and the Emperor was able to make his part good. But these things were done,
that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken, The Kings of the earth shall give
their Revel. 17.
strength and power to the beast, etc. That they may agree together, and give
their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God be fulfilled. Who that
beast shall be, Augustine writing upon the Psalms very well declares, Ita
traditur de Antichristo, Aug. in Psa. 9.
quod omnes reges superaturus sit, and solus regnum obtenturus. Thus it is
written of Antichrist, that he shall conquer al Kings, and obtain the
kingdom himself alone, and who it is unto whom the Kings of the earth have
given their kingdom: and which does obtain the kingdom himself alone., if
any man doubt, let him be advised by these sayings of them, which knew it
well, and were not enemies to the Bishoppricke of Rome, Johan. de Parisiis
says Some think, that Johan. de Paris. de potestat. regia. ca. 22.
by reason of this donation (of Constantine) the Pope is the Emperor, and the
Lord of the world: and that hereby he has power both to set up, and also to
put down Kings, as an Emperor. And if this be too little, to say thus upon
heare-saie, the same says further plainly, Omnis potestas saecularis
immediate data est Papae. Al manner temporal power was given immediately unto
the Pope. What other thing is it that Innocentius says? The Emperor holds
his empire of the Pope: and therefore he is bound to swear homage and fealty
to the Pope, as the vassal is bound to his Lord.

In this right Pope Adrian said, Behold it is in our hand to bestow the
Empire upon whom we list. Were not the state of the empire now decayed: were
not the prophecy of the Apostle now fulfilled: were not the Emperor
(howsoever he have in a mystery a bare name left) taken away, as well in
respect of the Countries which he did hold; as of the authority, the rule,
and power which he had over the world: these proud speeches could never have
been suffered.

Now then seeing the empire is so decayed, and abased, and the Bishop of Rome
so highly advanced into his seat and authority (so highly I say) that some
are bold to say, The Pope has the princehoode of all the whole world, and,
The Pope is king of kings, and Lord of Lords: Let Gregory, who has
otherwhere given great light to this prophecy, show us hereby also to know who
is Antichrist. He says, Antichristus veniens ipsas etiam summas Greg. (...).
33. ca. 22. in lob
huius saeculi potestates obtinebit. Antichrist when he shall come, shall
conquer the highest estates, and powers of this world.

This whole matter is also expressed in the seventh of Daniel. The fourth beast
was fearful, Dan. 7.
and terrible, and very strong, it had great iron teeth: it devoured and brake
in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet: and it was unlike to the
beasts that were before it: for it had ten horns. And behold, there came up
among them an other little horn, which had eyes like a man, and a mouth
speaking presumptuous things. This beast is the empire of Rome, the greatest
Empire that ever was. It was divided into ten, or, into sundry kingdoms, as
I showed you, and as we see this day. The little horn is Antichrist. The
Empire shall be divided and weakened, then Antichrist shall come. He shall speak
words Dan. 7.
against the most high, and shall consume the Saints of the most high, and
think that he may change times and laws, and they shall be given into his
hand. Daniel says he shall speak words against the most high, and shall think
he may change times and laws, and they shall be given into his hand. Wherein
he shows not only the pride and presumption of Antichrist, but that he shall
also prevail for a time. Such a one there has been, and yet is. He
blasphemeth God, murdereth the saints, has changed times and laws, the laws
of God, and the laws of nature. He is Antichrist.

To make an end of this part of knowledge of Antichrist, who he shall be, in
what place he shall dwell, and of that which should let his coming: let us
remember he shall be no Jew nor heathen, but a christian, and no king or
temporal wight, but a bishop, an universal priest, and most holy Pope. As
Hierome upon the words of the prophet, O pastor and Idolum, etc. O idol
sheapheard, that etc. says, Pastor stultus Hiero in 11. Z^cgar.
and imperitus haud dubitem quin sit Antichristus, qui in consummatione mundi
dicitur esse venturus, I doubt nothing but that this foolish and unskillful
sheaphearde is Antichrist, which should come toward the end of the world.
And farther says: Tam sceleratus est pastor vt Ibid.
non idolorum cultor sed ipse idolum nominetur: dum se appellat deum and vult
ab omnibus adorari. This shephearde is so wicked that he is not called a
worshipper ofidols, but an idol it self: because he calls himself God, and
will be worshipped of al men.

Let us remember we may not seek him in the streets, or in market places, or
in woods, or in the wilderness: but in the temple of god. There shall he sit,
and hold the stern, and devise laws and canons, and shall rule the hearts
and confciences of the people: there shall he show his power, and put on him
the cl^ake of simplicity, and of truth, and of holiness.

S. Augustine says, Antichrist shall not only sit in the church of god, but
also shall show himself in outward appearaunce, as if he himself were the
Church it self. Non in templo Dei, De (...). dai li. 20. ca. 19.
sed, in templum dei sedeat: tanquam ipse sit templum dei, quod est ecclesia.
Not, that he sits in the temple of God, but he sits as the temple of God,
as if he himself were the temple of God, which is the Church. Let us remember
what shall let his coming, even the safety of the Emperor, and his
continuance in that full power and estate wherein he then was. The decaie of
the Empire shall make way for Antichrist. If therefore it be weakened and has
been weakened any time sithence, if the kingdoms of the world be divided from
it: that is an evident token that the coming of Antichrist is not stopped, but
he has come and showed himself, and by little and little ever since such
decay of the Empire, has enlarged himself and established his power over al
countries and nations, as Chrysostom says: Donec illius Chriso. hom. 4. in
2.2. These.
imperij timor fuerit. etc. As long as the Empire shall be had in awe, no man,
shall straightway submit himself to Antichrist: but after that the Empire shall
be dissolved, Antichrist shall invade the state of the Empire standing void:
and shall labor to pull unto himself the empire both of man and God.

V. 8. And then shall that wicked man be uttered, whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy him with the appearaunce of his
coming.

Antichrist shall be opened by little and little. Al his devises and practices
shall be disclosed: that they may appear and be seen of the world. He is in
this place called (...) a man without order. This is another peculiar note of
Antichrist. He shall seek to be free, and go at liberty: he shall be tied to
no law, neither of God, nor of man. Let us once again look into the state of
the Church of Rome to seek out this lawless man. There he sits, that
says, I cannot err. Why is it said, Papa solutus est Extra de costit. licet.
9 qu. 3. cu^ci. 10. de parisiis, de pot. reg and papali.
omni lege humana. The Pope is exempted from al law of man? And again, why
must we expound any fact of the holy father for the best? and, if it be theft,
or any other thing, that of it self is evil (as adultery or fornication) we
must think it is done by the secret inspiration of God. Again why say they,
The doings Did. 40. non nos: in glosa.
of the Pope are excused, as Sampsous murders: as the Jews robberies: and as
the adulteries of Jacob. And again, why say they? Neither all the clergy, nor
all the whole world Pet. de pal^ de depot. Pp. Art. 4.
may either judge or depose the Pope: but because he is lawless.

Why is it said, In ijs quae vult est ei pro ratione Extra de translat. Epi.
quanto in glo.
voluntas, nec est qui dicat illi, domine cur it a facis? In such things as he
wills, his will stands in steed of reason, neither may any man say unto
him, O sir, why do ye this? but, because he is lawless. Why is it said of
him, although Distinct. 40. si Papa. in glosa.
all the world would judge in any matter against the Pope, yet it seems we
ought to stand to the judgment of the Pope. For he seems to have al laws
in the chest of his bosom, but because he is (...) that lawless man? Why is
it, notwithstanding the Pope Ibid.
draw innumerable companies of people by heaps with him into hell, that yet no
mortal man may once dare reprove him, but because he is that lawelesse man?

Why is it said, Papa etiam rerum naturam immutat, De trans^. Epis. ca. quan^,
glosa. ^is. 7
substantialia alicuius rei applicando alteri and de nihilo potest facere
aliquid, and sententiam quae nulla est aliquam facere. Ille enim potest supra
ius dispensare, and de iniustitia facere i^stitiam corrigendo iura and mutando.
The Pope may also change the very nature of things, in applying the
substantial parts of one thing to another: and of nothing can make something:
and of no sentence, may make a sentence: for he may dispense above the law,
and of wrong may make right, by correcting and changing the laws. One
Zabarella says, they persuaded the bishops, that they might do al things: and
therefore whatsoever they listed, yea such things as are not laweful. How
could this have been wrought, but that the scriptures should be fulfilled?
This is he whom Paul describes, that wicked lawless man. Thus he reigns and
rules without law, without reason, without fear of God, without regard of
man. He is exempted from al law, and his word is law to bind all the world.
This is Antichrist. This is he of who^ Daniel prophesied, Daniel. 7.
He shall think he may change laws and times: the times of nature and the
laws which God himself has ordained. This is he which has carried himself
so long time under the color of holiness: this is he, which has beguiled and
blinded the eyes of the world.

But blessed be the name of our God, which is the God of truth, and the God of
lights: his tyranny and treachery is now revealed, and therefore not
regarded. Oh what mountains of money made he sometimes of pardons? His pardons
were reputed the only safety, and comfort of men's souls. He was not reckoned
a christian whosoever sought them not. No man might lack them neither in his
life, nor after his death. But where are they now? what is become of them? who
buieth the^? who regards the having of the^? who reposeth his trust in the^
children make sport of them, and play with them in the streets. They see the
filth of them, and the sollie, and abhor them. How comes this so to pass?
The man of sin is revealed.

What a kingdom made he of purgatory? he shut out thence whom he listed: and
released such as were there at his pleasure. He claimed power over the quick
and dead: he sold the years, the dai^s, and the months by round reckoning, a
hundred, five hundred, and a thousand, and thousand thousands years of pardon.
Of which folly his own Canonistes were ashamed. One of them says, Na^ quod
dicitur Petro, 10. Mayor in 4. sentent. did. 20. qu. (...).
tibi dab^ claues, etc. Touching that Christ said unto Peter, Unto thee will I
wiue the keys, etc. We must understand this authority with a corn of salt (
other ^ise it may be unsavory). Therefore certain of the Popes pardons that
promise twenty thousand years, are foolish and superstitious.

This was not given for nothing, but sold for money. Who had ought to give,
had speedy dispatch: but poor souls that had nothing, or no friends to pay
for them, should lie still. This was a wealthy kingdom. But now where is
purgatory? who regards it? Who cares for it? children scorn it in their
streets, and know it is a ^able. How comes this so to pass? the wicked, or
lawelesse man is revealed.

He was able to rule the whole world with a beck. His word stood as the word
of God: no Prince nor Emperor durst withstand it. It was thought impossible
that he should ^rre. But now the world sees, his wo^ deceivable and vain:
he erreth, and has lived in great error. Now few men will believe him: no
Prince will trust his word: howsoever they (whose eyes God has not yet opened
to see the truth) trust him in religion, in worldly matters they will not trust
him. How comes this so to pass? the man of sin is revealed. What shall I
say more? behold round about the world all places, and even Rome it self.
The poor massing Priest stands a cold, and can get no hire: the Popes
Palles lie a rotting: his Bulls go a begging: his wares stand upon his hand:
no wise man will buy them. Why? how comes this so to pass? The man of sin
is revealed, all his deceit and treachery is revealed.

The Pope stirs and strives at this day all that he can. He excommunicateth
and curses: he sends out his bulls: he blows up seditions: he breeoeth
treasons: he raises subjects against their Princes: he sets Princes upon
their subjects: he imprisoneth, and murdereth the Saints of God: he shakes and
enflameth the whole world in his quarrels. But al in vain. Why so? how
comes this to pass? there is no counsel, no wisdom, no fire, no sword,
that shall prevail against the Lord. The man of sin, and his errors are
revealed. Men see and know, and detest the blindness wherein they were lead:
the people forsake him over and over the world.

Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish
with the brightness of his coming.

9 Even him whose coming is by the effectual working of Satan, with all power
and signs, and lying wonders.

10 And in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, among them that perish,
because that they received not the word of the truth, that they may be saved.

By the order of the Apostles words I should now speak of the overthrow of
Antichrist: how, and by what power he shall be confounded. But, because the two
verses next following, speak yet of the state of Antichrist, by whose means
he shall come: and of what countenance he shall be: and with whom he shall
prevail: it shall be good we consider these things first, and then show how ^e
shall be destroyed.

When Christ came into the world, he came in the name of his father, to save
the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and to gather the flock that was
scattered. Antichrist shall come in the name of the Devil, to scatter and
disperse, and consume the stock of Gods sheep. His coming shall be by the
effectual working of Satan. And what or who is Satan? he has been a
murderer from the beginning: through his envy came death into the world: he
is the Prince of this world: the Prince of darkness: the father of lies: the
spirit of pride, which has said, I will ascend above the height of the
clouds, and I will be like the most high. He shall work and inflame the heart
of Antichrist, and fill it with his spirit and wickedness, and shall make him
the man of sin, and the son of perdition, full of vanity, and of pride,
and of ungodliness, that he may mock the world, and blind the hearts of the
people.

His coming shall be by the working of Satan: yet he shall make show as if he
came in the name of Christ. He shall come with fatherly looks, with holy
countenance, and shall set himself in the holy place: but his whole endeavor
shall be to deface the kingdom of Christ: which he shall practice to do, not by
the leading of any Angel or Archangel, or by the power of God, but by the
effectual working of Satan. He shall allege the Doctors and Fathers: he
shall allege Peter and Paul, the holy Apostles of Christ: he shall allege
Christ, and God himself, as though his doings were warranted by them: he shall
say, I am the buttresse and pillar of the Church, my word is the word of God:
he shall set up masses and sacrifices of his own: he shall take away the word
of God: he shall teach the people to give divine honor to a weak creature.

But S. Paul in this place discloseth him, and his doings, and lays them open
to the eyes of the faithful. He works not the work of an Evangelist as did
Peter or other the Apostles, he takes not power and au^oritie either of God or
of Christ: but his coming is by the operation of Satan. Therefore he
foresheweth, Antichrist shall command to abstain from meats. He shall say,
touch not, taste not. He shall also forbid to marry. He shall say, marriage is
unholy, and unlawful, not convenient, nor meet for holy profession. Who
would not think it a holy thing to abstain from meats, and to chastise the
body? who would not think it a holy thing, to abstain from marriage, and to
think of those things which belong to God? seeing holiness and devotion are a
pleasant sacrifice to God: but yet it is not al so. Some shall speak lies
through hypocrisy, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from 1.
Tim. 4.
meats. They shall depart from the faith, and give heed to the spirits of
error, and doctrines of Devils. He says it is the Devils gospel. They are
canons and rules of Antichrist. Satan shall instruct him, Satan shall be the
author and sounder of that religion.

With all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness. He shall need to be of great power and force that shall
encounter with God. Therefore the Apostle says, he shall come with miracles and
devises of Satan. Christ forefold, that false Christ's shall rise, and false
Prophets, and Mark. 13.
shall show signs and wonders, to deceive, if it were possible, the very
elect. Again he says: Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.
have we not in thy name prophesied? and by thy name cast out Devils? and by
thy name done many great works? and then will I profess to them, I never knew
you, depart from me ye that work iniquity. These things shall Satan bring to
pass under my name.

The Apostles wrought miracles, thereby to confirm the Gospel which they
preached. As the Evangelist writes, The Lord wrought Mark. 16.
with them and confirmed the word with signs that followed. And as the
Apostle, Salvation Heb. 2.
at the first began to be preached by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us, by
them that heard him, God bearing witness thereto, with signs and wonders, and
with diverse miracles and gifts of the holy ghost, according to his will. So
shall Antichrist work miracles, to overthrow the gospel. As Iannes and
Iambres withstood Moses: 2. Tim. 3.
so do these also resist the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith. But they shall prevail no longer, for their madness
shall be known to all men, as theirs also was.

Aaron cast forth his rod before Pharao, and Exodus 7.
his servants, and it was turned into a serpent: And the charmers of Aegipt did
in like manner with their enchauntments. Aaron smote the water, and all the water
that was in the river, was turned into blood: and the inchaunters of Aegipt did
likewise with their sorceries. And as Aaron caused frogs to come Exodus 8.
and cover the land, so the sorcerers did likewise with their sorceries. But
the illusions of the Wis. 17.
magical Arts came to naught (says Solomon) and it was a most shameful
reproach for boasting their knowledge. So shall Antichrist come in working
signs, and lying wonders, as did Iannes and Iambres to desace the gospel and
glory of God.

It is not said, he shall work wonders, but false lying wonders. But how can
his miracles be false? If false, how be they miracles? If miracles, how be
they false? They shall be false after two sorts, some are called false
miracles, because they seem to be miracles, and are not. Some are called false
miracles, because they are used falsely to mainetaine his falshoode.

Of the first sort of false miracles, we have seen an infinite number in the
dai^s of our fathers in the kingdom of Antichrist. Then was there appearance of
spirits, and visions of Angels, our Lady came swimming down from heaven,
poor souls came creeping and crying out of purgatory, and ietted abroad, and
kept stations, casting stakes of fire, and beset highwaies, and bemoned their
cases, the pains and torments were so bitter. They sought for help, and cried
for good prayers, they cried for Diriges, they cried for Masses of Requiem, for
masses of Scala coeli, for trentals of masses. Hereof grew portsale of pardons,
and hereof grew the province of purgatory, the most gainful country, that
ever was under ye city of Rome.

But these miracles were no miracles at al. They were devised by subtle
varlets, and lazy lordaines for a purpose, to get money. Oftentimes the
spirit has been taken and laid in the stocks: the Angel has been stripped:
good Lady has been caught: the conueyance and the miracle has appeared: the
engines, and sleights, and the cause, and the manner of the working has been
confessed. In those days, Idols could go on foot: Roodes could speak:
Belles could ring alone, Images could come down and light their own candles.
Dead stocks could sweat and bestirre themselves: they could turn their ^ies:
they could move their hands: they could open their mouths: they could set
bones, and knit sine^es: they could heal the sick, and raise up the dead.

These miracles were conueyaunces and suttleties and indeed no miracles. The
trunks by which they did speak, the strings and wi^rs, with which they moved
their faces and bands: all the rest of their treachery has been disclosed.
These be the miracles of which Paul speaks. Miracles in sight, but indeed no
miracles. The other sort of false miracles, is, when such things as be in deed
wrought and done, are untruely applied by Antichrist to maintain his
falshoode. God gives recovery to the diseased: the deaf receive their
hearing: the blind receive their sight. He asswageth the tempests, and staieth
the rage of fire, that it continue not. These things are done by the finger of
God. Antichrist draws us from so thinking of the mercy of God, and tells
us we have other friends to whom we are beholding, which have done so and so
for us. It was this Saint, says he, it was that Saint, that took pity of
your case, and wrought the remedy for you. It was Apollonia, it was Genouefa,
it was Sitha, it was our Lady. Such a Saint is able to do much: such a Saint
can work miracles.

Hereof grew in^ocation of Saints. Hereof it came to pass that each Saint was
assigned and allotted to his sundry charge and several office apart: Saint
Blase for the choking: Saint Roch, for the pestilence: Antonie, for the
burning: Valentine, for the falling sickness: Roman, for madness:
Apollonia, for the toothach: Petronilla, for agues: and others, for other
purposes. Wherein it was wisely foreseen, that they were so limited and
ordered, least perhaps else any one might be over saucie, and incroch upon,
and trouble his fellows. It was also foreseen that al saints should not
have power to work in all places. Some wrought at Canterbury, some at
Walsingham, some at York, some at Buxton, some in one place, some in another,
some in the towns, some in the fields. Even as Hieremie said among the
Jews: According to the number of Ier. 11.
thy Cities, were thy Gods. Hereof grew Pylgrimages, and Worshipping of
Images: and kissing of Relics. Hereof grew oblations and enritching of
Abbeys. Every man had his peculiar Saint, on whom he called. Every country
was full of Chapels: every Chapel full of miracles: and every miracle full of
lies.

These miracles are wrought by Antithriste. They are his tools wherewith he
works, they are his weapons wherewith he preuayleth. They are full of lying,
full of deceitfulness, and full of wickedness. So shall Antichrist prevail,
and rule over the world. By these miracles he shall possess the ears, the
eyes, and the hearts of many, and shall draw them after him. He shall
shadow the Moon, and darken the Sun, and make the third part of the
stars of heaven to follow him. He shall change light into darkness, and
darkness into light. He shall work in all things at his pleasure. If a man
see well, he shall make him blind. This is a miracle. Such as are whole he shall
make sick: he shall infect them with leprosy which before were clean. This is
a miracle. He shall change the sense and feeling of nature, he shall make the
son hate the father: and shall make the Father hate the son, yea to seek
the death of his son. This is a miracle. He shall make the people mislike and
doubt the word of God, and embrace his follies. This is a miracle.

These be the works of Antichrist, which he shall bring to pass. This shall
he work in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness. He shall come with all
kinds and shifts of deceit. He shall come with show of praying, with vizarde
of fasting, with companies of Monks, Friars, Chanons, and al kind, and color
of holiness. He shall seek to prevail by threatening, and by flattering, by
fair means, and by foul: he shall excommunicate, and release from
excommunication: he shall promise forgiveness of sins and life everlasting.
He shall make boast of the Fathers, and ancient doctors: he shall make boast
of the universal consent: he shall boast of general councels: he shall boast of
Christ's Apostles, and of the Gospel of Christ, and of the word of GOD. So
shall he falsely, and deceitefully work himself credit, and beguile the
world, in abusing the holy name of God. No kind of deceitefolnesse or
suttletie, but he shall use it. So shall he make the people seek upon him, and
kings, and emperors to fall down before him, and to say, who is like unto the
beast? who is so wise, so learned, so holy, so wealthy, so mighty, and so
catholic? without him no man is to be rekoned holy or learned. Without him no
man may traffic, buie, nor sell. Without him no man may read publicly in
Uniuersities: no man may preach to the people: no man may be accounted a
Christian, no man may hope to be saved without him, without his leave and
liking. Such wonders, such miracles shall he work, so shall he conquer and
subdue the world.

Now, who be they which shall be deceived, in whom shall he prevail? Among
them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved. They shall be deceived by him, Which perish, whose hearts are
not marked with the spirit of God: whose names are not written in the book of
life: in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds, that the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, should not shine unto them: they shall follow
him, and shall be the children of damnation, and shall have their reward with
him. Be he learned or unlearned: be he King or subject: albeit he be holy,
albeit he be catholic: Antichrist shall come unto him in all deceitefulnesse
of unrighteousness, because he has not received the love of the truth that
he might be saved.

Here mark, he does not say, Because they received not the truth, but, he
says, because they received not the love of the truth. Many in our days can
speak thus, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is Romans 1.
the power of God unto salvation to every one 2. Cor. 2.
that believes: for it is the savor of life unto life. They can say, There is
given none other Act. 4.
name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, neither is there salvation in
any other than by Jesus Christ, whom we have learned by the Gospel: many will
confess, there was never more, nor better teaching since the time of the
Apostles. They seem to receive the truth. But they are like the horse and
mule in whom is no understanding. They receive it, because the Prince
receives it, and because the politic laws of countries establishe it. They
are carried away with the swaie of the world. They hear it with their cares:
(Nay, I would GOD they would lend their ears to the hearing of it) but with
their hearts they do not hear. They have no feeling of the word of GOD, and
of the truth. They wetghe it not, they love it not. They consider not what it
is, nor from whom it is sent. They know not that it is the water of life, and
the bread which is sent from heaven. They have no taste, no savor, nor
pleasure in it.

Therefore it shall be taken from them, and given to a Nation which shall
bring forth the fruits thereof. They shall be cast into utter darkness, and
the last state of them is worse than the first. It had been better, 2. Pet. 2.
for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they have
known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto them. It should
not be ^harged upon them for their damnation, for our Savior says, If I had
not come and John 15.
spoken unto them, they should not have had sin: but now have they no
cloak for their sin. They find no sweetness in the word of GOD: they are
not converted by it that they may be saved: they have no pleasure in the ways
of the Lord, they have no comfort to know his will. These be the bondslaues
of Satan: these be they upon whom shall come the abomination of desolation:
these be they against whom Satan and Antichrist shall prevail, because they
have not received the love of the truth. They have not received it into their
hearts, that they might be saved. They had no hearts to feel it, they had no
eyes to see it.

V. 11, And therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies.

12. That al they might be damned which believed not the truth but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.

The spirit of God, is the spirit of truth, and gives light into our
hearts, and makes us behold that blessed hope, and rejoice in the knowledge
of his will. Therefore the Prophet David makes prayer, O God renew (...).
(...).
a right spirit within me, and, take not thy holy spirit from me. And
again, O Psalm. 13.
Lord my GOD lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death. And again he
says, Psalm. 36.
With thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see light. Without
this spirit we are but flesh and blood: even void of sense and
understanding. The natural man perceives 1. Cor. (...).
not the things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him. No
man knows the things of GOD, but the spirit of God. And those things which
God has prepared for them that love him, he has revealed unto us by his
spirit. Christ says, No man Ioh. 6.
comes to me, except the father draw him. Unless a man be borne from above,
unless God print and seal his heart with his finger: he shall not be able to
see the kingdom of God.

Now, if we have the word of God before our eyes, and regard it not, nor be
thankeful for it, nor set price by it, God in his justice will withdraw it from
us. Then shall we delight in darkness, and have pleasure in error: our latter
end shall be more dreadful, than was our first beginning. This is it which
Paul says, God shall send them strong delusion. That is, his holy spirit the
spirit of truth shall depart from their hearts, and the power of Satan shall
dwell with them, and wholly possess them. This is the just judgment of GOD. And
this is the condemnation, Ioh. 3.
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than
light. They forsake the light, and delight in darkness, and this is their
condemnation. They will not understand, nor seek after God, that they may be
reformed. The Prophet says, Because Psalm. 109.
he loved cursing, it shall come unto him, and because he loved not blessing, so
shall it be far from him. God will strike them with blindness. They shall be
as^onied. They shall fall into rebuke and the snares of the Devil. They shall be
drowned in perdition and destruction.

So great shall be the power of error. Men shall not only be deceived, but shall
be de^iued mightily and strongly. They shall desire to be deceived, and shall
bear a deadly hatred against him who so ever shall seek to reform them. They
shall harden their hearts against God and his holy word: they shall stop their
ears, and not hearken to his counsel: they shall not open their eyes to
behold the destruction which is to come upon them. So great and so mighty
shall be the delusion. So deadly shall be the cloud and blindness of their
hearts. They shall be given over into a repr^bate mind. They shall be filthy,
and increase in filthiness. Such shall be the power of Satan, such shall be
the power of error and deceitfulness. They shall despise the glorions Gospel
of Christ: therefore GOD shall forsake them, and give them over to follow
Antichrist.

God has this day sent the light and comfort of his holy word into the
world. Many godly men have desired to see that we see, and to hear that we
do hear. Blessed be the name of the Lord, which has in mercy visited us. We
beseeth him to bless the work that he has begun. Saint Paul says, The
grace of Tit. 2.
God that brings salvation to al men has appeared. And to the Colossians he
says: The Coloss. 1.
Gospel is come unto you, even as it is unto all the world. And again, Have
they not heard? Romans 10.
no doubt their sound went through all the earth, and their words into the
ends of the world, The poor receive the glad tidings of the gosped. GOD has
visited and redeemed his people. But yet the Apostle says, They have not al
believed our Gospel: For Esa^as Romans 10.
says, Lord, who shall believe our report? And again says the Prophet
Esaias, I'haue Esai 65.
spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walked in a
way that was not good. Wisdom cries in the streets (...) I have called and
ye refused, I have stretched Prou^ out mine hand, and none would regard.
Such is the power of Satan, so shall he stop their ears, that they shall
not understand what is spoken in the name of the Lord.

Paul is a true Prophet, and foretold long before, that which we may now
behold with our eyes. In the latter times, some shall 1. Tim. 4.
give heed unto spirits of error. They shall be as men without sense or
feeling, they shall forsake the truth, and betake themselves to follow lies
and fables. Even they shall do this, which shall sit in the Church of God,
who shall profess and carry the name of Christ. Christ ministered his last
supper in Luke 22.
both kinds. Saint Paul tells the Corinthians, As often as ye shall eat
this bread and drink 1. Cor. 11.
this cup ye shall show the Lords death till he come. That this institution
of Christ should be kept in the Church until the end of the world. The
Apostles received this order: the holy fathers and martires used it. But now
many, even too too many, will not so have it, nor so use it. They will not
follow the example of the Fathers nor of Martires, nor of the Apostles, nor
keep the ordinance of Christ: so strong a delusion has bewitched them.

The people of God were taught to pray in the vulgar tongue, that their
hearts might give consent, and their mouth say Amen. This order did Peter and
Paul, and John and James, and the godly fathers keep. There is not one of
them, that took order for the contrary: but now there are some risen up,
which in spite of Christ and his Apostles say: prayers shall be made in a
strange tongue, either Latin or Greek The people shall not understand what
they hear. They shall not know what it is, which they themselves say: their
hearts cannot give consent thereto, their mouths cannot say Amen. The example
of the Apostles, the commandment of Christ, the comfort of the people, the
confusion of the Church nothing moves them: so great and mighty is the power
of error.

The people worship a creature in steed of the creator, who is GOD over all
blessed for ever. They see they do amiss: yet continue in it, and find no
fault. They see, wherein their Fathers were deceived, yet they sa^, they
could not be deceived. They see many and foul abuses, yet seek not to
redress them. For they say, we will walk in the ways of our forefathers:
we will believe, as they believed, howsoever they believed. We will do as
they did, whatsoever they did; they will not hear the word of the Lord. Thus
shall they delight in darkness, and loath the light: they will be deceived,
and will not see the truth. So mighty and so terrible is the power of error.

They be learned in Philosophy and in the tongues: they be learned in the
laws: they be learned in Physic: learned in the Doctors: and learned in
stories. They are skillful to buie and sell, to purchase land, to enrich
themselves, and to provide for their children. They have knowledge in all things
else. But themselves, and the truth of God, and the way to salvation they have
not known. A these, when he is taken, blusheth. A harlot is ashamed of her
filthiness, and a drunkard of his beastliness. But they that are such, have
hardened their faces, they cannot blush. Whatsoever they have said, or done,
either openly, or in secret, by hypocrisy, or cruelty, by rauin or treachery
in offering pardons to sale, in deceiving the people of God, in accusing the
righteous, and condemning the innocent: they cannot repent, they know no
shame. So great is the power of error. Christ says unto them. The Publicanes,
and the harlots Mat. 21.
shall go before you into the kingdom of God. They consider, that they have
done amiss, but you are wilful in your blindness. Oh the depth of the
wisdom and knowledge of God. Who is wise and considers this? They strive
against the manifest truth, they strive against their own conscience, they
strive against the spirit of God. This is that sin which shall never be
forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

Therefore says Paul, that al they might be damned, which believed not the
truth. Al shall be damned, which believed not. Then let no man say, I will
follow the example of my fathers, I will do as the greater part does. So many
and so many, for so many years, in so many places have bin on this side.
The judgment of God stands not in the multitude, but in the truth. Whosoever
shall set themselves against his holy will, be they never so many, they shall
be damned. Let such mark well what Ignatius who lived in the time of the
Apostles has said. Audivi quosdam dicentes, si non invenero Evangelium in
antiquis, non credam. Talibus autem ego dico: quia mihi antiquit as Jesus
Christus est, cui non obeaire, manifestus and irremissibilis interitus est.
Ignaty epist. 5. ad Philadel, I have heard some which say, unless I find the
Gospel in them of old time, I will not believe it. But unto such I say, that
Jesus Christ is, unto me antiquity. Whom to disobey is manifest and
unpardonable destruction. Let no man say, I hope I do well, my meaning is
good, I have a desire to please GOD: I believe well, I do my conscience: If I
do a^isse God will regard my simplicity. Let no man so say. Saint Augustine
says, It is certain Aug. quae 43 in quaestion. v^ter. and no vitestam.
that a foolish faith, not only does no good, but also hurts. If thou
believe not the truth, thou dwell in lying: thou art the child of the Devil,
which is a liar, and the father thereof. The mouth which speaks lies slaieth
the Wisd. 1.
soul. Thy faith is no faith, it is but a wilful opinion, it is but an error,
for it is not according to the truth, it is not built upon the rock, it is
not grounded on the word of God. Change thine error. Faith is by hearing, and
Romans 10.
hearing by the word of GOD: receive the truth, believe the truth, and love
the truth. Otherwise, if thou refuse the bread of life, and feed on poison:
if thou forsake the water of life, and dig unto thy self a Cesterne that will
hold no water: thou shall lead thy days in wilfulness and shall die in
sin: thy blood shall be upon thine own head. Thou shall not s^e the glory
of God, death and damnation shall be thy meede, because thau had pleasure in
wickedness, and did not give thy heart to receive, and love, and believe
the truth.

Now it remains, that we hear how Antichrist shall be euerthrowen. We
have seen his pomp and pride, his might and power, that he ouerlooketh all
the world, binds all Kings and Princes, and nations to keep his laws, and
is himself exempted from all laws of GOD or man. So mighty and so maruailous
is his power, Who can declare it? He is called of his own side, Stupor mundi,
The gaze stock, or wonder of the world. Something less than God, something
more than man. But, being in all this estate, in the midst of his
Pontificalibus, so fast mortized, so high built up to the skies, so surely
shoared, so strongly beset on every side, he shall be suddenly shaken down,
and become the shame of the world.

How may this be done? being so mortized, so built, so shoared, and so beset,
who shall shake him down? What power shall consume him? shall it be the great
power of Kings or of Emperors? They shall give their power Revel. 1^.
and authority to the beast, and fight with the lamb, that is, against Christ.
Shall it be the authority of Bishops and Cardinals, and great Clearkes? al
they are lincked and joined to him. Shall it be by the wisdom and drift of
Counsailours and men of law? They be the feed men, and sworn to him. Shall it
be the violence and conspiracy of the people? They shall kneel down to him,
and honor him, and reverence him as an Angel of God. If neither the power of
Doctors, nor of Bishops, nor Archbishops: if not the power of Counsailors, and
men at law: if not the power of the Kings and Princes of the world: if not
the power and commotion of the people: if al these shall not abolishe him: what
power then is it, wherewith he shall be consumed? it shall be the power of God
which shall be revealed from above, The Lord shall consume him with the spirit
of his mouth.

These words are diversely taken. Some ^und them thus: GOD shall appoint the
great Angel Michael to set upon Antichrist, and he shall destroy him. Others
take these words to be spoken of the day of judgment, and then this shall be
fulfilled when Christ shall say: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire: that this is the spirit of the Lords mouth wherewith he shall be
consumed. But the Apostle speaks of the prea^hing of the gospel. That God by
his word which is mighty to do all that whereunto he appoints it, shall make
his doings manifest, and let all the world see that he was not sent of God: that
he did never set forth the glory of God: that he has not sought the
salvation of the people: that in matters of faith, and in all his life he is
adversary to Christ, this is that breath that shall descrie his errors and
vanities, this is that spirit which shall consume the kingdom of Antichrist.
This overthrow is already begun, as our eyes may behold this day.

In like sort speaks Esaias the prophet. He Eza. 11.
shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips shall he slaie the wicked. Princes make their conquests by power and
strength, by fire and sword, and engines of war, but God shall beat down
his adu^rsarie with the r^d of his mouth. By the true preaching of his word.
His word is mighty, it is his sword, it is his mace: it is the rod of his
mouth: it is the breath of his lips. It is of great force, no strength shall
withstand it, it shall finite the earth, it shall ^ea the wicked. S. Paul says,
We do not war after 2. Cor. 10.
the flesh, for the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God to cast
down holds. This sword has hewne down in many places, the cruelty,
tyranny, simonie, insatiable greediness, the errors, ignorance, darkness,
vanities, hypocrisy, superstition and idolatry, which have bin brought into
the church and used by Antichrist. These were the pillars, and strength, and
glory of his kingdom.

And here mark the Apostles speech. He says not, God shall convert
Antichrist, or change his heart that he may be saved. But he says, Whom the
Lord shall consume. Gods word is almighty. By his word he can do whatsoever
pleases him. He can make the deaf to hear, and the blind to see. He was able
to call the thief upon the cross, unto repentance. He was able to raise up
Lazarus out of his grave. He is able of stones to raise up children to Abraham.
He can throw down every high thing, that is exalted against the glory of GOD,
and will bring kings and Princes, and the rulers of the earth to the obedience
of Christ. But of Antichrist it is said, The Lord shall consume him. Such is
the hardness and blindness of his heart, he will not receive the love of the
truth, he will not believe the truth of God, that he might be saved. Therefore
destruction shall come upon him.

Hereby we are taught what to think, or hope of reformation of the abuses and
errors of the church of Rome. They have been advertised of them not only by
the professors of the gospel: but also many of themselves have spoken for
reformation of sundry abuses. They have kept many counsels and assemblies.
They have promised redress. They have sit in consultation many years. What
one thing have they reformed? see and look over their a^es and sessions. They
be abroad in print. Hitherto they have reformed nothing, no, not their pardons:
no, not their sr^ws: they have hardened their hearts, and set themselves
against the highest. Therefore shall the glory of the Lord show it self in
their destruction. With the breath of his lips they shall be consumed and
brought to nothing.

And shall abolish with the brightness of his coming. The Lord shall come, and
shall make his enemies his footstool. Then the sun shall be black as a
sackcloth, and the moon shall be like blood. There shall be an earthquake:
Kings, and great men, and rich men, and every bond man and free man shall hide
themselves in dens: they shall say to the hills, and mountains, and rocks,
fall upon us and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb. Then shall Antichrist be quite overthrown.
Then his kingdom shall be utterly abolished and have an end. Then it shall
appear, who has sought the glory of Christ, who has followed the doctrine
of the gospel, and who has done the true endeavor of a faithful shepherd, the^
it shall appear who is the woolfe who scatters and spoileth the flock. S.
Hierome. says Circumdabit ^um calix dextere Hicro lib^ in 2. Ab^.
domini, etc. The cup of the Lords right hand (which is the Lord and
savior) shall compass him about, when he shall stay him with the breath of
his mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming. Then all the
ignominy and shame which he has heaped up upon himself with thoughts,
deeds, and words, shall fall upon his glory and pomp: in so much that he
shall be afterward as vile and contemned of al men: as he was before reputed or
highly esteemed of them.

This might suffice touching the ruin and fall of Antichrist. Yet I will add to
that has been spoken, the manner of the sight, and of the victory, and of the
triumph which shall follow. The fight is doubtful and dangerous: the
victory shall be glorious: the triumph shall be joyful. Hear let us call to
remembrance the wars which tyrants and ungodly princes have made against
the people of God, and what has followed. Scuacherib the great king of the
Assirians, came up against Jerusalem with horses and chariots, and infinite
numbers of picked soldiers. The whole country of Iewrie was in an agony: all the people were astonished with fear, to see so many enemies, and themselves so
few: to see the enemies so strong, and themselves so weak. They knew not,
neither where to seek aid, nor how to escape the present danger. Suddenly the
Lord sent his Angel from heaven to relieve his people. In one night he smote in
the 2. King. 19.
camp of the Assyrians, an hundred four score and five thousand, which were
al dead coarses. The residue were scattered, and ran away straggling: they
knew not where to hide their head. King Senacherib went his way and returned.
And when he was in (...) at home, and woorshipping his God Nisroch, in the
temple, Adramelech and Sharezer his sons slew him.

Remember the cruel wars which Nabuchodonozer King of Babylon made against
Gods people. He took their city, spoiled their Temple, sacked Jerusalem, and
gave the pray to his soldiers. He took the Nobles and gentlemen, and
merchants, and yeomen, and led them captives. Some of them he took with him to
Babylon, and some he sold for money: so great and so terrible was his victory.
In the midst of al his pomp, God bereft him of his wit, and astonished him
with deadly madness. He was driven from men, and did eat grass Dan. 4.
as the Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, til his hayres
were grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws. He imagined
that he was an Ox, that he had hoof and horn, and hair as Oxen. He
therefore forsook his palace, his princely apparel, and dainty fare, and lay
abroad, and fed with beasts. So did God avenge the cause of his people.

Who has not heard of the war which Pharao had against the Israelites, the
battle was strange, and the victory sudden. The people of god was beset with
dangers on every side, the Exodus 14.
wilderness had shut them in. Before their faces they saw the raging sea, that
they could not escape it, behind their backs, they did beholds Pharao with his
army march after the^: if they went forward they must needs be drowned: if
they retired, they must needs be slain. Their enemies were mighty, and they
were weak. Suddenly God divided the waters, and made the sea dry land, so that
the children of Israel went through the midst of the sea upon dry ground
safely as through a meadow, Pharao followed after with his sword and spear to
work his fury. Then the sea returned to his course, and drowned the chariots,
and horsemen, and all the host of Pharao, there remained not one of them alive.
Their carkases lay afloat upon the water, and were cast in heaps upon the
shore. Such shall be the end of those that hate the Lord. So shall he make
his name triumph over all the world.

Let us imagine a battle of two mighty princes, both of great power, and of
great ^ourage, they meet together in the field, they join battle, both
sides encounter together, either part is bent to beat down the other, what an
horror is it to hear the braying of Horses, the sound of trumpets, the
thunder of drums, the roaring of guns, the clashing of swords, the groaning
and mournful voice of them which are slain, and the crying and trembling of
the people? now let us by this make some resemblance of the battle between
Christ and Antichrist, between Christ the son of God, and Antichrist the
son of the devil. Either of them is well prepared. They are both mighty, and
have both of them soldiers, and knights to attend upon them.

Antichrist shall come from the earth, for all his glory is upon the earth, his
power shall be the power of Satan. Christ shall come from the heavens above, even
from the bosom of his father. What cognizance shall they give? how and by what
difference shall their soldiers be discerned? the ensign of Christ shall be
enerlasting truth: the ensign of Antichrist shall be, falsehood and vanity, and
al deceitfulness. By these marks shall either be known. With what soldiers
shall they make their field? they that shall follow Christ are poor and simple,
who have forsaken themselves, their goods, and their lives, and tremble at the
word of God. The men of war which fight with Antichrist and follow him,
shall be mighty Kings and Princes, and powers, and states of the world, as
S. John has said. And Gregory Reu. 17.
has said, An army of Priests is prepared to wait upon the king of pride.
And here, by may you know him.

What armor shall they have, and with what weapon shall they fight? Antichrist
shall furnish his men with spear, and sword, and fire. He shall rejoice in
killing, in burning, and in shedding of blo^d. Christ shall send his men into
the field naked, and armed with patience. They shall take up their cross and
follow him, ready to suffer whatsoever shall be laid upon them. Their
weapons shall be prayers and weeping. What shall be the pretense of this fight?
Antichrist shall come in his own name, to maintain and exalt himself. Christ
shall come in his fathers name, to mainetaine the glory of his father. What
shall they seek? wherefore fight they? what is it they shall desire to
mainetaine? Antichrist shall desire to mainetaine his own traditions, Christ
shall maintain the holy word of God. Christ shall procure the glory of his
father: Antichrist shall maintain his own glory. In what place shall this
battle be? upon what downs or plain, or in what country? Neither in hill,
nor in any plain, but in the hearts of the people. There shall the war be.
There shall it be fought. If it were possible the elect should be confounded.
His assault shall be so terrible, that many shall be offended in Christ: many
shall deny Christ: many shall be ashamed of him: and the love of many shall
wax cold. But blessed is he which continues to the end.

We have heard briefly of Christ and Antichrist, their estates, their several
cognizance, what bands of me^ they shall have, what armor they shall bear, by
what title they shall claim, what they shall seek, and where the fight shall
be, that it shall be made in the consciences of ye people. There shall Antichrist
sit: there shall he be worshipped as God: there they shall call him the holy
and most holy father: there shall be given to him the power of heaven and earth:
there he himself shall rouse himself, and be settled, and shall say, I sit as a
Prince, I shall never be removed, I cannot fall. But Christ shall blow him down
with the breath of his mouth, and shall abolish him with the brightness of his
coming. Christ shall have the upper hand, and destroy him. Even that Christ
whom they made the reproach and scorn of the people, whom they reviled calling
him drunkard, and companion unto Publicans and harlots, which was so poor and
simple, which was oppressed and afflicted, and yet opened not his mouth, which
was brought as a sheep to ye slaughter, and was killed.

S. John had a revelation, and did see Jesus Reu. 1.
Christ the son of God. And, He had in his right hand seven stars, and
out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword. It was sharp and mighty: it
enters through even to the dividing Heb. 4.
asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the ioints and the marow, and is
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. So we see the breath of
the mouth of Christ is a sword. This sword shall overthrow Antichrist. Remember
how Dagon sell on his face upon the 1. Sam. 5.
ground before the Ark of the Lord, how he could not stand, how at that
presence, the head and the two palms of his hands were cut off upon the
threshold with a fall. So shall Antichrist fall at the presence of Christ. His
arms and his head shall be broken off, and he shall not stand. Remember, that
Aaron cast forth his rod Exodus 7.
before Pharao and his servants, and it was turned into a serpent: so did the
charmers of Egypt. They cast down every man his rod, and they were also
turned into serpents. But Aarons rod devoured their rods, and consumed them to
nothing. Even so shall the truth of Christ consume and bring to nothing the
falsehood of Antichrist. Al his glory shall be scattered as the chafe which
the wind drives away, as a thin some is scattered away with a storm, and
as the smoke which is dispersed with the wind, and as the darkness which can not
abide in the sight of the sun: it shall be consumed, it shall be defaced, it
shall not stand. At the name of Jesus every knee shall how, and every tongue
shall confess, that Jesus Christ is mighty, to the glory of God the father:
that he is worthy to receive glory, and honor, and power.

But who may better disclose this mystery, and the fall of Antichrist, than
John. the Evangelist, which leaned on Jesus bosom, whom Jesus loved, and
which was endued with wisdom from above? Let us hear him. I saw (says he) an
Angel sly in the midst of heaven, Reu. 14.
having an everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
to every nation and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice,
Fear God, and give glory to him: for the hour of his judgment is come, and
worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of
waters. And there followed another Angel, saying: It is fallen, it is fallen,
Babylon ye great city: for she made al nations to drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication. And the third Angel following the^, said with a loud
voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand, the same shall drink the wine of the wrath of God,
and shall be tormented in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and
before the holy Lamb, they shall have no rest day nor night.

Again, the seventh Angel poured out his Revel. 16.
vial into the air, and there came a loud voice out of the Temple of heaven
from the throne, saying, It is done. That is, it is concluded, judgment is
given, it shall stand for ever. And there were voices and thunderings, and
lightnings, and there was a great earthquake, and the great city was rent into
three parts, and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto
her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. Then one of the Angels
talked with me, saying, Come, I will Revel. 17.
show thee the damnation of the great whore that sits upon many waters,
with whom have committed fornication the Kings of the earth, and the
inhabitants of the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication. And, in
the same Chapter he says: These have al one mind and shall give their power and
authority to the beast, that is, to Antichrist. Thus the kings and al princes
(as squiers to his body) shall fight against the lamb. But the lamb shall
overcome them, for he is lord of lords, and king of kings.

I saw an other Angel coming down from Revel. 18.
heaven, having great power, so that the earth was lightened with his glory,
and he cried out mightily with a loud voice, saying, It is fallen, it is
fallen, Babylon the great city (the harbor and palace of Antichrist) and is
become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of al foul spirits. And I heard
an other voice from heaven say: ^o out of her my people (believe her not, do
not as she commands you) that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. For her sins are come up into heaven, and God
has remembered her iniquities. Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and
give her double according to her works: and in the cup that she has filled
unto you, fill her the double. In as much as she glorified her self, and lived
in pleasure, so much give you to her forment and forrow. For she says in her
heart, I sit being a Queen: the world is mine, no ill shall touch me. Therefore
shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, and she shall be
burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord God which will condemn her. And the
kings of the earth, which have committed fornication, and lived in pleasure
with her, shall bewail her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning, and
shall stand a far off for fear of her torment, saying, alas, alas, the great
ci^ie Babylon, the mighty city, for in one hour is thy judgment come. And
the Merchants of the earth shall weep and wail over her: for no man buieth
their ware any more: the ware of gold and silver, and of pretions stone, and of
pearls, and of fine linen, and of purple, and of silk, and of scarlet, and of
al manner of Thime wood, and of al manner of Yuorie, and of al vessels of most
precious wood, and of brass, and of iron, and of marble, and of cinamome, and
odours, and ointments, and frankencense, and wine, and oil, and fine flower,
and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and servants, and
souls of men^o man any more shall buie her parchment, wax and seals: no man
shall buie her orders, her dispensations, pluralities, totquot, non residence,
Perinde valere: no man shall buie her concubines, her oil, salt, holy water,
holy bread: no man shall buie her palles, her agnos dei, her jubilees, masses,
trentals, and pard^ns: no man shall any more buie of her, forgiveness of their
sins, and life ever lasting: no man shall regard her: no man shall buie, or
seek to get this merchandise of her any more.

The merchants of these wares shall stand a far off, for fear of her plagues,
and say, alas that great city that was clothed in reins, and scarlet, and
purple, and gold, and diamonds, and precious stones, in one hour is al thy
glory stripped from thee: O what city under heaven was like unto thee? Thou wast
the great city, the noble, and the holy city. Then a mighty Angel took up
a stone, like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea saying: With such
viol^nce shall the great city Babylon be cast, and shall be found no more. She
shall be out of remembrance, they shall seek the place where she stood, and
not find it. The voice of harpers and musitions, shall be no more heard in her:
The light of a candle shall shine no more in her: her merchants, officers, and
dataries were the great men of the earth, and by her enchauntments were al
nations deceived. And in her was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the
saints, and of all that were stain upon earth.

Then I heard a great voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying, Halleluiah
salvation, and glory, and honor, and power be to the Lord our God. For he
has condemned the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants shed by her hand. And
again they said, Halleluiah, and the smoke rose up for evermore, and the
four and ^nentie elders fell down, and worshipped god that safe on the throne,
saying, Amen Halleluiah. Then a voice came out of the throne, saying: praise
our God al ye his servants both small and great. And I heard like ye voice of a
great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of strong
thunderings, saying: Halleluiah, for our Lord God almighty has reigned. Let
us be glad and rejoice, and give glory to him: for she is fallen, she is
fallen, Babylon that great city: there she lies, the mother of filth and
fornication. There lies Antichrist the man of sin, the son of perdition, which
is an adversary, which has sit in the temple of God, and exalted himself
above all that is called God: that wicked and lawless man lies there. The
Lamb, the root of Iesse, the lion of the tribe of Judah, has overcome, and
gotten the victory. He is worthy to receive glory and honor. Then shall the
Apostles, and the Prophets, and the Angels say, praise and honor and glory be
unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the lamb for evermore. We thank
thee, we give thanks to thee O God, which art, and was, and shall be. Thou have
avenged the blood of the Prophets and Martyrs, thou have destroyed them that
have defiled the earth. Thy name be blessed for ever. Amen Halleluiah. Such
glee and triumph shall be in heaven for the overthrow of Antichrist.

Thus have I by occasion of the Apostles words, spoken of the coming, and of
the kingdom of Antichrist. And, least we might be de^eiued as touching his
person: I have said what he should be, what things he shall do, of what
estate he shall be, what countenance he shall carry, in what place he shall sit,
at what time shall be his coming, by what means he shall prevail, who they be
that shall believe in him, what power shall beat him down, what end he shall
have, what triumph shall follow upon his fall.

I have told you, that he shall be the overthrow of the world, the confusion
of the Church, the son of perdition: that he shall destroy himself, and be
the destruction of others.

I have told you, he shall be a reverend father, and wear a myter, and be a
Bishop, and a Bishop of Bishops. So says Gregory, so Jerome, so Augustine,
and Barnard, and others. And can not we tell who it is, that calls himself an
universal Bishop, the Bishop of al Churches? Do we not hear of such a one?
Do we not know him? What soever he be, wheresoever he dwell, what countenance
soever he bear, he is Antichrist. I have told you, he shall sit in the temple
of God, in the consciences of the people: that the people shall hear, credit,
follow, and honor him, as if he were God: and think it sin and da^aioon to
break his loare.

I have told you where he shall be stalled where his chief place shall be,
whence he may be seen. Saint John says, he shall sit in a City built upon
seven hills: that city is the city of Rome. Rome is so built, Rome is set
upon seven hills. Dame Sybilla says, Antichrist shall sit by the water of
Tyber: and Tyber is a river, that runs by Rome. Ioachimus Abbas says,
Antichrist is long since borne at Rome, and shall be advanced in the
Apostolic see. He is borne, and shows himself, not at Babylon, not at
Constantinople, but at Rome. These be plain speeches. If any man doubt this,
let him read their books, they be extant abroad. Antichrist shall sit in
Peter's chair, and Rome shall be the seat of his kingdom.

I have told you, he shall come when the state, and majesty of the Empire shall
be weakened. Antichrist shall possess the Emperors lands, and bear the
sword, and wear his crown^, and shall make the Emperor fall down and worship
him, and kiss his feet. Has there ever been any such Bishop in the world?
Has there (I say) ever been any such? If ever there were any such, Saint
Paul says, the same is Antichrist.

I told you, the world shall fall down, and reverence him, and shall seek life
and salnation at his hands. John says, they shall cry, Oh who is like the
beast, who is like our holy father? who is so wise, so learned, so holy? they
shall follow him whither soever he will lead them: they shall eat what so ever
he will give them. And they which shall do thus, are such as have no feeling, no
care, no love to the truth of God. Therefore God forsakes them, and leaves
them to follow li^s. I told you, he shall prevail by falshoode, and by fained
miracles: by Bulls, by Pard^ns, by Purgatories, and by such other devises, and
shifts of Satan.

I told you, he shall be contrary to Christ, in Sacraments, in sacrifice, in
prayers, in life, in doctrine, in religion, in the whole form and order of the
Church. He shall shut, that Christ has opened. He shall open, that Christ has
shut. He shall curse, that Christ has blessed: and bless, that Christ has
cursed. No man shall be accounted faithful, no man catholic, no man the son
of the Church, no man may be saved without him. Such credit and countenance
shall he bear.

I told you, he shall be confounded and beaten down by the force and power of
Gods mighty word. His word is omnipotent. It shall disclose the works of
darkness: it shall hew down Idolatry, Superstition, and the whole kingdom
of Antichrist, as our eyes do see this day, Blessed be God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ: his mighty hand has wrought these things. He has
triumphed the name of his Christ: he will bless the things he has begun. He
will overthrow the whole power of Antichrist, by his presence, and by the
glory of his coming. Then shall it appear who is the successor of Peter, who
is the true vicar of Christ, and who is Antichrist.

V. 13. But we ought to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved
of the Lord, because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation,
through sanctification of the spirit, and the faith of truth.

14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

God has chosen you from the beginning, his election is sure for even The
Lord knows who are his. You shall not be deceived with the power and
suttletie of Antichrist, you shall not sal from grace, you shall not perish. This
is the comfort, which abides with the faithful, when they behold the fall of
the wicked. When they see them for sake the truth, and delight in fables. When
they see them return to their vomit, and to wallowe again in the myer. When
we see these things in other, we must say, alas, they are examples for me,
and they are lamentable examples. Let him that standeeh take heed that he fall
not. But God has loved me, and has chosen me to salvation. His mercy shall
go before me, and his mercy shall follow in me. His mercy shall guide my
feet, and stay me from falling. If I stay by my self, I stay by nothing, I
must needs come to ground. Although all the world should be drowned with the
waves of ungodliness, yet will I hold by the boat of his mercy, which shall
safely preserve me. If all the world be set on fire with the flame of
wickedness, yet will I creep into the bosom of the protection of my Lord, so
shall no flame hurt me. He has loved me, he has chosen me, he will keep me.
Neither the example, nor the company of others, nor the entising of the devil,
nor mine own sensual imaginations, nor sword, nor fire is able to separate me
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. This is the comfort of
the faithful. So shall they wash their hands in the blood of the Lamb.

Therefore says Paul, you are my children: I have begotten you in Christ,
God has given you unto me, he has made the Gospel which is come unto you by
my ministry. fruiteful in you, I ought to give God thanks always for you.
Whatsoever falls upon others, although others fall and perish, although they
forsake Christ, and follow after Antichrist, yet God has loved you, and given
his son for you, he has chosen you and prepared you to salvation, and has
written your names in the book of life.

But how may we know that God has chosen us? how may we see this election?
or how may we feel it? the Apostle says, Thorough sanctification, and the
faith of truth, these are tokens of Gods election. Have you received the
gospel? it is the light of the world, it teaches us to know that God is God,
and that we are his people. The credit you give to the Gospel, is a witness
of your election. We believe what soever God speaks, because it is the word
of God. For his word is truth. We believe that Christ is the lamb John. 1.
of God, that he has taken away the sins of the world: because it is the
word of God. We 1. John 1.
believe that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from al sin: because it is
the word of God. We believe, Christ came to save sinners. Because Matt. 9.
it is the word of God. We believe, Esaie. 48.
God will defer his wrath, and will shows mercy for himself, for his own
names sake: because it is the word of God. We believe, Psalm. 22.
they that trust in the Lord, shall not be confounded, because it is the word
of God. We Ephesians. 2.
believe, we are saved by grace through faith, and that not of our selves, it
is the gift of God: not of works, least any man should boast: because it is
the word of God. We believe, without Hcb. 11.
faith it is impossible to please God: and again, that faith comes by
hearing: and again, Romans 10. Philip.
that it is the gift of God: because it is the word of God. It is the truth.
We believe that Reu. 18. 19.
Antichrist shall be confounded, and bereft of al his glory, because the word
of the Lord has spoken it. His word is righteousness and truth. We will always
believe that is true, therefore we cannot but believe the word of God.

Faith knows no falsehood, it beholds the truth only, and not al truth, but
the truth of God. It is not settled upon vanities, nor upon errors. Unless it
be truth by the word of God, whatsoever thou hold in opinion, is not to be
called faith. The Turk is settled in errors, he persuades himself he is
rightly settled, he calls his opinions, Faith and beleese. Yet this is not
faith, because it is not the faith of truth, it has not the word of GOD to
assure it. Therefore when men will say, believe our Masses, believe our
sacrifices: believe our transubstantiations, and our real presences: believe us
what soever we say, believe that we can not err, believe that you are in a
good belief, if you say you believe as the Church believes, though you know
not how or what ye Church believes. They abuse and mock the people of God.
There is no truth in this doctrine. It never past out of the mouth of God. God
ordained not Masses, nor that the priest should offer sacrifice for the quick
and dead. Therefore it is no matter of faith, it is folly, and vanity, it is
ungodliness, it is error, it has no substance. He that receives such
doctrine, makes much of a shadow, he can not hold it.

Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. The word of God is
truth. The Gospel is the word of God, and the power of God to save them that
believe. The belief of the Gospel is laid up in our hearts by the spirit of
God. He brings us to the knowledge of the truth. This spirit bears
witness unto our spirit that we are the sons of God.

This spirit teaches us to withdraw our minds from worldly cares, to call
our doings to a reckoning, to think of the dreadful day of judgment, to
repent for our former sins, and to serve GOD in holiness and righteousness.
This spirit shows us the mercy of God, helps us to pray, and prays for
us, is our comforter, helps our in^irmities, and makes us know the things
that are given us of GOD. This did David see, when he prayed, Create a clean
heart in me oh God, and renew a right spirit within me; My heart is sinful,
my heart is foul: renew it with thy spirit, thy spirit in right, he shall
make my heart clean. Again, take not thy holy spirit from me. I am thy
servant, and the son of thy handmaiden, turn thy far^ away from my sins:
be^lde me, and receive me in thy mercy. Restore me to the light of thy
countenance. Open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise:
stablish me with thy free spirit. This strength we gather in God by his
spirit. This comfort us in all temptations, and ^areth witness with our
spirit, that we be the children of God: that God has chosen us, and does love
us, and has prepared us to salvation: that we are the ^eires of his glory:
that God will keep us as the apple of his eye, that de will defend us, and we
shall not perish.

V. 15. Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and keep all the instructions which
ye have been taught, either by word or by our epistle.

God has set you in a race. Let no man hinder you, let no man keep you from
the goal. Stand past and keep that doctrine which you have (...) I was
present with you, I taught you by (...) of mouth: when I was away from you. I
taught you by letters. I am careful for you. I bear you in my heart: and love
you (...) Christ Jesus. He has given me charge ever you, he will require you
at my hands. I have cleansed and garnished your hearts by the word of truth:
take heed, take heed the wicked spirit come not, and bring sea^ spirits
worse than himself, and enter in, and ^el with you, and the end of you be
worse than the beginning.

Remember Lots wife, she went not forth straight into the may appointed her,
but looked back behind her, and she became a pillar of salt: and so continues
until this day. A terrible example to those, which have set their hand to the
plough, and look back again, and have made themselves unworthy the kingdom
of heaven. God will forsake such, and make their hearts hard as a stone. You
are the ^ome of the Lords field, God has blessed you, grow then and be
fruitful until the harvest, that you may be gathered, into the Lords barn.
You are the light of God, which God himself has kindled: let no p^ffe of wind
put you out. You are the house of God, God has built you upon a rock: let no
violence, nor tempestuous-weather beat you down.

I have spoken to you, I have written to you. I have showed you the whole
counsel of God. The word which I spoke to you, is the very word of God. I
testitie before the Lord, and call God to witness unto my soul, that it is
the truth of God, and not any devise of man. You did believe it, you received
it not as the word of men, but as it is indeed the word of God. Become not now
unfaithful, although you spy many infirmities in your teachers: although you
see them fall into offenses, and ware covetous, and give evil example in their
life and conversation. Although you see the faith of many shalten, and that
they have put away from them a good conscience, and turn back from the love
of the gospel which they once seemed to profess, and so are gone out from
among you: yet stand you upright. Hold fast ye doctrine which you have
received: and continue in the things which you have learned, and be persuaded
that they are able to make you wise unto salvation, through the faith which is
in Christ Jesus. Christ says, woe be to the world because of offenses,
whosoever Matt. 18.
shall offend one of these little ones, which believe in me, it were better for
him, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in
the deapth of the sea. And again he says, Blessed is he Matt. 11.
which is not offended in me. Therefore, work your own salvation in trembling
and in fear. Blessed is he that abides with Christ in temptations, and
continues faithful unto the end.

V. 16. Now the same Jesus Christ our Lord, and our God even the father which
has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through
grace,

17 Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every word and good work.

After his exhortation that they would stand fast, and continue faithful unto
the end: he turns himself to God, and prays him to look upon them
mercifully down from heaven, and to fulfill the work begun, and to increase
and multiply his grace in them. So ought al Preachers and servants of God to
do in their sermons. For, alas, what are we? what is our word? what is our
labor without the assistance of God? We are, only the voice of a crier in
the wilderness: we call upon the people to prepare the way of the Lord,
and to make his paths straight: we give warning, that the Lord is even at
hand. He that teaches is nothing: he that planteth is nothing: he that
waters is nothing: our tongue is nothing: our word is nothing: our wit is
nothing: Peter is nothing: Paul is nothing. It is God which opens the hearts
of the people, and makes them tremble at his words. It is God which gives the
increase, and makes his word to be of force.

The Prophet says, The Lord gave the Psalm. 68.
word: great was the company of Preachers. It is the work of GOD, both to
make his word mighty, and to make the people to receive it, and yield unto
it. He gives us hearts to feel the comfort of his word, and to yield our
obedience in doing as the word requires. For, he is the father of lights,
from whom al gifts are powered down upon us. We are the children of Adam:
we are flesh and blood, and nothing but vile claie and ashes. Our eyes are
dim, our senses dull, and our hearts heavy. Christ tells us truly, Without
me ye can do nothing, neither hear John 15.
the word, nor believe it.

I mark your presence, that you are many gathered together this day in this
place. Every man seems to stand with bent countenance, and earnest looks,
and desirous to learn. And albeit I which speak am but a worm, unworthy to
creep upon the earth, yet the word which we have heard is the word of God,
the word of comfort, and the word of life. But God knows in all this company
how many have ears to hear. In the Acts of the Apostles, when God opened
their hearts, they understood the Scriptures. Before they heard, and knew not
what they heard. Paul preached: Lydia a woman which sold purple Act. 16.
heard him: the Lord opened her heart, that she hearkened unto Paul. Then she
understood his words and believed. This comfort is of God, who has loved us,
and has given us everlasting consolation, he will give you understanding
hearts, and will stablish you in every word, and good work.

CHAP. 3.
FVrthermore brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord, may have free
passage, and be glorified, even as it is with you.
Pray for me, that I may be a faithful seruante, doing the will of GOD from
my heart, that he will open my mouth boldly to publish the secret of the
Gospel, and to declare the riches and glory of his kingdom. For of my self
I am nothing. I have not the key of David, I cannot give light unto the wor^e,
and am not able to open the hearts of the people. That the word of God may have
free passage: he says not, pray for us, that my word may have passage: or,
that my name may be spoken of and glorified: or, that the people may behold my
doings and talk of me. For, we preach not our 2. Cor. 4.
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Christ's
sake. I am but an unprofitable servant. I am the poor Ore that treads out
the wheat: I am a poor crier to proclaim the will of the Lord.

Pray you that the word of the Lord may have free passage, that the Gospel
of Christ may be glorified, that the hearts of the people may be ready and
greedy to receive it, that the kingdom of Heaven suffer violence, and the
violent take it by force: that the word may so possess the hearts of the
people, as fire has passage through stubble: that it may shine as the sun
beams over all the world: that it may be known from Cast to Weast, and from
North to South. In this forte pray, that the word may have a glorious
entrance into you and also among other. Herein shall appear the love you
have to the Saints, and the zeal you bear to the house of God, when you wish
others to be partakers of his blessedness with you: when you seek not your
own glory, but the building of the Church of Christ: when you pray that GOD
will be merciful unto other^ as unto you: that a light may be given to them
which sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: that they may know the
time of their visitation.

Such a prayer made David, God be merciful Psalm. 67.
unto us, and bless us, and cause his fare to shine among us: that they may
know thy way upon earth, thy saving health among al nations. Let the people
praise thee, oh God, let all the people praise thee. Thus did Hieremie pray,
Turn thou us unto thee oh Lord, and Iam. 5.
we shall be turned. Give us a new heart and a new spirit, incline our hearts
unto thy testimonies, that we may know and fear thy name. So did Christ
teach us to pray, Hallowed be thy name, among the infidels which Matt. 6.
know thee not: let thy name be had in reverence among al people. Thy kingdom
come, thy will be done. There is no other God, but only thou, let all the
earth come and worship thee. Even so must we also pray, that the word of God
may have free passage, and his name be glorified in all places.

V. 2. And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and il men: for all men
have not faith.

3. But the Lord is faithful, which will stablishe you, and keep you from
all evil.

4. And we are persuaded of you through the Lord, that ye both do, and will
do the things which we command you.

5. And the Lord guide your hearts to the love of GOD, and the waiting for of
Christ.

From unreasonable and evil men. Which conspire against the Lord, and his
anointed: which blaspheme that good name that is called upon us. Such were
Iannes and Iambres, which resisted Moses in the time of the law. Such were
they in the time of the Prophets, which said, The word that thou have Ierem.
44.
spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hear it of thee. But we
will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, as to burn incense to
the Queen of Heaven, as we have done, both we and our fathers, our Kings and
our Princes. Such were in the time of the Gospel the Scribes and the Pharisees,
Which made the commandment of God, of Matt. 15.
no authority by their tradition. Which turned darkness into light, and light
into darkness. Such was Alexander the copper smith. Such were others. The
whole Scriptures are full of such. They were false prophets, false Apostics,
false brethren. They cauled di^sion in the church. They went out to preach in
the name of Christ, but inwardly they were ravening woolues.

Such were in the days of our fathers, and such there are in our days, such
Iannes and Iambres, such idol worshippers, such srorners of Gods word, such
scribes and Pharisees, such Alexanders, such false prophets, false Apostles, and
false brethren, we have more than a good many in our days. They pretend the
Gospel: no man more. In company of protestants, they will be protestants, in
company of others, they are quite become contrary. They come to the church,
and receive the holy communion: they resort secretly to corners where they
hear mass. They like the one, and like the other. They like the light, and
they love darkness, and make no difference between them. These are ready to
serve Christ, and also ready to serve Antichrist: faithful neither to God, nor
to Baal. And this is among many counted the highest point of wisdom, to be
able so to color and hide himself, that you shall not know what profession he
is of, to what church he joins himself, what religion he holds, whose
word or Gospel he follows, in what GOD he believes. Such there are. And
they only, be the singular men, reckoned the sine wits, and cunning
fellows of the world.

This is to be lamented, that in a christian estate there should be any such.
That they at whose hands God shall require a straiter accoumpt, than of others:
because he has given them the use of greater talents, either of wit, or of
learni^g, or of preferment, or of riches, should so mispende the good gifts of
God, or use his talents to such evil purpose, that they more than al other,
should devise means how to deny Christ among men, and as much as in them
lies to seek to cr^e again the Lord of glory.

The jews deal not so wickedly, the Turks deal not so traitorously. The
Je^e, although his case be miserable, and his heresies most dangerous: yet he
is earnest in his folly: he will not dissemble his profession. The Turk is
faithful unto Mahomet, and will not deny, or forsake him.

These false brethren, and dissembling christians are worse than Jews and
Turks. They are void of conscience, void of says, void of fear, of shame,
and of the grace of GOD. They are filthy swine, shameless dogs, and the
enemies of the cross of Christ. These hinder the passage of the Gospel, and
blaspheme the holy word of their salvation, and do all that in them lies to
abolish the light of Gods truth. S. Paul tells us, al men have not faith:
many hearts lie naked and void of faith, many seem to live, and yet are dead.

Howsoever these men carry out their doings in this life, they cannot mock God.
He knows who are his. Christ shall say unto these running witted dissemblers,
depart from me ye hipocrites, I know you not. You shall receive your portion
with the devil and his Angels.

Pray that we may be delivered from such unreasonable and evil men: that they
stop not the free passage of the Gospel: that they may have no power against
the glory of God. Then shall it appear, that God is faithful in all his words,
and holy in all his works: that his truth and mercy shall last for ever. He will
establish us in all goodness, and defend us from al evil: he will keep us from
all the power of Satan: he will keep us from al temptation, that the wicked shall
not prevail against us.

And we are persuaded of you through the Lord that ye both do and will do the
things which we warn you of. You know what commandments we gave you by the
Lord. I spoke unto you the will of GOD, and not mine own. I was unto you but a
messenger, to deliver unto you such an errand as GOD sent unto you: I hope ye
have received it in such duty as becomes, and that you both do, and will
hereafter obey it. I am your physician. The receipt which I have given you, is
sovereign, and shall work your health: I trust it tarieth with you, and you
brook it well. I have spoken unto you in the name of God. His name is holy. He
will cause that my labor shall not be in vain, but will make it fruitful in you.
Although al men have not says, yet al men are not void of faith. Although
there be many, the children of this world, yet there be some the children of
light: he that is of God, hears the word of God. They that be the sons of
God are obedient to the wisdom of god their father. God guide your hearts,
that you may love him, that you may know what good God has wrought unto your
souls: that you may see the depth of his mercy: that in all your tribulation
and adversity under the cross, and in your death, you may look for the day
of Christ: when the trumpet shall be sounded, the graves shall be opened, the
dead bodies shall come forth, and we shall be taken up into the clouds: then
shall he change our vile b^die, that it may be like his glorious body: then
shall we be like the Angels of God, we shall see God face to face, and rest with
him for ever.

V. 6. We warn you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinately, and not
after the instruction which he received of us.

The kingdom of God is like to a draw net Mat. ^3.
^ast into the Sea, that gathers of al kind of things: it is like a field,
wherein grows both corn and weeds. Sundry Uirgines went out to wa^e upon
the Spouse, some were wise, some were foolish: some had oil in their Lamps,
some had none. Many came to the marriage, some had their wedding garment, some
lacked it. Many are called, but few are chosen. Some bear the name of
christians, yet live in Usury, to the spoil and undoing of their brethren.
Some bear the name of Christians, yet live in adultery and fornication, as
the heathen which know not God. These be they through whom the name of God is
evil spoken of.

Therefore says Paul, I warn you that you withdraw your selves from every
brother, that walks inordinately. Forsake him, refuse his company, eat not
with him, dru^ke not with him, that so he may be ashamed of his filthiness.
Keceiue him not to your house, nor bid him God speed. For he that bids him.
God speed, is partaker of his evil beedes. Have you no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but even reprone them rather. A little leaven
does leaven the whole l^mpe. The wrath of god shall come not only upon those
which commit wickedness, but also upon al those which consent to the working
thereof. Among the Corinthians one had committed incest, and taken his fathers
wife. Saint Paul says, Let such one be delivered 1. Cor. 5.
unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus. Deliver him up to Satan.

Mark his ^rdes, and in what case he speaks them. For, they that delight in
wickedness, and are sold over unto sin, which are filthy, and increase in
filthiness: They are not of God, they have no part in the Church of God. The
Devil and Satan has power over them, therefore deliver them up unto Satan. The
reward of sinue is death: the soul which has sinned, shall die. For this
cause has the Church of God ordained excommunication: that he which has do^e
wickedly may be ashamed: that others who are guiltless may be afraid: and
that the heavy displeasure of God may be avoided.

We warn you (says he) in the name of our Lord. You know me, and my name,
and that I am an Apostle of Christ. But the commandment which I give you, is
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. I warn you by the glorious day of his
coming, that you withdraw your selves from every one that lives
inordinately. Receive him not to your company, bid him not God speed, that
you be not partakers of his evil, that he may know his filthiuesse, and be
ashamed. Yet let us pray for such, that they may be sorry, that they may
know whom they have offended, and turn again unto the Lord. For God would
not the death of a sinner, but that he repent of his wickedness, and live. The
mercy of God is about al his works.

V. 7. For ye your selves know, how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not
our felues inordinately among you.

8. Neither took we bread of any man for naught: but we wrought with labor
and tra^aile night and day because we would not be chargeable to any of you.

9 Not because we have not authority, but that we might make our selves an
example unto you, to follow us.

10 For even when we were with you, this we warned you of, that if there were
any which would not work, that he should not eat.

11 For we hear that there are some which walk among you inordinately, and
work not at al, but are busy bodies.

12 Therefore them that are such, we warn and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ,
that they work with quietness, and eat their own bread.

13 And ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing.

Here Paul makes his speech against those who under the pretense of the
Gospel lived idly, and would not labor. Take an crample of me, I lived not
idly, I earned my bread, I was not chargeable to any. Do you as you have us
for an example. So ought the servants of God to live, that their well doing may
be a pattern for the people to follow. Saint Paul tells Timothy, A Bishop
must be 1. Tim. 3.
unreprovable. He says not, without sin: for no man is without sin: but,
without rebuke. And again, Let no man despise thy 1. Tim. 4.
youth, but be unto them that believe, an example in word, in conversation, in
love, in spirit, in faith, and in pureness. And unto Titus the Bishop of
Candia he says: In all things show thy self an example of good works, with
vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity, integrity, and with the wholesome word,
which cannot be condemned, that he which withstandeth may be ashamed, having
nothing concerning you to speak evil of. So, in this place to the
Thessalonians, he says, you behold my conversation, how I have lived among
you. Be ye folowers of me: let me be the pattern for you to follow. Such
should be the speech of al those who are Bishops and ministers in the church
of God. They must walk so uprightly, that they may be unto al others the
patterns of good life, of liberality, of mercy, and of love. They must carry
the ark of the Lord, that the people may follow them.

We behaved not our selves inordinately, etc. Whereas I was an Apostle of
Christ, the first fruits of the gospel, a chosen vessel, called from above, and
set apart from mine own own, to be the ambassador of God into the world,
and had so much to do: Yet I used my hands, and pained my body, to get my
bread. I lived like one of Adams children in travel of my body, and sought my
bread in the sweat of my brows. Not that I might not lawfully have lived upon
you, and have required my maintenance at your hands. It was lawful for me to
have done so, for the workman is worthy of his hire. God has appointed that he
which teaches the Gospel, shall live by the Gospel.

This matter S. Paul reasons with the Corinthians, Have we not power to
eat and 1. Cor. 9.
drink? or have we not power to lead about a wife, a sister, as well as the
rest of the Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord and Cephas? Who goes a
warfare at any time at his own cost? Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not
of the fruit thereof? or, who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of
the flock? I might eat and drink at your charge, and require charges of you
for me, and mine. I am the souldior of God. Christ is my captain: I have
planted the vine of the Lord of hosts among you, I have fed you, you are the
sheep of the house of Israel. The hire due to the soldier: the fruit whereof
he should eat which keeps the vine, and the milk which Christ's sheep yield
to their feeder, is nothing else but your charitable benevolence toward the
servants of Christ. Again, It is written in the law of Moses. Thou shall not
muzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. He tranaileth for thee,
that thou may live. Suffer him to lick a little for his pains. We are the
Lords oxen, we thresh forth his corn. If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great thing if we reap your carnal things? We are Gods
husbandmen, we travail and take pains, we plough, we sow, we harrowe, we
are abroad in wind and weather, in storm, in hail, in lightning and thunder.
No man knows the care the poor husbandman takes. Winter nor Summer, our
work is never at an end. Now if we by our labor minister to you the bread
which comes from heaven, is it much that you give us the bread of the earth?
Do you not know that they which wait at the altar are partatakers with the
altar? It has so seemed good unto GOD, it is his appointment, he has
established it by his law, and it is most agreeable to the law of reason, and
nature.

Yet this is also to be weighed in the consideration hereof, that whosoever
asks the pay of a soldier, must buckle his armor, and go a warrefare. He
that drinks the wine, must plant the grape: he that requires milk, must
feed the flock: he that will not be mureled, must thresh the corn: he that
reapeth carnal things, must sow spiritual things: he that requires the
bread of the earth, must minister to his hearers the bread of heaven: he that
will live of the sacrifice, or of the altar, or of the Gospel: must offer the
sacrifice, wait upon the altar, and teach the gospel. He that teaches not the
gospel, nor cares for the teaching: he that serves not the altar, nor cares
for the serving: he that goes not on warrefare, that planteth not, that
feeds not, that thresheth not, that plougheth not, that frauaileth not, that
takes no pains, that abides not lightning, thunder, wind, weather, storm
and ha^le: he that cares not to do these things: I can make no account of
him. He is not within Paul's reckning. The workman is worthy of his hire. But
what right has he to the hire which is not a workman?

I might, says he, have received mainteinance at your hands: but I took
nothing, that I might be an example for you to follow, that none should live
idly, but that They work with quietness, and eat their own bread.
Idleness is the mother of all mischief. An idle pack is as if he were
already dead. His feet serve him not to travail: his hands help him not to
work: his eyes serve him not to see his estate: his heart regards not the
time and misery of his age. Beggerie falls upon him, and gnaweth his bones,
but he feels it not. For he is as if he were already dead. Solomon faith, He
that follows idleness, Prou. 12.
has no understanding. And again, He Prou. 28.
that follows idleness, shall be filled with poverty. He is unprofitable to
himself, and unto others. His children shall beg at every door. Again he
says, The slothful will not plough Prou. 20.
because of winter: he shall beg in summer, but have nothing. That is, men
that have received increase of Gods blessing by taking pains, shall deny
bread unto such, and vpbraide them for their idleuesse, and so drive them to
labor. They will say, as it is devised that the Ant said, in like case to the
Grasshopper. In the summer thou did nothing but sing, therefore thou may
sterue in the winter. These extremities be great, if a man will weigh them
advisedly. Yet Ecclesiasticus says farther, Idleness brings much evil. It
Eccle. 23.
is an evil teacher. He that does nothing is ill occupied. The mind of man is
ever stirring and doing somewhat. If it be not doing well, it is doing ill.
Water is clear, and fair, fresh, and comfortable: yet if it stand still in a
hole, or be kept long in a vessel, whence it has no issue, it will rotte and
smell, and be unwholesome. Even so it fares with the sons of Adam, if they
have nothing to do, no way to bestow their wit, they will rotte, and prove
unwholesome and devise mischief all the day long.

What is it that fills the prisons, and brings so many to the gallows,
and causes so many parents to bewail the untimely death of their children,
but idleness? when the poor wretches have received their judgment, and come
to the place of execution, and stand on the ladder, what counsel give they to
young men, and to children, but to beware of idleness? what is cause of such,
and so many diseases in the body? Ask the Physicians, and they will tell you
idleness. Whereof rise mutterings in Cities against Magistratrs? whereof rise
rebellions in kingdoms against Princes? you can give no greater cause thereof
than idleness. Behold (says the Lord) this was Ezech. 16.
the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness. This was it that called for fire down from heaven, and wasted so
many cities into ashes. Christ says, Of every idle word that men shall
speak, Mat 12.
they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment. If we shall make
account for our idle words, what shall we do for our idle hands, for our
idle feet, for our idle body, for our idle soul? what account for all our
idleness shall we make at the day of judgment?

We warned you, says the Apostle, that if any would not work, the same should
not eat^ This is a hard saying: yet says Paul I my self have kept it. I have
fulfilled it in mine own body. He does not say, if any be sick or weak, or
impotent, and can not work, but if any be idle, and froward, and will not
work: to such a one give not to eat: that so he may see the danger of
idleness, and work with his hands the thing which is good, Ephe. 4.
that he may have to give him that needs. It is not lawful to give them the
bread of the Church, and the alms ordained for relief of the poor. This
bread they may not eat.

But you will say, Kings and Counsailours, Bishops, Preachers, and all other
sorts of learned men neither plough, nor sow, nor hedge, nor ditch, nor use
such painful labor of the body: they sit at rest and live idly. They that
so think are deceived. The toil which princes take, and the great cares
wherewith they are occupied, pass al other cares in the world. Saint Paul
calls the office of a Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.
a good work. If a bishop, or minister study the Scriptures, preach the
gospel, catechize the children, and take a care of the souls of Gods people:
if he sow the Lords field, feed the Lords flock, thresh the Lords corn,
2. Cor. 11.
and walk before the people carefully: if he have the care of the Churches,
and can say with the Apostle, who is weak, and I am not 2. Cor. 11.
weak? who is offended, and I burn not? any offense that is given to my
brother, is to me as a fire, or as a torment. If he be instant in 2. Tim. 4.
season, and out of season: if he do the work of an Evangelist, and make his
ministry fully known: he shall find himself occupied, and not be idle.

The master of the ship seems to be idle, to sit still, and to do
nothing. He stirs not the pumpe, he drives not the oars, he sounds not
the deep, he rides not the ropes, he skaleth not the shrowdes, he runs
not hither and thither, forewarde or backwarde, under the hatches or above. He
sits still, holds his peace, and looks upon the load star, and in
appearaunce does nothing. But his labor passes all the rest. Whithout his
labor, all the pains which the other Mariners take were lost. Were it not for
his labor, the ship would soon strike upon rocks, and be stayed in the
sands, and they al should perish. Even so fares it in the state of princes,
and of their counsaylors, they seem to do nothing, yet they do al things,
which is for the peace and the wealth, and the safegarde of all the people.

Be not weary in well doing: many occasions to discourage you to do well. The
world is full of lets, but be you steadfast, immovable, and abundant always in
the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your labor is not in vain
in the Lord. Stand fast, and keep the instructions, which you have been
taught. Distribute to the necessity of the saints. Do good unto al men,
especially to them that be of the household of faith. Live not after the lusts
of men in wantonness, drunkenness, and gluttony, and in abominable
idolatry. Though they speak evil of you, because you run not with the^ unto
that same excess of riot: though the Devil cast you into prison, and there you
have tribulation, be you faithful unto death. They that have afflicted you shall
give an account to the righteous judge: and the afflictions which you suffer in
this present time are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed unto you.

V. 14. If any man obey not this our saying, note him by a letter, and have no
company with him, that he may be ashamed.

15. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

You have been taught not only what you shall believe, but also how ye ought to
live: be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only. If any despise and will
not follow our doctrine, forsake him, and let him have no fellowship with you:
that, so he may be ashamed, and repent, and turn again to the obedience of
Christ. But lay apart al bitterness, and anger, and wrath. Reprove him, but hate
him not. Kill the sin that is in him by all the means you can, for it is the
work of the Devil: but recover again the man that did offend, and restore him
if it be possible, by exhortation, and by your prayers made for him: for he is
the creature of God.

Here I have good occasion to speak of excommunication, a principal part of
the discipline of the Church: a matter which many know not, which some do
souly abuse, and over lightly give forth, and which many regard not as they
ought. It cutteth us off from the bodic of Christ, and remoueth us from the
fellowship of the Gospel. Let no man despise it. It is ye sword of God, the
power of the holy Ghost, the discipline of Christ, it is an ordinance which
the Church has received from above.

By it the Goats are divided from the Lambs, the weed from the good corn,
and the sons of GOD from the sons of Belial. It has continued from the
beginning, and has been used in the Church of Christ, in the sinagogue of the
Jews, in the law of Moses, and before Moses received the law: among the
Patriarchs, and the Prophets, and the Apostles of Christ. Christ says, If
thy brother trespass against thee, Matthew. 18.
in doing any wickedness, Go and tell him his fault between thee, and him
alone: if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother. But if he hear thee
not, take yet with thee one or two: and if he will not vouchsafe to hea^e them,
tell it unto the Church, publish it, and make it known: And if he refuse to
hear the Church also, if he continue wilful, and stand in his wickedness:
Let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a publicane. This form of
excommunication our savior has set down, whereby the wicked and ungodly are
removed from the Church of Christ.

So Saint Paul speaks of him that lived in filthynesse, with his fathers
wife. That they give him no comfort in wickedness, but take away the evil from
among them. Let such a one, says he, Be delivered unto Satan, 1. Cor. 5.
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus. Company not together with fornicatours. If any that is
called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an idolater, or a rayler,
or a drunkarde, or an extortioner, with such one eat not. Let him be put away
from the company of the faithful. So did Saint Paul excommunicate Himenaeus,
and 1. Tim. 1.
Alexander, and delivered them to Satan, that they might learn not to
blaspheme.

In the law of Moses God commanded Number. 5.
the children of Israel to put out of the host every leaper, that they should
neither eat, nor drink, nor walk abroad, nor come to church, nor offer
sacrifice, nor make their prayers with the people. Such one, whithersoeuer he
went, hid his face, rent his clothes, gave warning to avoid his company, and
to fly from him, because he was foul and filthy. His hands were filthy, and
made the water unclean: his breath was corrupt, and infected the air. So
miserable was his case. This was a kind of excommunication: in such sort were
the filthy divided from the clean.

God also set down this ordinance Genesis 17.
to Abraham, that every uncircumcised man child, should be cut off from his
people, because he has broken the covenant. This ordinance of
excommunication God has appointed against Idolaters, against fornicatours, and
crafty deceivers, and other such like offenders in the seven and twentieth of
Deuteronomie, Cursed be the man that shall make any carved or molten Image, an
abomination unto the Lord, the work of the hands of the craftesman, and
puts it in a secret place. And all the people shall answer and say, Amen.
Cursed be he, that makes the blind go out of the way: and all the people shall
answer and say, Amen. This is excommunication. This is the use of the keys.
This is that, of which Christ spoke, He that hears you, hears me, and he
that Luke 10.
despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me. And, Ioh. 20.
Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted: and whosoeuers sins ye
retain, they are retained. Whatsoever ye bind on earth, Matt. 18.
shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoener ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. That which you say, shall be confirmed: it shall continue and stand for
ever.

If any therefore be excommunicate from the Church, and removed from the
fellowship of the Gospel, and from the hope of the life to come: let him humble
himself, and pray unto God, that he will open his eyes, and that he may see in
what case he stands. Let him lay forth his heart in the sight of God, and
consider his fault, and behold his misery, and think thus with himself: I was
sometimes the child of God, and a member of his body: I was a ^raunch of the
vine, which God has planted: and a sheep of his pasture. But now alas I am
divided from the pastures of life. I am fruitelesse and withered, and cut off
from that blessed vine: I receive no moisture from that heavenly root: I am no
more a member of the body of Christ. I am out of Paradise, and have no joy, or
pleasure: I am out of the temple and cannot offer any sacrifice: I am fallen
from that heavenly Jerusalem, from the City of God, from the fellowship of
the Saints, and can not kneel down, nor lift up my hands, nor make my
prayers. God will not hear me, I am none of his: I am as a heathen and a
publicane, I can not think of those things which are on high above.

But why art thou cut off from thy brethren, and banished out of the florke of
Christ? because of thine ungodliness, and looseness of life. Because thou
have offended heaven and earth: and have offended against the Church of God.
And lived in fornication, and adultery: and both thy body and thy mind are
defiled: thou art unworthy to dwell in the house of God: his house is holy.

By what authority is this done? thou must not think that the Judge or the
Officer does it. It is not the judgment of any mortal man. It is the judgment
of the almighty, and everlasting God. It is his hand that brings this to
pass against thee. It is his word, it is his key. His hand is mighty, his
work shall stand, his word is forcible, his hey is the key of David, it
opens, and no man shuts, it shuts and no man opens. God is departed
from thy heart: his spirit will not dwell in a filthy soul: there is no
agreement between God and Belial. Thy soul is void of grace and of the fear
of God.

What becomes of thee in this case? Whither do thou go, into what misery
do thou fall? into the gulf of death: into the seat of pestilence, and the
power of Satan, and the snares of the Devil, and into a reprobate mind. Thy
heart follows him: thy soul serves him. He is the father of all the children
of disobedience, and his children follow him. Thou art filthy and increasest
in filthiness, the fear of God is not before thee, thou do not acknowledge
thy sin, because of the blindness of thy heart.

Wreake not thy self upon thy neighbor that accused thee, nor upon the
Judge, that pronounced sentence against thee. The sentence is none of his: this
is not his work, he has not judged thee. The hand of God is stretched forth
to thy punishment: it is thine own life, and wickedness which forces
indgement upon thee. The Judge sits in the place of GOD, in the seat of
justice: he can not bless, that GOD has cursed: he must needs do right
and eq^ie. He sees the abomination of thy life, (...) sees the filthiness
which thou have done in the house of God, and therefore says: In nomine Dei,
etc. in the name of the living God, and of Jesus Christ, before whom I stand,
and before whom al flesh shall appear: by the authority of his word, and by
the power of the holy ghost, I divide thee from the fellowship of the
Gospel, and declare, that thou art no more a member of the body of Christ,
thy name is put out of the book of life: thou have no part in the life to
come: thou art not in Christ, and Christ is departed from thee. I deliver thee
to Satan, the Prince of darkness. Thy reward shall be in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone. Thou shall sterue and wither, and not abide.
The grace of GOD is taken out of thy heart. The face of the Lord is upon al
them that do evil, they shall not taste of his mercy.

As for the Judge and Minister, which gives sentence against thee, he
mourns and lamenteth for thee. When he strikes thee, he strikes himself.
We are al one flesh, and one blood, and al together make one body, and are one
an others members. Therefore, when he does excommunicate thee, from the
brethren, he cutteth off an arm from his own body. Jeremy dealt roughly
with the people that offended God, and threatened them, that the enemy should
come upon them, the sword should devour them, and they should be utterly
destroyed, yet he wished that he had a stream of tears, that his heart might
have wherewith to mourn for their transgressions.

David prays, that God will stretch forth his hand upon the wicked, Scatter
them abroad Psalm. 59.
by thy power, and put them down oh Lord our shield. Again, Let them be
chafe before Psalm. 35.
the wind, and let the Angel of the Lord scatter them. And again, Let their
table be a Psalm. 69.
snare before them, and their prosperity their ruin. Again, Let his prayer
be turned into Psalm. 109.
sin. Aid him not, hear him not when he calls unto thee. Yet he says, I
saw the transgressors, and was grieved because they kept not thy word. I
pined away, and consumed to death, the grief was so deadly unto my soul.

Christ cried out woe upon Corazin and Bethsaida: upon the Scribes and
Pharisees: yet when he came nigh to Jerusalem, he wept over it, saying: Oh if
thou had even now Luke 19.
at the least in this thy day known those things, which belong unto thy peace:
but now are they hid from thee. Thine enemies shall make thee even with the
ground, they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou
know not the time of thy visitation. Even such a sorrow also had Saint
Paul for those that offended God, Who is weak, and 2. Cor. 11.
I am not weak, who is offended and I burn not? My body is shaken, my heart
is wounded for them, such a care have I for the church of God.

It is reported of John the Evangelist, that Eus lib. 3. cap. 23.
he commended a yongman to the education of a certain Bishop nigh to Ephesus:
and when he heard that he was fled and followed the company of such as were
dissolute, riotous, and given over to al manner lew^sse: he was careful for
him, and sought him out. And came to the place where he and ill company were.
When the yongman knew him, he was astonished, and ^ed away from him. But the
old man followed him, and cried, Oh my child turn again, turn unto me, I am
thy father, I have begotten thee in Christ Jesus. I come not to hurt thee,
there is yet hope of salvation, I will make answer unto Christ for thee. Fall
to the ground, hold up thy hands, ask mercy of God, he is merciful and will
receive thee. At these words the yongman cast down his weapons, and trembled,
and wept bitterly, and was converted.

When David heard of the destruction of that wicked wight Absalon, he wrong his
2. Sam. 18.
hands and wept saying, O my son Absalon, my son, my son Absalon, would
God I had died for thee, oh Absolon, my son, my son. Such a care, such a
love, and zeal has a godly minister over his people, if he be a true pastor,
which has taken his calling from God, and has due consideration of his charge.

He weepeth for the sins of the people, as did Jeremy, he gusheth out into
tears, and consumes away as David, because of the ungodly: he is wounded at
heart, and trembles, as Paul, to see them perish. He seeks for them, calls
after them, that they may return, to him as did John the Cuangelist: and is
willing to die for their sake, if so be he might redeem them, as David was for
Absalon. The people are his children, he is their father. Albeit they be
wicked, and filthy: yet he presents himself before God for them, and
pours forth his prayers, and says sanctify them, oh Lord, sanctify them
with thy truth, thy word is truth. Let their hearts see the wrath to come, and
thy heavy displeasure, which they have deserved, and hangs over their heads.
They are thine, save them, and let not satan prevail against them. Turn them
oh Lord, and they shall be turned. Give them a new heart, and renew a clean
spirit in them, that they may fear thee all the days of their life. Turn
away the captivity of their souls. Bring them to the fellowshippe of the
Gospel: make them lively stones meet for thy building, build up the walls of
Jerusalem. So careful is a good minister for the people of his charge, be they
never so ungodly. Yea the more they lack the comfortable grace of God, the more
must be the care for them. This is that Saint Paul says, have no company
with such, to encourage him: yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him
as a brother.

V. 16. Now the Lord of peace, give you peace always by all means. The Lord
be with you al.

17. The salutation of me Paul, with mine own hand, which is the token in
every epistle: so I write.

18. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you al.

I need not commend peace unto you. It is the guard and strength of mighty
Princes: it is the nurse and fosterer of the Church of God: it is the wealth
and prosperity of the world: it is the comfort and quietness of our
conscience: it is truce taken with God and man, and our own selves. I need
not to tell you who is the worker of peace. You know God is the God of peace.
Worldly peace seems to be made by the will and liking of men: but God moves
their hearts, and establishes it. But the peace of the heart, and quietness
of mind passes al understanding. The power, and wisdom, and strength, and
riches of all the world are not able to make it. It is the glory of God, that
he alone is the God of peace.

I pray for you, that nothing may be done among you, to the hinderaunce of
peace: but that it abide with you always, not for a while, not in prosperity
only: but in persecution, in your death, and for ever. If God be with you, you
shall have peace. And if you love one an other and keep his word: God will come
to you, and love you, and abide with you, and give you the comfort of his peace.

The salutation of me Paul: he gave them warning before of false Apostles,
who came in his name, and pretended his word or his letter. Therefore now
tells them, how they shall know certainly, whether such Epistles as they
receive be his, written, or sent by him. In every Epistle, that I send, says
he, to the Churches, or to any the brethren, I write mine own name, and send
this greeting written with mine own hand, which now I send to you al, The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you al.

AMEN.
FINIS.

