A sermon made by John Chrysostom patriarche of Constantinople, of patience,
of ye end of ye world, and of ye last judgment. Whereunto is added an other
Homely made by John Brentius of the virtue of Christ's resurrection translated
into English by Thomas Sa^pson Anno. do. 1550.

Grace peace and mercy from God our father, and the Lord Jesus our Savior, be
with the beloved Reader in the Lord.
THree things there are, which Christ our sauyoure taught concerning the day
of judgment: First to what joys the faithful shall be received: Secondly
what horrible pains the unfaithful and wicked shall abid: Thyrdely how
sudden the coming of that day shall be. And of this sudden coming he
makes in the gospelles much and large mention, and compares it to the
coming of the floude, to the burning of Sodo^, to a lightenyng which (as it
were in the twi^ckli^g of an eye) goes from ye east unto ye west, to a thief
yt comes on a man's house in the night time, and says he, In such an hour
as ye think not, Mat. ^4.
Will the son of man come, thus not showing when the day shall be, he
does teach no more but that sodaynely it will come. This thing he did so
diligently teach, forseing that men would be sluggardes and idle, neither
watching for the day, nor yet preparinge them selves to the judgment,
therefore he still cried Watch Watch, both signifing that he would not have us
taken unawares, and also teaching us that we should be faithful servants in
our vocacyon, ministering righteousness toward our brethren, and not become
tirauntes and bellyegods, as they do which think not at al of his coming:
that we might also have oil in our lamps and our lamps burning, such
fruits of faith that men may se our good works and gloryfie the father
which is in heaven, and so meet the Lord our bridegroom in the air, to
enter with him into the kingdom of heaven. This was one of ye ends of
Christ's teaching concerning this matier. Now a man would think, that if
there had never been any more spoken of this thing, this warning and
teaching of Christ had been sufficient to have made all men before us, and to
make us also most chiefly which are in the latter ends of the world,
circumspect, watchinge and prepared accordyngly to receive the Lord.

But neither his teaching, neither the same doctrine taught by his Apostles,
which we read and hear every day, neither ye writing of the old fathers
from age to age of this matter, neither the preching and writing in this our
time, and that more is though that all the signs and tokens which should go
before that day are al ready come and passed, yet can none of all these
things make us to watch, and prepare our selves for that day, so great is
our synnefull security. What I pray you will be the end of this our secure
and careless life and synnynge? Forsothe this, that it shall be rewarded with the
pain due for the contempt of God, that our parts must be with the tirannous
and flesshlye servant, and with the sloggishe careless and folyshe virgins,
which is in that utter darkness where we shall have no other chere but weeping
and gnashyng of teeth. This is an undoubted truth.

The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Let all them therefore that do desire
to be partakers of the kingdom of God, prepare them selves, forsake sin,
labor for faith, and set on fire their lamps gyuyng forth the fruits of
faith, and consider the day of the Lord to be now nearer at hand then ever it
was, when we shall al arise, both good, and bad. Watch therefore. The which that
thou may be occasioned ye better to do, I give unto the (good Reader)
translated into English these two little sermons, one of Chrysostom, which
does amongst many other notable lessons full ernestly admonyshe thee of that
day: The other of John Brentius, which teaches the virtue and effect of
Christ's resurrection. Be thou therefore (good Reader) by the reading of these
once again warned to prepare thy self unto that day, and so from henceforth now
behave thy self, yt when the Lord shall come you may be found unblameable,
and so able to stadde in his sight, that thou may enter with him into glory:
Which grant unto us all, that Lord, that shall judge us al, to whom be glory
for ever.

A sermon of John Chrysostom, patriarche of Constantynople, of patience, and
ye end of this world: of the second coming of the Lord: and of the
everlasting joys of the just, and pains of the evil. Translated out of
greek into latin by John Theophilus, and out of Latin into English by T.S.
THe life of the just, truly, is excellent. But how does it florishe, but by
patience? Love it, my brother, as the mother of strength. For the Psalme-writer
does admonyshe the saying. Psalm. 37.
Hope thou in the Lord and keep his Way. And Paul to the end that thou
might keep this virtue says: Romans v.
Tribulacion brings patience. The which if thou exercise, thou shall find ye
spryng of all goodness, which is hope, and hope makes not ashamed. Psalm. 37.
Hold the still in the Lord, and abide pacyently upon him. For even thereby
shall thou verily find a thing that is not to be highly esteemed. And he shall
give the thy hertes desire. What is more blessed then this man, which, as his
own, has the welwyllynge ears, of so great a king? Who desires not to
have the Judge to give ear, and to show him favor? My brother, thou art
the work man of virtue. Christ has hired the into his vyneyard. Whiles you have
time work goodness. Give care to Paul which says.

VVatsoeuer a man sows, that shall he reap Sow in the spirit, Galat. vi.
that thou may reap everlasting life. For he yt sows in ye flesh shall
of the flesh reap corrupcion. And harken unto an other admonisher which
says. Ose x.
SoVVe unto the righteousness, and reap the fruits of VVeldoyng. Be not weary
of thy labor: for there is hope of harvest, and time of gatheri^g. For where as
appointed games are, there are rewards: where battles, there are honors
gotten: where fight, there is ye crown of vyctorie. Have an eye unto these
things, and harness thy self unto pacyence. Let him always sownde in thine
ears, which cries with ye saints. Be strong, Psalm. xxvi.
let thine heart be of good comfort, and Wait thou still for the Lord.
Prepare thy works: husbonde thy feelde. Thy life is the feelde. Take a good
matthooke, I mean the old and new testament: make an hedge about thy
ground with thorns, that is, with doctrine, prayer, and fasting. If you have
this hedge, the beast that is the Devil shall not break into ye. Till thy
soul as a good vineyarde. And as the keapers of vyneyardes do clap their
hands, and cry out with their voice, and with such noyses they drive away
such as do pryuily lurcke to spoil them, even so do you cry in prayer, make
noise with singyng of psalms, and thou shall drive away the evil best, the
fox, that is to say the devil. Of the which best the scripture speaks.
Get you the foxes. etc. Cantic. 2.
Take good heed always of the enemy. If he does shote at thy heart with
unlawful lust, if he with his darte does cast his filthy thoughts in to thy
mind, cast forth against him the shield of faith, Ephesians. vi.
turn against him the helmet of hope, take to thee ye sword of ye spirit,
which is the word of God. And when thou art so harnessed abid thine enemy. Be
not faynte herted in the batell. But in all points be sober, and say, ii. Cor.
ii.
His thoughts are not Unknown to us. Be joyful always: as it is written.
Let your softnes be Known unto all men. Philip. 4.
Let the fear of God lyghten in thy heart. Be not a cowardlye soldier, be not
fearful, and a slow workma^, fle not from the crown of victory. Life is
short, but the judgment is long. Lokyng unto this, speak unto thin own
heart and say with ye blessed prophet. Psalm. xxvi.
Be strong, and let thy heart be of good comfort, and Wait thou still for the
Lord. i. Reg. xvii.
Follow David and with one cast of a stone overthrow thine enemy. The
Aungelles are about the, as the beholders of thy life: i. Cor. iiii.
Vue are made (says he) a gasynge stock, to the World, and to the
Aungelles, and to men. If they shall se that thou ouercommest, they shall
rejoice in thy good work, but if they shall se the to be overcome, they shall
departfull sad, nether shall they be able to look upon the, but the devils shall
mock the. Therefore take for thy sword the fear of of God. For the fear of
God is a two edged sword, cuttyng away all evil lusts. Take unto the
therefore always the fear of God. Of the last day
And remember continually that same last day, when the heavens shall be
destroyed with fire, and ye elements shall melte away with heat, ii. Pete.
iii.
but the earth and ye works that are in it shall be burnt up. When the
sterres shall fall down as leaves. The Sun and Moon shall be made dark,
Luke. xxi. Mat. 24.
and shall not give their light. When the Son of God shall be openly showed,
and shall come down from the heaven up on the earth, and the powers of the
heavens shall be moved. When Aungelles shall pass hither and thither, ye
sowndes of the trompettes shall come, fire shall burn before him, and runnyng
up and down shall burn up the whole world. In the compass about him shall
be a mighty tempest. There shall be earthquakes, and lyghtninges, such as never
were before, nether yet are unto this day. In so much that the very powers
of heaven shall be smytten with great fear. Therefore, my brother, what manner
parsones ought we to be then? What fear, Exodus xix.
what deadly dread shall come upon us? Remember how that the Israelites could
not in the wilderness abide the cloud and darcknesse, and the voice of GOD
speaking out of the myddest of the fire, but caused that he should not speak
unto them, neither were they able to abide him, when he yet hid much of his
majesty, yea though yt he neither came down to them in anger, nor yet spoke
angrily unto them. Give ear therefore my brother, if they were not able to abide
his coming which comforted them, when as neither the heavens burning were
destroyed, neither the earth nor ye things that are in it were burned up, when
there was none that blewe any such trompet, as that trompet shall sou^de, when
it shall raise up al them that have sleapte since the beginning of the world,
neither did the fire burn the world, neither yet happened there the^ any of
those fear full things which shall come.

What shall we do, when he shall come down with such anger and wrath as is
intolerable, and shall sit upon the seat of his glory, and shall call before
him ye whole earth from the risyng of the sun to the going down thereof: and
from all the ends of the earth, that he may judge his people, and give unto
every one of them according to his works. Alas what manner parsons ought we to
be, when we shall stand vpnaked, and unclothed, to be brought before his
judgment seat. Ah, woe is me. Where is then our colored hypocrisy, and where
is then yt might of the flesh? where is the beawtye which is both disceitfull
and unprofitable? where is then the swetnes of man's voice? where becomes then
shameless and vnshamefased pratyng? where is the array of garments? where is
the^ the pleasure of sin, which is in deed unclean and filthy? where are
they then which drink their wine with their tabours and instruments of
musyke and do not look upon the works of GOD? where is then the contempt of
those men, which do now live without fear? where are then ye fine pleasures
and nyce tenderness? (...) al things are passed away, and are dissolved even
as the enfected air. Where is the^ the gredy desire of monye and riches, and
the vnmercyfulnesse which always folowethe it? where is then that cruel pride
which does horribly hate all me^, and seems unto it self to be somewhat?

Where is then the unprofitable and vain glory of men? where is then might,
and tyranny? where then is King? where is Prince? where is Duke? where then
are these proud Rulers, which by reason of their riches do contempne God?
Then when they shall perceive that this was spoken of them. They meruayled, they
were astonyed, Psalm. xlvii. and.xlviii.
and suddenly cast down, fear came upon them, they are troubled, fear took
the^. There shall be sorrows as are the sorrows of a woman that trauaileth, they
shall be torn in pieces with a mighty spirit. But where is the wisdom of ye
wise? where be their new inuencio^s? Woe, woe to the^? They are moved out of
their place, they are cast down even as a droncken man, and all their
wisdom is swalowed up.

i. Cor. i.
Where is the wise? Where is ye scrybe? where is the raker of treasure together
of this vain world? My brother, wey with thy self what manner of parsons we
shall be when we must give an account of those things which we have done, as well
great things as small. For until such time as we have justly satisfyced yt
just judgment, in what condition shall we be? And how careful shall we be,
The ever lastyng joys of the righteous.
that we may find favor before him? But what manner of joy shall come upon
us, which are set a part upon the rightha^d of God? In what case shall we be
then, when all ye saints of God shall salute us? Abraham shall salute the,
Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Noe, Job, David, and all the holy Prophets, Apostles,
and Martirs: and all those righteous men which pleased God in the life of their
flesh: and how many shall thou hear there, and shalt maruayle at their life,
whom a little before thou desire but to see? They shall there come unto the,
being very glad for thy salvation. How shall we then be inwardly moved? What
unspeakable joy shall yt be, when the king in his gracyous good mood shall
say unto them that be on his right hand. Mat. ^^
Come ye children of my father, and possess the kingdom, which is prepared
for you from the beginning of the world. Then shalt thou my brother receive
that most glorious kingdom, and the princely crown of glory of the hand of
the Lord, and from thence forth shalt thou reign with Christ. Then shalt
you receive for thine enherytaunce those everlasting goods which God has
prepared for the^ that love him. Then ever afterward shalt thou be without
carefulnes, and without al fear. Consider, my brother, what it is to reign in
heaven, for as we said before, you shall receive ye crown of glory at the hand
of ye Lord, and shall from thenceforth reign with Christ. ^^y with thy self my
brother, what a thing it is always to behold the face of God? What a light
is in it: (...)
The Sun shall never be thy day light, (as Esai said) and the light of the
Moon shall never shine unto the: but the Lord God shall be thine everlasting
light, and thy God shall be thy glory. Behold my brother, what manner of joys
are laid up for them which fear ye Lord, and which do keep his
commandments.

Furthermore cast in thy mind my brother also the destruction of sinners. The
destructyon and the pain of the evil men.
When they shall be brought before the dredful judgment seat, with how great
bashfulnesse shall they be amassed before the just judge, when they shall not
have one word to answer. How shall they be ashamed, when the Lord shall
speak unto them in his wrath, and in his anger shall trouble the^, sayi^g,

Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. xxv.
which is prepared for the Devil and his angels. Alas, alas, in what
affliction, and perplexitye shall their spirits be, when all shall maynely
cry out? saying. Let the sinners be turned into hell, Psalm. ix.
and all nacyons which do forget GOD.

Alas, alas, what a sorrowful so^g shall they sing wryngyng their hands and
sorowyng, when they shall be at the point to be led away, that they may be
cruelly punisshed for ever and ever? Alas, alas, what a place is that, where
there is weeping and gnasshynge of teeth, which is called Hell, the which
place the Devil him self does horriblye fear? Alas what a fire is that fire
of Hell which shall be never quenched out? Alas, what a poison worm is that
that never ceasseth gnawynge? Esaias. 66. Ezech. xx. Mark. ix,
Alas how grievous are those utter darknesses which continue for ever? Alas
what manner of mynysters are they which are appointed to have the ordrynge of
the torments, which lacking both mercy, and tender heart, do still spitfully
vpbrayde and beete? Then they which are punysshed shall cry strongly unto the
Lord, and he shall not hear them. The^ shall they know that al things that
were in this life were but vain things, and transitory, and the things
which they thought here to be sweet, they find that they are more bitter
the^ any gal or poison. Where is then ye pleasure of the flesh, which is falsely
so called? For there is no other pleasure, but to fear the Lord. To fear the
lord is true pleasure.
For it is ye true pleasure, for this does in deed fill the soul as with lust
and fatnes. Then shall they despair of them selves, and of ye works which they
have wrought. Then shall they confess saying. Just is the judgment of God.

Have we herd these things, and would we not turn from our evil works? And
then it shall no thing avail them. Alas woe is me, which being taken with such
sins, as no man has done the like, have sinned above the number of the
sand, and am holden back of them as if it were with many iron cheynes. I have
no hope that I shall look up into heaven. To whom then shall I flee, but unto the
thou merciful? but unto the which do not remember wrongs?

A prayer.
Have mercy upon me o God after thy great mercy, and according to the
multitude of thy mercyes do away my iniquity. Wasshe me more from my sins,
Psalm. 51.
and purge me from my wyckednes: for I know mine iniquity, and my sin is
ever against me. Against the only have I sinned, and I have done evil in
thy sight. Unto the do I flee, for thy great mercy and thy goodness. I have
provoked thee, and I do flee unto thee, even for thy very gentleness to be
entreated. I have call the away, and I flee unto thee, for thy great
goodness and thy gentleness.

And I pray unto thee, beseching thee, that thou will turn thy face from my
sins, and put away all my mysededes. Make in me a clean heart O God, and
renew a right spirit within me, for thy only names sake. For I have nothing
that I should offer unto the, not one good work, no clean heart, but trusting
in thy mercies I cast my self upon the^: Chrisostom had no good works to be
saved by.
That thou wylt work, in me repentance, so that I fall not easyly again into
sin, but from this time forth I may serve the in holiness and ryghteousnes all
the days of my life, forthine is the Kingdom and Empire for ever and ever. So
be it.

I Beseech thee my brother which lokest for these things, that thou study to
be found clean, and without spot, in peace. If any evil thought come unto
the, lay hold on this sword: that is to say, think up on the fear of GOD,
and thou shalt cut down all the power of the enemy. Take unto the also in
stead of a trompet ye holy scriptures: for as the trompette gathers
together the souldyours even so the holy scriptures when they cry unto us,
they gather together our thoughts in the fear of the Lord. For our
thoughts are as souldyours which do fight the field against the enemies of
the king. And again. As the trompet that sou^deth in the time of battle
stirs up the corrage of the young men and them that fight against the
enemies, even so the holy scriptures do stir up thy redynes, unto that
which is good, and make the manly against evil affections. Therefore my
brother, as much as thou canste, compel thy self to be often occupied in
them, that they may gather together thy thoughts, which the enemy does
scater abroad by his wicked inuencions, suggestinge unto the evil lusts:
either else some times sendyng upon thee some troubles: either else now and then
ministryng unto thee wealth and security. These things he works by his
malice and guyle, to the end that he might turn man from God. For often times
it chau^ceth yt when he can not win and overcome a man through lusts, then
afterward he will bring unto him temptacions, to darcken the mind, that he
may afterward find ye same more apt for his purpose, to the end that he may
then sow in to it such things as he lists: and he begins sometimes to
move man to think on this wise, and, as it were, to swear. That sythens the
time that I begone to do good, I have had very evil luck. Let us therefore do
evil yt good may come thereon. Then if a man be not found sober, Roma. iii.
he swaloweth him up, even as hell does a living man. But if he can not so
overcome him, then brings he unto him welthe and prosperytie, and promoteth
him, dryuing him thereby into a deceit that is more grievous and haynouse the^
any other affection is. That is, that he makes a man proud, and without
fear. This draws ye mind into the deep of fleshlye pleasures. This makes
the mouth to blaspheme heaven. For it is written. They stretche forth their
mouth against heaven. Psalm. 73.
This causes that a man knows not God, that he knows not his own
infirmity, that he thinks not of death and the day of judgment. This is
the way of all evils. He ye delights to walk this way, that is in the way
of wealth and ease he shall come at length into the gates of death. This is
the way which ye lord speaks of. Mat. 7.
Broad and wide is ye way that leads to destruction. Lo, my brother, now
have thou herd for what cause the enemy does study to bring unto us sometime
prosperity, somtymes aduersitye. For as he fyndeth the man's mind affected
which stryueth against him, even so does he with his evils appoynte his army
against him. Therefore my brother be sober and take heed and give thy self
always to readyng, that it may teach the, how thou ought to avoid the
snares of the enemy, and to obtain everlasting life. For the Reading of
holy Scriptures does make the wandrynge wit to stand steadfast, and does
give unto it the knowledge of God.

Hear thou now (my brother) that he gets the knowledge of God, which
with an earnest mind gives diligence to ye holy Scriptures? Therefore, my
brother, do not lyghtlye esteem thy soul, but be diligent in reading, and in
prayers: that light may be given unto thy mind, and thou may be made a
perfect and whole man, wantynge nothing in any point. Let other men glory in
keeping the company of great men, of Princes and Kings. But do thou glory
before the Angels of God, speaking unto God, and unto the holy Ghost, by the
holy Scriptures. For he that speaks unto the by them, is the holy Ghost.

Give dylygence therefore yt thou contynually watch to the readyng of the holy
scriptures, and to prayer. For as often as thou there through kepest company
with God, so often are thy soul, body and sprite sanctified and hallowed. Be
sure therefore of this, brother, that when thou happenest upon them thou art
hallowed. Give diligence therefore yt thou often give heed unto them. And though
thy hands have no leisure, yet pray in thy mind. For blessed Anne the mother
of ye prophet Samuel, i. Meg i.
did pray and her lyppes only did move: and her prayer entered into the ears
of the Lord of Sobaoth, and the thing that she asked was granted unto her.
Therefore my brother, although thy hands be not at leisure, yet pray with thy
mind, for God hears also, even them that hold their peace. And if thou can
not read, be then often in ye place where thou may hear, and take profit.
Ecclesi. vi.
For it is written. And if thou see a man of understanding, get thee soon
unto him, and let thy foot tread upon the steps of his doors. But this is
meet not only for the^ that can not read, but that can also. For there are
many which do read, and they know not what they read.

Wherefore my brother take heed that thou dyspise not the grace that is in the,
which is given unto the by the gift of Christ, but take heed, and seek how
thou may please the Lord, yt thou may get unto thy self ye blessedness of
his sai^tes: as it is written. Blessed are they which search for his
testimonies, Psalm. 119.
and do seek hi^ with their whole heart. Take heed that the enemy hyndre the
not, that when thou should read he make the slothful, and cast the into
such businesses as shall withdraw the, saying: Dyspatche this thing first,
it is but a little thing, and then shalt thou read without any care. For
how often puts he these things into thy mind, that he may make thee
chereful unto the works of thy hands? But he does cast al such things into
thy mind to ye end that he may withdraw the from reading, and from thy
greater profit. For the Devil when he sees a man dysposed unto reading, he
sets him self against him with these or other such like occasions, seakyng
if he by any means may let him. But do not thou obey unto him, but be as ye
heart which thristeth and desires Psalm. xli.
to come to the springes of waters, that is to say, to the holy scriptures,
yt thou may drink of them, and that they may refreshe thy thirst, which
art burnt with so many affeccyons. But drink of them which are meet, and are
profitable for thee. As for example, when God gives the this gift that thou
understand some saying, let it not slyppe: but think upon it in thy mind,
and write it in thy heart, and so shall thou always remember the same. For it
is written.

I shall meditate in thy iustyfiynges. Psalm. 119
And again. I have hydden up thy words in my heart, that I should not sin
against thee.

And again. Wherewithal shall a young man cleuse his way? even in keapynge
thy word. Well beloved thou see that by the remembrynge the word of God, a
man does amend his life. For who is it which is myndefull of the sayings of
God, and does not amend his way? Is he not altogether a castaway and a
wretch, which remembers nothing at all, but forgets eue^ those things
also which he knows? To him yt is such a one God speaks. Wherefore do thou
preach my laws, Psalm. 50.
and take my covenant in thy mouth.

Wherefore he commands that that shall be taken from him which he seems to
have. Mat. xiii. Mark. iiii. Luke. viii
But what is that thing which is commanded to be taken from him which he
seems to have? even faith: for he calls him self a Christian, Titus i.
but he denies it in deeds, and is worse then an infydell. Therefore he
commands the holy gooste to be taken from him which he received in ye day
of his redempcyo^, which he seems to have: so that such a man is like a wine
vessel, which runs out by reason of a leake, wherthrough the wine is
lost: which thing they that know not, where they see the vessel, thyncke
that it is full: but when any wine should be drawn out of it, then appears
it unto all men that it is empty. In like manner also such a man when an
account shall be asked of him at the day of judgment, he shall be found empty,
and then his works shall be open unto all men. Of this sort are they also which
shall say unto the king at that day. Lord have we not prophesied, Mat. vii.
and in thy name have we not done many good deeds? And when the king answers
he shall say unto them.

Verily I say unto you, I know you not Thou see brother that such a one has
nothing at al. Be thou therefore myndfull of the word, and direct thy way.
Take heed that thou do not suffer the birds to light down and to eat up
the seed of the son of God. Luke. viii.


For he said, that the seed is ye word which ye do hear. Hyde therefore the
seed in the furrows of thy heart, that is to say, hyde ye word in the myddest
of thy heart, that thou may bring forth unto God some fruit in fear. But
when thou read, read diligently and earnestly, and handle the sentence
weying it advisedly: labor not to read over many leaves: but if thou chance
upon any hard thing, let it not grieve the to read over that verse twis or
thrice, till thou understand the meaning and pyth of it.

But when thou preparest thy self to sytte down to read, or else to hear
an other, pray unto God first, saying:

Lord Jesus Christ open mine eyes and the ears of my heart that they may hear
thy words and understand them: A prayer
and that they may do thy will O Lord. Psalm. 119.
For I am a stranger in ye earth, hyde not thy commandments from me. But
open mine eyes, and I shall behold the maruayles of thy law. For in thee o my
God have I trusted, that thou may give light unto my heart.

Yea my brother I beseech the pray so always unto god that he will give light
unto thy mi^d, and yt he will make open unto the the strength of his words: For
many have erred trusting to their own wit, and saying yt they were wise,
Roma. i.
they became fools, and did not understand the things that were written, and
so falling into blasphemies did perish. If thou therefore in thy readyng, find
any thing that is hard to be understood, take heed that ye wicked enemy do
not teach the to say within thine own self: it is not so as that word
speaks. For how should it be so? and on such like sort. But if thou believe
god, believe his words also: and say unto the Devil. Go behind me adversary:
Mat. xvi.
for I know thee not. The words of the Lord are pure words: Psalm. xii.
as the silver which from the earth is tried, and purified seven times in ye
fire. There is no euel thing in them nor doubtful, but all things in them
contained are good in their sight that are wise, and al things in them are
perfect to them that find knowledge. But I am a fool, and am ignorant, yet I
know that they are written spiritually. For the Apostle says that the law is
spiritual. And so look thou up in to Heaven and say. Lord I have believed thy
words, and say not against them, A prayer
but I trust unto ye words of thy holy ghost. Therefore save me thou O Lord,
that I may find favor before thee. For I seake no other thing but only that
I may be saved O merciful: that I may obtain thy grace, for thine is the
kingdom and mercy for ever So be it.

An Homelye of the Resurrection of Christ, and of the power and fruit thereof,
written in Latin by John Brentius, and translated into English by T.S.
Now yt I shall speak of the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, I desire
you that you all will harken with such ears and minds, not as vain men are
wont to give to idle, and now and then also to hurtefull, tales, which do
only seake this, that they may be delyghted and waste the time, but with
such ears and minds as very godly men do give to him that entreats of the
most high and chief matier of holy relygion, and of our perpetual salvation.
For if Christ had not risen again, our preaching had been in vain, as
Paul says, our faith were in vain, the testimonye of the Apostles of the
resurrection of Christ were in vain, the dead should not rise again, we
should yet remain in our sins: all they which are fallen a sleep in Christ
were lost: finally if that in this life only we had faith in Christ we were
the^ ye most miserable of all men. Wherefore, most dear friends, if ever we did
care (as there ought to be none other so great a care) to know the things
that Christ did, ye cause of our salvation do most above all things enforce
us, that we well do understand the rysyng again of Christ from the dead. We
shall first therefore show that Christ verily is risen from the dead, then what
profit, what glory, what majesty, the resurrection did bring to Christ him
self. Lastly what profit, what health, yea and what happiness has happened
us, even unto us I say, by the resurrection of Christ. i. Tim. ii.
Remember (Paul writes to Timothe) yt Jesus Christ rose again from death.
By which admonicio^ he does mean, that there ought nothing among godly men
to be more esteamed then the resurrection of Christ. And yt I may here take my
beginning, not only those arguments by which Christ showed him self alive
unto his disciples after his resurrection, do witness the rysynge again of
Christ from the dead, but also the prophecies of the prophets which were
before the resurrection of Christ. In the.xv. psalm he says. Therefore did my
heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad, moreover my flesh also shall rest in hope:
Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will suffer thine holy
one, to se corrupcion. And in an other Psalm. The Lord said to my lord, sit
on my right hand, until I make thyn enemies a fotestole under thy feet. And
that these be prophecies of the resurrection of Christ, Peter witnesses in
his first sermon which he made upon witsondaye, as it is written in the second
chapter of the Acts of ye Apostles. To this agrees Esaie. His sepulcher
(says he) shall be glorious: For it appears by the beginning of that
chapter (which is the.xi.) that Esaye in that place does preach of Christ,
and Paul approves the same in the.xv. chapter to the Romans. And again Esaias
says in the.liii. chapter.

After that he has offered his life for sin he shall se long lasting
seed, and the will of the Lord shall be ruled in his hand. For because that
his soul has labored, he shall see, and be satisficed. And that the Prophet
in this place does preach of Christ thou shalt plainly perceive, by
the.viii. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. But what neade any more?
Whersoeuer ye prophets do preach of the ever lasting kingdom of Christ,
there also do they preach of the resurrectio of Christ. For Christ could not
have obtained an everlasting kingdom, except he had risen from death into ye
glo glory of his father. Now, Christ also himself did often, and much before
his death, prophecye of his resurrection from death.

Destroy (says he) this temple, and in three days will I raise it up again.
And again: as Jonas was in ye belly of the Whale three days, and three
nights, so shall the son of man be in the heart of the earth, three days,
and three nights. And again. The Son of man must suffer many things, and
be reproved of the elders, and chief priests, and scribes, and be slain, and
the third day rise again. Again: It is written, I shall smite the shepeherd,
and the sheep of the Rock shall be that I am risen, I will go into Galile before
you. But what do I? The things which Christ before his death preached of his
resurrection, be much more known by the histories of the gospels then that
the same need in this place with many words to be repeted. But these are
prophecyes of the resurrection, before that it was done. But after that it was
done, there was no matter or occasion let pass, in which Christ did not
plainly witness, that he was in deed risen from the dead. These we shall
now pass over, for because yt in our entreating of ye History of the
gospel, they are handeled at large, saving that we will add this herunto,
that the Apostles were chiefelye ordained for this purpose, that they should
witness the resurrection of Christ. Wherefore (says Peter) of these men
which have companyed with us all the time that the Lord Jesus had his
conversation among us, Acts. ^.
beginning at the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up
from us, must one be ordained to be a wytnes with us of his resurrection. And
again. Actum. x.
Him God raised up the third day and showed him openly, not unto all the
people, but unto us witnesses, chosen before of God for ye same intent, which
did eat and drink with him, after that he rose from death. Briefly as the
prophecies of the prophets concerning the resurrection of Christ, are the
most true sothe sayings of the holy ghost, so is there nothing more
certain, then that Christ verily is risen from the dead, even in deed. Whereof
we shall speak more herafter. Now let us see what he has gotten by his
Resurrection. Christ truly is not risen from death in such sort as that dead
man which by the touching of the carkais of the prophet Eliseus reuyued, 4.
Reg xiii
to dye again, Luke. vii John. xi.
nether yet as ye son of the wydowe, neither as Lazarus ye had lien.iiii.
Acts. ix.
days in his grave, neither as Dorcas in Ioppa, were called again to life.
For these verelye were raised from death, but i^to this corporal life to die
again. But Christ risen from death (as Paul says) dies no more, Acts. xiii
death has no more power over him. And again: He raised him up from death now
no more to return to corruption. And that I may comprehend all in one word,
Christ by his resurrection entered into his glory.

For he says in Luke. Luke xxiiii.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things and to enter into his glory.
Here therefore we must try out what the glory of Christ is. The glory of
Christ.
First truly the glory of Christ is, that he is the Son of God. In to this
glory therefore he entered by his resurrection, that is, he proved by his
resurrection yt he was in deed the Son of god. Roma. i.
He is declared (says Paul) to be the son of god with power, after the spirit,
that sanctifies, sense the time that Jesus Christ our Lord rose again from
death. And this glory is greater then that it can worthyly be expressed with
words. Wherefore we shall touch the other parts of his glory, and majesty.
Secondlye the glory of Christ is that he is, of ye same blessedness, majesty,
and almighty power with God his father. Wherefore into this glory also he entered
in by his resurrection. Sit (says the father) on my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy forestole. Furthermore, the glory of Christ is that
all things are subject unto him, yt he is Lord of heaven and earth, and
Judge of the living and of the dead. This majesty Christ received by his
resurrection. Philip, ii,
God has exalted him (says Paul) on hye, and given him a name which is above
all names, that in ye name of Jesus every one should bow, both of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. And again.

Christ therefore dyed and rose again, and revived, Rom xiiii,
that he might be Lord over dead and quick. Acts. xvii.
And again. He has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world by
that man by who^ he has appointed, and has offered faith unto all men, after
yt he had raised him from death. But who can either by thynkyng conceive,
either else by words, I say not express, but no more but somewhat touch all the
parts of that glory and majesty, which Christ by his resurrection did
receive? Wherefore lettynge pass this part of the sermon, and co^mendyng it
rather unto faith, then showing it unto man's reason, we shall come to this yt
we put forth in the thread place, and which is most of all to be considered of
us and with great study to be searched for, that is to say, what profit,
what health or happynes the resurrection of Christ has brought unto us me^.
Our pro^ite by Christ's ^eath.
And for because that now we are come to speak of the chief point of
relygion, yea and of ye matier of our whole salvation, we will not bring forth
man's dreams, but will gather places of the holy scripture, by which we shall
show that the resurrection of Christ is our very and everlasting salvation.
And first of the profyt of the resurrection of Christ there is nothing in the
scriptures more short, and clear, then that Paul writethe to the Romans,
Rom iiii,
saying: He was delivered for our sins, and was raised again for our
iustificacion. For as the death of Christ has pourged our sins, and has
brought to pass, that our sins are forgyuen us of God for Christ's sake, so
the Resurrection of Christ, has brought unto us ryghteousnes, and has
brought to pass that as many as believe in Christ, may be esteemed before God
even righteous for Christ's sake. They truly are called blessed, whose
iniquity is forgyuen, and whose sins are covered, but our sins are not
covered but with true and perfect righteousness. And we forasmuch as
partaineth unto our nature, are so far from perfect rightwisnes, as the heaven
is from the earth. For albeit that many have a cyuile honesty and
righteousness, yet do they want in themselves the true and perfect righteousness.
Therefore Christ rose again from death to this end, that as by his death he
has obtained, that God the father forgyueth us our sins, and is become
favorable unto us, so by his resurrection he should obtain, that God should
impute unto us all the righteousness of Christ, and that he should not
otherwise judge of us, then as if we by our works had perfectly fulfilled all
righteousness. Which spared not (says he) his own son, Romans viii.
but gave him for us all, how can it be, that with him he should not give us al
things also? For unto Christ belongs true and perfect ryghtwisnes. Seeing
therefore that Christ is given unto death for us, and is given unto us by his
Resurrection, it is plain also that by his resurrection his rightwisnes is so
given unto us that we may glory of it as of our own, and we may set it not so
much against the accusynges of our sins, as against the gates of hell. Peter
says, that baptism saves us, i. Peter. iii
not the putting away of the fylthe of the flesh, but the promise or
couenaunte of a good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ. For as for us, whether we consider our sins or the ryghtwysnes of
our flesh, we have an evil conscience, and we do know that we are gyltye of
everlasting damnacyon: For our sins verelye, because they do dyrectlye
fight against the will and law of God: For our ryghtwysnesse also, because our
rightwisnes is both imperfect and vnpure. But a good conscience (sayethe
Peter) is wroughte in us, by the resurrection of Christ. How? because God
knytteth himself unto us by a covenant, and stricketh up a bargayne in manner
with his hand with us, by the resurrection of his Son, that he will for
Christ his sons sake, know and judge us perfectlye righteous, and make us
saved. If the conscience do know these things by faith, what can be better
then it? what more quiet, and even in the mids of death, yea in ye horrible
judgment of God, what more secure? Herto belongs it that Peter also in an
other place says. ^. Peter. i
Blessed be God, which according to his abundant mercy, begat us again unto a
lyuelye hope. By what? it follows: by yt, that Jesus Christ rose again from
death. But what is that lively hope, into the which the resurrection of
Christ has begotten us again? Forsothe this it is: that God has given unto
us by the resurrection of Christ, ye true, whole, and perfect ryghtwisnes,
which Christ the son of God, has, that by it we should obtain an immortal,
undefiled, and an enheritaunce that perishes not, even in heaven. What could
therefore happen unto us more profitable, yea or else more necessary then ye
resurrection of Christ? i. Cor. xv.
And true it is that Paul says. If Christ be not risen, you are yet in your
sins. But now he is risen again: We are not only therefore delivered from
our sins as many of us as believe in him, but also the same ryghtwysnes which
he has is imputed also unto us, perfect and on every side sufficiently
performed. Furthermore the resurrection of Christ has brought unto us not
only our victory over afflyctions, and death, but also our own resurrection
from death into life, and everlasting blessedness. Christ (says Paul) is
risen from the dead and become the first fruits of them yt sleep. For by a
man came death, and by a man came the resurrection of ye dead. For as by Adam
al do die, even so by Christ shall all be made alive. For, to the end that we
may rightly understand the benefit of Christ, we must not consider and
behold Christ by his outward body only, that is to say, by one part of his
or one member only, but by his whole and perfect spiritual body. For so does
Paul teach ye Christ is to be considered of us, when he (...) to the
Ephesias, sayi^ge: He has made hi^ above all things the head of the
congregacyon, which is his body. Ephesians. ^.
Therefore as the whole body of man is made of the head and many members, so
whole Christ is made (forasmuch as now serves for our purpose) of his own
person as the head, and of all them that believe in him as of diverse members.
But now, when as it is plain, that Christ the head is risen from the dead,
how could it be, that he should not draw also with him self al his members
from death, unto life, and resurrection? Should ye head rise, and leave behind
him, the hand or the foot, yea or so much as the little finger? Christ (thou
wylt say) did rise alone, because no man ascended into heaven, but he which
descended. Very well, he rose alone: but this must be added, that he also did
rise whole. Whole Christ is, ye head, with his members. Whither so ever
therefore the head is come, even thither also are the me^bres comen. And who
are the true members of Christ, but they that believe i^ him? Do you not know,
says Paul, that your bodies are the members of Christ? And again: We are
members of the same body, of his flesh, and of his bones. It is therefore
manifest, that as many as believe in Christ, are risen together with Christ.
Ephesians. li.
Whereof Paul says: When we were dead by sins, he quickened us together
with Christ (by grace are ye saved) and raised us up together with him, and
made us to sit together with him among them of heaven, in Christ Jesus. And
again: Colos. ii.
Ye are buried with him through baptism, in whom ye are risen again
through faith, that is wroughte by the operacyon of God, which raised him
from death. And ye when ye were dead through sin, and through the
uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened with him, and has forgiven us
all our trespaces. For as Christ has drawn al them that believe in him
together with him self into his death and burial: We are buried (says Paul)
together with him by baptism for to dye: Romans v^
eue^ so verily has he drawn with himself them into his resurrection, so
that as many as are dead and buried together with Christ, they have also risen
again with Christ: Whether we live (says he) or Romans xiiij
we dye, we are the Lords. For Christ therefore died and rose again, that he
might be Lord over the dead and quick. But thou will say how have we
risen again with Christ, which do yet notwithstanding live in this mortal
body, and needs we must dye? We said before, that now we are occupied in ye
most high matier of our salvation.

Wherefore we must bring forth not man's dreams, but the wytnessynges of God.
Let us hear therefore Christ's own sermon of this matter. John. iii.
As Moses (says he) lyfted up the serpente in the wyldernes, even so must ye
son of man be lift up, that who soever believes in him, perish not, but
have everlasting life. And Paul: Roma. x,
If thou knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is ye lord, and do believe in thy
heart, that God raised him up from death, ^ shalt be saved. For
notwithsta^dinge that after the resurrection of Christ, we are yet mortal me^
in earth, and subject to all aduersyties, yet by faith, I say, by faith in
Christ we are so made partakers of his resurrection, We shall rise again
yt first unto us truly does belong the right of rysynge from death unto
everlasting blessedness in the last day. For faith does fasten us, and as I
might so say does incorporate us to Christ. Sens therefore yt Christ in who^
we are incorporate is risen, it ca^ not be, that we should not rise with him.
For as touching it yt as yet we do die, and our bodies do rotte in the earth,
yea or be brent with fire, should this be any let to our resurrection?
Forsothe, God, which when as yet there was nothing, could make this so great
a work of this world, could he not also find again ye body which was made
before, yea though it were turned into dust, in ye earth, or the sea, and call it
again unto life? God does call those things which are not, yt they may be,
John. xii.
and can he not the^ call again those things which seem to have perysshed?
Has he not set forth unto us in every little grain the image of our
resurrection. Except ye wheat corn (says Christ) fall into ye ground and dye,
it brings forth no fruit. And Paul says. Thou fool, ^. Cor. xv.
ye which you sowest, is not quickened, except it dye. And what sowest you?
Thou sowest not ye body that shall be, but bare corn, as of wheat, or some
other: but god gives it a body at his pleasure, to every seade his own body.
Which of us can see i^ a cornell of a Pear so great a boughe of a tree, as
grows out of it, being laid in the ground? Who ca^ see in a grain of corn
so great a stalk and an ear as ye reapers do reap? Man does not se, but God
seith, which also works these. And should he raise up a dead grain or seade,
and not a man? For not only that he can, but yt he will also raise us from ye
dead, he has not only testified by ye resurrection of Christ his Son, but
also by many other arguments, promyses, and miracles, which were long now to
repete. The resurrection of ye dead truly is by scriptures so certain and
sure, yt is also co^me^ly rehearsed in the common confession of our faith.
Wherefore there is nothing more surely to be holden, then yt through Christ
the right and glory of the Resurrection from the dead unto everlasting
blessedness belongs even unto us. Furthermore when we believe yt we through
Christ shall rise again, this faith can not be idle in us, but even now,
whiles yet we are in this mortal body it does think upon the resurrection. For
as in the young plants it does furthwith appear what the fruits wylbe, and in
the wits of children it is anon showed forth what thing is to be looked for
of them, even so in the godly the resurrection that is to come does begin
to bring forth his fruit whiles that we do yet live in the earth. Moses was
appointed of god to be ye deliverer and law gyuer to Israel. But he did not
only then execute this office, when he brought the people out of Egypt, but
the appointment of this office that he should take in hand began even then
also to work in Moses, when as yet he being a child (if we will believe
Josephus) he threw down the crown royal of the king of Egypt, trod it
under his feet: When as he slew the Egipcian that did wrong to the Israelite,
when he labored to agree the Israelites which strove together, and when he
did deliver the daughters of ye priest of Madian from the wrong of ye
shepeherdes. These truly were the begi^ninges of his office yt he should
have. David was chose^ king of Israel. But this election was not idle in
David until that time that after the death of Saul he was openly called to be
king of the people. But David even then began to take upon him like a king,
when as in the keeping of his sheep he slew a Bear and a Lion, and when with a
bold stomach he set upon Goliathe and slew him. So ye faith of the
resurrection shall not only practice his power in raysynge our bodies unto
everlasting life in the last day: but if ye true faith be in us, even in this
life also does it show forth ye strength that it has: And first it holds us
up in all ye adversities of this life, yea even in the mids of death. For if
we shall rise again into everlasting life, the which thing we know by faith
that we shall do, what disaduauntage (I pray you) what evil hap can
adversities yea or death it self, bring unto us? I pray the, if a man
should put of from the a fylthy garmente, to put on upon the and clothe the
with a Kingly aparel, would you call ye taking of the fylthy apparel from ye
disadvantage, or euel luck, or rather should not you call it great profit.
To suffer adversity i^ this world and at length to dye, surlye they be nothing
else, then a putting away of anold and filthy garment, yt thou may take unto
ye a most gorgius garment. We do know (says Paul) yt if our earthly mancio^ of
this dwelling were destroyed, ii. Cor. v.
we have a building of god, an habitacion not made with hands, but eternal in
heaven. For therefore sigh we, desiringe to be clothed with our mansyon which is
from heaven. Wherefore, when by faith we do think upon our resurrection from
death through Christ, it can not be but that we shall get ye vyctory, not only
over al ye afflictions of this world, but also of death and hell. Moreover ye
same faith of ye resurrection does begin or exercise in us the new life, A
new life.
worthy the Resurrection, that forsakinge all ungodliness and unrighteous we
may follow all kinds of heavenly virtues. For verylye except the newnes of
life does follow the faith of the resurreccion, it is a plain argument that
the faith is dead. And what is there that should be a live in a man when as
his faith lives not, which is the life of the Just manne. For the Just
(says he) lives by faith. Wherefore in this above all things must we most
chiefly labor, that we do show forth our true faith of the resurrection by
good works, and being yet in the earth we may live an heavenly life. For
true righteousness is brought and given unto us by the resurrection of Christ
in such sort, that god does judge us for Christ's sake Just and holy in deed.
How then could this stand together, that we despysinge and defilynge that
righteousness of Christ, should live in unrighteous? The resurrection of
Christ has called us back from death, to life, and everlasting
blessedness. What now is more vile, yea what is more pernicious, then forsaking
life, to make himself bond again to death, and everlasting mischyefe. He
whosoever it be that follows sin does give himself to death, and
everlasting destruction. For the reward (says he) of sin is death. Romans
vi.
In the policy of Moses it was most straightly commanded that no man
contynuinge the days of the feast of the pass over should eat leauened bread.
He that eats (says he) leauened Exodus x. ii.
bread, his life shall peryshe out of the congregation of Israel, as well of
strangers as of dwellers in the land. This law precheth unto us, that after
that Christ who is our pass over is risen from death, it is lawful for no
man to have fellowship either with unclean and ungodly men, either else to
lead an unclean life, or a life leauened with sins. i. Cor. v.
Purge ye says Paul the old leaven, that ye may be new doughe, as ye are
unleavened for Christ our pascale lamb is offered up for us. Therefore let us
keep holy day not with old leaue^, neither with the leue^ of maliousnes and
wickedness, but with the sweet bread of pureness and truth. For they that do
still go forward in their wickedness and Iniquity those men (horrible it is to
say) do for as much as in them lies, crucify Christ again, and do deny that he
is risen from death. For the resurreccion of Christ is denied not only with
mouth of the adversaries of our relygion, but also of the ungodly by their
deeds and works which do live amongst us are called christians. For where as
Christ by his death took away sin and by his resurrection brought again
righteousness, now from hence forth to sin and to despise ryghteousnes what
else is it, the^ to call Christ again unto death, and even to fight against his
resurrection? And behold here the cursed wickedness of those men which do
yet follow the lusts of sin. Christ truly by his resurrection brought to
pass that we should be chosen to be ye children of God, and the enheritours
of all the heavenly goods. But our sins do cause that we become the children
of the deuell and the enherytours of everlasting fire. What is therefore more
horrible, what more cursed, then to rage in such a liberty of sin, that thou
do not only utterly cast away the chosing wherewith God choseth the, but
also thou gyuest over thy self into the household of the devil, that thou
may with his Angels peryshe euerlastinglye? For after that Christ is risen
from death and we be engrafted into his death, we are no longer our own men,
but his, which by his death and resurrection has delivered us from death
into life. Therefore we must obey Christ, and not sin. We are buried (says
paul) with him by baptysme for to die, Roma. vi.
that likewise as Christ was raised from death by the glory of the father,
even so we also should walk in a new life: And again.

For as towchinge that he died, he died concerning sin ons, and as touching
that he lives, he lives unto God.

Likewise Imagine ye also, that ye are dead concerning sin: but are alive
unto god through Christ Jesus our Lord. ii. Cor. v.
And again. If one be dead for all, then all were dead, and he died for us
all, that they which live, should not henseforthe live unto them selves, but
unto him which died for them, and rose again. And in an other place. Colos.
iii.
If ye be then risen again with Christ, seek those things which are above
where Christ sits on the right hand of god. Set your affection on things
that are above, and not on things which are on the earth. And what are those
things on earth which are to be avoided, and things that are above to be
sought for. Mortify (says he) your earthly me^bres, fornication, uncleanness,
unnatural lust, euel concupiscence, and covetousness, wrath, fersenes, (...),
cursed speaking (...) thy speaki^g, and put on tender mercy, kindness, humblenes
of mind, meknes, softnes, and what so ever other godly virtue there is. For if
we do these things we shall not only confess in words and common sayings yt
Christ in his own parso^ is risen again, but also we shall testify yt he also
is risen again in us, and ye he lives in us, yea and that all the right of
Christ's resurrection does belong unto us, so that we may not only over cum
afflictions and death in this world, but that we may also get everlasting
blessedness in the world to comme, by ye resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord,
which is together with ye father and the holy ghost god to be praised for ever and
ever So be it.

Imprinted at London, in S. John's street by Nicolas Hill, for John Shefelde,
dwelling in Paul's church yard.


