A SPIRITVAL CHAIN, AND ARMOVR OF CHOICE, FOR SION SOVLDIERS.

Which, whosoever wears graciously, shall be sure of the best honor, comfort
and safety (whether he live or die in the battle) that can come to a
Christian soldier. Very necessary for these times.



LONDON, Printed by William Jones, for Robert Mylbourne at the great South
door of Paul's. 1622.

TO MY ESPECIAL, REVEREND, LOVING AND BELOVED FRIENDS (BOTH Magistrates,
Ministers and others) who love the Sion of our God, and to such friends of
theirs also as unto whom they shall think good to impart this book (for the
end here proposed,) and in conclusion to all them who intend to publish any
Treatise: Grace and peace be multiplied from God the Father, and from our Lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.
Reverend, loving and beloved in the God of honor and love, it so pleasing his
divine Majesty to withhold me by much weakness a great while of late from
preaching his holy word, I searched my heart wherein I might do most service
(in these my old years and decaying days) to my good God, and most good to
his Church, by any other talent which he has bestowed upon me. Having a small
one in writing, I resolved to use it now (as called thereunto.) Our glorious
God says by Solomon's pen, Without counsel, Prou. 15.22.
purposes are disappointed, but in the multitude of counselors, they are
established. I desire therefore to have my poor labors perused by many of my
judicious friends (and theirs also) thereby to obtain sound counsel. Heartily
then I beseech you in that gracious God of ours, to show me your love in this
action: herein chiefly, viz. if you find any thing in this Treatise which
might dishonor our good God, or do any manner of hurt to his Sion, that you
will admonish me of it. As I ought not, so I will not be judge of mine own
works (there being nothing wherein a man may sooner deceive himself.) Books
(in my judgment) require a greater purifying then gold, yea and a more
excellent fire also to purge them. No material fire purges gold so well, as
the spirits of Gods childoen (a famous kind of fire) do purge those books
which are submitted to that most true and trusty trial. So I call it, because
such spirits do make their trial by the word (that fire of fires) though I be
not of his mind for the time of impression, who said, Nonum premantur in annum
(publish your books the ninth year,) yet am I just of the same man mind for
taking a large time both to reuise and advise; yet I desire not to tie others
unto my manner of publishing books, or to tax any who take less time and
counsel in penning and spreading abroad of their works, if they take so much
as may show that they be not of a private spirit, and readier to offer unto the
world nimis praecocia quam satis praeparata, things rather too hastily ripened,
then sufficiently prepared. There will be wants when the longest and best care
is taken; (for who can say that his heart, pen or tongue are perfect?) much
more does great haste make great waste. You shall perceive that I find fault
with such kind of haste: and here I advise all writers to take good leisure.
This also I add (out of my experience from the present Treatise) for inducing
others the sooner and the more to rely on that old proverb, Plus vident oculi
quam oculu^ (a great many of eyes see more then one,) viz. that to my
remembrance I never showed this book to any, but I was moved necessarily to
put in or take out somewhat (so against the next impression, if the godly
experienced see cause, I purpose to do.) And I most humbly thank our gracious
God for giving me the mind and the means to have the judgment of diverse
godly and worthy men in this action, which yet also I seek more and more,
(using the Press as a help at this time to that end.) No more now but that I
humbly beseech our blessed God to bless you and yours, and all your
emploiments and studies: and withal I desire your prayers for a blessing to me
and my endeavors, so as we all in all our purposes and actions may seek his
glory. To God our Father almighty, and to his dearly beloved Son our
blessed Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, and to the holy Spirit, three Persons
and one God, most wise, holy, just and merciful, be all honor, praise, and
thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

To those pattern Captains (so I call them who are Leaders by their godly
example) of the Artillery and Military in the City of London (that famous
City of the kingdom, his Majesty's most strong, safe and trusty Chamber) and
to all others there, who any way have any special hand for upholding the
practice of Chivalry (in what offices soever they be settled) I wish all manner
of peace from the God of peace, and all holy and provident preparation for all
kinds of godly war.
THe Wife who^ Bethsheba described, Prou. 31.
has bin, is now, and for ever shall be a peerlesse pattern to all virtuous
wives: right so your worthy actions concerning matters of Chivalry (that the
knowledge and exercise thereof may not decay in Citizens) have bin, are now,
and I hope will be a notable example to the present age, and to all posterity.
Therefore as it is said of the virtuous wife, A woman that fears God, Prou.
31.30. v 29.
shall be praised: Her children rise up, and call her blessed: Her husband
praises her: her own works praise her: So say I of you: The training up of
the Cities valiant men, yea youths, nay very children in feats of arms (being
first taught to fear their God, and to be armed against, and fight against
Satan) causes those children to rise up and bless both parents and Preachers,
and Captains for their education: yea and it makes the whole land to rejoice
in their good God for the worthy pattern which you give to the kingdom in
these right worthy actions both for body and soul. Hereby you show that you
are not like the lazy people of Laish, Judge. 18.7, 8, 9.
who by their carelessness were fit to be made a prey to any that would invade
them. Go on good Citizens thus to join religion and prowess, piety (by the
peaceable word) and policy (by the preventing sword:) so shall your works
continue to praise you in the gates, and to cause the praise of our glorious
God to sound both in earth and in heaven. For your better progress herein, I
have sent you (even first of all) a little Treatise touching the antiquity and
nobility of gracious Soldiers, and concerning the holy behavior which they
ought to have, without which, no science, mystery or art, no not the seven
Liberal Arts, no nor any other knowledge whatsoever, are of any reckoning with
our God. The Lord our God bless it to you, and bless you all, and the whole
City also, especially with continuance of that good word of our good God, so
powerfully preached, and with your increase of love and obedience thereunto,
together with all kinds of godly peace, and with each good means to maintain
them: and all this in a most long, quiet and blessed reign of our gracious
Sovereign Lord King James. Amen.

To the worthy Captains and to the whole Companies of the Artillery in other
Cities and Towns of our Nation, who have imitated this famous pattern of the
City of the Kingdom, and chiefly to Londons notable neighbors for imitation,
I mean them of the Artillery at Westminster, and to all other gracious
helpers thereunto, the self same peace in the self same sort, that is to say,
all manner holy peace in the God of peace.
IT is one of the greatest honors that may be, to follow the steps of good men
in good actions. The praise and benefit hereof you receive to Gods glory, by
imitating your renowned Mother-Citie of London in training up your people for
skill in war. The increase in this Skill, is a means to strike a fear into
inveterate foes, who otherwise will watch opportunities to offer strokes. Old
wily foxes are venturous upon lambs in places where they wind no foot, nor
bait, nor grinne. Old kites will quickly spy where nets be prepared, and
where not. Old Ravens will soon smell both match and powder: and old robbers
of houses will soon perceive which houses are strong, and which are weak.
Right so it is with old enemies to a nation. Well you know (by reason of many
iourneys about your affairs) that the very sight of a sword makes a thief
stay his hand sometimes (though not his heart,) yea and by Gods restraining
power saues some throats from cutting: Right so in peace, a preparation for
war makes the enemies heart to faint, and the hearts of good men to rejoice.
This holds in the spiritual war also, by preparing to have that sword of
the Spirit ready both in the greater and lesser Churches of our God; yea and
ready also in every heavenly hand of each newborn Christian (considering
the great subtlety and strength of that old Serpent, our irreconcilable
adversary.) Imitate your honorable Mother, in her so many holy provisions and
actions: imitate her in the double, by piety I mean and by policy; by
providing both the heavenly and the earthly sword: endeavor you also always as
she does, to use all good means for defending your selves and your country:
amongst others, practice effectually that laudable training prescribed by a
provident order. Thus defend your selves: yea and be you, and let us all be
defenders ever, offenders never. Let not your use in arms be out of your arms
(as a thing unaccustomed.) Our proverb is, Use legs and have legs: so I
say, Use arms skilfully, and have skill in arms. Be you then religious more
and more, and be you also valorous more and more: continue to bring up your
youth in the trade of both these ways; so shall they not depart from them:
both these be holy ways to enter into, and to walk in. For your better
treading in these peaceable, yet preventing and defending paths; and for your
true use of war when you have occasion (which our good God keep us from, if
it be his blessed will) I have likewise sent you (aforehand also) my
collections of those eight links, and the chain made of them, together with a
description of your Armor of choice and proof. No more at this time, but the
Lord our God so guide you still in holy actions, as that you may do them
cheerfully and constantly, to your own private and your countries public
good, and always to his glory in the first and highest place. Amen.

A SPIRITVAL CHAIN, AND ARMOVR OF CHOICE, FOR SION SOVLDIERS.
HEaring of wars and of rumors of wars, unto which many soldiers of many
countries in Christendom were like to be sent, I have written a plain and
short Treatise, more and more to stir up so many of them now (and others
hereafter) as by any means may have use of it, unto a gracious carriage in this
high calling of theirs; which so much concerns not only themselves, but all
Christian Churches and Commonwealths also, yea and the glory of God withal,
together with their own particular safety, (for the better setting forth of
his glory.) A short Treatise (in comparison) I write, because I fear that if
it were long, there would be much want of fit time, and much more of good will
to read it, (the multiplicitie of books considered.) A plain Treatise I
write, because most soldiers are plain men, altogether unlearned touching any
skill in the Arts* for whose sake it is, that when I use any illustration in
Latin (for more delight to the learned) I omit not to translate it. Now if
there be a blessed peace in most places, yea or in every place before my book
comes forth, I shall much rejoice at it, as he who wishes that all Christian
Kings and Princes would labor to make Halcyon neasts for breeding Sion birds,
and that none of them would nourish such Romish Ravens, Hawks and Harpies as
delight in cruel preying upon innocents (Princes and all) more then in true
prayer to the true God. Yet seeing wars are as like to continue in the world
as diseases (both being sent of our God as punishments for sin) my book may
stand in such stead as medicines, printed long before for such and such
maladies when people fall into them. Weapons are provided in peace against the
time of war; and why not counsels? Surely both these are necessary aforehand.
Now as the Apostle Paul said touching his brethren the Jews, My hearts desire
and prayer for Israel, Romans 10.1.
is, that they may be saved: so say I for Protestant soldiers (my Christian
brethren) my hearts desire and prayer for them, is, that they may be holy, and
do worthily, like King David's Worthies: 2. Sam. 23.
yea so worthily, as they that walk by the eye and word of their God (this
being the only way to have Gods Angels to protect them, Number. 23.21.
and the shout of a King amongst them, yea and the King of Kings on their
side.) Thus shall they show themselves gracious soldiers and truly religious,
both by profession and practice. No other sorts will respect such Armor and
such a Chain as this, whose linkes are found in the word, and put together by
the word. These links, this armor and this chain, I wish to all Sion
soldiers. By Sion soldiers I mean such as earnestly contend for the faith
once given to the Saints, Jude verse 3.
showing their good faith by good works; and utterly abhorring that Whore of
Babylon as well for her loose life, as for her devilish doctrine. For this
departures sake, by believing, speaking and doing, (or at leastwise for the
outward profession hereof) I call them generally Sion soldiers. If any of them
do not answer so worthy a departure, and so worthy names as are here given
them for this departures sake, so much the more they have to answer hereafter,
because they abuse their honorable calling and name. It is my duty, and not my
offense, to judge in love of such, and to give the best titles and terms I can
to such, whose Baptism, Profession, Vows, Education, Vocation and God do call
them with a loud voice, to be the self same in deed, which I in words name
them, (Sion soldiers, sacred soldiers.) Gracious men will not take so high
titles in vain, but abandon vanities, and follow the ways of wisdom. I
desire that this little book may do them good herein. It comes not hastily
abroad, no sooner penned but printed, Lapwing-like. They report that this bird
is more forward both for foot and wing then other birds are, insomuch as it
will run away with the shell on it head, and quickly take flight also: so do
many Lapwing books now adays. For in our time this saying of Solomon is more
and more verified: There is no end of making many books; and much study is a
weariness to the flesh: and that also of the Poet, Seribimus indecti, doctique
poemata passim.
Both learned and unlearned men,
Each where apace we plie the pen.


Had I therefore known of any in our days, who had written purposely of this
subject, I would have kept silence, and not ventured upon the hazard of doing
so needless a work as that which already is done. But finding none (by sight
or report) who have made it their labor in such sort as they who take it for
their task, though some have dealt graciously therein by the way, and
perceiving it to be a thing worth the labor, (yea and a whole and long labor)
rather then it should be unhandled, I have set a weak hand to it. This matter
offers one just occasion (before I go any farther) to write at large of the
most worthy and ancient profession of a Soldier: yet since I doubt not but this
truth is generally received, I will only handle it in brief, and so come to
the maine point which I aim at, that is, The holy carriage of good soldiers,
whereby they ought to honor this high profession of theirs.

Touching the calling of a soldier to fight corporally, that I may speak (for
better understanding) as the thing is indeed; I say, that the heavenly armor
of a soldier was in truth and substance before the earthly, (howsoever for our
weak capacity the spiritual armor was afterward made plain to us by the
corporal,) so as according to a supernatural sense, the bodily armor may be
said to take denomination of the armor of the spirit, and the corporal combat
denomination also of that spiritual combat which the children of God have with
Satan and his children. For why? the armor of armours belonging to this
combat (even the armor of God) was before any corporal combat could be used.
Adam presently after the promise (no doubt) did put it on: I will put enmity
(says our God) between thee and the woman, Genesis 3.15.
and between thy seed and her seed: He shall break thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel: Here is mention made of a spiritual war, to which belonged
spiritual armor instantly, and the grand Captain of the war pointed unto
(That promised seed Christ Jesus) whose soldiers all godly people must be
(both Captain and soldiers fighting against the evil one.) Now as this
enmity is manifest in the soul of good men (carrying a godly hatred against
the devil continually, and against the qualities of the wicked whilst they
remain in the old birth,) so it is also declared by an open corporal combat
hand to hand against Gods foes in battle, when our God will have them
punished, or brought in subjection, or put to death. Therefore though fields
and camps could not be at first, till multitudes were increased; yet a
disposition to war (both spiritual and corporal) was at first; and that as
well in the bad to offend, as in the good to defend. This evil disposition was
quickly seen in Cain, Lamech and Esau. And a kind of duel there appeared when
as yet there were but a few men in the world, namely between Cain and Habel;
Cain offending, and Habel (we may well think) striving (as nature taught) to
defend himself: but he was a stronger spiritual soldier then temporal, God
suffering his bloody brothers strength to prevail so far, as to take away his
mortal life in that corporal combat. Here were both wars begun in two
brethren, Cain exercised a most ungracious fleshly war, as his wicked murder
declared (he fought for Satan:) Habel by his fathers example practiced the
gracious spiritual war, as his holy and well accepted sacrifice declared,
Genesis 14.
(he fought against Satan.) The father of the faithful did know and practice
this war both ways; with faith he made war against Satan, and with weapons
of war against five wicked Kings. Hereby it plainly appears, that the
calling and dignity of them that war on Gods side is very ancient, and no
less honorable then that calling whereof Christ Jesus (being King of Kings and
supreme Commander in the wars) is Head and chief Leader. If we look to the
temporal war, this he acknowledges himself to be (even a Captain of the
Lord of hoasts,) we may perceive in the book of Joshua, Ios. 5.13.14.15
at the besieging of Ierico: And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Ierico,
that he lift up his eyes and looked, and behold there stood a man over against
him with his sword drawn in his hand; and Joshua went unto him, and said unto
him, Art thou for us or for our adversaries? And he said, Nay, but a Captain of
the host of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth,
and worshipped. If we look to the spiritual war, there also he professes
himself to be our most powerful Pr^nce and governor, yea the author and
finisher of our faith, without whom we can do nothing, (a Captain of Captains
therefore;) and we also most joyfully confess this, esteeming it our greatest
renoune to fight under his banner (though with afflictions) as his soldiers.
So says Saint Paul to his son Timothy: Thou therefore suffer affliction as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ. And of himself he says, I have fought a good
fight. Abraham, I say again, was such a soldier, both spiritual and
temporal. Spiritually we may see it, where our God says, I know him, that
he will command his children and his household after him, Genesis 18.19.
and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. And
corporally we may not doubt but that he taught his people what to do in battle
against those cursed Kings. And no marvel that so good a son and servant as
Abraham, did imitate so good a father and master as his God in this
instruction. Our gracious God vouchsafes to teach his servants (his soldiers)
how to fight: He teaches my hands to fight, says King David. Nay more then
this, so honorable is the profession of a soldier, that God of war, by the
pen of his servant Moses, professes himself to be a man of war, The Lord is
a man of war, says he. You saw before, that he called himself a Captain of
the Lords host; here he is called plainly, A man of war. As he took men's
nature upon him, so takes he men's names unto him: they men of war, he a man
of war; they brethren, he a brother; they servants, and he a servant: yea,
and imparteth also his own names to the sons of men, he a father, and men
fathers; he a King, and men Kings; nay, he a God, and men Gods. And what so
great marvel is this for names, since it is his good pleasure to make men
partakers also of the divine nature (in regard of qualities,) and to give them
an entrance here into his everlasting kingdom, where at his appearing they
shall be like him, yea one with God. O wonderful humiliation on the one side!
O wonderful exaltation on the other side! War then is ancient; war then
is honorable. If we respect the spiritual war, all the life of man is a
war, (says Job:) if we respect the corporal war, we may see, that as our
God will be called a warrier, so he will have his deputy Kings (who yet above
all other men ought to seek peace, and make peace, and keep peace, if it be
possible) to be vvarriers also when time and cause are offered. Samuel did
signify thus much to the Israelites, when he told them that their King would
choose some of their sons to make instruments of war, and other some to be
Captains over thousands. To this end for one also, he gave King Saul another
manner of heart then that which he had when he sought his fathers asses, (a
courageous heart for battle;) and made little David a man of great courage, as
to take a Bear by the throat, a Lion by the beard, and a Giant by the ears:
yea and this provident God of ours charge Kings to make war by counsel, and
teaches them to be circumspect in war: What King (says our God) goes to war
against another King, and sits not down first, Luke 14.31.
and takes counsel, whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that
comes against him with twenty thousand. Moreover, we perceive that all people
of understanding despise a coward, and respect a man of valor; whence it is
that the name of a dastard, is a base byword of great reproach. And hence also
it comes, that they who are to be chosen to offices of any eminency in the
Weal public, one special quality regarded in them, is (according to Iosuahs
counsel) that they be men of courage. Lastly, Exodus 18.21.
we may see in all ages that the most worthy Kings and Princes have highly
preferred soldiers of fidelity, policy and prowess; yea giving them titles
and places so high, as to be of their Council; such were King David's Worthies:
2. Sam. 23.8.
and from hence (even from courage in war) proceeded that which greatly shows
and sets forth the ancient dignity of a valiant soldier, namely Arms.
Soldiers are specially called Men of arms; nay they only are so called, and
have had both Names and Arms given them (as well as other honors) for their
worthy deeds of Chivalry. These things thus, I will come to apply that which I
have briefly laid down of the right worthy and ancient profession of a
soldier; concerning which, this I say: Since the antiquity, dignity,
estimation and use of men of war is so great, what manner care ought true
Christian soldiers to have for joining heavenly carriage with earthly (nay
rather with heavenly) courage, heavenly armor with earthly arms? Surely an
exceeding great care, (thereby adorning a profession so princely, with all
eminent virtues and holiness;) otherwise they do not only forset all their
former titles, ornaments and aduancements of sacred and worthy soldiers, but
withal they shame (as much as in them lies) their country, their Religion,
their Kings, their Princes, their Leaders, their parents, their teachers, their
kinsfolks, their alies, yea and dishonor their God also. Far be it then that a
Sion soldier (any one I mean who have that name) should in his deeds be found
to be a swearer, a drunkard, a drone, a tigre, a peacock, a liar, a bragger, a
Thraso, a filthy doer, a loose speaker, a lascivious liver, a quareller, a
cutter, a cozener, a shifter, an irregulous Atheist, a prophaner of the
Sabbath, or any way tainted with any other notorious sin: No, no, a Sion
soldier must be a Saint by life, as he is by calling. Hence it is that I use
my best endeavor to persuade all Protestant soldiers to all manner holiness,
and this not only in peace, but in war also (yea and then especially) lest
they lose the presence of God and his blessed Angels when they have most need
of them. Will you see a precise commandment for a special regard of their
holy carriage in war? his general commandment to all the world, that they be
holy as he is holy, Leuit. 19.2.
might serve for all sorts: yet it is his good pleasure (very remarkable) to
inform their care of holiness in the very time of war: Deuteronomy. 23.9.
When thou go out (says our God) against thine enemies, keep thee from all
wickedness. Will you moreover see the exhortation of a most valiant and godly
Captain to this? See it in Joshua, a little before the destruction of Ierico.
The very day before their miraculous passage through Jordan, Ios. 3.5.
he called them together, and said, Sanctify your selves. For your better and
more full consideration yet, what a great respect our glorious God has to his
peoples holiness in war, ponder I pray you deeply of the grievous state of
Gods army (yea and of good Iosuah himself especially) at their fight with the
men of Ai. How came this? Ios. 7.1.
Because there was one wicked man in secret among them. Behold, this turned to
their great discomfort. Consider then with your selves, how fearful the
standard of any camps must needs stand in all ages, if there be many notorious
wicked men in them, horribly infected like lepers with many contagious vices.
Our good God I know, both can and may spare such camps for his own names
sake, for his own childrens sake; but I am sure that the case of such camps
shall for ever be desperate for ought that man can see. How so? Because the
true and powerful word of our most true and powerful God (whose revealed will
belongs to us and our posterity) has showed it: Read and consider: If thou
shall obey diligently the voice of thy God, Deuteronomy. 28.1.2, 3.
and observe and do all his commandments which I command thee this day, then
the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth: and all
these blessings shall come on thee: Blessed shall thou be in the city, and
blessed also in the field. verse. 7,
The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee, to be smitten
before thy face: They shall come out against thee one way, and fly before thee
seven ways. verse. 15.
But it shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the
Lord thy God, which I command thee this day, the Lord shall cause thee to be
smitten before thine enemies: Thou shall go out one way against them, ver.
25.26.
and fly seven ways before them, and shall be removed into all the kingdoms
of the earth; and thy carkeis shall be meat unto all the fowls of the air,
and unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray them away. Now let us
return again to that case of Gods camp at Ai. The lamentable state of that
camp does show, Gods angry entrance into a terrible execution of this law with
great severity. Against whom? Against his own most dearly beloved people. Ios
7.10.
Observe it well: And the Lord said unto Iosuah, Get thee up, wherefore lie
thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned, and they have transgressed my
covenant which I commanded them: for they have even taken of the accursed
thing, and have stolen and dissembled also, and they have put it even amongst
their own stuff. Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before
their enemies, but turned their backs before them, because they were accursed.
Neither will I be with you any more, except you destroy the accursed from among
you. Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify your selves against to
morrow. For thus says the Lord God of Israel: There is an accursed thing in
the midst of thee, O Israel: thou can not stand before thine enemies, except
ye destroy the accursed from amongst you. ver. 24.25.
Then Joshua and all Israel took Achan the son of Zeuah, and the silver, and
the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons and his daughters, and his
oxen and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had, and they
brought them unto the valley of Achor. And Joshua said, Why have thou troubled
us? The Lord shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with
stones. And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. O
fearful judgment! Whom may not this make to tremble, when they commit
grievous sins in war? I acknowledge that this was an extraordinary case,
at an extraordinary time; neither do I in any wise compare lesser sins with
this, but still I say, that vile sins may cause our holy God to turn his
face from the army. And the thing that I press, is, that shameful (or rather
shameless) sinners with a high hand should for ever either be reformed in, or
removed from Sion camps. Great vigilancie, I say, should be had in this matter,
and all good means should be used to obtain a holy camp. And still I
heartily desire you to remember the state of Gods camp at Ai. For more
stirring up of all sorts to the practice of holiness in camps, let all true
Christians consider, that the chief cause why our God would have his enemies
overthrown in war by his children, is their wickedness. And will not the
same God expect, that they who are made instruments to punish others for their
horrible sins, should be void of such vileness? Yes certainly. Yea and our
glorious God hasteneth the ruin of his foes, lest his children should learn
of them to do after their abominations, and so sin against the Lord their God.
Deuteronomy. 20.17, 18
Now though these abominations consist especially in false worship, yet all
the godly know, that all manner filthiness of life which either idolaters or
his own children lie in, are abominable to our God also. Yea and as idolatry
leads to filthiness, so filthiness leads to idolatry. Read Number. 25 1, 2,
3, 4, 5.
This is apparent in the matter touching Baal Peor, where the people committing
whoredom with the daughters of Moab, were enticed by and by to bow to their
idols: for lo thus it is said, The people began to commit whoredom with the
daughters of Moab, and they called the people unto the sacrifice of their gods,
and so the people did eat, and bowed down unto the gods of their harlots. And
then by degrees it is said, that Israel (signifying a great number) coupled
himself unto Baal Peor, whereby the Lords wrath was kindled against them all,
till the heads of many were hanged up against the sun, that the indignation
of the Lord might be turned from the residue. Call to mind the Israelites
estate, a little before they fell to these gross sins. When Balak would have
smitten them, Balam tells him, he could not do it, Number. 23.21.
Because their God was with them. And why was he with them? Because he had not
beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither perverseness in Israel. The great people of
this great camp, were true worshippers and holy livers, therefore the
soldiers could not be conquered: they were both outwardly and inwardly holy.
Now for the better persuading you yet again to outward and inward holiness in
war, remember that our all seeing God is not pleased with any worship ever so
religious for the form, Isai. 1.2, to 20. Isai 58.1. to 8. Mica 6.6, 7, 8.
or with any outward actions ever so specious for the show, or costly for the
matter, if righteousness of heart and holiness of life go not with them hand
in hand: no not with venturing of life for killing his enemies, (how many
soever they kill.) See this for venturing of life, in the case of King Saul, he
behaved himself valiantly against Gods foes; for he smote the Amalekites from
Hauilah until thou come to Shur, 1. Sam. 15.7, 8.
that is over against Egypt, and he took Agag the king of the Amalekites
alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword: yet
because he wickedly brake the commandment of his God, and trusted in a shining
outward performance, without a simple inward obedience, which is better then
sacrifice, his valiantness was of no value with our God.

What may I write to move you yet more to a godly behavior in war? I will
add this more: That God who precisely commands cleanliness of body in the
camp, Deuteronomy. 23.12, 13.
(as we may read Deuteronomy. 23.) does he not much more regard cleanliness of soul
in the camp? Yes, yes. Psalm. 39.5. Reu. 1.13.
Remember then as Holiness becomes the Lords house for ever, because he
stands in the midst of the golden Candlesticks: so Holiness becomes the
Lords camp for ever, Deuteronomy. 23.14,
because he walks in the midst of thy camp to deliver thee, and to give up
thine enemies before thee: therefore let thy camp be holy, that he see no
unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee. This holds in spiritual
things, much more then in corporal. Our God is a spirit, and vieweth the
spirit of man, and requires spiritual cleanliness, inward cleanliness
specially. Math. 11.18.
Is this commandment of God true, and this presence of God true? Yea, they are
most true. O then let Sion soldiers be Cornelian soldiers (such I mean as
fear God and are devout: Acts 10.2,7.
) for this end and purpose I heartily with and pray, and advise that all Sion
soldiers may now and for ever earnestly consider of, and diligently labor to
get and put on the spiritual Chain and Armor which now I come to describe. I
show it, but God only can bestow it.

This Chain is made of eight heavenly linkes. I have here by Gods assistance
collected eight worthy things from his own word (the mouth of the Lord has
declared them,) which they that make true use of, shall prove true soldiers of
Jesus Christ their heavenly Captain. Every Christian must have these eight
linkes (according to their several places and occasions,) and wear them close
together (as in a chain,) and put on this armor also: but specially these
double soldiers who fight both corporally and spiritually, they must have
double care to enjoy them graciously. They that despise any one of these
linkes, or any part of this armor, our God will despise them, and they shall be
found unworthy of the name of Christian soldiers. God grant that such as make
show to fight on his side, may in truth wear these eight worthies (worthy
links I mean) graciously joined together, as a spiritual chain about their
holy necks. These they are.

1. Person. Genesis 4.1.4, 5.
First, they must consider of their persons, how they stand in Gods favor. As
the sacrifice of a wicked man is not acceptable to our God, no more is his
person: if not his person, then no action which he performs. 2. Cause. Ios
10.5.8. Deuteronomy. 23.4.
Secondly, they must look to the cause for which they must fight, that it be
holy: our just God will maintain no unjust cause. Thirdly, they who fight the
Lords battles, 3. Courage. Ios. 1.6.
must see to their courage, that it be valiant. He sends not forth cowards to
fight for him, but valiant men; and this valiantness is settled on a firm
resolution at all assayes. Fourthly, they must consider of such mercy as
belongs to Christian soldiers, 4. Mercy. Iam. 2.13.
and that must be abundant; for our God delights in mercy. Fifthly, they must
observe truth in all their leagues and promises; and that must be unfeigned and
constant. 5. Truth. Psalm. 15.4.
The God of truth loves truth. Sixthly, they must have consideration of their
wages, 6. Wages. Luke 3.14.
when to take it holily, and when to be without it patiently. Seventhly, they
must have care of their spiritual armor: 7. Armor. Ephesians. 6.13.
this armor they must put on and keep on for ever, and not their corporal
only. Eighthly and lastly, 8. Consultation. Judge. 20.18.
they must always consult with their good God in all plots, enterprises and
actions whatsoever. Of these eight things briefly, according to my little skill
and strength.

For the first worthy, that is to say, a worthy person. 1 A worthy person.
and rules all things therein, both for beginning, middle and end; (For of
him, and through him, Romans 11.36.
and to him are all things.) How can a soldier have any blessing in war, if
his person be not loved but hated of this all-gouerning God? Except his person
be found worthy in that Worthy of worthies Christ Jesus, whereby his conscience
is more and more purified, he is like an outlaw, Tit. 1.15.
deprived from all comfort in, and protection from the high God. As an earthly
Courtier can have no likelihood to be graced and preferred (but rather to be
disgraced and dejected) if there be evident tokens that the King of that
country abhors him: so it is with every soldier in Gods camp, if his person
be not gracious with that heavenly Captain of Captains, Michael, whose great
name declares his greatness; Who like our God?
Faith, with a gracious purpose of amendment of life, if God lengthen the
days, are inward tokens of Gods favor to a soldiers person. The outward
signs to be seen of men, are, A real change of their old life, for that
shows the new birth; Zeal for Gods glory, with an utter detestation of all
lewd company; and generally a holy carriage and behavior in words and deeds,
governed by the word, as in Gods presence. Such sanctified soldiers may assure
themselves that they are well accepted by the God of battle, be it by life, be
it by death. Therefore all wicked soldiers that are hardened in notorious
vices, are quite excluded (whiles they so remain) from all hope that their
persons please God, and thereby have just cause to quake at every sound of the
Trumpet or Drum. This being true (as it is most true) it behooves Christian
soldiers to consider deeply hereof, and to labor by all means that their
persons may be gracious in the eyes of their God, (yea and to know it and make
it known by those tokens above named, and such other) before they put foot to
war, lest they fall into horrible danger of soul and body, state and name.
I write not this to discourage any sinner, but rather to hearten them more, by
becoming holy: I who write this, do acknowledge, that both my self and my
fathers house, and my own house have sinned and do sin; but I write it to
stir up my self and mine in our places, and all Sion soldiers in their
places, to a gracious regard of holiness more and more; without which, neither
can we look for any blessing in peace, nor they in battle. Therefore that you
may prosper in war, leave off your gross sins, and come to the battle, and
stand in the battle graciously and holily, that so your persons may be
accepted in and by Christ Jesus our Lord. Thus much for the first
consideration, the first link, the first worthy thing.

The second thing for Sion soldiers to consider of, is, the cause for which
they fight, 2. A worthy cause.
they must have a worthy cause. A soldier (how valiant and virtuous soever)
who has no consideration of this, is in no better case then his horse; the
horse goes willingly and fiercely to the battle as well as his master; look
whither he rides him, thither the horse hastes; against whom or for what
cause, the beast cares not, because it is a beast; it suffices the dumb
creature that his master sets him forward: but this is not enough for a man,
especially for a Sion soldier, he may not suffer himself to be drawn on to
war by his own vainglorie or covetousness, without due respect to the cause; no
nor to be compelled to war in a cause apparently known to be unholy and
unjust. Most true it is, that he must go to war sometimes, when well he knows
the cause; nay more then that, when he is utterly ignorant thereof. For
soldiers may be justly pressed by their governors to take weapon, way and
ship toward some exploit which as yet is hidden and unfit to be opened for a
season. If it be hid continually, then they must beware of suspicion, and judge
lovingly of their Prince, (Love is not suspicious, 1. Cor. 13.5.6.7
but hopeful rather) and rest fully persuaded that the cause is good. Their
diligent search to know the goodness of the cause, Pro^. 5.3.
and their desire to fight in a holy cause (when by any secrecy in the Princes
heart which is deep and unsearchable, or by any suddenness of combat it
cannot be revealed) is accepted by our good God who searches the herat. Now if
he cannot come to an evident truth of the justness of the cause, yet a
Centurion soldier (so I call the obedient at a beck) must go with all speed,
Math, 8.9.
laboring to fight with as much courage as if he knew the cause to be ever so
just: and then our gracious God who sees his holy purpose, will take this good
hope conceived of his Deputy in good part, and take his due obedience given to
his Deputy, as done to himself. Beware then of false whisperings, which many
times bring disobedient murmurings. Gods Vicegerent must not be denied aid (no
nor so much as grudged at) upon surmises and rumors: so they might have no
hearty use at all of subjects for maintaining their wars. Howbeit that serious
inquiry, that full purpose, that hearty desire to fight in a good cause
(abhorring the contray) should be in all Sion soldiers. Therefore those
soldiers show themselves to have ignorant, blockish and wicked hearts, who
care nothing at all in what cause they venture lims and life; much more they
who hazard themselves when the cause is plainly discerned to be bad. If hope of
gain be their principal motive, then have they hearts possessed with the
root of all evil. 1. Tim. 6.10.
Here mercenarie soldiers are greatly to be reproved, who run to and fro
(like greedy wolves,) and fly hither and thither (like hungry Eagles) where
they may have most wages, whether they fight for God or for the Devil, they
care not, so they may have money and spoils. Such as these can look for no
good success in the battle. God forbid that any Protestant soldier should be
of this mercenarie mind. Hence it is that I advise all godly soldiers to use
all good means to be thoroughly persuaded of the goodness of their cause, that
so that good God and mighty defender of right, may stand for them, and that
they may stand to him with true courage in the field. And yet again I advise a
gracious soldier to judge the best of the cause, if by those occasions which I
have named (or the like) he can never find the depth of it: for he must in no
wise contest with his governors about the cause, by standing upon nice terms,
shifts and euasions. Thus might unwilling soldiers find store of starting
holes to avoid all skirmishes. To conclude, a Sion soldier must be zealous for
a good cause, and not jealous of a good Prince; he must use all good
inquisition, and avoid all evil suspicion. And thus much for the second
worthy sink, namely a worthy cause.

Thirdly, since all men, though virtuous, 3. Worthy, Courage.
godly and prudent, are not endued with courage fit for war, (for courage is a
special gift of God) it behooves a true Christian to consider how God has
stirred him up that way, and not offer himself to war upon a sudden heat or
mood in ever so good a cause, but stay till he find that the God of battle
has bestowed a firm courageous heart upon him, without which he is able to do
small good, nay rather much harm. Faint hearts may sooner discomfort others,
then perform any acceptable service at all. Yet this I say in the case of
courage: when any goes to war voluntarily upon a deceived heart, and then
finds his courage faint; or when any that is pressed to war by his Prince, is
oppressed with fear of the enemy, then let him do that to obtain courage,
which men ought to do for obtaining wisdom; Iam. 1.17.
both these descend from the Father of lights. Iam. 1.5.
Therefore as Saint James says, If a-man lack wisdom, let him ask it of
God, which gives to all men liberally, and reprocheth no man: so say I, if any
Christian soldier want courage, let him ask it of God in faith, and for his
glory, not for by and bad respects; and if then our most wise God does not
vouchsafe (upon earnest petitions) to bestow this gift upon him, surely he
should do well to confess his faintness: and then such gracious Captains as
shall have full notice thereof, shall do well also to send him back for some
other emploiment at home. I make no way here for dissemblers to wind out of
their Princes service: our God can give holy Captains discerning spirits, to
judge of things in wisdom: but I speak of such soldiers whose dastardly
fear is apparently seen. Here I suppose that old rule of our good God is to
be remembered and practiced for ever, which says, Let the officers speak unto
the people, Deuteronomy. 20.8.
and say, Whosoever is fearful and fainthearted, let him go and return unto
his house, lest his brethrens hearts faint as well as his heart: yet I
determine nothing hereof, but leave it to the godly wisdom of religious
Captains.

To go forward now in speaking more fully of courage, I must put you in mind
that this courage which here I write of, has always a holy and noble
resolution from the first hour to the last. What resolution? A Christian
resolution, full of magnanimity. A heart, a soul, a body, fully resolved and
prepared for all kind of extremities, yea death it self, which ends all: a
heart, a soul, which makes the will and testament at home, in such sort as if
the man were never to return to his short home, but to go (as our phrase of
speech is) to his long home: a heart, a soul prepared to leave all in all, and
to bear all brunts for Christ his sake. When the person of a soldier is once
accepted of his God in that most worthy Son of his, that Lamb, I say, who is
worthy to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, Reu. 5.12.
and strength, and glory, and praise; then with this resolution (which is
inseparable from that acceptance) the Sion soldier defieth all Gods enemies,
despises all dangers, and (after a heavenly manner) denies all friends and
himself also for Christ's sake. Then he says, Life I look not for thy
continuance, Death I fear not thy sting; Wife, father, mother, son,
daughter, brother, sister, friend, neighbor, fare you well, I am resolved of
my course; if I never come again to my house, I have a house, not made with
hands, prepared for me. By a little shadow of this courageous resolution, viz.
that it was the most glorious and blessed thing that could be to die for ones
country; O praeclara mors quae naturae debita patres est redita. Cicero in
Philip.
the old Romans (who were like old wine, which is better then new) became a
kind of Lords over their own lives (not caring for death,) and thereby (at
length) a kind of Lords also over the known parts of the world. If they could
thus resolve upon so poor, weak and sandy a ground, what manner of resolution
may Sion soldiers make upon the most faithful promise and oath of the God of
truth, Heb. 6.13. to the end 1. Cor. 2.9. 1. Pet. 1.4.
touching those surpassing joys, which the eye has not seen, nor the ear
heard, nor the heart of man conceived, laid up and reserved in store by our
good God for them that love him, Math. 9.29. Math. 10.34.
and lose any friends for his sake, yea and especially for them that die in his
cause. If mortal Princes and governors hold it their renoune to requite their
Captains and soldiers for their constancy and courage, how will the
immortal God perform this to his worthies? If the Romans could give their
Torquatus a chain of honor and a name of dignity, (which remains to this
day, even the name of a chain,) what will our God give his valiant men? Surely
both palms, and garlands, and chains, and a celestial crown, together with
an everlasting name in heaven. What is it then to lose our country or friends
for such a King, such a God? What is it to lose a lim for him? nay, what is it
to lose life it self for him? Surely it is no loss, but great advantage. And
they who in this sort lose a mortal life, shall find an immortal life.
Therefore you Sion soldiers take this link of courage, together with the
rest, for making up a chain of honor here, which will procure you a better
chain then the Romans could give their Torquatus. O prepare to come from home
with resolved courageous minds. And therefore prepare to come also with
resolved hearts, to behave your selves so as becomes Christians, in all manner
holiness: otherwise do not loo^e to obtain true resolved courage from our
God. For this heavenly resolution can never enter into the heart of a wicked
man; because our God has threatened, yea and assured him the quite contrary,
(even everlasting punishment with the Devil and his Angels) except he repent,
except he amend, except he be newborn, except he present his body a living
sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
holy and acceptable to God: which things if by the grace of our most gracious
God he perform, then shall he be more valiant then any giant, then shall he
not fear the face of any enemy, but strike and dash to pieces the iaw bones
of Gods foes; flee at them like a Dragon, and tear them like a Lion, Reu. 5 8.
(because the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is with him.) Such soldiers as these
have no cause to fear any enemies, because they fear God, and have him for
their friend. If they die, they die in great honor, because they die for God,
and in God, and to God: if they live, they live in great honor, both for their
good life, and for their true valor. True valor, I say, that is stirred up by
a calm and religious mind to fight for the truth. Desperate resolutions
proceed not from Christian fortitude, but from rash fury. It is not brainsick
venturing in mad moods, drunken veins, and furious fits, that makes a worthy
soldier, a noble soldier in life and death: by such venturing thou may
venture upon, and enter into hell. As it is in Martyrdom, so it is in battle:
The cause, not the torment, makes a Martyr. Right so, a good life lead in
peace, not a bad life lost in war, makes a blessed soldier at his death in
the fields. Let Sion soldiers therefore be resolved upon true valor, then may
they stand to it with courage, because they stand upon a certainty. They shall
be certain either of a glorious victory in life, or of a more glorious
victory by death. Such soldiers are far more resolute for Sion, then even the
ancient Romans were for old Rome, or the new ones can be for new Babylon. Such
warriers are indeed more excellent conquerers then ever the most excellent
Romans were. For by Christ Jesus their Captain, they become spiritual
conquerers of the whole world, yea of the flesh, and sin, and death, and
devil, and hell. These be truly courageous and truly resolved soldiers. Thus
much for the third worthy, namely a resolute courage.

4. Worthy, Mercy.
The fourth worthy thing to be considered of Sion soldiers, is Mercy. Albeit a
sacred soldier must be courageous and valorous, and that in such sort as to
lay about him most manfully, without respect of the life of any whosoever,
rather then put his own life, and his countries, and his cause in danger: yet
on the other side, there are times when, and persons to whom mercy must be
showed. I plead not here for Agags, 1 Samuel 15.33. Judge. 2.21.
nor for Zeba's and Zalmunna's, whom the Lord will have destroyed (principal
irreconcilable enemies,) such must find no favor: the blood which they have
merciless spilt, cries out for their blood without mercy. Benhadad. 1. King.
2. Sam. 15.11,
But the thing which I would say, is this; Such as are misled ignorantly (like
those two hundred whom Absalon abused) mercy is due to them: Such as before
have showed mercy to others, mercy is due to them. If Zeba and Zalmunna had
been merciful unto Gideons brethren, Gideon says, Judge. 8.29.
he would not have slain them. Babel was commanded to leave her throne, and
sit in the dust, because she showed no mercy to the Israelites, but laid a
very heavy yoke upon the ancient. Isai. 47.6. Deuteronomy 20 10. 2. Sam. 20.18. Psalm.
137. Obed.
The like is said also of the children of Edom. Such as yield in due time
without resisting, mercy is due to them. Such captives as may be spared
without any danger of present or future harms (through their treachery or
multitude,) it is better to show mercy there then rigor. Matrons and virgins
(unless they have bin like Iesabel) it is good (in sacking of towns) to show
mercy to them; whom to handle in the least unchaste manner, let the thought
thereof be far from all Sion soldiers. The great huffing Harlot (mother of the
Stues) leave villainy to her sons: fie upon such filthiness, let it not once
be named among Protestant soldiers, but rather giving of thanks for the
victory. Moreover young children, if there be any kind of hope to stay them by
the word, it is pity to slay them by the sword. The aged (who have not bin,
nor are like to be special counselors against God and his children) it is
good to show mercy to them, (never insulting over the miserable, but pitying
their case rather.) Herein I would have all Sion soldiers utterly to abandon
the horrible instructions of that infamous Florentine Machiauel, who persuades
to all cruelty, esteeming Christian mercy to come from a silly simple mind,
unfit for a valiant man. This scorner derideth humility and meekness,
patience and gentleness, esteeming that they do not become manhood, but make
Christians much inferior to the Barbarians in courage, and that it breeds
nothing but dastardlinesse. A fit schoolmaster for Satan's sons. In
particular therefore I join with all good Christians in branding out this
firebrand of hell, and in admonishing all, especally soldiers, to learn of
our blessed Savior, that most meek Lamb and gentle Dove. Let his sayings be
frequent in your mouths and settled in your souls. Amongst others, remember
these which follow, some whereof proceeded from his own most blessed mouth,
and all of them from his sacred Spirit: Math. 5.12. Luke 6.36. Mica 7.18. Mat.
5.7.
Do as thou would be done unto: Be merciful as your heavenly father is
merciful. Mercy pleases our God. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy. Let none think that mercy and manhood, courage and kindness,
courtesy and chivalry, might and meekness, cannot dwell together. True
courage has piety, and piety has pity. Numb. 12.3.
This mixture was seen in Moses, a most valiant Captain, yet the meekest man
of that world. It was seen also in noble Joshua; yea and many worthy patterns
there are left us of great valiantness and great mercy joined together in
Christian Emperors, Kings and Captains, as Constantine, Valentinian,
Charlemaine, Charles the fifth, and our King Henry the fifth (crowned in Paris.)
What shall I say more? Time would be too short to reckon up many other valiant,
yet meek and merciful Christians. As they who in their vocations do kill
beasts to sustain the life of man, are not thereby made the more cruel to man
if they be spiritually minded, (the fleshly I confess may thence be fleshed to
hardness of heart;) no more are holy soldiers made savage by embruing their
hands in the blood of many beastly foes. As they who in the old Law killed
beasts continually for sacrifices, were not thereby made bloody hearted: no
more are those Soldiers who perform an acceptable work to our God, by
shedding the blood of his enemies, thereby made fierce to his friends: No, no,
they continue innocent like Doves, and mild as Lambs. Though their banners be
red, their manners be white. Though their swords be bloody, their words be
gentle and their deeds lovely. And thus should Sion Souldier-striue to make a
difference between the Whore of whores bloody soldiers and themselves: these
like our God full of mercy; those like the King-killing Locusts, and like
Satan full of massacres. So much for the fourth worthy link. Only adding that
all the matters here named concerning warlike mercy, must still be weighed in
the balance of Christian wisdom, with due regard first to the word of our
God, then to time, place, occasion, circumstance and person; each of which I
leave to the holy discretion of prudent Captains and Soldiers.

The fifth worthy link, the fifth worthy thing I say, 5. The fifth worthy link,
is Truth.
for sacred Soldiers to consider of and practice, is, Truth in all leagues,
cathes and promises. The very heathen had great care of this: how much more
should Christians respect it. Regulus in Tul. offic. lib. 3,
Students know what Tully wrote of Regulus; namely how being at liberty, and
giving promise either to release certain captives or return; made choice to
come back, yea to extreme torments for his promise sake. Let the equiuocating,
dissembling, double faced, double dealing Whore of the world and her vassals
(whom she teaches to dissemble by mental reseruations and blasphemous abuse
of that place of Scripture, My son give me thy heart, Pro. 23.26.
and it suffices;) let them be infamous as they are, for breaking all bonds of
truth: but let Protestant soldiers bind fast and keep fast these bonds,
though it should be to their great seeming loss, our good God will requite it;
and it is no loss to gain his favor, though with loss. We may be deprived
of some temporal comfort (which might notwithstanding have turned to our
discomfort;) but the inward joy of Gods Spirit by obeying him, is of more value
then any gain, especially the gain of ungodliness. Remember that although
this truth is to be kept by all persons at all times and places, and in all
vocations, yet specially among Princes, Generals, Captains and soldiers in
war. My reason is this: In peace the matters between man and man are most
commonly touching lands and houses or goods, by some kind of contract, bargain,
sale or exchange, none of these do reach to the life of man directly: albeit
then that the breach of word in these cases may do great harm, yet I say
again it touches not life; and withal it extends it self either to one
person only, or to one household only, or to some few persons or households: but
the breaches of promise in war, are of so large extent, as that that they
stretch to the spoil of a whole army, sometimes of a whole country, even for
all in all, (goods, houses, lands, lives, what not?) Therefore these breaches
of promise are like the breaches of the sea into the maine land, which carry
down all before them, and leave no place, no building, no person untouched,
ouerwhelming Churches: it is not thus in the breach of promise in civil
contracts and bargains in peaceable times at home. Hereby I go not about to
extenuate the least failing in common promises with the meanest sort of people:
for Gods children should be very wary to promise no more then they are willing
and in all likelihood able to perform. And though their purpose be ever so
good, yet if the plots fail, if the payment come short, they are to be grieved
for it, and to endeavor by all possible means to give satisfaction, and not
only so, but then withal they must be abundantly wary that they fall not into
the like again. A dear child of God may be overtaken in these civil things,
sometimes by his own proiects missing, sometimes by others deceiving him,
sometimes by sudden losses or crosses, which fall out to the sounes of men: but
they must take heed of wilful defrauding any of their goods, and much more of
crafty cozening and deceiving, and they must carefully make restitution by all
good industry and frugalitie; and they must also for ever after be the more
wary how they borow. Consider now of the cases in war. Consider I say of the
breaking of leagues, vows and oaths amongst wicked men in martial matters.
You shall find that most of them are Machiauillian and Ahitophel plots made of
purpose, even as artificers make nets to catch wild beasts. Do not imitate
them. Deal you (...) plainly, truly, sincerely and righteously with all sorts
of people, friends and foes. Our holy forefathers have bin highly careful of
plain dealing, and so let us. Joshua that right valiant Captain, and all the
Princes with him, gave a notable pattern of this plain dealing and true
dealing in the case of the Gibeonites, though they wrought craftily. The
Israelites were commanded to spare no such near neighbors as the Gibeonites
were, yet having made a promise to them suddenly, they feared more to break
that old rule of truth, that rule I say of promise keeping, then this new rule
of worldly policy, in killing such as might be goades in their sides and
thorns in their eyes. This pattern let all true Christian soldiers imitate,
and not prefer politic cruelty before Protestant innocence. As each godly
policy may be used against wicked enemies, so all kind of piety must be
practiced toward them. We must repay good for evil, and not carry revenging
minds. If revenge be evil, how evil is it when a Christian shall break all
bonds of promises given, of purpose to break into revenge by craft. This is
utterly evil. As Joshua and the Nobles were and are justly to be commended for
that famous example of keeping promise, so Saul's sons were worthily hanged (a
long time after) even for that very promise broken with some of the Gibeonites.
Consider that our God is the God of truth, yea truth it self; his sons the
sons of truth, and our Protestant Religion the Religion of truth: but
contrariwise, Satan is the father of lying from the beginning, all his Popish
Iesuited sons lying children, and their Religion a Religion of lies. Therefore
still I say, let all Protestants and Protestant soldiers above all continue in
all truth as touching leagues, promises and oaths. Let Sion soldiers excel
in that virtue (truth I say) whose opposite vice (falsehood) is most proper to
all winding, shifting, turning whores, and to Rome above all. Let all
Protestant soldiers abhor that vice, and procure a most blessed name of
careful and sure keeping all their oaths, leagues and promises, that so they
may (in, by and through Christ Jesus our Lord) obtain the promise of resting
in Gods holy mountain, Psalm. 15.
when that whore and her bastard seed (who make a practice wilfully, willingly
and purposely to break all promises with Protestants) shall be thrown into
the sea of destruction, yea the bottomless lake, except repentance be given
them. To conclude this point, let us (even all Protestants) carefully imitate
our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in a^l truth, and abhor that whore of
Rome his enemy, especially for her falsehood. And so I conclude the joining of
this fifth link to the rest, namely, Truth in all leagues, oaths and promises.

The sixth worthy link, is Contentednes, The sixth worthy link is contentednes
with their pay Luke 3.4.
I say contentedness with their pay: and this according to John Baptists
advertisement, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely, and be
content with your wages. The want of this worthy link, is a chief cause why so
many make such havoc and waste in war (against all laws of God and man,) as
shows them to be utterly unworthy of this high calling of a soldier. As
wicked sons will not stay for their fathers goods till they come to it by
their gift or death, but rob them in their life time: so wicked soldiers will
not stay for spoils till their heavenly Father has brought their foes to
death or flight, but they will use pilling and polling by and by, yea and
sometimes killing and ransacking (not of foes only, but of friends also) as
soon as they get the name of soldiers. These counterfets are the cause of that
ill report which generally is brought up even upon all soldiers, how holy
soever. Howbeit it is the duty, and it will be the wisdom of all good people
to lay the blame where it ought to be laid, and not to traduce and blot the
innocent; let the wicked bear his own disgrace. Our God will not have a good
son to bear the ignominy of his fathers fault; and shall a good soldier
bear the spot of his wicked fellows sin? This is unjust. Learn you and
practice you the gracing of sacred soldiers: they watch for you when you
sleep: they fare hard for you, when you feast: they endure extreme cold and
heat, when you are in case and place to procure comforts and remedies both
ways: they want the mutual society of their dearest friends, when you are in
the midst of them: yea and diverse times they lack that blessing of blessings,
the word preached (by tumults and tossings) when you enjoy it abundantly: and
lastly they hazard their lives for you, as well as for themselves, when you sit
under your own vines in all safety and plenty. Requite not the good sort of
soldiers so ill, as to disgrace them with vile persons, and to join them with
riotous and rakehels. To whom shall I resemble such a wicked generation? Surely
such wicked soldiers in war, are like Elies riotous sons in peace,
whatsoever their lusting heart desires, that their theeuish hands will wrest,
without any respect of justice, law, order, season, age or sex: but gracious
soldiers, who fear the great God of Israel, will be as well contented with
competent pay in war, as any poor thresher, hedger or ditcher in peace; so far
will they be from hurting any, as that they will rather defend their neighbors
goods (innocents goods) from the violence of others who make no conscience of
their ways. No doubt but good David taught his soldiers this doctrine, and
kept them in this discipline: yea and it may well appear that they followed
his instructions. Nabals servant confessed their abundant kindness, yea so
far as to be a wall to them both by day and night. This was a rare example,
quite contrary to the custom of most soldiers now adays, who take robbing
and rifling as a part of their wages; so as when they receive press money, they
esteem that they receive also a large license to take all manner commodities
from all sorts of people (without any regard of Gods eye or fear of his
sword,) spoil they will, rob they will (how, when, whom, they care not) as
they go to war, in the time of war, and as they return from battle. These are
Satan's takers, right Shabeans. God forbid that any Protestant soldiers should
ever use this riot, this cruelty: nay rather let them be well contented with
such pay as our God allotteth them: yea and let them have more contentedness
then this also, or else they be not gracious, Sion soldiers. Put case that
Kings, Princes, Generals and Captains have not always their pay ready (as it
may fall out sometimes to the most godly, liberal, provident and potent
governors in the world,) is there not a higher contentednes to be practiced
here by Christian soldiers? doubtless there is. For though no man goes a
warfare at his own cost (as the Apostle says,) yet in days of necessity,
sacred soldiers must take their God for their play master, and rest quiet, and
stand courageous for a time without their pay. Nay a degree further then this
too: Say that victuals wax scarce as well as wages, yet Sion soldiers will
make no mutinies for all these wants, no, though under officers should neglect
or abuse them in all these things (which God forbid, and give wisdom and care
to superior magistrates to look narrowly to that point,) holy soldiers will
not murmr as the wicked Israelites did in the wilderness, but rather submit
themselves as meek lambs under the mighty hand of their heavenly Father,
(even as Samson did, when our good God quenched his thirst presently, whereby
he was refreshed in a time of great want,) and sooner give comfort to their
gouerners whom they see grieved for their sakes, then add afflictions and
griefs unto them by their discontentments. It is one thing to keep back the
hirelings wages or food out of a covetous or careless mind, and another thing
to be wounded in heart because the strait is so great, that Kings, Princes,
Generals and Captains cannot do that for their soldiers which their soul
desires: in such a case sanctified soldiers will rather cheer up their
valiant governors (by their holy learning to abound and want) then make
tumults for lack of cheer. How far then will they be from such an utter
falling away, as to forsake God and governors, cause and camp, because their
purses and mouths be not always filled? Many wicked soldiers are utterly
void of this godly mind, who upon the least want of pay or provision, do show
all manner want of patience and contentedness; yea so far as to make
insurrections. Some (in this case) fall to cursing, railing and rauing; and
othersome fall away to the enemy. No longer plenty, no longer duty; no
longer pay, no longer Prince. Such soldiers as thus forsake God and governors
for want of money and meat, do bewray great emptiness of grace, and do much
disgrace the honorable profession of a soldier. This shows that their
grounds and resolutions in coming to war, were sinister, and quite void of all
godliness. As between man and wife, parents and children, friend and friend,
there is a firm indissoluable bond of love, as well in adversity as
prosperity: so it is between governors and their soldiers, nothing must
part them but death, until by a general consent they give over war. If at any
time the wants be so great, as they cannot be endured, then it will be the
wisdom and mercy of supreme Leaders and Commanders, to relinquish and break
up for a time, and to use all good means for their soldiers safety as for
their own: but whiles hope of victory remains, and matters go in a
tolerable sort, no want of wages in any wise, nor any sufferable want of any
necessaries, will cause soldiers that have tasted of the new birth, to abandon
the camp, or curse and ban their Rulers; knowing that so much the more
patience as they have in extremities, so much the more recompense they shall
have (both with God and man) in victories. As they that faithfully suffer other
losses at home (in lands, houses, goods or liberties) with our most blessed
Savior, shall undoubtedly reign with him: so they that in war suffer with
their Leaders in hard straits, shall undoubtedly triumph with them at length;
if not in earth, yet let them know, that if they suffer Christianly in war,
(for Christ's sake I say) this is also a right blessed means through Christ's
merits to reign with him and with his Deputie-Captaines eternally. Let not
Christian soldiers then look with the eye of flesh upon present means, but
with the eye of faith upon Gods power and promise, and wholly commit themselves
unto this good Father of fathers, esteeming his glory and his Deputies comfort
and protection to be of more value then all the wages and victuals in the
world. Let it never be said, that Sion soldiers are like covetous worldlings,
all for money, nothing for love. The ancient heathen shall condemn such
selfe-louers; yea weak women amongst the heathen shall condemn them, even a
Moabite: did Ruth leave Naomi (though greatly urged) because she was now become
poor? No sure, she cleaued to her in a time of penury (much like a time of
war) and that in a most loving and constant manner. Naomi you know was in very
extraordinary grief and distress when she was to travel alone (for ought she
knew) from Moab to Judea. This tender mother in law was loath to have her
daughters in law with her, lest they should come to dangers and wants. At
length the one of them was persuaded to return; but the other would by no
means leave her: come what wants might come, Ruth would not forsake Naomi.
Naomi did say, nay rather Marah (as she calls her self) she would take part
with her in bitterness. Ruth 1.
Ponder well upon her most kind words (a rare daughter in law,) Entreat me not
to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou go,
I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: Thy people shall be my people,
and thy God my God: where thou die, will I die, and there will I be buried:
The Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.
Doubtless gracious soldiers will say as much for the love which they bear to
their loving Kings, Princes, Governors and Captains; they will not leave them
nor forsake them for want of wages, no nor for want of food, so long as nature
has any strength to hold out. Sion soldiers would think it great shame and
disgrace, that any woman, specially a Moabite, should go beyond them in close
standing to a dear friend in time of adversity. As Ruth then ventured to
gleane for her mother in law and her self amongst strangers (and some of them
of strange and boisterous qualities:) so will they venture to roue and reap in
the enemies country for their own and their Captains sustenance: yea to rush
through multitudes, 1 Samuel, 13.15.^^
like David's Worthies for the water of Bethlehem, rather then exclame against
their Leaders for such wants as lie not in their power to supply. A low ebb of
earthly maintenance will not bring a Sion soldier to a low ebb of heavenly
love. Good King David was brought to a low ebb, when he and his men are the
Shewbread. And what great store of provision may we suppose that he had, 1 Samuel 21.7.
when he sent to Nabal for some of his store? or when King Achish asked him,
Where he had bin a rouing that day? 1 Samuel, 15.6.
Neither is it like that he had much wages to give his soldiers in the
wilderness. Behold here a great Captain in great wants; yet his loving
soldiers held out with him to the end, without any storming at all merely for
want of money or meat. So let Sion soldiers do with their David's, and not
stand upon their due or right, in times of difficulty. Let soldiers learn to
make a difference of times, and according thereunto now and then to flourish in
all things, now and then to fade in all things, save only in one, that is to
say, the assurance of a powerful, glorious and gracious God, to supply all
their wants, if they will ply him with earnest petitions, and trust to him who
never failed any. One way or other a faithful man shall be supplied, yea and
sometimes that way he least thought on; as Lot from his bondage, and the
Israelites from the famine which the Aramites caused. Therefore I say once
more, that a Sion soldier must still look upon that famous worthy link of
his heavenly chain, Resolved courage; and not be clamorous or detected for
want of his due in time of adversity. Is this a soldiers case alone when he
is abroad in war? No surely: It is the Mariners case at Sea: yea and more then
that also, it is the Plowmans case at home; it is the Artificers case at home;
nay and it may be the Pastors, and the very Kings case himself at home. All
these have their portions allowed of the Lord our God, and according to their
places plentiful portions in time of prosperity; but in adversity, in
troubled waters, in storms, in dearths, in time of pestilence, in persecutions
for the Gospel, each of these (even the Lords anointed) must be content to
abate of their due, of their right, yea and come to sackcloth and ashes with
fasting sometimes: they must not look continually for such plenty,
recompense, attendance and respect, as belongs unto them: No, no, they are in
their right way when in such cases they abate of their right. If this
contentednes with want of their due, belong to Prince and Pastor, how much more
to common people? If to Kings and Captains, how much more to soldiers? All
men must receive their state, calling and place upon condition, that if our
good God will call them to wants, they must be as well contented with penury as
with plenty, and say with patient Job, The Lord has given, the Lord has
taken away, Job 1.21. Job 2, 10.
blessed be the name of the Lord: Shall we receive good at the hands of the
Lord, and not receive evil? And they must say with Paul, I have learned in
whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content: I can be abased, and I can
abound: every where in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be
hungry, to abound and to want. Is not our heavenly Father most wise, most
provident, most powerful, and most loving? He is. Therefore this affliction,
this want is good for us; otherwise he would not suffer it to fall upon us. Now
know this moreover, that such wants as these may come to the most godly
soldiers as well as to the most ungodly ones. For in things of this nature,
There is (as Solomon says) one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to
the good and to the evil, to the clean and to the unclean, to him that
sacrifices and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is the sinner;
and he that swears, as he that fears an oath. Good soldiers may do good
an hundred times, and yet sustain many wants afterward: wicked soldiers may
do evil (yea commit foul outrages) an hundred times, and yet remain in great
plenty, yea and go away with notable victories. Howbeit in the end there
shall be a differeence made and seen, as both David and his son Solomon say,
Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil: But though a
sin-do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know
that it shall be well with them that fear the Lord: but it shall not be well
with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow, because
he fears not before God. And again: Mark the way of the upright man, and
behold, for the end of that man is peace. A good soldier considering this end,
will not be discouraged in a faithless manner for want of wages and victuals
(when the enemy has abundant) and thereby grieve his governor, Act. 21.13.
but as Paul said in his kind of war, What mean you to weep and to break mine
heart? I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die for the name of the
Lord Jesus: So should a holy Sion soldier say: Why break you my heart O
loving Captain, by grieuing for my wants, I am ready not only to want my
wages and food for the cause of my Christ, but to spend my dearest drop of
blood for him, and with you. Zach. 11.11.
Gracious Iosian soldiers (so I call the tender hearted to their governors)
will mourn to see their Captain come to any grief or wound, by the Captains
own failing in any of his plots or cariages: how will they fear then to bring
their Captain to mourning, by their own failing in any duty of kindness to
their Governor? A holy soldier will say thus in time of his governors
disabilitie to pay wages: I serve a good Lord, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who
has promised not to leave us nor forsake us; he will pay you and me our wages
(good Captain.) And thus he will say in time of distress for food: Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Math. 4.4.
I live not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of my God: hence am I strengthened; I did put on this mind at home in my
country, before I stepped a foot toward this war; therefore be not grieved (I
beseech you) for any wants of mine; as I have bin well contented with my wages
heretofore, so am I as well content without it now; and as for food (O Captain)
I wait upon my good God for it; and here will I stand for him, and to you, come
what may come, till death it self come, (God assisting me,) only be you
strong and of good comfort. Thus much for the sixth Worthy, wherein I have bin
the longer, because many soldiers have bin so short in this contentednes with
pay and provision, as thereby to hazard, or dissolve, or destroy mighty armies.

7. Worthy link, Armor.
The seventh worthy link, which I advise Protestant soldiers to consider of,
is, their spiritual armor, they must have much more care of putting on and
keeping on that armor, then of their corporal armor; this is that true armor
of proof, which Paul for the excellency thereof does call The Armor of God.
By this armor Gods children are enabled (through him, by whom they can do all
things) to stand against the greatest assaults of all: Take unto you (says the
Apostle) the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the
evil day, Ephesians. 6.13.
and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about
with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness, and your feet
sh^d with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; above all things take the
shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench the fiery darts of the
wicked, and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is
the word of God, praying always with all prayer and supplication in the
spirit. Let me now lay down a little concerning every of these seven pieces of
armor, Truth the girdle
the better to express them for the vnlearneds sake. First of all, Truth in
worshipping the true God, and soundness in this truth, must compass you about
like a girdle, to make you strong in your marching, as they whose loins are
girded, whereby you may the better fight against all adversaries whatsoever
they be that oppose this truth. In truth and in spirit you are to worship the
true God, he will make this truth a mighty defense to you, being indeed the
first part of a Christian soldiers armor. This armor is not like the
corporal, which is put on peecemeale, this part first, and that next, and then
the girdle last: nay this is put on all together: and so the girdle of verity
fastneth on all the rest. For without this truth in Gods worship, no other
parts will sit closely, or remain orderly upon you. As the heathen man Cato
said well of Caesar touching his earthly girdle, Odi puerum, male cinctum, I
hate that same yonker who goes so loosely girded: so our God hates old and
young, high and low, who care not for his true worship, this gracious girdle;
mark their behavior, you shall find it loose. He that cares not for this truth
in worshipping the true God, shall be a false and a loose soldier. Therefore
keep on your girdle, you Sion soldiers. Beware of idols, beware of all false
worship (Masses and the purtenances, adoration of Saints) and such like. Then
having endeavored to give our God his due, Righteousness the breastplate.
then I say comes your Breastplate of righteousness; your righteous life must
shine clearly before men. Part not this true life from true worship: our
glorious God shall have great honor thereby, and the adversaries shall rest
ashamed, when they speak that evil of you which they cannot prove. This plate
will so cover your breasts, as to make them undaunted and joyful continually:
yea it will be such a piece of armor, as none shall be able to pierce, no not
the greatest Anack or Goliath in earth or hell. This piece of armor thus
settled, you must also put on spiritual shoes, before you go abroad: Peace the
shoes.
you must have peace from the Prince of peace; you cannot stand in any war
without this peace which passes all understanding. If you venture abroad
without those shoes (that peace) every place shall be as sharp stones, nay as
thorns wheresoever you tread; and if you kick, you shall kick against pricks.
Therefore you must carefully put on this piece of armor, even that peace which
comes from the God of peace; you must fasten it on to your souls, as shoes to
your feet, then shall you tread safely. Mal. 4.3.
Upon what? Even upon the necks of the wicked at last (till they be as dust)
how great soever they be. They have their pleasure now, and you shall have your
joy hereafter: their pleasure is momentanie, your joy shall be everlasting. Nay
more then so, our good God does oftentimes also afford his soldiers this
down treading of his enmies in this world, Ios. 10, 24.25.
yea upon their very necks, as he did in Iosuahs time. This peace with God is
the chief peace, which no war of the most vile enemies can keep from you. This
peace with God, will breed peace with men also, and with all the creatures; yea
and nourish patience and courage against all oppositions: without which, men
shall come so unprepared to battle, as a traveler to his journey if he want
shoes. What a comfortable peace is this? How famous are the very soles of
these shoes, and how beautiful are the feet that bring you this peace. To
this peace you are prepared by the glad tidings which the word of our God
brings you touching the Messiah, Faith the shield.
in whom our peace consists. Your shoes being on, abroad you go, but not
without your Shield in any wise. In your journey (over and above stones and
thorns) make account that you shall meet with Bulls of Basan, whom no
enclosure will hold; with young and old foxes also, yea mad dogs and other mad
beasts, (such as Paul fought with) nay with Bears, wolves, lions, tigres,
and aspes: fear them not, you Sion soldiers, depend faithfully and wholly upon
your heavenly Father, trusting in his mercy through the merits of his dear
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, Savior and grand Captain, and upon his good will
toward you, and withal upon his most powerful ability to defend you. This
faith shall be your shield, and by it you shall be shielded. This part of your
armor is of such proof, as you have a whole cloud of witnesses in the word of
our God, Heb. 11. the whole chap. and chap. 12.1.
to testify that whosoever used it in a gracious manner, were alvvayes kept
from all the hurt of any troubles. You may have (seeming) griefs, Heb. 12.11.
but they shall bring you a substantial quiet fruit. This is that shield which
performs that truly, which is falsely reported of enchanted shields, viz.
continual preservation: no earthly nor infernal blow can utterly and finally
ouerturne him that has well put on this shield. 5. Salvation the Helmet.
But yet, left (notvvithstanding all this) dreadful death do offer to seize
upon you, and utterly to dismay you, you must have more armor then this;
deaths stroke is mighty, it offers violence to the very heart of your
temporal comfort, even to life it self. How shall you do now? On with your
Helmet, O Sion soldier, and that is salvation. Say to your self, and say
truly, Salvation is mine, by my Christ reserved in heaven for me; 1. Pet. 1.4.
2. Pet. 1.1^.
nay an entrance into that everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, is ministered unto me abundantly. When this Helmet is thus put on, let
death strike and do the vvorst it can; this assurance that eternal life is
yours, and kept in store for you (by him from whom none can wrest it) this,
this will cover your head in the day of your greatest battle. Then shall you
say to death, 1. Cor. 15.55.
where is thy sting? and to the grave, Where is thy victory? My head, my life,
is kept safe by my Head (that Lord of life.) Imitate the vvilie serpent in
this, he still maintains his head above all parts; so do you maintain your
head-peece, assured salvation.

The next piece of armor is your Sword Remember well that you are not to fight
as children, 6. The word the sword.
with fists or with little vvands, but with a two edged sword, that word of
our God. This cutteth every way; it defends, it offends. As David said of
Goliahs sword for preservation of his body, None to that, 1. Sam. 21.9.
give it me: so say I of this sword, for preservation of your soul, None to
this, take it to you in your right hand. Math. 4.1.
With this sword our Savior put off Satan that great Tempter: by the same
sword all his members do the same. It beats your enemies weapons to their
faces, yea to their souls, and bruiseth their hairie scalpes. Bind it fast on;
let it not rust: 2. Sam. 23.10.
use it, yea till it cleave to your hand, like the sword of Eleazar, David's
worthy. Then if at any time, you begin to faint in so great a skirmish, (as the
Apostles did in that great wind, 7. Prayer the key
when they feared the sinking of the ship) you have another excellent piece of
armor, defensive and offensive also, and that is prayer: nothing daunteth
Satan more, neither is there any thing which more comfort the thirsty
soul of man in this combat. We may spiritually and truly call it Heavens key.
Eliah shut and opened the heavens by it. Iam. 5.17.18. 2. King. 6. Exodus 32.10.
Ios. 13.14,
Elisha showed his servant an army of Angels by it. Moses stayed the Lords
hand by it. Joshua stayed the course of the Sun by it (the better to be revenged
on Gods enemies.) But of this piece of armor I shall have occasion to speak a
little more in the last Worthy. Mean while thus I say: You have heard seven
pieces of spiritual armor, the last whereof (even prayer) has the most
charge laid upon it, because it helps to make all the rest brighter and
brighter, and is of a larger extent for doing good to others, yea to the whole
Church. This piece of armor may be a means to wound them that wound your
dear ones (namely your Princes, Pastors, fellows in arms, and domestical
friends) more then any gun or other weapon whatsoever: you must use it,
specially for benefiting the Lords anointed, and your spiritual Leaders who
are to direct you for doctrine and life, (Gods salt to season you, Gods lights
to guide you;) your charge in this, is that you use it with watchfulness,
instancie and feruencie: yea, when the wicked sleep drunken sleeps, and all
manner sinful sleeps, then must you watch to perform this duty of prayer,
seeking him in your bed by night, whom your soul loves, Came. 3.1.
as the Spouse in the Canticles; yea rising at midnight, as David did, Psalm.
119.62.
to praise so good a God. Remember that you have a special care of this
armor: otherwise you will be found naked, and so lie open to the enemy of
enemies. But if you be thus armed, then I say again that no darts of Satan,
nor of his wicked partakers shall utterly daunt you, no not the dart of death.
But who shall help you to put on this armor? Who but your reverend, holy,
skillful and loving Preacher; by whom (if you will) you may have this armor of
proof, and this worthy Chain more fully expressed unto you; yea the very
life of them brought to your souls. The writings of mortal men are like an
image (as it were) in respect of that life which comes from the mouth of Gods
Ambassadors, by direction and impression of his Spirit. As you have watchmen
continually for your bodies, lest you should be surprised on a sudden; so God
has made them watchmen for your souls: therefore be ruled by them, and suffer
your spiritual armor to be joined together, and put upon you with all
willingness and thankfulness. Infinitely happy are they who make true use of
this armor of armours. And if those faithful Armorers, whom God sends to arm
their souls against the assaults of that compasser of the world, Job 1.7. 1.
Pet. 5 8.
that Adversary, who goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may
devour. And thus much for this seventh worthy, that is to say, worthy armor,
consisting as you have seen of seven pieces. This is such an armor of proof,
as no shot, no not canon shot, no not the canon shot of hell shall ever be able
to pierce: therefore in any wise see that it be well put on.

8. Worthy, Consultation.
The eight and last worthy thing for sacred soldiers to consider, is, that in
all actions whatsoever (specially their great enterprises) they consult with
their God before they attempt any thing. This has always bin the gracious
practice of most famous Kings, Princes, Judges, Captains, soldiers and all:
this did Moses, this did Joshua, this did David, this did the children of Israel
presently after Iosuas decease. Judge. 1.1.
Now the chief means to consult with our glorious God, as well in these
actions of war, as in all other actions of peace, are two: by prayer, and by
the word. I speak not here of the word of God and of prayer in general (which
are two principal parts of the armor spoken of before,) but I speak of them
only as they are means to consult with God. These two are twins, and must not
be parted. Pray first, and then to the Law and to the Testimony. Prayer is
found to be a special means to ask counsel of, and to receive counsel from
his divine Majesty, yea to talk with his most sacred self, as a son with the
father. What may I call prayer, but a key (as I have already touched) to open
the heavens; yea a kind of most gracious violence offered to our most glorious
God. Math. 11.12. Exodus 17.11. 2. Chron. 14.11 2. Chron. 18.31
By this means Moses prevailed against Amaleck: by this means Asa prevailed
against the King of Ethiopia: by this means Iehosaphat escaped present death in
war, when Ahab for want of this was killed in the same battle. The word is that
other means to ask and receive heavenly counsel: concerning which I say,
that no good Captain or soldier will undertake any thing out of his own, or
any other man's wit, policy, learning or experience, except he have that word
of God for his warrant. 2. Sam 23.1, 2, 3, 4. 2. Chron. 18.2. 2. King 19.2.
From hence did good King David take his counsel in martial affairs: from
hence Iehosaphat, from hence Hezekiah. The word makes young men wiser then
their elders, yea then their teachers, nay then the greatest counselors, who
take not their counsel from thence. You must therefore with King David, make
the testimonies of your God your delight, Psalm. 119.24.
yea the men of your counsel. This is the line and level of a Sion soldiers
life: this is the true light to walk by; without which whosoever enters into
and follows any path, let him be sure to miss the King of Kings high way,
though he should plot with Jeroboam, and out plot Achitophel (which were hard
for the best wit to do.) Nay, grant that he hit her plot of profit, pleasure
or honor, yet shall he miss the path of heaven, except he return. The ways
of man may seem straight, green and pleasant at first: but if he consult not
with the word of his God, they will prove crooked, black and mirie at last. But
why go I about to praise the Sun for light, the fire for heat, silver seven
times tried for pureness, and that which passes the honey and the honie-comb
for sweetness? They praise themselves: yea and God himself praises them.
Only this I will say more: As no godly Captain or soldier will do any
thing (how mean or how great soever) except he have Gods word to allow it; so
also no godly Captain or soldier will do any doubtful thing, be it ever so
small, how much less the weightier things, of such a private wit or conceit in
the word, as to become his own judge, what is the will of God therein, but
rather advise with holy Seers, Coloff. 3.2.
and such as have set their affections on things above, and not on things
below. A man's own prayer to God (according to the word) and his own
consultation with God by the word, are not enough in these cases. Romans 12.3.
This ouerweening wit (presuming to understand above that which is meet)
hurts the most godly when they fall into it. And as for the wicked who
contually both work and play with their fine (refined) wits, Prou. 26.12.
there is more hope of arrant fools then of such. Good men may fail in this,
by trusting too much unto their own judgment, and thereby meet with a
temporal punishment for such slips. But the wicked make a continual practice
of relying on their own policy, quite neglecting, yea and some of them
contemning the the word. Was not Achitophel a pattern of such fools?
Doubtless he was. And if you see an example of a holy man quite ouerturned by
trusting to his own counsel, see it in gracious Josiah, when this good King,
this peerlesse King, (for in that respect so I may say of him) took advice by
the word from the mouth of Hulda the Prophetess, 2. Chron. 34.21
he received a right comfortable answer from the Lord his God: but afterward
for want of taking such advice, that most famous, religious, zealous King,
perished in the battle against Pharao Neco. 2. Chron. 35.20
We do not find that he did then consult with his God by the help of his
gracious Prophets. Now if it be a thing so dangerous, not to ask counsel of
holy Ministers, what is it to refuse their good counsel given? what to
enterprise things quite contrary to the word? Surely a double and treble fault,
full of double and treble danger. By obstinate refusing good counsel from the
Lords true messengers, Number. 14.45.
you may see that the Israelites were overthrown in fight against the
Amalekites and Canaanites. 1 King. 22.17.28.
And so also came Ahab to his desperate death, he would go up to Ramoth Gilead,
though the Prophet showed him his fall most plainly. Happy then are they who
give ear and obedience to the word of our God, Mal ^.
truly opened by his faithful Ministers. The Priests lips should preserve
knowledge. For whom? For all sorts, both high and low, rich and poor, learned
and unlearned, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of hoasts. Yea, and as he should counsel all sorts of
warriers by the word, so should he comfort and encourage them in the very time
of entrance into the battle: When thou go out to battle against thine
enemies (says our God by his servant Moses) and see horses and chariots,
Deuteronomy. 20.2.3.4.
and a people more then thou, be not afraid of them: for the Lord thy God is
with thee, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. And it shall be when ye
come nigh unto the battle, that the Priest shall approach and speak unto the
people, and say unto them: Hear O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle
against your enemies, let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neither be troubled because of them, for the Lord your God is he that is with
you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you. Thus you see what
great use and need there is of the Ministers private counsel and public
instruction even in war. These things so, it always behooves both Captains
and soldiers to be frequent in consultation with their God touching all
matters belonging to their places. Consultation I say by often and fervent
prayers, and consultation by advice of godly and learned Preachers. This
consultation must begin at the first hour, and never end till a soldiers last
hour be ended: yea and Sion soldiers ought also to join private reading and
meditation in the word together with this consultation, according to that in
the first Psalm, His delight is in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.2.
and in his law will he meditate day and night: and agreeable also to that in
John, Search the Scriptures, John. 5.39.
for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify
of me. And specially as our God commands Joshua (which commandment extends
to all soldiers) Let not this book of the Law depart from thy mouth, Ios. 18.
but meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe and do according
to all that is written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous,
and then shall thou have good success. For this purpose if they read Psalm. 3.
Ps. 27. Psa. 57. and Psalm. 118. they may find much comfort in these places.
And thus much for the eight worthy link here joined with the rest, as the
last link to make up a heavenly Chain for Sion soldiers. Such as keep these
links together in a gracious order, are fitly adorned to wait upon the true God
of battle, that King of glory, and they to whom our God gives these eight
worthies for a spiritual chain, are fittest, and likest to perform most
valiant actions, and worthy of great honor here with their Kings and Princes,
and shall be accounted worthy to reign as kings with that King of Kings for
ever. Shall I now say that here touching these eight links, which I said before
concerning those seven pieces of armor, viz. suffer thy Pastor to join these
eight links together for thy good, and to fit them to thee for thy defense; I
might say so: but I will say thus: Do not only suffer, but entreat thy Pastor
also to join and fit these seven pieces of armor above named, as heavenly and
complete armor of choice to defend thee; and these eight links also, as a
heavenly chain to honor thee. and then march on O famous Sion soldier. It
seems that noble Joshua had such soldiers (soldiers thus armed, Ios. 1.16,
17, 18
thus adorned) as may appear by their gracious answer to him: All that thou
command us, will we do: and whither soever thou sendest us, will we go:
According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto
thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee as he was with Moses. Whosoever he be
that does rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words
in all that thou command him, he shall be put to death; only be strong and
of a valiant courage. Such a soldier also had that right noble courageous and
loving Jonathan to his armor-bearer: 1. Sam. 14.6.7.
Come (said this Princely Captain) let us go over unto the garrison of those
uncircumcised: it may be that the Lord will work with us. For there is no
restraint in the Lord to save by many as by few. And his armor-bearer said unto
him: Do all that is in thine heart: turn the. Behold I am with thee according
to thine heart. These were gracious soldiers, loving soldiers obedient
soldiers, resolved soldiers, worthy soldiers. So all those Protestant
soldiers may be truly esteemed and shall be constantly found gracious, loving,
obedient, valiant, resolved, worthy soldiers, upon whom our bountiful God
will vouchsafe to bestow these eight worthies above named in some acceptable
measure. I say again, in some acceptable measure. For I go not about to plead
for protection, which this life affoordeth not to any whatsoever (from the
thrones to the thresholds,) but I labor to describe such soldiers as now do
show themselves or hereafter shall show themselves to be in the new birth: such
I say, as put off the old man, and put on the new man, endeavoring with
industry and earnestness (by their instant serving of God, Act. 26.7.
like the twelve Tribes) to please that heavenly Captain Christ Jesus. These,
these are true worthies, because they are approved by the true God. Without
these eight worthy things here named, none of those nine Worthies of the world
could have any due and true praise: nay, look in what measure any of them had
those eight worthy things, (yea even contentednes with that wages from God,
those bounds I say which Iehoua gave them) according to that measure was their
gracious acceptance with God, and their worthy commendations with good men. The
rest of their praise was but temporal and windy; this substantial and
everlasting. And now you see those eight worthy links taken from Gods treasury
(even his heavenly word.) Abraham's soldiers had these eight worthy things in
their measure: Iosuahs soldiers had these eight in their measure: King David's
soldiers had these eight in their measure; each of them in a sanctified
measure. Whence it came that all of them became so truly famous and victorious?
This spiritual chain made them so, in and by their most worthy Captain (that
Captain of the Lords host) Christ Jesus. Blessed are and shall be the
nations: blessed are and shall be the cities: blessed are and shall be the
camps, where continual gracious, earnest endeavor is used to have all their
soldiers thus armed and adorned: thus armed, I say, with that armor of God,
consisting of those seven heavenly pieces; and thus adorned with this
spiritual chain made of eight heavenly linkes (both Armor and Chain of one
metal.) Our God has promised to bless them, and (as Isaac said touching his
good son Jacob) they shall be blessed. Genesis 27.33.
Curse them who so will, even with bell, book and candle. This blessing I have
wished for and prayed for to all them that unfeignedly love Sion: all who^ I
humbly beseech our good God to bless, arm, defend and keep in such sort and
ways, as whereby they may bring most honor to their own names, most joy to
their own souls, most good to the Church and Commonwealth where they live,
most renown to the Deputy Majesty's whom they serve, and most glory to that
Majesty of Majesty's, (whom we all serve) whose holy Name be blessed and
praised by all holy means, for ever and ever. Amen.

A short Postscript touching Sion Captains.
IF Sion soldiers should be armed with that armor of proof (that armor of
God) and adorned with this heavenly Chain, then surely these things belong in
a higher degree to Sion Captains. O how careful should all Christian Leaders
be to abstain from all appearance of evil; ^ Thessalonians. 5.22.
and how much more to avoid horrible blaspheming of the glorious name of their
great God (that most shameful sin of Christendom,) yea and utterly to abhor
all beastly (nay more then beastly) drunkenness, looseness of life, bloody
cruelty, dissimulation, treachery, defrauding soldiers of their wages, and
generally all base ways? Surely my pen cannot utter that excellent care which
they should have to lead their soldiers both valiantly and graciously. The
time may come when I shall endeavor to press this more at large: mean while I
only say this in a few lines: That Armor of God consisting of seven heavenly
pieces, and this spiritual Chain made of eight heavenly links, belong
specially to Protestant Captains. Therefore God grant them grace to make a
special use of them, to the end they may be the better fitted to fight the
Lords battles, specially against that Horsleach Whore of Babylon, to her utter
overthrow in these our days, if so it please his holy Majesty, whose most
glorious name be blessed and praised for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. lin. 1. for study, read reading. and lin. 16. for one, read me.
page 6. lin. 31. for Prence, read Prince. page 7. lin. 23. read that the God.
page 1^. lin. 6. for have, read has. and lin. 24. for inform, read enforce.
page 23. in the marg. for patris est redita, read patriae est reddita. p. 25.
l. 21. for fields, read field.


