THE First and second Part o f the troublesome Reign of John King of England.
With the discovery of King Richard Co rdelions Base son (vulgarly named, The
Bastar d Fawconbridge:) Also, the death of King John at Swinstead Abbey. As
they were (sundry times) lately acted the Queens Majesty's Players. Written by
W. Sh.

Imprinted at London by Valentine Simmes for John Helm, and are to be sold at
his shop in Saint Dunstons Churchyard in Fleetestreet. 1611.

The troublesome Reign of King John.
Enter K. John, Queen Elinor his mother, William Marshall Earl of Pembrooke,
the Earls of Essex, and of Salisbury. Queen Elianor. BArons of England, and
my noble Lords;
Though God and Fortune have bereft from us
Victorious Richard scourge of Infidells,
And clad this Land in stole of dismal hew:
Yet give me leave to joy, and joy you all,
That from this womb has sprung a second hope,
A King that may in rule and virtue both
Succeed his brother in his Emperie.

K. John My gracious mother Queen, and Barons all;
Though far unworthy of so high a place,
As is the Throne of mighty Englands King;
Yet John your Lord, contented vncontent,
Will (as he may) sustain the heavy yoke
Of pressing cares, that hang upon a Crown.
My Lord of Pembrooke and Lord Salsbury,
Admit the Lord Chattilion to our presence;
That we may know what Philip King of France
(By his Ambassadors) requires of us.

Q. Elinor Dare lay my hand that Elinor can guess
Whereto this weighty Embassade does tend:
If of my nephew Arthur and his claim,
Then say, my Son, I have not missde my aim.

Enter Chattilion and the two Earls. John My Lord Chattilion, welcome into
England:
How fares our brother Philip king of France?

Chat. His Highness at my coming was in health,
And willed me to salute your Majesty,
And say the message he has given in charge.

John And spare not man, we are preparde to hear.


Chat. Philip, by the grace of God most Christian King of France, having taken
into his gardain and protection Arthur D. of Britain son and heir to
Ieffrey thine elder brother, requires in the behalf of the said Arthur, the
kingdom of England, with the lordship of Ireland, Poiters, Aniow, Toraine,
Maine: and I attend thine answer.


John A small request: belike he makes account,
That England, Ireland, Poiters, Aniow, Toraine, Maine,
Are nothing for a King to give at once:
I wonder what he means to leave for me.
Tell Philip, he may keep his Lords at home,
With greater honor than to send them thus
On Embassades that not concern himself,
Or if they did, would yield but small return.

Chat. Is this thine answer?


John It is, and too good an answer for so proud a message.


Chat. Then King of England, in my Masters name,
And in Prince Arthur duke of Britains name,
I do defy thee as an enemy,
And wish thee to prepare for bloody wars.

Q. Elinor My Lord (that stands upon defiance thus)
Commend me to my nephew, tell the boy,
That I Queen Elianor (his grandmother)
Upon my blessing charge him leave his Arms,
Whereto his headstrong mother pricks him so:
Her pride we know, and know her for a Dame
That will not stick to bring him to his end,
So she may bring herself to rule a realm.
Next, wish him to forsake the King of France,
And come to me and to his uncle here,
And he shall want for nothing at our hands.

Chat. This shall I do, and thus I take my leave.


John Pembrooke, convey him safely to the sea,
But not in haste: for as we are aduisde,
We mean to be in France as soon as he,
To fortify such towns as we possess
In Aniow, Toraine, and in Normandy.

Exit Chatt. Enter the Shriue and whispers the Earl of Salis. in the care.
Sals. Please it your majesty, here is the shriue of Northhamptonshire, with
certain persons that of late committed a riot, and have appeald to your
Majesty, beseeching your Highness for special cause to hear them.


John Will them come near, and while we hear the cause,
Go Salsbury and make provision,
We mean with speed to pass the Sea to France.
Say shriue, what are these men, what have they done?
Or whereto tends the course of this appeal?

Shriue Please it your majesty, these two brethren unnaturally falling at odds
about their fathers living, have broken your Highness peace, in seeking to
right their own wrongs without course of Law, or order of Justice, and
unlawfully assembled themselves in mutinous manner, having committed a riot,
appealing from trial in their country to your Highness: and here I Thomas
Nidigate shrine of Northamptonshire do deliver them over to their trial.


John My Lord of Essex, will thoffenders to stand forth, and tell the cause of
their quarrel.


Essex Gentlemen, it is the Kings pleasure that you discover your griefs, and
doubt not but you shall have justice.


Phil. Please it your M. the wrong is mine: yet will I abide all wrongs, before
I once open my mouth t'vnrip the shameful slander of my parents, the dishonor
of my self, and the bad dealing of my brother in this princely assembly.


Robert Then, by my Prince his leave, shall Robert speak,
And tell your Majesty what right I have
To offer wrong, as he accounts wrong.
My father (not unknown unto your Grace)
Received his spurs of Knighthood in the Field,
At kingly Richards hands in Palestine,
When as the walls of Acon gave him way:
His name sir Robert Fauconbridge of Mountbery.
What by succession from his Ancestors,
And warlike service under Englands Arms,
His living did amount to at his death
Two thousand marks reuenew every year:
And this (my Lord) I challenge for my right,
As lawful heir to Robert-Fauconbridge.

Philip If firstborn son be heir indubitate
By certain right of Englands ancient Law,
How should my self make any other doubt,
But I am heir to Robert Fauconbridge?

John Fond youth, to trouble these our princely cares,
Or make a question in so plain a case:
Speak, is this man thine elder brother borne?

Robert Please it your Grace with patience for to hear.
I not deny but he mine elder is,
Mine elder brother too: yet in such sort,
As he can make no title to the land.

John A doubtful tale as ever I did hear,
Thy brother, and thine elder, and no heir:
Explain this dark Aenigma.

Robert I grant (my Lord) he is my mothers son,
Base borne, and base begot, no Fauconbridge.
Indeed the world reputes him lawful heir,
My father in his life did count him so,
And here my mother stands to prove him so:
But I (my Lord) can prove, and do auerre
Both to my mothers shame, and his reproach,
He is no heir, nor yet legitimate.
Then (gracious Lord) let Fauconbridge enjoy
The living that belongs to Fauconbridge.
And let not him possess another right.

John Prove this, the land is thine by Englands law.


Q. Elin. Ungracious youth, to rip thy mothers shame,
The womb from whence thou did thy being take,
All honest ears abhor thy wickedness,
But gold I see does beat down Natures law.

Mother My gracious Lord, and you thrice reverend Dame,
That see the tears distilling from mine eyes,
And scalding sighs blown from a rented heart:
For honor and regard of womanhood,
Let me entreat to be commanded hence.
Let not these ears here receive the hissing sound
Of such a viper, who with poisoned words
Does masserate the bowels of my soul.

John Lady, stand up, be patient for a while:
And fellow, say, whose bastard is thy brother?

Philip Not for my self, nor for my mother now;
But for the honor of so brave a man,
Whom he accuses with adultery:
Here I beseech your Grace upon my knees,
To count him mad, and so dismiss us hence.

Robert Nor mad, nor mazde, but well advised, I
Charge thee before this royal presence here
To be a bastard to king Richards self,
Son to your Grace, and brother to your Majesty.
Thus bluntly, and

Elian. Young man, thou needst not be ashamed of thy kin,
Nor of thy Sire. But forward with thy proof.

Robert The proof so plain, the argument so strong,
As that your Highness and these noble Lords,
And all (save those that have no eyes to see)
Shall swear him to be bastard to the king.
First, when my Father was Ambassador
In Germany unto the Emperor,
The King lay often at my fathers house;
And all the realm suspected what befell:
And at my fathers backe-returne again
My mother was delivered, as it is sed,
Six weeks before the account my father made.
But more than this: look but on Philips face,
His features, actions, and his lineaments,
And all this princely presence shall confess,
He is no other but King Richards son.
Then gracious Lord, rest he King Richards son,
And let me rest safe in my Fathers right,
That am his rightful son and only heir.

John Is this thy proof, and all thou have to say?


Robert I have no more, nor need I greater proof.


John First, where thou said in absence of thy Sire
My brother often lodged in his house:
And what of that? base groom to slander him,
That honored his Ambassador so much,
In absence of the man to cheer the wife?
This will not hold, proceed unto the next.

Q. Elin. Thou say she teemde six weeks before her time,
Why good sir Squire, are you so cunning grown,
To make account of women's reckonings?
Spit in your hand and to your other proofs:
Many mischances happen in such affairs,
To make a woman come before her time.

John And where thou say, he looks like the King,
In action, feature and proportion:
Therein I hold with thee, for in my life
I never saw so lively counterfeit
Of Richard Cordelion, as in him.

Robert Then good my Lord, be you indiffrent Judge,
And let me have my living and my right.

Q. Elinor Nay, hear you sir, you run away too fast:
Know you not, Omne simile non est idem?
Or have read in. Hark ye good sir,
It Was thus I warrant, and no otherwise,
She lay with sir Robert your father, and thought upon King Richard my son,
and so your brother was formed in this fashion.


Robert Madame, you wrong me thus to jest it out,
I crave my right: King John, as thou art King,
So be thou just, and let me have my right.

John Why (foolish boy) thy proofs are frivolous,
Nor can thou challenge any thing thereby.
But thou shall see how I will help thy claim:
This is my doom, and this my doom shall stand
Irreuocable, as I am king of England.
For thou know not, we will ask of them that know,
His mother and himself shall end this strife:
And as they say, so shall thy living paste.

Robert. My Lord, herein I challenge you of wrong,
To give away my right, and put the doom
Unto themselves. Can there be likelihood
That she will loose?
Or he will give the living from himself?
It may not be my Lord. Why should it be?

John. Lords, keep him back, and let him hear the doom.
Essex, first ask the Mother thrice who was his Sire?

Essex. Lady Margaret, widow of Fauconbridge,
Who was Father to thy Son Philip?

Mother. Please it your Majesty, Sir Rob. Fauconbridge.


Rob. This is right, ask my fellow there if I be a thief.


John. Ask Philip whose son he is.


Essex. Philip, who was thy Father?


Philip. Mas my Lord, and that is a question: and you had not taken some pains
with her before, I should have desired you to ask my Mother.


John. Say, who was thy Father?


Philip. Faith (my Lord) to answer you, sure he is my father that was nearest
my mother when I was begotten, and him I think to be Sir Robert Fauconbridge.


John. Essex, for fashions sake demand again,
And so an end to this contention.

Robert. Was ever man thus wronged as Robert is?


Essex. Philip speak I say, who was thy father?


John. Young man how now, what art thou in a trance?


Elianor. Philip awake, the man is in a dream.


Philip. Philippus atauis aedite Regibus.
What say thou Philip, sprung of ancient Kings?
Quo me rapit tempestas?
What wind of honor blows this fury forth?
Or whence proceed these fumes of Majesty?
Me thinks I hear a hollow Echo sound,
That Philip is the son unto a King:
The whistling leaves upon the trembling trees,
Whistle in consort I am Richards son:
The bubling murmur of the waters fall,
Records Philippus Regius filius:
Birds in their flight make music with their wings,
Filling the air with glory of my birth:
Birds, bubbles, leaves, and mountains, Echo, all
Ring in mine ears, that I am Richards son.
Fond man! ah whither art thou carried?
How are thy thoughts ywrapt in Honors heaven?
Forgetful what thou art, and whence thou camst.
Thy Fathers land cannot maintain these thoughts,
These thoughts are far unfitting Fauconbridge:
And well they may; for why this mounting mind
Does soar too high to stoop to Fauconbridge.
Why how now? know thou where thou art?
And know thou who expects thine answer here?
Will thou upon a frantic madding vain
Go loose thy land, and say thy self base borne?
No, keep thy land, though Richard were thy Sire,
What ere thou think, say thou art Fauconbridge.

John. Speak man, be sudden, who thy Father was.


Philip. Please it your Majesty, Sir Robert
Philip, that Fauconbridge cleaues to thy jaws:
It will not out, I cannot for my life
Say I am son unto a Fauconbridge.
Let land and living go, it is Honors fire
That makes me swear King Richard was my Sire.
Base to a King adds title of more State,
Than Knights begotten, though legittimate.
Please it your Grace, I am King Richards Son.

Robert Robert revive thy heart, let sorrow die,
His faltring tongue not suffers him to lie.

Mo. What headstrong fury does enchant my son?


Philip Philip cannot repent, for he has done.


John Then Philip blame not me, thy self have lost
By wilfulness, thy living and thy land.
Robert, thou art the heir of Fauconbridge,
God give thee joy, greater than thy desert.

Q. Elia. Why how now Philip, give away thine own?


Ph. Madame, I am bold to make my self your nephew,
The poorest kinsman that your Highness has:
And with this Proverb gin the world anew,
Help hands, I have no lands, Honor is my desire;
Let Philip live to show himself worthy so great a Sire.

Eli. Philip, I think thou knewst thy Grandams mind:
But cheer thee boy, I will not see thee want
As long as Elinor has foot of land;
Henceforth thou shall be taken for my son,
And wait on me and on thine uncle here,
Who shall give honor to thy noble mind.

John Philip kneel down, that thou may thoroughly know
How much thy resolution pleases us,
Rise up Sir Richard Plantaginet king Richards Son.

Philip Grant heavens that Philip once may show himself
Worthy the honor of Plantaginet,
Or basest glory of a Bastards name.

John Now Gentlemen, we will away to France,
To check the pride of Arthur and his mates:
Essex, thou shall be Ruler of my Realm,
And toward the maine charges of my wars,
I Will ceaze the lasic Abbey lubbers lands
Into my hands to pay my men of war.
The Pope and Popelings shall not grease themselves
With gold and groates, that are the soldiers due.
Thus forward Lords, let our command be done,
And march we forward mightily to France.

Exeunt. Manet Philip and his Mother. Philip Madame, I beseech you deigne me so
much leisure as the hearing of a matter that I long to impart to you.


Mother. What Is the matter Philip? I think your suit in secret, tends to some
money matter, which you suppose burns in the bottom of my chest.


Phil. No Madam, it is no such suit as to beg or borrow,
But such a suit, as might some other grant,
I would not now have troubled you withal.

Mother. A Gods name let us hear it.


Phil. Then Madam thus, your Ladyship sees well,
How that my scandal grows by means of you,
In that report has rumord up and down,
I am a bastard, and no Fauconbridge.
This gross attaint so tilteth in my thoughts,
Maintaining combat to abridge mine ease,
That field and town, and company alone,
What so I do, or wheresoere I am,
I cannot chase the slander from my thoughts.
If it be true, resolve me of my fire,
For pardon Madam, if I think amiss.
Be Philip Philip, and no Fauconbridge,
His father doubtless was as brave a man.
To you on knees, as sometime Phaeton,
Mistrusting sielly Merop for his sire,
Straining a little bashful modesty,
I beg some instance whence I am extraught.

Moth. Yet more ado to haste me to my grave,
And will thou too become a mothers cross?
Must I accuse my self to close with you?
Slander my self, to quiet your affects?
Thou moou'st me Philip with this idle talk,
Which I remit, in hope this mood will die.

Phil. Nay Lady mother, hear me further yet,
For strong conceit drives duty hence awhile:
Your husband Fauconbridge was father to that son,
That carries marks of Nature like the fire,
The son that blotteth you with wedlockes breach,
And holds my right, as lineall in descent
From him whose form was figured in his face*
Can Nature so dissemble in her frame,
To make the one so like as like may be,
And in the other print no character
To challenge any mark of true descent?
My brothers mind is base, and too too dull,
To mount where Philip lodges his affects,
And his external graces that you view,
(Though I report it) counterpoise not mine:
His constitution plain debilitie,
Requires the chair, and mine the seat of steel.
Nay, what is he, or what am I to him?
When any one that knows how to carpe,
Will scarcely judge us both one country borne.
This Madam, this, has drove me from my self:
And here by heavens eternal lamps I swear,
As cursed Nero with his mother did,
So I with you, if you resolve me not.

Moth. Let mothers tears quench out thy angers fire,
And urge no further what thou do require.

Phil. Let sons entreaty sway the mother now,
Or else she dies: I Will not infringe my vow.

Moth. Unhappy task: must I recount my shame,
Blab my misdeeds, or by concealing die?
Some power strike me speechless for a time,
Or take from him a while his hearings use.
Why wish I so, unhappy as I am?
The fault is mine, and he the faulty fruit,
I blush, I faint, oh would I might be mute.

Phil. Mother be brief, I long to know my name.


Moth. And longing die, to shroud thy mothers shame.


Phil. Come Madame come, you need not be so loath,
The shame is shared equal twixt us both.
Is It not a slackenesse in me, worthy blame,
To be so old, and cannot write my name.
Good mother resolve me.

Moth. Then Philip hear thy fortune, and my grief,
My honors loss by purchasse of thy self,
My shame, thy name, and husbands secret wrong,
All maimd and staind by youths unruly sway.
And when thou know from whence thou art extraught,
Or if thou knew'st what suites, what threats, what fears,
To move by love, or massacre by death.
To yield with love, or end by loves contempt.
The mightiness of him that courted me,
Who tempered terror with his wanton talk,
That something may extenuate the guilt.
But let it not advantage me so much:
Vpbraid me rather with the Roman dame,
That shed her blood to wash away her shame.
Why stand I to expostulate the crime
With pro and contra, now the deed is done?
When to conclude two words may tell the tale,
That Philips father was a princes son,
Rich Englands rule, worlds only terror he,
For honors loss left me with child of thee:
Whose son thou art, then pardon me the rather,
For fair King Richard was thy noble father.

Phil. Then Robin Fauconbridge I wish thee joy,
My sire a king, and I a landlesse boy.
Gods lady mother, the world is in my debt,
There Is something owing to Plantaginet.
I marry sir, let me alone for game,
I Will act some wonders now I know my name.
By blessed Mary. I Will not sell that pride
For Englands wealth, and all the world beside.
Sit fast the proudest of my fathers foes,
Away good mother, there the comfort goes.

Exeunt. Enter Philip the French King, and Lewis, Limoges, Constance, and her
son Arthur. King. Now gin we broach the title of thy claim,
Young Arthur in the Albion territories,
Skaring proud Angiers with a puissant siege:
Brave Austria, cause of Cordelions death,
Is also come to aid thee in thy wars;
And all our Forces join for Arthurs right.
And, but for causes of great consequence,
Pleading delay till news from England come,
Twice should not Titan hide him in the West,
To cool the f^t-locks of his weary teame,
Till I had with an unresisted shocke
Controld the manage of proud Angiers walls,
Or made a forfet of my fame to Chance.

Constable. May be that John in conscience or in fear
To offer wrong where you impugn the ill,
Will send such calm conditions back to France,
As shall rebate the edge of fearful wars:
If so, forbearance is a deed, well done.

Arth. Ah mother, possession of a Crown is much,
And John as I have heard reported of,
For present vantage would adventure far.
The world can witness, in his Brothers time,
He took upon him rule, and almost reign;
Then must it follow as a doubtful point,
That he will resign the rule unto his Nephew.
I rather think the menace of the world
Sounds in his ears, as threats of no esteem,
And sooner would he scorn Europa's power,
Than loose the smallest title he enioyes;
For questionless he is an Englishman.

Lewis. Why are the English peerless in compare?
Brave Caualiers as ere that Island bred,
Have lived and di'd, and dared, and done enough,
Yet never graced their country for the cause:
England is England, yielding good and bad,
And John of England is as other John's.
Trust me young Arthur, if thou like my reed,
Praise thou the French that help thee in this need.

Lymog. The Englishman has little cause I trow,
To spend good speeches on so proud a foe.
Why Arthur here is his spoil that now is gone,
Who when he lived outrou'd his brother John:
But hasty curres that lie so long to catch,
Come halting home, and meet their ouer-match.
But news comes now, here is the Ambassador.

Enter Chattilion. K. Phil. And in good time, welcome my Lord Chattillion:
What news? will John accord to our command?

Chat. Be I not brief to tell your Highness all,
He will approach to interrupt my tale:
For one self bottom brought us both to France.
He on his part will try the chance of war,
And if his words infer assured truth,
Will loose himself, and all his followers,
Ere yield unto the least of your demands.
The Mother Queen she takes on amain
Against Lady Constance, counting her the cause
That does effect this claim to Albion,
Coniuring Arthur with a grandames care,
To leave his Mother; willing him submit
His state to John, and her protection,
Who (as she says) are studious for his good.
More circumstance the season intercepts:
This is the sum, which briefly I have shown.

K. Phil. This bitter wind must nip some-bodies spring:
Sudden and brief, why so, it is harvest weather.
But say Chattilion, what persons of account are with him?

Chat. Of England, Earl Pembrooke and Salisburie,
The only noted men of any name.
Next them, a bastard of the Kings deceast,
A hardy wild-head, tough and venturous,
With many other men of high resolve.
Then is there with them Elinor Mother Queen,
And Blanch her Niece, daughter to the King of Spain:
These are the prime birds of this hot adventure.

Enter John and his followers, Queen, Bastard, Earls, etc. K. Phil. Me
seems John, an ouer-daring spirit
Effects some frenzy in thy rash approach,
Treading my Confines with thy armed troops.
I rather looked for some submisse reply
Touching the claim thy Nephew Arthur makes
To that which thou unjustly do usurp.

K. John For that Chattilion can discharge you all,
I list not plead my Title with my tongue.
Nor came I hither with intent of wrong
To France or thee, or any right of thine;
But in defense and purchase of my right,
The town of Angiers: which thou do begirt
In the behalf of Lady Constance son,
Whereto nor he nor she can lay just claim.

Constance Yes (false intruder) if that just be just,
And headstrong usurpation put apart,
Arthur my Son, heir to thy elder brother,
Without ambiguous shadow of descent,
Is Sovereign to the substance thou withholdst.

Q. Elinor Misgouernd gossip, stain to this resort,
Occasion of these undecided iarres,
I say (that know) to check thy vain suppose,
Thy son has naught to do with that he claims.
For proof whereof, I can infer a Will,
That bars the way he urges by descent.

Con. A Will indeed, a crabbed woman's will,
Wherein the devil is an ouerseer,
And proud dame Elinor sole Executresse:
More wills than so, on peril of my soul,
Were never made to hinder Arthurs right.

Arthur But say there was, as sure there can be none,
The Law intends such testaments as void,
Where right descent can no way be impeacht.

Q. Elinor Peace Arthur peace, thy mother makes thee wings
To soar with peril after Icarus,
And trust me yongling for the Fathers sake,
I pity much the hazard of thy youth.

Constance Beshrew you else how pitiful you are,
Ready to weep to hear him ask his own;
Sorrow betide such Grandames and such grief,
That minister a poison for pure love.
But who so blind, as cannot see this beam,
That you forsooth would keep your cousin down,
For fear his mother should be used too well?
I there is the grief, confusion catch the brain,
That hammers shifts to stop a Princes reign.

Q. Elia. Impatient, frantic, common slaunderer,
Immodest dame, vnnurtur'd quarreller,
I tell thee I, not envy to thy son,
But justice makes me speak as I have done.

K. Phil. But here is no proof that shows your son a king.


K.I. What wants, my sword shall more at large set down

Lew. But that may break before the truth be known.


Bast. Then this may hold till all his tight be shown.


Lym. Good words sir sauce, your betters are in place.


Bast. Not you sir doughtie, with your Lions case.


Blanch. Ah joy betide his soul, to whom that spoil belonged:
Ah Richard, how thy glory here is wronged.

Lym. Me thinks that Richards pride and Richards fall,
Should be a president t'affright you all.

Bast. What words are these? how do my sinews shake?
My fathers foe clad in my fathers spoil,
A thousand furies kindle with revenge,
This heart that choler keeps a consistori^,
Searing my inwards with a brand of hate:
How does Alecto whisper in mine ears?
Delay not Philip, kill the villain straight,
Disrobe him of the matchless monument
Thy fathers triumph ore the Savages,
Base heardgroom, coward peasant, worse than a threshing slave,
What make thou with the Trophie of a king?
Sham'st thou not coystrell, loathsome dunghill swad,
To grace thy carcass with an ornament
Too precious for a Monarkes couerture?
Scarce can I temper due obedience
Unto the presence of my Sovereign,
From acting outrage on this trunk of hate:
But arm thee traitor, wronger of renown,
For by his soul I swear, my Fathers soul,
Twice will I not reuiew the mornings rise,
Till I have torn that Trophie from thy back,
And split thy heart for wearing it so long.
Philip has sworn, and if it be not done,
Let not the world repute me Richards son.

Lym. Nay soft sir bastard, hearts are not split so soon,
Let them rejoice that at the end do win:
And take this lesson at thy foe-mans hand,
Pawn not thy life to get thy Fathers skin.

Blan. Well may the world speak of his knightly valor,
That wins this hide to wear a Ladies favor.

Bast. Ill may I thrive, and nothing brook with me,
If shortly I present it not to thee.

K. Phil. Lordings forbear, for time is coming fast,
That deeds may try what words can not determine,
And to the purpose for the cause you come.
Me seems you set right in chance of war,
Yielding no other reasons for your claim,
But so and so, because it shall be so.
So wrong shall be subornd by trust of strength:
A tyrants practice to inuest himself,
Where weak resistance gives wrong the way.
To check the which, in holy lawful arms,
I, in the right of Arthur, Geffreys son,
Am come before this city of Angiers,
To bar all other false supposed claim,
From whence, or howsoere the error springs.
And in his quarrel on my princely word,
I Will fight it out unto the latest man.

John. Know King of France, I will not be commanded
By any power or prince in Christendom,
To yield an instance how I hold mine own,
More than to answer, that mine own is mine,
But will thou see me parley with the Town,
And hear them offer me allegiance,
Fealty and homage, as true liege men ought.

K. Phil. Summon them, I will not believe it till I see it, and when I see it,
I Will soon change it.


They summon the Town, the Citizens appear upon the walls. K. John You men of
Angiors, and as I take it my loiall subjects, I have summoned you to the walls:
to dispute on my right, were to think you doubtful therein, which I am
persuaded you are not. In few words, our brothers son, backed with the king of
France, have beleagred your town upon a false pretended title to the same: in
defense whereof I your liege Lord have brought our power to fence you from the
Usurper, to free your intended servitude, and utterly to supplant the foemen,
to my right and your rest. Say then, who keep you the town for?


Citizen For our lawful King.


John I was no less persuaded: then in Gods name open your gates, and let me
enter.


Citizen And it please your Highness we comptroll not your title, neither will
we rashly admit your entrance: if you be lawful King, with all obedience we
keep it to your use, if not King, our rashness to be impeached for yielding,
without more considerate trial: we answer not as men lawless, but to the
behoof of him that proves lawful.


John I shall not come in then?


Citizen No my Lord, till we know more.


K. Phil. Then hear me speak in the behalf of Arthur son of Geffrey, elder
brother to John, his title manifest, with out contradiction, to the crown and
kingdom of England, with Angiers, and diverse towns on this side the sea: will
you acknowledge him your liege Lord, who speaks in my word, to entertain you
with all favors, as beseems a King to his subjects, or a friend to his
welwillers: or stand to the peril of your contempt, when his title is proved by
the sword.


Citiz. We answer as before, till you have proved one right, we acknowledge
none right, he that tries himself our Sovereign; to him will we remain firm
subjects, and for him, and in his right we hold our town, as desirous to know
the truth, as loath to subscribe before we know: more than this we cannot say,
and more than this we dare not do.


K. Phil. Then John I defy thee, in the name and behalf of Arthur
Plantaginet, thy king and cousin, whose right and patrimony thou detainest, as
I doubt not, ere the day end, in a set battle make thee confess; whereunto,
with a zeal to right, I challenge thee.


K. John. I accept thy challenge, and turn the defiance to thy throat.


Excursions. The Bastard chaseth Lymoges the Austrich Duke, and makes him
leave the Lions skin. Bast. And art thou gone misfortune haunt thy steps,
And chill cold fear assail thy times of rest.
Morpheus leave here thy silent Eban cave,
Besiege his thoughts with dismal fantasies,
And ghastly objects of pale threatening Mors.
Affright him every minute with stearne looks,
Let shadow temper terror in his thoughts,
And let the terror make the coward mad,
And in his madness let him fear pursuit,
And so in frenzy let the peasant die.
Here is the ransom that allaies his rage,
The first freehold that Richard left his son:
With which I shall surprise his living foes,
As Hectors statue did the fainting Greeks.

Exit. Enter the Kings Heralds with Trumpets to the walls of Angiers: they
summon the Town. Eng. Her. John by the grace of God King of England, Lord of
Ireland, Aniou, Toraine, etc. demands once again of you his subjects of
Angiers, if you will quietly surrender up the town into his hands?


Fr. Herold. Philip by the grace of God King of France, demands in the
behalf of Arthur Duke of Britain, if you will surrender up the town into
his hands, to the use of the said Arthur.


Citizens. Herrolds go tell the two victorious Princes, that we the poor
Inhabitants of Angiers, require a parley of their Majesty's.


Herolds. We go.


Enter the Kings, Queen Elianor, Blanch, Bastard, Lymoges, Lewis, Castilean,
Pembrooke, Salisbury, Constance, and Arthur Duke of Britain. John. Herold,
what answer do the Townsmen send?


Philip. Will Angiers yield to Philip King of France?


Eng. Her. The Townsmen on the walls accept your Grace.


Fr. Her. And crave a parley of your Majesty.


John. You citizens of Angiers, have your eyes
Beheld the slaughter that our English bows
Have made upon the coward fraudfull French?
And have you wisely pondred therewithal
Your gain in yielding to the English King?

Phil. Their loss in yielding to the English King.
But John, they saw from out their highest towers
The Cheualiers of France and crosse-bow-shot
Make lanes of slaughterd bodies through thine host,
And are resolved to yield to Arthurs right.

John. Why Philip, though thou braust it fore the walls,
Thy conscience knows that John has won the field.

Phi. What ere my conscience knows, thy army feels
That Philip had the better of the day.

Bastard. Philip indeed has got the Lions case,
Which here he holds to Lymoges disgrace.
Base Duke to fly and leave such spoils behind:
But this thou knewst of force to make me stay.
It farde with thee as with the mariner,
Spying the hugie Whale, whose monstrous bulk
Does bear the waves like mountains fore the wind,
That throws out empty vessels, so to stay
His fury, while the ship does sail away.
Philip it is thine: and fore this princely presence,
Madame, I humbly lay it at your feet,
Being the first adventure I atchieu'd,
And first exploite your Grace did me enjoin:
Yet many more I long to be enioyn'd.

Blanch. Philip I take it, and I thee command
To wear the same as erst thy father did:
Therewith receive this favor at my hands,
T'incourage thee to follow Richards fame.

Arth. Ye Citizens of Angiers are ye mute?
Arthur or John, say which shall be your King?

Citizen. We care not which, if once we knew the right
But till we know, we will not yield our right.

Bast. Might Philip counsel two so mighty Kings,
As are the Kings of England and of France,
He would advise your Graces to unite
And knit your forces against these citizens,
Pulling their battred walls about their ears.
The Town once won, then strive about the claim,
For they are minded to delude you both.

Citti. Kings, Princes, Lords, and Knights assembled here,
The Citizens of Angiers all by me
Entreat your Majesty to hear them speak:
And as you like the motion they shall make,
So to account and follow their advice.

John. Phil. Speak on, we give thee leave.


Cittiz. Then thus: whereas the young and lusty knight*
Incites you on to knit your kingly strengths:
The motion cannot choose but please the good,
And such as love the quiet of the State.
But how my Lords, how should your strengths be knit?
Not to oppress your subjects and your friends,
And fill the world with brawles and mutinies:
But unto peace your forces should be knit
To live in Princely league and amity:
Do this, the gates of Angiers shall give way,
And stand wide open to your hearts content.
To make this peace a lasting bond of love,
Remains one only honorable means,
Which by your pardon I shall here display.
Lewis the Dolphin and the heir of France,
A man of noted valor through the world,
Is yet unmarried: let him take to wife
The beauteous daughter of the king of Spain,
Niece to K. John, the lovely Lady Blanch,
Begotten on his sister Elianor.
With her in marriage will her uncle give
Castles and towers, as fitteth such a match.
The Kings thus joined in league of perfect love,
They may so deal with Arthur Duke of Britain,
Who is but young, and yet unmeet to reign,
As he shall stand contented every way.
Thus have I boldly (for the common good)
Delivered what the City gave in charge.
And as upon conditions you agree,
So shall we stand content to yield the Town.

Arth. A proper peace, if such a motion hold;
These Kings bear arms for me, and for my right,
And they shall share my lands to make them friends.

Q. Elian. Son John, follow this motion, as thou love thy mother.
Make league with Philip, yield to any thing:
Lewis shall have my niece, and then be sure
Arthur shall have small succor out of France.

John. Brother of France, you hear the Citizens:
Then tell me, how you mean to deal herein.

Constable. Why John, what can thou give unto thy Niece,
That have no foot of land, but Arthurs right?

Lew. Bir lady Citizens, I like your choice,
A lovely damsel is the Lady Blanch,
Worthy the heir of Europe for her pheere.

Constable. What kings, why stand you gazing in a trance?
Why how now Lords? accursed Citizens
To fill and tickle their ambitious ears,
With hope of gain, that springs from Arthurs loss.
Some dismal Planet at thy birthday reigned,
For now I see the fall of all thy hopes.

K. Phil. Lady, and Duke of Britain, know you both,
The King of France respects his honor more,
Than to betray his friends and favorers.
Princess of Spain, could you affect my Son,
If we upon conditions could ageee?

Bast. Swounds Madam, take an English Gentleman?
Slave as I was, I thought to have moved the match.
Grandame you made me half a promise once,
That Lady Blanch should bring me wealth enough,
And make me heir of store of English land.

Q. Elian. Peace Philip, I will look thee out a wife,
We must with policy compound this strife.

Bastar. If Lewis get her, well, I say no more:
But let the frollicke Frenchman take no scorn,
If Philip front him with an English horn.

John. Lady, what answer make you to the K. of France?
Can you affect the Dolphin for your Lord?

Blanch. I thank the King that likes of me so well,
To make me Bride unto so great a Prince:
But give me leave my Lord to pause on this,
Least being too too forward in the cause,
It may be blemish to my modesty.
Q. Elinor. Son John, and worthy Philip K. of France, Do you confer awhile
about the Dower,
And I will school my modest Niece so well,
That she shall yield as soon as you have done.

Constance. I, there is the wretch that brocheth all this il,
Why fly I not upon the Beldams face,
And with my nails pull forth her hateful eyes.

Arthur. Sweet mother cease these hasty madding fits:
For my sake, let my Grandam have her will.
O would she with her hands pull forth my heart,
I could afford it to appease these broils.
But (mother) let us wisely wink at all,
Least farther harms ensue our hasty speech.

Phil. Brother of England, what dowry will thou give
Unto my son in marriage with thy Niece?

John. First Philip knows her dowry out of Spain,
To be so great as may content a King:
But more to mend and amplify the same,
I give in mor ey thirty thousand marks.
For land I leave it to thine own demand.

Phil. Then I demand Volquesson, Torain, Main,
Poiters and Aniou, these five Provinces,
Which thou as King of England holdst in France:
Then shall our peace be soon concluded on.

Bast. No less then five such Provinces at once?


John. Mother what shall I do? my brother got these lands
With much effusion of our English blood:
And shall I give it all away at once?

Q. Elin. John give it him, so shall thou live in peace,
And keep the residue sans ieopardie.

John. Philip, bring forth thy son, here is my niece,
And here in marriage I do give with her
From me and my successors English Kings,
Volquesson, Poiters, Aniou, Torain, Main,
And thirty thousand marks of stipend coin.
Now citizens, how like you of this match?

Cittiz. We joy to see so sweet a peace begun.


Lewis. Lewis with Blanch shall ever live content.
But now King John, what say you to the Duke?
Father, speak as you may in his behalf.

Phil. K. John, be good unto thy Nephew here,
And give him somewhat that shall please you best.

John. Arthur, although thou troublest Englands peace
Yet here I give thee Britain for thine own,
Together with the Earldom of Richmont,
And this rich city of Angiers withal,

Q. Elian. And if thou seek to please thine Uncle John,
Shall see my son how I will make of thee.

John. Now every thing is sorted to this end,
Lets in, and there prepare the marriage rites,
Which in S. Mary's Chapel presently
Shall be performed ere this Presence part.

Exeunt. Manent Constance and Arthur. Art. Madam good cheer, these drouping
languishments
Add no redress to salve our awkward haps,
If heavens have concluded these events,
To small avail is bitter pensiveness:
Seasons will change, and so our present grief
May change with them, and all to our relief.

Constable. Ah boy, thy years I see are far too green
To look into the bottom of these cares.
But I, who see the poyse that weighs down
Thy weal, my wish, and all the willing means
Wherewith thy fortune and thy fame should mount.
What joy, what ease, what rest can lodge in me,
With whom all hope and hap do disagree?

Arth. Yet Ladies tears, and cares, and solemn shows,
Rather then helps, heap up more work for woes.

Constable. If any power will hear a widows plaint,
That from a wounded soul implores revenge;
Send fell contagion to infect this clime,
This cursed country, where the traitors breath,
Whose perjury (as proud Briareus,)
Beleaguers all the Sky with mis-beleefe.
He promised Arthur, and he swear it too,
To fence thy right, and check thy fo-mans pride:
But now black-spotted Periure as he is,
He takes a truce with Elnors damned brat,
And marries Lewis to her lovely Niece,
Sharing thy fortune, and thy birth-dayes gift
Between these lovers: ill betide the match.
And as they shoulder thee from out thine own,
And triumph in a widows tearefu^l cares:
So heavens cross them with a thriftlesse course,
Is all the blood yspilt on either part,
Closing the cranies of the thirsty earth,
Grown to a loue-game and a Bridal feast?
And must thy birthright bid the wedding banes?
Poor helpelesse boy, hopeless and helpless too,
To whom misfortune seems no yoke at all.
Thy stay, thy state, thy imminent mishaps
Wounds thy mothers thoughts with feeling care,
Why lookst thou pale? the color flies thy face:
I trouble now the fountain of thy youth,
And make it muddie with my doles discourse,
Go in with me, reply not lovely boy,
We must obscure this moan with melody,
Least worser wrack ensue our malcontent.

Exeunt. Enter the King of England, the King of France, Arthur, Bastard, Lewis,
Lymoges, Constance, Blanch, Chattillion, Pembrooke, Salisburie, and Elianor.
John. This is the day, the long-desired day,
Wherein the Realms of England and of France
Stand highly blessed in a lasting peace.
Thrice happy is the Bridegroom and the Bride,
From whose sweet Bridal such a concord springs,
To make of mortal foes immortal friends.

Constable. Ungodly peace made by another war.


Phil. Unhappy peace, that ties thee from revenge,
Rouse thee Plantaginet, live not to see
The butcher of the great Plantaginet.
Kings, Princes, and ye Peers of either realms,
Pardon my rashness, and forgive the zeal
That carries me in fury to a deed
Of high desert, of honor, and of arms.
A boon (O Kings) a boon does Philip beg
Prostrate upon his knee: which knee shall cleave
Unto the superficies of the earth,
Till France and England grant this glorious boon.

John. Speak Philip, England grants thee thy request.


Phil. And France confirms what ere is in his power.


Bast. Then Duke sit fast, I level at thy head,
Too base a ransom for my fathers life.
Princes, I crave the combat with the Duke
That braues it in dishonor of my sire.
Your words are past, nor can you now reuerse
The Princely promise that reuiues my soul,
Whereat me thinks I see his sinews shake:
This is the boon (dread Lords) which granted once
Or life or death are pleasant to my soul;
Since I shall live and die in Richards right.

Lym. Base bastard, misbegotten of a King,
To interrupt these holy nuptial rites
With brawles and tumults to a Dukes disgrace;
Let it suffice, I scorn to join in fight,
With one so far unequal to my self.

Bast. A fine excuse, Kings if you will be Kings,
Then keep your words, and let us combat it.

John. Philip, we cannot force the Duke to fight,
Being a subject unto neither Realm:
But tell me Austria, if an English Duke
Should dare thee thus, would thou accept the challenge?

Lym. Else let the world account the Austrich Duke
The greatest coward living on the earth.

John. Then cheer thee Philip, John will keep his word,
Kneel down, in sight of Philip King of France,
And all these Princely Lords assembled here,
I gird thee with the sword of Normandy,
And of that Land I do inuest thee Duke:
So shall thou be in living and in land
Nothing inferior unto Austria.

Lym. K. John, I tell thee flatly to thy face,
Thou wrong'st mine honor: and that thou mai'st see
How much I scorn thy new made Duke and thee,
I flatly say, I will not be compeld:
And so farewell sir Duke of low degree,
I Will find a time to match you for this gear.

Exit. John. Stay Philip, let him go, the honors thine.


Bast. I cannot live unless his life be mine.


Q. Elia. Thy forwardnes this day has joyed my soul,
And made me think my Richard lives in thee.

K. Phil. Lordings let us in, and spend the wedding day
In maskes and triumphs, letting quarrels cease.

Enter a Cardinal from Rome. Card. Stay king of France, I charge thee ioyn not
hands
With him that stands accursed of God and men.
Know John, that I Pandulph Cardinal of Millaine, and Legate from the Sea of
Rome, demand of thee in the name of our holy Father the Pope Innocent, why thou
do (contrary to the laws of our holy mother the Church, and our holy Father
the Pope) disturb the quiet of the Church, and disanull the election of Stephen
Langhton, whom his holiness has elected Archbishop of Canterbury: this in
his holiness name I demand of thee?


Ioh. And what have thou or the Pope thy master to do to demand of me, how I
employ mine own? Know sir priest, as I honor the Church and holy Churchmen, so
I scorn to be subject to the greatest Prelate in the world. Tell thy master so
from me, and say, John of England said it, that never an Italian Priest of them
all, shall either have tithe, tole, or polling penny out of England; but as I am
King, so will I reign next under God, supreme head both over spiritual and
temporal: and he that contradicts me in this, I Will make him hop headless.


K. Phil. What K. John, know you what you say, thus to blaspheme against our
holy father the Pope?


Ioh. Philip, though thou and all the Princes of Christendom suffer themselves
to be abused by a Prelates slavery, my mind is not of such base temper. If the
Pope will be king of England, let him win it with the sword, I know no other
title he can allege to mine inheritance.


Card. John, this is thine answer?


John. What then?


Card. Then I Pandulph of Padua, Legate from the Apostolic Sea, do in the
name of Saint Peter and his successor our holy father Pope Innocent, pronounce
thee accursed, discharging every of thy subjects of all duty and fealty that
they do owe to thee, and pardon and forgiveness of sin to those or them
whatsoever, which shall carry arms against thee, or murder thee: This I
pronounce, and charge all good men to abhor thee as an excommunicate person.


Ioh. So sir, the more the fox is cursed the better a fares: if God bless me
and my Land, let the Pope and his shauelings curse and spare not.


Card. Furthermore, I charge thee Philip K. of France, and all the kings and
princes of Christendom, to make war upon this miscreant: and whereas thou
have made a league with him, and confirmed it by oath, I do in the name of our
foresaid father the Pope, acquit thee of that oath, as unlawful, being made
with an heretic; how sai'st thou Philip, do thou obey?


Ioh. Brother of France, what say you to the Cardinal?


Phil. I say, I am sorry for your Majesty, requesting you to submit your self
to the Church of Rome.


Ioh. And what say you to our league, if I do not submit?


Phil. What should I say? I must obey the Pope.


Ioh. Obey the Pope, and break your oath to God?


Phil. The Legate has absolu'd me of mine oath:
Then yield to Rome, or I defy thee here.

Ioh. Why Philip, I defy the Pope and thee,
False as thou art, and perjured King of France,
Unworthy man to be accounted King.
Give thou thy sword into a Prelates hands?
Pandulph, where I of Abbots, Monks, and Friars
Have taken somewhat to maintain my wars,
Now will I take no more but all they have.
I Will rouse the lazy lubbers from their cells,
And in despite I Will send them to the Popc.
Mother come you with me, and for the rest
That will not follow John in this attempt,
Confusion light upon their damned souls.
Come Lords, fight for your K. that fights for your good

Phil. And are they gone? Pandulph thy self shall see
How France will fight for Rome and Romish rites.
Nobles to arms, let him not pass the seas,
Let Us take him captive, and in triumph lead
The K. of England to the gates of Rome.
Arthur bestirre thee man, and thou shall see
What Philip K. of France will do for thee.

Blanch. And will your Grace upon your wedding day
Forsake your bride, and follow dreadful drums?
Nay, good my Lord, stay you at home with me.

Lew. Sweet heart content thee, and we shall agree.


Phil. Follow my Lords, Lord Cardinal lead the way,
Drums shall be music to this wedding day.

Exeunt. Excursions. The Bastard pursues Austria, and kills him. Bast. Thus has
K. Richards son performd his vows,
And offered Austria's blood for sacrifice
Unto his fathers everliving soul.
Brave Cordelion, now my heart does say,
I have deserved, though not to be thine heir,
Yet as I am, thy base begotten son,
A name as pleasing to thy Philips heart,
As to be called the Duke of Normandy.
Lie there a prey to every rau'ning foul:
And as my father triumphed in thy spoils,
And trod thine Ensigns underneath his feet,
So do I tread upon thy cursed self,
And leave thy body to the fowls for food.

Exit. Excursions. Arthur, Constance, Lewis, having taken Q. Elianor prisoner.
Constable. Thus has the God of kings with conquering arm
Dispearst the foes to true succession,
Proud, and disturber of thy Countries peace,
Constance does live to tame thine insolence,
And on thy head will now avenged be
For all the mischiefs hatched in thy brain.

Q. Elinor. Contemptuous Dame, vnreuerent Duchess thou,
To brave so great a Queen as Elianor,
Base scold, have thou forgot, that I was wife
And mother to three mighty English Kings?
I charge thee then, and you forsooth sir boy,
To set your Grandmother at liberty,
And yield to John your Uncle and your King.

Constable. It Is not thy words proud Queen shall carry it.


Elin. Nor yet thy threats proud Dame shall daunt my mind.


Arth. Sweet Grandam, and good mother leave these braules.


Elian. I Will find a time to triumph in thy fall.


Constable. My time is now to triumph in thy fall,
And thou shall know that Constance will triumph.

Arthur. Good mother, weigh it is Queen Elinor,
Though she be captive, use her like her self.
Sweet Grandame bear with what my Mother says,
Your Highness shall be used honorably.

Enter a messenger. Mess. Lewis my Lord, Duke Arthur, and the rest,
To arms in have, K. John relyes his men,
And ginnes the sight afresh: and swears withal
To loose his life, or set his mother free.

Lewis. Arthur away, it is time to look about.


Eli. Why how now dame, what is your courage coold?


Constable. No Elinor my courage gathers strength,
And hopes to lead both John and thee as slaves:
And in that hope, I hale thee to the field.

Exeunt. Excursions. Elianor is rescued by John, and Arthur is taken prisoner.
Exeunt. Sound victory. Enter John, Elianor, and Arthur prisoner, Bastard,
Pembrooke, Salisbury, and Hubert de Burgh. John Thus right triumphs, and John
triumphs in right:
Arth^r thou see, France cannot bolster thee:
Thy mothers pride has brought thee to this fall.
But if at last nephew thou yield thy self
Into the gardance of thine uncle John,
Thou shall be used as becomes a Prince.

Arthur Uncle, my grandame taught her nephew this,
To bear captivity with patience.
Might has preuaild, not right, for I am King
Of England, though thou wear the Diadem.

Q. Elin. Son John, soon shall we teach him to forget
These proud presumptions, and to know himself.

John Mother, he never will forget his claim,
I would he liude not to remember it.
But leaving this, we will to England now,
And take some order with our Popelings there,
That swell with pride and fat of lay men's lands.
Philip, I make thee chief in this affair,
Ransacke the Abbeis, Cloisters, Priories,
Convert their coin unto my soldiers use:
And whatsoere he be within my Land,
That goes to Rome for justice and for law,
While he may have his right within the Realm,
Let him be iudgde a traitor to the State,
And suffer as an enemy to England.
Mother, we leave you here beyond the seas,
As Regent of our Provinces in France,
While we to England take a speedy course,
And thank our God that gave us victory.
Hubert de Burgh take Arthur here to thee,
Be he thy prisoner: Hubert keep him safe,
For on his life does hang thy Sovereigns Crown,
But in his death consists thy Sovereigns bliss:
Then Hubert, as thou shortly hearst from me,
So use the prisoner I have given in charge.

Hubert Frolic young prince, though I your keeper be,
Yet shall your keeper live at your command.

Arthur As please my God, so shall become of me.


Q. Elian. My son, to England, I will see thee shipped,
And pray to God to send thee safe ashore.

Bastard Now wars are done, I long to be at home,
To diue into the Monks and Abbots bags,
To make some sport among the smooth skind Nuns,
And keep some revel with the fanzen Friars.

John To England Lords, each look unto your charge,
And arm your selves against the Roman pride.

Exeunt. Enter the King of France, Jews his son, Cardinal Pandolph Legate,
and Constance. Philip What, every man attacht with this mishap?
Why frown you so, why droope ye Lords of France?
Me thinks it differs from a warrelike mind,
To lowre it for a check or two of Chance.
Had Lymoges escapt the Bastards spite,
A little sorrow might have serude our loss.
Brave Austria, heaven joys to have thee there.

Card. His soul is safe and free from Purgatory*
Our holy Father has dispenst his sins,
The blessed Saints have heard our Orisons,
And all are mediators for his soul,
And in the right of these most holy wars,
His Holiness free pardon does pronounce
To all that follow you against English heretics,
Who stand accursed in our mother Church.

Enter Constance alone. Philip. To aggrauate the measure of our grief,
All malcontent comes Constance for her Son.
Be brief good Madame, for your face imports
A tragic tale behind that's yet untold.
Her passions stop the organ of her voice,
Deep sorrow throbbeth mis-befalne events,
Out with it Lady, that our Act may end
A full Catastrophe of sad laments.

Constance. My tongue is tuned to story forth mishap:
When did I breath to tell a pleasing tale?
Must Constance speak? let tears prevent her talk:
Must I discourse? let Dido sigh and say,
She weeps again to hear the wrack of Troy:
Two words will serve, and then my tale is done:
Elnors proud brat has robbed me of my son.

Lewis. Have patience Madame, this is chance of war:
He may be ransomed, we revenge his wrong.

Constable. Be it never so soon, I shall not live so long.


Phil. Despair not yet, come Constance, go with me,
These clouds will fleet, the day will clear again.

Exeunt. Card. Now Lewis, thy fortune buds with happy spring,
Our holy Fathers prayers effects this.
Arthur is safe, let John alone with him,
Thy title next is fairst to Englands Crown:
Now stir thy father to begin with John,
The Pope says I, and so is Albion thine.

Lewis. Thanks my Lord Legate for your good conceit,
It Is best we follow now the game is fair,
My father wants to work him your good words.

Card. A few will serve to forward him in this,
Those shall not want: but let us about it then.

Exeunt. Enter Philip leading a Friar, charging him show where the Abbots gold
lay. Phil. Come on you fat Franciscan, dally no longer, but show me where the
Abbots treasure lies, or die.


Friar. Benedicamus Domini, was ever such an injury*
Sweet S. Withold of thy lenity, defend us from extremity,
And hear us for S. Charity, oppressed with austeritie.
In nomini Domini, make I my homily,
Gentle gentilitie grieve not the Clergy.

Phil. Gray-gown'd good face, conjure ye,
nere trust me for a groat
If this wast girdle hang thee not
that girdeth in thy coat.
Now bald and barefoot Bungie birds,
when up the gallows climing,
Say Philip he had words enough,
to put you down with riming.

Fr. O pardon, O parce, S. Francis for mercy,
Shall shield thee from night-spels, and dreaming of devils,
If thou will forgive me, and never more grieve me,
With fasting and praying, and Hail Marie saying,
From black Purgatory, a penance right sorry:
Friar Thomas will warm you,
It shall never harm you.

Phil. Come leave off your rabble,
Sirs, hang up this lozell.

2. Fr. For charity I beg his life,
Saint Francis chiefest Friar,
The best in all our Covent sir,
to keep a Vintners fire.
O strangle not the good old man,
my hostess oldest guest,
And I will bring you by and by
unto the Priors chest.

Phil. I, say thou so, and if thou will the Friar is at liberty,
If not, as I am honest man, I hang you both for company.
Fr. Come hither, this is the chest, though simple to behold,
That wants not a thousand pound in silver and in gold.
My self will warrant full so much, I know the Abbots store,
I Will pawn my life there is no less, to have what ere is more.

Phil. I take thy word, the overplus unto thy share shall come,
But if there want of full so much, thy neck shall pay the sum.
Break up the Coffer, Friar.

Friar Oh I am undone, fair Alice the Nun
Has took up her rest in the Abbots chest.
Sancte benedicite, pardon my simplicity.
Fie Alice, confession will not salve this transgression.

Philip What have we here, a holy Nun? so keep me God in health.
A smooth facde Nun (sor aught I know) is all the Abbots wealth.
Is this the Nunries chastity?
Beshrew me but I think
They go as often to venery as niggards to their drink.
Why paltry Friar and Pandar too, ye shameless shaven crown,
Is this the chest that held a hoord,
at least a thousand pound?
And is the hoord a holy whore?
well, be the hangman nimble,
He Will take the pain to pay you home,
and teach you to dissemble.
Nun O spare the Friar Anthony,
a better never was
To sing a Dirige solemnly,
or read a morning mass.
If money be the means of this,
I know an ancient Nun,
That has a hoord these seven years,
did never see the sun;
And that is yours, and what is ours,
so favor now be shown,
You shall command as commonly,
as if it were your own.

Friar Your honor excepted.


Nun I Thomas, I mean so.


Philip From all save from Friars.


Nun Good sir, do not think so.


Philip I think and see so:
why how camst thou here?

Friar To hide her from lay men.


Nun It Is true sir, for fear.


Philip For fear of the laity: a pitiful dred
When a Nun flies for succor to a fat Friars bed.
But now for your ransom my cloyster-bred conney,
To the chest that you speak of where lies so much money.

Nun Fair sir, within this press, of plate and money is
The value of a thousand marks, and other thing by gis.
Let us alone, and take it all, it is yours sir, now you know it.

Phi. Come on sir Friar, pick the lock, this geere does cotton hansome,
That covetousness so cunningly must pay the lechers ransom.
What is in the hoord?

Friar Friar Laurence my Lord, now holy water help us,
Some witch or some devil is sent to delude us:
Haud credo Laurentius, that thou should be pend thus
In the press of a Nun we are all undone,
And brought to discredence if thou be Friar Laurence,

Friar Amor vincit omnia, so Cato affirms,
And therefore a Friar whose fancy soon burns,
Because he is mortal and made of mould,
He omits what he ought, and does more than he should.

Philip How goes this geere? the Friars chest filld with
a fausen Nun.
The Nun again locks Friar up,
to keep him from the Sun.
Belike the press is Purgatory,
or penance passing grievous:
The Friars chest a hell for Nuns!
how do these dolts deceive us?
Is this the labor of their lives, to feed and live at ease?
To revel so lasciuiously as often as they please.
I Will mend the fault or fault my aim,
if I do miss amending,
It Is better burn the Cloisters down,
than leave them for offending.
But holy you, to you I speak,
to you religious devil,
Is this the press that holds the sum,
to quit you for your evil?

Nun. I cry peccaui, parce me,
good sir I was beguiled.

Fr. Absolve sir for charity,
she would be reconciled.

Phil. And so I shall, sirs bind them fast,
This is their absolution,
go hang them up for hurting them,
Haste them to execution.

Fr. Laurence. O tempus edax rerum,
Give children books they tear them.
O vanitas vanitatis, in this waning aetatis,
At threescore welneere, to go to this geere,
To my conscience a clog, to die like a dog.
Exaudi me Domine, siuis me parce
Dabo pecuniam, si habeo veniam.
To go and fetch it, I will dispatch it,
A hundred pound sterling, for my lives sparing.

Enter Peter a Prophet, with people. Pet. Hoe, who is here? S. Francis be your
speed,
Come in my flock, and follow me,
your fortunes I will reed.
Come hither boy, go get thee home,
and clime not over hie,
For from aloft thy fortune stands, in hazard thou shall die.

Boy. God be with you Peter, I pray you come to our house a Sunday.


Pet. My boy show me thy hand, bless thee my boy,
For in thy palm I see a many troubles are ybent to dwell,
But thou shall escape them all, and do full well.

Boy I thank you Peter, there is a cheese for your labor: my sister prays ye
to come home, and tell her how many husbands she shall have, and she will give
you a rib of bacon.


Peter My masters, stay at the towns end for me, I Will come to you all anon: I
must dispatch some business with a Friar, and then I Will read your fortunes.


Philip How now, a prophet! sir prophet whence are ye?


Peter I am of the world and in the world, but live not as others, by the
world: what I am I know, and what thou will be I know. If thou know me now,
be answered: if not, enquire no more what I am.


Phil. Sir, I know you will be a dissembling knave, that deludes the people
with blind prophecies: you are he I look for, you shall away with me: bring
away all the rabble, and you Friar Laurence, remember your ransom a hundred
pound, and a pardon for your self, and the rest; come on sir prophet, you
shall with me, to receive a prophets reward.


Exeunt. Enter Hubert de Burgh with three men. Hubert My masters, I have showed
you what warrant I have for this attempt; I perceive by your heavy
countenances, you had rather be otherwise employed, and for my own part, I
would the King had made choice of some other executioner: only this is my
comfort, that a king commands, whose precepts neglected or omitted, threatens
torture for the default. Therefore in brief, leave me, and be ready to attend
the adventure: stay within that entry, and when you hear me cry, God save the
King, issue suddenly forth, lay hands on Arthur, set him in this chair,
wherein (once fast bound) leave him with me to finish the rest.


Attendants We go, though loath.


Exeunt. Hubert My Lord, will it please your Honor to take the benefit of the
fair evening?


Enter Arthur to Hubert de Burgh. Arthur Gramercie Hubert for thy care of me,
In or to whom restraint is newly known,
The joy of walking is small benefit,
Yet will I take thy offer with small thanks,
I would not loose the pleasure of the eye.
But tell me courteous Keeper if thou can,
How long the King will have me tarry here.

Hubert I know not Prince, but as I guess, not long.
God send you freedom, and God save the King.

They issue forth. Arthur Why how now sirs, what may this outrage mean?
O help me Hubert, gentle Keeper help:
God send this sudden mutinous approach
Tend not to reaue a wretched guiltles life.

Hubert So sirs, depart, and leave the rest for me.


Arth. Then Arthur yield, death frowneth in thy face,
What means this? good Hubert plead the case.

Hubert Patience young Lord, and listen words of woe,
Harmefull and harsh, hells horror to be heard:
A dismal tale fit for a furies tongue.
I faint to tell, deep sorrow is the sound.

Arthur What, must I die?


Hubert No news of death, but tidings of more hate,
A wrathful doom, and most unlucky fate:
Deaths dish were dainty at so fell a feast,
Be deaf, hear not, its hell to tell the rest.

Arthur Alas, thou wrongst my youth with words of fear,
It Is hell, it is horror, not for one to hear:
What is it man if it must needs be done,
Act it, and end it, that the pain were gone.

Hubert I will not chaunt such dolor with my tongue,
Yet must I act the outrage with my hand.
My heart, my head, and all my powers beside,
To aid the office have at once denide.
Peruse this Letter, lines of trebble woe,
Read ore my charge, and pardon when you know.

Hubert, these are to command thee, as thou tendrest our quiet in mind, and
the estate of our person, that presently upon the receipt of our command, thou
put out the eyes of Arthur Plantaginet.


Arthur Ah monstrous damned man! his very breath infects the elements.
Contagious venom dwells in his heart,
Effecting means to poison all the world.
Vnreuerent may I be to blame the heavens
Of great injustice, that the miscreant
Lives to oppress the innocents with wrong.
Ah Hubert! makes he thee his instrument,
To sound the trump that causes hell triumph?
Heaven weeps, the Saints do shed celestial tears,
They fear thy fall, and cite thee with remorse,
They knock thy conscience, moving pity there,
Willing to fence thee from the rage of hell:
Hell Hubert, trust me all the plagues of hell
Hangs on performance of this damned deed.
This scale, the warrant of the bodies bliss,
Ensureth Satan chiefetaine of thy soul:
Subscribe not Hubert, give not Gods part away.
I speak not only for eyes privilege,
The chief exterior that I would enjoy:
But for thy peril, far beyond my pain,
Thy sweet souls loss, more than my eyes vain lack:
A cause internal, and eternal too.
Advise thee Hubert, for the case is hard,
To loose salvation for a Kings reward.

Hubert My Lord, a subject dwelling in the land
Is tied to execute the Kings command.

Arthur Yet God commands whose power reaches further,
That no command should stand in force to murder.

Hubert But that same Essence has ordaind a law,
A death for guilt, to keep the world in awe.

Arthur I plead, not guilty, treasonlesse and free.


Hubert But that appeal my Lord concerns not me.


Arthur Why thou art he that may omit the peril.


Hubert I, if my Sovereign would omit his quarrel.


Arthur His quarrel is unhallowed false and wrong.


Hubert Then be the blame to whom it does belong.


Arthur Why that's to thee if thou as they proceed,
Conclude their judgment with so vile a deed.

Hubert Why then no execution can be lawful,
If Judges doomes must be reputed doubtful.

Arthur Yes where in form of Law in place and time,
The offender is convicted of the crime.

Hubert My Lord, my Lord, this long expostulation,
Heaps up more grief, than promise of redress;
For this I know, and so resolude I end,
That subjects lives on Kings commands depend.
I must not reason why he is your foe,
But do his charge since he commands it so.

Arthur Then do thy charge, and charged be thy soul
With wrongful persecution done this day.
You rolling eyes, whose superficies yet
I do behold with eyes that Nature lent:
Send forth the terror of your Moouers frown,
To wreake my wrong upon the murderers
That rob me of your fair reflecting view:
Let hell to them (as earth they wish to me)
Be dark and direful guerdon for their guilt,
And let the black tormenters of deep Tartary
Vpbraide them with this damned enterprise,
Inflicting change of tortures on their souls.
Delay not Hubert, my orisons are ended,
Begin I pray thee, reaue me of my sight:
But to perform a tragedy indeed,
Conclude the period with a mortal stab.
Constance farewell, tormenter come away,
Make my dispatch the Tyrants feasting day.

Hubert I faint, I fear, my conscience bids desist:
Faint did I say? fear was it that I named:
My King commands, that warrant sets me free:
But God forbids, and he commands Kings,
That great Commander countercheckes my charge,
He stays my hand, he makes soft my heart.
Go cursed tools, your office is exempt,
Cheer thee young Lord, thou shall not loose an eye,
Though I should purchase it with loss of life.
I Will to the King, and say his will is done,
And of the langor tell him thou art dead,
Go in with me, for Hubert was not borne
To blind those lamps that Nature pollisht so.

Arthur Hubert, if ever Arthur be in state,
Look for amends of this received gift,
I took my eiesight by thy courtesy,
Thou lentst them me, I will not be ingrate.
But now procrastination may offend
The issue that thy kindness undertakes:
Depart we Hubert to prevent the worst.

Exeunt. Enter K. John, Essex, Salisbury, Penbrooke. John Now warlike
followers, rests aught undone
That may impeach us of fond oversight?
The French have felt the temper of our swords,
Cold terror keeps possession in their souls,
Checking their ouerdaring arrogance
For buckling with so great an ouermatch,
The arch proud titled Priest of Italy,
That calls himself grand Vicar under God,
Is busied now with trentall obsequies,
Mass and months mind, dirge and I know not what,
To ease their souls in painful purgatory,
That have miscarried in these bloody wars.
Heard you not Lords when first his Holiness
Had tidings of our small account of him,
How with a taunt vaunting upon his toes,
He vrgde a reason why the English Ass
Disdaind the blessed ordinance of Rome?
The title (reverently might I infer)
Became the Kings that erst have borne the load,
The slavish weight of that controlling Priest:
Who at his pleasure temperd them like wax
To carry arms on danger of his curse,
Banding their souls with warrants of his hand*
I grieve to think how Kings in ages past
(Simply devoted to the Sea of Rome)
Have run into a thousand acts of shame.
But now for confirmation of our State,
Since we have proind the more than needful branch
That did oppress the true well-growing stock,
It rests we throughout our Territories
Be reproclaimed and invested King.

Pemb. My Liege, that were to busy men with doubts,
Once were you crowned, proclaimd, and with applause
Your city streets have ecchoed to the ear,
God save the King, God save our Sovereign John.
Pardon my fear, my censure does infer
Your Highness not deposde from regal State,
Would breed a mutiny in peoples minds,
What it should mean to have you crowned again.

John Pembrooke, perform what I have bid thee do,
Thou know not what induces me to this.
Essex go in, and Lordings all be gone
About this task, I will be crowned anon.

Enter the Bastard. Philip What news, how do the Abbots chests?
Are Friars fatter than the Nuns are fair?
What cheer with Churchmen, had they gold or no?
Tell me, how has thy office took effect?

Phil. My Lord, I have performd your Highness charge:
The ease-bred Abbots, and the bare-foote Friars,
The Monks, the Priors, and holy cloystred Nuns,
Are all in health, and were my Lord in wealth,
Till I had tithde and told their holy hoords.
I doubt not when your Highness sees my prize,
You may proportion all their former pride.

John Why so, now sorts it Philip as it should:
This small intrusion into Abbey trunkes,
Will make the Popelings excommunicate,
Curse, ban, and breathe out damned orisons,
As thick as haile-stones fore the Springs approach:
But yet as harmless and without effect,
As is the echo of a Cannons crack
Dischargde against the battlements of heaven.
But what news else befell there Philip?

Bast. Strange news my Lord: within your territories
Near Pomfret is a prophet new sprung up,
Whose divination volleis wonders forth:
To him the Commons throng with Country gifts,
He sets a date unto the Beldames death,
Prescribes how long the Virgins state shall last,
Distinguishes the moving of the heavens,
Gives limits unto holy nuptial rites,
Foretells famine, abounds plenty forth:
Of fate, of fortune, life and death he chats,
With such assurance, scruples put apart,
As if he knew the certain doomes of heaven,
Or kept a Register of all the Destinies.

Ioh. Thou telst me maruels, would thou had brought the man,
We might have questiond him of things to come.

Bastard My Lord, I took a care of had-I-wist,
And brought the prophet with me to the Court,
He stays my Lord but at the Presence door:
Pleases your Highness, I will call him in.

John Nay stay awhile, we will have him here anon,
A thing of weight is first to be performd.

Enter the Nobles and crown King John, and then cry God save the King. John
Lordings and friends supporters of our State,
Admire not at this vnaccustomd course,
Nor in your thoughts blame not this deed of yours.
Once ere this time was I invested King,
Your fealty sworn as Liegemen to our state:
Once since that time ambitious weeds have sprung
To stain the beauty of our garden plot:
But heavens in our conduct rooting thence
The false intruders, breakers of worlds peace,
Have to our joy, made sunshine chase the storm.
After the which, to try your constancy,
That now I see is worthy of your names,
We craved once more your helps for to inuest us
Into the right that envy sought to wrack.
Once was I not deposde, your former choice;
Now twice been crowned and applauded King?
Your cheered action to install me so,
Infers assured witness of your loves,
And binds me over in a Kingly care
To render love with love, rewards of worth
To balance down requital to the full.
But thanks the while, thanks Lordings to you all:
Ask me and use me, try me and find me yours.

Essex A boon my Lord, at vantage of your words
We ask to guerdon all our loyalties.

Pemb. We take the time your Highness bids us ask:
Please it you grant, you make your promise good,
With lesser loss than one superfluous hair
That not remembered falls from your head.

John My word is past, receive your boon my Lords,
What may it be? Ask it, and it is yours.

Ess. We crave my Lord, to please the Commons with
The liberty of Lady Constance son:
Whose durance darkeneth your Highness right,
As if you kept him prisoner, to the end
Your self were doubtful of the thing you have.
Dismiss him thence, your Highness needs not fear,
Twice by consent you are proclaimed our King.

Pemb. This if you grant, were all unto your good:
For simple people muse you keep him close.

Ioh. Your words have searched the center of my thoghts,
Confirming warrant of your loyalties,
Dismiss your counsel, sway my state,
Let John do nothing, but by your consents.
Why how now Philip, what ecstasy is this?
Why casts thou up thy eyes to heaven so?

There the five Moons appear. Bast. See, see my Lord, strange apparitions,
Glancing mine eye to see the Diadem
Placed by the Bishops on your Highness head,
From forth a gloomie cloud, which curtaine-like
Displaid it self, I suddenly espied
Five Moons reflecting, as you see them now:
Even in the moment that the crown was placed
Can they appear, holding the course you see.

Ioh. What might portend these apparitions,
Unusual signs, forerunners of event,
Presagers of strange terrors to the world:
Believe me Lords, the object fears me much.
Philip thou toldst me of a Wizard but of late,
Fetch in the man to descant of this show.

Pemb. The heavens frown upon the sinful earth,
When with prodigious vnaccustom'd signs
They spot their superficies with such wonder.

Essex. Before the ruins of Jerusalem,
Such meteors were the Ensigns of his wrath,
That hast'ned to destroy the faultfull town.

Enter the Bastard with the Prophet. John. Is this the man?


Bast. It is my Lord.


John. Prophet of Pomfret, for so I hear thou art,
That calculat'st of many things to come:
Who by a power repleat with heavenly gift,
Can blab the counsel of thy Makers will.
If fame be true, or truth be wronged by thee,
Decide in cyphering, what these five moons
Portend this clime, if they presage at all.
Breath out thy gift, and if I live to see
Thy divination take a true effect,
I Will honor thee above all earthly men.

Pet. The sky wherein these moons have residence,
Presents Rome the great Metropolis,
Where sits the Pope in all his holy pomp.
Four of the moons present four provinces,
To wit, Spain, Denmark, Germany, and France,
That bear the yoke of proud commanding Rome,
And stand in fear to tempt the Prelates curse.
The smallest moon that whirles about the rest,
Impatient of the place he holds with them,
Does figure forth this Island Albion,
Who gins to scorn the sea and seat of Rome,
And seeks to shun the Edicts of the Pope:
This shows the heaven, and this I do auerre
Is figured in the apparitions.

Ioh. Why then it seems the heavens smile on us,
Giving applause for leaving of the Pope.
But for they chance in our Meridian,
Do they effect no private growing ill
To be inflicted on us in this clime?

Pet. The moons effect no more than what I said:
But on some other knowledge that I have
By my prescience, ere Ascension day
Have brought the Sun unto his usual height,
Of Crown, Estate, and Royal dignity,
Thou shall be clean dispoyl'd and dispossessed.

Ioh. False dreamer, perish with thy witched news,
Villain thou woundst me with thy fallacies:
If it be true, die for thy tidings price;
If false, for fearing me with vain suppose:
Hence with the Witch, hels damned secretary.
Lock him up sure: for by my faith I swear,
True or not true, the Wizard shall not live.
Before Ascension day: who should be cause hereof?
Cut off the cause, and then the effect will die.
Tut, tut, my mercy serves to maime my self,
The root does live, from whence these thorns spring up,
I and my promise past for his deliu'rie:
Frown friends, fail faith, the devil go withal,
The brat shall die, that terrifies me thus.
Pembrooke and Essex, I recall my grant,
I will not buy your favors with my fear:
Nay murmr not, my will is law enough*
I love you well, but if I loved you better,
I would not buy it with my discontent.
Enter Hubert. How now, what news with thee?

Hub. According to your highness strict command,
Young Arthurs eyes are blinded and extinct.

Ioh. Why so, then he may feel the crown, but never see it.


Hub. Nor see nor feel, for of the extreme pain,
Within one hour gave he up the ghost.

Ioh. What is he dead?


Hub. He is my Lord.


Ioh. Then with him dies my cares.


Essex. Now joy betide thy soul.


Pemb. And heavens revenge thy death.


Essex. What have you done my Lord? Was ever heard
A deed of more inhumane consequence?
Your foes will curse, your friends will cry revenge.
Unkindly rage, more rough than Northern wind;
To clip the beauty of so sweet a flower.
What hope in us for mercy on a fault,
When kinsman dies without impeach of cause,
As you have done, so come to cheer you with,
The guilt shall never be cast me in my teeth.

Exeunt. Ioh. And are you gone? The devil be your guide:
Proud rebels as ye are, to brave me so:
Saucie, uncivil, checkers of my will.
Your tongues give edge unto the fatal knife,
That shall have passage through your trayt'rous throats.
But hushed, breath not bugs words too soon abroad,
Lest time prevent the issue of thy reach.
Arthur is dead, I there the corzie grows:
But while he lived, the danger was the more;
His death has freed me from a thousand fears,
But it has purchased me ten times ten thousand foes.
Why all is one, such luck shall haunt his game,
To whom the devil owes an open shame:
His life a foe that leueld at my crown,
His death a frame to pull my building down.
My thoughts harpt still on quiet by his end,
Who living aimed shrewdly at my room:
But to prevent that plea, twice was I crowned,
Twice did my subjects swear me fealty,
And in my conscience loved me as their liege,
In whose defense they would have pawned their lives.
But now they shun me as a Serpents sting,
A tragyke tyrant, stern and pitilesse,
And not a title follows after John,
But butcher, blood-sucker, and murderer.
What planet governed my nativity,
To bode me sovereign types of high estate,
So interlac'd with hellish discontent,
Wherein fell fury has no interest?
Cursed be the crown, chief author of my care,
Nay cursed my will, that made the crown my care:
Cursed be my birthday, cursed ten times the womb
That yielded me alive into the world.
Art thou there villain, furies haunt thee still,
For killing him whom all the world laments.

Hub. Why here is my Lord your Highness hand and seal,
Charging on lives regard to do the deed.

John Ah dull conceipted pesant, know thou not
It was a damned execrable deed?
Shewst me a Seal? Oh villain, both our souls
Have sold their freedom to the thrall of hell,
Under the warrant of that cursed Seal.
Hence villain, hang thy self, and say in hell
That I am coming for a kingdom there.

Hubert My Lord, attend the happy tale I tell,
For heavens health send Satan packing hence
That instigates your Highness to despair.
If Arthurs death be dismal to be heard,
Bandie the news for rumors of untruth:
He lives my Lord, the sweetest youth alive,
In health, with eye sight, not a hair amiss.
This heart took vigor from this forward hand,
Making it weak to execute your charge.

John What, lives he! Then sweet hope come home again,
Chase hence despair, the purueyor for hell.
Hye Hubert, tell these tidings to my Lords
That throb in passions for young Arthurs death:
Hence Hubert, stay not till thou have reueald
The wished news of Arthurs happy health.
I go my self, the ioyfullst man alive
To story out this new supposed crime.

Exeunt. The end of the first Part.
To the Gentlemen Readers.
THe changelesse purpose of determinde Fate
Gives period to our care, or hearts content,
When heavens fixed time for this or that has end:
Nor can earths pomp or policy prevent
The doom ordained in their secret will.
Gentles, we left King John repleate with bliss
That Arthur liude, whom he supposed slain;
And Hubert posting to return those Lords,
Who deemed him dead, and parted discontent:
Arthur himself begins our latter Act,
Our Act of outrage, desprate fury, death;
Wherein fond rashness murdreth first a Prince,
And Monkish falsenesse poysneth last a King,
First Scene shows Arthurs death in infancy,
And last concludes John's fatal tragedy.
The second part of The troublesome Reign of King John. Containing The
entrance of Lewis the French Kings son: With the poisoning of King John by a
Monk.
Enter young Arthur on the walls. NOw help good hap to further mine intent,
Cross not my youth with any more extremes:
I venture life to gain my liberty,
And if I die, worlds troubles have an end.
Fear gins dissuade the strength of my resolve,
My hold will fail, and then alas I fall,
And if I fall, no question death is next:
Better desist, and live in prison still.
Prison said I? nay, rather death than so:
Comfort and courage come again to me,
I Will venture sure: it is but a leap for life.
He leapes, and brusing his bones, after he was from his trance, speaks thus;
Hoe, who is nigh? some body take me up.
Where is my mother? let me speak with her.
Who hurts me thus? speak hoe, where are you gone?
Ay me poor Arthur, I am here alone.
Why called I mother, how did I forget?
My fall, my fall, has killd my mothers son.
How will she weep at tidings of my death?
My death indeed, O God, my bones are burst.
Sweet Jesus save my soul, forgive my rash attempt,
Comfort my mother, shield her from despair,
When she shall hear my tragycke overthrow.
My heart controls the office of my tongue,
My vital powers forsake my bruised trunk,
I die I die, heaven take my fleeting soul,
And Lady mother all good hap to thee.

He dies. Enter Pembrooke, Salisburie, Essex. Essex. My Lords of Pembrooke and
of Salisburie,
We must be careful in our policy,
To undermine the keepers of this place,
Else shall we never find the Princes grave.

Pemb. My Lord of Essex, take no care for that,
I warrant you it was not closely done.
But who is this? lo Lords the withered flower,
Who in his life shined like the Mornings blush,
Cast out a door, denied his burial right,
A prey for birds and beasts to gorge upon.

Salisb. O ruthful spectacle! O damned deed!
My sinews shake, my very heart does bleed.

Essex. Leave childish tears brave Lords of England,
If water-floods could fetch his life again,
My eyes should conduit forth a sea of tears.
If sobs would help, or sorows serve the turn,
My heart should volley out deep piercing plaints.
But bootlesse were it to breath as many sighs
As might eclipse the brightest Summers sun,
Here rests the help, a service to his ghost.
Let not the tyrant causer of this dole,
Live to triumph in ruthful massacres,
Give hand and heart, and Englishmen to arms,
It Is Gods decree to wreake us of these harms.

Pemb. The best advice: But who comes posting here?
Enter Hubert. Right noble Lords, I speak unto you all,
The King entreats your soonest speed
To visit him, who on your present want,
Did ban and curse his birth, himself and me,
For executing of his strict command.
I saw his passion, and at fittest time,
Assured him of his cousins being safe,
Whom pity would not let me do to death:
He craves your company my Lords in haste,
To whom I will conduct young Arthur straight,
Who is in health under my custody.

Essex. In health base villain, were it not I leave the crime
To Gods revenge, to whom revenge belongs,
Here should thou perish on my rapiers point.
Call'st thou this health? such health betide thy friends,
And all that are of thy condition,

Hub. My Lords, but hear me speak, and kill me then,
If here I left not this young Prince alive,
Maugre the hasty Edict of the King,
Who gave me charge to put out both his eyes,
That God that gave me living to this hour,
Thunder revenge upon me in this place:
And as I tendered him with earnest love,
So God love me, and then I shall be well.

Sals. Hence traitor hence, thy counsel is herein.
Exit. Hu. Some in this place appointed by the King,
Have thrown him from this lodging here above,
And sure the murder has bin newly done,
For yet the body is not fully cold.

Essex. How say you Lords, shall we with speed dispatch
Under our hands a packet into France,
To bid the Dolphin enter with his force,
To claim the kingdom for his proper right,
His title makes lawful strength thereto.
Besides, the Pope, on peril of his curse,
Has bard us of obedience unto John,
This hateful murder, Lewis his true descent,
The holy charge that we received from Rome,
Are weighty reasons, if you like my reed,
To make us all persevere in this deed.

Pemb. My Lord of Essex, well have you advised,
I will accord to further you in this.

Salisb. And Salisbury will not gainesay the same:
But aid that course as far forth as he can.

Essex. Then each of us send straight to his allies,
To win them to this famous enterprise:
And let us all yclad in Palmers weed,
The tenth of April at S. Edmunds Bury
Meet to confer, and on the altar there
Swear secrecy and aid to this advise.
Mean while, let us convey this body hence,
And give him burial, as befits his state,
Keeping his months mind, and his obsequies
With solemn intercession for his soul.
How say you Lordings, are you all agreed?

Pemb. The tenth of April at S. Edmunds Bury,
God letting not, I will not fail the time.

Essex. Then let us all convey the body hence.


Exeunt. Enter K. John, with two or three, and the Prophet. Ioh. Disturbed
thoughts, foredoomers of mine ill,
Distracted passions, signs of growing harms,
Strange prophecies of imminent mishaps,
Confound my wits, and dull my senses so,
That every object these mine eyes behold,
Seem instruments to bring me to my end.
Ascension day is come, John fear not then
The prodigies this prattling Prophet threats.
It Is come indeed: ah were it fully past,
Then were I careless of a thousand fears.
The Dial tells me, it is twelve at noone.
Were twelve at midnight past, then might I vaunt,
False seers prophecies of no import.
Could I as well with this right hand of mine
Remove the Sun from our Meridian,
Unto the moonested circle of th'antipodes,
As turn this steel from twelve to twelve again,
Then John, the date of fatal prophecies,
Should with the Prophets life together end.
But multa cadunt inter calicem supremaque labra.
Peter, unsay thy foolish doting dream,
And by the crown of England here I swear,
To make thee great, and greatest of thy kin.

Peter. King John, although the time I have prescribed
Be but twelve hours remaining yet behind,
Yet do I know by inspiration,
Ere that fixed time be fully come about,
King John shall not be king as heretofore.

John. Vain buzzard, what mischance can chance so soon,
To set a king beside his regal seat?
My heart is good, my body passing strong,
My Land in peace, my enemies subdued,
Only my barons storm at Arthurs death,
But Arthur lives, I there the challenge grows,
Were he dispatched unto his longest home,
Then were the King secure of thousand foes.
Hubert, what news with thee, where are my Lords?

Hub. Hard news my Lord, Arthur the lovely prince,
Seeking to escape over the castle walls,
Fell headlong down, and in the cursed fall
He brake his bones, and there before the gate
Your barons found him dead, and breathless quite.

Ioh. Is Arthur dead? then Hubert without more words hang the Prophet.
Away with Peter, villain out of my sight,
I am deaf, be gone, let him not speak a word.
Now John, thy fears are vanished into smoke,
Arthur is dead, thou guiltless of his death.
Sweet youth, but that I striued for a crown,
I could have well affoarded to thine age,
Long life, and happiness to thy content.

Enter the Bastard. Ioh. Philip what news with thee?


Bast. The news I heard was Peter's prayers,
Who wished like fortune to befall us all:
And with that word, the rope his latest friend,
Kept him from falling headlong to the ground.

Ioh. There let him hang, and be the Ravens food,
While John triumphs in spite of prophecies.
But what is the tidings from the Popelings now?
What say the Monks and Priests to our proceedings?
Or where is the Barons that so suddenly
Did leave the king upon a false surmise?

Bast. The Prelates storm and thirst for sharp revenge:
But please your Majesty, were that the worst,
It little skild: a greater danger grows,
Which must be weeded out by careful speed,
Or all is lost, for all is leueld at.

Ioh. More frights and fears* what ere thy tidings be,
I am prepared: then Philip, quickly say,
Mean they to murder, or imprison me,
To give my Crown away to Rome or France;
Or will they each of them become a King?
Worse than I think it is, it cannot be.

Bast. Not worse my Lord, but every whit as bad.
The Nobles have elected Lewis King,
In right of Lady Blanch, your niece, his wife:
His landing is expected every hour,
The Nobles, Commons, Clergy, all Estates,
Incited chiefly by the Cardinal,
Pandulph that lies here Legate for the Pope,
Think long to see their new elected King.
And for undoubted proof, see here my Liege,
Letters to me from your Nobility,
To be a party in this action:
Who under show of fained holiness,
Appoint their meeting at S. Edmunds Bury,
There to consult, conspire, and conclude
The overthrow and downfall of your State.

Ioh. Why so it must be: one hour of content,
Matched with a month of passionate effects.
Why shines the Sun to favor this consort?
Why do the winds not break their brazen gates,
And scatter all these perjured accomplices,
With all their counsels, and their damned drifts?
But see the welkin rolleth gently on,
There Is not a lowering cloud to frown on them;
The heaven, the earth, the sun, the moon and all,
Conspire with those confederates my decay.
Then hell for me, if any power be there,
Forsake that place, and guide me step by step,
To poison, strangle, murder in their steps
These traitors: oh that name is too good for them,
And death is easy: is there nothing worse,
To wreake me on this proud peace-breaking crew?
What say thou Philip? why assists thou not?

Bast. These curses (good my Lord) fit not the season:
Help must descend from heaven against this treason?

Ioh. Nay thou will prove a traitor with the rest,
Go get thee to them, shame come to you all.

Bast. I would be loath to leave your Highness thus,
Yet you command, and I, though grieved, will go.

Ioh. Ah Philip, whither go thou? come again.


Bast. My Lord, these motions are as passions of a mad man.


Ioh. A mad man Philip, I am mad indeed,
My heart is mazed, my senses all foredone.
And John of England now is quite undone.
Was ever King as I oppressed with cares?
Dame Elianor my noble mother Queen,
My only hope and comfort in distress,
Is dead, and England excommunicate,
And I am interdicted by the Pope,
All Churches cursed, their doors are sealed up,
And for the pleasure of the Romish Priest,
The service of the Highest is neglected,
The multitude (a beast of many heads)
Do wish confusion to their sovereign;
The Nobles blinded with ambitions fumes,
Assemble powers to beat mine Empire down,
And more than this, elect a foreign king.
O England, were thou ever miserable,
King John of England sees thee miserable:
John, it is thy sins that makes it miserable,
Quicquid delirunt Reges, plectuntur Achiui.
Philip, as thou have ever loved thy King,
So show it now: post to S. Edmunds Bury,
Dissemble with the Nobles, know their drifts,
Confound their devilish plots, and damned devises.
Though John be faulty, yet let subjects bear,
He will amend, and right the peoples wrongs.
A mother though she were unnatural,
Is better than the kindest step-dame is:
Let never Englishman trust foreign rule.
Then Philip show thy fealty to thy King,
And among the Nobles plead thou for the King.

Bast. I go my Lord: see how he is distraught,
This is the cursed Priest of Italy
Has heaped these mischiefs on this hapless land.
Now Philip, had thou Tullies eloquence,
Then might thou hope to plead with good success.

Exit Ioh. And art thou gone? success may follow thee:
Thus have thou showed thy kindness to thy King.
Sir, in haste go greet the Cardinal,
Pandulph I mean, the Legate from the Pope.
Say that the King desires to speak with him.
Now John bethink thee how thou may resolve:
And if thou will continue Englands King,
Then cast about to keep thy Diadem;
For life and land, and all is leueld at.
The Pope of Rome, it is he that is the cause,
He curses thee, he sets thy subjects free
From due obedience to their Sovereign:
He animates the Nobles in their wars,
He gives away the Crown to Philips son,
And pardons all that seek to murder thee:
And thus blind zeal is still predominant.
Then John there is no way to keep thy crown,
But finely to dissemble with the Pope:
That hand that gave the wound must give the salve
To cure the hurt, else quite incurable.
Thy sins are far too great to be the man
T'abolish Pope, and Popery from thy Realm:
But in thy Seat, if I may guess at all,
A King shall reign that shall suppress them all.
Peace John, here comes the Legate of the Pope,
Dissemble thou, and whatsoere thou sai'st,
Yet with thy heart wish their confusion.

Enter Pandulph. Pand. Now John, unworthy man to breath on earth,
That do oppugn against thy mother Church:
Why am I sent for to thy cursed self?

John. Thou man of God, Vicegerent for the Pope,
The holy Vicar of S. Peter's Church,
Upon my knees, I pardon crave of thee,
And do submit me to the sea of Rome,
And vow for penance of my high offense,
To take on me the holy Cross of Christ,
And carry Arms in holy Christian wars.

Pand. No John, thy crowching and dissembling thus
Cannot deceive the Legate of the Pope,
Say what thou will, I will not credit thee:
Thy Crown and Kingdom both are taken away,
And thou art cursed without redemption.

John Accursed indeed to kneel to such a drudge,
And get no help with thy submission,
Vnsheathe thy sword, and sley the misprowd priest
That thus triumphs ore thee a mighty King:
No John, submit again, dissemble yet,
For Priests and Women must be flattered.
Yet holy Father thou thy self do know,
No time too late for sinners to repent,
Absolve me then, and John does swear to do
The uttermost what ever thou demaundst.

Pandulph John, now I see thy hearty penitence,
I rue and pity thy distressed estate,
One way is left to reconcile thy self,
And only one which I shall show to thee.
Thou must surrender to the sea of Rome
Thy Crown and Diadem, then shall the Pope
Defend thee from th'inuasion of thy foes.
And where his Holiness has kindled France,
And set thy subjects hearts at war with thee,
Then shall he curse thy foes, and beat them down,
That seek the coffeehouse of the King.

John From bad to worse, or I must loose my realm,
Or give my Crown for penance unto Rome:
A misery more piercing than the darts
That break from burning exhalations power.
What, shall I give my Crown with this right hand?
No: with this hand defend thy Crown and thee.
What news with thee?

Enter Messenger. Please it your Majesty, there is descried on the coast of
Kent an hundred Sail of Ships, which of all men is thought to be the French
fleet, under the conduct of the Dolphin, so that it puts the country in a
mutiny, so they send to your Grace for succor.


K. Ioh. How now Lord Cardinal, what is your best advise?
These mutinies must be allaid in time,
By policy or headstrong rage at least.
O John, these troubles tire thy wearied soul,
And like to Luna in a sad Eclipse,
So are thy thoughts and passions for this news.
Well may it be, when Kings are grieved so,
The vulgar sort work Princes overthrow.

Card. K. John, for not effecting of thy plighted vow,
This strange annoyance happens to thy Land:
But yet be reconciled unto the Church,
And nothing shall be grievous to thy state.

Ioh. On Pandulph, be it as thou have decreed,
John will not spurn against thy sound advise,
Come lets away, and with thy help I trow,
My Realm shall flourish, and my Crown in peace.

Enter the Nobles, Pembrooke, Essex, Chester, Bewchampe, Clare, with others.
Pemb. Now sweet S. Edmund holy Saint in heaven,
Whose Shrine is sacred, high esteemed on earth,
Infuze a constant zeal in all our hearts,
To prosecute this act of mickle weight,
Lord Bewchampe say, what friends have you procured.

Bewch. The L. Fitz Water, L. Percie, and L. Rosse,
Vowed meeting here this day the leuenth hour.

Essex. Under the cloak of holy pilgrimage,
By that same hour on warrant of their faith,
Philip Plantagenet, a bird of swiftest wing,
Lord Eustauce, Vescy, Lord Cressy, and Lord Mowbrey,
Appointed meeting at S. Edmunds shrine.

Pemb. Until their presence, I Will conceal my tale,
Sweet accomplices in holy Christian acts,
That venture for the purchasse of renown,
Thrice welcome to the league of high resolve,
That pawn their bodies for their souls regard.

Essex. Now wants but the rest to end this work,
In Pilgrims habit comes our holy troop
A furlong hence, with swift unwonted pace,
May be they are the persons you expect.

Pemb. With swift unwonted gate, see what a thing is zeal,
That spurs them on with feruence to this shrine,
Now joy come to them for their true intent:
And in good time, here come the war-men all,
That sweat in body by the minds disease:
Hap and hearts-ease brave Lordings be your lot.
Enter the Bastard Philip, etc. Amen my Lords, the like betide your luck,
And all that travel in a Christian cause.

Essex. Cheerely replied brave branch of Kingly stocko,
A right Plantagenet should reason so.
But silence Lords, attend our commings cause:
The servile yoke that pained us with toil,
On strong instinct has framed this conuenticle,
To ease our necks of seruitudes contempt.
Should I not name the foeman of our rest,
Which of you all so barren in conceit,
As cannot level at the man I mean?
But lest Enigma's shadow shining truth,
Plainly to paint, as truth requires no art.
The Effect of this resort imports this,
To root and clean extirpate tyrant John,
Tyrant I say, appealing to the man,
If any here that loves him, and I ask,
What kindship, lenity, or Christian reign,
Rules in the man, to bar this soul impeach?
First I infer the Chesters banishment:
For reprehending him in most unchristian crimes*
Was special notice of a tyrants will.
But were this all, the devil should be saved,
But this the least of many thousand faults,
That circumstance with leisure might display.
Our private wrongs, no parcel of my tale
Which now in presence, but for some great cause
Might wish to him as to a mortal foe.
But shall I close the period with an act
Abhorring in the ears of Christian men,
His cousins death, that sweet vnguiltie child,
Untimely butcherd by the tyrants means,
Here are my proofs, as clear as grauel brook,
And on the same I further must infer,
That who vpholds a tyrant in his course,
Is culpable of all his damned guilt.
To show the which, is yet to be described.
My Lord of Pembrooke, show what is behind,
Only I say, that were there nothing else
To move us, but the Popes most dreadful curse,
Whereof we are assured, if we fail,
It were enough to instigate us all,
With earnestness ofsprite, to seek a mean
To dispossess John of his regiment.

Pemb. Well has my Lord of Essex told his tale,
Which I auerre* for most substantial truth,
And more to make the matter to our mind,
I say that Lewis in challenge of his wife,
Has title of an uncontrolled plea,
To all that longs to our English crown.
Short tale to make, the Sea Apostolic,
Has offered dispensation for the fault.
If any be, as trust me none I know,
By planting Lewis in the Usurpers room:
This is the cause of all our presence here,
That on the holy Altar we protest,
To aid the right of Lewis with goods and life,
Who on our knowledge is in arms for England.
What say you Lords?

Salis. As Pembrooke says, affirms Salisburie:
Fair Lewis of France that spoused Lady Blanch,
Has title of an uncontrolled strength
To England, and what longs to the Crown:
In right whereof, as we are true informed,
The Prince is marching hitherward in arms.
Our purpose, to conclude that with a word,
Is to inuest him as we may devise,
King of our country, in the tyrants stead:
And so the warrant on the Altar sworn,
And so the intent for which we hither came.

Bast. My Lord of Salisburie, I cannot couch
My speeches with the needful words of art,
As does beseem in such a weighty work,
But what my conscience and my duty will,
I purpose to impart.
For Chesters exile, blame his busy wit,
That meddled where his duty quite forbade:
For any private causes that you have,
Me think they should not mount to such a height,
As to depose a King in their revenge.
For Arthurs death, K. John was innocent,
He desperate was the deathsman to himself,
Which you, to make a color to your crime, iniustly do impute to his defalt,
But where fell traitorisme has reside^ce,
There wants no words to set despite on work.
I say it is shame, and worthy all reproof,
To wrest such petty wrongs in terms of right,
Against a King anointed by the Lord.
Why Salsburie, admit the wrongs are true,
Yet subjects may not take in hand revenge,
And rob the heavens of their proper power,
Where sits he to whom revenge belongs.
And does a Pope, a priest, a man of pride,
Give charters for the lives of lawful kings?
What can he bless, or who regards his curse,
But such as give to man, and take from God?
I speak it in the sight of God above,
There Is not a man that dies in your belief,
But sels his soul perpetually to pain.
Aid Lewis, leave God, kill John, please hell,
Make havoc of the welfare of your souls,
For here I leave you in the sight of heaven,
A troop of traitors, food for hellish fiends;
If you desist, then follow me as friends,
If not, then do your worst, as hateful traitors.
For Lewis his right, alas it is too too lame,
A senseless claim, if truth be titles friend.
In brief, if this be cause of our resort,
Our pilgrimage is to the devils shrine.
I came not Lords, to troop as traitors do,
Nor will I counsel in so bad a cause:
Please you return, we go again as friends,
If not, I to my King, and you where traitors please.

Exit. Percie. A hot young man, and so my Lords proceed,
I let him go, and better lost than found.

Pemb. What say you Lords, will all the rest proceed,
Will you all with me swear upon the Altar,
That you will to the death, be aid to Le. and enemy to John?
Every man lay his hand by mine, in witness of his hearts accord.
Well then, every man to arms to meet the king,
Who is already before London.

Enter Messenger. Pemb. What news Herald?

The right Christian Prince my master, Lewis of France, is at hand, coming to
visit your Honors, directed hither by the right honorable Richard Earl of
Bigot, to confer with your honors.


Pemb. How near is his Highness?


Mes. Ready to enter your presence.


Enter Lewis, Earl Bigot, with his troop. Lew. Fair Lords of England, Lewis
salutes you all
As friends, and firm wel-willers of his weal,
At whose request, from plenty flowing France,
Crossing the Ocean with a Southern gale,
He is in person come at your commands,
To undertake and gratify withal,
The fullness of your favors profferd him.
But worlds brave men, omitting promises,
Till time be minister of more amends,
I must acquaint you with our fortunes course.
The heavens dewing favors on my head,
Have in their conduct safe with victory,
Brought me along your well manured bounds,
With small repulse, and little cross of chance,
Your City Rochester, with great applause,
By some divine instinct laid arms aside:
And from the hollow holes of Thamesis,
Echo apace replied, Viue la Roy.
From thence, along the wanton rolling glade
To Troynouant, your fair Metropolis,
With luck came Lewis, to show his troops of France,
Wauing our Ensigns with the dallying winds,
The fearful object of fell frowning war;
Where after some assault, and small defense,
Heavens may I say, and not my warlike troop,
Temperd their hearts to take a friendly foe
Within the compass of their high built walls,
Giving me title, as it seemd they wish.
Thus fortune (Lords) acts to your forwardness,
Means of content, in lieu of former grief:
And may I live but to requite you all,
Worlds wish were mine, in dying noted yours.

Salis. Welcome the balm that closes up our wounds,
The sovereign medcine for our quick recure,
The anchor of our hope, the only prop,
Whereon depends our lives, our lands, our weal,
Without the which, as sheep without their heird,
(Except a shepherd winking at the wolf)
We stray, we pine, we run to thousand harms.
No marvel then, though with unwonted joy,
We welcome him that beats woes away.

Lew. Thanks to you all of this religious league,
A holy knot of Catholic consent.
I cannot name you Lordings, man by man,
But like a stranger unacquainted yet,
In general I promise faithful love:
Lord Bigot brought me to S. Edmunds shrine,
Giving me warrant of a Christian oath
That this assembly came (...)
To swear according as your p^ckets showed,
Homage and loyal service to our self,
I need not doubt the surety of your wills,
Since well I know, for many of your sakes,
The towns have yielded on their own accords:
Yet for a fashion, not for misbeleefe,
My eyes must witness, and these ears must hear
Your oath upon the holy Altar sworn,
And after march, to end our commings cause.

Sals. That we intend no other than good truth,
All that are present of this holy league,
For confirmation of our better trust,
In presence of his Highness, swear with me,
The sequel that my self shall utter here.
I Thomas Plantaginet, Earl of Salisburie, swear upon the Altar, and by the
holy army of Saints, homage and allegiance to the right Christian Prince Lewis
of France, as true and rightful King to England, Cornwall, and Wales, and to
their territories: in the defense whereof, I upon the holy Altar swear all
forwardness. All the Eng. Lo. swear.

As the noble Earl has sworn, so swear we all.


Lew. I rest assured on your holy oath,
And on this Altar in like sort I swear
Love to you all, and princely recompense
To guerdon your good wills unto the full.
And since I am at this religious shrine,
My good wel-willers give us leave awhile,
To use some orizons our selves apart,
To all the holy company of heaven,
That they will smile upon our purposes,
And bring them to a fortunate event.

Sal. We leave your Highness to your good intent.


Exeunt Lords of England. Lew. Now Vicount Meloun, what remains behind?
Trust me these traitors to their Sovereign State,
Are not to be believed in any sort.

Meloun. Indeed my Lord, they that infringe their oths,
And play the Rebels against their native King,
Will for as little cause revolt from you,
If ever opportunity incite them so:
For once forsworn, and never after sound,
There Is no affiance after perjury.

Lew. Well Meloun, well, let us smooth with the^ awhile,
Until we have as much as they can do:
And when their virtue is exhaled dry,
I Will hang them for the guerdon of their help:
Mean while we will use them as a precious poison,
To undertake the issue of our hope.

Fr. Lo. It Is policy (my Lord) to bait our hooks
With merry smiles, and promise of much weight:
But when your Highness needs them no more.
It Is good make sure work with them, lest indeed
They prove to you as to their natural King.

Melun. Trust me my Lord, right well have you aduisde,
Venom for use, but never for a sport
Is to be dallied with, lest it infect.
Were you instald, as soon I hope you shall:
Be free from traitors, and dispatch them all.

Jews That so I mean, I swear before you all
On this same Altar, and by heavens power,
There Is not an English traitor of them all,
John once dispatched, and I fair Englands King,
Shall on his shoulders bear his head one day,
But I will crop it for their guilts desert:
Nor shall their heirs enjoy their Seigniories,
But perish by their parents foul amiss.
This have I sworn, and this will I perform,
If ere I come unto the height I hope.
Lay down your hands, and swear the same with me.
The French Lords swear. Why so, now call them in, and speak them fair,
A smile of France will feed an English fool.
Bear them in hand as friends, for so they be:
But in the heart like traitors as they are.
Enter the English Lords. Now famous followers, chiefetaines of the world,
Have we solicited with hearty prayer
The heaven in favor of our high attempt.
Leave we this place, and march we with our power
To rowse the tyrant from his chiefest hold:
And when our labors have a prosperous end,
Each man shall reap the fruit of his desert.
And so resolved, brave followers let us hence.
Enter K. John, Bastard, Pandulph, and a many Priests with them. Thus John,
thou art absolu'd from all thy sins,
And freed by order from our Fathers curse.
Receive thy Crown again, with this prouiso,
That thou remain true liegeman to the Pope,
And carry arms in right of holy Rome.

John I hold the same as tenant to the Pope,
And thank your Holiness for your kindness shown.

Philip A proper jest, when Kings must stoop to Friars,
Need has no law, when Friars must be Kings.

Enter a Messenger. Mess. Please it your majesty, the Prince of France,
With all the Nobles of your Graces Land
Are marching hitherward in good array.
Where ere they set their foot, all places yield:
Thy Land is theirs, and not a foot holds out
But Dover Castle, which is hard besieged.

Pan. Fear not king John, thy kingdom is the Popes,
And they shall know his Holiness has power,
To beat them soon from whence he has to do.

Drums and Trumpets. Enter Jews, Melun, Salisbury, Essex, Pembrooke, and all
the Nobles from France, and England. Jews Pandulph, as gave his Holiness in
charge,
So has the Dolphin mustred up his troops,
And won the greatest part of all this Land.
But ill becomes your Grace Lord Cardinal,
Thus to converse with John that is accursed.

Pand. Jews of France, victorious Conqueror,
Whose sword has made this Island quake for fear;
Thy forwardness to fight for holy Rome,
Shall be remunerated to the full:
But know my Lord, K. John is now absolu'd,
The Pope is pleased, the Land is blessed again,
And thou have brought each thing to good effect.
It rests then that thou withdraw thy powers,
And quietly return to France again:
For all is done the Pope would wish thee do.

Jews But all is not done that Jews came to do.
Why Pandulph, has king Philip sent his son
And been at such excessive charge in wars,
To be dismissed with words? king John shall know,
England is mine, and he vsurps my right.

Pand. Jews, I charge thee and thy accomplices
Upon the pain of Pandulphs holy curse,
That thou withdraw thy powers to France again,
And yield up London and the neighbor towns
That thou have taken in England by the sword.

Melun Lord Cardinal, by Jews princely leave,
It can be naught but usurpation
In thee, the Pope, and all the Church of Rome,
Thus to insult on Kings of Christendom,
Now with a word to make them carry arms,
Then with a word to make them leave their arms.
This must not be: Prince Jews keep thine own,
Let Pope and Popelings curse their bellies full.

Bast. My Lord of Melun, what title had the Prince
To England and the Crown of Albion,
But such a title as the Pope confirmed:
The Prelate now lets fall his fained claim:
Jews is but the agent for the Pope,
Then must the Dolphin cease, since he has ceast:
But cease or no, it greatly matters not,
If you my Lords and Barons of the Land
Will leave the French, and cleave unto our King.
For shame ye Peers of England suffer not
Your selves, your honors, and your land to fall:
But with resolved thoughts beat back the French,
And free the Land from yoke of servitude.

Salisbury Philip, not so, Lord Jews is our King,
And we will follow him unto the death.

Pand. Then in the name of Innocent the Pope,
I curse the Prince and all that take his part,
And excommunicate the rebel Peers
As traitors to the King, and to the Pope.

Lew. Pandulph, our swords shall bless our selves again:
Prepare thee John, Lords follow me your King.

Exeunt John Accursed John, the Devil owes thee shame,
Resisting Rome, or yielding to the Pope, all is one.
The devil take the Pope, the Peers, and France:
Shame be my share for yielding to the Priest.

Pand. Comfort thy self king John, the Cardnall goes
Upon his curse to make them leave their arms.

Exit. Bastard Comfort my Lord, and curse the Cardinal,
Betake your self to arms, my troops are pressed
To answer Jews with a lusty shocke:
The English archers have their quiuers full,
Their bows are bent, the pikes are pressed to push:
Good cheer my Lord, King Richards fortune hangs
Upon the plume of warrelike Philips helm.
Then let them know his brother and his son
Are leaders of the Englishmen at arms.

John Philip I know not how to answer thee:
But let us hence, to answer Jews pride.

Excursions. Enter Meloun with English Lords. Mel. O I am slain, Nobles,
Salsbury, Pembrooke,
My soul is charged, hear me: for what I say
Concerns the Peers of England, and their State.
Listen, brave Lords, a fearful mourning tale
To be delivered by a man of death.
Behold these scarres, the dole of bloody Mars
Are harbingers from natures common foe,
Citing this truncke to Tellus prison house;
Life's charter (Lordings) lasts not an hour:
And fearful thoughts, forerunners of my end,
Bids me give physic to a sickely soul.
O Peers of England, know you what you do?
There Is but a hair that sunders you from harm,
The hook is baited, and the train is made,
And simply you run doting to your deaths.
But lest I die, and leave my tale untold,
With silence slaughtering so brave a crew.
This I auerre, if Jews win the day,
There Is not an Englishman that lifts his hand
Against King John to plant the heir of France,
But is already damnd to cruel death.
I heard it vowed; my self amongst the rest
Swore on the Altar aid to this Edict.
Two causes Lords, makes me display this drift,
The greatest for the freedom of my soul,
That longs to leave this mansion free from guilt:
The other on a natural instinct,
For that my Grandsire was an Englishman.
Misdoubt not Lords the truth of my discourse,
No frenzy, nor no brainsicke idle fit,
But well aduisde, and wotting what I say,
Pronounce I here before the face of heaven,
That nothing is discovered but a truth.
It Is time to fly, submit your selves to John,
The smiles of France shade in the frowns of death,
Lift up your swords, turn face against the French,
Expel the yoke that is framed for your necks.
Back warremen, back, imbowell not the clime,
Your seat, your nurse, your birth days breathing place,
That bred you, bears you, brought you up in arms.
Ah! be not so ingrate to dig your mothers grave,
Preserve your lambs and beat away the wolf.
My soul has said, contritions penitence
Lays hold on man's redemption for my sin.
Farewell my Lords; witness my faith when we are met in heaven,
And for my kindness give me grave room here.
My soul does fleet, worlds vanities farewell.

Sals. Now joy betide thy soul well-meaning man,
How now my Lords, what cooling card is this?
A greater grief grows now than erst has been.
What counsel give you, shall we stay and die?
Or shall we home, and kneel unto the King.

Pemb. My heart misgaue this sad accursed news:
What have we done? fie Lords, what frenzy moved
Our hearts to yield unto the pride of France?
If we persevere, we are sure to die:
If we desist, small hope again of life.

Salsb. Bear hence the body of this wretched man,
That made us wretched with his dying tale,
And stand not wayling on our present harms,
As women wont: but seek our harms redress.
As for my self, I will in haste be gone:
And kneel for pardon to our sovereign John.

Pemb. I, there is the way, lets rather kneel to him,
Than to the French that would confound us all.

Exeunt Enter King John carried between two Lords. John Set down, set down
the load not worth your pain,
For done I am with deadly wounding grief:
Sickely and succourlesse, hopeless of any good,
The world has wearied me, and I have wearied it:
It loathes I live, I live and loathe my self.
Who pities me? to whom have I been kind?
But to a few; a few will pity me.
Why die I not? Death scorns so vilde a prey.
Why live I not, life hates so sad a prize.
I sue to both to be retaind of either,
But both are deaf, I can be heard of neither.
Nor death nor life, yet life and near the near,
Ymixt with death, biding I wot not where.

Phil. How fares my Lord, that he is carried thus?
Not all the aukeward fortunes yet befalne,
Made such impression of lament in me.
Nor ever did my eye attaint my heart
With any object moving more remorse,
Than now beholding of a mighty King,
Borne by his Lords in such distressed State.

Ioh. What news with thee? if bad, report it straight*
If good, be mute, it does but flatter me.

Phil. Such as it is, and heavy though it be,
To glut the world with tragic elegies,
Once will I breathe to aggrauate the rest,
Another moan to make the measure full.
The brauest bow-man had not yet sent forth
Two arrows from the quiver at his side,
But that a rumor went throughout our Camp,
That John was fled, the King had left the field.
At last the rumor scaled these ears of mine,
Who rather chose as sacrifice for Mars,
Than ignominious scandal by retire.
I cheered the troops, as did the prince of Troy
His weary followers against the Mermidons,
Crying alowd, S. George, the day is ours.
But fear had captiuated courage quite,
And like the Lamb before the greedy Wolf,
So heartlesse fled our war-men from the field.
Short tale to make, my self amongst the rest,
Was feign to fly before the eager foe.
By this time night had shadowed all the earth,
With sable curtains of the blackest hue,
And fenced us from the fury of the French,
As Io from the jealous Iunoes eye,
When in the morning our troops did gather head,
Passing the washes with our carriages,
The impartial tide deadly and inexorable,
Came raging in with billows threatening death,
And swallowed up the most of all our men,
My self upon a Galloway right free, well paced,
Out stripped the floods that followed wave by wave,
I so escaped to tell this tragic tale.

John Grief upon grief, yet none so great a grief
To end this life, and thereby rid my grief.
Was ever any so unfortunate,
The right Idea of a cursed man,
As I, poor I, a triumph for despite,
My fever grows, what ague shakes me so?
How far to Sminstead, tell me, do you know?
Present unto the Abbot word of my repair.
My sickness rages, to tyrannize upon me,
I cannot live unless this fever leave me.

Philip Good cheer my Lord, the Abbey is at hand,
Behold my Lord, the Churchmen come to meet you.

Enter the Abbot and certain Monks. Abb. All health and happiness to our
sovereign lord the King.


John Nor health nor happiness has John at all.
Say Abbot, am I welcome to thy house?

Abbot Such welcome as our Abbey can afford,
Your Majesty shall be assured of.

Philip The King thou see is weak and very faint,
What victuals have thou to refresh his Grace?

Abb. Good stote my Lord, of that you need not fear,
For Lincolneshire, and these our Abbey grounds
Were never fatter, nor in better plight.

John Philip, thou never needst to doubt of cates,
Nor King nor Lord is seated half so well,
As are the Abbeis throughout all the land,
If any plot of ground do pass another,
The Friars fasten on it strait:
But let us in to taste of their repast,
It goes against my heart to feed with them,
Or be beholding to such Abbey grooms:

Exeunt. Manet the Monk. Monk Is this the King that never loved a Friar?
Is this the man that does contemn the Pope?
Is this the man that robbed the holy Church,
And yet will fly unto a Friory?
Is this the King that aims at Abbeis lands?
Is this the man whom all the world abhorres,
And yet will fly unto a Friorie?
Accursed be Swinstead Abbey, Abbot, Friars,
Monks, Nuns, and Clarks, and all that dwells therein,
If wicked John escape alive away.
Now if that thou will look to merit heaven,
And be canonized for a holy Saint:
To please the world with a deserving work,
Be thou the man to set thy country free,
And murder him that seeks to murder thee.

Enter the Abbot. Abbot Why are not you within to cheer the King?
He now begins to mend, and will to meat.

Monk What if I say to strangle him in his sleep?


Abbot What, at thy Mumpsimus? away,
And seek some means for to pastime the King.

Monk I Will set a dudgeon dagger at his heart,
And with a mallet knock him on the head.

Abbot Alas, what means this Monk to murder me?
Dare lay my life he will kill me for my place.

Monk I Will poison him, and it shall never be known,
And then shall I be chiefest of my house.

Abbot If I were dead indeed he is the next,
But I Will away, for why the Monk is mad,
And in his madness he will murder me.

Mon. My L.I cry your Lordship mercy, I saw you not.


Abbot Alas good Thomas do not murder me, and thou shall have my place with
thousand thanks.


Monk I murder you! God shield from such a thought.


Abbot If thou will needs, yet let me say my prayers.


Monk I will not hurt your Lordship good my Lord: but if you please, I will
impart a thing that shall be beneficial to us all.


Abbot Will thou not hurt me holy Monk? say on.


Monk You know my Lord, the King is in our house.


Abbot True.


Monk You know likewise the King abhorres a Friar.


Abbot True.


Monk And he that loves not a Friar is our enemy.


Abbot Thou say true.


Monk Then the King is our enemy.


Abbot True.


Mon. Why then should we not kill our enemy, and the king being our enemy, why
then should we not kill the K.


Abbot O blessed Monk! I see God moves thy mind
to free this land from tyrants slavery.
But who dare venture for to do this deed?

Mon. Who dare? why I my Lord dare do the deed,
I Will free my Country and the Church from foes,
And merit heaven by killing of a King.

Abbot Thomas kneel down, and if thou art resolved,
I will absolve thee here from all thy sins,
For why the deed is meritorious.
Forward, and fear not man, for every month,
Our Friars shall sing a Mass for Thomas soul.

Mon. God and S. Francis prosper my attempt,
For now my Lord I go about my work.

Exeunt. Enter Jews and his army. Jews Thus victory in bloody Laurel clad,
Follows the fortune of young Lodowike,
The Englishmen as danted at our sight,
Fall as the foul before the Eagles eyes,
Only two crosses of contrary change
Do nip my heart, and vex me with unrest.
Lord Meluns death, the one part of my soul,
A brauer man did never live in France.
The other grief, I that is a gall indeed,
To think that Dover Castle should hold out
Against all assaults, and rest impregnable.
Ye warrelike race of Francus Hectors son,
Triumph in conquest of that tyrant John,
The better half of England is our own:
And toward the conquest of the other part,
We have the face of all the English Lords,
What then remains but ouerrunne the land?
Be resolute my warrelike followers,
And if good fortune serve as she begins,
The poorest pesant of the realm of France
Shall Be a master ore an English Lord.

Enter a Messenger. Jews Fellow, what news?


Mess. Pleases your Grace, the Earl of Salsbury, Penbrooke, Essex, Clare, and
Arundell, with all the Barons that did fight for thee, are on a sudden fled
with all their powers, to join with John, to drive thee back again.


Enter another Messenger. Messen. Jews my Lord, why standst thou in a maze?
Gather thy troops, hope not of help from France,
For all thy forces being fifty sail,
Containing twenty thousand soldiers,
With victual and munition for the war,
Putting them from Callis in unlucky time,
Did cross the seas, and on the Goodwin sands,
The men, munition, and the ships are lost.

Enter another Messenger. Jews More news? say on.


Messen. John (my Lord ^ith all his scattered troops,
Flying the fury of your conquering sword,
As Pharaoh erst within the bloody sea,
So he and his environed with the tide,
On Lincoln washes all were overwhelmed,
The Barons fled, our forces cast away.

Jews Was ever heard such unexpected news?


Messenger Yet Lodowike revive thy dying heart,
King John and all his forces are consumde.
The less thou needst the aid of English Earls,
The less thou needst to grieve thy nauies wrack,
And follow times advantage with success.

Jews Brave Frenchmen armed with magnanimity,
March after Jews, who will lead you on
To chase the Barons power that wants a head,
For John is drowned, and I am Englands King.
Though our munition and our men be lost,
Philip of France will send us fresh supplies.

Exeunt. Enter two Friars laying a Cloth. Friar Dispatch, dispatch, the King
desires to eat,
Would a might eat his last for the love he bears to church men.

Friar I am of thy mind too, and so it should be and we might be our own
caruers.

I marvel why they dine here in the Orchard.


Friar I know not, nor I care not. The King comes.


John. Come on Lord Abbot, shall we sit together?


Abbot Pleases your Grace sit down.


John Take your places sirs, no pomp in penury, all beggars and friends may
come, where Necessity keeps the house, courtesy is barred the table, sit
down Philip.


Bast. My Lord, I am loath to allude so much to the proverb, honors change
manners: a king is a king, though Fortune do her worst, and we as dutiful in
despite of her frown, as if your highness were now in the highest tipe of
dignity.


John Come, no more ado, and you tell me much of dignity, you will mar my
appetite in a surfeit of sorrow. What cheer Lord Abbot, me thinks ye frown like
an host that knows his guest has no money to pay the reckning?


Abbot No my Liege, if I frown at all, it is for I fear this cheer too
homely to entertain so mighty a guest as your majesty.


Bast. I think rather, my Lord Abbot, you remember my last being here, when I
went in progress for powches, and the rancor of his heart breaks out in his
countenance, to show he has not forgot me.


Abb. Not so my Lord, you, and the meanest follower of his majesty, are
heartily welcome to me.


Monk Wassell my Liege, and as a poor Monk may say, welcome to Swinstead.


John Begin Monk, and report hereafter thou wast taster to a King.


Monk As much health to your Highness as to mine own heart.


John I pledge thee kind Monk.


Monk The merriest draught that ever was drunk in England.
Am I not too bold with your Highness?

John Not a whit, all friends and fellows for a time.


Monk If the inwards of a toad be a compound of any proof: why so it works.


John Stay Philip, where is the Monk?


Bastard He is dead my Lord.


John Then drink not Philip for a world of wealth.


Ba. What cheer my liege? your collor gins to change.


John So does my life: O Philip, I am poisoned.
The Monk, the Devil, the poison gins to rage,
It will depose my self a King from reign.

Bast. This Abbot has an interest in this act.
At all adventures take thou that from me.
There lie the Abbot, Abbey, Lubber, Devil.
March with the Monk unto the gates of hell.
How fares my Lord?

John Philip, some drink, oh for the frozen Alps,
To tumble on and cool this inward heat,
That rages as the furnace seuen-fold hot.
To burn the holy tree in Babylon,
Power after power forsake their proper power,
Only the heart impugnes with faint resist
The fierce invade of him that conquers Kings,
Help God, O pain! die John, O plague
Inflicted on thee for thy grievous sins.
Philip, a chair, and by and by a grave,
My legs disdain the carriage of a King.

Bast. A good my Liege, with patience conquer grief,
And bear this pain with kingly fortitude.

John Me thinks I see a catalogue of sin,
Wrote by a fiend in marble characters,
The least enough to loose my part in heaven.
Me thinks the Devil whispers in mine ears,
And tells me, it is in vain to hope for grace,
I must be damned for Arthurs sudden death,
I see I see a thousand thousand men
Come to accuse me for my wrong on earth,
And there is none so merciful a God
That will forgive the number of my sins.
How have I lived, but by another loss?
What have I loved, but wrack of others weal?
When have I vowed, and not infringed mine oath?
Where have I done a deed deserving well?
How, what, when, and where, have I bestowed a day,
That tended not to some notorious ill.
My life repleate with rage and tyranny,
Craves little pity for so strange a death.
Or, who will say that John deceasde too soon?
Who will not say, he rather lived too long.
Dishonor did attaint me in my life,
And shame attends John unto his death.
Why did I escape the fury of the French,
And did not by the temper of their swords?
Shameless my life, and shamefully it ends,
Scorned by my foes, disdained of my friends.

Bast. Forgive the world and all your earthly foes,
And call on Christ, who is your latest friend.

John My tongue does falter: Philip, I tell thee man,
Since John did yield unto the Priest of Rome,
Nor he nor his have prospred on the earth:
Cursed are his blessings, and his curse is bliss.
But in the spirit I cry unto my God,
As did the kingly prophet David cry,
(Whose hands, as mine, with murder were attaint)
I am not he shall build the Lord a house,
Or root these locusts from the face of earth:
But if my dying heart deceive me not,
From out these loins shall spring a kingly branch
Whose arms shall reach unto the gates of Rome,
And with his feet treades down the Strumpets pride,
That sits upon the chair of Babylon.
Philip, my heart strings break, the poisons flame
Has overcome in me weak Natures power,
And in the faith of Jesus John does die.

Bastard See how he strives for life, unhappy Lord,
Whose bowels are divided in themselves.
This is the fruit of Popery, when true Kings
Are slain and shouldred out by Monks and Friars.

Enter a Messenger. Mess. Please it your Grace, the Barons of the Land,
Which all this while bare arms against the King,
Conducted by the Legate of the Pope,
Together with the Prince his Highness son,
Do crave to be admitted to the presence of the King.

Bast. Your Son, my Lord, young Henry craves to see
Your Majesty, and brings with him beside
The Barons that revolted from your Grace.
O piercing sight, he fumbleth in the mouth,
His speech does fail: lift up your self my Lord,
And see the Prince to comfort you in death.

Enter Pandulph, young Henry, the Barons with daggers in their hands. Prince O
let me see my father ere he die:
O uncle, were you here, and suffered him
To be thus poysned by a damned Monk?
Ah he is dead, Father, sweet Father speak.

Bastard His speech does fail, he hastes to his end.


Pandulph Lords, give me leave to joy the dying King,
With sight of these his Nobles kneeling here
With daggers in their hands, who offer up
Their lives for ransom of their foul offense.
Then good my Lord, if you forgive them all,
Lift up your hand in token you forgive.

Salis. We humbly thank your royal Majesty,
And vow to fight for England and her King:
And in the sight of John our sovereign Lord,
In spite of Jews and the power of France,
Who hitherward are marching in all haste,
We crown young Henry in his fathers sted.

Henry Help, help, he dies; Ah father! look on me.


Legate K. John, farewell: in token of thy faith,
And sign thou die the servant of the Lord,
Lift up thy hand, that we may witness here,
Thou diedst the servant of our Savior Christ.
Now joy betide thy soul: what noise is this?

Enter a Messenger. Mess. Help Lords, the Dolphin makes hitherward
With Ensigns of defiance in the wind,
And all our army stands at a gaze,
Expecting what their Leaders will command.

Bast. Let Us arm our selves in young K. Henry's right,
And beat the power of France to sea again.

Legate Philip not so, but I will to the Prince,
And bring him face to face to parley with you.

Bast. Lord Salsbury, your self shall march with me.
So shall we bring these troubles to an end.

King Sweet uncle, if thou love thy Sovereign,
Let not a stone of Swinstead Abbey stand,
But pull the house about the Friars ears:
For they have killed my Father and my King.

Exeunt. A Parley sounded, Jews, Pandulph, Salisbury etc. Pand. Jews of
France, young Henry Englands king
Requires to know the reason of the claim
That thou can make to any thing of his.
King John that did offend, is dead and gone,
See where his breathless trunk in presence lies,
And he as heir apparent to the crown
Is now succeeded in his Fathers room.

Henry Jews, what law of arms does lead thee thus,
To keep possession of my lawful right?
Answer; in fine, if thou will take a peace,
And make surrender of my right again,
Or try thy title with the dint of sword:
I tell thee Dolphin, Henry fears thee not.
For now the Barons cleave unto their King,
And what thou have in England they did get.

Jews Henry of England, now that John is dead,
That was the chiefest enemy to France,
I may the rather be inducde to peace.
But Salsbury, and you Barons of the Realm,
This strange revolt agrees not with the oath
That you on Bury Altar lately swear.

Sals. Nor did the oath your Highness there did take
Agree with honor of the Prince of France.

Bast. My Lord, what answer make you to the King?


Dolphin Faith Philip this I say: It boots not me,
Nor any Prince, nor power of Christendom
To seek to win this Island Albion,
Unless he have a party in the Realm
By treason for to help him in his wars.
The Peers which were the party on my side,
Are fled from me: then boots not me to fight,
But on conditions, as mine honor wills,
I am contented to depart the Realm.

Henry On what conditions will your Highness yield?


Lew. That shall we think upon by more advice.


Bast. Then Kings and Princes, let these broils have end,
And at more leisure talk upon the League.
Mean while to Worster let us bear the King,
And there interre his body, as beseemes.
But first, in sight of Jews heir of France,
Lords take the Crown, and set it on his head,
That by succession is our lawful King.
They crown young Henry. Thus Englands peace begins in Henry's reign,
And bloody wars are closde with happy league.
Let England live but true within it self,
And all the world can never wrong her State.
Jews, thou shall be bravely shipped to France,
For never Frenchman got of English ground
The twentieth part that thou have conquered.
Dolphin, thy hand; to Worster we will march:
Lords all, lay hands to bear your Sovereign
With obsequies of honor to his grave:
If Englands Peers and people join in one,
Nor Pope, nor France, nor Spain can do them wrong.

FINIS.

