The treatise answering the book of Berdes. Compyled by Collyn clowte,
dedycatyd to Barnarde barber dwelling in Banbery.



To drink with me, be not a ferde
For here ye se grows never a berde*


I am a Fool of Cock lorellys bote
Calling al knaves, to pull therein a rope.
The preface, or the pystle.
TO the right worshypfulle (Barnarde Barber,) dwelling in Banberye, Collyn*
Clowte, surrendreth gretynge with immortal thanks.

IT was so worshypful sir, that at my last being in Mountpyllour I chau^sed to
be assocyat with a doctor of Physyke / which at his return had set forth.iij.
Books to be prynted i^ Fleetstrete, within Temple bar, the which Books were
compyled together i^ one volume named the Introductorie of knowledge / whereupon
there did not resort only unto him merchants, gentylmen, and wymen / but also
knights, and other great men, which were desirous to know the effycacyte,
and the effect of his aforesaid bodis, and so among many things, they
desired to know his fansye, consernynge the werynge of Berdes / He answered in
great experyence. Some will weer berdis because their faces be pocky, maungy
sausflewme, lyporous, and dysfygured / by the which many clean men were
infected. So this done he desired every man to be contentyd: Wherefore I desire
no man to be dyspleasyd with me. And where as he was anymatyd to write his book
to the end, that great men may laugh thereat / I have devised this answer to the
intent: that i^ the redyng they might laughe us both to scorn / And for that
cause I wrote this book, as god knows my pretense / who ever keape your
maystershyp in health.

Here follows a treatise, made Answering the treatise of doctor Board upon
Berdes.
Calling to remembrance your notable reproach given unto berdes, I was
constrained to render the occasion thereof, whereupon, I found by long surmyse
and study that ye had red the storye of Hellogobalus, and found therein great
and strong auctoryties / which by lykelyhode mouyd you to this Reformacyon of
berdes. For ye know that Hellogobalus being given much to the desire of the
body, and that by much superfluyte, ye thought it requysyght to commit the
fylthy syn^e of lechey, upon the receyptes of delycate meats. For he caused
his cokes to make and ordeyne such hot meats that may provoke or st^t^ him
the rather thereunto. And i^ there so doing he made them some of his preuye
chamber some of his head lords of his counsel But yet the chief and pryncypall
preseptes that he gave unto his cokes, was this that they should not only polle
their hedes, but also shave their berdes. For this entente, that when he were
dronkyn, or v^^etynge ripe by taking excess, that he might be well assuryd,
that it came not by no here of from his cokes heddes. For his delyght was not
only in the feminyne kind / and also delyghted in wo^^^^y me^n / yet ^^ and
his syne vnder^y^ faces led not only a ^ytyous life, but also made a
shameful end. Not withstanding other that, or this storye following was and
^s the ^^^alyon why yt abore berdes, and that was this at your last being in
Mowntpyllyer, Martyn the surgyen being there with you, and did accompany daily
with none so much as with you: if ye be remembered, he brought you to dinner upon
a day to one Hans smormowthes house a duche man, in which house you were
cupshore, otherwise called dronkyn, at which time your berde was long / so
then your assocyat martyn brought you to bed / and with the remouyng your
stomach tornyd, and so ye vometyd in his bosom, howbeit as much as your berde
might hold upon your berde remained till the next day in the morenyng. And
when ye waked and smelt your own berde, ye fell to it a fresshe, and calling
for your friend Martyn showing the cause of this last myschaunce. whereupon ye
desired to shave you. And so when ye saw your berde ye said that it was a
shamfull thing on any man's face. And so it is in such cases I not deny / yet
shall ye consider, that our English men being in England does use to keep
their berdes much more clen

(...) As ^^^ge as any berdes be worn
Mocking shall not be forborne
But yet al length his is the scorn.
I fere it not
with berdyd men, he will not drink
Because it does in their berdes synke
The cause thereof, ye may soon think
His berde in Flaunders ones did stynke
which by dystulacyon
Of a vomytacyon
Made such dysturbacyon
That it abored the nacyon.
I fere it not
Some berdes he says does grow a pace
To hyde an evil roleryd face
In faith his had an homlye grace
when he was in that dronkyn case
But sithe he does this matter stere
To make that shauynge should be dear
I think it does full well appear
That foles had never less wit in a year
I fere it not
A berde says he, will breyd much care
If that he with his master compare
Hi^ may ye prove a wy^ full dare
That judges so a man to fare
what man living, I would feign know
That for comperason letes his berde grow
But yet though that a spyghtfull shrow
His spyghtful words, abroad does blow
I fere it not, etc
Of berdes he says, there co^ms no gaynes
and berdes quycknyth not the brains
Lo how in Physyke, he takes pains
He merytes a busshel of brwers graynes
He warns also every estate
To avoid berdes, for fere of debate
If men, like him should use to prate
His warnyng then should come to late.
I fere it not
If berdes also a purse does pycke
As ye compare them to be like
yet ye have got more in one wycke
Then berdes in.x. together may stryke
For by casting of a pyspotte
ye have pollyd many a grote
yea and much more god wotte
By falshede ye have got.
I fere it not
yet one thing more, I will assail
The danger of drynkyng ye do bewail
Believe ye me, if all do fail
Instead of a cup, ye shall have a payle
For you have given warning plain
That berdyd men, shall be full feign
To bring a cup, for their own gain
The more fool you, so to dysdayne,
I fere it not
Note me well, for it is true
Though berdyd men, ye will eschew
There be much honyster men than you
That will drink long, or they do spewe
As you have done, I know or this
wherefore I say, though so it is
I will not tell that is amys
yet will I tell, some trewyth yewys.
I fere it not
yet of one thing, that ye do treat
How that a berde, in a great sweet
By like does catch, a kauysshe hete
Thereby ye do a great praise get
For trewely unfeigned
your honyste is dystayned
All though ye have dysdayned
Men know ye have sustained.
I fere it not
Though in the winter, a dew will lie
That dystylleth from the nose pryuelye
To refrain your cup, ye pray the^ hartly
And all is for superflous glotonye
For glotony, is of such a kind
That end of excess, he can none find
Till past is both, the wit and mind
So one of those ye be assynde.
I fere it not
The second part of that song.
I Little thought, ye were so wise
Berdes to deuyse of the new guyse
But truly, for your enterprise
ye may go cast your wit at dyse
At syncke or syse, which so does fall
Fere ye not to cash at all
For if you lose your lostes be small
It is to dear, a tenys ball.
I fere it not
A berde upon his over lyppe
ye say will be a proper tryppe
whereby ye shall the better skyppe
Go your ways. I dare let you slyppe
where as be many more
I think by.xx. score
In cock lorelles ^ote before
ye may take anore.
I fere it not
yet though that ye one thing do crave
which is a muster deuyles berde to have
ye make me study, so god me save
If this peticion, came not of a knave
Perhapes some other man did make it
And so ye did up take it
But best ye were forsake it
For fere of Pears go nakyt.
Now fere you that
ye say some berdes be like la^bes woll
with little wit within their skull
who goth a mile, to suck a bull
Comes home a fool, and yet not full
And where ye wyshe the^ pekt with pyes
That weres a berde, unto their lies
Be wise take heed, such homely spies
O times can spy your crafty lies.
I fere it not
But sir I pray you, if you tell can
Declare to me when god made man
I mean by our forefather Adam
whyther that he had a berde than
And if he had, who did him shave
Sith that a (...), he could no^ have
well then ye prove him there a knave
Because his berde, he did so save.
I fere it not
Christ and his apostles, ye have declared
That their berdes might not be spared
Nor to their berdes, no berdes co^paryd
True it is, yet we repayryd
By his vocacion, to follow in general
His disciples, both great and small
And following there use we should not fall
Nothing exceptynge our berdes at all
I fere it not
Sa^pson with many thousands more
Of ancient philosophers, full great store
would not be shaven, to dye therefore
why should you then, repyne so sore
Amyt that men does Imytate
Things of antyquite, and noble state
Such cou^terfeat things oftymes do mytygate
Much ernest ire, and debate.
I fere it not
Therefore to cease, I think be best
For berdyd men, would live in rest
you prove your self, a homly gest
So folyfshely, to rail and jest
For if I would go make in ryme
How new shauyd me^, look like scraped fwyne
and so rail forth, from time to time
A knauysshe laud, then should be mine
I fere it not
what should avail, me to do so
if I should teach, how men should go
Thinking my wit, much better lo
Then any other, friend or fo
I might be imputed trewly
For a fool, that does gloryfye
In my nowne self only
I think you will it veryfye.
I fere it not
And thus farewell, though I do wryght
To answer for berdes, by reason right
yet vnberdyd men, I do not spyght
Though ye on berdes therein delyght
And in concludynge, of this thing
I pray god, laue our noble king
Berdes and vnberdyd, to heaven us bring
Where as is Joy everlasting.
I fere it not. etc.
Finis,
Barnes in the defense of the Berde.


BArnes I say if thou be shent
Because thou wantyst eloquence
Desire them that thine intent
May sto^de all times for thy defense
Considering that thy hole pretense
was more desirous of unity
Then to enuent curyosyte.
R W

Ad imprimendum solum.


