THE DVKE OF SAXONY HIS IVBILEE: With A SHORT CHRONOLOGY.

BOTH Showing the goodness of God, in blessing the Go^^^^ of Christ, since
LVTHER first opposed the Popes Pardons.

Revel 6.2. and 19.11, 13, 19, 21. I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he
that sat on him, had a bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth
conquering, and to conquer.

Printed by WILLIAM JONES dwelling in Red-crosse-streete. 1618.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader; It is an abhorred custom of the Synagogue of Rome to
publish common prayers in a strange tongue: it would be (at least) a blame
worthy oversight in these our home planted Churches of Christ not to publish
common praises in our vulgar tongue. The former takes away the possibility of
saying Amen with our own spirits: the latter neglects a just opportunity of
finging a joint (though as yet an earthly) Halelu-iah with Gods Saints:
Receive therefore here offered to thine hands common praises in thy propper
language, to wit, a Iubile observed in Saxony, and by the translation of a
worthy Minister in our London Dutch Church, made a rejoicing assumed in
England. Were it not translated, it could not be understood, were it not
understood it could not be a rejoicing to the English, which get it ought to
be, because it ministers matter of praises to God common to them with the
Dutch. Our rule wills it should be common. For when the Proper in (Psalm.
102.) had made it a note of all Gods servants that they take pleasure in the
ston^s of Zion, and a promise of their Master that he would build up Zion, he
concludes in Psalm. 18. that This shall be written for the generations to come,
and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord. Now we and all
Gods people wheresoever, make up all but one body, the Church (which is Zion)
the requickening and recollecting of whose members was in part, by Luther
effected: we have all but one head, Christ, the functions of whom, and sole
effecacy of whose merits were by Luther cleared, and defended: we have all but
one Faith and Gospel, which in fundamental points was by Luther professed,
and propagated. Seeing therefore this requickening of the Churches members,
this defense of Christ's merits, this profession of the true Faith made in the
beginning of the next preceding age are here joyfully recognized let that
promise of the rearing of Zion, once written, now performed, stir up us the
generations following in England as well as in Germany, to praise the Lord.
Hereby shall we show the feeling of fellow members, and the communion of
Saint-like believers in preferring Jerusalem above our chiefest joy: Psalm.
137.6. Add we to our rule commanding, the examples of others provoking to make
this matter of rejoicing common. Diverse other parts of Germany in a godly
imitation have Iubilized with Saxony, and in some places, authority has
caused new coins to be stamped with sentences comprehending the letters
numerall of the year. 1617. terminating the Age since Luther first set up his
propositions. These let us follow howsoever, perhaps, not in stamping the
letters of the year upon our coins, yet in imprinting the glad tidings
thereof in our hearts. You see (gentle reader) that this Iubile ought to be
common: now that it may be more common, understand that it is Christian. Here
is not any Popish rite, sauouring of iudaisme, thrust upon any of the Churches.
For why? Rome, in an apish (because unwarranted) imitation of the Jewish
Church, retains years of Iubile as a perpetuated rite of the Gospel: the
Churches of Christ do not so: Rome appoints state or set times for her
Iubilies: the Churches of Christ do not so. This presented Iubile of Saxony
is my warrant. The occasion whereof was taken from a prophecy currantly
received among the Papists (though as blind in the uttering, as false in the
event) namely, that Luthers doctrine should breath out its last, with the
expiring of an hundredth years. Which being laid and weighed in the balance
by the Christian Duke of Saxony, and other Princes, together with their own
experimental knowledge of the now more then ever, flourishing and roote-taking
of the doctrine of the Gospel both throughout Germany, and in other countries,
they not only found that Prophecy to light and the Prophets thereof vain, but
also thought fit, by way of an holy Triumph, and Feast (as it were) of
shouting, thankefully to solemnize the remembrance of their manumission from
the thraldom of Antchrist, by the hand of God upon Luther, and through Luther
just an hundredth years before. So that the occasion and time hereof being of
so extraordinary nature, no doubt but God is hereby much glorified, in that by
the same the hearts of his people are more quickened to the more affectionate
embracino of his truth so graciously continued And here, if thou will give me
leave I will adventure to make a surer Prophecy then thr Papists did, viz. The
second coming of Mahomet for the strengthening of the Turkish Infidel, and the
exterpation of Luthers purer doctrine for the confirming of the Popish, shall
fall out both in a year. When this will be, let the Pope enquire of the
Musti^ and in mean time that I presage truly be thou pleased to gather out
of the Preface of a learned man in Scotland before the Archbishop of Spalato
his reasons of departure or there printed. Which, being full of most worthy
observations helping to fill up the measure of our joy, I have hereunto
prefixed. Neither have I only prefixed these, as helping to fill, but also
adjoined to the Iubile, celebrated in the last, a Chronology continued yearly
from the first of that hundredth since Luther, as fulfilling that measure of
joy. This was penned in Latin by students in Worms and printed at Heidelberge
and now translated into English. For a more clear insight into the prosperous
success of the Gospel, therein but touched, I refer thee to an Oration of
that Reverend and learned, Scultetus made in the Arch-Palatine Court, and
called a Secular Sermon. Now this Chronoligy, I say, fulfilleth our joy, in
that whereas among the Jews fifty years forty nine were of service, the
last only of releasing, every one of our hundredth assures us of the release
of some either Churches or Persons, from Romes Aegiptian bondadge and
Babilonish captivity, howsoever in (indeed) Marke-Anthonie de Dominis may
well make the last notoriously solemn. This in breife of the Gospells Iubile,
with a word more of the Popish, I will conclude. The Papists (forsooth) hearing
of this Iubilizing of Christ his Churches thought it stood not with the policy
of there kingdom to sit still leaning on their elbowes, and hanging their
ears. How then? They put good faces on it, force out a laughter; and celebrate
a Iubile. Did they not fear, may we think, that the report of our joyful
release would cause many to free themselves from their bonds? But see we what
the celebrate. A Iubilee, surely but verba-tenus in name only, reatenus in
nature, a Fast. Yea, Simulatum Iubelaeum fit duplex jeiunium: Their Iubile
fained makes their Fast doubled. Wherefore I may apply that to the Synagogue of
Rome which the Poet spoke of another, Spem vultu simulat, prem^t alto cord
dolorem, Whilst hope in face sits counterfeit, heart-pressing grief makes
pulses beat. Behold their Iubile which should argue joy; and joy the Spirits
dilatation, is become a Fast, whose associate is grief, and greifes the
Spirits compression. Behold their clapping of hands is naught else but
wringing of hands; their shoutings, groanings; their release, bondage; their
feastings, fastings. And justly may they so do. For such fasting is to them a
sign that our bridegroom Christ is not among them: for if the Bridgrome were
with them how could they mourn? Mat. 9, 15. But I desire they may still
mourn, and be inwardly vexed not so much for the downfall of their
abominations, as for their abominations themselves, and do thou (good
Reader) take up with me in their behalf the prayer of the Prophet Psalm. 83.19.
Fill their faces with shame O Lord, that they may know thy name. This is the
worst I wish them, with which and mine earnest wishes to thee that thou
would clappe hands with those in exultation with whom thou art to claspe
hands in holy profession, I leave these treatises to thy view, and thy self
to the watchful eye of Gods providence: Farewell.

A Preface set before the Archbishop of Spalato his Reasons of Departure,
printed in Scotland.
Receive (Christian Reader) a proof of the force of Truth, and a presage of
the end of that work God is about to do in these last Ages: A man brought up
in the Learning of Egypt, and enchanted with the Sorceries of Babel, without
the help or counsel of any Protestant, by occasion of Popish Tyranny,
searching the truth, finds out their error in Doctrine, and abuses in
Discipline: and convinced of both, first in his mind forsakes their opinions,
and now in his body flees from their society. This is not like to the change
of Apollinaris, and Arrius of old, or of Carrier in our time, whose
miscontented humor, for hopes disappointed, made them alter their opinion: But
more like to that of Paulus Vergerius Bishop of Iustinople, whom unjust
suspicions at the first burdened with a secret favor of Lutheranisme: for
purging whereof he intended a refutation of Luthers Doctrine. But while he
wrangled with the Truth, to overcome it, he was taken captive of it; and
leaving his place and dignities, rendered himself at Tubing to our Profession.

The ground of our presage, is Gods truth in times accomplishment, wherein
Providence goes on with remarkable degrees of persons, and places, not without
some respect to the Periods of time. He raised Wickleff from their Schools,
John Husse from their Pulpits, Martin Luther from their Cloisters, and now
Mark Antony from their Archiepiscopall Chair. The places have the like
gradation: Great Britain seems too far from Rome, to waken them by
Wickleffs cry: therefore it founded nearer in Germany. And now Dalmatia
looking over the Venetian Gulf, assures Italy, that her next Aduertiser shall
be within her bowels. It was more than a Poetical License to apply Sybilla's
Oracles of Christ to Saloninus the son of Pollio, for keeping in memory his
victory, in taking in Salonas. But this our Saloninus makes large
restitution, and applies the Oracles of God to the own purpose: As the
Clergy has gone before, so Princes do follow: The King of Great Britain,
with most of the Princes of Germany, stand out already against Rome: the
ambiguitie of France will resolve in the end in an open departure: and the
temporizing of Venice imports more the want of occasion, than of will and
resolution. The Roman Empire did stretch out it self by degrees, proceeding
from the mids to the extremities, as circles go out from the Center: and at
the extremities again their ruin began, and went back to the heart. The fall
of their spiritual Monarchy shall keep the same course.

The Periods of time have their own observation. The Jewish solemnity of
Iubilee, not brought into the Church till the thirteenth Age, was then tied to
the Centenarie number: and that their joy has since proved to be like the
song of the Marmaid before a storm: for soon after, Wickleffe began to
trouble their mirth: and in the end of that Age John Husse made them some more
business, till in the 1415. year, the holy Fathers, at Constance by a Punicke
faith, brought him to the fire. An hundred years after him, Luther renewed his
song with greater boldness, and in the 1517. year gave out his Propositions
against the Pope: from which time they have persuaded themselves, and even to
this day assure their followers, that Luthers doctrine can stand no longer then
an hundred years. This present year closes that Period: and while they look
for an euanishing of that Doctrine, behold, even from themselves it receives
again a new light, a new testimony. We hold with Plato the fatalitie of
Periods, but Pythagoras numbers are too weak a ground for such a necessity:
or if we shall take any numbers, it must be these of sin; and in sin, more
the degrees then the numbers: The Amorites sins must come to the height, and
the Jews must fill their cup before their punishment. The Pharisees of our
time do mightily to fill out their measure. The pride and filthiness of Sodom,
the whoredoms of Babel are now multiplied exceedingly; and the greatest sin,
even that to death, is become an Epidemicke disease among their Clergy. John
the 22. can deny the truth, Leo the 10. can scoff at it, Gardinerus can
confess it at his death, but with this addition: That it must rather still be
impugned, then the state of Rome decay. All their wits run upon this one
point, but all their means turn upon them. The cruelty of their inquisition,
the tyranny of their Prohibitions, their impudency in falsifying words and
writs, give them but a moments advantage. But even from these shall come their
ruin. A lie has no more strength than for the time it is spoken and
credulously embrace^: but the eternal force of Truth has more than a moment
any prevailing. What then rests for them, but that they give place to the
fatalitie of their estate, since they will not give place to the Truth. And for
us, while Rome is renting in it self, take heed that we be not divided.
Whosoever now casts the apple of strife into the Reformed Church, proves an
enemy to God, and an improfitable friend to Antichrist. Let us stand still,
and behold the work of the Lord, and be sure, while we imagine we have left
Babel, that we have first forsaken Egypt.

W. S.

THE DVKE OF SAXONY HIS IVBILEE.
FIrst we make no doubt, but that every Christian and good loving heart does
duly esteem what a high and great work of Grace it is, that Almighty God, in
these latter days, and on the late evening of the world (after so long and
miserable darkness and bondadge) has brought us unto the clear light of the
blessed Gospel, and Christian Liberty, and has preserved us hitherto, in the
midst of the manifold rage and boisterousnesse of the Devil and his
Instruments.

We must therefore acknowledge, that we are in duty bound, even from the
bottom of our souls to laud, praise, and honor the High Majesty of God, for
the same.

Therefore we have concluded, with leave of the Highest to celebrate a solemn
feast of Iubilee. For, if the corporal deliverance of the Israelites out of
Egypt was of such weight and worth, that many hundred years thereafter, the
said deliverance was most gloriously extolled: Then it is more expedient, that
the spiritual deliverance from the Romish Antichristian bondage be celebrated
with joy and thanksgiving.

We will therefore, first, That this feast of Iubilee, on the 26. day of
October 1617. be published from the pulpit in our Lands and Dominions unto our
people, admonishing them unto a serious and hearty meditation of the same.

Secondly, we will that on the 30. of October, in the afternoon in every
Parish Church, at the accustomed hour, the Vesper be sung, and the Confession
read, as is done on other high Festival days.

Thirdly, we ordain, that on the 31. of October, (on the which, an hundred
years before, that dear and worthy instrument of God, M. Martin Luther of
blessed memory, did set up his first disputation against that shameless and
impudent Popish shop of Indulgences) two Sermons shall be made, one before, the
other after Noone: likewise on the first and second of November, and on the
said three days, the holy Supper of the Lord shall be distributed, and the
Ministers shall admonish their hearers to consider how Almighty God by the
said reformation has given unto them, the right use of his most holy
Testament, and has delivered his Church from the manifold abuses of the same.

In the Villages where there is no Preacher, on the first and second of
November only, shall be made a Sermon in the fore-noone time, and in the
afternoon may be sung and read the wonted Vesper, or Evening prayer.

Fourthly, whereas the custom bears in our Churches, that on Festival days
and Fridayes, the ordinary Text, (which is called the Epistle and Gospel) is
read before the Sermon: We will, that on the 31. of October, in stead of the
Epistle, be read the 76. Psalm, with this admonition:

Dearly beloved, hear with attention, and due reverence the 76. Psalm,
wherein the most High is praised, that he has made himself known aright unto
his people, and has defended the same, in the true divine service against the
furious rage of the enemies: And the people is admonished to testify and show
their obedience and thankfulness unto the Lord their God.

The words of the Psalm are these:

In Judah is God known, his Name is great in Israel, etc.

In stead of the Gospel, shall be read the 12. chapter of the holy Prophet
Daniel, with this admonition:

Dearly beloved, hear with attention and due reverence, the 12. Chapter of
the holy and high-illuminated Prophet Daniel, wherein is clearly foretold, not
only how Antichrist, (whom the holy Ghost describes under the name of
Antiochus) that is the Pope, should do and deal according unto his pleasure,
should exalt himself over all that is called God, should make no account of
the honest love of women, nor also of God; should honor a Masse-God (called
Mausim) as his God, should seduce much people with the oblation of great gifts:
But also, how Almighty God in due time, by a sound of the morning and midnight
would terrify and astonish him: Which is brought to pass by that worthy man
and instrument of God, Doctor Luther, of blessed memory, one hundred years
ago.

The words of the chapter are these, etc.

On Friday the first of November, we ordain in stead of the Epistle, the 87.
Psalm: and to propound the same unto the Congregation, as follows:

Dearly beloved, hear with attention and due reverence, the fourscore and
seventh Psalm, wherein is worthily exalted, the glory of Gods Church, how the
most High loves the same, how firm the same is grounded, what worthy things
are preached in the same in all Languages, with joy and exultation. All which
things by Gods singular grace are to be found in our Evangelical Churches.

The words of the Psalm are these, etc.

Instead of the Gospel, shall be read a part of the 14. Chapter of the
Revelation of S. John, from the sixth verse unto the 13. exclusive.

Dearly beloved, hear with due attention and reverence, a part of the 14.
Chapter of the Revelation of S. John: Wherein the holy Ghost manifestly
foretells, how in the last days, (after that Antichrist had raged a long
time with great fierceness,) Almighty God would send an Angel, that is to
say, an Evangelical Teacher, Preacher and Reformer, who should declare unto
all kind of Nations an everlasting Gospel; and by the said preaching of the
Gospel, that great city Babylon, (which is, the Romish Popery) should be
destroyed, whereof the said Teacher should give beforehand a faithful warning.
All which, is richly brought to pass and accomplished one hundred years ago,
by Doctor Luther of blessed memory, and his faithful followers the
Evangelical Divines, Teachers, and Preachers in many kingdoms,
Electoratships, Dukedomes, Lands and Dominions, but chiefly in Germany.

The words of the text are these, etc.

Concerning the third Festival day, whereas the same falls on the 20. Sunday
Trinitatis, the accustomed Epistle and Gospel may be read, because that out of
both such matter can be drawn and handled, which is fit for the present time
of Iubilee Feast.

Yet if any one is desirous, in the morning or evening Sermon to expound some
other Text, we leave it to his discretion; whether it be the 46 or 48. Psalm. or
the 13. chapter of Exodus, verse. 3. or the 14. chapter of the said Book, or
the 16. chapter of the Revelation, or some part of the 17. or 18. or any other
fit sentence.

But on the 31. of October, and 1. of November the appointed Psalms and
Lessons shall be read and declared in the Sermon.

Yet if any high-graduated Divines please to draw from some other Text their
Meditationes Iubilaeas, we in our gracious favor will admit the same.

Fifthly we ordain, that good order be kept in singing: and we doubt not but
that in our Cities, the Superintendents and Preachers, will ordain the figurall
Music. Besides, we hold it fit and profitable for the common people, to cause
before and after the Sermon, those songs to be sung, which are best known unto
them, both for voice and matter.

The first words of the songs are these: Lord God we praise thee, Lord God we
thank thee.
Now praise the Lord my soul.
Glory be only unto the highest God.
Our God is a firm and strong tower.
If our God were not with us when our enemies rage.
O Lord thy godly Word has long bin kept in darkness.
Preserve us, O Lord, by thy Word, etc.


Sixthly we ordain, that the Common prayer of Confession be not read on this
Feast: But we have given order to set down a certain form of prayer, and
thanksgiving, whereby the Highest is praised for his gracious and powerful
deliverance out of the cruel Egyptiacal bondage: And again, is prayed, that by
his omnipotency (as hitherto, so for the time to come) it would please him, to
conserve amongst us the pure and saving Gospel, and the right understanding and
use of the holy Sacraments, against all dammageable errors and heresies, for
us and our heirs. Besides, it is ordered, to pray that it would please God
from time to time to give Christian Dukes and Magistrates, and to grant unto
those that now are, a long life and blessed welfare, both temporal and
eternal.

We will, that these our Ordonances shall be duly observed without
contradiction, in all our cities and villages, by the Superintendents,
Ministers, and Deacons, and all the Inhabitants of our Countries and Dominions.

And concerning our two Universities Leipsich and Wittenbergh, we hold it fit
and expedient, that the Theological faculty, employ the whole week after the
2. of November, in exquisite Disputations and Orations, comprehending therein
the description of former darkness, of the ensuing gracious Evangelical light,
and the great utility of the present Reformation: Doctorall promotions may
likewise be made if the occasion be offered.

The other faculties are not hereby excluded, for it is likewise permitted unto
any of the Professors to celebrate the great work of the Almighty, and the
continuance of his mercy this last hundred years, in the name if their
faculty.

Finally, we are pleased, in our gracious good liking, that for the good
imitation of others, this our Ordonance by public intimations, be notified a
month before, that so other Countries may receive the knowledge thereof. If it
please also some of our Divines, to signify unto other sincere Divines, this
our Christian intention, and to admonish them, to conform themselves unto this
Action acceptable unto God, we will in our favor like well of it.

The Lord grant by his grace, that we, and all the Inhabitants of our
Dominions, may perform this ensuing Feast of Iubilee, with good health, due
attention, and hearty joy in God.

Datum Dresden, the 12. of August, 1617. Johannes George, Churfurst, that is,
Prince Elector.

A CHRONOLOGY OF THE GOSPELS IVBILEE.
IN the year 1517. the first wound was inflicted upon Antichrist, in a
disputation at Wittenberge against Indulgences.

T^^refore do Gospellers Iubilize.

In the year 1518. the doctrine concerning justification and the freewill of
man was clearly explained in a disputation at Heidelberge.

Therefore do etc.

In the year 1519. it was manifested in a solemn disputation at Lipswicke,
that there was no supremacy of the Pope of Rome.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1520. Germany began to laugh at, and to contemn the brutish
thunderbolts or excommunications of the Pope.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1521. the cause of the Gospel was maintained at Worms, before
the Emperor and the whole Empire.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1522. The Gospel was propagated far and wide through Germany,
Heluetia, Liuonia, or Liefe-land.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1523. the Popes Legate acknowledges in the diet of the Empire,
that the Church of Rome is sick with errors and vices, some places of France
are illustrated with the light of the Gospel, and the truth of it is sealed
with the blood of Henry of Zutphen.

Therefore etc.

In the year 2524. the Emperor, the Princes of the Empire, in an assembly in
Stiria, Ferdinand, Henry the eight King of England, Lodowick King of Hungary,
and Bohemia; the Duke of Bauaria and Loraine, the Pope, the Cardinal of
Loraine, the Archbishops of Ments and Riga, the Bishops of Denmark, Spira, and
Strausburge, labor in vain to oppress the Gospel.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1525. amongst the Countrey-insurrections, the Contentions about
the Sacraments, of the Anabaptists and of the Schwenkfeldians, the conspiracies
of the mightiest enemies against the Gospel, the Gospel took place in the
kingdom of Sueuia, in the Dominion of the Lantsgraue of Hassia, and in a great
part of Rhetia.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1526. the Emperor, and the King of France being at contention
amongst themselves through the Popes instigation against their will, they grant
halcion days to the Church. The Emperor abolisheth the authority of the Popes
name through all Spain.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1527. the Pope being taken the English and the French conspiring
against the Emperor do minister occasion to the Gospellers of further
spreading abroad the sincere doctrine.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1528. the truth of the reformed doctrine triumph in the
disputation of Berne, upon which followed the reformation of many famous
Churches.

Therefore etc.

The year 1529. is renouned for the reformation of many Churches, and the
unconquered constancy of many Gospellers in diverse trials, chiefly for the
Martyrdom of Lodowicke Berquinus in France, and of Clarebachius and
Flidstedius in Germany.

Therefore etc.

The year 1530. rejoices professors of the Gospel for the confession of
their doctrine publicly made by the Princes at Ausberge, before the Emperor.

Therefore etc.

The glorious, and almost miraculous deliverance of the Protestants from a
mischeife hanging over their heads does grace the year 1531.

Therefore etc.

The peace of Religion in Germany, the propagation of godly doctrine in
France, the Martyrdomes of the faithful in England, do make famous the year
1532.

Therefore etc.

The glory of the year 1533. is exceeding great because that therein the King
of England shook off the Popes yoke.

Therefore etc,

In the year 1534. the Duke of Wirtemberge and Pomerania, having abandoned
Popery embrace the Gospel.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1535. the Churches of George Earl of Wirtemberge in Alsasia are
purged from the Popes leaven. Cromwell does pull down the Monasteries in
England, being dens of monstrous villainies.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1536. the Citizens of Berne with their associates do make war
with the Duke of Sauoy. and do take almost the whole Country of the Antuatum,
by which victory peace from the foreign ennemie, is obtained to the common
wealth and Church of Geneua, and the Gospel is spread all abroad through Savoy.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1537. The whole Kingdom of Denmark having abandoned the Pope
under the government of Christian the third, acknowledged Chist to be the
only head of the Church.

Therefore do the Gospellers Iubilize.

In the year 1538. A public Church is opened at Strasburge. to those that
were banished from France and Belgia. It is determined in England, that the
Bible being translated into the English tongue, be keept every where in
Churches, to be read by all that desire it.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1539. Misnia, the Marquisate of Brandenburge, the Dukedom of
Sagana in Silesia and others, renounce Popery.

Therefore do the gospellers Iubelize.

In the year 1540. Robert Barnes D. of Divinity, a man of great esteem with
the King of England, being burnt to Ashes by the Papists, taught not only the
English his own countrie-men, but all Christians, to esteem less even of
their lives, than of the profession of the true faith.

Therefore do the Gospellers Iubelize.

In the year 1541. The Emperor by his private letters, grants the
Protestants the peace of religion. Therefore etc.

In the year 1542. Otto Henry, Count Palatine of Rhene, Duke of either
Bauaria, imbraceth the purer doctrine.

Therefore do the Gospellers Iubelize.

In the year 1543. Hermanus Earl of Weda, Archbishop of Colen applied
himself to reform the state of the Church.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1544. the Pope being not regarded, the Donawerdenses give their
names to Christ. Peter Alexander, Preacher to Mary Queen of Hungaria, and
Governesse of the Lowe-Countries, writteth and teaches many things
Orthodoxally.

Therefore do the Gospellers Iubilize.

In the year 1545. Henry Duke of Brunswicke being a cruel enemy of the
Reformed Religion, came into the power of the Lantsgraue,

Therefore do the Gospellers Iubilize.

In the year 1546. Frederick Elector Palatine does bring the Reformed
Religion into the whole Palatinate.

Therefore the Gospellers do Iubilize.

In the year 1547. when all things in Germany seemed to be in a desperate
case, Edward (the Son of Henry the Eight) King of England abrogats the
MASS, remoues Images out of the Temples, commands Bibles to be printed in the
Vulgar tongue, ministerial duties to be performed in the same tongue, both
kinds to be administered in the Eucharist.

Therefore do the and.

In the year 1548. and 1549. during the time of the interim, there is a
sifting of the Gospellers, and the Hypocrites are discerned from sincere
Professors.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1550. Maidenburg showed a memorable example of Constancy, in
defending the sincerer Doctrine.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1551. the Protestants are not afraid to appear in the Tridentine
Council; the Papists not daring to hear the Reasons of the reformed Doctrine.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1552. the most constant Confessors of Christ, John Frederick
Elector of Saxony, and Philip Lantsgraue of Hassia, being freed from
captivity are sent home: the Passauian peace is established.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1553. at Lions in France nine Students confirmed the verity of
the reformed Doctrine by bloody Martyrdom.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1554. the Cities and Nobles of Greichgoia hold a Synod, wherein
they renounce the Interim, and bind themselves to teach, and hear the purer
Doctrine.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1555. it is decreed in the Diet at Ausburg, that they should not
make war with any Prince, Earl or Imperial City for the doctrine of
Religion.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1556. Charles Marquess of Baden, reformed the Churches under his
jurisdiction according to the prescript of Gods word.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1557. Otto Henricus Count Palatine Elector, does the second time
purge the Churches of the Palatinate, from Popish Idolatry.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1558. the Nobles of Scotland purge the Churches of Sterlin from
all Massing stuff, and appoint Preachers of the Gospel in towns here and
there.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1559. All England, Elizabeth being queen thereof, does the
second time receive the Gospel.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1560. the French men present the Confession of their faith to the
King: the Nobles of Scotland reject the Mass, demolish Altars, and abolish
Images.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1561. the Princes and States Protestants in Germany, being
gathered together at Naumburg, renew their consent to the Apostolic Faith,
against the Antichrist of Rome: the Frecnh of the Reformed Religion discourse
of the chief Heads of the pure Faith, in the Conference at Poissy, before the
King and the whole kingdom.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1562. God disappointed the dangerous plots of the Guyzes, tending
to bring the French Churches into the hatred of the German Princes.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1563. an Edict published the 19. of March, grants peace of
Religion to the reformed Churches in France.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1564. the Protestant Princes and Magistrates firmly demonstrate
by many Arguments, that the Tridentine Council was neither godly, nor lawful,
nor free: and consequently not to be received with a safe conscience: That
Antichrist was President there, and that errors quite contrary to the holy
Scripture were maintained therein.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1565. Maximilian the Emperor showed himself favorable to the
Gospellers of Silesia, Morauia, Bohemia, Austria, Hungaria, and grants the
Magistrates of Gorlick, that the Monastery of the Minorites being turned into
a public School, they may take order, that both humane Learning, and also the
purer Doctrine of Religion be taught there.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1566. in Brabant, Holland, Zeeland, and Flanders, the idolatrous
Images of the Papists are cast down, the Popish Religion removed, and the
Gospel received in many places.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1567. Frederick the 3. Count Palatine Elector, abolisheth popish
Rites in the Palatinate of Bauarie, Ioachimus Fredericus, Marquis of
Brandenburg, Administer of the Archbishopricke of Magdeburg, does open the
Cathedral Church of Magdeburg, that had bin shut up almost 20. years, and
commends it to the Preachers of the Gospel.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1568. Maximilian the 2. Emperor, grants the Nobility of
Austria, the free exercise of the purer Doctrine.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1569. Julius the son of Henry Duke of Brunswicke, takes order,
that the Churches which are under his jurisdiction be religiously reformed
according to the rule of Gods word.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1570. In France it is granted by the kings Edict, that the
Princes, Barons, and Nobles in their territories, that others in certain
Countries, and suburbs may use the exercise of the reformed Religion without
impeachment.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1571. Peace being made the third time in France, a Synod of
the reformed Churches of the whole Kingdom, is assembled at Rochel; in which,
the Confession of the faith of the French Churches is repeated and confirmed.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1572. that bloody Massacre at Paris, was a most pregnant
argument to the reformed Churches, that the Papists despaired of the cause of
the Romish Religion, seeing they deemed it could not be maintained by holy
Scripture, but by incredible treachery.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1573. the number of the Protestants grows exceeding great, out
of the blood of those of the reformed Religion that were cruelly slain, and
that beyond the conceit of the King, the Pope, and all Papists, Rochel by the
wonderful providence of God, is delivered from the duke of Aniou, as once
David was from Saul.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1574. Middleburg in Zeland is taken by Composition: Leyden in
Holland is miraculously delivered from a siege.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1575. in the midst of the wars of the low Countries, the
University of Leyden is set open by the munificencie of the States of Holland.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1576. the order of Baptising with the manner of visiting the
sick, is set forth at Venice: In which book the doctrine of the free
justification of a sinner before God, is clearly propounded.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1577. the agreement between professors of both Religions in the
Low Countries, is sworn at Brussels.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1578. Amsterdam the most famous Mart-towne of Holland, is
reformed according to the rule of Gods word, the Romish Religion banished, and
Images defaced.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1579. the union of Vtrecht is made by means of John Eearle of
Nassau then Governor of Gelderland and Sutphen, he restored some most famous
provinces of the Low Countries to the liberty of the purer religion.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1580. the townsmen of Deuenter, they of Swool, of Vtrecht, of
Freezland, and of Drenth, break down Images, and forsake the Romish religion.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1581. The exercise of the Popish religion is forbidden at
Antwerpe and Bruxels by a public Edict.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1582. Gebhardus Archbishop of Collen, Elector of the Empire, does
assay the reformation of Religion.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1583. the Churches of France do flourish amongst the thorns of
diverse persecutions.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1584. The conspiracy of certain Noblemen against the life and
State of Q. Elizabeth, begun at the instigation of the Pope, is discovered by
the singular goodness of God.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1585. the Kingdoms of France, and Navarre learn to contemn
excommunications of Pope Sixtus the fifth, against Henry king of Navarre, and
Henry Duke of Condee.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1586. at Luneburg Frederick king of Denmark, the Ambassadors of
the Q. of England and of James king of Scotland, the Electors of Empire John
Casimirus Administrator Palatine, Christian Elector of Saxony, John Georgius
Elector of Brandenburg, and other Princes of the Empire, wisely considering
that the troubles in France concerned the Germane Churches, agreed to aid the
king of Navarre.

Therefore etc.

In the year 1587. the holy league between the Pope and certain popish
Princes, is renewed in vain.

Therefore do etc.

In the year 1588.

With ships sans number bridging all the Maine,
Spaniards presume they will Britain join to Spain:
Would know the moving causes of such stirs?
The proud, Ambition drives, and Avarice spurs.
How fit by winds was puffed Ambition drowned?
And swelling waves the swelling sunk to ground:
How fit did swallowing gulfes of Seas never dry,
Swallow up the Helluo's of Worlds Seigniorie?
In the year 1589. the king of France makes a league with the king of Navarre,
and makes him Lieutenant over his armies.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1590. James Marquess of Baden son of- Charles, an Apostate,
dies of the blooudie flux, in the very beginning of the persecution against
them of the reformed Religion, the doctrine of the Gospel is preserved in that
part of the Marquistate, to the great grief of the Papists.

Therefore, etc.

The years from 1591. even till the truce of Spain with the Low Countries
(which happened in the year 1608.) are ennobled, by reason of the almost
continual victories of the Hollanders against the Spaniards: that is, of the
Gospellers against the Papists: thefore in regard of all those years,

the Gospellers do iubilize.

In the year 1608. Liberty of Religion in Bohemia, Morauia, and Hungaria, was
established.

Therefore, etc.

In the year 1569. and 1610. William Duke of Gulicke being dead, the word of
God is freely preached, by the permission of the Princes, through the Dukedomes
of Bergh, of Cleue, and Gulicke.

Therefore, etc.

From the year 1610. to the year 1617. the Churches through France, Germany,
England, Scotland, Denmark, Suetia, Polonia, Hungaria, Bohemia, have had, and
at this day have reasonable Halcion days, Antichrist in vain withstanding
them.

Therefore do etc.

And to thee most High and mighty God, with a devoted heart they give thanks,
that amongst those ragings of the Jesuits, amongst so many persecutions of the
Roman Antichrist, thou do notwithstanding gather to thy self a Church
amongst us, wherein thou art both truly acknowledged, and also art worshipped,
according to the prescript of thy Word. Blessed be thy holy Name for ever and
ever. Go forward O God, to bless the Vine which thou have planted in so many
kingdoms, Dominions, Countries, Cities,: And grant that we drawing from
Christ alone the sap of true consolation, and bringing forth the fruit of a
holy life through him alone, may for ever adhere unto our Savior Christ, even
as branches to the Vine. Keep under Jesuits, the bellows of Satan, lest
they continue to make civil dissentions, and trouble the peace of thy Church.
Lead and govern the hearts of thy faithful ones in the spirit of unity, that
we may all be one, as thou art one, and sanctify us in thy truerh, thy word is
Truth. Amen.

TO THE READER,
AS before their is a remarkable example of the exceeding goodness of God, in
glorifiyng the Gospel of his welbeloved Son, by the Archbishop of Spalato
his renouncing of Antichrist, and forsaking his Primacy Ecclesiastical over
two Kingdoms for the truth sake, where by the period of the first hundred
years; after Luther had set up his Propositions against tho Popes pardons, was
gloriously shut up: So it is thought convenient to commend to thy godly
consideration the great, and good work of our gracious God, the God of Truth,
in advancing his Truth this year 1618. being the first of the second hundred
years, by discovering the treason of Barneuil, and his Arminian accomplices
tending to the great impeachment of the same. By delivering up a principal
instrument in the same to a reprobate mind, so as he murdered himself, after
he had confessed the treason, by raising up that Worthy in Israel, Grave
Maurice Prince of Orange, with admirable policy, diligence, and peace to purge
Arminian towns of corrupt, and dangerous Magistrates, and to Reunite Provinces
and Cities, which were upon the point of Confusion so preuayling was the
diulish policy of Arminian herisy; and by sanctifiyng the minds of the noble
States, in a most religious manner, to call together the present National
Synod at Dorte. Whereby, through Gods blessing upon the same, Truth may be
cleared, Wisdom justified, and the Gospel have a freer passage. Which God
grant for his great Names sake: Amen.


