Dainty Conceits, with a number of rare and witty inventions, never before
printed.

Made and invented for honest recreation, to pass away idle hours.

Laboris condimentum otium. By THOMAS JOHNSON.

LONDON, Printed by E. A. for Henry Gosson and Francis Coules. 1630.

THERE BE FIVE THINGS TO BE LOOKED UNTO OF HIM that takes a Farm, or places
himself in the Country.
FIrst, that it be a fertile soil. Secondly, an wholesome air. Thirdly, that
there be water at will, and that sweet and good. Fourthly, thathe have good
neighbors. And lastly, that the way thereunto be easy, fair, and commodious,

To make Walls or Floores, that neither Snaile, Weasle, Cat, Mouse, or Weuill,
will come near, to destroy either Corn, or other thing.
Make your walls or floores of what matter or substance you think meet, and
let them be well dried, then take clay, and in the tempering thereof put in the
foam o^ dregs of Oyk that fleeteth on the top of Oil and mingle them well
together, then take wild Olive trees leaves and put there among here with
plaster your foresaid walls and fl^^res quite over and let it dry, then take
the said some of Oil, and rub it over the walls and out of doubt no vermin
will approach it.

To take away the good taste or savor of Oil.
HAng Oil in a chimney where smoak^ and sut are, and it spoileth the taste o^
Oil, for it will not come near any heat bu^ his own natural heat that it
has in it self

How to order Oxen when they are newly vnyoaked coming from labor.
OF all beasts Oren are most subject t^ hide binding, and therefore as soon a^
they be come from their labor and be vnyoaked, you ought to rub their necks
where the yoke touched, with your hand, and to press^ down the ^kinne of
their backs, and then t^ pull it as if you pulled it from the ribs, for that
is a help that they shall not be hid^ bound.

To glaze pots within.
TAke your vessel which must be well burned, then take red lead as much as you
will, and put thereto a tenth part of water, and of Tartar nine parts, then
mix them together, and glaze your pots as the manner is, for this is excellent.

How to know all manner of sores.
IF thou see an Impostume or other sore in what place of the body soever it be;

First, take heed to the color thereof, and if it be red and nesh in feeling,
then it is engendered of evil blood, and if it be hot and moist withal, the
signs where of it par takes be Gemini, Libra, and Aquary, the Planet Jupiter
and Mercury, when the Moon or the Planet be in these signs, or in any of
them, use no medicines to such a sore. If it be red and therewith hard, it is
engendered of heat, and is hot and dry, the signs be dries, Leo, and
Sagittarius, the Planets, Sol, and Mars, while the Moon is in these, use no
medicine to the griened place.

If if be white, gray or blackish affirm, says Hypocrates, that it proceeds
of cold and dryness, if it be hard and the signs there, unto belonging to
Taurus, Uirgo and Capricorn and Saturn, who is cold and dry is the Planet.
Whilst the Moon is abiding in one of these signs, use no medicine to such a
disease: but if the sore have these last named colors, or any of them, and
there withal be not hard in feeling but nesh, say that it comes of a cold
moisture, as engendered of fleame, the signs agreeing thereunto be Cancer,
Scorpio, and Pisces, the Planets there, of answering, be Venus and the Moon.
Thus easily may any one know whereof any swelling or sore does come, as
Hypocias says.

To make Gunpowder.
TAke what quantity of Saltpeter you will, and half so much quantity of quick
brimstone, small coules made of sallow or willow, half so much as of
brimstone, and if you think it convenient, you may put thereto a little quick
silver, then being them all to powder, and farce them, and put these in some
hot place.

Five devices at Cards.
HOw to draw out the whole deck of Cauds, and to tell what every Card^ is
before you draw it out.

Take the whole deck of Cards and hold them close together, and near unto /
your eye, and over against you hang a looking glass, and by it you shall see
every card, to the amazement of the beholders.

Or thus.
Take a piece of a looking-glass in your left hand, vn^eene to the beholders,
and so you shall perform the same:

Also if you think these two ways too open or plain, take the cup, and put
a little drink in your mouth, stooping down with your head, let a little
quantity fall upon the table to the breadth of a shilling, then hold your cards
as before is said, clo^e to your eye under the moisture, and the cards will
shadowin such sort, that you may know every card before you draw it, and it is
so hard to be descryed, that in seven years you may scantly be perceived.

Again if you deliver to your fellow one Card whasoeuer it be at a venture,
and take two next following your self, see how many those two are above ten,
and so many you may affirm that you are more then he, and more then will make
him ten, as to make it plain with an example.

I put the case that I deliver to my friend standing by, the six of Clubs, and
I take the two next Cards, which are the Qu^^ne of Hearts, and the four of
Diamonds, I say therefore unto my friend, or lay a wager with him, that I have
as many as he, as many as will make him ten, and four pippes to spare, and so
is there.

In like manner I deliver to a stander by two Cards, and take my self double
the number, to wit four: I may say in like sort, that I have as many as he,
and as many as will make him twenty, and so many to spars as I have pippes in
my hand above twenty.

So likewise delivering three Cards and taking six to your self, you may say
that you have as many as he, and as many as will make him thirty, and the odd
pippes to spare: and thus you may do it to many Cards, in doubling the Cards,
and respecting ten soeuery Card.

If your familiar friends be in company, you may take three knaves, and lay
them with their faces downwards, but let two of them lie together, and the
third by himself: than say to one with whom you may be bold: Whether had you
rather of occasion served, to make the two Cards which lie together three, or
to take part with this one, and make him two? then will he take the one or the
others part, if he take the two, then say to him, here I pray you make them
three knaves.

Also if you take the four knaves, and lay them all together in such sort on
the top or bottom, that the standers by perceive you not, and take three of
them, and show them to the beholders saying, see you these three knaves? who
will answer, yea: then prick away one of those three that you showed, and lay
the other two in the place where-from you took them, and give the Cards one
cut or two: you may then wager with them, that although you cut away one of the
knaves that yet three are together still, which they will deny at the first,
having not regarded what knave it was you did prick.

Also if you lay all the coat Cards together, and when you have so done, came
your companion to cut them four, or five or six times: you may affirm that
by his so often cutting of them, all the coat Cards are together, for being
once together, the cutting seldom parts, which if you perceive by the
bottom Card, cause him to give them one out more, so shall you have them all
together.

How to know if one Card be missing what Card it is.
TAke the Carss and face them, and ever as you tell the pipe, and always at
every ten cast it out of your mind, and count to ten till you come to the end,
then maike what number is remaining at the end, and see what it wants of ten
and that is the Card, and if ten be remaining, you may affirm that ten is
missing. And by this way may you bid your friend or acquaintance, to take out
of the deck any Card what he will, and yhu will tell him what it is presently:
As for example, a friend takes the Ace of the Hearts, and I look or run over
the Cards, and pass all the ten Cards, and the rest I tell casting away ten
ever as I tell, and in the end I find but nine remaining in tale, therefore
because nine wants but one of ten, I know that it is an Ace, and I run over
the Cards again quickly to see which of the Aces it is, and then I affirm to
my friend that it is the Ace of hearts.

To know what Card one thicketh.
BID your friend think what Card he will, and then take the pack, and lay the
Cards, Card by Card into three heaps with the faces upward, and when you have
done, demand in which heap his Card is, and that heap lay nethermost, and in
this sort do three times, and at the last time the Card which your friend
thinks will be the uppermost of that heap: marry if you cast them the fourth
time also, remembering the Card at the third time, it will not so easily be
perceived.

Another.
SHuffle the Cards, and show unto your friend the bottom Card, bidding him
mark the Card that he know it well then put the Cards behind your back, and
turn that bottom backward, that is to say, the back of that Card to the
back of the deck, then show him the next bottom Card, and demand if that do
his Card, then he will answer no: and in showing that Card, the other Card is
in your sight, whereby you may know the Card as well as he.

Another.
Mark you the bottom Card privily, and then opening the Cards, bid one draw
what Card him likes, and when he has drawn the Card and seen it, lay that
Card close to your known Card, and then give him the Cards to cut or shuffle,
whether he will, and ay that you can tell him his Card, or in drawing know when
it comes out, which easily you may do, for that it will come either the next
before or the next after the marked Card.

How to smell out the four Aces, or four knaves being blindfolded.
Rub the edges of them with a little beaten pepper, and you may easily smell
them from the rest.

How to know whether one take up a King Card, or a Queen, being absent in
another room.
THis trick requires the help of another, who must be in that room, and
when the Card is taken up, he must first speak, and ask his fellow what it
is, and if he see that the king is taken up, then must he ask his fellow
short, saying what is it? but if the Queen be taken up, he must ask his fellow
saying, what is it? And (...) by the demand may he that is in another room
tell justly* whether of them a stander by does take up, to the wonder of the
beholders.

How to keep Wine from sowring.
When you fear that your wine will be sour, by reason of thundering or
lightning, have always Look seeds in store for the same purpose, then pound
some of them in a mortar, and put into your vessels of wine, and it will
preserve it from being sour.

How to keep Ale or Beer in Summer from sowring.
TAke a handful or two (according as the quantity of your vessel is in
bigness) of the herb called Mugwort, and being well washed, and after well
drained from the water, put it into your vessels of Beer and Ale, and it will
not sour, a matter of small cost and greatest profit.

To make Oil de Bay.
TAke green Bay leaves, and stamp them with oil, and clean swines grease,
and being well stamped together put it into an earthen pot, and so let it stand
to rot for the space of forty days at the least, and stop it very close, then
at the forty days end, set it on the fire, and boil it with a soft fire, and
put thereto the juice of parsley, then strain it and keep it very close.

How to make Ginger bread.
TAke two pound of scummed honey, twelve peund of flower, put thereto ginger
beaten in powder, pepper, cloves, and mace, in powder, and make into what
fashion you will, and bake it as you would dee bread.

How to close or join together a sword, dagger, or knife, being broken a
sunder.
TAke an Adamant stone and burn it in the fire till it be red without, then
shave off that red into a dish* take also two gads of steel broken into four
pieces, vinegar a scruple, perdegreece an ounce, then put your steel, viueger,
and verdegreece into a stillitory of glass, and let them still to water, and
then mingle the powder of your burnt Adamant with the water and ^o put it into
a violl, and keep it for your use.

Or else thus.
TAke Tin and melt it, and then put thereto as much Mercury, and mingle them
well together so that you may make powder of them both, then take the powder of
the Adamant, as much as of either of them, and mingle all these together, then
take salt and Roman Uitrioll, and still a water of them, and keep it in a
glass well stopped. Now you corrosiue water being made, take your blade that
is broken, and lay it upon a plain board, being sure, that both the broken
pieces lie as even together as may be, then lay a thread even about the same,
and ihen put ware about the thread, and when thou have done, draw away the
thread, and lay of your powder in the place where your thread lay, and put a
little of your corrosiue water upon your powder, Factum est.

A water to gild upon steel or iron.
TAke an ounce of Argoll, two ounces of salt, an ounce of Alome, a quarter of
an ounce of verdegreece, and grind them well together, then put thereto a
pint of vinegar, and so let it stand a little season, and with that water
may thou gild on what metal thou will.

To make any gilt thing as hie colored as the Angel Noble.
TAke Sal armoniacke, and Uerdegreece, made in sottle powder, and put in piss,
or in vinegar till it be thick like pappe, then lay there of upon thy ring, or
other thing whatsoever that gilt is, and lay it over a very small fire till it
moke, and then put it in some close thing, and cover it till it be cold, and
expertum est.

How to gild with small cost.
TAke a quart ofred wine, and see the it with brazell to a pint, then take
gold-foile the Price of four pence and put thereto, then heat thy silver red
hot, and quench it therein, and it shall finely gild.

How to couch gold upon a cloth.
TAke Bole-armoniacke and Close, and so grind them together, and lay it over
the cloth some what warm, and ere it be dry, touch there on thy gold, and so
let it dry thoroughly, and then may thou begin to burnish it.

Another manner of way.
TAke water and chalk and grind them well together, then strain it through a
cloth, and then put it into a horn, and do thereto some rear of eggs, and
then stir it well together, and set it ur some moist place, and the longer it
stands, the better it is, Expertum est.

How to graft a vine upon a vine.
TAke and cleave the stock of a vine, as you do other trees, and put the
graft in the clist, and stop it well with ware and bind it fast.

How to help a tree that is long before it bear fruit.
TAke an anger or wimble, and bore a hole so deep as the pith of the tree at
the least, then take a pin made of some dry hard timber, but see that you
make it somewhat greater then the hole at the one end, and then take a hatchet
or hammer, or any such like thing, and see you drive in the pin so forceably,
that you cleave the stock a little, then take some wax, and stop the cliffe
close, and rest assured it will bear fruit the year following.

How to have Peaches sooner by two months then other.
GRaft your Peach on a Mulbery, or on a Uine.

How to have Plums all the Summer unto Alhallontide.
GRaft one in another in the Sorbery tree, and in the Mulbery tree.

How to make Medlers and Cherries to abide until the new come.
GRaft in a Mulbery tree as is aforesaid, and wet your grafts in honey, and put
thereto powder of cloves.

How to keep a Rose flesh a month and more.
YOu may use it every day, and in the night put it into honey, and it will
continue long, as has been often proved.

To have fruit without blossoms.
GRaft upon a Ftigge tree, and the fruit that conuneth thereon will come
without blossom.

To have fruit that will endure two year.
GRaft on a Warden, or upon a Quince tree.

To have fruit without chore.
TAke a graft, and set it into the stock at both the ends, so that the graft
may grow like an half hoope.

To have Cheries at Alhallontide.
GRaft Cherry-tree grafts upon a Mulbery tree, or upon a sage stock, and the
cherries that come thereon, will endure until the time aforesaid.

To have Medlers sooner by two months, and also greater than others.
TAke your grafts and then wet them in honey, and then graft them either upon a
Mulbery tree, or on a thorn.

To have ripe Pears very soon.
GRaft your Pears upon a Hawthorn, and you shall have early Pears.

To have Pears very late.
Graft upon a Warden tree.

To have Wardens betimes.
GRaft upon a Mulbery, or upon the Quince tree.

To have Mulberies very soon.
Graft upon the thorn.

To have them late.
Graft them upon the Medier tree.

To have a half Pear, and a half Apple to grow together.
TAke two grafts, the one of the Apple tree, and another of a Pear tree, and
cleave them in such sort, that you may finely join the one half of the Apple
to the other half of the Pear, but it must be done so closely, that no water
enter into them, and the fruit that comes of them, will be of tallage both of
the apple and the pear.

The principal thing for grafting of any thing, is ever throe or four days
before the change of the Moon. And for planting, the day of the change, and
the two next days following are best for any thing.

How to make letters of gold.
TAke gum of Almonds and grind it to powder, then temper it with Uermillion
as finely ground: let your gum be dissolved in the white of an egg, and
mingle them all together, and temper them in such sort, that you may write
therewith, and when you think it convenient, use thereof with your pen, and
the letters that you make, will soeme to be of gold. Probatum est.

How to make a Serpent fly from a man.
LEt him approach near to a Serpent naked, and he will fly from him, whereas
being clothed, he will leap upon him, and the fasting spittle of a man kills
him: wherefore when a Serpent is in danger, he wriggleth himself to save his
head wherein lies his heart.

The nature of the Raven.
THe property of the Raven is to have such a delight in her own beauty, that
she vouchsafes not to give her young ones food, until she see wherether they
be black of color or not.

FINIS.

