Parthenophil and Parthenophe.

Sonnettes, Madrigals, Elegies and Odes.

To the right noble and virtuous gentleman, M. William Percy Esquier, his
dearest friend.



To the Learned Gentlemen Readers
GEntlemen these labors followinge, beeinge come of late into my hands
barely, without title or subscription, partly moved by certain of my dear
friends, but especially, by the worth and excellency of the work, I thought it
well deserving my labor to participate them to your judicial viewes: where
for both varieties of conceits, and sweet Poesy, you shall doubtless find,
that which shall be most commendable, and worth your readinge, the Author
though at the first unknown, yet enforced to accord to certain of his
friends importunacy herein, to publish them by their means, and for their
sakes: unwilling (as it seems) to acknowledge them, for their leuity, till he
have redeemed them with some more excellent work hereafter, till when he
requesteth your favorable, and indifferent censures, of these his over
youthful Poemes, submitting them to your friendly patronages. Farewell this of
May 1593.

GO barstard Orphan pack thee hence,
And seek some stranger for defense:
Now ginnes thy baseness to be known,
Nor dare I take thee for mine own:
Thy leuity shall be discried.
But if that any have espied,
And question with thee of thy Sire,
Or Mistrisse of his vain desire,
Or ask the place from whence thou came,
Deny thy Sire, Love, Place, and Name:
And if I chance unawares to meet thee,
Neither acknowledge me, nor greet me,
Admit I blush, perchance I shall,
Pass by, regard me not at all,
Be secret, wise, and circumspect,
And modesty sometimes affect:
Some goodman that shall think thee witty,
Will be thy patron, and take pity:
And when some men shall call thee base,
He for thy sake, shall him disgrace:
Then with his countenance backed, thou shall
Excuse the nature of thy fault:
Then if some laddes, when they go by,
Thee bastard call, give them thely,
So get thee packing and take heed,
And though thou go in beggars weed,
Hereafter when I better may,
I Will send relief some other day.
SONNETS
SONNET I.
MYstrisse behold in this true-speaking Glass.
Thy beauties Graces of all women rarest,
Where thou may find how largely they surpass
And stain in glorious louelynesse the fairest.
But read (sweet Mistrisse) and behold it nearer
Pondring my sorrows outrage with some pity,
Then shall thou find no worldly creature deerer,
Then thou to me, thy self, in each Love ditty.
But in this mirrhor equally compare,
Thy match-lesse beauty, with mine endless grief:
There like thy self, none can be found so fair.
Of chiefest pains, there are my pains the chief,
Betwixt these both, this one doubt thou shall find,
Whether are here, extremest in their kind.
SONNET II.
Whiles with strong chains, of hardy-tempered steel,
I bound my thoughts, still gadding fast and faster:
When they through time, the diffrences did feel,
Betwixt a mistrisse service and a master.
Keeping in bondage iealously enthralled,
In prisons of neglect, his natures mildness.
Him I with sollitary studies walled,
By thraldom choking his out-rageous wildness.
On whom, my careful thoughts I set to watch,
Guarding him closely, least he should out-issue:
To seek thee (Laya) who still wrought to catch,
And train my tender boy, that could not misse-you:
So you bewitched him once, when he did kisse-you:
That by such sleightes, as never were found out
To serve your turn he daily went about.
SONNET III.
He when continual vigill moved my watch,
Some-deale by chance, with careful guarde to slumber:
The prisons keys, from them did slowly snatche,
Which of the five, were only three by number:
The first was Sight, by which he searched the wards,
The next was Hearing, quickly to perceive:
Least that the watchmen heard, which were his guardes:
Third, Touch, which Vulcanes cunning could deceive.
These tho the Springes, Wards, Boultes, or Gimbols were
The Miracles of Vulcanes forgery:
Laid open all for his escape: now there,
The watchmen grin'd for his impiety,
What crosses bred this contrariety:
That by these keys, my thoughts in chains be left,
And by these keys, I of mine heart bereft.
SONNET IIII.
Laya soon sounding out his nature thoroughly,
Found that he was, a Lovely Virgin Boy:
Causeless why did thou then, deal with him roughly,
Nor yet content with him, sometime to toy.
But iealouse kept, least he should run from thee,
Whom if thou kindly meant to Love, 'twas needelesse:
Doubting least that he should run back to me,
If of him any deal, thou did stand heedelesse.
Thou coop'st him in thy Clossets secret Corners,
And then thy hearts dear play-fellow did make him,
Whom thou in person guardedst least suborners
Should work his freelidge, or in secret take him,
And to this instant, never would forsake him:
Since for soft service, slavish bonds be change,
Why did thou from, thy iealouse master range?
SONNET V.
It chanced after, that an youthful squier,
Such as in courting, could the crafty guise,
Beheld light Laya, she with fresh desire,
Hoping the atchieuement of some richer prise:
Drew to the Courtier, who with tender kiss,
(As are their guilefull fashions which dissemble.)
First him saluted, then with forged bliss
Of doubtless hope, sweet words by pause did tremble.
So whiles she slightly gloas'd, with her new pray,
Mine hearts eye tending his false mistrisse train:
Vnyoak't himself, and closely escaped away,
And to Parthenophe did poast amain
For liberal pardon, which she did obtain:
And judge (Parthenophe) for thou can tell,
That his escape from Laya, pleased me well.
SONNET VI.
Him when I caught, what chains had I provided,
What fetters had I framed, what locks of reason:
What keys of continence, had I devised,
Impatient of the breach, against any treason.
But fair Parthenophe, did urge me still,
To liberal pardon, for his former fault:
Which out alas, prevailed with my will,
Yet moved I bonds, least he should make default:
Which willingly she seemed to undertake,
And said, as I am virgin, I will be
His bale, for this offense, and if he make
An other such vagare, take of me
A pawn, for more assurance unto thee.
Your Love to me quoth I, your pawn shall make,
So that for his default, I forfeit take.
SONNET VII.
Her Love to me she forthwith did impawne,
And was content to set at liberty:
My trembling heart, which straight began to fawn,
Upon his mistrisse kindly curtesy.
Not many days were past, when like a wanton,
He secretly did practice to depart,
And to Parthenophe did send a Canton
Where, with sighs accentes, he did loves impart:
And for because she daign'd him that great sign,
Of gentle favors, in his kind release:
He did conclude all duty to resign,
To fair Parthenophe which does increase
These woes, nor shall my rest-lesse muses cease:
For by her of mine heart am I deprived,
And by her, my first sorrows heat revived.
SONNET VIII.
Then to Parthenophe (with all post have)
As full assured of the pawn fore pledged
I made, and with these words disordred placed,
Smooth, tho with furies sharp outrages edged:
Quoth I (fair mistres) did I set mine heart
At liberty, and for that made him free,
That you should arm him for another start,
Whose certain bale you promised to be?
Tush (quoth Parthenophe) before he go
I Will be his bale at last, and doubt it not.
Why then (said I) that morgage must I shoe
Of your true-loue which at your hands I got?
Ay me, she was, and is his bale I wot,
But, when the morgage should have cured the soar:
She past it of, by deed of gift before.
SONNET IX.
So did Parthenophe release mine heart,
So did she rob me of mine hearts rich threasure,
Thus shall she be his bale before they part,
Thus in her love she made me such hard measure
Ay me nor hope of mutual love by leisure,
Nor any type of my poor hearts release
Remains to me, how shall I take the ceasure
Of her loves forfeture, which took such peace
Combyned with a former love, then cease
To vex with sorrows, and thy greefes increase.
It Is for Parthenophe thou sufferst smart.
Wyl'de natures wound not curable with art
Then cease, with choking sighs and hart-swolln throbbes.
To draw thy breath, broke of with sorrows sobbes.
SONNET X.
Yet give me leave (since all my joys be perished)
Hartlesse to moan, for my poor hearts departire.
Nor should I mourn for him if he were cherisht,
Ah no! she keeps him like a slavish martyr:
Ah me! since mercylesse she made that chartyre,
Sealed with wax of steadfast continence,
Signed with those hands which never can vnwrite it,
Writ with that pen, which by pre-eminence
To sure confirms whatseuer was inditit:
What skilles to wear thy gyrdle or thy gartyre,
When other arms shall thy small wast embrace?
How great a wast, of mind and bodies weal
Now meltes my soul! I to thine eyes appeal,
If they thy tyrant champions owe me grace.
SONNET XI.
Why did thou then in such disfigured guize
Figure the pourtraict of mine ouerthro?
Why manlike did thou mean to tyrannize,
No man but woman would have sinned so:
Why then in human and my secret foe
Did thou betray me, yet would be a woman?
From my cheef wealth out weauing me this woe,
Leaving thy love in pawn till time did come on
When that thy trustlesse bonds were to be tried,
And when (through thy default) I thee did sommon
Into the court of steadfast love, then cried
As it was promised, here stands his hearts bale:
And if in bonds to thee my love be tied:
Then by those bonds, take forfect of the sale.
MADRIGALL 1.
Oh powers celestial, with what sophistry
Took she delight, to blancke my heart by sorrow,
And in such Riddels act my tragoedie,
Making this day for him, for me to morrow.
Where shall I Sonnets borrow
Where shall I find breasts, sides, and tongue,
Which my great wrongs might to the world dispense?
Where my defense?
My Physic where? for how can I live long
That have forgone mine heart? I Will steal from hence,
From restless souls mine Hymns, from seas my tears,
From winds my sighs from co^caue rocks and steel
My sides and voices Echo: reeds which feel
Calm blastes still-mouing, which the shepherd bears
For waylefull plaints, my tongue shall be:
The land unknown to rest and comfort me.
MADRIGALL 2.
Might not this be for man's more certainty
By natures laws enactit
That those which do true meaning falsify
Making such bargains as were precontractit
Should forfect freelidge of loves ^enancie
Tot'h plaintiff grieved if he exact it
Think on my love, thy faith: yet have thou crakt it
Nor nature reason love nor faith can wake thee
To pity me my prisoned heart to pity
Sighs no fit incense nor my plaintes can make thee
Thy nose from savor and thine ears from sound
Stopt'e and obturate, naught could shake thee
Think on when thou such pleasure found
To read my lines and reading term them witty
Whiles lines for love and brains for beauty witless
I for thee feuer-schor't, yet thou still fitlesse.
SONNET XII.
Vexed with th'assaultes of thy conceived beauty
I restless on thy favors meditate:
And tho dispare full love (sometime) my suite tie
Unto these fagottes figures of my state,
Which bound with endless line by leisure wate
That happy moment of your hearts reply.
Yet by those lines I hope to find the gate,
Which through loves laberinth shall guide me right.
Whiles unacquainted exercise I try
Sweet solitude I shun my life's cheef light
And all because I would forget thee quite.
And (working that) me think it is such a sin
(As I take pen and paper for to write)
Thee to forget: that leaving I begin.
SONNET XIII.
When none of these my sorrows would aledge,
I sought to find the means, how I might hate thee.
Then hateful curiousness I did in wedge
Within my thoughts, which ever did awaite thee.
I framed mine eyes for an unjust controllment,
And mine unbridled thoughts (because I dare not
Seek to compel) did pray them take enroulment
Of natures faults in her, and equal spare not.
They searched and found her eyes were sharp, and fiery:
A moule upon her forhead, colored pale.
Her hair disordred, brown and crisped wyerye.
Her cheeks thin speckled with a summers male.
This told, men ween'd it was a pleasing tale.
Her to disgrace, and make my follies fade
And please it did, but her more gracious made.
MADRIGALL 3.
Once in an arbor was my mistress sleeping
With rose and woodbind wouen
Whose person thousand graces had in keeping
Where for mine heart her hearts hard flint was cloven
To keep him safe: behind stood pertly peepin ge
Poor Cupid softly creepinge
And drove small birds out of the myrtle bushes
Scared with his arrows who sat cheeping
On every sprigge whom Cupid c^lles and hushes
From branch to bra^ch whiles I poor soul sat weeping
To see her breathe not knowing
Incense into the clouds and bless with breath
The wyndes and air whiles Cupid underneath
With birds with songs nor any posies throwing
Could her awake
Each noise sweet lullaby was for her sake.
MADRIGALL 4.
There had my Zeuxes places and time to draw
My mistress pourtraict, which on platane table
With nature matching colors as he saw
Her leaning on her elbow, tho not able
He began with vermil, gold, white, and sable
To shadow forth: and with a skillful knuckle
Lively set out my fortunes fable,
On lips a rose, on hand an hony-suckle.
For nature framed that arbor in such orders
That roses did with woodbynes buckle,
Whose shadow trembling on her lovely face
He left vnshadow'd, there art lost his grace
And that white lilly leaf with fringed borders
Of Angels gold vayled the skies
Of mine heavens hierarchy which closed her eyes.
SONNET XIIII.
Then him controlling, that he left undone
Her eyes bright circle thus did answ^re make,
Restes mist with silver cloud had closed her Sun,
Nor could he draw them till she wear awake
Why then quoth I were not these leaves dark shade
Upon her cheeks depainted, as you see them:
Shape of a shadow can not well be made
Was answered, for shades shadows none can eye them.
(...) ^on, proves (...) argument for me,
That my greefes image I can not set out:
Which might with lively colors blazed be.
Wherefore since naught, can bring the means about
That thou my sorrows cause should vewe throughout,
Thou will not pity me: but this was it.
Zeuxes had neither skill, nor colors fit.
SONNET XV.
Where or to whom then shall I make complaint,
By guilefull wyles, of mine hearts guide deprived?
With rightes injustice, and unkind constraint
Barred from her loves which my deserts atchiued.
This though thou sought to choke far more revived
Within mine hartlesse breast, left almost fencelesse,
Oh make exchange, surrender thine for mine,
Least that my body void of guide be fencelesse,
So shall thou pawn to me sign for a sign
Of thy sweet conscience, when I shall resign
Thy loves large Charter, and thy bonds again.
Oh but I fear mine hopes be void, or mencelesse,
No course is left, which might thy loves attain:
Whether with sighs I sewe, or tears complain.
SONNET XVI.
Yea that accursed deed before insealed,
Is argument of thy first constancy:
Which if thou had to me before revealed
I had not pleaded in such feruencie,
Yet this delights, and makes me triumph much
That mine heart in her body lies imprisoned:
For (among all bay-crown'd conquerors no such
Can make the slavish captive bost him conquered)
Except Parthenophe, whose fiery gleames
(Like Jove's swift lightning rages, which rocks pearseth)
Heating them in-lye with his soddeyne beams
And secret golden mines with melting sear^eth,
Eft-soones with cannon, his drad rage rehearses
Yet naught seems scortched, in apparent sight:
So first she secret burnt, then did affright.
SONNET XVII.
How then succeeds (that amid this woe)
Where reasons sense does from my soul denide:
By these vain lines my fittes be specified
Which from their endless Ocean daily floe
Where was it borne whence did this humor groe?
Which long obscured with melancholyes mist
Inspires my gyddie brains vnpurified
So lively, with sound reasons to persist
In framing tunefull Elegies, and Hymns
For her whose name my Sonnets note so ^rimmes,
That naught but her chaste name so could assist:
And my muse in first tricking out her lymmes,
Found in her liuelesse shadow such delight:
That yet she shadows her, when as I write.
SONNET XVIII.
Write write, help help, sweet muse and never cease
In endless labors pens and papers tyer
Until I purchase my long-wish't desire:
Brains with my reason never rest in peace,
Wast breathless words, and breathfull sighs increase,
Till of my woes remorsefull you espy her,
Till she with me, be burnt in equal fire.
I never will from labor wits release
My senses never shall in quiet rest
Till thou be pitiful, and love alike:
And if thou never pity my distresses
Thy cruelty with endless force shall strike
Upon my wits, to ceaselesse writs addressed;
My cares (in hope of some revenge) this lesses.
SONNET XIX.
Imperious Jove with sweet lipp'd Mercury
Learned Minerua, Phoebus god of light
Vain-swelling Bacchus, Venus queen of beauty
With light foot Phoebe lamp of silent night:
These have (with diverse dieties beside)
Borrowed the shapes of many a mortal creature,
But (fair Parthenophe) graced with the pride
Of each of these, sweet Queen of lovely feature.
As tho she were, with pearl of all their skill
By heavens chief nature garnished she knittes
In wrath Jove's forehead, with sweet noting quill
She matcheth Mercury, Mineruaes wits,
In goldie-lockes bright Tytan, Bacchus syttes
In her hauds conduict pypes, sweet Venus face,
Dianaes leg the tyrian buskines grace.
SONNET XX.
These eyes thy bewties tenants, pay dew tears
For ocupation of mine heart thy free hold:
In tenor of loves service (if thou behold)
With what exaction it is held through fears,
And yet thy rentes extorted, daily bears,
Thou would not thus consume my quiets gold.
And yet thr covetous thou be, to make
Thy beauty rich, with renting me so roughly
And at such sommes, thou never thought do take,
But still consumes me, then thou do misguide all:
Spending in sport for which I wrought so toughlie.
When I had felt all torture and had tried all,
And spent my stock through streane of thine extortion
Of that I had but good hopes for my portion.
SONNET XXI.
Yea but uncertain hopes, are anchors feeble
When such faint-harted pilates guide my ships,
Of all my fortunes ballist with hard peeble
Whose doubtful viadge proves not worth two chippes
If when but one dark cloud shall dim the sky
The cables of hopes happiness be cut,
When bark with thoughts drowned mariners shall lie
Pressed for the whirle poole of greefes endless glutte.
If well thou mean (Parthenophe) then rauishe
Mine heart with doubtless hope of mutual love,
If otherwise, then, let thy tongue run lauishe:
For this, or that, am I resoulu'd to prove,
And both, or either ecstasy, shall move
Me rauish't, end with surfeit of relief:
Or senseless daunted dye, with soddeine grief.
SONNET XXII.
From thine hearts ever burning vestall fire,
The torch-light of two suns is norisht still.
Which in mild compass still surmouuting hyer
There orbs with circled harmony fulfill.
Whose rolling wheels run on Meridian line,
And turning, the turn back the mistie night,
Report of which clear wonder did incline
Mine eyes to gaze upon that uncouth light,
On it till I was sunburned did I gaze,
Which with a fervent agony possessed me.
Then did I sweat, and swelt, mine eyes daze
Till that a burniug fever had oppressed me:
Which made me faint, no Physic has represt me.
For I try all, yet for to make me sound
Ay me! no grass, nor Physic may be found.
SONNET XXIII.
When with the dawning of my first delight
The day light of loves delycasie moved me
Then from my heavens disdainful starrie light
The moone-light of her chastity reprou'd me
Her forheads threatfull clouds from hope removed me
Till midnight reared on the mid-noctiall line
Her heart whiles pities slight had vndershou'd me
Then did I force her downward to decline
Till dawning day light chearefully did shine
And by such happy revolution drew
Her mornings blush to joyful smiles incline
And now Meridian heat dries up my dew
There rest fair Planets stay bright orbs of heaven
Still smiling at my dyall past eleven.
SONNET XXIIII.
These mine hart-eating eyes do never gaze
Upon thy sons harmonious marble wheels
But from these eyes through force of thy suns blaze
Rain tears continual, whiles my faithes true steeles
Tempred on anueile of thine hearts could flint
Strikes marrow-melting fire into mine eyes:
The tinder whence my passions do not stint
As matches to those sparkles which arise.
Which when the taper of mine heart is lighted
^ke Salamanders nurrish in the flame
(...) the loves with my new torch delighted
A w^e like knattes did flourish in the same
But burnt their wings, nor anyway could frame
To fly from thence, since Jove's proud byrd that bears
His thunder veu'd my sun but shed down tears.
SONNET XXV.
Then count it not disgrace if any view me
Some-time to shower down rivers of salt tears
From tempest of my sighs dispayre-full fears:
Then scorn me not alas sweet friends but rue me:
Ah pity pity me for if you knew me,
How with her looks mine heart amends and wears,
Now calm now rageous as my passion bears
You would lament with me, and she which slew me.
She (which Ay me) she which did deadly wound me
And with her bewties balm tho dead keeps lively
My liuelesse body, and by charms has bound me
For thankelesse meede to serve her if she viuely
Could see my sorrows maze which none can tread
She would be soft, and light, tho flint and lead.
SONNET XXVI.
When lovely wrath my mistress heart assaileth,
Loves golden darts take ame from her bright eyes:
And Psiche Venus rosy couche empayleth
Placed in her cheeks, with lillyes where she lies:
And when she smyles from her sweet looks and cheare-full
Like Phoebus when through soddein clouds he starteth,
After stern tempests, showers, and thunder feare-full,
So she my worlds delight with her smiles harteth.
Aurora yellow looks when my love blushes,
Wearing her hears bright color in her face,
And from loves rubie portall lovely rushes
For every word she speaks an Angels grace:
If she be silent every man in place
With silence wonders her, and if she sleep,
Air does with her breathes murmur music keep.
SONNET XXVII.
Why do I draw this cool releeuing air
And breathe it out in scaulding sighs as fast?
Since all my hopes dye buried in dispayer
In which hard soil mine endless knottes be cast:
Where when I come to walk be soundry mazes
With bewties skillful finger lyned out,
And knottes whose borders set with double dazes,
Doubles my dazed muse with endless doubt
How to find easy passage through the time
With which my mazes are so long beset,
That I can never pass but fall and clyme
According to my passions which forget
The place where they with loves guide should have met:
But when faint-wearied all me thinks is past
The maze returning makes me turn as fast.
SONNET XXVIII.
So be my labors endless in their turns
Turn turn Parthenophe turn and relent,
Hard is thine heart and never will repent,
See how this heart within my body burns:
Thou sees it not atnd therefore thou reiournes
My pleasures, ill my days been over spent:
When I beg grace, thou mine entreaty spurns:
Mine heart with hope vpheld, with fear returns
Betwixt these passions endless is my fit
Then if thou be but human grant some pity
Or if a saint sweet mercies are there meedes
Fair lovely chaste sweet-spoken learned witty
These make thee saint-like and these saints befit
But thine hard heart makes all these graces weeds.
SONNET XXIX.
Bless still the myrr-tree Venus for thy meede
For to the weeping myrre, my tears be dew:
Contentious winds which did from Tytan breed
The shaking Aspine tree belonges to you
To' the Aspine I bequeath my ceaselesse tongue:
And Phoebus let thy laurels ever flourish
To still green laurel my loves do belong:
Let mighty Jove his oaks large branches nurrish
For to strong oak mine heart is consecrate
Let dreadful Pluto bless black Heben tree
To' the Heben my despair is dedicate:
And Nayads let your willowes loved be
To them my fortunes still removed be:
So shall my tears, tongue, passions never cease
Nor heart decay nor my despair decrease.
SONNET XXX.
So this continual fountain of my tears
From that hard rock of her sweet beauty trickling,
So shall my tongue on her loves music tickling,
So shall my passions fed with hopes and fears,
So shall mine heart which wearing never wears,
But soft is hardened with her bewties prickling
On which despair my vulture seas'd stands pickling
Yet never thence his maw full-gorged bears.
Right so, my tears, tongue, passions, heart, despair
With floods, complaints, sighs, throbbes, and endless sorrow,
In seas, in volumes, winds, earthquakes, and hell,
Shall floate chaunte, breath, break, and dark mansion borrow.
And in them I be blessed for my fair:
That in these torments for her sake I dwell.
SONNET XXXI.
I burn yet am I cold, I am a could yet burn
In pleasing discontent, in coffeehouse pleased
Diseased I am in health, and health-full am diseased
In turning back proceed, proceeding I return
In mourning I rejoice, and in rejoicing murne
In preasing I step back, in stepping back I preased
In gaining still I loose, and in my losses gain
Grounded I waver still, and wavering still am grounded:
Unwounded yet not sound, and being sound am wounded:
Slain yet am I a live, and yet alive am slain:
Hounded mine heart restes still, still resting is it hounded:
In pain I feel no greef, yet void of grief in pain
Unmoved I vex my self, vnuext yet am I moved
Beloved she loves me not, yet is she my beloved.
SONNET XXXII.
Scarce twice seven times had Phoebus wagon wheel
Obliquely wandered through the Zodiacks line,
Since nature first to Ops did me resign,
When in mine youthful vain I well could feel
A lustful rage, which reasons cheanes of steel
With headstrong force of lust did still untwine,
To wanton fancies I did then incline:
Whilst mine unbridled Phaeton did reele
With heedlesse rage, till that his chariot camme
To take in fould his resting with the Ram
But bootlesse all: for such was his unrest
That in no limittes he could be contained.
To lawless sportes and pleasures ever pressed
And his swift wheels, with their sweet oil distained.
SONNET XXXIII.
Next when the boundless fury of my sun
Began in higher Climates to take fire,
And with it somewhat kindled my desire,
Then least I should have wholly been undone
(For now mine age had thrice seven winters run)
With studies, and with labors did I tyer
Mine itching fancies, which did still aspier:
Then from those obiectes (which their force begone
Through wandering fury to possess mine heart)
Mine eyes there vain seducers I did fix
On Pallas, and on Mars, home, and in field,
And armed strongly least my better part
To milder obiectes should it self immixe,
I vowed I never would to beauty yield.
SONNET XXXIIII.
But when in May my worlds bright fiery sun
Had past in Zodiac with ^is golden (...)
To place his beams which in the twynnes begun,
The blazing twynne stars of my worlds bright bea^e
My mistress eyes, mine heavens bright sun, and moon,
The stars by which poor shepherd I am warned
To pin in late, and put my flocks out soon,
My flocks of fancies as the signs me learned:
Then did my loves first spring begin to sproute,
So long as my suns heat in those signs rayned.
But wandering all the Zodiac throughout
From her mayes twynnes, my sun such heat constrained,
That where at first I little had complained,
From sign to sign, in such course he now posteth
Which daily me, with hatt^ sl^ing ^steth.
SONNET XXXV.
Next when my sun by progress took his hold
In Cancer of my mistress crastie mind,
How retrograde seemed she, when as I told
That in his claws such torches I did find,
Which if she did not to my tears lay plain
That they might quenched be from their outrage,
My lones hot June should be consumed in pain
Unless her pity make my grief assuage.
Oh how she frowns, and like the Crabbe back turns
When I request ^er put her beams apart:
Yet with her bea^es my souls delight she burns:
She pities not to think upon my smart
Nor from her Cancers claws can I depart,
For there the torch of my red-hot desire
Greeues, and releeues ^e, with continual fire.
SONNET XXXVI.
And thus continuing with outrageous fire,
My sun proceeding forward to my sorrow
Took up his court, but willing to retier
Within the Lions den his rage did borrow:
But whiles within that mansion he remained,
How cruel was Parthenophe to me,
And when of my great sorrows I complained,
She Lyon-like wished the might tenfold be:
Then did I rage and in vukindly passions
I rent mine hear, and rac'd my tender skin,
And rauing in such frantique fashions,
That with such cruelty she did begin
To feed the fire which I was burned in.
Can women brook to deal so sore with men?
She man's woe learned it in the Lions den.
SONNET XXXVII.
But pity which sometimes does Lions move,
Removed my sun from mo^die Lions c^ise,
And into Virgoes boure did next remove
His fiery wheels, but the she answer ga^
That she was all vowed to virginity,
Yet said boue all men she would most affect me:
Fie Delian goddess in thy company
She learned with honest color to neglect me,
And underneath chaste vayles of single life
She shrowdes her crafty claws, and Lions heart,
Which with my senses now do mingle strife
Twixt loves, and virtues, which provoke my smart:
Yet from these passions can I never part,
But still I make my suites importunate
To thee, which makes my case unfortunate.
SONNET XXXVIII.
When thine hart-pearcing answers could not hinder
Mine hearts hot hammer on thy steel to batter,
Nor could excuses cold quench out that cynder
Which in me kindled was, she weighed the matter,
And turning my suns chariot him did place
In Libras equal mansion, taking pawse,
And casting with deep judgment to disgrace
My love, with dealing cruel in the cause:
She busily with earnest care devised,
How she might make her beauty tyrannous,
And I for ever to her yoke surprised:
The means found out with cunning perilous:
She turned the wheels with force impetuous,
And armed with womanlike contagion,
My sun she lodged in the Scorpion,
SONNET XXXIX.
Then from her Venus, and bright Mercury
Mine heavens clear Planets, did she shoot such blazes
As did infuse with heates extremity
Mine heart, which on dispaires bare pasture grazes:
Then like the Scorpion did she deadly sting me,
And with a pleasing poison pierced me,
Which to these utmost sobbes of death did bring me,
And through my souls saint sinews searced me:
Yet might she cure me with the Scorpions oil
If that she were so kind, as bewtifull,
But in my bale she joys to see me boil,
Tho be my passions dear, and dewtyfull,
Yet she remorselesse, and unmerciful:
But when my thought of her, is such a thing
To strike me dead, judge if her self can sting.
SONNET XL.
But ah my plague through times outrage increased,
For when my sun his task had finished
Within the Scorpions mansion, he not ceased
Nor yet his heates extremes diminished,
Till that dead aming Archer dressed his quiver,
In which he closely couched at the last,
That Archer which does pearce both heart, and liver
With hot gold-pointed shaftes, which ranckle fast:
That proud commanding, and swift-shooting Archer,
Fa^ (...) which does (...),
And more then Phoebus, is an inward parcher,
Thou with thy notes harmonious, and songs soote
Allured my sun, to fire mine hearts soft root:
And with thine e^r w^ding golden Arrow
First pricked my soul, then perc'd my bodies marrow.
SONNET XLI.
When my sun Cupid took his next abiding
Among craggie rocks and mountains with the goat,
Ah then on beauty did my senses doat,
Then had each fair regard my fancies guiding,
Then more then blessed was I if one tyding
Offaemal favor set mine heart a floate:
Then to mine eyes each maid was made a moate.
My sickle thoughts with diverse fancies slyding
With wanton rage of lust so me did tickle:
Mine heart each bewties captiuated vassal
Nor vanquished then, as now, but with loves prickle
Not deeply moved, till loves beams did discover
That lovely Nymphe Parthenophe, no lover,
Stop there for fear, loves privilege does pass all.
SONNET XLII.
Pass all, ah no! no jot will be omitted
Now though my sun within the water rest
Yet does his scaulding fury still infest:
Into this sign whiles that my Phoebus flitted
Thou moved these streams, whose courses thou committed
To me thy water-man bound and adrest
To power out endless drops upon that soil
Which withers most when it is watered best:
Cease floodes, and to your channells make recoyle,
Strange floodes which on my fire burn like oil:
Thus whiles mine endless furies hyer ran,
Thou thou (Parthenophe my rage begun,
Sending thy beams to heat my fiery sun:
Thus am I water-man, and fier-man.
SONNET XLIII.
Now in my Zodiackes last extremest sign,
My lucklesse suune his happelesse mansion made,
And in the water willing more to wade
To Pisces did his chariot wheels incline:
For me poor fish he with his golden line
Bayted with bewties, all the river lade
(For who of such sweet baytes would stand afrade)
There nibbling for such food as made me pyne,
Loves golden hook on me took soddeine hold
And I down swallowed, that empoysened gold
Since then, devise what any wisher can
Of fiercest torments, since all joys devise,
Worse greefes, more joys did my true heart comprize,
Such were loves bates, my crafty fisher man.
MADRIGALL 5.
Such strange effects wrought by thought wou^ding Cupid
In changing me to fish, his bates to swallow
With poison choking me, unless that you bid
Him to my stomach give some Antidote:
Fly little god with wings of swallow,
Or if thy feathers fast floate,
That Antidote from mine hearts empress bring,
My feeble senses to revive:
Least, if thou wave it with an Eagles winge
To late thou come, and find me not alive.
MADRIGALL 6.
Oh why loved I? for love to purchase hatred,
Or wherefore hates she? but that I should love her,
Why were these cheeks with tears bewatred?
Because my tears might quench those sparks,
Which with heates pity move her:
Her cloudie frown with mist her beauty darkes,
To make it seem obscured at my smyles,
In dark true Dyamonds will shine.
Her hate my love, her heat my tears beguyles:
Fear makes her doubtful, yet her heart is mine.
MADRIGALL 7.
Youths wanton spring, when in the raging Bull
My sun was lodged, gave store of flowers:
With leaves of pleasure, stalks of hours
Which soon shak'd of the leaves, when they were full
Of pleasures beauty dew'd, with April showers:
My summer love, whose buddes were bewtifull,
Youthful desiers with heates unmerciful
Parched, whose seeds when harvest time was come
Wear ears against my suites obturate,
With sheaues of scorn bound up, which did benumme
Mine heat with greef, yet made her heart indurate:
Oh chaste desiers which hel'd her heart immurate
In wall's of Adamante vnfoyled!
My winter spent in showers of sorrows tears
Haylestones of hatred, frostes of fears,
My branches bar'de of pleasure, and despoiled.
MADRIGALL 8.
Why am I thus in mind, and body wounded?
Oh mind, and body mortal, and divine!
On what sure rock is your forte grounded?
On death? Ah no for at it you repine:
Nay both intombed in her bewties shrine
Will live (tho shadowlike) that men astounded
At their Anatomies, when they shall vewe it,
May pitiful rewe it,
Yea but her murdering beauty does so shine,
Oh yet much merciless!
That heart desiers to live with her which slew it,
And tho she still rest pitylesse:
Yet at her beauty will I wonder,
Though sweet graces past repeat,
Never appear (but when the threate)
Fiering my secret heart, with dar^e and thunder.
SONNET XLIIII.
Oh dart and thunder whose fierce violence
Surmounting Rhetorickes dart and thunder boultes
Can never be se^ out in eloquence,
Whose might all mettles mass a sonder moultes:
Where be they famous Prophets of old Greece?
Those anchiant Roman Poets of acompt,
Musaeus which went for the Golden Fleece
With Jason, and did Heroes loves recompt
And thou sweet Naso with thy golden vearse
Whose lovely spirit rauish't Caesar's daughter,
And that sweet Tuskane Petrarke which did pearse
His Laura with love Sonnets when he saught her:
Where be these all? that all these might haue^ taught her
That saints divine are known saints by their mercy,
And sainctlike beauty should not rage with pearse eye.
SONNET XLV.
Sweet bewties rose in whose fair purple leaves
Loves Queen in richest ornament does lie,
Whose graces were they not too sweet and hye
Might here be seen, but since their sight bereaues
All senses, he that endless bottom weaues
Which did Penelope, who that shall try
Then wonder and in admiration dye
At nature-passing natures holy frame:
Her beauty thee reuiues, thy muse vpheaues
To draw celestial spirit from the skies
To praise the work and worker whence it came:
This spirit drawn from heaven of thy fair eyes
Whose gilded cognissance left in mine heart,
Shows me thy faithful servant to my smart.
SONNET XLVI.
Ah pearse-eye pearsing eye, and blazing light
Of thunder thunderblazes burning up!
Oh sun sunne-melting, blind, and dazing sight!
Ah heart down driving heart, and turning up!
Oh matchless beauty bewties beauty stayning!
Sweet damask rose bud Venus rose of roases!
Ah front Imperious deuties deutie gayning!
Yet threatfull clouds did still incloase and cloases!
Oh lillye leaves when Juno lillyes leaves
In wondering at her colors grain distayned!
Voice, which rocks voice and mountains cleaues
In sonder at my loves with pain complained!
Eye, lihtning Sun, heart bewties bane unfeigned!
Oh damask rose! proud forhead! lillye! voice!
Ah partial fortune! sore chance! fillye choice.
SONNET XLVII.
Give me mine heart for no man lives hartlesse,
And now deprived of heart I am but dead:
And since thou have it in his tables read,
Whether he rest at ease in joys and smartlesse,
Whether beholding him thine eyes were dartlesse,
Or to what bondage his inthral-ment leads.
Return dear heart and me to mine restore,
Ah let me thee possess, return to me:
I find no means deuoyde of skill and artlesse
Thither return where thou triumph't before
Let me of him but repossessor be
And when thou gives to me mine heart again
Thy self thou do bestow, for thou art she
Whom I call heart, and of whom I complain.
SONNET XLVIII.
I wish no rich refinde Arabian gold
Nor Orient Indian pearl rare natures wonder,
No Diamondes the Aegiptian surges under,
No Rubyes of America dear sold,
Nor Sapphires which rich Affrike sands ensold
Treasures far distant, from this Isle a sender,
Barbarian Iuories in contempt I hold:
But only this, this only Venus grant
That I my sweet Pathenophe may get:
Her heirs no grace of golden wyers want
Pure pearls with perfect Rubines are in set,
True Dyamondes in eyes, Saphires in veins,
Nor can I that soft Iuory skin forget:
England in one small subject such contains.
SONNET XLIX.
Cool cool in waves, thy beams intolerable
O sun, no son but most unkind stepfather,
By law nor nature sier but rebel rather,
Fool fool these labors are inextricable,
A burden whose weight is importable,
A Siren which within thy breast does bath her
A fiend which does in graces garments grath her,
A fortress whose force is impregnable:
From my loves lymbeck still stilled tears, oh tears!
Quench quench mine heat, or with your soueraintie
Like Nyobe convert mine heart to marble:
Or with fast-flowing pyne my body dry
And ryd me from dispaires chyll'd fears, oh fears!
Which on mine heben harpes heart strings do warble.
SONNET L.
So warble out your tragique notes of sorrow
Black harp of liuer-pyning melancholy
Black humor patron of my fancies folly,
Mere folies which from fancies fire borrow,
Hot fire which burns day, night, midnight, and morrow,
Long morning which prolonges my sorrows solie
And ever ouerules my passions wholly:
So that my fortune where it first made forrow
Shall there remain, and ever shall it plowe
The bowels of mine heart, mine hearts hot bowels:
And in their forrowes sow the seeds of love,
Which thou did sow, and newly spring up now
And make me write vain words, no words but vowells,
For naught to me good consonant would prove.
SONNET LI.
Lame consonants of member-vowells robbed
What perfect-sounding words can you compose
Wherein you might my sorrows flame disclose?
Can you frame mamed words as you had throbbed?
Can you with sighs make signs of passions sobbed?
Or can your characters make sorrows shows?
Can liquids make them? I with tears make those,
But for my tears with taunts and frumpes am b^bbed.
Could mutes procure good words mute would I be,
But then who should my sorrows image paint?
No consonants or mutes or liquids will
Set out my sorrows, tho with grief I faint:
If with no letter but one vowell should be,
An A. with H. my Sonnet would fulfill.
SONNET LII.
Me thought Calliope did from heaven discend^
To sing, fair mistress thy sweet bewties (...),
Thy sweet enchanting voice did Orpheus r^e,
Who with his harp which down the gods did send
Celestial coneorde to the voice did lend,
His music all wild beasts so did amaze
That they submissiue* thy looks did bend:
Hills, trees, towns, bridges, from their places wend
Hopping, and dancing, all they winds be still
And listen, whiles the Nightingalles fulfill
With Larkes and Thrushes all defectes of pleasure:
Springs sang thy praises in a murmur shill,
Whiles I enraged with music, out of trance
Like Bacchus preeste, did in thy presence dance.
MADRIGALL 9.
For glory pleasure and fair flourishing,
Sweet singing, courtly dancing, curious love
A rich remembrance virtuous nurrishing,
For sacred care of heavenly things
For voices sweetness musickes notes above
When she deuinely speaks or sings
Cleio dismount, Euterpe silent be,
Thalia for thy purple put on sackcloth,
Sing hoarse Melpomine with Jove's Harpies three,
Terpsichore break of thy galliard daunces,
Leave Erato thy daliance, court in black-cloath,
Thy praises Polymneia she inhaunces,
For heavenly zeal Urania she outreacheth,
Plead not Calliope sing not to thy Lute,
Jove and Mnemosine both be mute
Whilst my Parthenophe your daughters teaches.
MADRIGALL 10.
Thou scaled my fort blind Captain of conceit,
But you sweet mistress entered at the breach:
There you made havoc of my heart,
There you to triumph did my tyrant teach,
Beware he knows to win you by deceit,
Those Iuory walls cannot endure his dart,
That turret framed with heavens rare art
Immured with whitest porphyre, and inset
With roses cheeking natures pride of Rubye:
Those two true Diamo^ds which their windows frette,
Arch't with pure gold yet mourn in sable shade,
Warn not these that in danger you be?
Vanquish her little tyrant I will true be,
And tho she will not yield to me
Yet none could thrall my heart but she.
MADRIGALL 11.
Thine eyes mine heaven which harbor lovely rest,
And with their beams all creatures cheer
Stoule from mine eyes there clear,
And made mine eyes dim myrrouldes of unrest.
And from her lillye forhead smooth, and plain,
My front his withered sorrows took,
And through her grace, his grace forsook:
From soft cheeks rosy red,
My cheeks their leanesse, and this pallid stain.
The golden pen of natures book
(For her tongue that task undertook)
Which to the graces secretorie led,
And sweetest muses with sweet music fed,
Enforced my muse in tragique tunes to sing:
But from her hearts hard frozen string,
Mine heart his tenderness, and hear possessed.
MADRIGALL 12.
Like to the mountains are mine high desiers,
Level to thy loves highest point;
Grounded on faith which thy sweet grace requiers,
For springs, tears rise in endless sourse:
For summers flowers, loves fancies I appoint.
They trees with storms tossed out of course
Figure my thoughts still blasted with despair:
Thunder, lightning, and hayle,
Make his trees mourn, thy frowns make me bewail,
This only diffrence here fire there snowes are.
SONNET LIII.
Why do I draw my breath vain sighs to feed
Since all my sighs be breathed out in vain?
Why be these eyes the condnictes whence proceed
These ceaselesse tears, which for your sake do rain?
Why do I write my woes, and writing grieve
To think upon them, and their sweet contriuer,
Begging some comfort which mighe me relieve,
When the remembrance is my cares reuiuer?
Why do I sew to kiss, and kiss to love,
And love to be tormented, not beloved?
Can neither sighs, nor tears my sorrows move,
By lines, or words, nor will they be removed?
Then tire not tyrant, but on mine heart tyer,
That vnconsum'd I burn in my desire.
SONNET LIIII.
When I was young indewd'd with natures graces
I stoule blind loves strong bow and golden arrows,
To shoot at redbrestes, goldfinches, and sparrowes:
At shrewd gyrles, and at boys in other places
I shot when I was vexed with disgraces:
I perc't no skin, but melted up their marrowes,
How many boys and gyrles, wished mine embraces?
How many prayz'd my favor, boue all faces?
But once (Parthenophe) by thy sweet side sitting
Love had espied me in a place most fitting
Betrayed by thine eyes beams, which makes blind see:
He shot at me, and said for thine eyes light,
This daring boy that durst usurp my right,
Take him a wounded slave, to love, and thee.
SONNET LV.
Nymphs which in beauty mortal creatures stain,
And Satyrs which none but fair Nymphs behold,
They to the Nymphs, and Nymphs to them complain,
And each in spite, my mistress beauty told:
Till soundely sleeping in a myrtle grove,
A want on Satyr had espied her there,
Who deeming she was dead, in all have strove
To fetch the Nymphs which in the forestes were:
They flocking fast, in triumph of her death
Lightly beheld, and (deeming she was dead)
Nymphs sang, and Satyrs daunced out of breath,
VVhilest Satyrs with the Nymphs la voultaes lead
My mistress did awake, then they which came
To scorn her beauty, ran away for shame,
SONNET LVI.
The dyall love which shows how my days spend,
The leaden plummets sliding to the ground,
My thoughts which to dark melancholye bend,
The rolling wheels, which turn swift hours round
Thine eyes (Parthenophe) my fancies guide:
The watch continually which keeps his stroke,
By whose often turning every hour does slide
Figure the sighs which from my liver smoke,
Whose often invasions finish my lives date:
The watchman which each quarter strikes the bell,
Thy love which does each part exanimate,
And in each quarter strikes his forces fell:
That hammer, and great bell which ends each hour,
Death my life's victor, sent by thy loves power.
SONNET LVII.
Thy beauty is the sun which guides my day,
And with his beams to my worlds life geues light,
With whose sweet favor all my fancies play,
And as birds singing still inchant my sight
But when I seek to get my loves chief pleasure,
Her frowns are like the night led by the lamp
Of Phoebes chaste desiers, whilst without leisure
Graces like stars through all her face encampe:
Then all my fancies birds lie whisht for fear,
Soon as her frowns procure there shadie sorrow
Saving mine heart, which secret shot does bear
And nature from the Nighting all does borrow:
Which from lamentes, because he will not rest
Has loves thorn prickle pointed at his breast.
SONNET LVIII.
Fair Clytie does flourish with the spring
And eft soones withered like thy golden hear,
And Ioes vyolettes grow flourishing,
But soon defaced which thine eyes semblance bear:
Anemone, with hyacinthe springs pride,
Like to thy beauty loose their lovely gloss,
So will thy cheeks with graces bewtified
Return to wrinckles, and to natures dross:
Roses (as from thy lips) sweet odours send,
Which herbs in them whilst juice, and virtues rest,
From some diseases rigor, life defend:
These (as thy self) once withred, men detest:
Then love betimes, these withered flowers of yore
Revive: thy beauty lost returns no more.
SONNET LIX.
Ah me sweet beauty lost returns no more,
And how I fear thine heart fraught with disdain,
Dispaier of her disdain castes doubt before.
And makes me thus of mine hearts hope complain,
Ah me nor mine hearts hope, nor help: dispaier
Avoid my fancy, fancies utter bayne
My woes chief worker, cause of all my cayer
Avoid my thoughts that hope may me restor^
To mine hearts heaven, and happiness again:
Ah will thou not but still depresse my thought?
Ah (mistress) if thy beauty this has wrought,
That proud disdainfulness shall in the rain,
Yet think when in thy for head wrinckles be,
Men will disdain thee then, as thou do me.
SONNET LX.
Whilst some the Troiane wars in verse recount,
And all the Grecian Conquerours in fight,
Some valiant Roman wars boue stars do mount,
With all their warlike leaders, men of might:
Whilst some of Bryttish Arthures valor sing,
And register the praise of Charlemayne:
And some of doughtie Godfrey tydinges bring,
And some the German broils, and wars of Spain:
In none of those, my self I wounded find
Neither with horseman, nor with man on foot:
But from a clear bright eye, one captain blind
(Whose pu^sance to resist did nothing boot)
With men in golden arms, and darts of gold,
VVounded my heart, and all which did behold.
SONNET LXI.
To none but to Prometheus me compayer,
From sacred heaven he stoule that holy fire:
I from thine eyes stoule fire, my judgments are
For to be bound with cheanes of strong desire
To that hard rock of thy thrice cruel heart:
The ceaselesse waves, which on the rocks do dash
Yet never pearce, but forced backward start
Those be these endless tears, my cheeks which wash:
The vulture which is by my goddess doom
Assigned to feed upon mine endless liver,
Despair by the procured, which leaves no room
For Ioculus to jest with Cupides quyuer:
This swallows worlds of livers, spending few,
But not content: O god shall this be true?
SONNET LXII.
Fie, fie, fierce tyrant, quench this furious rage,
O quench this rageous fury, little god!
Nay mighty god, my furies heat assuage,
Nor are thine little darts, nor brittle rod,
Ah that you had a sweet recuring dart,
Or such a rod as into health might whipp^ me:
With this to level at my troubled heart,
To warn with scourge that no bright eye might trippe me*
Vain words which vanish with the clouds why speak I?
And bootebesse options builded with void air?
How often enraged in hopeless passions break I,
How often in false vain hope, and black dispayer?
How often left liuelesse at thy cloudie frown?
How often in passion, mounted, and plucked down?
MADRIGALL 13.
Soft lovely Roselike lips, conioyn'd with mine,
Breathing out precious incense such,
Such as at Paphos smoke to Venus shrine,
Making my lips immortal with their tuche:
My cheeks with tuch of thy soft cheeks divine,
Thy soft warm cheeks, which Venus favor much:
Those arms, such arms which me embrac'de,
Me with immortal cyncture guirding round
Of everlasting bliss, then bound
With her enfolded thighs in mine entangled,
And both in one self soul plac'de,
Made an Hermophrodite, with pleasures rauish't:
There heat for heats, soul for souls empyer wra^gled,
Why dyed not I with love so largely lauish't?
For wake (not finding truth of dreams before)
It secret vexes, tentimes more.
MADRIGALL 14.
Ah tentimes worse tormented then before,
Tentimes more pity should thou take of me,
I have endured, then sweet restore
That pleasure, which procured this pain:
Thou scorn'st my lines, a saint which make of thee,
Where true desiers of thine hard heart complain:
There thou boue stella plac'de,
Boue laura with ten thousand more installed,
And now proud thinks me graced,
That am to thee (though merciless) inthrall'de.
SONNET LXIII.
Jove for Europaes love took shape of Bull,
And for Calisto playde Dianaes part
And in a golden shower, he filled full
The lap of Danae with celestial art,
Would I were changed but to my mistress gloves,
That those white lovely fingers I might hide,
That I might kiss those hands, which mine heart loves
Or else that cheane of pearl, her necks vain pride,
Made proud with her necks veins, that I might fold
About that lovely neck, and her pappes tickle,
Or her to compass like a belt of gold,
Or that sweet wine, which down her throat does trickle,
To kiss her lips, and lie next at her heart,
Run through her veins, and pass by pleasures part.
SONNET LXIIII.
If all the loves were lost, and should be found,
And all the graces glories were decade,
In thee the graces ornaments abound,
In me the loves by thy sweet graces laid.
And if the muses had their voice forgone,
And Venus husbands forge had lost his fire,
The muses voice, should by thy voice be known,
And vulcanes heat, be found in my desire.
I will accuse thee to the gods of theft,
For Pallas eye, and Venus rosy cheek,
And Phoebes forehead, which thou have berefte,
Complain of me to Cupid, let him seek
In vain for me each where, and in all parts,
For against my will, I stoule one of his darts.
SONNET LXV.
Oh that I had no heart, as I have none,
(For thou mine hearts full spirit have possessed)
Then should mine argument be not of moan,
Then under loves yoke should should I not be pressed:
Oh that without mine eyes I had been borne,
Then had I not my mistress beauty vewed,
Then had I never been so far forlorn,
Then had I never wep't, then never rewed:
Oh that I never had been borne at all,
Or being, had been borne of shepheardes brood,
Then should I not in such mischances fall,
Quiet my water and content my food:
But now disquieted, and still tormented,
With a duerse fate, perforce must rest contented.
SONNET LXVI.
Ah sweet content, where is ^hy mylde abode?
Is it with shepheardes and light-harted swaynes?
Which sing upon the downs and pype abroad
Tending their flocks and cattle on the playnes?
Ah sweet content, where do thou safely rest?
In heaven, with Angels which the praises sing
Of him that made and rules at his behest
The minds, and hearts of every living thing?
Ah sweet content, where does thine harbor hold,
Is it in Churches, with Religious men,
Which please the gods with prayers manifold,
And in their studies meditate it then.
Whether thou do in heaven, or earth appear,
Be where thou will, thou will not harbor here.
SONNET LXVII.
If Cupid keep his quiver in thine eye,
And shoot at ouer-daring, gasers hearts,
Alas why be not men afraid, and fllye
As from Medusaes, doubting after smartes?
Ah when he draws his string, none sees his bow,
Nor hears his golden fethred arrows sing,
Ay me till it be shot no man does know,
Until his heart be pricked with the sting,
Like semblance bears the musket in the field,
It hittes, and killes unseen, till unawares
To death wounded man his body yield,
And thus a pesant, Caesar's glory dares:
This diffrence left, twixt Mars his field, and loves,
That Cupids souldior shot, more torture proves.
SONNET LXVIII.
Would God (when I beheld thy bewteous face,
And golden tresses, rich with pearl, and stone)
Medusaes visage had appeared in place,
With snakie locks, looking on me alone:
Then had her dreadful charming looks me changed
Into a senseless stone, oh were I senseless!
Then rage through rash regard had never ranged,
Whereas to love I stood disarmed and fencelesse:
Yea but that diverse object of thy face,
In me contrarious operations wrought,
A moving spirit, pricked with bewties grace,
No pitties grace in thee, which I have sought
Which makes me deem, thou did Medusa see,
And should thy self, a moving marble be.
SONNET LXIX.
The leauelesse branches of the liuelesse bows
Carue winters outrage in their withered barks:
The withered wrinckles, in my careful brows
Figure from whence, they drew those crooked marks:
Down from the Thracean mountains, oaks of might,
And lofty firres into the valley fall,
Sure sign where Boreas has vsurp'te his right,
And that long there, no Syluanes dally shall:
Fields with prodigious inundatious drown'de,
For Neptunes rage, with Amphitrite weep:
My looks, and passions, likewise show my wound,
And how some fair regard did strike it deep.
These branches, blasted trees, and fields so watered,
For wrinckles, sighs, and tears, fore show thine hatred.
SONNET LXX.
What can these wrinckles, and vain tears portende
But thine hard favor, and indurate heart?
What show these sighs, which from my soul I send
But endless smoke, raiz'd from a fiery smart?
Can thou not pity my deep wounded breast?
Can thou not frame those eyes to cast a smile?
Wylt thou with no sweet sentence make me blessed?
To make amends will thou not sport a while?
Shall we not once with our opposed eyne
In inter change, send, golden darts rebated?
With short reflection twixt thy brows and mine
Whilst love with thee, of my greefes has debated?
Those eyes of love, were made for love to see,
And cast reguardes on others, not on me.
SONNET LXXI.
Those hairs of Angels gold, thy natures treasure
(For thou by nature Angellike art framed)
Those lovely brows, broad bridges of sweet pleasure,
Arche two clear springs of graces gracious named,
There graces infinite do bathe, and sport:
Under on both sides, those two precious hills
Where Phoeb'e, and Venus have a several forte:
Her couche with snowie lillyes Phoebe filles,
But Venus with red Roses here is adorneth,
There they with silent tokens do dispute:
Whilst Phoebe Venus, Venus Phoebe scorneth,
And all the graces Iudgers there sit mute
To give their verdict, till great Jove said this,
Dianaes arrows wound not like thy kiss.
SONNET LXXII.
My mistress beauty matched with the graces
Twix't Phoeb', and Juno should be Judged there,
Where she with mask had, vayl'd the lovely places,
And graces in like sort I masked were:
But when their lovely bewties were disclosed
This Nymphe (quoth Juno) all the graces passes,
For bewteous favors in her face disposed,
Loves goddess, in loves graces she surpasses:
She does not pass the graces Phoebe sade
(Though in her cheeks the graces richly sit)
For they be subjects to her beauty made,
The glory for this fair Nymphe is most fit:
There in her cheeks the graces blush for shame,
That in her cheeks to strive, the subjects came.
SONNET LXXIII.
Why did rich nature graces gr^nt to thee,
Since thou art such a niggar^ of thy grace?
Or how can graces in thy body be
Where neither they, nor pity find a place?
Ah they been handmaydes to thy bewties fury,
Making thy face to tyrannise on men.
Condemned before thy beauty by loves Jury,
And by thy frowns adiudg'd to sorrows den
Grant me some grace, for thou with grace art wealthy
And kindly may afforde some gracious thing,
Mine hopes all as my mind weak and vnhealthie,
All her looks gracious, yet no grace do bring
To me poor wretch, yea be the graces theare:
But I the furies in my breast do bear.
SONNET LXXIIII.
Cease ouer-tyred muses to complain,
In vain thou powers out words, in vain thy tears,
In vain thou writes thy verses, all in vain:
For to the rocks and wall which never hears
Thou speaks, and sendes complaints which find no grace:
But why compaire I thee to rocks, and walls:
Yes thou discendes from stones and rocks by race',
But rocks will answer to the latter calls,
Yea rocks will speak each sentences last word,
And in each sillabe of that word agree,
But thou nor last nor first wilt me afford:
Has pride or nature bred this fault in thee,
Nature, and pride have wrought in thee these evils,
For women are by nature proud as devils.
SONNET LXXV.
Love is a name too lovely for the god,
He naked goes, read colored in his skin.
And bare (all as a boy) fit for a rod:
Hence into Afric, there seek out thy kin,
Amongst the Moors, and swarthie men of Inde,
Me thou of joys, and sweet content have hindered:
Have thou consumed me, and art of my kind?
Have thou in^ag'd me, yet art of my kindered?
Nay Ismarus, or Rhodope thy father,
Or craggie Caucasus thy crabbed sier,
Vesuuius else, or was it Aetna rather?
For thou how many do consume with fire?
Fierce Tygres, Wolves, and Panthers gave the suck
For lou^ly Venus had not such ^uill luck.
SONNET LXXVI.
Be blind mine eyes, which saw that stormy frown:
Wither long-watring lips, which may not kiss:
Pyne arms, which wisht' for sweet embraces missee
And upright parts of pleasure, fall you down:
VVast wanton tender thighs consume for this,
To her thighs elmes, that you were not made vynes:
And my long pleasure in her body grafted,
But at my pleasure her sweet thoughts repines.
Mine heart with her fair colors should be wafted
Throughout this Oceane of my deep dispaier:
Why do I longer live, but me prepaier
My life togather with my joys to finish?
And (long ear this) had I dyed with my care
But hope of joys to come, did all dim^ish.
SONNET LXXVII.
How can I live in minds or bodies health
When all four elements my greefes conspier?
Of all hearts joys depriving me be stelth,
All yielding poisons to my long desire,
The fire with heates extremes mine heart enraging,
Water in tears, from dispaires fountain flowing,
My soul in sighs, air to loves soul engaging,
My fancies coals, earthes melancholy blowing.
Thus these (by nature) made for my relief,
Through that bold charge, of thine Imperious eye
Turn all their graces into bitter grief,
And I were dead should any of them dye:
And they my bodies substance all be sick,
It follows then, I cannot long be quick.
SONNET LXXVIII.
The proudest Planet in his highest Sphere,
Saturn inthronist in thy frowning brows:
Next aufull Jove thy majesty does bear:
And unto dreadful Mars, thy courage bows,
Drawn from thy noble grandfathers of might:
Among'st the laurel crowned Poets sweet,
And sweet Musitions take the place by right:
For Phoebus with thy graces thought it meet:
Venus does sit upon thy lips, and chinne:
And Hermes has inrich't thy wits divine:
Phoebe with chaste desiers thine heart did win:
The Planettes thus to thee their powers resign.
Whom Planets honor thus is any such?
My muse then can not honor her too much.
SONNET LXXIX.
Covetous eyes, what did you late behold?
My rival graced with a sunne-bright smile,
Where he with secret signs, was sweetly told
Her thoughts with winkes, which all men might beguile
Audacious did I see him kiss that hand,
Which holds the reanes of mine unbridled heart,
And softely wringing it did closely stand
Courting with love terms, and in lovers art:
Next (with his fingers kissed) he touched her middle,
Then saucic (with presumption vncontrolld)
To hers from his eyes sent regardes hy riddle.
At length, he kissed her cheek: ah me! so bold
To bandie with bel-gardes in interchange?
Blind mine eyes (envy) that the may not range.
SONNET LXXX.
Long wished for death, sent by my mistress doom
Hold take thy prisoner full resolved to dye,
But first as chief, and in the highest room
My soul to heaven I do bequeath on hye,
Now ready to be seuer'd from thy love:
My sighs to air, to Crystal springes my tears,
My sad complaints (which thee could never move)
To mountains desolate, and deaf, my fears
^o Lambs beset with Lions, my dispare
To night, and irksome dungeons full of dread:
Then shall thou find (when I am past this care)
My torments which thy cruelties have bredde
In heavens, clouds, springs hard mountains, lambs, and night.
Here once united, then disseuer'd quite.
SONNET LXXXI.
O kingly jealousy which can admit
No thought of com-peeres in thine high desire!
Loves bastard daughter for true-loues unfit
Scaulding men's hearts, with force of secret fire:
Thou poisoned cancour of much-bewteous love,
Fostred of enuies pappes with wrathful rage,
Thou which do still thine own destruction move
With eagles eyes, which secret watch does wage:
With Peacockes feet, to steal in unawares:
With prognes wings to false suspect which flies
Which virtues hold in durance rashly dares,
Prouoker, and maintayner of vain lies,
Who (with rich virtues, and fair love possessed)
Causeless have all to thine hearts hell adrest.
SONNET LXXXII.
The chariot with the steed is drawn along,
Ships winged with winds, swift houer on the waves:
The stubborn plowes are hayl'd with Oxenstrong,
Hard Adamant the strongest iron craves:
But I am with thy beauty strongly forced,
Which (full of courage) draws me like the steed:
Those winds thy spirit, whence cannot be diuorc'd,
Mine heart the ship, from danger never freed:
That strong conceit on thy sweet beauty lade,
The strong neck't Ox, which draws my fancies plow:
Thine heart that Adamant, whose force has made
My strong desiers, stand subject unto you.
Would I were horse, ox, Adamante, or wind:
Than had I never cared, for woman-kinde.
SONNET LXXXIII.
Dark night black image of my foul dispare,
With grievous fancies cease to vex my soul,
With pain, sore smart, hot fires, cold fears, long care:
Too much (alas) this ceaselesse stone to roll.
My days be spent in penning thy sweet praises,
In pleading to thy beauty never matched,
In looking on thy face, whose sight amazes
My sense, and thus my long days be dispatched.
But night fourth from the mistie region rising
Fancies with fear, and saddispayer does send,
Mine heart with horror, and vain thoughts agrizing:
And thus the fearful tedious nights I spend:
Wishing the noone to me were silent night,
And shades nocturnall, turned to daylight.
SONNET LXXXIIII.
My sweet Parthenophe, within thy face
My passions Calender may plain be red:
The golden number told upon thine head,
The sun days (which in card I holy place
And which divinely bless me with their grace)
Thy cheerful smiles which can recall the dedde:
My working days, thy frowns from favors fled,
Which set a work the furies in my breast
These days are six to one more then the rest:
My leap year is (oh when is that leap year)
When all my cares I ouerleape, and feast
With her fruition whom I hold most dear.
And if some Calenders the truth tell me,
Once in few years, that happy leap shall be.
SONNET LXXXV.
From Eastes bed roasie, whence Aurora rises
Be thy cheeks figured, which their beams display
In smiles: whose sight mine heart with joy surpriseth,
And which my fancies flowers do fair array,
Cheered with the gracious dewes of her regard:
The West, whence evening comes, her frowning brow,
Where coffeehouse plowes his furroes hard,
(There does she bury her affections now)
The North whence storms, with mistes and frostes proceed,
My black dispayer, long sorrows, and cold fear:
The South whence showers, in great abundance breed,
And where hot sun does to Meridian rear,
Mine eyes whose obiectes naught but tears requier,
And my soft heart consumed with rage of fire.
SONNET LXXXVI.
Oh fiery rage, when will thou be consumed,
Thou that have me consumed in such sort,
As never was poor wretch (which so presumed)
But for surueying of that bewteous sort?
Kep't in continual durance, and inchayn'd
With hot desires, which have my body pyned:
My mind from pleasures, and content restrained,
My thoughts to care, and sorrows ward assigned:
There, with continual melancholy placed
In dismal horror, and continual fear
I pass these irksome hours, scorned and disgraced
Of her, whose cruelty no breast can bear canbeare,
No thought endure, no torture can outmatch:
Then burn on rage of fire, but me dispatch.
SONNET LXXXVII.
Burn on sweet fire, for I live by that fuel
Whose smoke is as an incense to my soul:
Each sigh prolonges my smart, befierce and cruel
(My fair Parthenophe) frown, and control,
Vex, torture, scaulde, disgrace me, do thy will,
Stop up thine ears, with flint immure thine heart,
And kill me with thy looks, if they would kill:
Thine eyes, those crystal phialls, which impars
The perfect balm, to my dead-wounded breast,
Thine eyes the quiuers, whence those dar^es were drawn
Which me to thy loves bondage have adrest:
Thy smile, and frown, night star, and daylightes dawne.
Burn on, frown on, vex, stop thine ears, torment me,
More for thy beauty borne, would not repent me.
SONNET LXXXVIII.
Within thine eyes mine heart takes all his rest,
In which still sleeping all my sense is drowned:
The dreams (with which my senses are oppressed)
Be thousand lovely fancies, turning round
The restless wheel of my much busy brain:
The morning, which from resting does awake me,
Thy beauty, banished from my sight again,
When I to long melancholy betake me:
Then full of errors all my dreams I find,
And in their kinds contrarious, till the day
(Which is her beauty) set on work my mind,
Which never will cease labor, never stay:
And thus my pleasures are but dreams with me,
Whilst mine hot fevers pains quotidian be.
SONNET LXXXIX.
What be those hears dyed like the marrigold?
Echo, gold
What is that brow whose frowns make any moan?
Echo, anymone
What were her eyes when the great Lords controllde?
Echo, roll'de
What be they when from them be loves thrown?
Echo, loves throane
What were her cheeks (when blushes raze) like?
Echo, roselike
What are those lips which boue perles rue be?
Echo, rewbee
Her Iuorie shoulders what be those like?
Echo, those like
What saints are like her speak if you be?
Echo, few be
Thou dwellst in rocks heart like somewhat then?
Echo, what then?
Androckes dwell in her heart, is it is true?
Echo, it is true
Whom she loves best, know this cannot men?
Echo, not men
Pass him she loathes, then I dismiss you?
Echo, misseyou
What sex to whom men sewe so vain much?
Echo, vain much
Furies there fires, and I complain such?
Echo, plain such.
SONNET XC.
My mistress arms are these, fair, clear, and bright:
Argent in midst where is an ogresse set
Within an azuer ann'let, placed right:
The creaste two golden bows, almost near met
(And by this creaste her power abroad is known)
These arms, she bears in the field of love,
By bloody colors where loves wrath is shown.
But in kind passion, mylder then the dove
Her goodly silver ensign she displayes
Semi de roses, at whose lovely sight
All lovers are subdued, and vanquished praise
Those glorious colors under which they fight:
I by these arms, her captive thrall was made:
And to those colors in that field betray'de.
SONNET XCI.
These bitter gustes which vex my troubled seas,
And move with force, my sorrows floudes to flow:
My fancies ship tossed here, and there by these
Still floates in danger, raunging too and froe:
How fears my thoughts swift pynnace thine hard rock,
Thine hearts hard rock, least thou mine heart (his pylate
Together with him self) shouldrashely knock,
And being quite dead-stricken, then should cry late,
Ah me! to late to thy remorselesse self,
Now when thy mercies all been banished
And blown upon thine hard rocks ruthlesse shelfe,
My soul in sighs is spent and vanished,
Be pittyfull alas, and take remorse,
Thy beauty too much practices his force.
SONNET XCII.
VVilt thou know wonders by thy beauty wrought?
Behold (not seen) an endless burning fire
Offancies fuel, kindled with a thought,
Without a flame, yet still inflamed hyer:
Noflames appearance, yet continual smoke
Drawn cool to kindle, breathed out hot again:
Two dy'mondes, which this secret fire proucke,
Making two christalls with their heat to rain:
A skin, where bewteous graces rest at ease:
Atongue, whose sweetness mazes all the muses:
And yet, an heart of marble matched with these
A tongue (besides) which sweet replies refuses.
These wonders by thy beauty wrought alone,
Through thy proud eye, which made thine heart astone.
SONNET XCIII.
Begges love which whilome was a dyetie?
I list no such proud beggars at my gate:
For alms he among cold Arctique folk does wate,
And sunne-burnt Moors in contrariety,
Yet sweates, nor freezes more: then is it piety
To be remorse-full at his bare estate,
His reach he racketh at an higher rate,
He ioynes with proudest in society:
His eyes are blind (for-sooth) and men must pity
A naked poor boy which does no man harm,
He is not blind, such beggar boys be witty
For he marks, hittes, and wounds hearts with his arm,
Nor coldest North can stop his naked race,
For (where he comes) he warmeth every place.
SONNET XCIIII.
Forth from mine eyes, with full-tide flows a river,
And in thine eyes, two sparkling chrisolytes:
Mine eyes still covet to behold those lights,
Thine eye still filled with arrows, is loves quiver:
Through mine eye, thine eyes fire inflames my liver,
Mine eyes in heart, thine eyes clear fancies write:
Thus is thine eye to me my fancies giver,
Which from thine eyes, to mine eyes take their flight,
Then pearce the secret center of my heart,
And feed my fancies with inflamed fuel,
This only greeues, mine eyes had not that art,
Thine to transpearce, thy nature was so cruel.
But eyes, and fancies, in this triumph make
That they were blind and raging for her sake.
SONNET XCV.
Thou bright beame-spreading loves thrice happy star,
The Arcadian shepherd Astrophill's clear guide:
Thou that on swift winged Pegasus do ride,
Auroraes harbenger, surpassing far
Aurora carried in her rosy carre:
Bright Planet, teller of clear euening-tide,
Star of all stars, fair fauor'd nights cheese pride,
Which day from night, and night from day do bar:
Thou that have worlds of hearts with thine eyes glaunce
To thy loves pleasing bondage taken thrall,
Behold, where graces in loves circles dance,
Of two clear stars, out-sparkling Planettes all:
For stars, her bewties arrow bearers be,
Then be the subjects, and superior she.
SONNET XCVI.
The sun in Pisces, Venus did intend
To see sick Flora, whose soil (since by kind
Tytan to the Antipod's his beams resign'de)
No pleasant flowers to welcome her did send,
To whom for need, Parthenophe did lend
(At natures suite) rich Helioch rise, which shyn'de
In her fair hear, white lillyes which combyn'de
Which her high-smoothed brows, which bent, love bend:
Violettes from eyes, sweet blushing eglantine
From her clear checkes, and from her lips sweet roases:
Thus Venus paradise, was made divine
Which such as nature in my Lady cloases.
Then since with her loves Queen was glorified,
Why was not my sweet Lady diefied?
SONNET XCVII.
Oh why should envy with sweet love consorte
But that, with loves excess seven sins unite:
Pride: that in high respect of my delight
I scorn all others. Lust: that with disporte
In thought of her, I sometimes take comfort.
Wrath, that with those in secret heart I fight
Which smile on her. and envy: that I spite
Such meats, and wines as to her lips resort
And tuch that tongue, which I can never kiss.
Sloth: that secure in too much love I sleep
And nuzzled so, am to be free'de remiss.
And covetous I never mean can keep
In craving, wishing, and in working this
Though still I kiss and tuch, still tuch and kiss.
SONNET XCVIII.
The sun my Ladies beauty representes,
Whose fierie-pointed beams each creature heates
Such force her grace on whom it counterbeates
Does practice, which the patient still torments:
And to her virtues the bright moon assentes,
With whose pure chastity my love she threats:
Whose thought it self in her cool circle seats,
And as the moon her bright habilimentes
Of her bright brother Phoebus borrows,
So from her beauty does her chaste desire
His brightness draw, for which none aspier,
To tempt so rare a beauty, yet forgive:
He that for thy sake so long sorroweth,
Can not but longer love, if longer live.
SONNET XCIX.
This careful head (with diverse thoughts distressed)
My fancies chronicleire, my sorrows nurse:
These watchful eyes (whose heedlesse am I curse)
Loves centernelles, and fountains of unrest:
This tongue still-trembling, harrold fit adrest
To my loves grief, then any torment worse:
This heart true fortress, of my spottelesse love,
And rageous furnace of my long desire:
Of these by nature am I not possessed
(Though nature there first means in me did move)
But thou (dear sweet) with thy loves holy fire
Mine head greefes anueyle made with cares oppressed,
Mine eyes a spring, my tongue a leafe-winde shaken,
Mine heart a wastfull wilderness forsaken.
SONNET C.
Pleading for pity to my mistress eyes,
Urging on duty favors as desartes,
Complaining mine hid flames, and secret smartes,
She with disdaynefull grace, in jest replies.
Her eyes were never made man's enemies:
Then me with me conceit she over thwartes,
Urging my fancy, which vain thoughts (...)
To be the causer of mine injuries,
Saying I am not vexed as I complained,
How melancholye bred this light (...)
Hard-harted mistress, can thou think I feigned?
That I with fancies vain vain woes repeat?
Ah no! for though thine eyes none else offend,
Yet by thine eyes, and noes, my woes want end.
SONNET CI.
Had I been banished from the native soil,
Where with my life I first received light:
For my first cradles had my tom^e been dight:
Or changed my pleasure for a ceaselesse toil:
Had I for nurce, been left to Lions spoil:
Had I for freedom, dwelt in shadie nigh^
Coup't up in loth-some dungeo^s from men's sight.
Those first desiers which in my breast did boil,
From which thy loves (unkind) thou banished
Had not been such an exile to my bliss.
If life (with my loves infancy) were vanished,
It had not been so sore a death as this:
If Lyonesses were in steed of nurses,
Or night for day, thine hate deserves more curses.
SONNET CII.
Vain gallantes, whose much longing spirits tickle,
Whose brains swell with abundance of much wit,
And would be touched feign with an amourous fit,
O lend your eyes, and bend your fancies fickle,
You, whom affections dart did never prickle,
You which hold lovers fools, and argue it:
Gase on my sun, and if tears do not trickle
From your much maisterd eyes where fancies sit,
Then, eagles will I term you for your eyes,
But Bears, or Tygres for your saluage hearts:
But if it chance such fountains should arise,
And you made like partakers of my smartes,
Her for her percing eyes, an eagle name:
But for her heart, a Tygre never tame.
MADRIGALL 15.
Natures pride, loves pearl, virtues perfection,
In sweetness, beauty, grace,
Of body, face, affection,
Has glory, brightness, place,
In rosy cheeks, clear eyes, and heavenly mind:
All which, with wonder, honor, praise take race
To charm, to shine, to fly, with fames protection:
Mine heart the first, mine eyes next, third my thought,
Did wound, did blind, did bind,
Which grieved, obscured, and wrought,
Heart, eyes, and sen^s with such imperfection,
That in their former comfort, sight, and kind,
The moved, gazed, and sought,
Yet found not, in what order, sort, and case,
Of tears, plaints, sighs, with seas, with murmr, wind,
To find, to get, t'imbrace,
Natures pride, loves pearl, virtues perfection.
MADRIGALL 16.
Sleep Phoebus still in glaucie Thetis lap,
Jove's eagles percing eyes be blind:
Soft things whose tuch, is tickle to the mind
Give no like tuch, all joys in one to wrappe.
All instruments, all birds, and voices
Make no such heavenly music in their kind:
No fruits have such sweet sap,
No root such ioyces,
No balm so much reioyces:
O breath, exceeding every rich perfume!
For love all pleasures in a kiss did lap.
Her eyes did give bright glaunces,
Sight is no sight, all light with that consume:
She tuch't my cheek, at which tuch mine heart dau^ces,
Mine eyes, in privy combat did praesume
Charging mine hands to charge her middle,
Whilst they threw wounding darts, and healing lances:
She kissed and spoke attonce a riddle:
But such sweet meaning in dark sense
As showed the drift of her deare-sweet pretense,
More pleasing, then the cord of Harp, or Lute.
On heavenly cherries then I feed,
Whose sap deliciouser then Angels food,
Whose breath more sweet, the^ gu^me, be^e, flower, or bood,
O kiss which did all sense exceed!
No man can speak those joys, then muse be mute:
But say, for sight, smell, hearing, taste, and tuch,
In any one thing, was there ever such?
MADRIGALL 17.
Envious air, all natures public nurse
Lend to my life no spirit:
Not that I prosper worse
Then erst of yoare, for I the state inherit
Which gods in Paradise, boue man's demerite,
But for I highly scorn,
Thy common vnpour should
With her sweet breath immixe, I cannot bear it:
Cold airs infusion cannot be forborne,
O kiss, o soul, which could
All way linges have outworne!
Angel of bliss, which cheeres me night, and morn,
Sweet cloud, which now with my soul do enfould,
Salve to my soul once sick.
Let men in Inde I'borne,
Cease boasting of rich drugges, and sweet perfume,
Egyptian gummes, and odours Arabicke
I loath, and wood dear sold
From Myrre, and Cypress torn:
Tarry sweet kiss, do not in clouds consume,
Yet can I feel thy spirit moving quick,
O why should air praesume,
To be her spirits rival!
What do I speak? nor am I lunaticke:
I can not live, else would I not assume
Cold air, to contriue all
My sorrows with immixion,
Then dye whilst this sweet spirit the does prycke,
Whilst thy sweet comfortes kisses are alyueall,
And loves sweet jurisdiction
Will make the dye possessed
Of all heavens joys, which for most comfort striueall:
Least death to pleasure should give interdiction
Ah let my lips be pressed,
And with continual kisses
Power everlasting spirit to my life,
So shall I all ways live, so still be blessed.
Kiss still, and make no misses,
Double, redouble kisses,
Murmr affections, war in pleasing strife:
Press lips, lips rest oppressed,
This passion is no fiction.
MADRIGALL 18.
After Auroraes blush the sun arose,
And spread his beams:
With whose clear gleames
My pricklesse rose-bud vaild his purple leaves,
In whose sweet fouldes, morning did pearls enclose,
Where sun his beams in Orblike circle weaues,
And them t'inrich stoule those,
Natures beauty, Phoebus virtue, loves incense:
Whose favor, sap, and savor my sense reaues.
My muse has these for theames,
They to my muse, my muse to them defense,
Phoebus (sometimes) loves oracles sendes thence.
Thus by my sun a rose,
(Though a sweet rose pricklesse)
Pricklesse arose, dear prickle!
Which me diseaseth much, though I be sicklesse,
Naught me of joy bereaues,
Save favor, sap, and savor all be fickle.
Blush not for shame, that thy sun spreades his beams
My soul in sunder cleaues:
After Auroraes blush, the sun arose.
MADRIGALL 19.
Thy loves conceits are wound about mine heart,
Thy love it self within mine heart a wound:
Thy torches all arow stick,
Which thy sweet grace about mine heart has bound:
There gleaming arrows stick in every part,
Which unto my marrow prick.
Thy bewties fancy, to mine heart is thrall,
Mine heart, thy beauties thrall is found:
And thou mine heart a bulwarcke art,
Conquered with beauty, battered to the ground.
And yet though conquered will not yield at all,
For in that conflict though I fall,
Yet I my self a conqueror repute:
In fight continual, like victorious mart,
Yet ever yield, as ever overthrown.
To be still prisoner is my suite,
I will be still thy captive known:
Such pleasing servitude,
Victorious conquest is, and fortitude.
MADRIGALL 20.
My love alas is sick, fie envious sickness!
That at her breast where rest all joys, and ease,
Thou should take such dispight, her to displease,
In whom, all virtues health has quickness:
Thou durst not come in living licknesse,
For had thou come, thou could not her disease,
Her beauty would not let the prease.
Sweet graces (which continually attend her)
At her short breath, breathe short, and sigh so deep,
Which sicknesses sharp furies might appease:
Both loves, and graces strive to mende her.
Oh never let me rest, but sigh, and weep:
Never but weep, and sigh, sick is my love,
And I loue-sicke, yet Physic may befrend her,
But what shall my disease remove?
SONNET CIII.
I slep't, when (underneath a laurel shade,
My face vprear'd aloft unto the heaven)
Me thought I heard this spoken in a sueauen,
Nature on earth loves miracle has made:
With this, me thought upon a bancke was lade
An earthly body, which was framed in heaven,
To whom such graces, by the graces given
Sweet music in their several orgaynes play'de:
In chief the silent music of her eye,
Softly recorded with heavens harmony,
Drew down Urania from Celestial sphoere:
Who mazed, at mazy turning of her eyne
(To make divine perfection) glazed theare
Those eyes with clearest substance christalline
MADRIGALL 21.
When this celestial goddess had indew'de
Her eyes with Sphoericke revolution,
Vesta with her next gift ensew'de,
And lent to nature that thrise-sacred fire,
To which once Iaphets offspring did aspier:
Which made a dissolution
Of a strange ore, engendered by the sun
In grace, and worth more pure then goulde:
Which (against the Cyprian triu^phes should be done)
Gilded those wheels, which Cupids' chariot rowl'de.
MADRIGALL 22.
In center of these stars of love,
(Boue all conceits in man's capacity)
An Orientiet which did not move,
To Cupids chariot wheel made for the naffe,
Was fixed, which could with mylde rapacitie
Of lighter lovers, draw the lighter chafe:
This, shadow gives to clearer light,
In which as in a myrroulde there was framed,
(For those which loves conditions treat upon)
A glass, which should give semblance right
Of all their Phisnomies impassionate.
Those hearts (which tyrant love does beat upon)
May there behold, what Cupid works,
Yielding in it, that figure fashionate
Which in the iettie myrrour lurkes.
MADRIGALL 23.
Phoebus, rich father of eternal light,
And in his hand a wreath of Heliochrise
He brought, to bewtifie those tresses:
Whose train, whose softness, and whose gloss more bright
Apolloes locks did ouerprise:
Thus with this gyrland, whiles her brows he blesses,
The golden shadow, with his tincture
Colored her locks, I gilded with the cyncture.
MADRIGALL 24.
Thus, as she was boue human glory graced,
The saint me thought departed,
And suddenly upon her feet she started,
Juno beheld, and feign would have defaced
That femall miracle, proud natures wonder,
Least Jove through heavens clear windows should epsy her,
And for her beauty, Iunoes love neglect:
Down she discendes, and as she walked by her
A branch of lilyes Juno tears in sonder.
Then from her Sphoere, did Venus down reflect,
Least Mars by chance her beauty should affect,
And with a branch of Roses
She bet upon her face, then Juno closes,
And with white lillyes did her beauty chasten.
But lovely graces in memorial,
Let both the Rose, and lillyes colors fall
Within her cheeks, which to be foremost hasten.
MADRIGALL 25.
Whiles these two wrathful goddesses did rage,
The little god of might,
(Such as might fitter seem with craynes to fight,
Then with his bow to vanquish gods, and kings)
In a cherry-tree fate smiling;
And lightly wauing with his motley wings)
Fair wings, in beauty boys, and gyrles beguiling,
And cherry garlandes with his hands compiling
Laughing, he leaped light
Unto the Nymphe, to try which way best might
Her cheer, and with a cherry branch her bobbed:
But her soft lovely lips
The cherryes, of their ruddie rubye robbed:
Eftsoons he to his quiver skippes,
And bringes those bottles whence his mother sippes
Her nectar of delight,
Which in her bosom clamed place by right.
MADRIGALL 26.
I dare not speak of that thrice holy hill,
Which spread with silver lillyes lies,
Nor of those violettes, which voy de veins fulfill,
Nor of that maze on loves hill top,
These secrets must not be surueyde with eyes,
No creature may those flowers croppe,
Nor bath in that clear fountain.
Where none but Phoebe, with chaste virgins wash,
In bottom of that sacred mountain:
But whether now? thy verses ouerlash.
SESTINE 1.
When I waked out of dreaming,
Looking all about the garden,
Sweet Parthenophe was walking:
Oh what fortune brought her hither!
She much fayrer then that Nymphe.
Which was bet with rose and lillyes.
Her cheeks exceed the rose and lillyes,
I was fortunate in dreaming,
Of so bewtifull a Nymphe:
To this happy blessed garden
Come you Nymphs, come fayries hither,
Wonder natures wonder walking:
So she seemed in her walking,
As she would make rose, and lillyes
Ever flourish, oh but hither
Hark (for I beheld it dreaming)
Lillyes blush't within the garden,
Staind with bewties of that Nymphe.
The Rose for anger at that Nymphe
Was pale, and (as she went on walking)
When she gathred in the garden,
Tears came from the rose and lillyes:
As the sighed, their breath in dreaming
I could well perceive it hither.
When Parthenophe came hither,
At the presence of that Nymphe,
(That hill was heaven where I lay dreaming)
But when I had espye'd her walking,
And in hand her rose, and lillyes
As sacrifice given by that garden,
(To love stood sacred that fair garden)
I dared the Nymphs to hasten hither:
Make homage to the rose, and lillyes
Which are sacred to my Nymphe:
Wonder when you see her walking.
Might I see her but in dreaming,
Even the fancy of that Nymphe,
Would make me night, and day come hither
To sleep in this thrice happy garden.
SONNET CIIII.
Hold (matchless myrrour of all womankinde)
These pens, and Sonnettes, servant of thy praise,
Placed in a world of graces, which amayse
All young beholders, through desire blind:
Thou to whom conquered Cupid has resigned
His bows, and darts during thy sunnie days,
Through thine eyes force infeebled by the rays
Which wondrers to their cost in thine eyes find.
That there with bewties excellence unable
To write, or bear, my pens, and books refuse,
Thine endless graces are so amiable,
Passing the spirit of mine humble muse,
So that the more I write more graces rise
Which mine astonished muse cannot comprise.
FINIS.
ELEGIES
ELEGY I.
WHy did the milk which first, Alcides nurrish't
(Ingendring with Cybele) breed the lillye?
The Assiria^ hunters blood why has it florish't
The rose with red? why did the Daffadillye
Spring from Narcissus self conceited love?
Why did great Jove (for the Paeneian cow)
Devise the marble colored vyolet?
Or what for Phoebus love, from mountains hyllye
Did Hyacinthe to rosy blushes move?
Since my sweet mystresse under Phoebes browe,
'unoes and fair Adonis flowers has set:
Adowne her neck Narcissus gold does bow,
Ioes gray violettes in her Crystal lights,
Th'Oebalian boys complexion still alightes
Upon her Hyacinthine lips like Rubye:
And with loves purest sanguine Cupid writes
The praise of beauty through the veins which blew be,
Conducted through loves sluice to thy face rosy,
Where doves, and redbrestes sit for Venus rightes:
In sign that I to the will ever true be,
The rose, and lillyes adorn my p^asie:
The vyolettes, and Hyacinthe shall knitte
With Daphadill, which shall embellish it
Such heavenly flowers in earthly poases few be.
ELEGY II.
Oh that some time thou saw mine endless fittes,
When I have somewhat of thy bewtte pondred!
Thou could not be persuaded that my wits
Could once retire so far from sense asondred,
Furies them selves have at my passions wondered,
Yet thou (Parthenophe) well pleased sittes
Whilst in me so thy moystures heat has thondred,
And thine eyes darts at every colon hittes
My soul with double pricks which mine heart splittes.
Whose faintyng breath with sighing commaes broken
Draws on the sentence of my death by pawses:
Ever prolonging out mine endless clauses
With iffs Parenthesis, yet find no token
When with my grief, I should stand even or odd:
My life still making preparations
Through thy loves darts to bear the periodde,
Yet stumbleth on Interrogations.
These are those scholar like vexations
Which grieve me when those studies I apply.
I miss my lesson still, but with loves rod
For each small accent sounded but awrye
Am I tormented, yet I can not dye.
ELEGY III.
Sweet thralldome by loves sweet impression wrought,
Loves in that bondage ever let me live,
For love has brought me bondslaue with a thought
And to my thoughts love did me bondsman give.
Ah me my thoughts poor prisoner shall I rest?
And shall my thoughts make triumph over me?
First to fierce famish't Lions stand adrest,
Or let hage rocks, and mountains cover thee.
Behold, one to his fancies made a pray,
A poor Actaeon with his hounds devoured,
An oak with his green Iuy worn away,
A. wretchconsum' with plenties great down powered:
A garment with his moath, dispoyl'd, and rotten:
A thorn with his bred Caterpiller cancerd,
A buried Caesar, with his fame forgotten,
A friend betrayed by those on whom he ancer'd,
Behold a fire consumed with his own heat,
An iron worn away with his own rust,
But wear mine heart of oak, this rage would eat
Still fresh as Iuy mine hard oak to dust,
And were my pleasures durable as steel,
Despair would force they should times cancor feel.
ELEGY IIII.
This day sweet mistress you to me did write,
(When for so many lines I begged reply all)
That from all hope you would not bar me quite,
Nor grant plain placet, nor give dead denial:
But in my chamber-window (while I read it)
A waspish be flew round about me ^uzzing,
With fulfilled flanks, when my times flower had fed it
(Which there lay strewn) and in my neck with huzzing
She fixed her sting, then did I take her out
And in my window left her where she died:
My neck still smartes, and swells round about
By which her wrathes dear ransom may be tried
A myrrour to (thee Lady) which I send
In this small schoede, with commendations tied
Who (though the sting and anguish stay with me)
Yet for revenge saw his unlucky end)
Then note the example of this hapless be,
And when to me thou do thy sting intend.
Fear some such punishment should chance to thee.
ELEGY V. To Parthenophil.
Are you so waspish, that from time, to time
You nurrish bees and to so good an end,
That having sucked your honnie they must clyme
Into your bosom, to bethanke their friend:
And for a sign, that they come to defend
Reward you with such weapons as they have:
Nor was it more then your desartes did crave
Not much unlike unto the Vipers yongling,
Who nurrish't with the breeders dearest blood
Snarles with his teeth, nor can endure the bongling
Within the Vipers belly, but makes food
Of her, thus nature works in her brood:
So you (forsooth) nor was it much amiss,
Feed snakes which thankefully both sting, and hiss.
But if that any of our sex did sting you,
Know this (moreover) though you bear the prick,
And though their frowns to melancholy bring you
Yet are we seldom, or else never sick:
Nor do we dye like bees, but still be quick
And soon recovering what we lost before,
We sting apace, yet still keep stinges in store.
ELEGY VI.
Behold these tears my loves true tribute payment,
These plaintiff Elegies my greefes bewrayers,
Acoutred as is meet in mournful raiment:
My red-swolne eyne, which were mine hearts betrayers.
And yet my rebel eye excuse prepaires
That he was never worker of my wayment,
Plaining my thoughts, that my confusion they meant:
Which thoughts with sighs (for incense) make dumme prayers,
To Appease the furies in my martyred breast,
Which witness my true loves, in long lament,
And with what agonies I am possessed.
Ah me poor man, where shall I find some rest!
Not in thine eyes with promise fearful hope,
Thine heart has vowed I shall be still distressed,
To rest within thine heart there is no scope.
All other places, made for bodies ease
As bed, field, forest, and a quiet chamber,
There ever am I with sad cares oppressed,
Each pleasant spectacle does me displease,
Grief, and despair so sore on me did sease
That day with tediousness does me molest
And (Phoebe carried in her coach of Amber)
Can not close up the fountains of my woe:
Thus days from nights my charged heart does not know,
Nor nights from days, all hours to sorrows go:
Then punish fancy, cause of thy disease.
ELEGY VII.
Youth full of error, whether do thou hayle me?
Down to the dungeon of mine own conceit:
Let me before take some divine receite,
For will I know my jailer will not bail me:
Then if thou favor not, all helps will fail me,
That fearful dungeon poisoned with despair
Affordes no casement to receive sweet air,
There ougly visions ever will apayle me
Vain youth misguideth soon with loves deceit
Deeming false painted looks most firmly fair.
Now to remorselesse indges must I sewe
For gracious pardon, whiles they do repeat
Your bold presumption, threatening me with you:
Yet am I innocent, though none bewail me.
Ah pardon, pardon, childish youth did view
Those two forbidden apples which they wished for,
And children long for that with once the rue.
Suffice he found repentance which he fish't for
With great expense of bates, and golden hooks.
Those living apples do the suite pursue
And are you Judges, see their angry looks
Where underneath that wrath-full Canopie
The use to open their condemning books:
Expect now nothing but extremity,
Since they be Judges, and in their own cause.
Their sightes are fixte on naught but cruelty,
Ruling with rigor (as they list) their laws
Oh grant some pity, placed in pitties h^ll!
Since our forefather for the like offense
With us received sufficient recompense,
For two fair apples, which procured his fall:
ELEGY VIII.
Cease sorrow, cease, oh cease thy rage alittle,
Ah little ease, oh grant some little ease:
Oh fortune ever constante, never brittle!
For as thou began so do thou still displease.
Ah ceaselesse sorrow, take some truice with me,
Remorselesse tyrants, sometime will take peace
(Upon conditions) and I Will take of thee
Conditions, so thou will thy fury cease.
And dear conditions, for to forfect life
So thou will end thy plagues, and vex no more.
But out alas! he will not cease his strife
Least he should loose his privilege before:
For were I dead, my sorrows rule were naught,
And whiles I live, he like a tyrant rages:
Ah rage fierce tyrant, for this grief is wrought
By love thy counsel which my mind ingageth.
To thy fierce thralldome, whiles he spoils mine heart,
So be my mind, and heart imprisoned fast
To two fierce tyrants, which this empyer part.
Oh mylder gods shall this for ever last,
If that I have these bitter plagues deseru'de,
Yet let repentance which my soul does melt
Obtain some favor, if you be not sueru'de
From laws of mercy, know what plagues I felt.
Yea but I doubt enchantment in my breast,
For never man, so much agreeu'd as I
Could live with ceaselesse sorrows weight oppressed,
But twenty thousand times perforce should dye:
And with her eyes she did bewitche mine heart,
Which lettes it live, but feel an endless smart.
ELEGY IX.
With humble suite upon my bended knee,
(Though absent far from hence not to be seen)
Yet in thy power still present as gods be
I speak these words, whose bleeding wounds be green,
To thee drad Cupid, and thy mother Queen:
If it at any time has lawful been
Men mortal to speak with adietie,
Oh you great guiders of young springing age,
Whose power immortal ever was I ween
(As mighty as your spacious Monarchy)
Oh spare me, spare my tedious pilgrimage!
Take hence the least brand of your extreme fires,
Do not against those (which yield) fierce battle wage:
I know by this, you will alaye your rage,
That you give life unto my long desiers,
Which still persuades me, you will pity take:
Life is far more, then my vexed soul desiers:
Oh take my life, and after death torment me,
Then (though in absence of my chief delight)
I shall lament alone, my soul requires,
And longes to visit sweet Elizian fields:
Then that I loved it never shall repent me,
There (till those days of Iubile shall comme)
Would I walk pensive, pleased, alone and dumme:
Grant this petition sweet loves Queen which weeldes
The heart of forlorn lovers evermore:
Or else Zanclaean Charibd me devour,
And through his waters sent to Stigian power,
Or patient let me burn in Aetnaes flame:
Or fling my self in fury from the shore
Into deep waves of the Lancadean god,
Rather then bear this tumulte and vproare,
And through your means be scourged with mine own rod:
Oh let me dye, and not endure the same:
The suite I make, is to be punished still,
Nor would I wish not to be wretched there,
But that I might remain in hope, and fear:
Sweet lovely saints, let my suite like your will.
ELEGY X.
In quiet silence of the shadie night,
All places free from noise of men, and dogs,
When Phoebe carried in her chariot bright
Had cleared the mistie vapors, and night fogges:
Then (when no care the quiet shepherd clogges,
Having his flock safe fodder'd in the fould)
A lively vision to my fancies sight
Appeared, which me thought wake I did behold,
A fiery boy, outmatching the moon light,
Who softly wispering in mine ear, had told
There thou thy fair Parthenophe may see:
I quickly turning, in an hebene bed,
With sable covering and black curtanes spredde,
With many little loves in black by thee,
Thee thee Parthenophe left almost dedde
(Paile cold, with fear) I did behold ay me!
Ah me! left almost senseless in my bed:
My groans perceived by those which near me lay,
By them with much ado recovered:
Which fearful vision so did me afray
That (in a fury set beside my wit)
Sick as before, me thought I saw thee yitt:
Venus thy face there covered with a veil,
Mine heart with horror chilles, to think on it:
The graces kissed thy lips and went away.
Then I with furious raging did assail
To kiss thee, least thou should depart before,
And then (in sight of those which there did stand)
Thinking that I should never see thee more,
Mistaking thee, I kissed a fire-brande:
Burnt with the fire (my senses which did fail
Freshly recalled into their wits again)
I found it was a dream, but sweet expound it,
For that strange dream, with tears renewes my pain,
And I shall never rest, till I have found it.
ELEGY XI.
Was it decreed by fates too certain doom,
That under Cancer's Tropique (where the Sun
Still does his race in hottest circuit run)
My mind should dwell, and in none other room,
Where comfortes all be burnt, before the bloome?
Was it concluded (by remorse-lesse fate)
That underneath Th'Erimanthian bear,
Beneath the Lycaonian Axel-tree,
(Where ceaselesse snowes and frostes extremity
Hold Jurisdiction) should remain my fear,
Where all mine hopes be nip'te, before the bear?
Was it thus ordered that (till my deaths date)
When Phoebus runs on our Meridian line,
When mistes fall down beneath our Hemi-sphoere,
And Cynthia with dark Antipod's does shine,
That my dispaier should hold his mansion there?
Where did the fatal sisters this assign?
Even when this Judgment to them was awarded,
The silent sentence issew'd from her eyne,
Which neither pity, nor my cares regarded.
ELEGY XII.
Oh never can I see that sunnie light,
That bright chntriuer of my fiery rage,
Those precious golden apples shinning hright,
But out alas, me thinckes some fearful sight
Should battle with the dear beholders wage.
I fear such precious things should have some force
Them to preserve, lest some beholders might
Procure those precious apples by their slight:
Then cruel Atlas banished from remorse
Enters my thoughts, and how he fear'de away.
The poor inhabitants which dwelt about
(Least some af his rich fruit should make a pray)
Although the Orchard, circummur'de throughout
With walls of steel was, and a vigil stout
Of watchful Dragons guarded every where,
Which bold attemptors vexed with hot pursuit,
So that none durst approach his fruit for fear.
Thus (Atlas-like) thine heart has Dragons set
Tyrannous hatred, and a proud disdain,
Which in that Orchard cruelly did rain,
And with much rigor rule thy lovely eyes,
Immured in steely walls of chaste desire,
Which entrance to poor passengers denies,
And deaths high danger to them that requier:
And even as Atlas (through fierce cruelty
And breach to laws of hospitality
When lodging to a stranger he denied)
Was turned to a stony mountain straight,
Which on his shoulders now support's heavens weight,
A just revenge for cruelty and pride:
Even so, thine heart (for inhumanitie,
And wrath to those that thine eyes apples love,
And that it will not lodge a lovely guest)
Is turned to rock, and does the burden bear
Of thousand zealous lovers dear complaints:
Whom thou with thy fierce cruelty di^st tear,
An huge hard rock, which none can ever move
And of whose fruit, no man can be possessed:
Thy golden smiles make none attemp'ts to dear,
But when attempted once those apples be,
The vain attemptour, after feels the smart:
Who by thy Dragons, hatred, and disdain
Are torn in sonder, with extremity:
For having entered, no man can get forth
(So those inchaunting apples hinder thee)
Of such dear prize, be things of such rare worth.
But even as Perseus, Jove's thrice valiant son
(Begot of Danae in a golden shower)
Huge Atlas conquered, when he first begone:
Then kill'^ ^he Dragons with his matchless power,
At length the bewteous golden apples won:
So right is he borne in a golden hour,
(And for his fortune may from Jove descend)
Who first thine heart an Atlas has subdue'd,
Next, hatred, and disdain brought to their end
Fierce Dragons, which attemptours all purseu'de,
And which before, none ever have eschew'de:
At length, who shall these golden apples gain,
He shall alone, be Perseus for his pain.
ELEGY XIII.
Swift Atalanta (when she lost the prise
By gathering golden apples in her race)
Shows how by th'apples of thine heavenly eyes,
(Which fortune did hefore my passage place
When for mine hearts contentement I did run)
How I was hindered, and my wager lost:
When others did the wagers worth surprise
I vew'de thine eyes, thus eyes vew'de to my cost,
Nor could I them enjoy when all was done,
But seeming (as they did) bright as the Sun,
My course I stayed, to vewe their fiery grace,
Whose sweet possession I could not comprise:
The Idaean shepherd (when the strise begun
Amongst three goddesses) as Judge decreede,
The golden apple Venus did awarde,
Cause of the wast, and downfall of proud Troy:
But when the graces had a sweet regard
How fair Parthenophe did her exceed,
And Venus now was from the world debarred
One so much fayrer far, as to much coye,
Parthenophe the chose in Venus fleede,
And since her beauty Venus did out go
Two golden apples were to her assigned:
Which apples all th'outrageous tumultes breed
That are hep'd up in my distressed mind.
Whose figure in enflamed Troy I find,
The chief occasion of mine endless woe.
ELEGY XIIII.
When I remember that accursed night,
When my dear beauty said she must depart,
And the next morning leave the Cities sight:
Ah then, even then black sorrow shew'de his might,
And placed his empyer in my vanquished heart:
Mine heart still vanquished, yet assaulted still,
Burnt with loves outrage, from whose clear torch light
Fierce sorrow finds, a way to spoil, and kill.
Ah sorrow, sorrow, never satisfied!
And if not satisfied, work on thy will:
Oh dear departure of mine only bliss!
When willing, from the City thou did ride,
And I made offer (tho then wounded wide)
To go with thee, thou rashly did refuse
With me distressed to be accompanied:
And binding words (imperious) did use
Commanding me an other way to choose.
Ah then, even then in spirit crucified,
Mine eyes with tears, mine heart with sighs, and throbbes:
Those almost blind, that hard swoln^ almost burst,
My brains abiuring harbor to my muse,
Did leave ^hoaked almost with strait sobbes,
Ah be that hour, and day for ever cursed
Which me of my life's liberty did rob:
For since that time I never saw my love,
Long can we not be seuer'd, I will follow
Through woods, through mountains, waves, and caves made hollow
Oh grief, of greefes extremity the worst!
Still will I follow, till I find thee out:
And if my wish with travel will not prove,
Yet shall my sorrows travel round about
In wailefull Elegies, and mournful verse
Until they find, and thee with pity perce:
Mean while to see thee more standing in doubt.
I Will sing my plaine-song with the Turtle dove;
And prick-song with the Nighting all rehearse.
ELEGY XV.
Oh dear remembrance of my Ladies eyes
In mind whose reuolutions I reuolue!
To you mine hearts bright guid-starres, my soul cries
Upon some happy sentence to resolve:
A sentence either of my life, or death,
So bale me from the dungeon of despair,
On you I cry with interrupted breathe,
On you, and none but you to cross my care:
My care to cross, least I be crucified
Above the patience of an human soul,
Do this, Ah this, and still be glorified:
Do this, and let eternities enroule
Thy fame, and name, let them enroule for ever
In lasting records of still lasting steel:
Do this, ah this and famous still persevere,
Which in another age thy ghost shall feel.
Yet (howsoever thou with me shall deal)
Thy beauty shall persevere in my verse:
And thine eyes wound, which thine heart would not heal:
And my complaints, which could not thine heart perce:
And thine hard heart, thy bewties shameful stain:
And that foul stain, thine endless infamy:
So (though thou still in record do remain)
The records reckon but thine obloquie,
When on the paper (which my passionbeares)
Relenting readers (for my sake) shed tears.
ELEGY XVI.
Ah were my tears (as many writers be)
Mere drops of incke proceeding from my pen,
Then in these sable weeds you should not see
Me seuer'd from society of men:
Ah me all colors do mine eyes displease,
Save those two colors, of pure white, and read,
And yet I dare not flourish it in these,
Because I can not, for my colour's dead.
Those colors flourish round about each where,
But cheefely with my mistress in their kind,
And feign I would her lovely colors wear
So that it might be pleasing to her mind:
But naught will please her ouer-cruell eye,
But black, and payle on body, and in face:
Then she triumphs in bewties tyranny,
When she sees beauty, beauty can disgrace.
When her sweet smiling eyes, dry Vest^es throane,
Can blubbered bleare-eyes drown in seaes of tears:
And laughes to here poor lovers how they moan,
Joys in the paper which her praises bears,
And (for his sake that sent) that schoedule tears:
What but pale envy does her heart assail)
When she would be still fair, add laugh alone,
And (for her sake) all other's mourn, and paile.
ELEGY XVII.
Dear mistress then my soul to me much dearer,
Wonder not that another writes my letter:
For sorrow still mine heart oppresses nearer,
And extreme sickness does my sinews fetter.
Of my dear life to thy love am I debtor.
Thine is my soul, then soul what can be meerer:
Thine my chief best, then that what can better?
Absented far, and (that which is far worse)
Unable either for to go, or ride,
Here am I in perpetual bondage tied,
Then if with saluage Sauromates, far worse:
This air is loath some, and this air I curse,
Because with thy sweet breathe it is not blessed.
Though hot, cool waters I can not abide
(Since the which thy clear eyes as all the rest)
Be not (as they sometimes were) purified.
The ground (I tread) my footing does infest:
Because it is not hallowed with thy feet.
I loath all meat, for all meat is unmeet
Which is not eaten, where thy sweet self feedest.
Nothing is pleasant, lovely, rich, or sweet,
Which does not with his grace thy beauty greet:
Ah too dear absence which this sickness breedest,
Of thy dear sweet, which can not be too dear.
Yet if thou will voutch-safe my life to save
Write but one line, one line my life will cheer:
The ransom of my life thy name will pay,
And I be freede from my much doubtful fear.
ELEGY XVIII.
If neither love, nor pity can procure
Thy ruthlesse heart subscribe to my content:
But if thou vow that I shall still endure
This doubtful fear which ever does torment.
If to thine eyes thine heart can lend a fire,
Whiles could disdain upon them settes a lock:
To bar forth pity which kind hearts desire,
Whiles the distressed make prayers to a rock.
If that thine eyes send out a sunnie smile,
From underneath a cloudie frown of hate:
Plain love with counterfeasance to beguile,
Which at thy windows for some grace awate.
If thou thine ears can open to thy praise,
And them with that report delighted, cherish:
And shut them, when the passionate assayes,
To plead for pity, then about to perish.
If thou can cherish graces in thy cheek,
For men to wonder at, which thee behold:
And they find furies, when thine heart they see^e,
And yet prove such, as are extremely cold.
Now as I find, no thought to man's conceit,
Then must I swear, to woman's no deceit.
ELEGY XIX.
Dear sorrow give me leave to breathe a while,
A little leave to take a longer breath:
Whose easy passage still thou do beguile
Choked up with sighs, proclamers of my death.
Oh let the tears of euer-thirstie eyes.
Return back to the channells of mine heart!
They to my sight be vowed enemies,
And made a traiterous league not to depart,
Under the color of tormenting those
Which were first causers of mine hearts distress,
And closely with mine heart by guile did close
Through blinding them to make my torment less.
Oh let those fearful thoughts which still oppress me
Turn to the dungeon of my troubled brain!
Despair t'accompanie, which does possess me,
And with his venom poisoneth every vain:
Ouglie despair, who with black force assaults
Me vanquished with conceit, and makes me dwell
With horror, matched in melancholies vaultes:
Where I lie burning in my fancies hell.
Oh thou drad ruler of my sorrows rage,
Of thee, and none but thee I beg remorse
With thy sweet breath thou may my sighs assuage,
And make my sorrows fountains stay their course,
And banish black despair, then help me now:
Or know, death can do this, as well as thou.
ELEGY XX.
Oh dear vexation of my troubled soul
My life with grief when will thou consummate?
The dear remembrance of my passing soul,
Mine heart with some restes hope does animate:
How many have those conquering eyes subdued?
How many vanquished captives to thine heart!
Hard-iron hearted Captains when they vew'de
Were drawn, till they were wounded with thy dart.
Oh when I there heard bodies have beheld,
Their martial stomaches, and often wounded face:
Which bitter tumultes, and garboyles foretell'd,
In which, it seemed they found no cowardes place
Then I recalled how far loves power exceedes
Above the bloody menace of rough war:
Where every wounded heart, close inward bleedes
And soddeine perc'd, with twinkling of a star.
Then (when such iron hearted Captains be
To thine hearts bulwark forced for to try
Which way to win that fort by batterye:
And how all conquerours their conquered lie)
Me thinks, thine heart, or else thine eyes be made
(Because they can such iron obiectes force)
Of hardest Adamante, that men (which lade
Continual siege) be thrall'd without remorse:
Thine heart of Adamant, because it takes
The hardest hearts drawn prisoners, unto the,
Thine eye because, it wonded many makes,
Yet no transpercing beams can pearce those eyne:
Thine heart of Adamant, which none can wound:
Thine eye of Adamant, vnperced found.
ELEGY XXI.
Happy depart with speed, then me more fortunate ever
Poor letter go thy ways, unto my sweet Ladies hands:
She shall look on thee, and then with her bewtifull eyes bless:
Smiling eyes (perhaps thee to delight with a glaunce)
She shall cast on a line (if a line there pleases her humor)
But if a line displease, then shall apeare in a frown,
How much she dislikes thy loves, and saucie salutings:
O my life's sweet light, know that a frown of thine eye
Can transpearce to my soul more swift then a Parthian arrow,
And more deeply wound then any lance, or a spear:
But thy sweet smiles can procure such contrary mot'ions,
Which can alone that heal, wounded before by thine eyes:
Like to the lances rust which heal'de whom warlike Achilles
(With right hand valiant) doughtilye wounded before.
Not unlike to the men, whose grief the Scorpion helps
(Whom he before did sting) ready to dye through pain:
Thou that beauty procures to be thy chastities hand maid,
With virtues regiment glorious ordered alone:
Thou that those smooth brows, like plates of Iuory plained
(When any look on them) can make apeare like a cloud:
Thou that those clear eyes (whose light surpasses a stars light,
Can make loves flames shoot, with cruel anger abroad:
Thou that those fair cheeks (when a man thy beauty beholds)
Deeply to wound can make, sweetly to blush like a rose.
Make thy brows (to delight mine heart) smooth shadow thy clear eyes:
Whose smile is to my soul like to the sun from a cloud
When he shines to the world in most pride after a tempest,
And with his heat prouokes all the delights of the ground.
Grant me sweet Lady this, this grant, kind pity requesteth
Tears and sighs make asuite, pity me, pity my suite:
Thus to thy sweet graces will I leave my drcerye bewaylings,
And to thy gracious heart, I recomend my lamentes:
Thrice blessed go thy way, to my dear go thrice speedy letter,
And for me kiss them, since I may not kiss her hands.
CANZON 1.
All bewties far perfections rest in thee,
And sweetest, grace of graces
Deckes thy face boue faces:
All virtue takes her glory from thy mind:
The muses in thy wits have their places,
And in thy thoughts all mercies be:
Thine heart from all hardness free:
An holy place in thy thoughts holiness does find:
In favorable speech kind:
A sacred tongue, and eloquent:
Action sweet, and excellent:
Music it self in joints of her fair fingers is:
She chauntresse of singers is:
Her plighted faith, is firm, and permanent.
O now, now, help, will thou take some compassion?
She thinks I flatter, writing on this fashion.
Thy beauty past, with misorder stained is.
In thee no graces find rest:
In thoe (who sought it) saw lest.
And all thy thoughts be vain, and vicious:
Thy brains with heavy dullness are oppressed.
Of thee no mercy gained is,
Thine heart hard, and feigned is.
Aminde profane, and of the worst suspicious:
In speech not delicious:
Atoung ty'de which cannot utter,
Gesture lame, like words which stutter:
Thy hands, and mind vnap'te in music to rejoice:
For songs unfit, an hoarse voice:
Thy faith unconstant, whatsoever thou mutter.
Be gracious, no, she thinckes my words be bitter,
Through my misfortunes, they for my self be fitter.
O'h how long, how long shall I be distressed?
How long in vain, shall I moan?
How long in pain, shall I groan?
How long shall I bathe in continual tears?
How long shall I sit sad, and sigh alone?
How long shall fear discomfort give?
How long shall hopes let me live?
How long shall I lie bound in dispaires, and fears?
With sorrow still my heart wears,
my sundry fancies subdue me,
Thine eyes kill me, when they view me:
When thou speaks with my soul thy voice music makes,
And souls from silence waketh.
Thy brows smiles quicken me, whose frowns slew me,
Then fair sweet behold, see me poor wretch in torment,
Thou perceiuest well, but thine heart will not relent.
Mine eyes and sleep, be fierce prosessed foes:
Much care and tears did make it,
Nor yet will they forsake it.
But they will vex my brains, and troubled eyes:
If any sorrow sleep, they will wake it.
Still sighing mine heart overthrows,
Yet art thou cause of these woes.
But what anayles if I make to the deaf such horrible outcryes?
She hears not my miseries,
O sorrow sorrow cease a while!
Let her but look on me, and smile,
And from me for a time thou shall be banished,
My comfortes are vanished:
Nor hope, nor time, my sorrows can beguile,
Yet cease I not to cry for mercy, vexed thus:
But thou will not relieve us, which perplexed us.
Ah would thou set some limits to my woes,
That after such a time set,
(As penance to some crime set)
Forbearance through sweet hope I might endure:
But as byrd (caught in the fowler's lyme set)
No means for his liberty knows,
Me such despair ouergoes,
That I can find no comfortable hope of cure:
Then since nothing can procure
My sweet comfort, by thy kindness,
Armed in peace, to bear this blindness)
I voluntarily submit to this sorrow;
(As erst) each even, and morrow:
Can women's hearts harbor such unkindness?
Oh relent, relent, and change thy behavior:
Foul is the name of tyrant, sweet of savior.
Long to the rocks have I made my complaints,
And to the woods desolate
My plaintes went, early, and late;
To the forsaken mountains, and rivers:
Yet comfortless, and still disconsolate.
Mine heart as it was wonted faintes:
Such small help, comes from such saints.
Why should men which in such pain live, be call'de livers?
Such arrows bear loves quiuers,
Now (since rocks, and woods will not hear,
Nor hills, and floodes my sorrows bear,
In founding Echoes, and swift waves, the world about)
These papers report it out,
Whose lasting Chronicles, shall time out-weare.
Then take remorse (dear love) and to these united
Shall be thy mercies, with match-lesse praise recited.
You happelesse winds, with my sighs infected,
Whose fumes you never let rise
To please her with sacrifice:
But evermore ingrosse clouds them choked,
So that my dear, could never them comprise,
O you (that never detected
My plaintes, but them neglected,
Which in your murmures brought might have her provoked,
When them with clouds you cloaked)
Know, that a prouder spirit flies,
Bearing them to posterities,
And lays them open wide, that the world may view them,
That all which read, may rewe them,
When they shall pearce thine ears, though not thine eyes.
Then sweet fair, pity my long service, and deutie,
Least thine hard heart be more famous, then thy beauty.
Then do no longer despise
But with kind pity relent thee,
Cease to vex, and torment me:
If shames fear move not, which all discouers,
Fear plague of remorse-lesse lovers.
THE FIRST EIDILLION of moschus describing Love.
Venus, aloude for her son (...)
If any spy love gadding (...)
It is my roage, he that shall him (...)
(For hyer) of Venus shall have kisses sweet:
But thou that bringes him, shall have more beside,
Thou shall not only kiss, but as guest stay.
By many marks, the boy thou man ^ray,
Among twenty such (beside) thou shall perceive him
Not of a pale complexion, but like fire,
Quick rolling eyes, and flaming in their gyre,
False heart, sweet words, which quickly will deceive him
To whom he speaks, sweet speech at your desire,
But vex him, then as any waspe he stingeth:
Lying, and false (if you receive him)
A crafty lad, and cruel pastimes brings.
A fair curl'de head, and a right waggish face.
His hands are small, yet he shootes far away,
For even so far as Acheron he shoots,
And to the infernal monarche, his darts stray:
Cloathlesse he naked goes in every place,
And yet to know his thoughts, it no man booteth,
Swift (as a bird) he flies, and quickly footeth
Now to these men, and women now to those,
But yet he sittes, within their very marrow,
A little bow, and in that bow an arrow:
A small flight-shaft, but still to heauen-wardg^es,
About his neck a golden dart-barrow,
In which he places every bitter dart,
Which often even at me he throws,
All full of cruelty all full of smart.
And yet this thing more wondrous, a small brand
That even the very sun it self does burn,
If him thou take, pitiless lead him bound,
And (if thou chance to see him weep) return:
Then (least he thee deceive) his tears withstand,
And if he laugh, draw him along the ground,
If he would kiss, refuse: his lips confound,
For those alone be poisoned evermore:
But if he say, take, these I give to thee,
All those my weapons which belong to me,
Tuch them not, when he lays them thee before,
Those gifts of his, all false and fiery be.
FINIS.
ODES PASTORAL.
SESTINE 2.
IN sweetest pride of youthful may,
Where my poor flocks were wont to stay
About the valleys and high hills
Which Flora with her glory filles,
Parthenophil the gentle swayne,
Perplexed with a pleasing pain,
Dispairing how to slake his pain,
To woods and floodes these words did say:
Parthenophe mine hearts sovereign,
Why do thou my delights delay?
And with thy cross unkindness killes,
Mine heart bound martyr to thy wills?
But women will have their own wills,
Alas why then should I complain?
Since what she list her heart fulfilles,
I sigh, I weep, I kneel, I pray,
When I should kiss she runs away:
Sighs, knees, tears, prayers spent in vain.
My verses do not please her vain.
Mine heart wears with continual thrilles,
His Epilogue about to play,
My sense unsound, my wits in wayne,
I still expect an happy day,
Whilst harvest grows, my winter spilles,
Parthenophe mine harvest spilles.
She robbes my storehouse of his grain:
Alas sweet wenche thy rage allay,
Behold what fountain still distilles,
Whiles thine heates rage in me does rain:
Yet moisture will not his flame stay.
Parthenophe thy surie stay,
Take hence the occasion of these Illes,
Thou art the cause, but come again,
Return, and Floraes pride distaine,
Her lillyes, rose, and daffadilles:
Thy cheeks, and forhead disaray
The rose and lillyes of their grain.
What swannes can yield so many quilles,
As all glories can display.
ODE 1.
WHen I walk forth into the woods
(With heavy passion to complain)
I vewe the trees with blushing buddes
Ashamed, or grieved at my pain:
There Amaranthe, with rosy stain
(Me pitying) does his leaves ingraine.
When I pass pensive to the shore,
The water birds about me fly:
As if the mournde, when rivers roar,
Chyding thy wrathful cruelty:
Halcion watches warily
To chyde thee, when thou commest-by.
If to the City I repaier,
Mine eyes thy cruelty betray:
And (those which view me) find my cayer:
Swollen eyes, and sorrows it betray,
Whose figures in my forhead are:
These curse the cause of mine il-fare.
When I go forth to feed my flocks,
As I, so they hang down their head:
If I complain to ruthlesse rocks
(For that it seems hard rocks her bred)
Rocks ruth in rivers may be read,
Which from those rocks downe-trickled.
When shepheard's would know how I fare,
And ask how does Parthenophil:
Il Echo answer's in voy de air:
And with these news each place does fill.
Poor herdgroomes from each cottage will
Sing my complaints, on every hill.
ODE 2.
Speak Echo tell,
With Lillyes, Columbines, and Roses,
What their Parthenophe, composes? Echo, poses
Oh sacred smell!
For those (which in her lap she closes)
The gods please well.
Speak Echo tell:
With Daffadilles what does she plette,
Which in such order she does set
For love to dwell*
As she should Floraes Chapel let? Echo, Chapplet
This love likes well.
Speak Echo tell:
Why Lillyes, and red Roses like her? Echo, like her.
No pity with remorse will strike her,
Did nature well?
Which did from fairest graces pike her
To be mine hell?
Speak Echo tell:
Why Columbynes she entertaines?
Because the proverb (watchet) faines
True loves like well?
And do these therefore like her veins? Ecch. her veins
There Cupid's dwell.
Speak Echo tell:
Wherefore her Chaplets yellow were like,
When others here, were more her like? Echo, hearelike:
Yet I know well,
Her heart is Tygre-like, or Beare-like:
To rocks it sell.
CANZON 2.
Sing sing (Parthenophil) sing, pipe, and play:
This feast is kept upon this plain
Amongst The Arcadian shepheard's every where
For Astrophill's byrth-day: sweet Astrophil.
Arcadies honor, mighty Pan's chief pride:
Where be the Nymph's, the Nymphs all gathred be
To sing sweet Astrophil's sweet praise.
Echo, record what feasts be kept to day
Amongst The Arcadian shepherd swain,
What keep the whiles they do the muses cheer? Echo, cheer
He chear'de the muses with celestial skill,
All shepheard's praise dye'd with him when he dye'd:
He left no peer, then what deserved he
At whose pypes sound the Lamb kin bays? Echo, bays
The Bullockes leap, the fawnes dance in array:
Kiddes skippe, the Satyrs friskynes feign,
Here stands an heard of swains, fair Nymphs stand there:
Swains dance, whiles Nymphs with flowers their baskets fill.
What was he to those Nymphs which garlands tied? Echo, tied
What ty'de him? has he to tell there bound to you? Echo, bountee
How? to report his martial days? Echo, all days.
Thrice happy man that found this happy way
His praise all shepheard's glory stayne:
What does Parthenophe my purchase dear? Echo, chase de^
What says she to her Parthenophil? Echo, ofill.
Shepheardes I fill sweet wines repurified,
And to his blessed soul this health heave we,
Singing sweet O des, and round lays.
Let every man drink round beside this bay:
Where are the Nymphs and sayrie train?
Stella, three garlandes in her hand does bear,
And those for his sweet sake she proffer will
Unto th'Elezian souls: And I have spied
Parthenophe, with spoil returns to me
Of three great hearts. sing virilayes.
Those golden darts fly never void of pray
And Stella sittes (as if some chain
Offancies bound her) by that mottley breere:
Where with sweet Eglantine, and Daffadil
She Clapplettes makes, with gold and scarlet dye'd.
Here Colin sittes beneath that oken tree
Eliza singing in his lays.
Blessed is Arcadiaes Queen, kneel swains, and say
That she (which here chief Nymph does rain)
May blessed live, to see the extremest year.
For sacrifice (then) Lambs and kiddlinges kill:
And be by them Eliza glorified,
The flower of loves, and pure virginity:
This Delian Nymphe does amaise.
The fairest deares which in the forestes stay,
Those hearts (which proudest heard's distaine
And raunge the forestes as with compeere)
Submissiue yield them selves, that if she will
She them may wound, or on their swift backs ride.
Lions, and Bears, with beauty tameth she:
Shepheard's, for her your voices raise.
Echo this favor if I purchase may
Do not herd-groomes there feign? Echo, the're feign.
What want they, speak, now they be blessed, if ear. Echo, fear.
What be the confines? rebell's they be still. Echo, they be still.
What is she, that so many swains does their guide? Echo, there guide
None but her self, has that ability
To rule so many blessed ways:
Her thoughts sure grounded on divinity,
For this sweet Nymphe, each shepherd prays.
ODE 3.
Upon an holy Saints eve
(As I took my pilgrimadge)
Wandering through the forest warye
(Blessed be that holy saint)
I met the lovely Virgin Marye
And kneeled with long travel fainte
Performing my dew homage,
My tears fore told mine heart did grieve
Yet Mary would not me relieve.
Her I did promise every year,
The firstling foemale of my flock
That in my love she would me further:
I cursed the days of my first love,
My comfortes spoils, my pleasures murder:
She, she alas did me reprove,
My suites (as to a stony rock)
Were made, for she would not give ear.
Ah love, dear love, love bought to dear!
Mary, my saint chaste, and mild
Pity, ah pity my suite;
Thou art a virgin, pity me:
Shine eyes, though pity wanting.
That she by them my grief may see
And look on mine heart panting:
But her deaf ears, and tongue mute
Shows her hard heart vnreconcil'de,
Hard heart, from all remorse exil'de.
ODE 4.
Bacchus father of all sport,
Worker of loves comfort:
Venus best beloved brother
(Like beloved is none other)
Greater father of felicity,
Fill full with thy divinity,
These thirsty, and these empty veins.
Thence fuming up into my brains
Exceed Apollo through thy might,
And made me by thy motion light:
That with alacrity I may
Write pleasing Odes, and still display
Parthenophe, with such high praises
Whose beauty shepheard's all amases:
And by those means her loves obtain,
Then having filled up every vain,
I shall be set in perfect state
The rightes of love to celebrate
Then each year fat from my sheepecoate
Thy sacrifice a tydie goat:
And Io Euohe shall be
Loud chaunted every where to thee.
ODE 5.
Parthenophe see what is sent:
By me (fair Nymphe) these saints salute thee,
Whose presents in this basket hear
Faithful Parthenophill does bear,
Nor will I prove ingrate, nor mute be.
If my power were,
Such gifts as these
(If they would please)
Here will ingely I would present.
And these those presents present be:
First Juno sent to thee these lillyes,
In whose steed chaste affection moves
Venus has sent two Turtle doves,
Narcissus gives the Daffadillyes:
For doves true loves:
For Daffadilles
My golden wills:
Which counteruailes, what here is sent thee.
Flora does greet thee with sweet Roses,
Thetis with rich pearl Orient;
Leucothoe with franckincense:
For Roses, my loves chaste pretense:
For pearls, those tears which I have spent:
My sighs incense,
For sweet perfume:
Thus I presume
Poor shepherd, to present these poasies.
Though I be rude (as shepherds are)
Lillyes I know, do stand for witness:
And Daffadilles thy golden hear:
And doves thy meekness figures bear:
Red Roses for a blushing brightness,
Thy teeth pearls were,
That incense shoed
Thy breathe that bloed
A sacrifice, for which gods care.
Blessed is that shepherd nine times nine
Which shall in bosom these flowers keep,
Bound in one posie whose sweet smell
In paradise may make him dwell
And sleep a tentimes happy sleep:
I dare not mell,
Else with good will
Parthenophil
Would to thy lips one kiss assign.
ODE 6.
Oh fair sweet glove
Divine token
Of her sweet love
Sweetly broken:
By words, sweet loves she durst not move,
These gifts her love to me do prove
Though never spoken.
On her fair hand
This glove once was,
None in this land
Did ever pass
Her hands fair white, come loves here stand,
Let graces (with yours) match her hand:
Hyde, hyde alas!
Graces would smile
If you should match,
Herr's yours beguile,
Here Is garlandes catch
From all the Nymphs, which blush the while
To see there white out-match't a mile
Which praise did watch.
This glove I kiss,
And for thy sake
I will not miss
But ballades make,
And every shepherd shall know this,
Parthenophil in such grace is
Muses awake:
For I will sing
Thy matchelesse praises:
And my pypes bring
Which floodes amaises,
Wild Satyrs friskines shall out-fling,
The rocks shall this days glory ring
Whiles Nymphs bring dazes.
Some woodbynes bear
Some damask roses
The muses were
A bynding poases,
My goddess glove to herrye here,
Great Pan, commes in with flowers sear
And crowns composes.
I note this day,
Once every year
An holy day
For her kept dear:
An hundredth swains on pypes shall play,
And for the glove mask in array
Withiolly cheer.
A glove of gold
I will bring in,
For which swains bold
Shall strife begin:
And he (which loves can best unfold,
And has in songs his mind best told)
The glove shall win.
Nymphs shall resort,
And they (which flowers)
Shall deck a forte
For parramours:
Which for this glove shall there contend,
Impartial Nymphs shall Judgment end:
And in those bowers.
Pronounce, who best
Deserved of all:
Then by the rest
A coronall
Of Roses, freshly shall be dressed:
And he with that rich glove possessed,
As principal.
ODE 7.
When I did think to write of war,
And martial cheefden's of the field:
Diana did enforce to yield
My muse to praise the Western star:
But Pallas did my purpose bar:
My muse as too weak it to weeld.
Elizaes praises were too hye,
Diuinest wits have done their best,
And yet the most have proved least:
Such was her sacred majesty,
Loves pride grace to virginity:
Oh could my muse in her praise rest!
Venus directed me to write
The praise of peerlesse bewties wonder,
A theme more fit for voice of thunder:
Parthenophe, from whose eyes bright,
Ten thousand graces dar'e my might,
And willed me five degrees write under.
But yet her fancy wrought so much,
That my muse did her praise aduenter,
Wherein of yore it durst not enter:
And now her beauty gives that tuche,
Unto my muse, in number such:
Which makes me more, and more repent her.
ODE 8.
In a shadie grove of myrtle,
(Where birds musical resorted)
With Floraes painted flowers fertle,
Which men with sight and sent comforted,
Whilst turtles equally disported,
Where each Nymphe loases,
Bunches of poases,
Which into Chapplettes sweet they sorted.
There seated in that lovely shade,
Which Laya bewtifull there sat
A gentle shepherd, which had made
Against evening twilight somewhat late,
An arbor built in Syluane state
Where in exchange,
Their eyes did raunge
Giving each other the check-mate.
He said sweet comfort of my life
Come and embrace Parthenophil
Met we sade she to fall at strife
I will be gone I that I will
I loved your long, why do so still
I can not choose
If you refuse
But shall my self with sorrow kill.
With that he sight and would have kissed
And vew'de her with a fearful smile
She turned and said your ame mist
With sighs redoubled the meanewhile
The shepherd sat, but did compile
Green knotted rushings,
Then roundlayes sings:
And pleasant does twilight beguile.
At length he somewhat nearer pressed
And with a glaunce the Nymphe deceauing
He kissed her, she said be at rest
Willing displeased in the receiving:
Thence from his purpose never leaving
He pressed her further,
She would cry murder,
But somewhat was her breathe bereauing.
At length he does possess her whoale,
Her lips, and all he would desire:
And would have breathed in her his soale
(If that his soale he could enspyer)
Eft that chaunc'd which he did requier:
A live soul possessed
Her matrone breast,
Then waking I found sleep a liar.
ODE 9.
Behold (out-walking in these valleys)
Where fair Parthenophe does tread,
How ioysome Flora with her dallyes,
And at her steps sweet flowers bredde:
Narcissus yellow,
And Amaranthus euerredde,
Which all her foote-steppes over spredde:
With Hyacynthe that finds no fellow.
Behold, within that shadie thick
Where my Parthenophe does walk,
Her beauty makes trees moving quick
Which of her grace in murmur talk:
The poplar trees shed tears,
The blossomed Hauthorne white as chalk,
And Aspine trembling on his stalk:
The tree which sweet (...) bears.
The barren Hebene coalie black,
Green Iuy with his strange embraces,
Daphne which scorns Jove's thunder-cracke,
Sweet Cypress set in sundry places:
And singing Atis tells
Unto the rest my mistress graces,
From them the wind her glory chases
Throughout the West: where it excelles.
ODE 10.
Why does heaven bear a Sun
To give the world an heat?
Why there have stars a seat?
On earth (when all is done)
Parthenophes bright Sun
Does give a greater heat.
And in her heaven there be
Such fair bright blazing stars,
Which still make open wars
With those in heavens degree:
These stars far brighter be
Then brightest of heavens stars.
Why does earth bring forth Roses,
Violettes, or Lillyes
Or bright Daffadylies:
In her clear cheeks she cloases
Sweet Damask Roses,
In her neck white Lillyes.
Violettes in her veins:
Why do men sacrifice
Incense to dieties?
Her breathe more favor gains,
And please the heavenly veins,
More then rich sacrifice.
ODE 11.
Lovely Maya Hermes mother
Of fair Flora much befrended
(To whom this sweet month is commended
This month more sweet then any other)
By thy sweet souerantie defended.
Dazes, Couslippes, and Primroses
Fragrant Violettes, and sweet Mynthe
Match'te with purple Hyacynthe,
Of these each where Nymphs make trim poses
Praising their mother Bericynthe.
Behold an heard of Iollie swains
Go flocking up and down the meade,
A troop of lovely Nymphs do tread:
And dearnely dancing on you plains
Each does in course her hornepype lead.
Before the grooms plays Peers the pyper,
The bring in Hauthorne and sweet brere,
And damaske-roses they would bear
(But them they leave till they be riper)
The rest, round morisses dance there.
With frisking gamboldes, and such glee,
Unto the lovely Nymphs they have:
Who there in decent order plac'de
Expect who shall Queen Flora be,
And with the may crown chiefly grac'de.
The shepheardes poopen in their pype
One leads his wenche a country round:
Another sittes upon the ground
And does his beard from driuell wipe,
Because he would be handsome found.
To see the frisking, and scouping
To hear the herdgroomes wowing speeches,
Whiles one to dance his gyrle beseeches,
The lead-heeld lazy luskines louping
Fling out in their new mottley breeches.
This done, with iollye cheer, and game
The batchler swains, and young Nymphs met
Where in an arbor they were set
Thither (to choose a Queen) they came
And soon concluded her fette.
There with a garland they did crown
Parthenophe my sweet true-loue,
Whose beauty all the Nymphs above
Did put the lovely graces down:
The swains with shoutes rocks Echoes move.
To see the roundes, and morisse daunces,
The leaden galliard's for her sake,
To hear those songs the shepheardes make:
One with his hobbie-horse still praunces,
Whiles some with flowers an high way make.
There in amantle of light green,
Reserved by custom for that day
Parthenophe they did array
And did create her summers Queen,
And ruler of their merry may.
SESTINE 3.
You loathed fields, and forrestes,
Infected with my vain sighs:
You stony rocks, and deaf hills:
With my complaints to speak taught:
You sandy shores, with my tears,
Which learn to wash your dry face:
Behold, and learn in my face,
The state of blasted forrestes.
If you would learn to shed tears,
Or melt away with often sighs,
You shall of me be this taught:
As I sit under these hills:
Beating mine arms on these hills,
Laid groueling on my lean face:
My sheep of me to bleate taught,
And wander through the forrestes.
The soddeine winds learn my sighs,
Auroraes flowers my tears:
But she that should see my tears,
Swift skuddeth by the high hills,
And sees me spent with long sighs,
And vewes my blubhered lean face,
Yet leaves me to the forrestes:
Whose solitary paths taught
My woes, all comfortes untaught.
These sorrows. sighs, and salt tears,
Fit solitary forrestes:
These out cries, meet for deaf hills:
These tears, best-fitting this face:
This air, most meet for these sighs.
Consume consume with these sighs,
Such sorrows, the to dye taught,
Which printed are in thy face:
Whose furroes made with much tears:
You stony rocks, and high hills,
You sandy shores, and forrestes.
Report my seaes, of salt tears:
You whom I nothing else taught,
But gronings tears, and sad sighs.
ODE 12.
One night I did attend my sheep
(Which I with watchful ward did keep)
For fear of wolves assaulting
For many times the broake my sleep,
And would into the cottage creep,
Till I sent them out haulting.
At length me thought about midnight
(What time clear Cynthia shined bright)
Beneath I heard a rumbling:
At first the noise did me affright,
But naught appeared in my sight,
Yet still heard somewhat tumbling.
At length good heart I took to rise,
And then my self crossed three times thrice,
Hence a sharp shephooke raught:
I feared the wolf had got a prise,
Yet how he might could not devise:
I for his entrance sought.
At length by moonelight could I espy
A little boy did naked lie
Frettish't, amongst the flock:
I him aproched somewhat nigh,
He gron'd as he were like to dye,
But falsely me did mock.
For pity he crye'd wella-day,
God master help me (if you may)
For I am almost starued:
I pitied him when he did pray,
And brought him to my couch of hay,
But guess, as I was served.
He bare about him a long dart,
Well gilded with fine painters art,
And had a pyle of steel:
On it I looked every part,
Said I, will this pyle wound an heart:
Tuch it (quoth he) and feel.
With that I tuch't the iauelinges point,
Eft-soones it perced to the joint,
And rages now so fierce:
That all the balmes which it anointe,
Cannot prevail with it a point,
But it mine heart will perce.
ODE 13.
On the plains
Fairie traynes
Were a treading measures:
Satyrs plaide,
Fayries staide
At the stoppes set leasures.
Nymphs begin,
To come in
Quickly, thick, and three fold:
Now the dance,
Now the praunce,
Present there (to behold)
On her breast
That did best
Aiewell rich was placed:
Flora chose,
Which of those
Best the measures graced.
When he had
Measures lad
Parthenophe did get it:
Nymphs did chide
(When they trye'd)
Where the judgment set it.
Thus the said,
This fair maid
(Whom you gave the jewel)
Takes no pleafure,
To keep measure,
But it is too to cruel
ODE 14.
Hark all you lovely Nymphs forlorn,
With Venus chaste Diana meets,
And one another friendly greetes:
Did you not here her wind an home?
Then cease fair Ladies do not morn.
Virgins (whom Venus made offend)
Resort into the wood at even,
And every one shall be forgiven:
There shall all controversies end,
Diana shall be Venus friend.
Hark (Nympes forlorn) what is decreede:
Spottelesse Diana (must notfayle)
But be adrest with Venus veil,
Venus must we^e Dianaes weed:
This veil will s^dow, when you need,
If any think a virgin light
Dian'e in Venus veil excuses,
And her Nymphe Phoebes habit uses:
These queinte attyres befit you right,
For each a diverse garment chooses.
ODE 15.
Vulcane in Lemnos I Will,
Did golden shaftes compyle
For Cupids bow:
Then Venus did with honnie sweet
(To make it please, anointe the pyle:
Cupid below
Dipped it in gall, and made it meet
Poor wounded creatures to beguile.
When Mars returned from war,
Shaking his spear a far
Cupid beheld:
At him in jest Mars shak'd his spear,
Which Cupid with his darte did bar
Which millions quelled:
Then Mars desierd his darte to bear,
But soon the weight his force did mar^.
Then Mars subdue'd, desier'd
(Since he was with it tyer'd)
Cupid to take it:
Nay, you shall keep it Cupid said,
For first to feel it you requir'de:
Wound I will make it
As deep as yours: you me did fear:
And for that, you shall be fier'd.
CANZON 3.
Sweet is the golden couslippe, bright, and fair:
Tentimes more sweet, more golden, fair, and bright,
Thy tresses (in rich tramell'de knottes) resembling.
Venus swannes back, is lovely, smooth, and white:
More lovely, smooth, and white his feathers are,
The filuer luster os thy brows dissembling.
Bright are the sunne-beames, on the water trembling:
Much brighter, shinning like loves holy fire
On the well-watred dya mondes of those eyes,
Whose heates reflection loves affection tryes.
Sweet is the sensor, whose fume does aspyer
Appeasing love, when for revenge he flies:
More sweet the censor, like thy seemly nose,
Whose beauty (then inventions wonder h'yer)
Nine times nine muses never could disclose.
Sweet Eglantyne, I can not but commend
Thy modest rosy blush, pure white, and read:
Yet I thy white, and read praise more, and more,
In my sweet Ladies cheeks since they be shed.
When grapes to full maturitie do tend,
So round, so read, so sweet, all joy before,
Continually I long for them therefore;
To suck there sweet, and with my lips to tuch:
Not so much for the muses Nectar sake,
But that they from thy lips there purpure take.
Sweet (pardon) though I thee compaire to such.
Proud nature, which so white loves doves did make.
And framed their lovely heads, so white, and round:
How white and round? it does exceed so much,
That nature nothing like thy chynne has found.
Fair Perles which garnish my sweet Ladies neck,
Fair Orient perles oh how much I admire you!
Not for your Orient gloss, or virtues rareness,
But that you tuch her neck I much desire your,
Whose whiteness so much does your luster cheek
As whitest Lillyes the primerose in fairness:
A neck most gorgious, even in natures bareness.
Divine rose buddes, which (when spring does surrender
His crown to summer) he last trophie reareth,
By which he (from all seasons) the palm bears,
Fair purple crisped fouldes sweet-dew'de, and tender,
Whose sweetness never wears, though moisture wears,
Sweet ripe-redde strawberryes, whose heavenly sap
I would desire to suck: but loves engender
A Nectar more divine, in thy sweet pappe.
Oh lovely tender pappes! but who shall press them?
Whose heavenly Nectar, and Ambroseall juice
Proceed from Viollettes sweet, and Asier-like,
And from the matchless purple Flower-deluce:
Round-rising hills, white hills (sweet Venus bless them)
Natures rich trophyes, not those hills unlike
Which that great Monarche Charles (whose power did strike
From thartique to th'antartique) dignified
With proud Plus vltra, which Cerographye
In unknown Caracters of victory
Nature has set: by which she signified
Her Conquestes miracle rear'de up on hye.
Soft Iuorie balls, with which whom she lettes play
Above all mortal men is magnified,
And wagers boue all price shall bear away.
Oh loves, soft hills how much I wonder you?
Between whose lovely valleys, smooth, and strait
That glassie moisture lies, that slipperie dew,
Whose courage tuch'te, could dead men animate:
Old Nestor (if between, or under you
He should but tuch) his young years might renew,
And with all youthful joys him self in dew.
Oh smooth white satin, match-lesse, soft, and bright?
More smooth then oil, more white then lillye is,
As hard to match as loves mountes hillye is,
As soft as down, clear as on glass sunne-light,
To praise your white my tongue too much sillye is:
How much at your smooth soft my sense amazed is,
Which charms the feeling and inchauntes the sight?
But yet her bright, smooth, white, soft skin more praised is.
How often have I, the silver swanne commended
For that eauen chesse of feathers in her wing,
So white, and in such decent order placed,
When she the dolye Dirge of death did sing,
With her young mournful Cygnettes train attended?
Yet, not because the milke-white wings her graced,
But, when I think on my sweet Ladies wast,
Whose Iuorie sides, a snowye shadow gives
Of her well ordered ribs, which rise in falling,
How often the swanne I pitied her death calling?
With dreerie notes? not that she so short lives,
And among the muses singes, for her installing,
But that so clear a white should be distayned
With one, that for loves sugared torment lives.
And makes that white a plague to lovers payned.
Oh how often, how often, did I chide and curse
The brethren winds in their power disagreeing?
East for unwholesome vapor, South for rain,
North for (by snowes and whirlewindes) bitter being:
I loved the West, because it was the nurse
To Floraes gardens, and to Coeres grain.
Yet tentimes more these I did curse again,
Because they were inconstant, and unstable,
In drought, in moisture, frostie cold, and heat,
Here with a sunnie smile, their stormy threate:
Much like my Ladies fancies variable.
How often with feet did I the marble beat,
Harming my feet, yet never hurt the stone,
Because like her it was impenitrable,
And her hearts nature with it was all one?
Oh that my ceaselesse sighs, and tears were able
To counter-charme her heart, to stone converted?
I might work miracles to change again
The hard to soft, that it might rue my pain:
But of her self she is so straitely skirted
(Falsely reputing true loud honor stain)
That I shall never ^ue, and never bye,
So many ways her ^de I have experted:
Yet shall I live, through virtue of her eye.
ODE 16.
Before bright Titan rais'de his teame,
Or lovely morn with rosy cheek
With scarlette did'e the Eastern stream,
On Phoebes day first of the week
Early my goddess did arise
With breathe to bless the morning air:
Oh heavens which made divine mine eyes
Glauncing on such a Nymphe so fair.
Whose hear (downe-spredde in curled tresses)
Phoebus his glitter and beams withstood,
Much like him when through Cypresses
He daunceth on the silver flood:
Or like the golden purled down
Brooched upon the palm-flowrd wyllowes,
Which downward scattred from her crown
Loosely disheuel'd on loves pillowes,
Covering her swan-like back below
Like Iuorie match'te with purest gold,
Like Phoebe when on whitest snow
Her gilded shadow takes hold.
Her forhead was like to the rose
Before Adonis prick'te his feet:
O^ like the path to heaven which goes
Where all the lovely graces meet.
Cupids rich chariotte stood under,
Moist perle about the wheels was set,
Gray Achate spokes not much a funder:
The Axeltree of purest i^tt.
Her seemly nose the rest which grac'de,
For Cupid's trophye was vprear'de:
Timperiall thrones where love was plac'de,
When of the world he would be fear'de,
Where Cupid, with sweet Venus sat:
Her cheeks with rose, and lillyes deck'te,
Nature upon the coache did wate,
And all in order did direct.
Her cheeks to Damas* eroses sweet
In sent, and color, wear so like:
That honnie-bees in swarms would meet
To suck, and sometimes she would strike
With dainty plume the bees to fear,
And being beaten they would sting:
They found such heavenly honny theare,
Cupid (which there sat triumphing)
When he perceived the be did sting her,
Would swell for grief, and curse that be
More then the be that sting'd his finger:
Yet still about her they would flee.
Then love to Venus would complain
Of nature, which his chariot dressed:
Nature would it excuse again
Saying she then showed her skill best.
When she drunk wine upon her face
Bacchus would dance, and spring to kiss,
And shadow with a blushing grace
Her cheeks, where lovers build there bliss:
Who when she drank would blush for shame,
That wanton Bacchus she should use,
Who Venus brother might defame
Her, that should such acquaintance choose.
What gloss the scarlet curtains cast
On a bed-steede of Iuorie,
Such like, but such as much surpast
All gloss, her cheeks did bewtifie.
Her roseate lips, soft lovely swelling,
And full of pleasure as a Cherry:
Her breath of divine spices smelling,
Which with tongue broaken, would make meny
The Infernal souls, and with her voice
Set heaven wide open, hell gates shut,
Move melancholye to rejoice,
And thrall'de in Paradise might put.
Her voice not human when she speaks,
I think some Angel or goddess
(Into celestial tunes which breaks)
Speaks like her, with such cheerfulness.
All birds, and instruments may take
There notes divine, and excellent,
Mellodious harmony ^o make
From her sweet voices least accent.
This we loves sanctuary call:
Whence sacred sentences proceed
Rould up in soundes Angelical,
Whose place sweet nature has decreede
Just under Cupids' trophye fixed:
Where music has his excellence,
And such sweetes, with loves spirit mixed,
As please far more then frankincense,
Thence issew forth loves Oracles
Of happiness, and lucklesse teene,
So strange be loves rare miracles
In her, as like have never been.
Her neck that curious axe^,
Pure Iuorie like, which does support
The gloabe of my Cosmographie,
Where, to my Planettes I resort
To take Judicial signs of skill,
When tempests to mine heart will turn,
When shoures shall my fountains fill,
And extreme droughtes mine heart shall burn:
There in that gloabe, shall I perceive,
When I shall find clear element,
There, gloomie mistes shall I conceive
Which shall offend the firmament,
On this my studies still be bent,
Where even as rivers from the seae^
In branches through the land be sent,
And into crooked sinews prease
Throughout the gloabe such-wise the veins
Clear Christalline throughout her neck,
Like sinuous, in their crooked trains
VVildely the swelling waves did check.
Thence rise her humble seemcly shoulders,
Like two smooth pullish't Iuory tops,
Of loves chief frame, the chief vphoulders
VVhiter then that was of Pelops.
Thence Cupids fiue-graind-mace out brau^cheth,
Which fiue-fold, the five senses wounds,
Whose sight, the mind of lookers launcheth,
Whose force, all other force astoundeth.
Thence to that bed, where loves proud Queen
In silent majesty sweet sleeps:
Where her soft lovely pillowes been,
Where Cupid through loves conduictes creeps.
Pillowes, of Venus turtles down
Pillowes, then Venus turtles softer,
Pillowes, the more where love lies down,
More couetes to lie down, and ofter:
Pillowes on which two sweet rose buddes,
Dew'de with Ambrosiall nectar lie,
Where loves milke-way, by springs, and floodes
Through violet paths, smooth slideth by.
But now with fears, and tears proceed
Loves place of torture to deelare,
Which such calamity does breed
To those, which there imprisoned are.
Which once in cheanes are never free,
Which still for want of succor pyne,
Dry sighs, salte-watrie tears which be
For dainty cates, and pleasant wine:
Immur'de with pure white Iuorye,
Fetters of Adamant to draw
Even steel it self (if ir be nigh)
A bondage without right, or law:
With poor Actaeon overthrown
But for a look: and with an eye
(In his clear arms) loves sergeant known
Arrestes each lover that goes by.
This is her heart, loves prison call'de,
Whose conquest is impregnable,
Whence who so chance to be in thrall'de,
To come forth after are unable.
Further to pass then I have seen,
Or more to show then may be told,
Were too much impudence I ween:
Here therefore take mine anchor hold,
And with the Roman Poet deem
Parts vnreueal'de to be most sweet:
Which here describ'de might evil beseem,
And for a modest muse unmeet.
Such blessed morninges seldom be,
Such sightes, too rare when men go by:
Would I but once, the like might see,
That I might dye, before I dye.
SESTINE 4.
Echo, what shall I do to my Nymphe, when I go to behold her? Echo, hold her.
So dare I not, least she should think that I make her a pray then? Echo,
pray then.
Yea, but at me she will take scorn, proceeded of honor? Echo, on her.
Me bear will she (with her to deal so saucilie) never? Echo, ever.
Yea but I greatly fear, she will have pure thoughts to refuse such? Echo,
few such.
Then will I venture again more bold, if you warn me to do so? Echo, do so.
I must write with tears, and sighs, before that I do so? Echo, do so.
But what if my tears, and sighs be to weak to remove her? Echo, move her.
So shall ye move huge Alps with tears, and sighs, if you may such. Echo,
you may such.
If any that shall affirm for a truth, I shall hold that they lie then? Echo,
lie then.
If I study to death (in ^inde) shall I lie never? Echo, ever.
Oh what is it to lie, is it not dishonor?
Echo, it is honor.
Then to flatter a while her, is it not dishonor?
Echo, honor.
Then will I wrest out sighs, and wring forth tears when I do so?
Echo, do so.
Least she find my craft, with her I may toye never?
Echo, ever.
Then if you jest in kind with her you win her?
Echo, you win her.
Then (what time she laughes from her heart) shall I smile then?
Echo, ey smile then.
They that like my joys, is it harm if I kiss such?
Echo, ey kiss such.
Yea but most Ladies have disdainefull minds, to refuse such?
Echo, few such.
In what space shall I know, whether her love rests in honor?
Echo, in one hour.
Oh for such a sweet hour my life of hours will I pray then?
Echo, ayo then!
Then if I find as I would, more bold to urge her I may be so?
Echo, be so.
But if she do refuse, then woe to the atempter?
Echo, attempt her.
She will proudly refuse, and speaks in jest never?
Echo, ever.
So though still she refuse, she speaks in jest ever?
Echo, ever.
Then such (as these) be the true best signs to seek out such?
Echo, seek out such.
Such will I seek but what shall I do when I first shall attempt her?
Echo, tempt her.
How shall I tempt her-eare she stand on terms of her honor?
Echo, on her.
Oh might I come to that! I think it is even so
Echo, it is even so.
Strongly to tempt, and move (at first) is surely the best then?
Echo, the best then.
What (when they do repugne, yet cry not forth) will they do then?
Echo, do then.
With such a blunt proeme, Ladies shall I move never
Echo, ever.
I must wait at an inche on such Nymphs whom I regard so
Echo, guarde so.
Those whom in heart I love, my faith does firmly deserve such
Echo, serve such.
Then (to become their slaves) is no great dishonor?
Echo, honor.
But to the muses (first) I will recommend her
Echo, commend her.
They that pity lovers is it good if I praise such?
Echo, ey praise such.
If that I write their praise, by my verse shall they live never?
Echo, ever.
If thy words be true, with thanks take adieu then
Echo, adieu then.
CARMEN ANACREONTIVM. ODE 17.
Reveal) sweet muse) this secrette,
Wherein, the lively senses
Do most triumph in glory
Where others talk of eagles,
Searching the Sun with quick-sighi:
With eyes in brightness pearsaunte,
Parthenophe, my sweet Nymphe,
With sight more quick then eagles,
With eyes, more clear, and pearsaunte,
And (which exceedes all eagles)
Whose influence gives more heat,
Then Sun in Cancer tropique:
With proud imperious glaunces,
Subdewing all beholders,
Which gaze upon their brightness,
Shall triumph over that sense.
Reveal (sweet muse) this secret,
Wherein the lively senses
Do most triumph in glory,
Where some, of heavenly Nectar,
The tastes chief comfort talk of,
For pleasure, and sweet relish:
Where some, celestial Syrroppes,
And sweet Barbarian spices,
For pleasantness commend most:
Parthenophe, my sweet Nymphe,
With lips more sweet then Nectar,
Containing much more comfort,
Then all celestial Syrroppes,
And which exceedes all spices,
On which, none can take surfeit,
Shall triumph over that sense.
Reveal (sweet muse) this secret,
Wherein, the lively senses
Do most triumph in glory,
Where some, Panchaian incense,
And rich Arabian odours,
And waters sweet distilled:
Where some of herbs, and flowers,
Of Ambergris, and sweet roots,
For heavenly spirit praise most:
Parthenophe, my sweet Nymphe
With breath more sweet then incense,
Panchaian, or Arabicke,
Or any sorts of sweet things,
And (which exceedes all odours)
Whose spirit, is loves godhead,
Shall triumph over that sense.
Reveal (sweet muse) this secret,
Wherein the lively senses,
Do most triumph in glory:
Where music, restes in voices,
As Socrates supposed:
In voice, and bodies moving,
As though Aristoxinus:
In mind, as Theophrastus.
Her voice, exceedes all music,
Her bodies comely carridge,
Her gesture, and divine grace
Does ravish all be holders:
Her mind, it is much heavenly
And which, exceedes all judgment.
But such sweet looks, sweet thoughts tell,
And makes her conquour that sense.
Reveal (sweet muse) this secret,
Wherein, the lively senses,
Do most triumph in glory:
Where some, of sacred hands talk,
Whose blessing makes things prosper:
Where some, of well-skill'de fingers,
Which makes such heavenly music,
With wood, and tuch of sinews:
Parthenophes divine hands,
Let them, but tuch my rude hands,
Let them, but tuch my pale cheeks,
Let them, but any part tuch:
My sorrow shall assuage soon,
Let her, but check the lute string,
The sound to heaven shall charm me:
Thus she the senses conquores.
ODE 18.
Oh that I could make her whom I love best,
Find in a face with misery wrinckled,
Find in an heart, with sighs ouer-ill-pynde,
Her cruel hatred!
Oh that I could make her whom I love best,
Find by my tears, what malady vexes,
Find by my throbbes, how forceably loves darte
Wounds my decade heart!
Oh that I could make her, whom I love best
Tell with a sweet smile, that she respects
All my lamentinges, and that in her heart
Mourn fully she rues!
For my desartes, were worthy the favors
Of such a fair Nymphe, might she be fairer
Oh then a firm faith, what may be richer!
Then to my love yield.
Then will I leave these tears to the wast rocks,
Then will I leave these sighs to the rough winds,
Oh that I could make her, whom I love best
Pity my long smart!
ODE 19.
Why should I weep in vain, poor and remediless?
Why should I make complainte, to the deaf wilderness?
Why should I sigh for ease, sighs they breed malady?
Why should I groan in heart, groans they bring misery?
Why should tears, plaintes, and sighs mingled with heavy groans
Practice their cruelty, whiles I complain to stones?
Oh what a cruel heart, with such a tyranny
Hardly she practices (in greefes extremity)
Such to make conquered, whom she would have deprest,
Such a man to disease, whom she would have oppressed?
Oh but (Parthenophe) turn and be pitiful!
Cruelty beauty staynes, thou sweet art bewtifull,
If that I made offense, my love is all the fault
Which thou can charge me with, the^ do not mass assault
With fuch extremities, for my kind hearty love:
But for loves pity sake, from me thy frowns remove.
So shall thou make me blessed, so shall my sorrows cease,
So shall I live at ease, so shall my joys acrease,
So shall tears, plaints, and sighs, mingled with heavy groans
Weary the rocks no more, nor lament to the stones.
ODE 20. ASCLEPIAD.
O sweet pitiless eye, bewtifull, Orient!
(Since my ^aith is a rock, durable every where:)
Smile, and shine with a glaunce, heartily me to joy,
Beauty takes a place, pity regardes it not:
Virtue finds a throane, settled in every part:
Pity found none at all, banished every where.
Since then beauty triumphs, chastities enemy:
And virtue cleped is, much to be pitiful:
And since that thy delight, is ever virtuous:
My tears (Parthenophe) pity, be pitiful,
So shall men the repute great, as an holy Saint:
So shall beauty remain, mightily glorified:
So thy fame shall abound, durably chronicled:
Then sweet (Parthenophe) pity, be merciful.
SONNET CV.
Ah me how many ways have I assaide
To win my mistress to me ceaselesse suite?
What endless means and prayers have I made
To thy fair graces ever deaf and mute?
At thy long absence like an errant page
With sighs and tears long iourneyes did I make,
Through paths unknown in tedious pilgrimage
And never slept, but always did awake.
And having found the ruthlesse, and unkind:
Soft skinn'd, hard-harted, sweet looks, void of pity:
Ten thousand furies raged in my mind
Changing the tenor of my lovely dittie:
By whose enchaunting sawes, and magic spell
Thine hard indurate heart, I must compel.
SESTINE 5.
Then, first with locks disheueled, and bare,
Strait guirded, in a cheerful calmie night:
Having a fire made of green Cypress wood,
And with male franckincense on alter kindled
I call on threefould Hecate with tears,
And here (with loud voice) invoke the furies:
For their assistance, to me with their furies:
Whilst snowye steedes in coach bright Phoebe bare.
Ay me Parthenophe smiles at my tears,
I neither take my rest by day, or night:
Her cruel loves in me such heat have kindled.
Hence goat and bring her to me raging wood:
Hecate tell which way she comes through the wood.
This wine about this altar, to the furies
I sprinkle, whiles the Cypress bows be kindled,
This brimstone earth within her bowelles bare,
And this blew incense sacred to the night.
This hand (perforce) from this bay this branch tears.
So be she brought which pitied not my tears.
And as it burns with the Cypress wood
So burn she with desire by day and night.
You gods of vengance, and auenge-full furies
Revenge, to whom I bend on my knees bare.
Hence goat, and bring her with loves outrage kindled.
Hecate make signs if she with love come kindled.
Think on my passions Hec'ate, and my tears:
This Rose mariene (whose branch she cheefely bare
And loved best) I cut both bark and wood,
Broke with this brazen Axe, and in loves furies
I tread on it, rejoicing in this night:
And saying, let her her feel such wounds this night.
About this alter, and rich incense kindled
This lace and Veruine to loves bitter furies
I bind, and s^rewe, and with sad sighs and tears
About I bear her Image raging wood.
Hence goat and bring her from her bedding bare:
Hecate reveal if she like passions bare.
I knitte tree true love knottes (this is loves night)
Of three discolored silks, to make her wood,
But she scorns Venus till her loves be kindled,
And till she find the grief of fighes and tears:
Sweet Queen of loves for mine vnpittied furies,
A like torment her with such scaulding furies:
And this turtle (when the loss she bare
Of her dear make) in her kind did shed tears,
And mourning did seek him all day, and night:
Let such lament in her for me be kindled,
And mourn she still, till she run raging wood:
Hence goat and bring her to me raging wood.
These letter's, and these verses to the furries
(Which she did write) all in this flame be kindled:
Me (with these papers) in vain hope she bare
That she to day would turn mine hopeless night,
These as I rent, and burn, so surie tears.
Her hardened heart, which pitied not my tears.
The wind shaked trees make murmr in the wood,
The waters roar at this thrice sacred night,
The winds come whisking still to note her furies:
Trees, woods, and winds, a part in my plaintes bare,
And knew my woes, now joy to see her kindled:
See whence she comes with loves enraged and kindled!
The pitchye clouds (in drops) send down there tears,
Owls scritche, Dogs bark to see her carried bare,
Wolves yowle, and cry: Bulls bellow through the wood,
Ravens croape, now, now, I feel loves fiercest furies:
See ^hou that black goat, brought this silent night
Through empty clouds by the daughters of the night?
See how on him she sittes, with love rage kindled,
Hither perforce brought with auenge-full furies?
Now I wax drousie, n^w cease all my tears,
Whilst I take rest and slumber near this wood:
Ah me! Parthenophe naked and bare,
Come blessed goat, that my sweet Lady bare:
Where have thou been (Parthenophe) this night?
What could? sleep by this fire of Cypress wood
Which I much longing for thy sake have kindled,
Weep not, come loves and wipe away her tears:
At length yet, will thou take away my furies?
Ay me, embrace me, see those ouglye furies.
Come to my bed, least they behold thee bare
And bear thee hence the will not pity tears,
And these still dwell in everlasting night:
Ah loves, sweet love, sweet fires for us has kindled,
But not inflamed, with franckinsense, or wood,
The furies, they shall hence into the wood,
Whiles Cupid shall make calmer his hot furies,
And stand appeased at our fier's kindled.
Join join (Parthenophe) thy self vnbare,
None can perceive us in the silent night,
Now will I cease from sighs, lamentes, and tears,
And cease (Parthenophe) sweet cease thy tears:
Bear golden Apples thorns in every wood,
Join heavens, for we conioyne this heavenly night:
Let Alder trees bear Apricockes (dye furies)
And Thistles Pears, which prickles lately bare.
Now both in one with equal flame be kindled:
Dye magic bows, now dye, which late were kindled:
Here is mine heaven: loves drop in steed of tears.
It ioynes, it ioynes, ah both embracing bare.
Let Nettles bring forth Roses in each ^oede,
Last ever verdant woods: hence former furies:
Oh dye, live, joy: what? last continual night,
Sleep Phoebus still with Thetis: rule still night.
I melt in love, loves marrow-flame is kindled*
Here will I be consumed in loves sweet furies.
I melt, I melt, watch Cupid my loue-teares:
If these be furies, oh let me be wood!
If all the fiery element I bare
It Is now acquitted: cease your former tears,
For as she once with rage my body kindled,
So in hers am I buried this night.
FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE Lord, Henry Earl of Northumberland.
Deigne (mighty Lord) these verses to peruse
Which my black mournful muse presents here,
Blushing at her first entrance in for fear,
Where of her self, her self she does accuse.
And seeking Patronage, bold means does use
To show that dewtie, which in heart I bear
To your thrice noble house: which shall out wear
Devouring time it self, if my poor muse
Divine aright, whose, virtuous excellence
She craves her ruder style to patronise.
Voutch-safe then (noble Lord) to give defense:
Who (when her brighter glory shall arise)
Shall fly to fetch fame from her fort of brass,
Which with your virtues through the world shall pass.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MOST renowned and valiant, Robert Earl of Essex, and
Ewe, etc.
Voutchsafe (thrice valiant Lord) this verse to read,
When time from cares of more importe permittes,
The too dear charge of mine vncharged wits:
And that I do my lighter muses lead
To kiss your sacred hands, I myldely plead
For pardon, where all gracious virtue sittes.
Since time of yoare there Lords first fruit admittes
My bashful muse (which lost her mayden-head
In too dear travel of my restless love)
To you my Lord her first borne babe presents,
Unworthy such a patron for her lightness:
Yet deigne her zeal, though not the light contents,
Till from your virtues registered above,
To make her love more known, she borrow brightness.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND Virtuous Lord, Henry Earl of Southampton.
Receive (sweet Lord) with thy thrise-sacred hand
Which sacre^ muses make their instrument,
These worthless leaves, which I to thee present
Sprung from a rude and unmanured land:
That with your countenance grac'de, they may withstand
Hundred ey'de enuies rough encounterment,
Whose patronage can give encouragement
To scorn back-wounding Zoilus his band.
Voutch-safe (right virtuous Lord) with gracious eyes
Those heavenly lamps, which give the muses light,
Which give, and take in course (that holy fire)
To vewe my muse with your judicial sight,
Whom when time shall have taught by flight to rise,
Shall to thy virtues of much worth aspyer.
TO THE MOST VIRTUOUS LEARned and bewtifull Lady Marie Countess of Penbrooke.
Pride of our English Ladies, never match'te,
Great favorer of Phoebus offspring,
In whom even Phoebus is most flourishing,
Muses chief comfort, of the muses hatch'te:
On whom Urania has so long time watch'te,
In fames rich forte with crown triumphing,
Of laurel euer-greene in lusty spring,
After thy mortal pilgrimage dispatch'te.
Unto those Planettes where thou shal't have place
With thy late sainted brother to give light:
And with harmonious Sphoeres to turn in race.
Voutch-safe sweet Lady with a forhead bright
To shine on this poor muse, whose first borne fruit
That you of right would take, she makes suite.
TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND most bewtifull Lady the Lady Strange.
Sweet Lady might my humble muse presume
Thy bewties rare perfection to set out,
(Whom she pride of our English court reputes)
Ambitious she would assume
To blazon, every where about
Thy beauty, whose dumb eloquence disputes
With fair loves Queen, and her by right confutes.
But since there is no doubt
But that thy bewties praise, which shall consume
Even time it self exceeds
All Bryttish Ladies, deigne my muses suites
Which unacquainted of your beauty craves
Acquaintance, and proceeds
T'aproche so boldly, and behaues
Her self so rudely, daunted at your ^ght
As eyes in darkness, at a suddeine light.
TO THE BEAVTIFVLL LADY THE Lady Brigett Manners.
Rose of that garlande, (fairest, and sweetest
Of all those sweet and fair flowers:
Pride of chaste Cynthias rich crown,)
Receive this verse, thy matchless beauty meetest:
Behold thy graces which thou greetest,
And all the secret powers
Of thine and such like bewties, here set down,
Here shall thou find thy frown,
Here thy sunnie smiling,
Fames plumes fly with thy loves which should be fleetest,
Here my toues tempests, and showers.
These read (sweet beauty) whom my muse shall crown,
Who for thee such a garland is compyling
(Of so divine sentes, and colors)
As is immortal, time beguiling.
Your bewties most affectionate servant. BARNABE BARNES.

A TABLE FOR TO FIND THE SONNETTES AND MADRIGALLES.
SONNET PAGE 36 And thus continu. 23 46 Ah pearse-eye pear. 31 Mad. 18 After
Auroraes. 86 59 Ah me sweet beauty. 40 Mad. 14 Ah ten times worse. 43 66 Ah
sweet content. 45 105 Ah me how many. 142 29 Bless still the mirre. 19 34 But
when in may. 22 37 But pity which. 23 40 But ah my plague. 25 76 Be blind
mine eyes. 50 93 Begges love which. 60 87 Burn on sweet fire. 56 49 Cool
cool in waves. 32 74 Cease ouer-tyred. 49 79 Covetous eyes what. 52 83 Dark
night black. 54 Mad. 17 Envious air. 67 22 From thine hearts. 15 Mad. 9 For
glory pleasure. 34 58 Fair clitie does. 39 62 Fie fie fierce tyrant. 41 94
Forth from mine. 60 85 From Eastes bed. 55 47 Give me mine eyes. 31 3 He when
continual. 2 6 Him when I caught. 4 7 Her love to me. 4 17 How then
succeeds. 12 77 How can I live. 51 104 Hold matchless. 75 101 Had I been
banish. 64 5 It chanced after. 3 19 Imperious Jove. 13 31 I burn yet am. 20
63 Jove for Europaes. 4^ 67 If Cupid keep. 45 64 If all the loves were. 44 103
I slept and under. 70 Mad. 22 In center of these. 71 Mad. 26 I dear not
speak. 73 48 I wish no rich. 32 4 Laya soon sounding. 2 Mad. 12 Like to the
mountal. 36 75 Love is a name. 49 80 Long wished for death. 52 Mad. 2 Might not
this be. 8 52 Me though Calio. 34 72 My mistresses bew. 48 84 My sweet Parthen.
54 1 Mistress behold. 1 90 My mistress arms. 58 Mad. 20 My love alas. 69 33
Next when the. 21 35 Next when my. 22 43 Now in my Zodia. 27 53 Nymphs which
in. 38 Mad. 15 Natures pride. 65 Mad. 1 Ah powers celestial. 7 Mad. 3 Once in
an arbor. 9 Mad. 6 Oh why loved I. 28 44 Oh d^t and thunder. 29 65 Oh that I
had no. 44 81 Oh kingly jealousy. 53 86 Oh fire rage. 55 97 Oh why should envy.
62 42 Pass all ah no. 26 100 Pleading for pity. 63 Mad. 23 Phoebus rich. 72
9 So did Parthenophe. 5 28 So be my labors. 18 30 So this continual. 19 32
Scarce twice seven. 20 45 Sweet bewties rose. 30 Mad. 5 Such strange. 27 Mad.
16 Sleep Phoebus still. 66 50 So warble out. 33 Mad. 13 Soft lovely rose-like.
48 96 The sun in Pisces. 61 8 Then to Parthenophe. 5 Mad. 4 There had my. 10
98 The sun my. 62 14 Then him control. 10 20 These eyes thy bew. 14 24 These
mine heart. 16 25 Then count it not. 17 99 This careful head. 63 39 Then from
her. 25 Mad. 10 Thou scald my. 35 Mad. 11 Thine eyes mine. 36 56 The d^all
love. 38 57 Thy beauty is the. 39 61 To none but to. 41 69 The leauelesse. 46
71 Those hears of A^g. 47 78 The proudest Plan. 51 82 The chariot with. 53 91
These bitter gustes. 59 95 Thou bright beam. 61 Mad. 24 Thus as she was. 72
Mad. 19 Thy la^es conceits. 69 2 Whilst with strong. 1 11 Why did thou then.
6 12 Vexed with the assaul^s. 8 102 Vain gallants. 64 13 When none of these. 9
15 Where or to whom. 11 18 Write write help. 13 23 When with the dow. 15 26
When lovely wrath. 17 27 Why do I draw. 18 38 When thine heart. 24 41 When my
son. 26 Mad. 8 Why am I thus. 29 53 Why do I draw. 37 54 When I was young. 37
60 Whilst some the. 40 68 Would God when. 46 70 What can these. 47 73 Why
did rich. 48 89 What be those. 57 92 Will thou know. 59 Mad. 21 When this
celestial. 70 Mad. 25 Whilst these two. 73 88 Within thine eyes. 56 10 Yet
give me leave. 6 16 Ye that accursed. 12 21 Ye but uncertain. 14 Mad. 7
Youths wanton. 28

ELEGIES AND ODES.
ELE. OD. PAGE 5 Are you so waspish. 78 16 Ah were my tears. 90 Ode. 4 Bacchus
father. 108 6 Behold these. 97 Ode. 16 Before bright Titan. 130 Ode. 9 Behold
out walking. 116 8 Cease sorrow cease. 80 17 Dear mistress. 91 Sest. 4 Echo,
what. 135 Ode. 14 Hark all you lovely. 124 21 Happy depart. 95 Sest. 2 In
sweetest pride. 103 Ode. 8 In a shadie grove. 114 10 In quiet silence. 83 18 If
neither love. 92 Ode. 11 Lovely maya. 118 2 Oh that some. 176 ELE. OD. PAGE
Ode. 6 Oh fair sweet. 110 Ode. 12 One night I did. 121 Ode. 13 On the
plains. 123 Ode. 20 Oh sweet pittielesse. 141 12 Oh never can I see. 85 15 Oh
dear rememb. 89 20 Oh dear vexation. 94 Ode. 18 Oh that I could. 140 Ode. 5
Parthenophe see. 109 Ode. 17 Reveal sweet. 137 3 Sweet thraldom. 77 Ode. 2
Speak Echo tell. 105 Canz. 3 Sweet is the couslip. 126 Canz. 2 Sing fing
Partheno. 105 13 Swift Atalanta. 87 Sest. 5 Then first with, 143 4 This day
sweet mist. 77 Ode. 15 Vulcan in Lemnos. 125 Ode. 3 Upon an holy saints. 107
(...) 1 Why did the milk. 75 (...). 1 When I waked. 74 Ode. 1 When I walk.
104 Ode. 7 When I did think. 113 10 Why does heaven. 117 Ode. 19 Why should I
weep. 141 9 With humble suite. 92 14 When I remember. 88 11 Was it decreede.
84 7 Youth full of error. 80 Sest. 3 You loathed fields. 120

Faults escaped in Printing.
Son. 1^. for common come on. Mad. 2. for wake the, make thee. Idem, for make
thee wake thee Mad. 3 for chirping, cheeping. Idem, for culles, calls. Mad. 4.
for places, place. Son, 15. 8. line for senseless senseless. Son. 16, for
rages, ragen. Idem, for searches, searseth Son. 17. for brimmes, trimmes.
Son. 20. line 14 for of, on. Son. 23. for past eleue^, next eleven Son. 24. for
knattes, g^attes. Son. 28. line. 5. for atin'd, and Sonnet 46. for mountains
cleanes, mountains hyllye cleaues. Son. 48 for Aff^ricke, Affricke. Son. 51.
^ine. 10. for stould, should. Son. 52. praze, and raze, praise raise. Mad. 9.
for virtuous, virtues. Son 47 for wounded man, the wounded man. Son. 73. for
yea, yet. Son. 76. line. 13. for any my* Son. 72. for marched, matched. Son.
84. for soul, foul. Son. 87. breast ca^ bear, leg. semel. Son. 98. for none
aspier, none dare aspier. Mad. 17. for v^pour* vapor. Mad. 18. for pricklesse
arose, prickles arose. Eleg. 12. lillyes adorn, for lillyes shall adorn
Elegy. 9. Lancade an, for Leucadean. Eleg. 12 for c^iuer, contriuer. Eleg. 6.
for with, which Eleg 7* for will, well. Idem, line 16 for with, which Canz. 1.
line. 19. for thoe, thee. Idem, for whatsoever, whatsoeare. Sest. 2. for all
glories, all her glories. Ode. 8. for they which flowers. They with flowers.
Ode. 7. for dare my might, dar'de my might. Ode. 8. for which lay^, with laya.
Ode. 10. for please the, pleases. Ode. 11. for her set, her to set. Canz.
3. for shere sweet, there sweet. Ode. 16, ^'imperiall, for the imperial. Idem,
if it be nigh, for if it be nigh. Sest. 4. for Ayo the^, Ay then. Ode. 16, for O^
like the, O^ ^ke the. Ode. 19* for mass assault, make assault Sest. 5. for
disheueled and hare, d^sheueled and bare. Idem, for tree true love (...) ^hree
true lovers Idem, line 50 (...), furies. Idem, for still, shill.


