A new Book of new Conceits, with a number of Novelties annexed thereunto.

Whereof some be profitable, some necessary, some strange, none hurtful, and
all delectable.

Laboris condimentum otium.

By THOMAS JOHNSON.

LONDON, Printed by E. A. for Edward Wright and Cuthbert Wright. 1630.

A MOST PRETTY Conceit, to know if two go to warfare, and the one be taken
prisoner, to tell the other of all his being, if he may see him that is at
liberty, and thus it is.
IMagine that two Brothers went to war, and before they entered battle, they
concluded, that if any thing happened to the one, more then to the other, so
that they were taken, or in prison, that then the other that was imprisoned,
shall declare his state and abode by signs in this manner, out of the Chamber
where he is, he should take three firebrands, three burning candes, or
whatsoever was easiest to be gotten, and these three shall be in stead of all
the letters.

One candle when it is showed out alone, should stand for the seven letters, A.
B. C. D. E. F. G. two candles for H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. X. Y.
Z. Now the variety is in the showing of them: for if you show one candle one
time, it stands for A. if you show it twice, it stands for B. if thrice,
for C. if four times, for D. if five times, for E. if six times, for F. if
seven times, for G. In like manner if you show out two candles once, it
stands for H. if twice, for I. if thrice, for K, etc.

And so likewise if that the three lights be showed once it notes P. if
twice, Q. if thrice* R. and so forth: As for example, if you would certify
that your Brother is taken, you must show one light twice, then for R. three
lights thrice, for O. two lights seven times, for T. you must show three lights
five times, for H. two lights once, for E. one light five times, and then
again from R. three lights thrice, and then have you the whole word Brother
certified, and so for the rest, for it is set down plain and easy enough.

To make White Roses Red.
TAke your White Roses and hold them over the perfume or smoke of red Wine, and
they will soon became red.

Of the nature of Beasts.
THe Ox is constant, the Ass flow, the Horse lusty, the Wolf not to be made
gentle, the Fox crafty, the Pismeare painful, the Be sparing, the Dog
prompt to friendship, the Lion solitary, the Bear most sluggish, the Panther
most vehement.

To know whether ground be fat, or not.
BEsprinkle a turfe, or clod of that earth with fresh water, and if it be
clammy or glewing together, and sticking to the fingers, assure your self
there is fatness enough in it.

To make Worms come out of any garden ground.
TAke walnut husks while they are green, and infuse them in water taken out of
some pit, or sees them, and with this water besprinkle or moisten your garden,
and you shall perceive an infinite number of worms to come out of the ground.

Signs of long life.
TO us crooked shouldred, large nostrils, to have above two and thirty teeth,
short fingred, thick and clear colored.

Signs of short life.
TO be thin toothed, to have long fingers, and a leady color.

Man's life is likened to an apple, which when it is full ripe, falls off the
tree of his own accord, or else by tempest of wind or other casualty is beat
down, before it comes to his due and perfect, ripeness.

A rule of the Chaldees to know whether a man or his wife shall dye first.
TAke both their names as they were baptized, as near as you can, and count
the letters of both their names, whether they be even or odd, for if they be
even, then the party that is elder shall dye first, if the letters be odd,
then the younger shall dye first.

Whether a man shall live or dye the year following.
LEt the party let one drop only of his blood, either of his nose or of his
finger, or elsewhere, fall into a dish full of fair water, and if it descend
whole in one drop, without parting to the bottom of the dish, it is a
likelihood that he may live that year, else not.

Sed hoc nemini, nisi solum Deo cognitum est.

The common people in Flanders, of long time held opinion, that if twelve men
or twelve women went together to a banquet, that one of those twelve should dye
within one year after.

To know what disease any sick body has, by the day and hour of his falling
sick.
IF any fall sick upon a Sunday, say, and affirm, that his disease is of
heat, and that of yellow choler, and that he is sick at the heart, and that
all his members are grieved. And if it so happen that he fall sick in the
hour of the Sun, his body then is of an exceeding heat, and is pained at
the heart and reins.

If he fall sick upon a Monday, and in the hour of the Moon, his disease is
of cold and moisture, and the pain lies on the right side, and without speedy
help he is in danger.

On Tuesday he that falls sick, labors of such diseases as are hot and
dry, as fevers, thoughts, burning in the reins. If in the hour of Mars,
fevers fear, yellow choler, signifies the things evil to be at hand, etc.

On Wednesday the lungs are grieved, he draws his breath with great pain,
and all His whole body and senses also are troubled very sore. In the hour of
Mercury he has some swelling in his body, and pain in his loins, being
sprung of a sudden great heat and taking cold after it.

On Thursday, the disease is of abundance of blood, of great heat of liver,
and under the Light about the right side, and that he has a fever. In the
hour of Jupiter the liver is not well, and the body is greatly troubled with a
cold quiuering or shaking, yet the disease is not long to endure.

On Friday, say the disease comes of faintness, or contraction about the
loins, reins, stones, backe-bone, and under the belly. If it be in the hour
of Venus, saiy it is cold.

On Saturday, say the disease is of cold and dryness, and that the disease is
like to continue long, sprung in the milt, and that all their members are
grieved, especially the stomach. In the hour of Saturn, the disease comes
by wind and cold, and the loins and spleen are infected.

The hours of the Planets shall be set out in a Table for that purpose, God
willing hereafter.

Why A. and E. be the foremost vowels rather then the rest.
A Is set foremost, because every man-child when he comes into this world,
cries A, A, A, as who would say Adam, Adam.

E Likewise, next vowell to it, for that every female child first cries E, E,
as who would say, Eve, Eve.

A Is thought to be the first letter of the row, because by it we may
understand Trinity, and Unity: the Trinity in that there be three lines, and
the Unity, in that it is but one letter.

And for that cause, in old time they used three pricks at the latter end of
the Cross row, and at the end of their books which the^ caused children to
call tittle, tittle, tittle: signifying, that as there were three pricks, (...)
and those three made but one stop, even so there were three Persons, and yet
but one God.

To cut a glass asunder.
TAke a wyre and buckle or bend the one end just the compass of the glass,
where you mean to have it cut, then put the wyre into the fire, and make it
red hot, and then put it over the glass just where it should be cut, and it
will cut it most finely.

Whether a journey shall be prosperous or not.
ANd if thou would go out of the town, and would know whether it be to
thy profit or not, of the first man that thou meetest, after thou go out of
doors, ask his name, and if his name begin with any of these letters, a, e, i,
o, u, it betokens good profit, p, y, x, joy, g, h, k, betokens heri^age, l,
m, n, s, thou shall not speed, c, r, t, (...)ote harm, b, f, worst of all. An
old rule.

Whether a woman with child be with a son or a daughter.
Milk a drop of a woman's milk upon your thombe, or into a dish of water, and
if it spread abro^d and continue not in the form that it fell, it is a girl,
if it continue perfect without spreading, it is a boy.

Pretty questions.
THree Minstrels there were, who traueling in the Country with their three,
wives, made a conuenant amongst themselves, that if any of their wives were out
of the presence of her own husband, with either of the other twain, it should
be lawful for that party with whom she was, to make her husband a cuckold.
This bargain concluded on, within a day or two after, it chanced that they
came to a river, over which they must needs pass, but there was neither bridge
nor boat that could carry them all over. At length they chanced upon a little
boat which would carry over but two at once, and there was no body to row but
themselves, so that one must needs bring back again the boat for the other.
Now the question is, how these might be brought over, and none of these be a
Cuckold.

Answer.

LEt two of the wives row themselves over, and then let one of those come over
again and feth the third wife, then must one of them come back, and let two
of the men come over to their wives, and she tarry on the hither side with her
own husband, then shall a man and his wife come over again, and leave his
wife with the other man's wife, and he and that other man shall go over: then
shall the wife that is there with them fetch one of those women over, and then
shall a man go over and fetch his wife, and then are they all over and no man
cuckold.

The second question of a man that had three daughters to marry.
THere was a poor man that had three daughters, and these were all to be
married, and their father being but poor, had nothing to give them but nine
pipes of oil, and in the first pipe there was but one gallon of oil, in the
second two gallons, in the third three gallons, in the fourth four gallons,
and so every pipe having a gallon more than the other, so that the last had
nine gallons of oil. Now this poor man is desirous to bestow these nine pipes
upon his three daughters, but so, that every one might have as much as the
other, I demand how this may be?

Answer.

FIrst you must know that there be fort^ five gallons in the whole, then to
the first daughter shall be given three vessels, to wit, the vessel wherein is
one gallon, the vessel (...) five gallons, and the vessel of nine gallons, s^
has she three pipes and fifteen gallons of oil. To the second give the pipes
wherein are the two gallons, the six and the seven gallons, so she has also
three pipes and fifteen gallons. Then let the third daughter have the rest,
that is, the vessels of three* four and eight gallons, and then are the(...)
equally divided.

The third question of two men traveling.
TWo men of acquaintance traveling from London together, till they came to
Saint Albones, the business of the one was such that he must needs go beside
the common may, and so go by Newport-pannell, the other of force must go by
Stony-Stratford and yet both must come through Northampton* The first man's
business is such, that the fir^^ day he can go but one mile, the second b^
two miles, the third day three miles, t^^ fourth day four, the fifth day five,
the sixth day six miles, and so every day one mile further then he did the day
before. The other man's business is such, that he can take east iourneys, and
therefore he would know how many miles he should go every day to meet his
fellow at Northampton, and how many days he should be.

Answer.

FRom Saint Albons to Northampton are thirty and six miles, and he that
increases his journey every day a mile, will be eight days ere he gets
thither, then the other must go every day four miles and a half to meet him
at Northampton.

The fourth question of three women that sold Apples.
THree women there were, which came to London with Apples, being all
neigh^ours, and their husbands commanded that ^hey should all sit together, and
every one full ^s many for money as another, and every one ^otwithstanding to
bring home as much mo^ey as the other, although the number was ^nequall, for
the first brought but thirteen ^pples to the market, the second forty two, and
the third three score and one. Now I demand how this might be?

Answer.

THe first sold ten Apples for a penny, so had she three remaining.

The second sold forty for four pence, and has two left.

The third sold threescore for seven pence, and had but one left.

Now the women seeing customers to press about them for the Apples that were
unsold, made a bargain between themselves to sell every Apple for three
pence, of them that were unsold: so the first who had three apples left, had
nine pence for three, and a penny for her other, which made ten pence. The
second who had two left, sold them for six pence, which with the four pence
she had received before, made her ten pence also. The third for threescore had
received seven pence, and for the odd one three pence, which also made ten
pence. So these women sold ten for a penny, and then one for a penny, and so
every one of them sold as good penny-worths as the other, and brought their
husbands just as much money home one as the other.

The fifth question of kindred.
TWo men marry each others mother that is to say, John marries Williams
mother, and William marries John's mother, and every of these has a child by
his wife, I would know what kin these children are?

Answer.

Either is others Uncle.

The sixth question is of three Merchants traveling.
THree Merchants there are in a strange Country traveling on foot, and these
have two packes to be carried to the next Town, which is three miles from
them, and they cannot hire these packs to be carried, so that of necessity they
must carry their packes themselves, and every one of them grieueth to carry
more then his fellows, as also to carry them further, and thereupon they
conclude together, that every man shall bear one pack just two miles. Now I
demand how this may be?

Answer.

LEt two of them take up the two packes and bear them one mile, and at the
miles end, let one of them deliver his pack to him that went empty, and let
the first carry it his full two mile, so likewise he that took the burden at
the first miles end, let him carry it to the Town, then let him that carried
the pack but one mile, take the first man's pack, and carry it to the iourneys
end: so either of them has carried one pack two miles, and thus the question
is absolved.

The seventh question is of Birds.
A Gentleman on a time being merrily disposed, called his Steward, and
delivered unto him thirty pence, commanding him to go to the market and bestow
that money in Fowled, but in such sort, that he should buy but three sorts: to
wit, Larkes, Woodcocks, and Ducks* Larks, at two a penny, Woodcocks a penny a
piece, and Duckes at two pence apeece, and of all these three sorts, he must
bring thirty in number. The question is to know how many of each sort he must
have, to bring his money equal with the tale of Birds.

Answer.

Fourteen Larks according to the rate before specified, come to seven pence*
nine Woodcocks, nine pence: seven Ducks come to fourteen pence. So will there
be thirty F^wles at the Masters price, and the thirty pence justly bestowed.

The eighth question of two men driving sheep.
TWo men driving sheep in two several parts, met together in Smith-field,
whereputting them into several pens, it chanced that two of the sheep
belonging to the one man, ran omong the other man's sheep. The man that lacked
his sheep, demanded his sheep of the other: nay, quoth the other (...) pray
thee let them be with mine, and then (...) number equal, the one of (...) has
no more then the other: Nay, rather, said the other man, then it should be so,
give me two of your sheep and mine own, and then shall I have twice so many
as you. I desire to know how many sheep either of these (...)*

Answer.

ONe of them had ten, and the other had fourteen.

The ninth question of fish.
A Woman went into fish-street to buy fish, and there she bought three Plaice,
which three together cost her eight pence, at her return home, her husband
demanded the price of them: They cost me eight pence, quoth the good wife, tell
me, gentle wife, said the husband, what is that apeece, for it seems to me
that they are all of an equal goodness. The woman making small account of so
small a reckoning, began to say that it was two pence half penny, and a half
penny over: that is true, said the husband, but I would know the very true
price of each of them. The silly woman could not do it, and therefore
requesteth all good women to help her.

Answer.

A Mite is the four and twentieth part of a penny, wherefore twelve mites make
an halfe-penny, and the third part of an halfe-penny is four mites, therefore
to conclude, each Plaice cost two pence halfe-penny and four mites, and the
question is absolved.

Another.
A Poor man in the North Country being far, from neighbors, but only one
poor woman within a quarter of a mile, came to this poor woman lacking
drink, to borrow two gallons of Ale. The poor woman was contented to lend her
two gallons out of her store, which was eight gallons, but they lacked a
measure, for she had two measures, the one of three gallons, and the other was
of five gallons: I would know how with these two measures, I might measure out
two gallons justly?

Answer.

I Answer thus: fill the five gallons vessel, and then out of that five
gallons vessel, power out the three gallons vessel full, and so will there be
left two gallons in the five gallons vessel.

Another question.
A Ship being upon the sea, and in ieopardy, wherein are men to the number of
thirty, whereof fifteen are Christians, and fifteen Turks: Now a tempest
arising, necessity constraines that some must be cast ouer-bodrd for the safety
of the rest, and the Christians refuse to be cast over,* so do the Turks, and
in the end there was no remedy, but needs they must be thrown over. To be
brief, the Master of the ship (as well to end the contention, as also to save
the Christians) appointed that they should be set in order, and that every
ninth man should be cast over. I demand how they should be placed, that all the
Christians might be saved?

Answer.

FIrst place four Christians, then five Sarazens, then two Christians and one
Turk, next three Christians and one Sarazen, after them one Christian and two
Sarazens, then two Christians and three Sarazens, next one Christian and two
Turks, then two Christians and one Sarazen. You may do this same at the Cards,
by taking red Cards for the Christians, and black for the Turks, or
contrariwise.

The nature of the Raven.
A Ristotle affirms, that when the Raven waxoth old and feeble, that then the
young ones help them, and bear them o^ their shoulders. And the same Author
faith that the Ravens lay many eggs, in somuc^ that the Male breaks some of
them, and throws them out of the nest, the Female only sits on the brood,
and the Male brings them meat all that time. And which is strange (he says)
that the Raven sits her brood in the very heat of Summer, against the kind
of other Birds or Fowls. Of which or the like opinion is Petronius, who says,
that the Raven lays when that fruits be ripe.

The nature of the Owl and of the Chough.
IN like case Aristotle says, that the eggs of Owls be small, speckled and
brickle* shelled, containing little yolke and much white. The greatest enemy
that the Owl has is the Cough, for all the day time he seeks to break her
eggs, even as the Owl by night seeks to spoil the eggs of the Rhough, and
therefore whenever they meet, they fight together.

A special rule in Gardening.
LEt any Gardener, orplanter, or setter of herbs, have an especial care what
^earbs or Plants they plant, set, or sow together, for if they set such as are
enmity together, the one hinders the prosperous increase of the other. Also
if herbs which be hot and dry of nature, be set or sown together, or the one
near the other, the one withdraws the sap, moisture, and nourrishment of
the other. A thing most true, yet seldom considered.

Seldom shall you see any vine planted by a day tree to prosper, or bring
forth either store of grapes, or any pleasant grape, for that the vine
detesteth the bay, insomuch as you shall never see a vine claspe her self
about the bay, but refusing it, will rather grow on the ground without hold.

The Colwort is likewise an enemy to the vine, wherefore let Gardeners take
heed how they plant any of these together.

When to dung land, that no herbage, or at the least very little shall grow
among the Corn.
BE sure that you carry out your compost ever when the Moon is decreasing in
light, that is, in the wane of the Moon, and you shall find it true by your
own experience, that your Corn will not be full of weeds.

Flax is very unprofitable to land.
THough Flax be profitable to a Commonwealth, yet Flax is an enemy to every
good ground, and profits not, except it be sown in the fattest ground, and
that is somewhat moist. The chiefest time to sow the same (says Collumella) is
from the Kalends of October, to the seven Ides of September, yet it is sowed in
February and March.

Tremellius says, that Flax and the Cicers are hurtful to good ground,
because the one is of burning nature, and the other salt.

Note that lean ground that is not dunged is of nature cold, and ground dunged
overmuch, is of a very hot burning nature.

How to make a vernish to gild letters with.
TAke four ounces of Linseed oil, two ounces of Rozen in the Pine, and one
ounce of Aloes Cabalme and boil all these together on the fire till all the
superfluities be consumed, and it will be clear and burn without cracking and
then it is perfect.

FINIS.

