Certain Orations and Answers made by John Casimire County Palatine of
Rhyne, Duke of Bauier etc. and his Ambassadors, unto the French King and his
Ambassadors in defense of ye maintenance of his Peace, and christian Religion.

Translated out of French. 1579.

Imprinted at London.

1579.

The Charge of the Lord of Villiquier as he delivered the same in vvrighting
unto my Lord the Duke Cassimir.
MY Lord, as touching the request which it pleased your highness this morni^g to
make unto me, namely yt I should in writing deliver unto you the charge which I
have received of my Master ye most Christian King, I am not minded to deny
you, (...), for that by word of mouth, I have not opened to you any other then
ye truth, which his Majesty wills, and is minded to let you know.

His Majesty therefore being sorry to hear of the deceasse of my Lord the
County Palatine your Father, does nevertheless much rejoice and praise God
for that so wise a Prince as my Lord, at this present Elector, has succeeded
him in the said Electorall Dignity, for the visitation of whom, his Majesty
has now sent me: commanding me by the way to see your Highness, to the end
to assure the same that he desires nothing more then to love you, as in
effect he has already, even to this time given, you to understand.

Also the more to confirm the goodwill which he bears you: he thought good
by me to give you to understand of his news together with the estate of his
affairs, which are as follows.

His Majesty having summoned the general Estates of his Realm unto his Town
of Bloys, after many and large conferences among them holden within these three
Months, they have with one general assent in full assembly, (whethery self was
present) requested his Majesty no longer to permit within his Dominions any
other then the exercise of the Catholic, Apostolic and Romain Religion,
whereunto at my departure his Majesty was determined to condescend. First
thereby to discharge ye duty of his conscience, which moves him after the
example of other Kings his Predecessors so to do, whotherby have peaceably
enjoyed their estates. Next by reason that hitherto he has perceived that the
diversity of Religions have with them brought into all parts of his Kingdoome
where they have been cstablished new, occasions of discention among his
Subjects, yea even among the quietest of them, and have been the only means to
maintain them in deuisions and particular hatred: moreover that it is to
manifest that they have not so much requested ye exercise of their said
pretended reformed Religion for any satisfiing or contenting of their
consciences, as for the maintenance of factions, practices, and drifts,
ordinarily devised against ye autotie of his said Majesty, to whom by all
means they endeavor to make them selves in power equal, by daily more and
more fortifying them selves, thereby upon every occasion and opportunity to
disobey him, and so to shake of the Yoke of obedience where unto naturally they
are bound, as the effects in each respect does make sufficient proof,
notwithstandi^g in words they would show them selves deuoid of all such
matter. As even of late their new supplying of la Charity with fresh men of
war, contrary to the agreement made, to the end wholly to apropriate the same
to the^ selves does manifestly declare as also their seazing upon sundry towns
and Castles, in the Countries of Poictou, Xantoigne, Guyen, Daulphine, and Lan
guedoc, together with diverse murders and cruelties practiced against the
Catholics do show the same. Again his Majesty on the other side, setti^g
before his eyes one thing worthy consideration, which is, that having since
the grant of the last Edict taken all order possible to cause the tolleration
of the exercise of the said pretendid reformed Religion in sundry towns and
places within his Dominios, he has not been able to bring the same to pass,
by reason of the oppositions of the Catholics who could not supporte the folly
wherwt they have endeavored to proceed.

And indeed perceiving by all their deeds and demenures that they sought to
increase and multiply them selves to ye ruin and overthrow of them and their
Catholic Religion, they have among them selves made Fraternities,
Assotiations, and leagues one with an other for the conservation both of them
selves and their said Catholic Religion, also ye thereby they may the better
provide for their own affairs Also where as it plesed you my Lord this
morning to aleadge unto me, yt in as much as the exercise of the before said
Religion was not freely permitted in France, it was an utter breaking, and
preuenti^g of the Edict of pacification whereunto his Majesty has so sole^nly
sworn, I do answer that contrariwise for the satisfiing to one of the
Articles thereof this assembly of Estates was summoned, to the end that after
the hearing of the complaints and greeuances of his Subjects, they might be
provided for as should seem requisite whereunto he could not better satisfy then
in using this determination which is correspondent unto the universal request
of the Deputies of the three orders of this Realm, namely the Church, the
Nobility and the third Estate, agreeing also with the judgment of his own
Consience, against the which he should think him self doing otherwise to err.
Wherefore to conclude, this is it which he thi^keth may best serve and profit
the general commonwealth of his Realm and of all his Subjects.

Thus subscribed Villiquier.

The Answer of my said Lord the Duke, unto the before said Chardge.
THe Lord Duke Ihon Cassimire having heard of the Lord of Villiquier what so
ever he had to say to him in the behalf of the King his Master, did request
his Majesty to take in good part this answer from poinct to poinct, and the
same to receive with as good a will as the said Lord Duke is affectionate to
the advancement commodity and service of his Majesty and the Crown of France.

First the said Lord the Duke most humbly tha^keth his majesty for ye greef
which he seems to perticipate in for the death of his late Lord and Father,
assuring his Majesty that he has great cause so to do in respect of the
zeal, care and singular afection which he always hare even to the last gasp
of his life, unto the advancement and preservation of his Majesty's person,
together with the comoditie and quietness of the whole Realm of France.

The said Lord Duke hops also that his Majesty shall find that my Lord the
Elector his brother has succeeded not only, in the Electorall Dignity, but
also in like goodwil and affection, wherein he the said Lord Duke does also
assure his Majesty that for his part he will follow the steps of his late Lord
and Father, so near as possible he may, and will alwaise by Gods help profess
ye same, not only to his Country, but also to his Majesty with as good a will
as ever he did.

Wherefore as his Majesty does the said Lord Duke so much honor, as by the way
to cause ye Lord of Villiquire, to visit him and to comunicate unto him of his
news can he not also forget as well most humbly to thank his majesty, as
also plainly to declare unto him, that understanding his intent to be such as
the said Lord of Villiquire has both given him to understand and left with him
in writing, is unto him news indeed.

First because that this his Majesty's pleasure is utterly repugnant unto the
promises, oaths, and assurances, wherwt his Majesty has always protested
both by mouth and wrighting, that he would mai^tain his Edict of Pacification,
concluded, and sealed by the authority of his Majesty the Queen his mother,
the Princes of his blood, and his privy counsel, at such time as his Majesty
had such store of his power about him, that easily he might have done what he
had pleased, and this he did to the end for ever to testify that he did
conclude, swear and solemply confirm the same, of his own pure, mere, free
and liberal goodwil, for the proffit, and quietness of his Kingdom, and
Subjects, as not only the said Lady Queen his Mother, the Princes and other
Lords have by word of mouth protested unto the said Lord Duke at the
concluding of the said peace, whereunto for the greater co^fimation of the same
they also requested the said Lord Duke to subscribe, as indeed he did: but
also his Majesty him self has both sent him word and confirmed the same.

More over this his Majesty's intent seems so much the more strange to the
said Lord Duke, as that to his great greef he thereby forseeth the final
perdition whereunto his Majesty for the putting of his determination in
execution, does hedlong cast his own person and whole Realm, whereof together
with the present estate of his affairs and the general ruin to come, the said
Lord with the rest of the Princes of Germany who do wish the preservation of
the French Monarchy, being daily truly advertised, as the said Lord of
Villiquier may by them selves understand, and shall see the writings both
written and printed which the said Lord Duke trusts will be sufficient to
revoke his said Majesty from his resolution, and whereby he shall perceive the
malice of his Servants hired hereunto, who vsurpi^g the title of the Estates in
ye name of all his subjects have made this request whereof they never received
commission of his Subjects, either were by them advowed, as the said Lord of
Villequier shall at his return very well understand.

The said Lord Duke may (thanks he to God) plainly testify, that he has of
most faithful and sincere affection advertised his Majesty as well by letters
and Ambassadors as by his Majesty's Messenger.

First beei^g in France, he warnded him of the holy league, the fruits
whereof, he may now evidently perceive to be utterly contrary to the faith and
reputation of his Majesty and quietness of his Subjects.

After being come, home by Prayllon him self (who is now here present) he gave
his Majesty to understand of the true aduertisme^ts which he had received of
ye drifts and practices prepared for providing and corrupting in each part,
and bringing to the devotion of those whom we do perceive, such as should
enjoy the title of the Estates: that is to say, to provide that no Estates
should be holden freely* lawfully and without respect of Religion, where at
might be present (as at all times aunciently they have been accustomed) the
Princes of the blood, together with all such as have whereof to complain.
Moreover the said Lord Duke has truly advertised his majesty after what
manner the Edict of peace has been executed nothing is done: that ye Estates
have been ordered in such wise as already he has been advertised: that the
Princes of the blood have thereunto been called to the end to entrap them. How
such men have been favored, as have offered to lay houlde upon their Parsons,
and to surprise those Towns where the Edict is lawfully and finceerely
executed, together with the places where those of the Religion have been forced
to keep them selves, and not to forsake the same by reason of the evil
execution of the Edict. He has been moreover truly advertised of the oath
lately made to his Majesty, the Copye whereof was su^marely delivered to ye
said Lord of Villequier, a matter, to say truth, horrible to be known among
men, and so strange that ye said Lord Duke could never have believed it, had
not the continual and late contrauensions against the Edict most manifestly
declared ye same, and the Kings proposition made by the said Villequier fully
confirmed it, as also the said matters do jointly cause the said Lord Duke to
believe that his Majesty's determination is correspondent to the declaration of
the aforesaid Lord of Villequier.

Howbeit the said Lord Duke trusts that in as much as it is a month since the
departure of the said Lord of Villequier, God has otherwise inspired his
Majesty and caused him to smell out this poisoned counsel, together with the
vanity of the offers of these pretended Estates, to the end to put his
Majesty in mind, yea to cause him, even as it were with his finger to touch
that which heertofore wisely and ripely, he has had in worthy consideration,
which also his faithful and truly affected Servants and Friends not only in
F^au^ce, but also through out Christendom, have manifested unto him, which
also finally necessity it self has given to understand, not only to his
Majesty, but to his Predecessors, by so much experience when they have
endeavored (but ever in vain) to root out the reformed Religion, and all
exercise of the same by wars, persecutions, and other means, even horrible
to be rehearsed, which the said Lord Duke could not over pass, by reason of the
sincere affection which he bears to the conservation of the mightines of his
Majesty: And to the end to see him at peace with his Subjects, the way is, to
set before his Majesty's eyes this little which follows.

First, that it may please his Majesty to call to mind the cou^sail of
Gamaliel that against that which comes of God, no power or practice of man
can prevail: also that whatsoever is not of God: wastes and perishes of it
self.

Secondly yt in matters of estate that is good, which is necessary, wherein his
Majesty may look in the looking glass of Germany, Poland, Hungary, Boheme,
Suisserland, and the lovv Country, not as things are cloked: but according to
the truth, as him self has seen, for to compare a Prince of Germany with his
majesty or with all France is an absurd thing, but to compare France, with
all Germany: is an equal proportion.

Thirdly, that his Majesty perceives that all the same Contries do floorish,
because they have found means to content the consciences of their subjects, by
which Examples his majesty may know yt not the permission of the Religion,
but the hinderaunce of the exercise of the same, has engendered the mischeefs
and calamities which now he beholds through all his Realm.

Fourthly, that his Majesty not being able to confirm the last peace
without his Edict of Pacification, and not being able to keep that without
maintaining the same and putting it in execution: he may plainly see that, the
maintenance of his Edict is the only fundation, and means of peace, yea it is
the very peace it self.

Fifthly, like as the upholding thereof is a mean of peace and avoiding wars,
so is it the only way whereby his majesty may recover the obedience of his
subjects: for it is a thing most certain ye a King becoming Captain of any
faction among his subjects, can never be well obeyed, for it is requisite yt he
should show him self a common Father to all his Subjects, in endeavoring to
reconsile them one to an other.

Also sixthly to deal and swear against ye vpholdi^g thereof, is the only mean
to bring his majesty's subjects in greater mistrust then before, and so to
areare more cruel war then before time.

Seventhly to allege ye sovereign authority of a King for the doing or
swering to such matters, to bring his majesty unto a perpetual rebuke among
all the world, whereby he shall be accounted a Prince void of all faith, law,
honor and virtue. For his majesty may call to mind how often he has both by
word and writing professed himself to be a true Prince, such a one as will
promise nothing but what he entende^h to perform, yea and minds rather to
promise nothing, so that no man of honor can otherwise conclude but that
either he ought not to have made the contents of ye edict: or else he ought to
observe it, as his majesty in his own person has used to say.

For ye eighth especially the Lord Duke assures him self that his majesty may
well perceive that with any man who would observe the coute^ts of their oath, or
follow the counsel of these pretended states which is no other then the oath it
self, notwithstanding it had never been sworn: it would be impossible to
have any trafique, because that neither word, promise, oath, obligation,
seal, or other thing whatsoever ordinary and lawful for the assurance of
faith among men, especially between the Prince and his subjects, considering
the imbecilitie of the said subjects, would be of any more force, but
contrariwise should serve only for nets and snares wherewith to entrap each
other.

Ninthly his Majesty ought to consider that neighbors and strangers cannot
assure them selves of that Prince, whose subjects cannot trust him, as they of
the Religion, who have overmuch been persuaded. For to show that they began
not: we need no other argument then the proposition of the said Lord of
Villequier, namely that the King is not minded to observe the principal point
of his Edict.

As touching the example of the Queen of England, it is sufficiently known
that that Ladies heart is such, as if she had among her subjects found such
numbers of Princes, Lords, gentlemen and others of the Roman Religion within
her dominions, who should as his Majesty's subjects have done, so often have
requested her, rather than to have incurred such spoils, and once only
falsified her faith and promise, her majesty would have permitted them the
exercise of their Roomish Religion.

Tenthly that his majesty should bear at the least as much affection unto his
own Subjects, as he has showed unto the estates of the low Countries, in
rejoicing with them for the determination that they have taken, for the
recovery of their liberty, having also been a mediator to the said Estates
for the restoring again of the County of Egmonde into his estates and
honors, wherein he has the more to consider of the policy of the Spaniarde,
who seeks nothing but to continue wars in France, to the end thereby to
turn away the tempest from his own Countries after his good and usual manner.

Finally, whereas his Majesty alleges that willingly he would leave his
Subjects the liberty of their consciences: that were much more to be
mistrusted because it is most undoubted, that he who can live without
exercise of his Religion, is utterly deuoyd of all conscience, so that it is as
much as if his majesty should say, I will grant my subjects their lives, but
in the mean time he should take from them their food, wherein the Papists do
show a sufficient argument that they cannot live without Mass, so that the
said Lord Duke cannot give his Majesty any better counsel, except that if
he mind to remain a King, and to show him self such a Prince that a man may
deal and trafique and trust to his majesty, that the^ he maintain his Edict,
and observe his faith in procuring the abuses of these pretended Estates
(whereof his majesty speaks) to be reformed by such means as shall be
thought reasonable, for the said assembly cannot be taken for true, free, and
lawful Estates, but rather for traitors to his majesty and his crown,
neither are they ye persons promised by the Edict, for they should be kept for
the maintenance and confirmation of the peace, but not for the subuerting
thereof, to which end they have most vilanously been subbourned, as many
times his Lordship has advertised his majesty. The rehearsal of all which
things the said Lord Duke could very well forbear, were he not constrained as
well by the plainness of his conscience and honor which is engaged in the
subscription of the peace, as also by reason of the singular affection which he
bears to the commodity, advancement and service of his majesty, in which
mind he will continue all his life time, having nothing in more
reco^mendatition then to bring to the crown of France, and the tranquillity of
his majesty's subjects, what so ever means or counsel God shall ever give
him without sparing ought, which the said Lord Duke most humbly desires his
majesty to believe, and for such a one to account him, placing him in the
number of his most faithful and affectionate friends and servants.

This is all which the said Lord Duke can imparte to his majesty, in ought
that appertains to his person. But as concerning his army that was in
France, the said Lord Duke, his Colonels, Reystremaisters and Captains, having
heretofore thought it strange that his majesty kept not with them the
promises which he had both made and so often reitreated unto them, as well at
Francfort as at Strasbrough touching their payment and hostages, do now
think it much more strange, and a matter almost impudent, that such a Lord
as the Lord of Villequier coming into these parts as Ambassador for his
majesty, has not only not brought any assurance of the same: but also not
so much as is spoken thereof saui^g by the way yea and which is more, that the
effect of his message is utterly repugnaunt unto the Obligations and promises
of his majesty.

Therefore the said Lord Duke, not in his own name only: but also in the name
of his whole army requires his majesty to have regard to his honor and to
keep faith and promise whereby at the next fair at Francforte as well the said
Lord Duke, as also his Colonels, Reistremaisters, and Captains, may be
satisfied, who in the name of the whole army, will meet at the said City of
Francforte, there to determine of their affairs, according as the Lord
Beuterich and the other Captains sent with him, may more amply advertise his
majesty.

All this does the aforesaid Lord Duke most heartily request the said Lord of
Villequier to let his Maistie, fully, openly, and at large understand,
together with what soever he has aunswerd by word of mouth, without any
circumstances* or difficulty, with like plainness, affection, and good will,
as the said Lord Duke in making this answer has proceeded and desires ever
to proceed toward his Majesty.

Thus subscribed I. Cassimire.

The Oration of the Lord of Buterich Ambassador from the most noble Prince,
John Cassimir, County Palatine of Rhine, Duke of Bauier, etc. pronounced
before the King in his town of Bloys.
SIr we have our commission on the behalf of my Lord ye Duke John Cassimire,
County Palatine of Rhine, Duke of Bauier etc. as well in his own name as also
in the name of all the Lords, Colonels, Rheystremaisters, and Captains, and
generally of all his men of war, who in his second voyage into France
accompanied him, after their most humble commendations, to beseech your
majesty to fulfill that which you have promised, signed, sealed, and
oftentimes confirmed, as well by mouth as letters, touching the pay and
assurance of the said men of war, which is the cause of our ariuall in your
Court.

Truly it would cause us to blush if particularly we should rehearse all that
is wanting of the performance of the promises made unto us both before and
after our departure out of this Realm. The place whereof we do claim our
selves, would seem to make this matter much more odious, were it not on the
one part the necessity, whereunto we are bound by the commandment of them
that have sent us, and on the other part the assurance which all they whom
this matter concerns have conceived, that your Majesty knowing the ground of
this case, how it goes and what depends thereof, will take so good and spedy
order, that besides the increase of your reputation, we shall receive such
satisfaction, as both we do promise our selves, and ought to hope for of a
King of France, who has made a solemn promise to a foreign nation,
especially unto ours.

First your majesty's Obligation bearing date the 27. of July 1576, does
expressy importe that at the fair of Francfort in September last past, the
third, fourth and fifth months should have been paid. That the 100000. francks
which my Lord the Duke John Cassimire lent to your Majesty for the supplying
of the payment of the two first months should at the same fair have been
discharged.

That your majesty before the same term should have sent Commissioners to
take order for that which yet rests due unto my said Lord the Duke John
Cassimir since his first voyage, together with that also which yet is behind
of the voyage of my late Lord the Duke of Deux ponts or two bridges.

That your Majesty would with all expedition accomplish the promised number of
hostages and that before our departure out of France.

These Articles together with many others are promised and signed by your
Majesty, conter-signed by one Secretary of estate, and one Secretary of your
treasury and sealed with your broad seal, the effect whereof or accomplishment
we have not hitherto found.

Leaving the reserch of the botome of these matters (as the first agreement
which my Lady your Mother made at Chesteau neuf) immediately after that my Lord
had received the money of your majesty showing in effect by ye law of an C.
thousand franks of his own for the supplying of the pay of two months, how
affectionate he was unto your crown, how he departed with all speed out of
France (which all Beystres would not have done) not minding by waiting for the
perfect accomplishment of your promises to be grievous or trubleso^ to your
people, so that what so ever aduertisment he received, as assuredly he had
many, and those from the best, that there was some hidden mystery, yet could
they not so much win him, as to cause him to show any token of mistrust so
much did he assure him self in your word.

Afterward your Majesty gave him to understand by sundry letters, that you
could not according to promise satisfy him at the fair of September, by reason
of the assembly of the Estates, who (besides the confirmation of the Edict made
by your own absolute and royal power) as we were promised, should entreat
upon some means how to discharge your Majesty toward strangers, and so to
content us, also that at Christmas this fault should be amended.

Immediately after Christmasse and before Newyeeres day, your majesty sent my
Lord word that the Estates had put a dout and let in the behalf of Castelas,
which could not so soon be decided, also that in ye mean time your Majesty
would cause to furnish at the fair of Strasbrough which was holden at the same
season, the parts of my Lord the Duke of Lorreine, and my Lord the Duke of
Vaudemont.

Sir we are sorry to say so much: but the truth is, there wants 250000.
which is in manner the one half which yet we have not received of those two
parts, and in the mean time my said Lord was personally at Strasbrough, where
were also sundry Colonels, Reistremaisters, Captains, and Soldiers at the
least xv. days and more, to their great costs, charges, labor and travail,
procured by the delay of the said payment.

Now is Easter fair, which is to be holden at Francfort at hand, at the which
your majesty's promise should take place.

First concerning the former dets dew unto both my Lord the Elector Palatine,
next to my aforesaid Lord the Duke John Cassimire.

Item touching the sixth and seventh months pay for the army.

Which articles, we can if need be, specify unto your majesty. Having
commission and express commandment to desire your majesty to satisfy the
same at this next fair at Fancfort, which is to be holden at. Easter next,
unto each and every of them, as well for the time past, as yt which is to come,
which amounts almost to 4. Millions of franks, besides costs and domages. The
payment of which sum within such a term, would go hard with any flourishing
estate, not indetted, turmoyled, or sacked with continual wars, for the space
of xv. or xvi: years, whereas if all had been quiet and in rest all things
might have abounded, so that now it cannot be but we must needs much doubt
thereof. And that that most troubles us is that before our eyes we see that
you seek not the means so to do, as is evident even by practice, thereby to
frustrate us of all hope of receiving any thing out of France into Germany,
either at this fair or any other, or of long time hereafter, notwithstanding
that by your obligation no troubles should impeach the effect of your promises,
which proceeds of I wot not what league. This (to be breef) is the final
breaking of the Edict of pacification, required (say they) by them who ought to
buy the firm establishment thereof with their own blood, which cannot be
other then accompanied with the most cruel and lamentable war that ever was.
These undoubtedly will be ye last civil troubles of your Realm, we are no French
men, this matter touches us not so near. We be men and Germans endewed with
humanity, which moves us to compassion in respect of the slander that is
like to enfue of this war, so far are we void of any desire to kindle the
wars, neither are we much practiced in matters of Estate, and yet do we
assuredly know that there was never any league but has been domageable to a
Monarchy, in the estate and among Subjects.

We have no commission (for your majesty lately sent us word, that it was not
your pleasure, although oftentimes your self have requested us) to deal in
your affairs, either in the affair of your estate, as with any your means,
either to examine such dealing as have past, neither have we heretofore done
it without the purchase and instaunce of those which do touch your person very
nigh, or else at the soliciting of other Kings your predecessors. Well have we
both charge and express commandment to open unto you the present necessity
of our affairs, and to propounde the ready means to relieve the same, the
which are so conjoined with the general and superficial consideration of your
estate: that we cannot speak of our own matters, but we must therewithal
somewhat touch yours.

Seeing therefore that my Lord the Duke John Casimire a Prince and your
neighbor, besides all ancient bonds wherewith he is bound to wish the wealth of
this crown, has in declaration of his goodness toward you, been honored with
goodly lands, a pention, a charge of a hundred men of arms, and an estate of
Colonel, which dignities he yet inioyeth, he finds him self so much bound
to your majesty that he thinks he should do injury to his deputy, if he
should dissemble the inconveniences like to ensue.

At such time as France was replenished with foreign Soldiers, every one
both great and small cried for peace, and such as supposed us not to be so
attentive thereto, as in effect we have declared our selves, said that the
same was the only way to collect money for our payments, because say they that
the charges of war were infinite and incredible, whereby it must needs follow
that the breaking of the peace does cut of and take away all means of our
satisfaction, so as we gather that we have therein as great interest, or more
then many great Lords of your subjects, and therefore that it is our duty
most humbly to exhort your majesty to the entertayning and assured observing
of the same, yea although neither the duty of Christian charity, the
simpatie that is in one only faithful body, or our affection to the wealth and
quietness of your dominions and crown, should drive us thereunto, either the
desire yt we have that your majesty's credit might remain in his full force
among all foreign Princes, and that the confidence which your Subjects ought
to repose in your should in no wise be deminished. There is none but knows
(it is so fresh in mind) what time, labor, and trauail first your self my
Lord, then my Lady your mother, my Lords ye Princes of your blood, my Lord ye
Duk John Casimire, your Counsel and others did sustain and endure, what
ruin, yea and how much money it cost before you could attain to this peace.

All good Frenchmen wished it, or judged it most profitable and necessary for
your estate, your people accepted it and joyfully received it, it was signed,
sealed, sworn, and published throughout all the Courts, Bayliwickes, Towns,
and places of this Realm, and notified unto strangers by your Ambassadors,
unto the singular contentation of such as wished the wealth of your Estate.
Finally no necessary ceremony was ommitted. We have, enjoy and possess the
lands, commodities and honors which you have conferred unto my said L. the
Duke John Casimire, for under any other title, he neither would receive the^,
neither accept of your hostages, we have also part of the jewels of your
Crown, and which we esteem more then all, we have your royal word.

Now that we should reap the fruits of this peace, and receine that which is
promised and dew unto us, also yt all men should congratulate with your
majesty for ye quietness yt you should find, we must change such speeches
into a bewayling of the miseryes arysing of wars.

At the least if the destenie of Fortune be such, either of royal and absolute
authority, either for certain considerations to us unknown, as we yt be
Germains are to rude to understand them, and our selves not open enough to
comprehend that your majesty will not that your subject should enjoy the fruit
of the Edict of pacification, then let it remain closed within the bounds of
your Realm, and not be dispersed in all corners of Germany, and in most part
of Svvizerland, for we cannot, but must needs receive much grief and
intolerable damage thereby.

This consideration together with infinite others, which to this purpose might
be alleged by such as would enter into the view of your estate, do to us seem
sufficient to extinguish, or at the least suspend this abolishment of the
Edict, until we be satisfied, and then might you more justly allege that we
have not to do to meddle therein, for now we deal with that that concerns
our selves, our honor and credit, together with the reputation of our whole
nation.

Yet if it were but a matter of five or six months labor, the end whereof we
might then find, and that it might so be easily compassed, then were there
some hope as touching our particular interest. But we now are certain and well
assured, that if we be once entered aborde this war: we be all ready over old
to see the end.

It is no small matter when a man is reduced to these extremities, that he will
rather overthrow him self and others, then with his goods to loose both
Country, honor, and life, when a man proceeds so far, it is done, all
respect and all duty of one side, and other vanishes away. The politic
person, and the reformed, each of them forgets him self, whatsoever
tends either to the one or other end seems lawful. Such as have abidden
these extremities the space of xv. or xvj. years, will not be daunted with
such beginnings, having so many intelligences and good aduertisements from all
parts, we know it: for we have frequented it. There must be a whole storehouse
of money, besides the shedding of the French blood. There will ensue a stiff
determination of irreconsiliable war, while in the mean time what will become
of our payments, the waiting for which, will be unto us as grievous and
intolerable, as it will be hard to send the same into Germany (so long as the
war does last) or easy to subdue the Huguenots.

What will our Reystres and soldiers, who are determined to meet at the next
fair of Francfort, say. I will leave to such as know what manner of men they be
in matters touching payments due. What will be the general judgment of our
foreign neighbors? The soberest will say that France which in all ages has
borne away ye price of humanity toward strangers, is now become impatible to
it self, neither able to abide peace, neither to maintain war.

To conclude we do beseech your majesty on the part of my Lord the Duke John
Casimire, who has in his own behalf together with the behalf of the body of
his army sent, us hither, to cause to furnish and satisfy at this next fair at
Francfort, the whole contents of the Obligation which we have of your majesty,
according as is before set down,

This Sir is (without speaking any farther in your affairs, the^ they concern
us) the effect of all that we are commanded to show unto your majesty at
this present, whom we do most humbly beseech to take the same in good part.
We are Germans and therefore do want copy of French phrases. The
commandment of those that have sent us, does lay upon us the necessity of
acquitting our selves, whereto we hope your majesty will have respect, for it
te^deth only to our satisfaction, and the peace which mainteineth and
preserves all estates. The hazardes of war have often dispearsed, wasted and
subverted in one day, yea in one hour, great Monarchies, how well so ever they
have been ordered or established. God for his grace, preserve yours in full
perfection.

At Bloys the 23 of February. 1577.

This being ended he proceeded on this wise.
SIr, I am to speak for my Lord the Duke John Cassimire who gave me particular
instructions to request your Majesty in his behalf, that you would not permit
your self to be led by such as do endeavor to procure you to break the peace
which was so hard to be made. Also that if there be any Article contained
therein which troubles your Conscience, or yt seems to rigorous, he wishes
that it might please you rather to procure some tolerable moderation of the
same, then again to areare wars by the breaking of the said Edict.

To which end he has commanded me to offer unto you whatsoever credit he may
have with the King of Navarre the Prince of Conde, the Marshall of Anuile and
the Churches, wherein he has sufficiently authorized me to procure any thing
tolerable, rather then to subvert all, namely to confer with ye King of
Nauers Deputy: wherefore it is in your Majesty to consult and devise, what I
may do therein whereto I do most humbly offer my Person.

To the King.
SIr I do most humbly request your majesty not to mislike that this day may
finish and cut of all such slanders as have been sown and spread throughout
Germany, France, and other places against my Lord and master the Duke John
Cassimire to the great prejudice of his honor and reputation. Namely that the
consideration and respect of his particular profit held him so intangeled and
brideled, that the same was periuditial unto the public and particular
commodity of his soldiers which followed him. In respect whereof: his
excellency has charged me before my departure, to remit into your majesty's
hands all such lands and estates wherewith it has pleased you of late to
gratify him, which are the Duchy of Estampes, the nine Lordships situated
within the Duchy of Burgundy, the pention, the Captainship over a hundred men
of arms, together with the estate of Colonel over 4000 Reystres.

The possession and inioying of all which things and of every of them, his
excellency has and here does renounce, not willing hereafter to pretend any
right in the same, neither minding at this present to reap any commodity
thereof. He does also render unto your majesty, all letters and deeds
concerning the same, except such as are depending of the aforsaid lands
situated with in the Duchy of Burgundy, the which the chamber of accounts has
deteyned, the arrest whereof is heerunto adjoined. Also in case his excellency
has reciprokely promised or sworn unto your Majesty any kind of duty, if
he has bound him self in any respect whatsoever, by word of mouth, letters,
or procter, his intent and purpose is by this restitution to be fully and
perfectly discharged, as of matter granted in consideration of the lands and
estates above mentioned, herein reuoking all duty or Obligation whatsoever,
except of good agreement and neighborhood, which at all times has been
maintained between the Kings of France, and the famelies of the Palatine
Princes, besides the earnest zeal which he bears to the wealth of this
Crown, from the which this restitution shall in no wise alienate his mind.

I have no Commission otherwise to descend to the particular occasions, but to
show your majesty that in case you be any thing desirous to know the same,
his excellency immediately after my return will not much stick to declare it.

In respect of our selves, who under the assurance of public faith and the
safe conduct which it pleased you to send us, are come even to your Court, I
have express charge of his excellency, most humbly to request your Majesty
to give leave to two of us with all speed to return into Germany, and me
Buterich to depart into England according to my masters commandment about
sundry his excellencies weighty affairs of importance, granting us to the
same end two several Pasports and safe conducts. (?)

At Bloys the 7. of March. 1577
FINIS,

