AN HOMILY of saint John Chrysostom upon that saying of saint Paul, Brethern,
I would not have you ignorant, what is become of those that sleep, to the end ye
lament not. etc. with also a discourse upon Job, and Abraham, newely made out
of Greek into latin by master Cheke, and englished by Tho. Cha loner.

ANNO. 1544.



TO THE RIGHT VVORshypfull master Antony Deny, one of the chief gentilmen of
the kings majesty's pryuey chamber.
A SMALL gift agreth with my small ability but not with the greatness of
your deserts, which justly to set forth, I leave to such, as may with
greater vessels wade more aptly in so large a sea. Not that wantyng power, I
do want of good will also, wherein I dare compare with the formest. It may like
you therefore of your singular goodness, which so many have proved, if you like
not my deed herin, at least to allow my entente, which in great things
thought it a second praise to will well. Fare ye no wourse, then your virtue
requires, the favor of men wishes, and your own dexterite promises.

Your most bounden Tho. Chaloner.

AN HOMILY OF Chrysostom.
FOUR days have I spent in expounding unto you the parable of Lazarus, lading
forth such treasour, as in that botched body we found hydden, which was
neither gold, nor silver, nor jewels, but rather religion constant courage,
suffrance, and much patience. Forlike as these slydyng and transitory treasures
are outwardly couerid with brambles, thistles, and rugged heth, and natheles in
digging deaper great richesse is discovered: So find we in Lazarus, botches
outwardely, but withinwarde, substance beyond estimation, a body diseased, but
a noble and lively spirit, in whom that saying of the apostle is fulfilled:
how well the utter man is corrupted, so well the inner man is renewid. And
truly I might this day also wade in the same parable, co^futyng such
heretics, as reprove the old Testament, with the Patriarchs, yea and spare
not to whette their tounges against god the maker of al things. But for I
would not my words all of one thing, should to much glutte you, these
disputations refer I to an other season, and now let us see, what we can say
in a new matter. Parde ye know, that ever one kind of meat, soon
squaymysheth the stomak, whereas change quickens a continual apetite. To the
end therefore we use the like in our sermon, let us after a long space, look
back again upon saint Paul. For as this present day is red unto us very
apoyntedly a place of ye apostle, and handesomely agrees that, that now we
intend to say, with that we have before said. Ye have herd then Paul declaring,
and saying: Brethren, I would not have you vnwyttyng what is become of those
that sleep, least ye-make dole, and mourn, as others do that want hope. That,
of Lazarus, was a strong sinew of the gospel, and this now is the voice of
thapostle, but in effect their tunes accord. For as in that parable I treated
much of the resurrection, and of the judgment to come: so has this text
brought me back now into the self same argument, because if we dig out well
this place of the apostle, we shall not miss of the very same treasure. For
then, my hole oration tendid to this effect, that ye hearers might be taught,
how nothing in this world was to be reputed for goodly, but yt rather in our
hope we should march on further, having daily before our eyes, the dome of our
judge, how redoutable his judgment is, and of what stern grauenes we should
find him. And does not Paul with these words counseill us the like? But
herke^ ye. Of those that sleep I would not have you ignorant, to thend ye
mourn not as other do, who have no hope: For and if we believe that Jesus is
dead and vprise^: so those that in Jesus do sleep, god shall lead with him. But
in chief, this is worth the search to be known. why? when he speaks of
Christ, his departing out of life he calls death, and where he speaks of
our death, he does name it a sleep, and not death. For he said not of the
dead, what then? of those that sleep, and a little after, so those that in
Jesus do sleep, not those that in Jesus are dead, god shall lead with him. And
then again. We that live, that are left til the coming of Christ, shall not
prevent them that are on sleep. Not so much as here said he, that are dead, but
thrice making mention thereof, thrice death he called a sleep. But not so of
Christ, as for and if we believe that Jesus is dead, he said not is on sleep,
but dead, and wherefore calls he it Christ's death, and our sleep? For not
rashely and at all auentures, but rather upon some great and deep respect,
has he used this observation of words. So speaking of Christ, he called it
his death, to the end the same might be thought a passion in him, and as to
us he qualifieth it with the name of sleep, that thereby he might comeforte our
sorrow. For the cause whereof proceeds the resurrection, boldly he called
death, but where all is grounded on hope, that names he a sleep, seming with
the very word to comfort us, and give us good hope. Inasmuch as he that
slepith shall rise again, and death is naught else but a long sleep. For do not
object me with this, that the dead hear not, speak not, see not, nor feel
not, seeing that a slepyng man has no part of all these. But if algates I
must reherce some wondre, how say you to this? That the soul of him that
sleapeth, does after a manner sleep also, and the dead do wake. But a dead man
(say thou) putrifieth, and rottith, chaungid into duste and ashes, what
thereof my friend? that makith the more for us. For incase a la^dlord, purposing
to reedifie an old and ruinous house, should (as he must) first of all
transport the tenauntes some where else, then pluck down the old buyldyng,
raysyng it more stately the^ ever it was, this deed (trow I) in nothing
offendith the tenauntes, but much more cheareth them, because they regard not
so much the present defacing, as with their mind they comprehe^d the plat of the
house that shall be, but not as yet, to be vewed at eye: Even so does god after
like rate dissolve our bodies, deductyng our souls the tenauntes as out of an
house, to thend the same being ones new repaired, he may with greatter glory
repossesse the^ again therein. Let us not therefore somuche count upon this
present, in manner defasyng, as on the gorgeousnes that our house shall be of. For
admit one had a copper image fordone with long age and rustynes, parde he
breaks it, and in the furnace new meltith it, to make it semelier then ever
it was. And as that dissoluing in the furnace, is not thutter destruction of
thimage, but rather a renewyng to the same: So is the dissolution of our bodies
not an undoing, but rather a new refresshing. When thou see therefore this
flesh of ours, as in a furnace melting and putrifieng, stay not thy self at
that sight, but rather have an eye to the mouldwerkes proporcion* Neither
suffice thy self herwith, but wade on yet further. Inasmuche as an image (...)
when he castith a body of brass, he does not new make it of gold, or
everlasting, but brase^ as before it was. Whereas god on the other side casting
this our mortal and earthly body, restorith it golden, and immortal. For the
earth that receiuith our bodies frail, and vnpure, rendrith the same again
immortal, and right pure. Why should we then so much behold on the corpse lieng
specheles, and with eyes closed, as when it rises again, partaker of the
glory passing man's vttrance, to be astonnied, and wondered at? For thus must we
from the present face of things, reduce our understanding to that hope that is
coming. Yet some will say, they long, and desire, after the deades
fellowship, and therefore mourn, and lament they. But what is that to purpose?
For and if thou should join thy daughter in marriage to some one, who leadyng
her away with him, should goo into a far country, living there in great
wealth and plenty of al things, this should not (I trow) much grieve the, in
as much as that sorrow, which of the length of her absence thou conceiuest,
through the comine report of her welfar, thou shall easily passover. And now
whereas no man, nor servant is the taker, but god himself, requiring that is
his own, thou sobbest and criest out. But seeing I am (say you) I can not
(...) And as for that I (...) stick with ye. For not thy mourning, but the
great excess thereof would I take from the. Inasmuche as to mourn it is a
kyndely thing for us, being men, but to do the same outrageously, is a very
madness, a sign of doting and an womannishe tendrenes. I admit therefore thou
wayle, I admit thou weape, but not that thou do stomach at it, or bear it
heavily, nay rather give thanckes unto god the taker, that so, thou maiste
worshipefully set furthe thy friend, going out of this life, and yield unto
him these honest funerals. For and if thou take it greuousely, thou both
violatest the dead, prouokest god the taker, yea and hindrest thine own self.
But in giving thanks therefore, so have thou set him furthe, glorified the
taker, and done thy self a great good turn. Weape therefore: but as the lord
did for Lazarus, who thereby prescribed unto us the rule, order, and very
terms of bewailing, which in no case we must pass. And so says Paul. Of
those that sleep I would not have you ignorant, least ye should bewail, as
others do that want hope.

Bewail says he: but not as the Greeks do, who deny the resurrection, whoo
despair of the life to come. I am ashamed I promise you, and not meanly I am
troubled in my sprite, when I see in the mercatestede these flocks of women
without shame, pluckinge their hears; styfing their arms, scraching their
chekis, yea and doing all this before the Greeks eyes. What will not they say?
what will not they blaste of us? These be they that so constantly affirm
there shall be a resurrection of the dead: gaye words: but their deeds draw
not after that line, with their words they maintayn the resurrection, but
their doings smelle of the desperate. If they firmly trusted on the
resurrection, they would not do thus, if they were persuaded, the dead went to
a better state, they would not make this dole. These tauntes, and worse then
these, do the unfaithful cast on us, when they hear us cry out so. Let us be
ashamed therefore, and use more modesty, nor sclander we not so much thereby,
both our selves, and those that look upon us. For I pray the tell me? why
bewaylest thou so sore the passer out of this life? Because he was an ill man?
In that point (me thinks) thou ought to render thanckes, that all iniquity
is now lopped from him. But put case he was good and virtuous, so much the
more then should thou reioise, at his taking away before any wyckednes had
perverted his good thoughts, and that he is removed to that place where for
ever he shall floryshe, without so much as never so little suspicion of any
turn in things. But he was a young man, glorify thou god therefore, that
took him, and so sone has called him to a better state. Then set case he was
old: and for that also yield thou thanks, in glorifieng god his caller.

Be ashamed therefore of thy dolemakynge: since that the pomp of burieng,
psalms singyng, prayers, assemble of head citisens, gatheringe together of the
brethern, al these things ar ordained, not that thou should lament, or be
repynyng, but to thend thou give thanks to god the taker. For like as every
man contendith to set fourth and speak well by such, as are called to some
great office or dignity, so of the saints that deceas, (as who says)
called to a greater promotion, we all should speak honorably, since that
death is restfulnes, the dispache of all thoughts and cares perteinyng to
this life. When thou see therefore any of thy nere friends shaking hands with
this world, do not take it grudgingly, but rather when the sorrow stingith the,
call thy wits together, search thine own conscience, considre how within
short space after the same end abides the also. Attempre thy self, and by the
others death take warning. Cut away all differring of amendment, call thy
dedis to account, and make the best chang thou can. The Ethnike and
unfaithful beholds the heauyn, and worshippith the heauyn, taking the same
for god. He sees the earth and worshippeth it, and gapith after things
mortal. But we on the other part behold the heaven, and praise the maker of the
heaven, inasmuche as we take the same not as god, but for the work of god. I
see ye work of this whole world, whereby as by the hand I am led unto the
creator thereof. The unfaithful sees riches, and fixes his mind thereon, and
is ravished therewith: I like wise see riches, and despise it. He feelith
poverty, and whyneth thereat: I feel the like, and rejoice thereat. For otherwise
be hold I things the^ he does. And eue^ so on death. He seith a corpse, and
takes it for a corpse: I see a corpse, and repute this part of death none other
but for a sleep.

And as in writing it comes to pass, that where as with eyes, as well the
conninge, as vnconning do pore on the letters, Yet not for that with like
understanding. For thunconning do take those for bare letters only which they
look on, whereas the conning with great subtilty pyke out the meaning under
hidden: So in the things self, with the self same eyes behold we all, on
mortal things, but not with the like understanding. Shall we therefore in this
opinion of death agree with the Ethnikes? we (I say) who in all other things
do disagree from them? Think we ones, to whom the dead is goone, and receive
we consolation, king he is with Petre, Paul, and the hole company of saints.

Think, how he shall rise again, and that with far more glory, and
reputation. Think, how that to mourn, and lament, other else thy tears, may
naught avail the, but in fine make rebound to thine own disadvantage. Think,
if thou do thus, whose example thou folowist, and in any ways eschonne the
company of sin. For here in, whom folowiste thou? or whom do thou
countrefaite? but the infidels, and those that have no hope? Like as Paul
says: lest ye mourn as the rest do, that have no hope. And mark ye well,
how warely the apostle speaks: for he said not hope of the resurrection, but
platly, those that have no hope. For who so looks not after the judgment day,
has no manner hope, not only of gods forsight in things, but not so much as
of gods right wisenes, according as he ouerue with all the same. He that has
no sight in this, nor iugith not this is so, is bruter then any beast, and
puttith all laws, judgments, good constitucions, and for short, al goodness
out of his own mind. For who so looks not to render any count of his doings,
slieth from all virtue, and cleuith to all naughtynes.

We then considering all this, and countinge the Greeks custom, which we
follow in making dole, to be a very madness and amasing of ye mind. Eschonne we
(I say) this usage with the^. For to none other intent does Paul so often make
mention of them, but that remembering what disworship we incur thereby, we
should refrain customynge with them, and rather make return to our own
noblesse.

And that not here only, but often, and continually does Paul so. For when he
would have us leave our sins, then makith he demonstration, what manner men
through our sins we are coupled with, to thend we should mislike, and be
offendid with the manners of the person, and shon his company. Further writing
to the Thessalonie^s, thus says he: Let each of you possess his own body in
all holiness and honor, not in susteining of disworship, as the Gentiles, who
know not god. And again, not as the other Gentiles, who walk in the vanity of
their hertes. So also in this place. Brethern, I would not have you ignorant
what is become of them that sleep, lest ye mourn as others do who want hope.
For not the nature of the thing, but the purpose of our mind, not the death of
the passer hence, but the weak sprite of the bewailer is that, that troublith
us. For as for the believing man, no present displeasures can displease him, but
rather before that (...) prepared for him, is (...) in this present (...) odds
betwix him and the vnfaithefull. No small vantage then receive we through
christian religion, onles we repute not continual quietness of mind, and ever
a like gladness, to be the greatest fruit we may here gather. Therefore says
Paul. Joy ye ever in the lord, again (I say) rejoice ye. For as much as before
the resurrection day, we are priuileged in the mean space, in that we fall not
into these daily troubles of our life, but rather through hope of the life to
come, even here receive we great comfort, and consolation. Moreover as we make
game on both sides, so on both sides is the unfaithful at after deal, (...)
throughthe punishment remaynyng him for not trusting in the resurrection, the
other, because every small mishappe here, discouragith him, whoo looks after
no manner wealth in that other world to come. And therefore not only for the
resurrectio^s sake, ought god to be thanked, but also for that hope of the
resurrection, hable to comfort our souls in perplexity, and encourage us
as well in other things, as it does in this, that we shall rise again, and be
with god. For and if we needs must lament, and mourn: those that live in syn,
not those that deceas with virtue, should we (...) weape for. And so did (...)
For writing to the Cori^ thus says he. Least at my coming to you, god humble
me so much, that I must be feign to bewail many of you, not as dead, but
that have sinned, and repent not of the excess and uncleanness they have
committed. Bewail the dead, for he wantith his senses, bewail a fool, for he
wantith wit. Meanly bewail the dead, for he is but at rest, but a foles life
is worse the^ his death. That and if algates we must be moan him that is
deprived of life, then much more him, that is void of ryghtwisenes, and has
missed of this gift of hope sent to us from above.

Such men therefore let us bemone, for this mourning we do (...) inasmuche as
in bemoning them, often times we do refourme them. Where as to bemone the dead
is both fond, and improfitable. And so let us not abrogat this custom of dole
making, but then let our dole be for sins sake only. For before poverty,
sikenes, untimely death, begylyng, or slander, all these with like
disco^modities appertaining to us we ought to bear out with a right good heart,
because these euilles, incase we be patient, may be occasion of a greter
croune and glory. But how may it be (say thou) that a man mourn not? To
this I are the contrary. How may it be, that a man endewed with reason
contemplation and hope of things to come, should m(...) But who is he (say
thou) that in this confusion, and change of things, may not somewhat be
moved? Many (I say) both in ours, and in our elders days.

For Job, when the hole nombre of his children perished, harken ye what he
says. God gave me them, God has bereuid me them, as pleases god, so is it
done. These words armeruailous to be rehearsed only, but if thou serchest them
narolier, tha^ will thou more marvel. For thus must thou make thy discourse:
How the dyuel his persecutour took away not haulfe his children, and left the
other haulfe, another that he took the more number, and spared the less, but
that he sweped away all the fruit, and yet the tree he ouerturned not, he
raised all the surges of the sea, and yet the ship he drowned not, he gave the
assault to the vttremoste, and yet the strong tower wanne he not. So Job abode
all his bruntes, and remained in one vnstyrred. Many darts were launced at
him, which he shruncke not for: nay rather they were launced, and he was not
wounded. Imagine we (I pray you) what a thing it was for Job, to see so many
of his children al at ones perishing. Yea, and trow ye not, it was a
sufficient corrosiue to his heart, to have the^ all taken from him? al (I say)
together, at one time, in one day, of like flower of age, of much hope and
towardness in such sort to finishe their yearis? after so many wrekes, and
scourges, this last to make up his mouth? specially he being so loving a
father, and his children such as deserved no less? For where as one leseth by
death his unthrifty children, well may it cause him to regrete a little, not
that the anguishe so hotely scaldith him, chiefly because the vngratiousenes of
such as deceas, may well be in cause, why that sorrow settithe not her tethe so
sharply in us. But if their goodness he commendable, then thrilleth the that
deape wound with continual remembrance, and the incurable evil breadeth two
manner thorns in thy heart. That one is the remorse of nature and kind, which
we that live have, the other is the virtue the deceased person was of.

Then, that Jobs children were of much towardnes, may be gathered by this, in
that their father took much care about their bringing up, and made often
sacrifice for them, having doubt at least upon their hidden sins. For
nothing was dearer to him, neither more tendid on, then his childrens
bringing up, an euidente argument not only of their good demeanor, but also
of his fatherly affection.

Inasmuche therefore as Job was a father, yea and so tender a father, as not
only expressed his natural love, but also the fear he took for them, besides
that they that died, were of such an aproued honesty, trebly were those panges
of sorrows leuelid at him. Which in case they had been put to one by one, so
might the pecemealeshype have geuin place to some manner consolation, as when the
presence of the surviuours, couerith the sorrow conceived for the dead. But
where as the hole flock decays, whom can he sustain to look upon? that
before was father to so many children, and now has not so much as one left
him. And here now I might bring in his fifte sword of sorrow, in that they all
at ones so suddenly were bereuid of their life. For and if their death had
vetid within space of.iiii. or.v. days, so might his wifes, and at his
neighbors have borne him feleship in lamenting with him, that in so short
space, and so vnlokid for, so goodly a meiny was quite fordone. But much more
cause of sorrow had Job, who not in three, in two, or in one day, but in a
moment was euenly deprived of them al. For a mishap long looked for, albeit it
touchith a man to the quick, Yet for that the evil coming is forseen, it is
wont to be more tolerable. but when ye same chancith both at ones, and at
unawares, then is it intolerable. When so ever then a thing is grievous of it
self, and thereto does opresse one beyond his expectation, that is surely a
great enforcement of his sorrow. Now therefore repute with thy self how
intolerable Jobs sorrow was, and how it passed the common grief felt in like
passions. But will thou hear now the sixte throw of Job? he lost al his
children in the flower of their youth, and pardie ye wot how sore men's
deaths before their time of ripenes, are wont not only to trouble their
friends, but also in sundry means to trouble them. then this of Jobs children
was not only an unripe death, but thereto, a violent death, which violentnes
may be taken for his seventh calamity for he saw them not yeldyng their
gostes and last breathes in their bodies, but they were al oppressed with the
ruin of the house where they banketted. Now put case some one as he dug
among those ruins, should pluck out now a stone, and then a limme of some
one of them, perchance one hand holding the cup, on other in the platter,
with all the shape of the body quashed asu^der, the nose frushed down, the
head crased, the eyes quisted out, the brain dispercled, and the hole
proportion of the body with the diuersnes of the bruses so disfygured, that the
poor father might uneaths discern the desired sight of one of his children
from an other. At the rehersall only of this tragedy, year moved to
compassion and tears. What think you then by him that saw this gere? For
seeing we now so long time sins, can not so much as hear with out tears, so
miserable a chance as this was, yea, and that nothing pertaining unto us: What
manner a man, and of how stony an heart was Job, (trow ye) who seeing all this
with his eyes, not in an other man's adversity, but in his own, could so
refrain, and mortify his courage? For he neither repined thereat, no not
somuche as ones openid he his mouth in grudge. As what meanith this? is this
the recompense of my mekenes? to this therefore has my house stood open to all
strange gestes, that I should se the grave of my children? have I therefore upon
those extendid all gentilnes, that these should suffer this death?

None of all these muttringis vttred he, no not somuche as ones thought them,
but after a long debatynge with him self took he all in good wourth. For like
as a cunnyng founder, when he castith an image of gold, does proportion and
make fete the moulde with all diligence, so he with proportioninge and feting,
brought his courage to a good point. And as a painful husbandman, watrith,
byndith, and hedgith in, the graffes of palm and Oliuertrees, likewise Job
ceased not with all his study to bring up each of their souls as a fruiteful
Olyue tree, to a greater encreace of virtue.

And having all done, when the storminge of the wicked sprite, had disturbed,
and beaten them to the ground, with a miserable end of their lives lotted unto
the^, yet used he no kind of blasphemy, but thanking god of al, gave so the
dyuell a clap at the advantage. But now if thou will say, that his sorrow for
loss of many children, is not to be compared to his, that had, and lost his
only child, thou speakist well, and I will well so be it. For not even, but
much greater was Jobs sorrow. For who can guess the benefit risinge to the
father of many children? and perconsequent, the wound received in many bodies,
must needs engender a more manifest calamite, and sharper heaviness. But now, if
thou desyrest an example of him, who having but one only son, showed
nevertheless as great as Job, or rather greater co^stance. Then look thou on the
Patriarch Abraham, who in deed saw not his son Isaac die, but was commanded
(which thing was far more piteous, and miserable) was commanded I say with
his own hands to kylle him, and yet this bidding he withstode not, neither
took it heuily, nor used none of al these wordis. To this the^ have thou made
me a father, that I should be mine own childs queller? better had it ben not
to have given him un to me, then in this wise to redemaund him. But if thou will needs have him, to what purpose I beseech the will thou have him slain of
me, and my hand to be his bludsheder? was it not thy promise, how in this boy
my sede should store all the world? and what fruit geuest thou me, when thou
pluckest up the roots? how assurest me thou of nephieus, and co^mandest my
only son to be slain? who ever saw the like, who did the like? I am
begiled, I am betrayed. Abraham truly againsaide not gods commandment, nor
stood not in terms of why, and wherefore, with him, but when he had ones herd.
Take thy dear and well-beloved son Isaac, and make of him sacrifice to me, upon
such an hille as I shall apointe the, with as good a will he went about it,
as if more had been commanded him, he would have done his uttermost, for he both
kept this secret from his wife, and from his servants, commanding them to
tarry at the foot of the hille, and taking with him only Isaac for his
oblation went up, not with a faint heart, but gladsomely about the execution of
gods commandment. Think therefore how hard a case this was, when no man
being by, he did question (perchance) with his son aparte, which might make
his heart the rather fowndre into pity, and a more vehement heat of love, not
in one or two days, but in many days to be quickenid in him, inasmuche as to
have dispached gods byddyng out of hand, was sure a very great and hard
enterprise, but not of such maistrye, as by respite of so many days to have
his mind temptid, specially being beseagid with so great a love, as he bare
toward Isaac. For therefore did god apoynte him a place of further distance,
where he should do his oblation, to the end the w^estlers styfnes might be the
better assaied. And in deed a stiff wrastler was Abraham, with no man, but
with the very law of nature. For what eloque^s is lively enough to set before
our eyes his stout heart? He led away his son, he bound him, laid him on
the heap of wod, drew his sword, was ready to strike him. I can not tell I,
how, nor by what means to describe all this.

He only knew it, who took upon him to do it. For no painted words may
sufficientely set out colors in this behalf.

For how was not his hand astonished? How did not the force of his synewes
weaken? How could not the desirable presence of his dear child, edge him to
compassion? And then again, that, that Isaac did, how wonderus was it? For as
Abraham obeyed god: so obeyed he his father, and as when god bad Abraham slay
him, he axed not after the cause wherefore: likewise Isaac, his father
constrayninge him, and offringe him upon the altar, enquired not of him why he
did it, but was subject to his will and pleasure. Here now may we see the
father, a sacrifice of his son, and a sacrifice yelden up without
bloudshedynge, a burnt offering without fire, for a figure of the death and
resurrection. He slew his son and not slew his son, not with his hand, but
with his intention he slew him. And god commanded thus much, not for effusion
of blouddes sake, but to manifest unto us the obedience of Abraham, and that
his promptenes might over all be notyfyed, to our teaching and instruction.
How that gods co^mandeme^tes ought to be preferred not only before our
children, the law of nature, and briefly all other things, but euin our very
own lives. And therefore came he down to let Abraham's hand, having Isaac as a
living witness of this act. What forgyuenes then shall thou obtain? or what
excuse can thou bring? seeing such a man as Abraham was, with so good an heart to
have bowed him self, and in all points to have geuin place to god, and thou
in this small case wilt not take it well, but stubbernly?

For neither allege thou thy mourning, nor yet ye gretnes of thy calamity,
but rather think how Abraham was stronger, then so excedyng great, and far
passing a sorrow. For it was enough, that gods commandment, had some thing
troubled, and cast his mind into perplexity, together with this, that god had
assayed his faith in other proofs aforetimes. Fo. who, except Abraham self
would not have reputed gods promis, as touching the multitude of his
generation, and nephieus, to have been but disceite, and trompery? And yet this
natwithstanding, we ought to have Jobs patience, and his wonderful moderation,
in great price, namely his ouerturne, and fall, being so piteous as it was,
in that a man of that excellent virtue, after so many alms deeds, and so
great hospitality kept, when he neither had provoked gods wrath upon him self,
nor on his children, should with his eyes behold so miserable a misfortune, so
strange, and so unlooked for, yea and such as in long time falls not upon
the wickedest men that be. Nor for all this did he not, as commonly men wont to
do, neither judged virtue vnauaylable, ne yet reputed his former life well led,
to have been spent in vain. Each of these therefore, we must not praise only,
but follow also, and do after their virtue. But some will say, nay: they were
men that passed. Ye truly: they passed, and were meruaylous men. Natheles at
our hands is required a greatter religion, then at theirs was, whoo folowid
but the old form of lyuinge only. For unless your justice be far more
habundant, then that of the Scribes, and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

Therefore in any wise use we moderation, and calling to our mind, these, and
those things, which of the general resurrection, and of these holy men have
been repetid, let us ever caulme our minds, not only when cause of mournyng is
obiectid unto us, but also when wear fre from any manner sorrow. For to the same
purpose I at this present, what time none (as I think) is in sorrow, have yet
grounded my theme thereupon, that when we have just cause of doole, yet being
armed with remembrance hereof, we may receive comefort accordingly. That like as
soldiers in time of peace, do practice feats of war, that when war is
ones proclaimed, and the time requires expertnes, they may then at neade
show furthe their conning, learned in time of rest. So likewise, prepare we
both our weapons, and medecines, all being yet quiet, that if at any time these
great troubles, miseries, or sorrows do assault us. We on the other side being
well armed, and strongly defensed, against all the dyuels bruntes, may with
much maistrie repulse them back, and sheld our selfs, with gods word, right
reason, and example taking at the good.

For in so doing, we may led this life in much tranquillity of mind, and
afterward be partners of heauins kingdom, with CHRIST JESUS, unto whom with
the father, and the holy ghost, be all honor and imperie, world without end.

AMEN.
LONDINI in officina Thomae Bertheleti regij impressoris typ^s excusum. Anno.
M.D.XIIIII. uicesimo nono die mensis Martij.

Cum priuilegio ad impr.^mendum solum.


