THE DIVILS CHARTER A TRAGAEDIE Containing the Life and Death of Pope ALEXANDER
the sixth.

As it was plaide before the Kings Majesty, upon Candlemasse night last by his
Majesty's Servants.

But more exactly reuewed, corrected, and augmented since by the author, for
the more pleasure and profit of the Reader.

AT LONDON Printed by G. E. for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop in
Newgate market, near Christ church gate. 1607.

TO THE HONORABLE AND HIS VERY DEAR FRIENDS SIR WILLIAM HERBERT, AND SIR
WILLIAM POPE KNIGHTS, ASSOCIATES IN THE NOBLE ORDER OF THE BATHE.

BARNABE BARNES CONSECRATETH HIS LOVE.

The Tragaedie of Alexander the 6.
PROLOGVS.
GRacious spectators do not here expect,
Visions of pleasure, amorous discourse:
Our subject is of blood and Tragedy,
Murder, foul Incest, and Hypocrisy.
Behold the Strumpet of proud Babylon,
Her Cup with fornication foaming full
Of Gods high wrath and vengeance for that evil,
Which was imposd upon her by the Diuill.
Francis Guicchiardine. SEnt from the Crystal Palace of true Fame,
And bright Star Chamber of eternal souls,
Seuerd from Angels fellowship awhile,
To dwell with mortal bodies here on earth:
I Francis Guicciardine a Florentine,
Am by the powerful and commanding Muse,
(Which bears domination in our souls)
Sent down to let you see the Tragedy,
Of Roderigo Borgia lately Pope,
Called the sixth Alexander, with his son
Proud Caesar: to present unto your eyes,
Their faithless, fearelesse, and ambitious lives:
And first by what ungodly means and Art,
He did attain the Triple-Diadem,
This vision offered to your eyes declares.
He with a silver rod moves the air three times. Enter, At one door
betwixt two other Cardinals, Roderigo in his purple habit close in conference
with them, one of which he guides to a Tent, where a Table is furnished with
diverse bags of money, which that Cardinal bears away: and to another Tent
the other Cardinal, where he delivers him a great quantity of rich (...)
^^braces, with joining of hands. Exeunt Card. Manner (...) (...) ^ome from an
other place a Moncke with a magical book and (...) in private whispering with
Roderick, whom the Monk draws to a chair on midst of the Stage which he
circleth, and before i^ another Circle, into which (after semblance of reading
with (...)) p^eare exhalations of lightning an^ (...) smoke in (...) wh^reof a
diui^l in most ugly sha^e from which Roderigo tur^e^h his ^^ce, he being
coniured ^owne after more thunder and ^ire, as^ends anot^er diuill like a
Sargeant with a mace under h^s girdle: Roderigo disliketh. He discendeth:
after more thunder and ^earefull fire, ascend in r^bes ponti^icall with a
triple Crown on his head, and Cross keys in his hand: a diu^ll him ensuing
in ^lacke robes like a pronotary, a cornerd Cappe on his head, a box of Lancets
at his gir^le, a little piece of fine parchment in his hand, who being brought
unto Alexander, he willingly receives him; to whom he delivers the
writing, which seeming to read, presentl^ the Pronotary strippeth up
Alexanders sleeue and lets his arm blood in a saucer, and having taken a
piece from the Pronotary subscribeth to the parchment; delivers it: the
remainder of the blou^, the other diuill seems to suppe up; and from him
disro^bed is put the rich Cap the Tunicle, and the triple Crown set upon
Alexanders head, the Crosse-keyes delivered into his hands; and withal a
magical book: this done with thunder and lightning the diuill d^scend:
Alexander aduanceth himself, and departs.

Guicchiardine. Thus first with golden bribes he did corrupt
The purple conclaue: then by devilish art
Satan transfigur'd like a Pronotarie
To him makes offer of the triple Crown
For certain years agreed betwixt them two.
The life of action shall express the rest.
ACTVS. 1.
SCAEN. 1.
Enter marching after drums and trumpets at two several places, King Charles
of France, Gilbert Mompanseir, Cardinal of Saint Peter ad Vincula: soldiers:
encountering them Lodowik Sforza, Charles Balbiano, the King of France and
Lodowike embrace. Char. Renouned Lodowik our warlike Cousen,
Auspiciously encountered on the skirtes
Of Pie^mont, we greet you joyfully.

Lo^o. Thrice and forever most renowned Charles,
A ^aithfull tongue from an unfeigned heart
As a just herrold full of ^^uth and honor
On the behalf of forlorn ^talie
Needing and craving a^ your Princely hands,
The patronage and true protection
Of such a Potent and victorious King
Humbly salutes your royal Majesty.
The ship of which some-time well guided state,
Is through tempestious times malignity
By worthless Pilots, foolish Gouerners
Mutually factious, like to sinck through Schism
Into the bottom of the black abisme
Through th'imposition of nec^ssity.
Do not! oh do not then (most Christian Charles)
Do not forsake her holding up her hands
For succor to your royal Clemency:
Her sails are rent, mastes spent and rudder brook
And under water such wide open leakes
As under water soon will make her sink.
Having been bilg'd upon so many shelues,
So torn, so rotten and so long vnrig'd,
And playing with the waves to and again
As one not governed with help of he^^e.
One then whom nature in his vows to God*
Has tied to tender her forlone estate
With eyes foreseeing and compassionate*
Retenders her to your high Majesty,
A Christian Prince so wise so valiant:
Undoubted heir unto the Crown of Naples,
By lawful right of that great house of Aniou:
Of which your grace is well known lawful heir,
By th'issues of that Charles the first, that first
Of the blood royal of the Crown of France,
Obtained that Kingdom ages many past.
These reasons wear with Lodowik Sforza moved,
To move your Majesty with martial force
To pass these mountains to possess your own.
March then most Christian and renowned Prince,
Advance thy lilly standard potent King:
And since all skandalls are removed and cleared,
Strike up your cheerful drums and march along
In Gods name; with good auspices of Saint Denis,
I know you doubt not mine integrity:
Can more gross error rest in policy.
Then first to raise a turbulent sharp storm,
And unadvisedly to leave defense
To doubtful chance and possibilities.
To broach strong poison is too dangerous,
And not be certain of the present virtue
Which is contained in his Antidot.
Wild fire permitted without limmit burns,
Even to consume them that first kindled it:
I did advise you, I inducted you,
And Lodowike, which brought you on with honor,
Will bring you of with triumph and renown.

Char. Embrace me Cousen Sforza: by the souls
Of my forefathers I rejoice as much
In thy dear friendship and wise industry,
As in the more parteof my patrimony:
Courage together let us share all one,
In life, in death, in purchase or in none.
Enter a Messenger with letters to Charles. (...) are fornmate for Daubigny,
(...) how that the Coloneses,
(Although Alfonso did accord with them,)
Declared have themselves for France and us,
Without dissembling or hypocrisy.

Lodo. Why this was it I did expect great Charles,
Our armies and our friends have been long sown,
The ground well plowed, the blade is full come up,
And doubt not we shall have a joyful harvest.

Char. Coosen Montpansier
March with your regiments to Pontremolt.
Expect us, or from us directions,
To meet our forces, when we come near Florence,
There shall you find the Swisse with their Artillery,
Newly by sea brought unto Spetia,
Come Coosen march we cheerfully together,
Fair is the way, fair fortune, and fair wether,

Mompansier with some soldiers and Ensigns before. King Charles with Lodowike
and his soldiers after. SCENA. 2.
Enter 2. Gentlemen with Libels in their hands. 1. Gent. Nay such profane and
monstrous Sodomie,
Such obscure Incest and Adultery,
Such odious Avarice and perfidie,
Such vinolence and bruti^h gluttony,
So barren of sincere integrity.

2. Gent. In whom there is no shame nor verity,
Faith nor religion, but mere cruelty?
Immoderate ambition, guilfull treachery,
Such profanation and Apostacy*
And in all falsehood such dexterity.

1. Gent. As heavens detest, and men on earth distaster


2. Gent. Such impious sacrilege, such adulation:


1. Gent. Of all good men such detestation.


2. Gent. Such Magic skill, such diuilish incantation.


1. Gent. Apparantfigures of damned reprobation.


^. Gent. As in all thoughts is thought abomination*


1. Gent. Time will outstrip us; for the morning star,
Portends the mounting of fair Phoebus Carre.

2. Gent. Have we, for danger drawn on by delay,
Admits no time ^o tarry till clear day.

1. Gent. Fix on your Papers, these for Alexander
And his ambitious Caesar: set on yours.
Hale reverent Pasquill I doll of verity, As he fixes on his papers.
Accept these sacri^ices which we bring.

2. Gent. These be sin offerings figuring foul vice.
Oh glorious guider of the golden Spheres,
And thou that from thy precious lyricke strings
Makes Gods and men in heaven and earth to dance
With sacred touch of sweetest harmony:
Pity these times, by whose malignitie,
We loose our grace, and thou thy dignity.

1. Gent. High Muse, which whilome virtues patronized,
In whose eternal rowles of memory
The famous acts of Princes were comprised
By force of everliving History:
What shall we do to call thee back again?
True Chronicler of all immortal glory,
When here with mortal men naught is devised,
But how all stories with foul vice to stain:
So that alas thy gracious Oratorie,
Which with mere truth and virtue simpathiz'd,
Is silent; and we Poets now with pain,
(Which in Castalian Fountains dipped our quilles)
Are forced of men's impiety to plain;
And well thou wote^t, wrought against our wills,
In rugged verse, vile matters to contain:
And herein lurkes the worst of mortal ills,
That Rome (which should be Virtues Paradise)
Bare of all good, is wilderness of vice.

2. Gent. How luculent and more conspicuous
Even then the sun, in cleerest Majesty,
His vehement and more then hellish thirst
Soaring to perch upon the spire of honor
Displ^^es his bastard wings: and in that nest
Where princely Fawlcons, or Jove's kingly Birds,
Should hatch their young ones, plants his ravenous Harpies,
His graceless^, impious, and disastrous sons,
Even in the sovereign Chair of domination.

1. Gent. But chiefly one, that devilish Cardinal,
Proud Caesar, farst, with fierce impiety:
His Oracle and instrument of shame
In all nefarious plotts and practices,
Is now become as wicked as himself:
But have we now, least any should suspect us.

2. Gent. Much conference with Pasquill may detect us.


Exeunt. SCAENA. 3.
Enter Gismond di Visselli, and after him Barbarossa. Bar. Dio viguarda Signior
illustrissimo: whether in such have my noble Lord thus early?


Gis. Signior Barbarossa in happy time well encountered, for I have some
business this morning with my brother the Duke of Candie, wherein I would both
use your counsel and countenance.


Bar. My good Lord Viselli, the countenance of your devoted poor friend, is of
less value then his counsel, yet both of very small validity: such as they
be, with his life and best fortunes he sincerely sacrifices all to your
service.


Gis. Pardon me dear sir no service more then reciprocal, and in due paritie
betwixt us, and since we be so near it, let us not pass Pasquill without an
Aue: what scandalous hyerogliphickes have we here?

A. S. P. M. M. P. S. A. These are the same letters with the first beginning at
the last, Magnum Petrum Sequitur Antichristus. Phy Diabolo, our blessed
Alexander (being Saint Peeters successor) this diuilish libeller calls
Antichrist.


Bar. Pause there my Lord a little, somewhat here concerns my Lord the
Cardinal Borgia.


Gis. Read it good Barbarossa.


Bar. Alexander Caesarem suum Galero et purpura donauit vt menstruoso spiritus
sui veneno, vniuersum simul conclaue suffocaret.


Gis. Oh most intolerable abomination?


Bar. Alexander adopted his son Caesar into the fellowship of Cardinals,
that he with the menstruous poison of his breath might choke the whole
Conclaue.


Gis. By the blessed alter of Saint Peeter this villainy surpasses patience.


Bar. My Lord here is a long libell.


Gis. Read it good Barbarossa: more mischeife of my wife nay read it.


Bar. Quid mirum? Romae facta est Lucretia Thais,
Vnica Alexandri filia, sponsa nurus.
The same in effect inseueth.
Welcome good Post from Rome tell us some news,
Lucrece is turned Thayis of the stews:
In whom her father Alexander saw,
His only daughter, wife, and daughter in law,
Shall I read on my Lord? here is much more.

Gis. Nay read out all, it is but of a whore.


Bar. Francesco di Gonsaga was the first,
That married Lucrece Alexanders daughter,
And yet the Pope those bains of bridale burst,
And made of marriage sacrament a laughter,
His reason was because that fellow poor,
Lackt maintenance for such a noble whore.

Gis. Malignant aspect of ungracious stars,
Why have you poynted at my miseries?

Bar. Have patience good my Lord and here the rest,


Gis. Patienza per forza, but this wounds to th'quick.


Bar. John Sforza now Lord Maerques of Pescare,
Was second husband to this ioly dame,
Of natures faculties he being bare,
In like state with his predecessor came,
(...) he, when he should have writ his mind,
Paper well might; but pen or incke none find.

Gis. Oh villamies of monstrous people,
Fashions and times deformed and unseasonable,

Bar. Yet my Lord a little have patience in your own cause


Gis. Malice perform thy worst least coming late,
I with anticipation cross that fate. Read it, toot man.

Bar. Gismond Viselli, nobly descended,
Is for his shameful match much discommended.
For never was the shameless Fuluia,
Nor Lais noted for so many wooers,
Nor that unchaste profuse Sempronia.
A common dealer with so many dooers,
So proud, so faithless, and so void of shame,
As is new brodell bride Lucretia,
Take to thee Gismond both the skorne and shame,
And live long ^ealous of Lucretia.
With pushing horns keep out all comers in,
For now thy mortal miseries begin.

Gis. Mortal miseries? but we are all mortal,
Fortune I scorn thy malice, and thy meed,
Keep them up safe that I may show them to his holiness,
Is this the license which our city Rome
Has given to beastly Bardes, and satyrists,
Ribbaldly Rimesters, and malicious curs,
To leave no state of Church nor seculer,
Free from their ordure, and polution.
Good Barbarossa bear me Company:
Exile and Punishment for such base poets,
And str^pes with wiery scourges were too little.
Which breathing here in Rome, and taking grace*
From the fair Sunshine of this hemisphere,
Contaminate that air with their vile breath.
Obumbrating this light by which they live,
If these were truth: this times impiety,
May soon sincke down under the diety. Exeunt.

SCAEN. 4.
Alexander in his study with books, coffers, his triple Crown upon a cushion
before him. Alex. With what expense of money plate and jewels
This Miter is attayn'd my Coffers witness:
But Astaroth my covenant with thee
Made for this soul more precious then all treasure,
Afflicts my conscience, O but Alexander
Thy conscience is no conscience; if a conscience,
It is a ^coprouse and poluted conscience.
But what? a coward for thy conscience?
The diuill is witness with me when I sealed it
And cauteriz'd this conscience now scard up
To banish out faith, hope and charity;
Using the name of Christian as a stale
For Arcane plots and intricate designs
That all my misty machinations
And Counsels held with black Tartarian fiends
Were for the glorious sunshine of my sons;
That they might mount in equal parallel
With golden majesty like Saturnes son
To darte down fire and thunder on their foes.
That, that was it, which I so much desired
To see my sons through all the world admired,
In spite of grace, conscience, and Acharon
I will rejoice and triumph in my Charter.
Alexander reads. Sedebis Romae Papa, summa in foelicitate tui et
Filiorum vine; 11. et 7. dies 8. post moriere.
Prouiso quod nunquam te signs tremende
Crucis signo.

Astaroth. Was ^ di^ill provides in his covenant
I should not cross my self at any time;
I never was so ceremonious.
Well this rich Miter thought it cost me dear
Shall make me live in pomp whilst I live here.
Holla Bernardo? He tincketh a bell.
Call hither my two sons the Duke of Candy and the
Cardinal of Valence.
Happy those sons whom fathers love so well
That for their sakes they dare adventure hell.
Enter the Duke of Candy and Caesar Borgia striving for priority. Come my dear
sons the comfort of my life
Yours is this earthly glory which I hold.
Cannot the spacious bounds of Italy
Divided equally contain you both?
From France and Swisserland I will begin
With Naples and those Towns in Peadmont
And all the signories in Lombardy
From Porto di Volane to Sauona
And Genes on the otherside of Italy
Upon the Mediterranean toward Greece;
Allotted Candy for his patrimony.
And in Romania from Pontremoli
And Prato to fair Florence; and from thence
In Tuskany within the River Narre
And fruitful Arno those sweet Provinces
Even to Mont Alto, Naples, Policastro
And Petrasilia in Calabria
The furthest home of Italy for Caesar.
Gain dubble strength with your united loves
Love one another boys you shall be Kings:
Fortune has been auspicious at my birth
And will continue gracious to mine end.
Castor and Pollux would not live in Heaven
Vnlesses they might be stellified together,
You for a little-turfe of earth contend
When they together shine the welkin cleeres:
And gentle gales bear fourth the winged fails,
But when they shine a part they threaten storms
And hiddeous tempests to the Mariners
Castor would not be called but Pollux Castor
And Castor Castors Pollux: so my Candy
Be (...) Candy, Caesa^, Candies Caesar,
With perfect love, dear boys love one another
So (...) shall be s^^engt^en^d by his brother.

(...) M^s^ blessed reverend and renowned father,
The lou^ by nature to my brother Candy,
(...) me sometimes in plainer sort
To clee^^ my conscience issuing from pure love,
It is mere love which mooues these passions,
When I do counse ^or advise your good.

Ca. I know dear brother when your counsel tends
Unto my good it issues from pure love.

Cae. As when I tax your princely conscience
Like an vnpitted penetentiarie,
Brother with reverence of his Holiness
You^ ^eart is too much spic'd with honesty.

Alex. I and I fear me he will ^ind it so,
Your brother Caesar tells you very true:
You must not be so ceremonious
Of oaths and honesty, Princes of this world
Are not p^ickt in the books of conscience,
You may not break your promise for a world:
Learn this one lesson look ye mark it well,
It is not always needful to keep promise,
For Princes (forced by mere necessity
To pass their faithful promises) again
Forced by the same necessity to break promise.

Cae. And for your more instructions learn these rules!
If any Cedar, in your forest spread,
And ouer-pee^e your branches with his top,
Provide ^n axe to cut him at the root,
Suborne informers or by snares entrap
That King of Flies within the Spiders Web;
Or else ensnare him in the Lions toils.
What though the multitude applaud his fame:
Because the vulgar have wide open ears
Mutter amongst them and possess their hearts
That his designements wrought against the state
By which yea wound him with a public hate.
So let him perish, yet seem pitiful
Cherrish the weakness of his stock and race
As if alone he meritted disgrace.
Suffer your Court to mourn his funerals,
But burn a bone-fire for him in your Chamber.

Alex. Caesar delivers Oracles of truth.
It Is well said Caesar, yet attend a little,
And bind them like rich bracelets on thine arms
Or as a precious jewel at thine ear.
Suppose two factious Princes both thy friends
Ambitious both, and both competitors,
Advance in hostile arms against each other
Join with the strongest to confound the weak
But let your wars foundation touch his Crown,
Your nearest Charity concerns your self;
Else let him perish; yet seem charitable.
As if you were merely composed of virtue:
Believe me Candy things are as they seem,
Not what they be themselves; all is opinion:
And all this world is but opinion.
Look what large distance is twixt Heaven and Earth,
So many leagues twixt wealth and honesty:
And they that live puling upon the fruits
Of honest consciences; starve on the Common.
Caesar can tell thee this in ample sort.
And Caesar love him, love him heartily;
Though mildness do possess thy brother Cand^e,
It is a gentle vice, vicining virtue.

Can. Under correction of your Holiness,
Those wars which virtue leu^es against v^ce,
Are only known to some particulers
Which have them written in their consciences.
Those are the same they seem and in such wars
Your son shall make remonstrance of his valor,
And so become true Champion of the Church.

Caes It is the precious Ornament of Princes
To be strong hearted, proud, and valiant,
But well attempted with callidity,
Brother with reverence of his holiness
(Whose sacred words like blessed Oracles
Have pointed at your prudence) Caesar would
Have given the like advise: but (in conclusion)
Undoubtedly to work out thy confusion.

Enter Barnardo. Ale. Upon my blessing follow Caesar's counsel;
It tends to thy glory.

Bern. Most blessed Lord,
Ambassadors from Ferdinande of Naples
Arrived here attend your holiness.

Ale. This is a welcome messenger for Godfrey,
To make a marriage with the Lady Saunce:
And Can^y for so much as this requires
A ioyfu^l entertainment; take that honor
And bid him welcome with due complements.
Show courteous, language laudable apporte;
Let them be feasted in more sumpteous sort
Then ordinary messengers of state:
Observe his speeches, fathom his designs;
And for I know thy nature tractable,
And full of courtesy: show courtesy
And good entreaty to them: Gentle Candie
Now show thy self a politician;
I need not give thee large instructions;
For that I know thee wise* and honorable
Greet them from us: Caesar shall at a turn
Give correspondence to thy courtesy:
I as well sits with my state and honor
Within these ten days will admit them hearing:
Mean while learn out by lore of policy
The substance of their motions, that we may
Be better arm^d to give them resolution.

Can. Your holiness in this shall see my skill,
To do you service, Exit Candy.

Alex. Caesar now to thee.
This task upon thy shoulders only leanes;
I rest upon thee Caesar: were it not
That thou must second it, or first it rather
I durst not trust such things of consequence,
To feeble spirits: therefore from our stables
Six Persian Coursers armed and furnished
With rich Caparisons of gold and Pearl,
With six rich Complet Armors for their saddles,
And such a Cabbinet of precious Jewels
As we shall choose within to morrow morning
Present from us in token of our love.
Let for no cost in sumptuous banqueting,
Believe me Caesar sometimes at a banquet,
More ground is got then at a bloody battle.
Worm out their humors, fathom their delights,
If they delight in that which Naples couets,
Fine, witty, loue-sick, brave, and beautiful,
Eloquent, glancing, full of fantasies.
Such Sugar hearted Sirens, or such Commets,
As shine in our imperial state of Rome,
True pick-locks in close wards of policy,
Present them with the Paragons of Rome:
And spare not for a Million in expense,,
So long as here they keep their residence.

Caesar. Caes^r in such a case will prooe true Caesar,
Wise, frank, and honorable.

Alex. I doubt it not:
And Caesar, (as thou do embrace my love,
More then the world besides) accomplish this,
And we shall Caesar with high blessings bliss, Exit

Caes. By this time is my fair Lucretia,
Befitted for a business of blood,
Nearly concerning her estate and mine. Exit.

SCAE. 5.
Enter Lucretia alone in her night gown untired, bringing in a chair, which
she planteth upon the Stage. Luc. Lucretia cast off all servile fear,
Revenge t^y se^^e upon thy jealous husband
T^^t (...) thine honor, wronged thy bed:
F^^re not; with resolution act his death:
L^^ (...) ^ace in policies
(...) now prove Caesar's Sister,
(...) ^^y s^ratagems as he:
(...) ^aue found examples in all times.
(...) thou m^lt ^he (...) c^ll to mind,
(...) wrath f^ll fury,
(...) indeous (...):
(...) ^^^ther of her only son,
A (...) Dau^hters (all but one)
(...) i^ one night, their husbands sleeping slew.
My (...) as ^ust as theirs, my heart as resolute,
My hands as ready. G^smond I come,
Ha^ld on with fury ^o revenge these wrongs
And love imp^^son'd with thy jealousy,
I have de^ised such a cu^ious s^are,
As (...) never yet devised,
To gra^pe h^s arms v^able to res^st,
D^aths i^s^ruments enclosed in these hands.
^hee kne^leth down. You (...) Dau^h^ers of gum Erebus,
Which spit out venge^^ce from your vipe^ous heirs,
Inf^^e a three-(...) g^^ in these arms;
I^^^ble (...) ^r^ng indurate heart,
To consumate the pl^^ o^ my revenge.
She rises an^ walks passionately. Enter G^smond di Viselli untrussed in
his N^ght-cap, tying his points. Here comes the sn^^ect of my Tragedy.

Gis. What my Lucretia walking alone?
Th^^e solitary ^assions should bewray
Some coffeehouse, and those gracious eyes
Seem to be moon'd with anger, not with love:
Tell me Lucretia, may thy Gismond know?

Luc. Demaundst thou the cause miutious Gismond?
When like a reduse (shut up from ^he world)
I live close prisoner to thy jealousy?
The Esperian Dragons kept not with more watch,
The golden ^ruit then thou my fatal beauty:
Thou would exclude me from the s^ght of Sun,
But that his beams break t^rough some ^^cu^sies
Thou woul^st d^bar^e me ^^om the common air,
(...) that against my will I ^uck it in,
And breat^ it out in sealding sighs again:
Were I in N^xos (...) no no^se is hea^d
But N^m^^es ^age (...) ^^ghts but ruthelesse rocks.
Or in the Libi^n ^eser^s or ex^hang'd
This Hemisph^^e o^ Rome for (...) Int^^odes,
We^e ^ot so g^^^^ous as to dwell in Rome,
Ba^^^h'd (...) and conference ^f friends.

G^s. (...) t^ou my ie^lous^e? may blame thy beauty,
And love im^^^son'd in those amo^ous looks:
^ea^e the (...) ef^ect^o^s on thy face,
Least he more wondering at thy precious eyes,
Then any Nymphs which he most hono^ed,
Should bear thee to some other Paradise,
And ^ob me, silly man, of this worlds joy.
I ^eare the winds least amorous Jove in them,
(Envying such precious nature among^t men)
With extreme passion hence should hurry thee.
Oh love is full of fea^e all things I fear,
By which I might be frustrate of thy love.

Luc. Scoffst thou me Gis^ond wi^h continual taunts?
Oh God of heavens, shall ^ both suffer shame
And scorn, with such dispisd captivity.

Gis. Here in the presence of the powers in Heaven,
I do not speak ^n scorn, but in mere love:
And further Lucrese, (of thy clemency,
For love, and b^autie* both are rich in bounty)
F^rgiue me what is past, and I will swear,
Never to vex thee with more ie^lousie.

Luc. Thou will so s^eare thy self: Gismond come hither?
Sit down and answer me this question. Gismond sits down in a Chair,
Lucretia on a stool beside him.
When I bestowed on thee this diamond
A Iewe^l once held precious as my life;
And with it ca^t away my self on thee
Did t^ou not promi^e to ma^ntaine mine honor,
(...) in word nor deed to give suspect
O ^^y (...) and have thou not since then
In (...) of my ne^^es^ Noble friends
(...) a (...) for my lightness^?
(...) his mo^y up
So (...) and sight of them?

(...) Wh^^ (...) thou did bestow this Diamond
I ^ad a (...) luster in mine eye:
And wa^ (...) o^ virtue, when I vowed
To ma^ntaine that, which was impossible:
B^t (...) that time this stone has had a s^aw,
(...) within the ring, his foil grown dim,
The ve^tue vani^^^ and the lust lost.

She grasp^th him in h^s chair. Luc. I can no longer brook these base rebukes.
These (...) riddles and close libellings

(...). Oh help I am strangled.


She stops his mouth, pulls out his dagger and offers to gagge him. Lu.
Peace w^etched villain, then reciue this quickly:
Or by the living powers of heaven i will kill thee.
She ^agge^^ him, and takes a pape^ out of he^ boosome. Take pen and incke:
it is not to make thy will;
For if then wilt subscribe, I will not kill.
It Is but to clear those scandalls of my shame,
With which thy jealousy did me defame.
Gismonde subscri^eth. So now that part is played, what follows now?
Thou Ribbauld, Cuckcold Rascal, Libeller,
Pern^cious Leche^ void of a^l performance;
Per^u^ious Coxcombe, ^oule, now for those wrongs
Which no great spirit could well tolerate
Come I, with mortal vengeance on thy soul.
Take this for sclandring of his Holiness
My blessed father and my brother Caesar She stabbeth
With incest: this take for my brother Candy:
And this for Noble Sphorza whom thou wrongest;
And since the time is short I will be short:
For locking up of me, calling me whore,
Setting esp^alls tending at my tail;
Take this and this and this to make amends. three sta^s together.
And put thee from thy pains;
She vnbindeth him, lays him on the grownd, puts the ^agger in his hand, a
p^per on his knee* and taking certain papers out of his pocket puts in
others in their steed: and co^^ai^th away the chair Now will my father
Alexander say
That I did take the best and safest way,
And Caesar will app^oue it with his heart,
That Lucrere has performed a cunning part.
If others ask who Gismonde killed or why
It was himself repenting jealousy. Exit Lucretia.

Barbarossa knocks at a door. Bar. Holla within there?
Why ^ellowes?

S^ruin^man. Here my Lord.


Bar. What is my Lord Viselli stirring yet?
My Lord the Pope expects him and the ambassadors
Of Naples crave his company. Enter Bar. and Seruingman.

Ser. My Lord I have not seen him yet this morning.


Bar. Is not your Lady Lucrce stir^ing yet?


Ser. No my good Lord I think she be not yet come from her chamber, her
custom is not to be seen so soon.


Bar. It Is well, t^s well, let her take case in gods name,
But make have call up my Lord thy master honest fellow.

Ser. Wi^h patience of your Lordship I will speak:
For three days space I did find in my Lord
Passionate motions, and strange melancholy
'T may be his solitude has drawn him forth,
I will first look the garden and the galleries.

Bar. Do my good friend I will expect thee in this parler here?
As Barbarossa goes on he finds Viselli murdered upon the ground, and
starteth. Fellow come ba^ke, come back, fellow come back:
Your Lo^d (...) mu^t^red here call up your Lady;
Call i^ your ^ellow se^uants. D^h anta Croce.
(...) g^asped in his fatal ^and
(...) ^ome violence, wrought on himself:
(...) much vio^ate her self?
(...) ^ought by bloody Borgi^es race?
(...) the (...) hyp^chrisie,
Ius^^^e (...) ^^me and in^eru^able
Re^^ale^^t, o^ (...) it in thy me^cy.

E^ter Lu^re^ia with Motici^l^. Luc. Where (...) ^y Lord? my dea^^ L^^d?


B^r. Fai^y Lady.
Approach no^ near this ^^th^ull s^e^tacle;
Approach not near th^s spe^ac^e o^ bl^ud,
This ^u^hfull spect^cle of bl^ud and death,
Lease suddain^ horror of these bleeding wounds
Wound thy d^stracted sp^rits to pale death.

L^c. Wha^ honor or what mo^tall spectacle.
Upon such sudden has astonished me?
Oh my dear Lord: Visell^ speak to me:
Oh most disastrous accident and hour;
Ay me most wretched and unfortunate,
My dearest* (...) the treasu^e of my life,
The sweetest paradi^e of my best hopes,
Is murth^ed^i^^k^ out the murderers
Leave not vnsear^cht a corner n^r a Crany:
Lock up the ^otes there least that homicide
Escape us in t^i^ passion --

B^r. Hau^ patience Lady
Heavens will reveal the murder do^bt it not.

Lu^. Ah Noble Barbaro^^a much I fea^e
Now with t^ese eyes I see the murderer,
S^aind wi^^ the guilt of nature; ^h my Lord
You l^ttle kn^w that these w^^ke w^mans hands
Twice ^escued have the v^ole^^e o^ his;
From killing of himself before this time:
Oh f^e upon the diuill, and melancholy;
Which leave me desolate a forelorne widow.

Mot. Madam these papers will bewray some matter.


Luc. Oh might I find an other murderer.


Bar. Th^se do contain some matter read them Lady.


Luc. My heart swollen up with sorrow, lends no light
Unto mine eyes, nor force unto my tongue
To see one letter, or to read one word,
I pray you read it good Lord Barbarossa.
Barbarossa reads. I Gismond de Viselli through desperate grief conceived in
jealousy (which I bare against my Lady Lucrecia) having found out by much
trial, and examina^ion her faithfulness and innocence, make this my
protestation as the last piacular oblation to her for those wrongs that with
mine own unfortunate hands I have ended my li^e, desring her and all others to
forgive me, and pray for me, subscribed with mine own hand, and sealed with my
seal. Gismon^ de Viselli.


Il vel^u^ d^amore, A me traf^se il cuor^. Mot. Oh Lord of heavens have pardon
on his soul.


Luc. This is his hand and seal, speak now my Lord:
Did not I soon disclose the murderer?
Told I not that the mur^herer was present?
Ah never never shall I live to see. she sounds.

Bar. Comfort you self dear Lady God will send succor
Your hu^band has paid dearly for these wrongs.

Luc. Give me my Lord again, death shall not have him,
Come my dear G^smond* come aga^ne my joy:
Delay me not least I prevent thy love
I cannot brook delay's, L^crece shall follow.

Lucrece offers to stab her self Barbarossa preuenteth her. Bar. Tempt not
Gods justice Lady, fall to prayer,
Help, in the take your Lord out of her sight.

Luc. Oh my dear friends that see my miseries,
I you beseech in dea^est tenderness
Bring in the body of my dearest Lord;
That I before my death may (with these eyes)
Behold him honored in his obsequies.

Bar. And I will bear these papers to his Holiness,
Whose sorrow will exceed for Gismonds death. Exeunt.

Enter Guicchiardin. Cho. Thus foul suspicion, fear and jealousy
Of shame, dishonor, and his wives hot lust,
Has seaz'd upon Visell; whose revenge,
Was to restrain Lucrece from Company*
But swelling pride, and lust, both limitles,
Answered his loving fear and shame with death.
Attend the sequel. Now successively
(After such warlike preparations,
So many firm hopes found in Italy)
King Charles with fifteen hundred men at arms,
Three thousand Archers, with six thousand Swisse.
French men, and Gascons twice as many more,
With martial measures, over Piemont
Treads a long march after his drums and fife,
With Milans force, and now his trumpets hard,
Unto the gates of Rome give fresh allarms,
Unto the Pope, who stirs up in arms,

ACT. 2.
SCAE. 1.
Enter Alexander with a Lintstock in his hand; with him Caesar Borgia, Caraffa,
Bernardo Piccolomini, the Castilian, Gassper de fois Mr. of the ordinance.
Alex. Castillian take five hundred harguebusse,
Two hundred Arbalastes, and fortify,
Upon the tower of Saint Sebastian,
Affronting that port where proud Charles should enter,
Called Santa Maria di Pop^lo.

Pic. Our soldiers ready be with match in cock,
To Attend this service, and our scurriers,
Are now returned having discryd King Charles,
Hi^ ensigns and his Cornets proudly mand,
With plumed regiments, and troops of horse,
Marching in glory to the gates of Rome. Exit Piccolo.

Alex. Bravely bring on your companies bold hearts,
Gaspar de Fois are those two Basiliskes,
Al^eady mounted on their carriages?

Gasp. They be.


Alex. We make you master of our Ordinance, He delivers his Linstock.
And on the Turret of Saint Adrian.
Plant six more Cannon, and four Culuerings,
Four Lizards, and eight Sacres, with all speed,
Take Gunners with you to the Cittadell,
Powder and shot, with Ladles for their charge,
See none be wanting; set them to their task.
Have a good care your Pyoners work hard,
To further your fortifications. Exit Gasper.

Caes. Pleases your Holiness to give me leave,
It fitteth well with our own purposes,
To give Charles entrance, and without restraint,
Least he by rigor should usurp that leave,
Which to resist were vain and dangerous.
Believe me Father we must temporize.

Caraff. Besides you see how the Calabrian Duke,
Out of the Port of Saint Sabastian,
Not one hour past, has issued and left Rome.
Now though you do suspect, conceal all doubts:
For you shall find this sure and commonly,
Dangers accompany suspicion,

Alex. We will embrace that course, but with your leave,
In Castle Angelo Capitulate:
Standing (as best befits us) on our guarde.

Enter Piccolomini, Gasper de Fois, with small shot En^igne, Drums and
Trumpets. Piccol. It Is time your Holiness took to your guard,
For Potent Charles (like one that conquereth)
Armed at all pieces, in his plumed caske,
And with a Lance resting upon his thigh,
Already with his forces has possessed
The suberbs, and is now come to the gates.

Ale. We are resolved: Gasper de fois take heed,
On pain of death no soldier be so bold
As to dischardge one piece or arbalast,
Before th'alarme being given from them,
We with a culuering from Castle Angelo,
Proclaim hostility: troop on a pace,
Take we what fortune peace or war affords,
The worst of resolution is with swords.

Exeunt with drums and trumpet^. Enter with drums and trumpets: King Charles,
Cardinal Saint Peter ad vincula, and Ascanio, Lodwick Sforza: Mompansier
ensigns, soldiers. Charles Thus far with much applause in joyful martch,
With good success and hopeful augurie,
We marched have within the walls of Rome,
Not little wondering that his Holiness,
Does give such slender welcome to our troops.

Lod. Your majesty may well perceive how fear,
And iealeous judgment of a wounded conscience,
Works hard in Alexander.

Asc. And how foxe-like.
(Houlding newtrality the surest guard)
He coopes himself in Castle Angelo.

Mon. Pleases your maistie to give a summons,
Unto the Castle for some parliance,
Upon such articles as were set down,

Char. Come we will touch him, summon forth a parle.
sound drum answer a trumpet. Enter Piccolomini upon the walls. What office
bear you marching on those walls,
We made no summons to confer with you.

Pic. Most Christian prince pleases your mightines,
I am Castillian of Saint Angelo, Under his Holiness.

Char. To bid defiance to our forces?


Pic. Noe most gracious Lord.
But to salute you from his Holiness.

Mon. What is he sick?


Pic. Not very well disposed,
S. Pe. ad vin. Nor ever was, nor will be well disposed.

Cha, An other summons for his Holiness, Exit Piccol, Sound drums, answer
trumpet.


Alexander upon the walls in his pontificalls betwixt Caesar Borgia and Caraffa
Cardinals, before him the Duke of Candie bearing a sword after them
P^ccolomini Gasperdefois. Ale. Most Christian Charles, here I salute your grace,
Bidding you peaceably welcome to Rome,
If you bring peace along with you to Rome.

Char. In filial Love I thank your Holiness,
We little thought it our most holy father,
That our alegeance to the Church of Rome,
Which we with all our predecessors tendered,
Should have enforced you to take sanctuary.

Alex. Son Charles know then we took not to this place,
In fear as to some refuge or asyle:
But for as much as news were brought in post,
That you with all your forces did approach.
Armed and in hostile manner to this City,
The Conclaue thought it fit tendering the safty,
Of holy Church, and sacred privilege,
To know your meaning first, and then with pomp,
To make your welcome in Saint Peter's palace,
In the best fashion with due ceremonies.

Char. Know then most holy father what we would,
Having in tedious marched from France thus far,
Past with our forces God still guiding us,
(As we be deeply bound by laws of nature.
And reason to work surely for our right)
We left noe busy doubts, nor obstacles,
Which might prevent us in our just imprease,
Hence was it that we did Capitulate,
So strictly with the crafty Florentines,
Whom we well knew favored Alphonsoes part.
And this made Ve^ice join in league with us.
Yet having notice that your Holiness.
Both with Alphonso (that usurps my Crown)
And his son Ferdinand drue deeper in
Upon considerations of more weight;
We thought it good to take France in our way.

Lod. And there to crave some certain Cautions
Of your indifferency to his just title
Had in the Crown of Naples: therefore first
We do require (if you these parties tender,
(As your late letters did importe) yield up
In Caution of your good intent to France;
This Castle which you now retain against us.

Can. Why Lodowick? the wethercocke is turned,
The wind stands fair, but how long will that hold?
So may we put in hazard our whole Church
The dear estate of Christ's flock militant
And bring confusion unto Christendom.

Alex. So may you seize upon the Churches rights,
If that we should refer all to your trust.

Can. This is Saint Peter's bul-warke; for my part
Here I will die ere I surrender it.

Cha. Now find I true which common brute proclameth
Of your bad meanings and hypochrisie:
But I refer your conscience to that Judge
Whom (if my conscience harber any thought
To wrong the Church of God, in any thing)
I call in justice to revenge on me.

Cae. Renowned Charles, suppose we should surrender*
How may we be secured that you will
Restore it, after your imprease at Naples.

Char. The faith and honor of a Christian King.


Ale. Your faith and honor? stay most Christian Charles
Men will not yield up Castles upon words
Unless their states, and lives grow desperate.

Mount. Why make we longer parlee with this Pope
Whose false-hood is so much that neither oath,
Nor honesty can purchase place with him.

Lodo. Who never yet in cause of con^equence
Ha^h k^pt his promise.

Char. Tell us, will ye grant?


Alex. What should we grant most Christian King of France
And tell me truly (were it your own case)
Whether you would (on such slight promises)
Accord to such uneven conditions?

Char. We did not think our royal promises
Had been so slightly censured in your heart:
But since we find your infidelities
We must requite it with extremity,
Cousen Mountpanseir.

Mount. My Lord.


Char. Forthwith cause ten brass pieces with their shot
And powder to be drawn out of Saint Marks;
Such as you find most fit for battery.
You will not here us now, we speak so low:
Standing aloft you proudly scorn inferiors;
We Will send our minds, written in fiery notes.

Caraf. Give doubtful answers, be not peremptory
Least through your heat, his rage exsaperate.

Caes. Offer unto him on his Princely word,
The strength of Terracina for a pledge.

Alex. Victorious Cha^les, such is my trust and love
That neither fear of force nor violence
Could any ways induce me to suspect you.
Hence came it that the ports of Rome were opened
(At our behests) to give you guestning.
Accept us therefore with our promises,
Which we shall under hand and seal confirm
Not any way to Cross your action.

Char. If you will yield up Castle Angelo
Resolve us presently without delays?

Caes. Because it is Saint Peeters Cittadell
The conclaue is in doubt to make surrender.

Char. You will not yield then?


Can. We cannot, nor we will not yield it up.


Char. Why then a parle with our ordinance.


Sound drums and trumpets: Alexander with his company of the walls
ordinance goeing of (after a little skirmish within) he summons from the
Castle with a trumpet; answer to it below; Enter Alexander upon the walls as
before. Alex. What come ye to make pillage of the Church,
Which held you dear as her chief Champion?
For bear your violence in the name of God:
Fearing the scourge, and thunder from above,
Ou^ offers are both just and reasonable.

Caes. Pieces which are of more valid^ty
We mean to tender to your Majesty.

Char. What are those pieces you would tender us.


Alex. To render presently the Cittadells
Of Terracina, Cinita Vecchia, and Spoleto.

Char. And we receive them very ^hankfully.
S. P ad vin. Our voices of the co^claue pass, that Charles
Shall Be possessed of Castle Angelo.

As. And if your meaning with your words accord
We dare engage our souls for resurrender.

Ale. Your souls? foh foh they stinck in sight of God and man,
Your souls? why they be sold to Lucifer,
Your consciences are of so large a last
That you would sell Saint Peter's Patrimony,
As Esau did his heritage for broth.

Pee ad Vi. Thou most prophaine and impious Moabite;
So full of vices and abominable,
No Pope but Lucifer in Peter's Chair.

As. Renowned Charles pull down this Antichrist;
Advance some worthy father in his place.
Your fame shall live with all posterities
Who from a wicked Bishops tyranny
Infranchised the Church of God misguided;
Even as (in this worlds worthy memories)
The names of Pepin and King Charlemaine
Your predecessors, were eternized
For helping good Popes, Saints of Holy life,
O^t of ungodly persecutions.

Lodo. A Pope by nature full of fraud, and pride;
Ambitious, auaritious, shameless, diuilish,
And that and which your experience testifies)
One that with mortal malice hates the French:
By whom this reconcilation made
Was more in fear and hard necessity
Then faithful inclination, or good will.

Alex. Iscraiot, reprobate apostata,
I charge thee to desist and make submission
With penance to the Mother Church of Rome
On pain of everlasting reprobation.

Asca. Blasphemous exorsist, here are no diuills
Which thou can conjure, with thy diuilish spirit.
We charge thee render up that triple Crown
Which most ungodly man thou do vsurp.
Those robes pontifical which thou prophanest,
Saint Peter's Chair wherein (like Antichrist)
Thou do advance thy self thou man of sin.

Sa. P. ad Vi. Saint Peeter does make challenge to those keys,
Which (in those hands defiled with blood and bribes)
Thou like a profane deputy do hold.

Ascan. That sword (with which thou sholdst strike Antichrist)
Thou like proud Antichrist converted have
Upon the members of Christ's chosen flock;
Saint Paul demaundes his sword, Peter his keys:

Alex. Forbear your blasphemies, what know ye not
Christ's Vicar general chosen on earth?
Have not I power to bind and loose men's sins,
And souls, on earth, in hell, and purgatory?
Come take Saint Peter's Chair proud heretics;
Here take this triple Crown, oh you would take it:
But he, that made it, did not for you make it.
Ascanio thou would have these Golden keys;
Here take them with my vengeance on thy head, He throws his k^ies.
And Pseudo Paulus would have Saint Paul's sword,
Ordained for his decollation.
Son Charles (since we capitulato with you)
Me thinks you should not suffer these t'affront us.

Char. Forbear your idle velletations,
Ang^ing and rubbing up the festred scarres
O^ wrath inueterate, and mortal quarrels,
We come not here to foster factions,
All are in one accorded, all are friends.
But yet most Holy-Father, let me crave,
Two favors more, both very reasonable;
First that you pardon both these Cardinals,
And other Barons which partake with me.
Then that the brother of great Baiaset,
That fled from Rhodes to France, and last to Rome,
With the protection of Pope Innocent
Called Gemen Ottoman, may be delivered
Into my hands, when after-time shall serve
For my best vantage in those holy wars,
Which we pretend against the Turks here-after.

Alex. The sun shall never set upon my wrath;
That Oily Lamp of blessed Charity
Shall not extinguish in my zealous heart:
He that knows all, knows this I cannot falter
With any brother, all are faithful friends:
Be but submissiue, mild, and penitent,
And all is past, as all had been well meant.
Now touching Gemen Ottoman, son Charles,
When you shall undertake those godly wars,
I will deliver him as willingly
As you demand: and with a cheerful heart,
Praising your godly zeal on Christ's behalf,
And praying for your good success in war.

Char. I thank your Holiness.


L^dw: These quarrels are as happily determined
As we could wish: call for an Actuarie,
And let a Charter Bipartite be drawn
Betwixt you: to confirm this amity.
And now most blessed Father I beseech,
That I may show the duty which belongs
Unto this place, and see Apostolic.

Alex. We will regreete your presence presently.


Drums and Trumpets: Charles and his company make a guard, Gasper de Fois,
Piccolominy, Caesar, Caraffa, Cardinals, a Friar with a holy water-pot casting
water; the Duke of Candie with a sword, Astor Manfredy supporting Alexanders
train, all bow as the Pop^ marches solemnly through, who crosses them with
his fingers. Alexander being set in state, Caesar Borgia, and Caraffa advance
to fetch King Charles, who being presented unto the Pope, kisseth his foot,
and then advancing two degrees higher, kisseth his cheek: then Charles
brings S. Peter ad Vincula, and Ascanio, which with all reverence kiss his
feet, one of them humbly delivering up his Crosse-keyes, which he rec^^ueth,
blessing them and the rest of Charles his company: The Drum and Fife still
sounding. Alex. Son Charles, your welcome is as acceptable,
As ever was Kings presence into Rome:
To morrow we will with the power of heaven,
Together celebrate a solemn Mass:
After the Senior, Bishop, Cardinal,
You must take place: and as our custom is,
Shall give us water when we celebrate:
This done, we will bestow some time in pleasures.
A guard for the Cardinals, French King, Friar and Pope: Enter with a solemn
flourish of Trumpets, after whom the guard troopeth, with Drums and Fife. Enter
Guicchiardine. Here leave we Charles with pompous ceremonies,
Feasting within the Vaticane at Rome:
From thence to Naples, where the peoples hatred
Conceived against the former Kings, made way
For him, without resistance to the crown.
This done, he marches back again for France,
And Ferdinand does repossesse his state.
Mean while King Charles sick of an Apoplexy,
Dies at Ambois: the Duke of Orleance,
Lewis the twelfth conioyntly knitting force,
Does march in arms with Ferdinand of Spain,
These regaine Naples and divide that realm,
But this breeds mortal war betwixt them both,
The wily Pope dissembles at all hands,
These quell only concerns him and Caesar. Exit.

ACTVS. 3.
SCAE. 1.
Enter Astor, Manfredi with Phillippo. Ast. Brother Phillippo what avails it,
When our state lost the Fauintines compounded,
That I should hold both life and liberty,
Withal revenues of my proper state,
When as my life within the Court of Rome,
Is much more loathsome to my soul then death,
And liberty more grief then servitude.

Phil. I rather choose within the river Tiber
To drown my self, or from Tarpeyan hill,
My vexed body to precipitate,
Then to subject my body to the shame
Of such vild brutish and unkindly lust.

Ast. He that with fire and Brimstone did consume
Sodom and other Cities round about.
Deliver us from this soule-slaying sin.
To which our bodies are made prostitute,

Enter Barnardo. B^r. Dear salutations from my Lord the Pope,
I recommend unto your excellence,
With semblable remembrance of his love,
To you my Lord Phillippo,

Ast Good Barnardo.
My duty bound unto his Holiness,
Return in payment from his Captive servant.

B^r. Ingenious Prince, I bring a friendly message
Of tender kindness, which I must impart:
They draw themselves aside. This Ruby from our Holy-fathers finger,
(In p^^uate token of his faithful love)
^
And there-withall, desires of your love,
To have with him some private conference.

Ast. I was now going to our Ladies mass,
In Saint John Laterans; where my ghostly father
Attends me for my confession.
But thank his Holiness on my behalf,
In all due reverence and humility.
Tell him I mean -- so soon as I return, pawse.
To come according to my bounden duty. Exit Bar.
My case is desperate, what shall I do?
Phillippo, was there ever any man
Hunted with such unsatisfied rage?

Phil. What has he sent again to visit you?


Astor. To visit me, nay to dishonor me,
Behold this Ruby sent from his own finger,
Which as a Bawd inuiteth me to shame.

SCENA. 2.
Alexander out of a Casement. Alex. Astor? what Astor? my delight my joy,
My star, my triumph, my sweet fantasy,
My more then son, my love, my Concubine,
Let me behold those bright Stars my joys treasure,
Those glorious well attempred tender cheeks;
That specious for-head like a lane of Lillies:
That seemly Nose loves chariot triumphant,
Breathing Panchaian Odors to my senses,
That gracious mouth, betwixt whose crimosin pillo^
Venus and Cupid sleeping kiss together.
That chin, the ball vowed to the Queen of beauty,
Now budding ready to bring forth love blossoms,
Astor Manfredi turn thee to my love,
Come hither Astor we must talk above.

Astor. Betrayed? a slave to sin? what shall I say?
Most Holy father.

Alex. Do not me forget:
I am thy brother, and thy dearest friend,
^
In ^iper years is pure and permanent,
Grounded on judgment, flowing from pure love:
Whereas the love lightning from young desire,
Fickle and feeble will not long hold fire,
It is so violent it will not last.
They Are blessed whose lovers love when youth is past.

Astor. To call you friend were too familiar,
To call you brother sorts not with our years:
To call you Father does import some fear,
Due to that age your Holiness does bear.

Alex. Tell me not of mine age and Holiness,
Thy sight suffices me to make me young:
Neither vpbraide me with my sanctimonie,
Love is the purest essence from ^boue,
And to thy soul I would affix my love.
Come hither then and rest with me to night,
Give me ^ruition of those amorous pits,
Where blinded Cupid close in ambush sits:
Who with his Arrow (when thou laughed at Venus)
Shot through thy smiling cheeks, and did inchaine us.
Thy Chamber with Ambrosiall odors breaths,
New loves and true loves unto them that entreats,
And furious M^rs made mild his Faulcheon sheatheth
At thy delicious aspect: see thy Chamber:
The walls are made of Roses, roof of Lillies,
Be not ashamed to mount and venture it,
Here Cupids Alter, and fair Venus hill is.
Thy bed is made with spice and Calamus,
With Sinamond and Spicnard, Arabic,
With Opobelsam and rich gums of Aegipt,
Music Angelical of strings and voices.
With sundry birds in sugared simphony,
Where whistling Wood-nimphes, and the pleasant choice is
Of Antique action mixed with harmony,
Attend thy joyous entrance to this Chamber.

Phil. Is it possible that the Diuil can be so sweet a dissembler?


Ast. Yes and play the pleasant part of a conceited Ani^re^,
(...) the shape of a bright Angel.

Alex. Now my sweet friend the joys of love does mutter
Thy mind too bashful is, speak tongue loves utter,
Thy Corrall gums cud loves pure quintisence,
And thou thy self fair boy loves purest essence.

Ast. Oh blessed heavens let Satan tempt no longer,
His force is powerful yet thy strenght much stronger,
He that with guilefull baits gilded untruth,
So seeks to blast the blossom of my youth.

Allex. Delicious fruits divine Confections,
Of herbs, roots, flowers of sundry fashions.
Preservatives drawn from the rich Elixar,
Of finest gould pure pearl and precious stones,
Provided for thy divine apetite,
Wines of more price (made by the industrious art,
Insacred distillations) then that Nectar,
Which Hebe bare, when Jove did most affect her.

Phi. Satan false god of lies, and flattery;
How palpable is this gross villain?

Alex. What will thou come Manfredi to my Chamber,
And bless me with thy precious breath of Amber.

Asto. After our ladies Mass I will return.
Dear God what furies in his soul do burn?
After the Celebration of the Mass,
I come my Lord. Exeunt Astor and Phillipp^.

Alex. Come then, and let that pass, Alexander tinketh a bell.
Holla Barnardo?
All business for this night I will adiourne,
Give good attendance that at his return*
Astor may come to me for my sick heart,
Till Astor with his beauty full embrace,
Do bless my body wounded with his dart,
Can find no rest, love has it in hot chase.

ACT. 3. SCAE. 2.
Enter Caesar Borgia the Cardinal, and Frescobaldy aruffaine. Caes. Will thou
perform it faithfully?


Fre. What I? will I live to eat, to drink, to sleep?


Caes. Will thou perform it valiantly?


Fres. Will I eat to drink, will I drink to sleep, will I sleep to live?


Caes. Will thou be secret, and conceal my plot?


Fres. My name is Frescobaldi, as for my pedigree,
My mother was of consanguinitie* with the Princess
Of Perugia: my father of the noble family of the Oddi,
Florentine both: I my self
Brought up a Page under Rayner King of Sicily,
Have served against the Turks and Sarazines,
Where at Vienna (with my single Pike,
Armed in a Maly Briggandine of Naples,
And with an old-Fox which I kept in store,
A monument of Mars when I depart)
I did unhorse three Turkey Ianizaries.
Then (in the wars of Ferdinand the King)
This Hippe was shot through with a Crocadile,
But that it were too tedious I could show you:
Under the King of Romans I was cut,
Just from this shoulder to the very pappe:
And yet by fortunes of the war am here,
I thank God, and my Surgion* all fix, trillill*
I fought at Malta when the town was girt
With Sargeants heads, and bul-beggers of Turkey:
And by my plot (niming below the rampire)
We gave th'obgoblings leave to scale our walls,
And being mounted all upon that place:
I with my Lint-stock gave fire to the train,
And sent them capring up to Capricornus.
Which when the wise Astronomers of Greece,
Prodigiously discovered from a far.
They thought those Turcaes fiery meteors.
Which with their Pikes were pushing in the clouds,
The learned Booke-men writ strange Almanacks,
Of signs, and apparitions in the air:
And by these honors (if I prove a blabbe)
Then call me villain, varlet, coward, skabbe.

Caes. Then tell me Frescobaldi
Where I may send to thee (...) time shall serve.

Fresc. Faith for the most part my mansion is in Ciuitauechiae nella strada di
san lorenzo, nere the conduict at a good old Ladies house, la do^na sempronia
at sign of the glister pipe, where if you chance to fail of me. Within three
houses more at sign of the frying-panne you may command me, at all hours in
the fore-noone.


Caes. Well gramercie ^ rescobaldi I will take the note of those houses in my
tables.

But be sure and ready when opportunity calls upon you.


Fres^o. May it please your most reverend grace (without offense to your
Lordship) to deliver me the parties name upon whom I should perform this
Tragedy. For I may parcase catch him in a gilder my self before you are aware;
and moylie mufle up his maistership, with the garotta, or stiletto, perchance
the ponya^d or pistol, such as I warrant you shall serve his turn.


Caes. Be it sufficient thou shall know hereafter,
My business and affairs are very great:
One word more, and adue.

He rowndeth with Frescobaldi. Fre. Secret as midnight, sure as the sun,
quick as the waters


Caes. Why? so said brave Frescobaldi like a man of some resolution farewell
remember the watchward -- do not fail.


Fresco. My business and affairs are very great my gracious Lord, one word
more with your grace my good Lord, and so I kiss your foot. He whispereth
with Caesar.


Caes. It was not ingratitud, neither forgetfulness in me Frescobaldi: Here
take this and remember me.


He delivers him a purse. Fres. I encounter your munificence with my love,
and your love with my service, my love and service with your money.

Padrone mio multo honorato,
More for your love then your money,
And yet your grace well knows, clothes must be wrought, weapons must be
bought; and Tauerns must be sought, and all brave exploits must be done, as
they should be done bravely.


Caes. But that I keep my secret to my self;
I would not use this slave for any gold:
Yet when I trust him he shall not deceive me. Exit Caesar.

Fresc. Now skelder ye scounderels, skelder you maggotmu^gers, you pompios;
you wood-wormes, you magatapipicoes, I am for you, now Frescobaldi, call thy
wits together, let me (...) see what a clock it is: very near eight, and
almost breakfast time at a cleauen, this very night must I stand Perdue for
this bloody service. I know my place and hour; I must confess and perchance
be hanged, I have in the Burdelliaes and in other such houses of natural
recreation and agility, received three or four score broken pates in my time:
and some bastinadoes for crossing courting spicy-spirited inamoratoes in their
humors. Besides I was the first that from the Swisse quarter, in the reign of
king Ferdinand brought up in his army the fashions of bowsing and to using
Greek and Spanish wines by the flagon, with that old stinckard Henrico
Baglioni, sometime Alferoes to Capitanco Piccolomini and my self; I remember
likewise at Terracinae I broake a glass (containing some quart of Robollia)
upon the face of Capitanco Fransesco Boccansacchia a very sufficient soldier
in that service, and to my knowledge a tall trencherman: howbeit from the teeth
down-ward as base a mettled coward as ever was coined out of the sooty side of
a copper kettle; so he was: well I will second my Lord in any slaughter for his
wages, and if any man will give me better hiers (when I have served the
Cardinals turn) I will present my pistol upon his sacred person afterward
for charities sake: well, now to the drinking school, then to the fence
school, and lastly to the vaulting school, to my Lady Sempronia. Exit.


Enter the Duke of Candie and Barbarossa. Can. This was an act of such strange
consequence,
As never yet was heard, a man found dead
Within a private chamber of his house;
When all his servants stird: not one of them
That could give evidence of what befell
But that he killed himself. Cosa impossible.

Baer. I was the first that found him in his blood;
Then warm from slaughter: such a ruthful sight
As yet I tremble to remember it.

(...) It is impossible (after a search)
No ^^^anger found within Vis^llies doers,
But that some servant of his family
Should have sure notice how the murder was.

B^r. It was his own hand sure.


Can. I cannot think it.
The gentleman was honest, full of sport,
And well affected.

Bar. Pardon me my Lord,
My Lady Lucrece told it in great grief
She twice before had rescued his life.

Can. Go too, go too.


Bar. Besides my Noble Lord.
Papers both writ, and sealed with his hand
Were found about him t^stifying this.

Can. Good Barbarossa pray my sister Lucrece,
Here to encounter me with her good company:
Som-what I would in private talk with her.

Bar. My Lord I will. Exit Barb.


Can. High God be merciful.
Thou that do know the secrets of al hearts,
If Lucrece (as my father does suspect)
Was privy to this murder of my life
Enter Lucrece Barb. with her. I can learn all she knows.
But yet I will not either suspect, or urge her were it true
Being indeed a violation of brotherhood and common humanity
She makes toward me -- sister how faires it with you?

Luc As with a dead Corse in a Sepulcher
Cold* liuelesse, comfortless, oppressed with sorrow.
Nor since my joy did leave me desolate
Ever could I brook well this open air
But still lamenting and disconsolate
Kept up in Chamber, mourning for my Lord.

Can. What order took you for his funnerall?


Luc. He that alive was shrined in my breast,
Now dead lives yet intombed in my thoughts,
There is a model of it in my closet.

Can. Perform it decently with diligence.


Lu. Brother me thinks the air is cold and raw,
And as you please let us confer within.

Can. Gladly dear sister with what have you may,
And I desire you noble Barbarosa
To meet us at my Chamber after supper.
My brother Caesar has appointed with me
Some business, and I crave your company.

Bar. Thanks my good Lord: but matters of much moment,
I have at that time with my Lord Caraffa;
And I must speak this night with my Lord Caesar.

Can. Tell him I will attend by nine of clock.


Bar. I will my good Lord.


Cand. Farewell Barbarossa.


Bar. Joy to you both. Exit Barbarossa.


Can. My trembling liver throbs, my cold hearts heavy;
My mind disturbed and I know not why
But all as he will, heavens above for me. Exeunt omnes.

SCEN. 5.
Enter Frescobaldi sol^s. Fres. This is the black night, this the fatal hand:
These are the bloody weapons which must be
Witness and actors of this Tragedy.
Now Frescobaldi play thy masters prize:
Here is a rich purse crammed with red crusadoes
Which does inspire me with a martial spirit,
Now could I combat with the diuill to night.
First did I wash my liver, lungs, and heart.
In Cretane wines and head strong Malues^e
(Such as would make a coward fight with Mars)
Then least I should with any weapons drawn
Be driven to danger of mine enemy;
I practiced my martial fe^cts of fence:
As for example if with arms vnsheath'd,
I were to kill this conduct here I come. he fenceth.
He makes a thrust, I with a swift passado,
Make quick auoydance, and with this stoccado
(Although he fence with all his finest force)
Barred of his body thrust him in the throat.
G^^rd^re^i ^ene, sigu^ri honorenoli.
Suppose this conduict or my duellist,
Should falsify the foine upon me thus.
Here will I take him, turning down this hand.
Enter Henrico Baglioni looking earnestly upon Frescobaldi. Il punto verso
indrizzato, thus.
Admit he force me with his ambroccado
Here I deceive then, with this passado
And come upon him in the speeding place.

Bag. what Mandragon or saluage Ascapart,
what Pantaconger or Pantagruell
Art thou that fightest with thy fathers soul
Or with some subtle apparitions.
Which no man can behold with mortal eyes
Or art thou ravished with bedlamy
Fighting with figments and vain fantazies
Chimeraes ot black spirrits of the night.

Fresc: Come not within 9. furlongs of this place.
My name is Rubosongal the grimme ghost
Of Bembocamber king of Calicute.
And here for this night I keep centrenell
For Muscopateron great king of flies;
Great grandfier of ten thousand hecatombes.

Bag: I Conjure thee foul fiende of Acheron
By puissant Hoblecock and Bristletoe,
By Windicaper Monti-boggl^bo.
Polipotmos and the dreadful names
of Mulli-sacke and Hermocotterock.
By Petrouidemi, by the dogged spirrits
Of Bacchus which Canary land inherrits.
By purple Aligant the bloody giant.
And leaden headed hollock pure and pliant.
By B^rrha Martia and by Sydrack sweet
Who did with matthew Glynne in combat meet.
And by this awful cross upon my blade
Of which black curres and hedghogges are afraid.
And by this fox which stinkes of Pagan blood,
Do thou walk there for mischief or for good.

F^es. Brave man whose spirit is approved well,
(As most aprooued panders truly tell)
Under g^eene hedges, under Cobblers stalles,
In portall, porches, under batterd walls,
Which day; by night keeps watch-full centinell
To gu^ze the pleasures of fair Claribell
Profane arch patriark of Pancridge steeple,
The bauldy beaken of ungodly people.
With other ma^ter which I might allege
To the Grand Captain of Collman-hedge,
Marching foul Amazonian trulls in troops
Whose ^anthornes are still lighted in their Poupes.
Some without kerchiefes, others with torn smockes;
Certain imboch'd with piles, and some with poxes.
Others with rotten shoes and stockings rent
With carrine in each ditch keep parliament.
In petticotes all patched and wast-coate torn,
And wandering with some ragge bless every thorn.
Which with their Targets never make retire,
From any breach till they their foomen fire.
Rebating the stiff points of their keen blades
Till a^l their champions masculine prove lades.
To thee says Fresceba^di case thy steel
Least thou the rigor of my fu^ie feel.

Bag. And yet I love thee for thy martial grace,
Thine in all service: shake hands and embrace.

Fresc. A pox upon thy coward fistes foul knave,
And yet I love thee rogue: ask rogue and have.

Embrace fantastically. Bagb. Come and embrace: it is bli^h when malte-men meet,
And drink till they have lost both head and feet.
And driueling sleep on every stall and bench
With every man a knee in his hand and in his Can a pretty wench
But Frescobaldi my brave Bodigonero,
Varlet of velvet, my moccado villain,
Old heart of durance, my stripped canuase shoulders,
And my Perpetuana pander tell me;
Tell me what humors Cataplasmatick,
Excited have thy Bacchick fantasies:
To draw that triumphant swerlidildido,
Upon some spirit of the Buttery,

Fris. This was no barmie spirit of the bottle,
It was a bloody spirit of the battle:
And if I lie, call me thy Wimble-cock.

Bag. A moldy jest, well I will answer thee:
I coni^re thee by Negra Luciaes name,
By Dol Pattenti, by the subtle shape,
Of Nanna Baliker, by the cunning fleights
Of Vini Clerilicks with her fair sprights:
By Mega Court, with Marga Marichalus,
That in Turnuliball does keep an Alehouse:
By Nan Riuehomo that hot stigmatist,
Now bedded wi^h the Ita^ian Vitraillist,
Which in the fiery Phlegitonian flames,
Did work strange vitriall dildidoes for Dames,
Her spirits have no power to touch this strand.
Till they transported from Lambechia land,
By Charon Ferriman of Black Auerne,
Fall Anchor at the Stilliard Tavern,
And by Tartarean Plutoes Heben bowl,
Why did thou combat with thy Fathers soul?

Fres. Learned Magitian skild in hidden Arts,
As well in prior as posterior parts,
I see thou kennist the secrets of all sorts,
Of sharp s^ringues and salacious sports:
Venerall Buboes, Tubers Vlcerous,
And James Defisticanckers venomous.
Doubtless Don Vigo then his vigor poured
Into thy brains, when he thy bottle scoured.
Noble Henrilico question no further,
My meditations are of blood and murder,
I ^easted have too long, pree-thee be gone.
Henrico Baglioni (by this sword)
I am to morrow to perform a duel,
And practicing in this nights melancholy,
How to dispatch it with a brave stoccadoe.
Here I did make a proof, prithie goodnight,
Trouble me now no more: early to morrow,
I Will march unto the sign oath frying-panne,
And take thee timely with thy points untrust,
To drink a flagon of greek wine with thee.

Bag. Goodnight my noble Rillibilb^bo,
Thou shall be welcome in the darkest midnight. Exit Bagli.

Fri Now to my watchword it is quight forgot, oh
Col nunolo la Pioggia: think upon it.
The clock strikes eleven. This is mine hour appointed this the place,
Here will I stand close till tha'llatum call,

he stands behind the post. Enter a Page with a torche, Duke of Candie and
Caesar Borgia disguised. Can. What is it a clock boy now?


Page My gracious Lord,
By Sistoes horologe it is struck eleven.

Caesa. A fit hour for our purpose noble brother,


Can. But has La Bella formiana noti^e,
Of our aproch to night.

Caes. Oh doubt it not, villain put out that torch, The boy puts out the
torch.
Being disguised we will not be discryed,
Depart you to my lodging presently,
Pain of thy life not one word that thou saw us. Exit page.

Can. It Is very dark, good brother go before,
You know the streets best.

Caesa. Oh keep your way; you cannot lightly fall,
But if you do.

Can, How then.


Caesa. You shall be supported.


Can. My heart begins to throb, my soul misdoubts,
I fear some treachery A che me fido, guarda me Dio,
On in Gods name.

Caes. Give me your hand brother, fie do not faint.


Can. Caesar I can scarce go,
A sudden qualme has seaz'd upon my spirits.

Caes. Tut brother forward with alacrity,
My life for yours you will be at ease anon,

Can. It Is a foul business let us retire,
And seek some other seasone for our sports,

Caes. I am ashamed thou should be general,
To lead those forces that fight for the Church,
And here show such faint hearted cowardice.

Can. Are you d^spos;d to quarrel in the streets,
Neither the time nor place serves instantly;
To call you to some audit for these words.

Caes. Abortiue Coward borne before thy time, Caesar trips up Candies heels.
I will not brook thy foolish insolence.
Col nuuolo la pioggia.

Caesar and Frescobaldi stab him. Can. Dear God revenge my wrongs, receive my
soul.


Caes. Let him receive thy soul when he thinks good,
I Will take an order for thy burial.
Help Frescobaldi let us heave him over,
That he may fall into the river Tiber,
Come to the bridge with him.

Fres. Be what he will the villaine's ponderous,
Has he some gould about him shall I take it?

Caes. Take it were there a million of ducats,
Thou have done bravely Frescobal^i,
Stretch thee, streth out thine arms fear that he
Fall not upon the arches.

Fres. I Will wash him doubt you not of a new fashion.


Caes. I think thou never had thy Christendom,
Follow for Company prenitious villain.

Fres. Hold hold, Coxwounds my Lord hold,


Caes. The devil go with you both for company.

Caesar casts Frescobaldi afte^ Caesar solus. Now Caesar Muster up thy wits
together.
Summon thy senses and advance thy self,
Ware and Earth have interposed their bodies,
Betwixt the worlds bright eye and this black murder.
Sweet silent nig^t (gu^rded with secret stars)
Keep silence, and co^^^ale this Tragedy;
Satur^e is lord ascendant ^f this hour,
Propitious patron of assassi^ates
O^ murt^ers, Paracides, and massacres:
Lord of my birth, auspitious to my life,
This is my first degree to d^mination.
Who can, or (if they could) who dare suspect,
How Caesar Borgia killed his brother Candie?
This is infall^b^e, that many crimes
Lurk underneath the robes of Holiness:
And underneath my Purple tunicle
This fact concealed is: Ascanio Sforza
Shall strangely (by some wily policies)
Be brought unto suspect for Candies death.
Sister Lucretia thou must follow next:
My fathers shame and mine, ends in thee.
Now show thy self true Caesar; Caesar shall
Either live Caesar like, or not at all.
Guicchiardine. Death and blood only lengthen out our Scoene.
These be the visible and speaking shows,
That bring vice into detestation,
Unnatural murders* cursed poysonings,
Horrible exorcisme, and Invocation,
In them examine the reward of sin.
What follows, view with gentle patience.

ACT. 4.
SCAE. 1.
Alexander in his study beholding a Magical glass with other observations.
Alex. Fore-god it is Candie, it is Candy I know it is Candie,
Where is that traitorous homicide? where is he?
I cannot see him: he shall not escape me so*
I must and will find him, though he we^^ invisible,
Appear appear; not yet; ha and Candy murdered too,
Let me look forth.
Alexander comes upon the Stage out of his study with a book in his hand.
Oh, oh, very good very good: well I perfectly peceiue.
By this descention of Arctophilax,
What time of night it is, sorrow give place;
Revenge in blood and fiery sacrafice,
Commands: nature now preuents her current: yield,
Let us adore the second eye of heaven, he boweth his body.
Bright Armatas increases she, is not combust.
O sacred season for nocturnall Ceremonies.
This ioyeous quarter is in Casmaran. ha. he looks on a watch.
What hour of night is it? why it is Salem, twelve a cloak,
What are our angels this quarter?
Gargatel Tariel Gauiel.
How goodly these augurize fair auspices of truth,
Now mountes bright Athaman in his goulden ascension,
Direct in opposition with our hemispher, he tinketh on a bell.
And now there hour with them is Aetalon:
Bernardo bring hither thy white robes of sanctity,
Have thou Coals ready burnt bring in my Thurible,
And sense about this sanctified place,
For here Festatiui must have her honor.
Candie my son is murdered, Candie my son,
Candie my son is murdered: I will raise
All the great diuills to show the murderer,
Even as thou lou'dst my son have and dispatch,
Have and dispatch it as thou love my soul.
It Is not yet yawne by three quarters of an hour,
What are our Angels of this night? Michael, Dardael, Huratipel
In a triumphant carre of burning gold,
Crowned with a circlet of black hebeny,
And with a mace of Iet King Varca rides.
Attended with his ministers of state, Andas and Cynaball.
Fit dismal times for our solemnities.
Enter Bernardo. Put on my robes give me my Pentacle,
Cense well Barnardo: bring me some fire in an earthen vessel
Now must I labor like a collyers horse.
After Bernardo had Censed he brings in coals, and Alexander fashioneth out
his circle then takes his rod. My precious best approved and trusty servant,
Hence in all have be-take thee to thy beads,
Whi^st these dark works of horror are in hand,
Red Sand^ll is my ^umigation.
standing without the circle he waueth his rod to the East. And calls upon
VIONATRABA. To the West. SVSERATOS. To the North. AQVIEL. To the Sowth.
MACHASAEL.
Conistro, et confirmo super vos in nomine Eye, eye, ey; have up and ascend
pernomeu ya, ya, ya; he, he, he; va; hy, hy; ha, ha, ha; va, va, va; an, an,
an; Fiery exhalations lightning thunder ascend a King, with a red face crowned
imperial riding upon a Lion, or dragon: Alexander puts on more perfume and
says. I conjure thee by these aforesaid names,
That thou receive no phantasmatike illusions.

Diue. What would great Alexander have with us,
That from our fiery region millions of leagues,
Beneath the sulphuro^s bottom of Abisse,
Where Mammon tells his ever tried gould,
Thou call'st me from strong business of high state,
From sure subuersions and mutations
Of mighty Monarchs, Emperors, and Kings,
From plotting bloody feilds and massacres,
Triumphant treasons and assassinates.
What Is thy demand?

Alex. I charge thee by the four recited names,
And by the dreadful title of great Phaa.
By which all creatures are sure sealed up,
By which the prince of darkness and all powers,
In earth and hell do tremble and fall down,
Show me the shape of that condemned man,
Which murdered my son the duke of Candy.

Diu. Keep a firm station stir not for thy life,
Expect a messenger of trust stand fast,

The devil descends with thunder and lighning and after more exhalations
ascends another all in armor. Diue. Sent from the foggy lake of fearful stix.
Am I commanded by that puissant monarch,
Which rides tryumphing in a chariot,
On misty black clouds mixed with quenchles fire,
Through vnquoth corners in dark paths of death,
To do what thou demandest.

Allex. Then by the dreadful names of Amioram,
Titepand Sadai show me that damned child of reprobation.
Which this night murdered the duke of Candie.

Diui. Keep a firm station stir not for thy life,


He goes to one door of the stage, from whence he brings the Ghost of
Candie ghastly haunted by Caesar persuing and stabing it, these vanish in at
another door. Alex. Hold, hold, hold, hold; per todos santos now no more,
Caesar has killed a brother and a father.

Diue. What would thou more shall I descend?


Alex. Show me the person by whose impious hand,
Gismond Viselli, was done to death?

Deue. Keep a firm station stir not for thy life.


He brings from the same door Gismond Viselli, his wounds gaping and after
him Lucrece undressed, holding a dagger fixed in his bleeding bosom: they
vanish. Alex. Out, out, no more no more, my soul disolues.


Deui. Say, say what would thou more? descend,


Alex. Beldachiensis, Berolanensis, Helioren, discende, discend^, iubeo, mando*
impero. Devil dese^deth with thunder. etc.


Enter Bernardo. Alexander tinketh his ^^ll, Alex. Out out alas Bernardo I am
wounded,
With grisly wounds and deep incurable.

Ber. Comfort your self in Gods name blessed father.
S^e long as noe wounds of the body bleed.

Alex. The cureles wounds I mean are of my body
Wounds both of my soul and body: but Bernardo
This is my comfort in calamity
Some shall pack after them for company
What Is a clock?

Barn. Very near six by Saint Peter's bell


Alex. Have thee, then pass thee to my Poticary, bid him provide those drugges
I spoke for yester-day, and bear them in all have to Dominico Giglio take you
those letters with you which are here, bid him deliver them Lodowick Sforzaes
name her lustful Paramoure; make have and see that he dispatch it quickly,
deliver him a purse from me for a token cramd with two hundred ducates, bid
him be secreat as he loves his life, have and begone.

Exit Bernardo. Astor shall follow, I must have his Lands
This thorn must be cut of being but tender
Then cut it soon whilst it is young and slender,
Least growing great it prick thee to the bone
My lust importunes it and he shall die,
Sons, Nephews, Daughters, Concubines, shall die.
My conscience is turned mercies enemy,
He that would rise to riches and renown
Must not regard though he pull millions down.

Exit Alexander into the study. SCEN. 2.
Enter Caesar Borgia with Caraffa and Bentiuoli. Caes. Where is his Holiness?
where is my father?
Alas your Son is slain; your haples Son,
My noble brother out alas, alas
Is murdered: in tender passion
Let curious search and inquisition
Be made through Rome to find the murderers:
I fear that Traitrous Judas Cardinal
Asc^^io Sforza with his complecies:
I wi^^ not hold fraternity with him:
An^ (...) behold my meaning blessed father:
(...) gain these robes, take here this hat,
And in these arms which I have bucled on
I do forswear al offices of Church,
Until I be revenged for his death.

He disrobeth himself and appears in armor. Alex. A foul red vengeance over
hangs his head
Whose heart indurate or whose diuilish brain,
Could execute conceive or meditate
So foul a murder of an Innocent.
Caraffa with Bentiuoli give leave
Somewhat I would in private have with Caesar.
Caesar desemble not for that were vain Exeunt Car. et Ben.
Whence come thou.

Caes. Directly from my Chamber.


Ale. Where did thou here this news.


C^s. Fishers which found his body brought the news.


Alex. Then he was droun'd Caesar was he not?


Caes. It seems he was.


Alex. What by some Fisher.


Caes. How should I know that.


Ale. Sure by some subtle Fisher that laid nets
For Candies life and honor: but say truly,
Was it thy brother.

Caes. Are not you my father?


Ale. Ah that I never had been any father,
But speak again, man speak the truth and fear not:
Who slew thy brother Candie this last night,
Who traind him forth who walked along with him.

Caes. Am I the keeper of my brothers person.


Alex. Execrable Cain; perfidious Homecide,
Apparent villain what can thou design?
Which I would know that thou can hide from me.

Caes. A plague upon your diuills you deal with them,
That watch more narrowly to catch your soul
Then he which sought my brother Candies death,
You know that Satan is the lord of lies
A false accuser and desembler,
Tell your falce liers they be lying Diuils.

Alex. Caesar no more, Caesar no more, thou know.


C^s. What know I?


Alex. That I know, dissemble not.


Caes. Suppose you know, suppose in wrath and fury
I killd my brother; can we mend it now?
He was not fashioned for these busy times:
He rests in peace, our peace rests in our swords.

Alex. Caesar thou do unkindly vex my soul,
With rubbing up my secret miseries:
Incurred by seeking to lift up thy head.

Caes. Pull me not down good father with your conscience:
Your conscience, father of my conscience is.
My conscience is as like your conscience,
As it were printed with the selfsame stamp.
I know my sins are burthenous, and bear them,
Your sins more heinous, yet your robes conceal them.

Alex. Out wicked and nefarious homicide.


Caes. Vpbraid me not, for if that Lamp burn dim,
Which should give light to men in darkest night;
How can they choose but must in shadows err,
That follovv the blind-glimering thereof:
Does this one petty fault appear so grievous?
Which if you well consider is no fault;
He was an honest man, and fit for heaven:
Whilste he lived here he breathed in misery;
And would have been enlarged: I ^et him free,
Now if I may compare your state with his,
Or your condition with my quality,
Have you not sold your self unto the Diuill,
To be promoted to the Papacy:
Have you not sold the livings of the Church?
Are not your coffers crammed with beastly bribes,
With foul extortion, and base Usury?
Have ye not (since your inauguration)
Poisoned and done to death six Cardinals;
In diuilish avarice to get their goods?
Have you not (which is most abominable)
Committed incest with your only daughter;
And made me sin with her for company,
That both might reign in hell for company?
Did you not take of Georgio Bucciardo
One hundred thousand Ducats from the Turk,
To kill his brother Gemen Ottamon?
Have you not kept the Pearl of Italy,
Astor Manfred^ that young virtuous Prince,
In beastly lust, and filthy Sodomie.
Blasting the blossom of his toward youth?
Have you not now given order for the death
Of my dear Sister, whom your passions caused
To kill her latter husband Di Viselli,
And robbed the noble Earl of his new spowse,
Only to cloak your vile impiety,

Ale. Caesar the Diuill has bin thy Schole-maister.


Caes. I pass your secret counsel with the diuill,
Your Avarice, ambition, perfidie,
Your bloody plots, inhumane cruelty,
Why then upbraid ye me with Candies death?
A bastard of our house, degenerate,
In whom no spark or spiracle of honor,
Appeared to raise the race of Borgia.
But had I been Lieutenant of your forces,
This arm had conquered all Romania,
France before this had trembled, Spain had stooped,
The Roman Emperor had faun'd upon us.
King Charles had been restraind, Frederick expulsd,
And Naples had been made our heritage.

Alex. A triple joy succeeds a single grief,
I have engaged all to make Caesar great,
Caesar it suteth with thy grace and glory,
To cloak my vices, I will pardon thine,
Let one of us excuse an others crimes,
And for this bloody fact so lately done.
As thou did cunningly begin proceed,
To lay the guilt or imputation
On them whose death may do thee benefit:
And never was my soul better contented,
Then that our woes are with rich hopes prevented.

Caes. Now stands Romania subject to my sword.
Imola furli, Camerine, and Vrbine
Shall have the first charge, if I there succeed,
Have forward farther with a better speed,
Caesar o nullo written in my guydon,
When with my troops victoriously I ride on.

Alex. Holla Bernardo, call in Caraffa with Bentiuoly: Enter Barn:
Ay now now now, my precious boy, my Caesar,
Prosecute as thou have begun,
With Art, look sullaine and demure,
Hold down thy head, like one swollen up with sorrow,
Enter Caraffa with Bentiuoly. They come, they come, say that those arms were
put on,
In revenge of Candies death.
The sovereign medicine of things past cure,
Is for to bear with patience and forget,
Caesar has vowde revenge for Candies death,
And in regard of Caesar's piety,
I make him general in his brothers place.

Coes. And never shall I sheath this sword in peace
Till it have wrought upon the murderer.

Caraf. Happy success accompany my Lord,
And in your battles give you victory.

Bent. Is order taken for his funerals.


Coes. Bentiuoli take you no thought for that,
That is the greatest care, which troubles me.

Alex. Come on my Lords, we will advise within,
For I must have your counsels in my grief. Exeunt omnes.

SCEN. 3.
Enter Lucretia richly attired with a Vyol in her hand. Luc. Kind Lodowike
had thou presented me,
With Persian clothes of gold or Tinsilry,
With rich Arabian Odors, precious stones,
Or what brave women hold in highest price,
Could not have been so gracious as this tincture,
Which I more value then my richest jewels,
Oh Motticilla. Enter Motticilla.
Bring me some mixtures and my dressing boxes,
This night I purpose privately to sup
With my Lord Cardinal of Capua.
Enter two Pages with a Table, two looking glasses, a box with Combs and
instruments, a rich bowl. Bring me some blanching water in this bowl. Exit
Motti.
She lo^keth in her glass. Here I perceive a little riueling
Above my for-head but I wimple it
Either with jewels or a lock of hair,
And yet it is as white as the pure snow:
O God when that sweet Marquis Mantoua,
Did in Ferrara feast my Lord and me,
What rich comparisons and similies,
He with ingenious fantasy devised,
Doting upon the whiteness of my brows?
As that betwixt them stood the chair of state,
Composed of Iuorie for the Paphian Queen:
Sitting in comfort after amourous conquest.
And kissed my for-head twenty thousand times.
Often have I wished the color of this hair
More bright, and not of such a Spanish dye,
And yet the Duke of Bourbon on his knees,
As the diuinest favor of this world,
Did beg one lock to make a Bracelet,
For which few hairs he garnished my head
With Jewels worth six thousand crowns at least.
My beaming eyes yet full of Majesty,
Dart love, and give bright luster to the glass,
As when the sun beams touch a Diamond.
The Prince of Salerne solemnly did swear,
These eyes were quiuers which such shafts did bear
That were so sharp, and had such fiery touch,
As Cupids Arrows never had so much,
The Rosy Garden of these amourous cheeks,
My nose the gracious forte of conquering love,
Breathing attractiue odors to those lovers
That languish and are vanquished with desire,
Gonzaga calls it the silver perch,
Where Venus turtles mutual pleasure search.
Sweet mouth the ^uby port to Paradise
Of my worlds pleasure from whence issue forth,
Many fa^se brags, bold sallies, sweet supplies,
A chinne the matchles fabric of fair nature,
A neck two breasts upon whose cherry niples.
So many sweet solcions Cupid sucked,
Give me some blanching water in this boule,
Wash my face Motticilla with this cloth,
So it is well now will I try these colors.
Give me that oil of Talck,
Take sa^snet Motticilla smooth my forehead.
She looks in two glasses and beholds her body. I must delay this color is
it carnation right.

Mot. Oh the true tincture of a damask rose,


Luc. What is it excellent.


Mot. Most full of life.
And madame that's a precious liniment,
As ever I beheld to smooth the brows.

Luc. I will correct these arches with this mullet,
Pluck not to hard, believe me Motticilla,
You pluck to hard.
I feel a foul stincke in my nostrells,
Some stink is vehement and hurts my brain,
My cheeks both burn and sting give me my glass.
Out out for shame I see the blood it self,
Dispersed and inflamed, give me some water.
Motticilla rubbeth her cheeks with a cloth. Lucretia looks in the glass.
My brains intoxicate my face is scalded.
Hence with the glass: cool cool my face, rank poison,
Is ministered to bring me to my death,
I feel the venime boiling in my veins.

M^t. Ah me dear Lady; what strange leoprosie?
The more I wash the more spreads on your face.

Luc. Send to my father; call physicians in, Exit Mo^^i
Oh Candie where art thou my comforter,
Dead and entombed; Lucrece must follow thee,
I burn I burn, oh where is my dear Lord.
My brains are seard up with some fatal fire.

Enter a servant and Physician with Morticila. Ser. Dear Lady cheer your
self, be not dismayed,
His Holiness in have has sent releife:
His own Physician to recomfort you.

Luc. For our dear Ladies passion bring some water to cool my thi^st.


Phi. Madam you may not drink,
Till you receive this one preservative.

Luc. A foul unsavory loathsome stink choakes up
My vital senses and a boiling heat
suppes up the lively spirit in my lungs.

Phi. This poison spreads and is incurable,
Madame receive one precious antidote.

Luc. What have I caught you Sforza,
Who painted my fair face with these foul ^pots,
You see them in my soul deformed blots,
Deliver me from that murdered man,
He comes to stab my soul I wounded him,
Oh Gismond Gismond hide those bleeding wounds,
My soul bleeds drops of sorrow for thy sake;
Look not so wrathful I am penitent.
Love and remorse did harbor in thine heart,
What do thou becken to me I will come,
And follow thee through millions of woes.

Phi. Sweet Lady will you take a little rest,
It will refresh your spirits instantly.

Luc. No rest until I see my Lord again.


Mot. Dear Lady do you love your life, take rest,


She takes hold of Motti^ila. Luc From the pure burning coals of true
contrition.
Me thinks I see the lively counterfeit,
Of catiue Cressed in her misery,
Ingenderd out of her disloyalty,
Ah Moticilla whom I trained up
In cunning sleights and snares of filthiness,
Forgive me for that sin; live and repent.

Mot: Oh God forgive me for my sins are great,
And if his goodness lend my life some space,
I will with penance call on him for grace,
And spend the remnant of my life in prayer.

Luc: I can no more, death summoneth my soul,
Open thy bosom father Abraham,
Merciful father let thy mercy pass
Extend thy mercy where no mercy was.
Merciful father for thy sons dear merit
Pardon my sinnfull soul receive my spirrit. Expirat Lucrece.

Phi: Now is her soul at rest it is very strange,
As well the cause as manner of her death,
I have been studied in Hipocrates,
In books of Gallen and old Auecine,
Observed the cures of diverse learned doctors,
In France in Spain and higher Germany,
Yet never met with such an accicent,
Bear in her body I will in all have,
Bring woeful news unto saint Peeters Palace,
His Holiness will grieuiously lament. Exeunt omnes.

SCAE. 4.
Enter Caesar and Barbarossa soldiers drums and trumpets. Caes: Fellows in
arms after our victories,
Had in the first front of our happy war,
With men of hardy resolution,
Now must we bend our forces against Furly,
Where that proud Amazonian Katharine,
Dares defiance in the face of war,
And yet our hopes are sure, all passage clear,
And she before I lodge this restles head,
Shall bear the bondage of this victori^.

Bar: These proud presuming spirrits of vain women,
Whose bloodlesse wounds are only bloody words,
(...) without reason, fight without resistance,
But on the face of grimme devouring War,
With frowning forehead menacing his force,
They fall down on their backs as Venus did,
When Mars beheld her with a Soldiers face,

Caes. Nay we must fight: I know the puissant spirit
Of warlike Kate the pride of Italy,
Sforzaes brave sister and old Riarioes widow,
Excellent valor, and deep policy
Must win it, if we purchase at her hands.

Bar. And yet we be beforehand with the Lady,
Having surprised her treasure and her sons,
As they were making their escape for Florence:
What shall we try renowned general?
And search her resolution.

Caes. Shall we? doubt you not,
Nay though the walls of Furly were of steel,
These pledges should make passage for our powers,
And what? shall we stoop for those twenty Ensigns,
Which this last night have entered their Ports,
Nay were they ten to one within those walls,
Caesar (that carries Fortune in his Standerd)
Would make them give ground and subject themselves.

Bar. Speak then at once renowned general,
Shall we go Souldier-like to work at first?
Shall we salute her with our Cannon?

C^s. What? no Barbarossa not without a parlee,
Fore-God I love her, and admire her valor,
And till we find her words prove empty squibs,
We give her all the noble rights of war,
Summon a parlee. Sound drum, answer Trumpet.
Enter upon the walls Countess Katherine, Iulio Sfor^a, Ensign* soldiers,
Drums, Trumpets. What have we Pallas come upon these walls,
To bring confusion of our companies:
Does proud Penthesilea live again,
Which some-time raging in the Fields of blood,
Made passage with her angry sword through millions.

Kat. I tell thee C^sar son of Alexander
A book befits thee better then a blade:
Percase in scorn thou will reply the like,
A distaffe fits me better then a pike.
Know Caesar had I now so many lives
As here are stoanes or hairs upon your beards,
I would forgo them al before this honor,
Which my dear Lord Riario did leave me,
The pledge of my dear love his Childrens patrimony.

Caes. Speak in a milder key renowned Kate.
I love you well and all brave Sforzaes race
Yet you must yield there is no remedy,
It is the Churches right and I must have it.

Kath. Me thinks a pulpet were more fit for thee,
But did thou ever read Saint Gregory:
That he which hunteth for authority,
Himself should govern direct and know well;
He did a deed of danger that advanced thee,
For proud ambition violates all right.

Caes. Be not so bitter Kate a friend intreates you,
But if entreaties will not, look upon me:
Here stands C^sar, the sharp scourge of Furly
And were your fort fenced with as many men,
As it is girt with stones Caesar would have it.
Subdue them and make pillage of their goods
And in resistance seal it with their bloods.

Kat. What are your weapons sheathed in your throats?
Is every word a sword then shake hands Caesar:
Venture no fu^ther and we will be friends
But if your words have accents in keen swords,
And end in blood, then Caesar look on me:
I with defiance turn swords in your throats,
You shall not thrust that imputation
Upon our fex, for I will fight it ou^
So long as I can stand upon these walls.

C^s. You would repent it, if you knew the worst,
Consider Kate be well advised first.

Kat. Caesar at one word to discharge my conscience,
Were there a Cannon there to be dischardg'd
Upon this fruitful womb the nurse of Children,
And I sure piece mell to be torn withal,
If I would not surrender up this forte
Your Cannon shot should plowe these bowels up,
That vow to God and my dear husband made:
I never will infringe with perfedy:
I know thee bloody Caesar: the dishonor,
In yielding up thy reverend purple roabes
Which should protect widows and Orphans rightes,
Appears well in taking unjust arms,
To wrong the Widows and the Fatherless
Either fight Caesar or forsake the field,
Persuade thy self alive I will not yield.

Caes. Then I will show you what wars desteny,
Prognosticates, bring forth her ransom hither
Barbarossa brings from Caesar's Tent her two boys. If nature be not quite
extinguished
These pledges shall enfranchize you from war
I brought them to this purpose; that in them,
You with your friends might live in liberty.

Kat. Never but with advantages dear Lord.
Monster of misery what think thou C^sar
That I will yield mine honor for their safety?
Be not deceived thou have surpised my Children,
Riarioes riches left in my tuition
And borne out of these bowels; but dear boys,
Courage your selves I will defend your honors:
I tell thee C^sar these my boys are taught
To bear with patience fates inevitable
These carry Sforzaes spirit and their fathers;
I dare gage life and ask them they will choose,
To lack their lives before they loose their honors.

Caes. Caesar in this has offered like himself,
He proffereth to preserve your town untouched:
Your goods, your wives, your lives, your liberties:
But mark what fruits thy bitterness brings forth,
To make thine hard heart infamous for ever,
Before thy face these boys shall loose their lives
If thou surrender no^ without more pa^lee.

Kath. Bloody (...) I defy thy malice,
I spit defiance in thy cowards face.
Traitor to God and man had thou been Caesar,
Ins^sting on high terms of worth and honor
Thou woul^st consider that their blood is Noble,
Thou would consider that they be but children,
Thou would consider that thou art a warrier
And that such noble blood spilt with dishonor
And tram'd in with insideous treachery,
By God nor man in heaven nor earth below
Can be forgotten or abolished.

Barb. Brave general you parlee with a woman,
Whose heart is obstinate, whose hands are freeble,
Seems in vain and over tedious.

Caesar. Speak at a word cannon is my next parlee,
You will not yee^d your state to save their lives.

Kath. I will not Caesar.


Caes. Cut of both their heads.


1. Boy. Let us entreat our mother noble general,
For to deliver up the state of Furly
And will you save our lives then.

2. Boy. Good Captain do not kill us.


Cas. If she will yield the state your lives are safe.


1. Boy. Good mother for my fathers sake that is dead,
And for mine Uncle sake part of your bowels
And for our own sakes yield your selves and save us.

2. Boy. Good sweet mother save us.


Kat. Poor boys, in heart unlike Riarioes race,
Or Sforzaes warlike linnage by the mother
Know what it is die with liberty,
And live with ignomineous servitude.
If you your lives buy with the loss of states
It were of all extreameties the vilest
But in extreamety to die resolved
Preserving state and reputation:
Is said to dye within the bed of honor,
This is an honor for Riarioes children,
And for my part, it never shall be said,
That Katherine being strong upon her guarde,
Having good forces able to defend,
In brutish feate should give away your states,
I rather will obtrude my self unarmed,
And meet the thickest ranckes that enter breach,
To be tossed up upon their soldiers pikes,
Sooner I will set all the town on fire,
And with my soldiers sacrifice my self,
Rather then render up your heritage,

Caes. Oh bravely spoken warlike Amaz^n.


1. Boy. Mother we scorn death in respect of honor
Let him perform his worst, we fear him not,
Courage sweet brother, think upon my father,
I will dye first, be not afraid of death.

Caes. Why then you are resolved to dye?


1. Boy. I to dye Caesar.


Caes. Bring hither both their heads.


Kath. Gods blessing rest with you my dearest sons
And if I loose your states, my life shall follow,
Nothing but violence shall force it from us,
Ere long this quarrel twixt us will stand even:
Farewell dear boys, till we three meet in heaven.

2. Boy Ah dear Mother, sweet mother, good Uncle Inlio save our lives.


Caes. Away with him.


2. Boy. Let me before I dye, but kiss my mother.


Kath. What would thou run again into my womb?
If thou went here thou should be Posthumus,
And ripped out of my sides with soldiers swords,
Before I would yield up thine heritage.

1. Boy. Come brother let us bravely dye together.


Caes. I tell thee when that these have lost their heads,
I will make sack and pillage of your state,
Man, women, Orphans, all put to the sword,
This has your obstinacy wrought in us,
Carry them hence, bring hither both their heads. Exeunt with the boys,
And then a charge upon this valiant Lady,
Thi^ (...), this proud Semeramis,
Whose valou^ B^rbar^ssa by these heavens,
Is very wonderful and glo^ious.

Kat^. Had he more force, what would this tirant do?


C^^. A change a charge.


Ka^^. F^r Gods sake charge, a charge let us to sight.


C^s. A spirit full of vengeance, wra^h, and spite,
Assau^t, assault, ch^rge noble hearts a charge.

A charge ^ith a peale of Ordinance: Caesar after two retreates e^treth (...)
^^alado, her Ensigne-bearer slain: Katherin recoue^eth ^he En^igne, and
sighteth with it in her hand. Here she shows excellen^ m^gnanimity. C^sar
the third time repulsed, at length enters by scalado, surpriseth her, brings
her down with some prisoners. Sound Drums and Trumpets. Caes. Courageous Kate,
you that would throw defiance
Into the face and throat of fate and Caesar,
Such are the fruits of pride and wilfulness.
Have I performed my word? are you surpised?
Is not your life and living in my power?

Kat. Now that my sons first by insidious means,
Bereaved of their lives, and their states lost,
The date of my calamities is out,
Go forward with thy tyranny, strike Caesar,
And take away the Mother with her sons:
This done, recount what is thy victory.
A woman with two children vanquished,
A prize befitting the renown of Caesar.

C^s. Come hither Katherine wonder of thy sex,
The grace of all Italian woman-hood:
Caesar shall never prove dishonorable,
Behold thy children living in my Tent.

He discovers his Tent where her two sons were a^ Cards. 2. Boy. Oh
mother, mother, are you come, we be not dead.


1. Boy. Good mother, thank the Captain, we live yet,
They gave us spices, wines, and bad us welcome,
I pray you thank them.

Kate. Oh but your lands and honors are both lost,
Had not an honorable death been better:
Then thus to loose your states and liuely-hoods.
Heroike soldier, whose deceit is honor.
Thou that have unexpected saved the lives
Of my two children, I submit them here
Thy captives, for their ransom what is fit.

Caes. I freely pardon ^hese two boys their ransom,
Lady behold thy treasure in my Tent,
Had I not won this town, this had thou lost,
See Soldiers that her Jewels be reserved
For her own service, now the quarrel ends.

Kat. But noble Caesar well entreat our people,
They be men valiant, civil, obedient,
If you their Magistrates entreat them well.

Caes. Take you the charge of Furly, Barbarossa,
Entreat the people well, do not restrain them,
We freely pardon all of them their ransomes,
So much as is in us, we pardon all,
Use them as Citizens of Rome in favor,
Other instructions you shall have here-after:
Till then regard your charge and so farewell.
Enter with a drum, Barbarossa, Soldiers. Lady, your self, with your two
little babes,
I will take order shall be sent to Rome,
Be not dismayed, you shall be well entreated,
You shall want nothing fitting your estates,
March with us on our way for Capua.

March Caesar, Katherine, her two boys, Ensigns, Soldiers, Trumpets, Drums.
Exeunt. SCAE. 5.
Enter Alexander out of his study. Alex. Bring in that Opium, and bowl of
Wine,
Here I must act a Trage-comoedie,
Bernardo is it well confected and prepared?
According to my conference with Rotsi.

Bernardo with a flaggon of wine and a boule Ber. He sent it as your Holiness
may see,
Safe sealed up

Alex, Fill me that bowl of wine,


Alexander opens a box and puts in the powder. B^r. It Is a drowsy
medicine, do not taste it my Lord,


Alex. Thou have ben taster to me, many times,
Begin Bernardo.

Ber. My Lord I slept too much the last night and I dare not,


Alex. It holds good color hold here Bernardo,
Give good attendance, bring them to their rest,
Then give me notice at my study door.

Ber. One set was past before I parted from them,
And by this time they be well heated.

Alex. Sir be diligent and serviceable in this,
Even as thou love thy master. Exit Alexander into his study.

Ber. Fear me not?
Were ^t not that my conscience has been fyer'd,
With flames of purgatory by this Pope,
I never could endure such villainy,
The best is he does pardon all my sins. Exit Bernardo.

Enter Astor and Philippo in their wast-cotes with rackets. Ast. This set was
strangely lost I durst have wagerd,
An hundred ducats after the first chase.

Phi. You think you play well, but believe me brother,
You cannot take pains not observe a ball,
With that dexterity which appertains.

Ast. Holla within there if I take no pains,
My wastcote well can witness for I sweat. Enter Bernardo.

Ber. Barber bring in some linen for my Lords


Phil. Bring me some wine for I am very thirsty


Enter two Barbers with linen. Ber. I listend for that string and he has
touched it.


Bar. Wilt please your Lordship sit on this low chair?


Phi. Rub my head first then comb it,


Ast. Fill me some wine Bernardo,


Ber. Good my Lord cool your self a little,


Ast. Give me wine and let it be thy labor good Barnardo
To call for music. Bernardo delivers wine.
Brother in this cup I commend the loves,
Of all true Fauentines our trusty friends,
Hoping ere long to live again with them.

Phs. I thank you brother, if our father Pope.
Perform his promise we'shall soon return.

Ast. This wine was good yet tastes of the casck,
It has a musty relish.

Phi. Lets here this music,


After the barbers had trimmed and rubbed their bodies a little, Astor caleth.
Ast. Holla within there.


Ber. My Lord.


Ast. I think it good after this little rubbing to repose my body


Phil. I am some what heavy.


Ber. I know the cause,


Ast. And what Bernardo.


Ber. Marry with much motion of your bodies my Lords,
You must not be so vehement in play.
I knew a noble French man at Anchona,
Twenty years since at tennice took his death.
With over heating of him self in play.

They lay them selves upon a bed and the barbers dep^^^. Phi. More music
there.


after one strain of music they fall a sleep: Ber. My Lords are both a
sleep music depart.
And leave them to their ease; alas sweet boys,
Is it not pity that these noble branches,
So sweetly knit in one, should never wake?
I that am hard of heart sighe for their sake,
My Lord. Bernardo knockeh at the study.

Alex. What news man?


Ber. Both fast a sleep.


Alex. And both upon one bed?


Ber. Ti^ done.


Alex: And chamber voyded?


Ber. All is performed my Lord.


Alex. My blessinge rest upon thee my Benardo.
Depart now with those letters I deliuerd,
To be conuayd to ^lore^ce leave me here.
Alexander upon the stage in his cassock and (...) ^^ap with a box under each
arm. Alexander solus. Sl^^p^ both secure upon your fatal bed,
Now that ^he God of silence Morpheus,
Has with his (...) to^ black horn sealed up,
Your langued eye lids laden with pale death,
Sleep until you draw your latest breath,
Poor ha^meles boys strangers to sin and evil,
Oh were my soul as innocent as yours!
This office is of highest consequence,
In friendsh^p for I consider it,
I sent you from a million of sorrows,
Into the flowery fields of Paradise.
Their to go habit in the groves of mittle,
To feed on Manna and to drink pure Nectar,
A cup of everlasting happiness.
Where such sweet music vn-con-ceiueable,
Shall entertain your senses in sweet comfort,
As the delight thereof shall never die
Astor what Astor speak awake Phillippo,
Both fast a sleep. He stireth and moves them opening both their bosoms.
Now Roderick betake thee to thy task,
What? peace Astor begins to talk I will attend.

Astor speaks in his sleep. Ast. Fair gracious Angel of eternal light,
Which reachest out that hand of happiness.
Hayling my spirit to that triumphant throne,
Of endless comfort I adore thy grace.

Phi. In his sleep. Oh goulden light of never setting Sun,
Hark brother Astor hark my soul is rapt,
Into the joys of heaven with harmony.

Alex. Do they not sleep? are they not yet a sleep?
Be not their senses yet locked up in sleep.
he stirs them. Astor awake awake, awake Philippo.
All safe and sure, oh this was but a dream,
Their Genius has fore told them of their end,
And joyfully they do shake hands with death.
He draws out of his boxes aspiks. Come out here now you Cleopatraes birds.
Fed fat and plump with proud Egiptian slime,
Of seven mouthed Nylus but now turned lean:
He puts to either of their breasts an Aspike. Take your repast upon these
Princely paps.
Now Ptolamies wife is highly magnified,
Ensigning these fair princely twins their death,
And you my lovely boys competitors,
With Cleopatra share in death and fate.
Now Charon stays his bote upon the strond,
And with a rugged for head full of wrath'
He thrusts a million from the shore of Stix,
To give you waftage to the Elisian fields,
I see their coulors chang and death sittes heavy.
On their fair foreheads with his leaden mace.
My birds are glutted with this sacrefice.
He takes of the Aspiks and puts them up in his box. What now proud worms?
how tastes you princes blood.
The slaves be plump and round in to your nests,
Is there no token of the serpents draught,
All clear and safe well now fair boys goodnight.
Bernardo, Bernardo, the feate is done,
Use thy discretion as I did de^ect. Exit Alexander.

Ber. It Is done in deed alas they both be dead:
Now must I follow my directions,
Holla within there. Enter Cardinal Caraffa with Bentinoli.

Caer. What news Bernardo?


Ber. Alas my Lord ill news,
But that his Holiness is fast a sleep,
And this day stirred not from his bedchamber
I would have brought him to this woeful sight:
Prince Astor with Phillippo was at Tennis,
And being ouer-heated at their game,
Drinking so suddenly upon that heat,
With much sweet Wine did surfeit instantly,
And here alas lie dead upon this bed.

Bent. Alas it is a ruthful spectacle,
Two princely boys of noble disposition,
Endued with honorable gifts of virtue.

Car. Of gracious favor, wise, and liberal.
Phaenzaes hope: Bernardo bear them in,
His Holiness will much bemone their fate.

Bent. My Lord, my Lord, I do not like of this.


Caraf. Peace man, no more do I, but bear with patience.


Bent. It is suspicious but we may not talk,
Come let us in, oh God!

Car. Oh God what times are these. Exeunt omnes.
Guicchiardine. After the bloody Duke Valentinoys
Had conquered Furly, with the warlick Lady,
By wily force he took in Capua,
Then through insidious sleights and treacheries,
He did surprise the state of Camerine,
Where he captiued Iulio di Varana,
With his two sons all which he strangled,
With semblable tyranny proud Coesar,
On terms of trust meets with the Duke Grauina,
And Vitel^ozzo with the prince of Fermo:
Whom he betraide at Sinigaglia,
Bereauing them both of their states and lives,
He conquereth Vrbin; and with violence,
Performs strange and hiddeous outrages.
By this time with his forces back to Rome,
Caesar is marching; what betyded there,
Ends in the subject of this Tragedy.

ACTVS. 5.
SCAE. 1.
Enter Caesar after a flourish of trumpets with Drum^, ensigns, soldiers.
Barbarossa, Cardinal Caraffa Bentinogli. Baglioni. Caesa. Now that by cunning
force and policy,
All the free states and cities o^ Romania
Subjected are unto the Church of Rome.
And that our pikes and swords in blood and slaughter,
Are staind and sheathed quiet in our scaberds,
Our blood and wounds stanch'd and bound up in scarfs,
Let us for this could season of the year,
Rest us and cheer our selves till the next spring.
And then march forward with alacrity.
Brave Barbarossa take these soldiers,
Unto some quarter where by sound of drum,
According to their muster give them pay,
Let them be satisfied and so dischargd.
Fellows in arms faithful and valiant,
I thank you for your pains and honesties,
In token of our good heart to your service,
We give each common soldier more then pay,
Two ducates: and all other officers.
According to their place redoubled,
With many thanks for your exceeding valor,
Assuring you that in these wars with us,
Caesar shall make you Captains of your spoils,
And so does he commend you to your ease.

Sold. A Caesar a Caesar God save Caesar. Exit Barba.


Sound trumpets and a flourish with drums marching with soldiers, Caesa. Sir
come hither you must wait on me.
My good Lord Cardinal and Bentiuoli,
Much thanks and dear acceptance of your loves,
I lovingly return for your great pains.

Cara^. His Holiness gave us in serious charge,
To give you greeting and withal prepares
A sumpteous ^east for that solemnity.
To which he does inuit the Cardinals
With other Lords your favorers in Rome.

C^s. Humbly commend my duty to my father
Tell him this night I purpose to be with him,
Pointing at letters in his hand. Tell him I live in health and touching these,
I pray you certify his Holiness,
I will have special care: and so my Lords
For a small season I will take my leave.

Ben. We do congratulate your safe return.


Exit Caraffa and Bent. C^sar looks on his letters. Caes Come hither Baglioni
speak sincerely,
Know thou Brandino Rotsi th'apothecary.

Bag. What I my gracious Lord? know I my self?


Caes. How should I know that sir?


Ba. May it please your highness he serves his Holiness.


C^. He did indeed sometime and for his villainies,
Is wort^ily ca^t of; but tell me sir:
Thou do rememb^r how for breach of arms
When thou did stab a certain lance-prizado:
I pardoned thee t^y life.

^ag. True my good Lord I very well remember,
He was a lousy villain, marry was he,
And if he lived yet such is my stomach,
That were he chopped in mammockes I could eat him:
But for that honor in a soldiers word
He spend my life to do your highness service.

Caes. Have thou thy piece then ready.


Bag. Oh my good Lord lies fix, sound as a bell,
With all my warlike furniture beside
Good flask and touch-box, a Valentia blade
A slavish dagger, powder of Rhemes and bulletes
Here they been.

C^s. Sometime this after-^oone within the park,
Next, to the Vatican, Ratsie will be:
And as I know thee stout and resolute,
Be^tow a bullet on him as he posseth;
Few words; if any man attach thee for it,
By my protection thou shall be enlarged.

Bag. And if I do not my good Lord damme me for it
I have an old grudge at him cole black curre,
He shall have two steel bullets strongly charged
Nay but here me my Lord?
I Will tell you what,
By this ^rue fox of steel
I had as good a spaniell for the water,
As ever hunted ducke: and this true villain
Because my dog did eat up a pannado
Within his house; what did that Spanish rogue?
What did he think you my Lord?
Marry very fair an^ instantly
Poyson^d my ^paniell with Rosa-solis,
A pox on him micher, faith i will pay him his old fippence for it now.

C^s. Take this to buy thee clothes my trusty servant,
Nay it is gold be not affeard of it.

Bag. Affeard my Lord
Were it a tempest in a shower of gold
I would endure it and adore you for it.

C^s. Then Baglion fit thee, to thy furniture,
Watc^ in a corner close beyond some tree:
And when the deed is done repair to me:
Say that thy piece went off against thy will,
Keep a light match in cock, wear flaske and touch-box:
And take a murren with thee so farewell;
Thus must I diue deep in a villains nature,
And thus must save a villain from the gallows
To play my parts in others purposes.
The man w^ome I to benefit would choose,
I must in matters of more moment use:
Or else I will not benefit a man,
And cut him of in s^que'l if I can.

B^g. Here me, but my good Lord mark my words well,
If old Henrilico s^^in^ in this service
Cass^ir him, call him whip-stock, let him perish,
For want of S^a^ish wines, and maluasie.

Caes. Then fail not my true servant finely, closely. Exit Caes.


Bag. No more, but by this cross,
Why now this Noble Caesar's like himself,
Has fitted me with service: if the world,
Had sought out som-what to content a man,
Nothing could better please old Ballion
Then to kill a rascal, coward, curre,
A Spanish squirt-vp, a black poysning toade.
I like this trading better then the wars
For there I serve for two ducates a month,
And not a duck egg richer when I march
And in continual hazard of my life
For which percase my piece kills twenty persons:
Now shall I march in purse with many ducates,
For one hours service but to kill one man,
Free from all danger of mine enemy,
I will about it and take up my stand. Exit.

Enter Bernardo. Bern. Thus does one hideous act succeed an other,
Until the mouth of mischeife be made up:
Now must I train my fellow to his death,
A deed of ^uch and I did swear the same,
Not only for the secrecy thereof.
But to conceal a matter of more we^ght,
Of greater moment and high cruelty:
When any d^ed of murder must be done,
To serve his Holiness, call for Bernardo.
He must be princ^pall or accessory
To serve all purposes; for gold or pardone,
The Pope gives both; and I can take them both:
Gold can make hard the softe^t conscience,
And mine is hardened by the practice of it.
Holla Signeor Bandino. He knocks at a door,

Enter Rotsie. Rot. Who calls without there? what my good fellow Bernardo?
Very welcome: what news with you?

Ber. My Lord has sent me for the things he spoke of.


Rot. Here they be very strong and sufficiently compounded
According to directions from his Holiness,
And special warrant under his privy signet
I tried them on three men condemned to death:
For rapine and vile murder: but the first
Within less then one quarter of an hour,
Puffed up, grew leaprous and his heart strings broake;
Then did I give al^ay the second time,
Enter Baglioni with his piece. The second prizoner died within three hours
I did the third time mittigate, a little,
And saw when it was minister'd the third man,
Who did within eight hours swell, rage and die.

Ber, Well have you done your part, set down your bottels,
And read this letter from the Duke Valentinoys,

He sets down his bottels and walking reads to himself. Bag. Well said
brave Pincoginger, by mine honor
Before I do this service lie there piece.
For I must have a saying to those bottels, He drinks.
True stingo stingo by mine honor. Oh that mine old friend and Boccadillio
Fre^cobaldi Wear hear alive again to taste of this other bottle, Well I will
venture upon it, that I may drink one hea^th To Fr^scebaldi I will encounter
with this stout He^torean, Greek.

Were Meleager here that slew the boore.
Like a Boracchio armed all in sack,
Or stout Achilles in a pewter coat.
Or old Assar^cus a^med in a wicker lyrkin,
Or Priamus armed with a leather Iacket,
Lined and imbost with Alligant and Hollock
By forch of arms and Mars his valiant hand,
I would encounter them whilst I could stand.
The ^laues are buisie reading their paphlagonian papers,
I must have a ^aying to y^u sir I must; though,
You be provided for his Holiness own mouth; I will be,
Bold to be the Popes ta^ter by his leave.
Now trusty Troylus, base los manos.

Rot Let him alone it is the Dukes pleasure,
That if he will taste he shall be suffered,
And therefore I was commanded to set them down,
In presence of such a fellow whom for his sauciness,
I have pepered.

Bern. Oh it is a perilous villeine if you knew him so well as I, believe me he
would peper you for it if he understood so much, peace man he has broken up
the bottle let him drink.


Rotsi. Nay let him drink and burst, for believe me I ^as enform^d before of
such a ^ellowe; for whom I was commanded to lay bate; oh notable villeine, how
he seals death.


Brg. This is a Noble nipster ^faith, so so. He drinckth.
Back again to kennell slave.

Rot. He has his full wages dout not Bernardo, to serve him till he die, seem
not to respect him in any case do I pray you.


Ber. Nay but do not you respect him, least he doubt you suspect him.


Rot. Oh doubt you not, doubt you not, I will never look, let us turn our
talk. Tell his Holiness it is well compounded and composed of all those drugges
mentioned in your letter, give the Duke right humble thanks for his token, and
with all reverence kiss his excellent hand.


Bern. And by this signet you are to deluiuer me the bottles.


Rot. Have a care of them and deliver them.


Bernardo receaueth the bottles. Ber. Farewell fellow Rotsi.


Rot. Adieu Bernardo.


Ber. Now do not I pity this Spanish villain because he consented to the
poisoning of this soldier, but for that I am innocent.


They go forth two several ways and Rot^i is shot by Baglioni. Bag. What is
the wild goose fallen? have at you Sir, might a poor soldier speak half a
score words to your venomous worship and according to your accustomed
surlinesse have no rep^yall: I believe you sir, your words are not offenciue
in any sort I must confess. Now thou infectious slave, thou compictious
Rascal, thou confectionary villeine: where is you sublimatum now sir? where is
your Ratsbanatum now? now where are your poisoned pu^lets in stued-broth? where
be they? you never drempt of a poisoned ballet, did you go too? now Signor
currigantino will I romage in the worm eaten keele of your rotten hulk^:
passion of my soul what papers are these. Foh powder, powder foh, what is here I
marry sir I like this well, a^e you so pursie sir, this may serve to stop a gap
in my neighbors hedge, what is this you show me with a s^ame to you, yea and
master of the small ordinance to, this Basilisk has been often mounted where
there has been hot and dangerous siruice in the I Will of Iapan, hold passion of
me my guts, out upon thee thou have poisoned me with thy stinking breath or
with thy villonous powders out alas alas what sirie commotions I feel in
my body gryping fretting and suming, a plague on your bottle ale with a
vengeance, I am peppered there is no remedy in all these extreme agonies!
must draw this villeine further: and throw him into a ditch, Deh veleno dell
Diabolo, farewell farewell my old Shurcordillio Frescobldi* farewell Madam
Sempronia, for in conscience I am guilty of mine own death oh the pangs of
hell and purgatory; come you lousy Rascal I will bury thee with carryon in
the next ditch.


He draws in Rotsi by the heels groaning. SCAE. 3.
Alexander, Caesar Borgia. Alex. Have you delivered to the bottleman,
The fatal wine.

Caes. I I gave charge to Bernardo,
Having them safely sealed with mine own signet,
That when feasting I do call for wine,
He shall break up the seals and fill that out,
For the two Cardinals Cornetto and Modina.

Alex. It Is well, now if our plot prove right,
Thou shall be master of much wealth to night,
Dying in estate all comes to my share,
Caraffa loves a sallet passing well,
And I have fitted one to serve his turn,
Their gould will make thy soldiers fight in blood,
And winge thy victories with good success.

Caesa. Let us noe longer entertain the time,
By this the Cardinals expect our presence.

Allex. On with auspicious steps triumphant Caesar.
And entertain them in brave iollity.

Exit. SCAE. 4.
Sound loud music: a cuppord of plate brought in. Enter with bottles Bernardo
with the bottleman. Ber. Have spetiall care you that have these in charge.
That these two sealed bottels be not stird,
Until his Holiness call for that wine

Bot. Fear not I will attend it as my life.


Sound trumpets solemnly, enter a table spread, Viandes brought in: after the
trumpets sound drums and sif; enter Alexander in his pontificalls, after him
Cornetto with Caesar, Barbarossa with Modina, B^ntiuoli with Caraf^a, the Pope
takes his place, three Cardin^lls on one side and captains on th^ther. Alx.
Martial your selves here sworne-men and there
Churchmen.

Cas. Here sit we swordmen to defend the Church.


Alex. My Lords give answer in sincerity,
Has not my Caesar fought well for the Church?
That has so soon subjected in her right.
Imola, Furly, Camerino, Capua,
Vrbine, Faenza* Sinegaglia.
Brave Caesar I must bost of it in presence,
That I Christ's vicare of his Church on earth,
Have such a son which issued fuom my loins,
That being vicare of the Churches wars.
Has in revolution of one year,
Done more then all the generals have done,
In honor of our Church for forty years,

Corn. Your Holiness with all your Cardinals,
Your barrons and indeed all christendom
Are bound to give God thanks for such a Prince.
And him great honor for his fortitude.

The Devil comes and changes the Popes bottles. M^d. Your excellence did in
a blessed hour.
Surrende^ up your Holy robe^ a^^ hat,
Be taking (...) and a^mes,
By which you might enlarge our liberties.

Ca^. (...) my Lord and see we have all of us good cause to rejoice, (...) I
had been with your excellence at Capua, I would h^d one boat with them as old
as I am.


C^s You might my Lord have had your choice of Ladies,
B^^^^full p^is^ners to be ^ent to Rom^.

Cara* I marry my Lord some what might have been said to this geere to die^^
(...), but tra^seant cum ceteris erroribus, would to GOD I wear as young as
when I was a Scholar in Padua, faith then I could have swingd a sword and a
buckler, and I did that then will being but a spring all of 24. years which be
talked of in Padua these 40. years I warrant it faith my Lord were I so lusty
now I would go with you to the waires this next spring that's flat, will you
eat any sallet my Lord, faith here are excellent herbs if you love them.


C^sa. They be my Lord too cold for my stomach, wilt please you my Lord to
drink a cup of old Greek wine with it, bring me some wine here.


Alex. Bring me some wine here I will drink a Joy to Caesar and this Noble
company.


Caes. Some wine for his Holiness own mouth, Bernardo.


Wine is brought to Alexander. Alex. C^sar your self are master of this ^east,
I drink a good success and victory,
Alexander d^inketh, trumpets sound. To Caesar and great happiness to all.

Caesar drinks. Caesa. Happy success and fortune to you all.


Alex. Hold Caesar; stay for we are poisoned,


rush from the table. Caes. My Lord it is all of.


^^ex. Then art thou qu^te undone.


Cas. Some villainous conspiracy lies hid
Within this company, and this pernicious villain
C^sar stabbeth Bernardo. Has practiced with the^; go with thy soul to hell,
I feel the raging of i^.

Corn. Away my Lord Modina come away,
Thi^ tra^^e was laid of purpose ^or our lives.

Modi, Our re^uge and defense is from above,
Let Satan work, he never shall prevail.

Exit Corn and Modina. Car^ss. How does my gracious Lord.


Alex. Oh very ^ick ^ bring me preservatives,
I think I have ^s good a^ any man. Alex. to his study.

Cas. My Lord ^entiu^gli take here my keys,
You know my study, search my Cabbinet,
There shall you find a little Crystal Phiall,
Wrapped up in Sarcenet bring i^ hither straight,
I feel Vesonus raging in my guts. Exit.

Alex. Here C^sar taste some of this precious water,
Against all plague, poison, and pestilence
A present help: I bought it of a Jew,
Borne and brought up in Galily. Caesar tastes.

C^s. My Lord it is too sorceable and hot.


Alex. The flames of Mongibell consume my liver,
Bring me to some repose.

Caraff. Comfort your self my Lord.


Alex. C^sar take rest,
Send for Physicians, all my fear remains
That Caesar shall miscarry.

Caes. And all my grief that both.
Noble Bentiuogli withdraw we both,
Unto my Chamber, I am very sick. Exeunt omnes.

SCEN. 5.
Enter Astaroth and calls. Asta. Belchar, Belchar, Belchar;


Bell. Varca, Varca, Varca,


Var. Astaroth, Astaroth, Astaroth.


The diuills meet and embrace. Asto. Let Orcus Erebus and Acheron,
And all those Ghosts which haunt the pitchy vaultes
Of cole black hags in Cimerian shades
Muster themselves in numbers numberless,
To dance about the Ghost of Alexander.

Var. Our fiery region void of all religion,
And diuilish order by necessity,
Compelled requires his present policy.

Bell. That fatal wine which for his Cardinals,
He destined I took out of the place:
And placed his own wine for those Cardinals.

Bar. The date of his damnation is at hand.


Asta. Be ready then for I the first will bear,
As swist as wirl-winde his black soul to Stix.

Bell. And I with poysned toads will stop his mouth,
Whose heart was never satisfied with lust.

Asta. And I with snakes and stinging Scorpions
Will scourge him for his pride and insolence.

Var. And I with force of fiends will hall his limbs,
And pull them till he stretch an achor length.

Bell. And for his avarice I will fill his paunch,
With store of moulten gold and boiling lead.

Asto. Then let us for his sake a horne-pipe tread.


They dance an antic. SCEN. Vltima.
Alexander unbraced betwixt two Cardinals in his study looking upon a book,
whilst a groom draws the Curtain. Alex. You talk of penance and of
penitence,
Compunction with contrition and remission
For all my sins; I pray you think of yours
You vex your selves too much I cannot thank you,
Have patience sirs; oh it is a goodly exorcisme
Quem penitet peccasse paene est innocens
Give leave, give leave, come hither when I call
Either mere fools or good physicians all.
They place him in a chair upon the stage, a groom sets a Table before
him. Nay leave me good my lords, feign would I meditate,
Leave me I pray you.

Caraf. We leave our prayers with your Holiness,
Call upon God, think of his endless bounty.

Ale. Pray for your selves, troble not me with prayers,
I pray you troble not your selves with praying.

Alex. solus. What is repentance? have I not forgotten?
He looks upon a book. Why repentance is a spiritual martiredome,
Which mortifieth sins and heales the soul:
Having been wounded with the spirits sword
This sword Gods book: that book by me profain'd
And by which book of God my soul is damned,
I damned undoubtedly.
Oh wretched Alexander, slave of sin
And of damnation; what is he that can
Deliver thy poor soul? oh none but he
That when thou did renounce him cast of thee,
Repentance is in vain, mercy too late,
Oh why should miserable mortal man,
Whose languashing breath lives in his nostrills
Vex and torment himself with daily travel
To scrape up heaps of gold to gape for honors?
What were the conquests of great Alexander:
Of Cyrus, Ca^us Caesar? what were it
To be possessed of this universe
And leave it all behind him in a moment?
Might some one man attain that happiness
Which our first Adam had ^n Parradice,
Before he did preuaricate? why then
It were a work oflasting worthiness
To rippe the bowels of our mother Ops
For treasure; and to conquer all the world,
Because eternity would promise it,
Out, out al^s my pains, my guts, my liver
And yet I fear it not though in secu^ity
Once more I will with powrefull exorcismes,
Inuoke those Angels of eternal darkness
To show me now the manner of death.

Alexander draws the Curtain of hi^ study where he discovers the diuill
sitting in his pontificals, Alexander crosses himself starting at the sight.
Diu. What do thou start foul child of reprobation
Vain are thy crosses, vain all exorcismies,
Those be no fruits of faith but mere hypocrisy:
Signa te signa temere me tangis and angis
Roma tibi subito motibus ibit amor.
Rome Which once was thy gorgeous concubine
Has now forsaken thee: now does she find,
Thy falsehood which did her adulterate
What do thou tremble slave of sin and hell?

Alexander takes his book of Mag^ke, the Diuil langheth. Alex. I exorcise
thee foul malignant spirit
In the names of, of, of --

Diuil. Of what? foul mouth, poluted soul?
Corrupted slesh; God has forsak^n ^hee,
Thy date expired it, thy power determined.

Alex. Dissolve dissolve, break, break, black soul dissolve,
And poison all this hem so here wi^h sin.

Diu. Thy death and dissolution stand at door,
Resolve now to dissolve, thy soul is ours.

Alex. Proud Lucifer Traitor, to great Jehovah,
Father of lies my time is not expired
I will not do that violence to God,
Taking that which is his from him
To be bestowed on his great enemy.

Diu. Thou that have thrown those graces in his face,
How can thou think upon salvation?
Think that thou art damned. I will declare it plainly.

They sit together. Alex. Seven years are yet to come, I look for them.


Diu. Examine thy soul with this counterparte.


Alex. Behold it? is it not for eight years and 8 days?


Diu. Thou fool examine in Arithmetik,
Numbers without distinction placed thus.
Annos with the figure 11. signifying eleven years, and the figure,
Seven applied to Dies importing seven days.

Alex. How? how? how? how? howes that?
Deh quella malitia del Diabolo: Deh quello veleno del inferuno.
And for what stands this figure then?

Diu. Why for eighteen this figure stands for octauo referred unto di^ last
before, signifying the eighth day after, so that Annos vndicem without
distinction signifying eleauen years; and this figure seven added to days;
and that octauo post, importing the eight day following, moriere, thou shall
die. I mean thy body with thy soul in respect of Heaven.

Thus many days have thou continued Pope,
And this is thy last day designed by fate.

^lex. Thou can not mock me with thy Sophistry,
M^ soul is more divine and cannot perish.

Diuil. Thy soul foul beast is like a Menstruous cloth,
^oluted with unpardonable sins.

Alex. Know then malignant Angel of confusion,
My soul is a divine light first created
In liknesse lively formed to the word,
Which word was God, that God the cause of causes,
My soul is substance of the living God,
Stamped with the seal of heaven, whose Carracter
Is his eternal word, at which hell trembles.

Diuil. And what of that? thou therein have no part,
I do confes^e thy soul was first ordayn'd
To good: but by free will to sin thou slave,
Have sold that soul from happiness to hell.

Alex. Mark yet what I can answer for this soul.
Mighty Jehovah most exuperant,
Two creatures made in feature like himself,
The world and man: world reasonable and immortal,
Man reasonable, but dissoluble and mortal,
And therefore man was called Microcosmus,
The little world, and second tipe of God,
Containing those high faculties and functions,
And elements which are within the world.
Man then that d^^h participate with all,
Through operation, conversation, and simbolisation,
With matter in the subject properly,
With the elements in body quadrifarie,
With growing plants in virtue vegitatiue
In sense with beasts; with heavens by th'influence
Of the superior spirits into the inferior
In wisdom and capacity with Angels,
With Eloym in that great continent,
Is without doubt preserved by that God,
Finding all things contained in himself.

Diuil. Answer me vain Philosopher to this,
Thou that have planted man in this perfection,
Not looking on thy detestable soul,
Which first like a pure leaf of whitest Lilly,
Clear from all blemish was bestowed by God,
And thou foul beast did shamefully polute it.
Is it not one of human faculties,
To propose for your selves the best you can,
Where other creatures carried with blind force,
Make themselves bond-slaues to the present time.
The scope of man's creation was to glorify
The most all potent maker of all things,
The Alpha and Omega of all bounty.
But he that wilfully betrays this soul,
That precious Jewel wherein God delights,
Dishonors God and does deprive himself,
Of all salvation and beatitude.

Alex. Rest with this answer, that my soul is Gods
Whose habitacle is prepared in heaven.
First it does know God being figured
According to that Image of himself,
And then the world whose lively shape it bears,
And to conclude the soul of man knows all,
Because with all things it does simbolize,
For in this Man there is a mind intelligent,
A quickening word and a celestial spirit,
That like a lightning every way diffused,
All things which are made by the mighty power,
Unites, moves, and replenisheth.

Diu. These things should have been thought upon before,
The summum bonum which lives in the soul,
Is an eternal pleasure to behold,
And have fruition of the mighty power.
Which thou did never see, nor can en^oy.

Alex. Pawse yet a little, let me meditate, Alexander holds up his hands
(...) and softly crying. Mercy, mercy, mercy; arise arise: up, up, up: fie, fie:
no, no? stir stubburne, stony, stiff indurate heart not yet, up. why, what?
will thou not foul traitor? to my soul? not yet?

The Diuill laugheth. Arise, arise, advance heart clogged with sin,
Oppressed with damnation: up advance yet.
Will thou not stir stiff heart? what am I damned?
Yet a little, yet a little, oh yet: not yet? alas.
High God of heavens and earth if thou bear love,
Unto the soul of ^infull man show mercy,
Me^cy good Lord, oh mercy, mercy, mercy.
Oh save my soul out of the Lions paws,
My darling from the den of black damnation,
My soul, my dove, cover with silver wings,
Her down and plumage make of fine tried gould,
Help, help, help, above* stir, stir, stupiditie.

Diu. He charms in David's words with Judas spirit,


Alex. It will not, no it will not, yet alas, no, no, no? is that my sentence
to damnation?

I am undone, undone.


Diuill. He shall despair, vassal of sin and hell,
Provide thy self in black despair to dwell.

He ceazeth on his face. Alex. I tell thee I cannot be resolved,
To dwell in darkness break black soul dissolve,
And poison all this Hemisphere with sin,

Here Alexander is in extreme torment and groneth whilst the diuill laugheth
at him. Alex. And if I may not reach that happiness,
Since for my sons sake I my self inthral'd,
Tell me shall Caesar die this death with me?

Diuill. Caesar; his youth and strength of blood drives out
This fat all poison and shall live a while.

Alex. Oh show me then the manner of his death,


Diu. Attend it time grows short all fear is past.


The Diuill brings from the door Lucreciaes Ghost, and after her the ghost
of Candie stabbed. Alex. What means that ghastly shadow which came first?


Diuil. By that which represents Lucretia,
Leprous and poisoned is thy death declared,
By poison which now struggleth with thy spirits,
And by that other which sets out to thee,
The murder of thy son the Duke of Candy,
Prefigur'd is the death of thy son Caesar,
Thou for the poisoning of thy daughter poisoned:
He for the murdering of his brother murdered.

Alex. Thus God is only just.


Diu. The Diuill cannot deny it.


Alex Man only false.
Learn miserable wretched mortal men,
By this example of a sinful soul,
What are the fruits of pride and Avarice,
Of cruel Empire and impiety,
Of profanation and Apostacy,
Of brutish l^st falsehood, and perfidie,
Of deep dissembling and hypocrisy,
Learn wicked worldlings, learn, learn, learn by me
To save your souls, though I condemned be.

Sound a Horn within, enter a Diuill like a Poast. 1 Diu. Here comes a fatal
message, I must hence. Exit.


Alex. My roabes, my roabes; he robs me of my roabes,
Bring me my roabes, or take away my life,
My roabes, my life, my soul and all is gone.

Alexander falls in an ecstasy upon the ground. 2. Diuil. From the pale
horror of eternal fire,
Am I sent with the wagon of black Di^,
To guide thy spirit to the gates of death,
Therefore I summon thee to come with speed,
For horrizons now stand thee not instead.

Alexander aduanceth a little. Alex. Horror and horror, fear ensues fear,
Torment with torments is Encompassed:
Despair upon despair, damnation
Upon damnati^^, hell and cons^ence,
Mu^t^er lust a^arice impiety,
Va^^e pr^ph^nation and apo^tacie,
Rage and distraction t^ranize: away,
Away proud Lucifer, away.

Diuill. away, away. The Diuill wind^h his horn in his ear and there more
diuills enter with a noise incompassing him, Alexander starteth.


Alex. Holla, holla, holla, come, come, come, what, when, where when, why,
deaf, strike, dead, alive, oh alas, oh alas, always burning, always f^eezing,
always living, tormented, never ending, never, never, never mending, out, out,
out, out, why, why, whether whether, thither.


Diuills. Thither, thither, thither.


Thunder and lightning with fearful noise the devils thrust him down and
go Triumphing. Enter Cardinals and Bentiuoli. Bent. What is he dead?


Car. Dead, and in such a fashion,
As much affrights my spirits to remember,
Thunder and fearful lightning at his death,
Out cries of horror and extremity.

Bent. Cause all your bells to ring my lords of Rome,
Rome is redeemed from a wicked Pope.

Car. God has beheld us with his eyes of mercy,
His name be glorified, join all in prayer,
And give him praise that took away your shame.

^ent. Go your procession, sing your letinies,
A^^ let your Churches through with multitudes,
Banquets and bonfiers through the City make.
In sign our Church is freed from infamy,

Car. Even as his spirit was inflate with pride,
Behold his body puffed up with poison,
His corpse shall be conuaied to saint Peeters,
Open for all beholders, that they may
See the reward of sin, amend and pray.
Guicchiardine. Th'omnipotent great guider of all powers,
(Whose essence is pure grace, and heavenly love,
As he with glory crowns heroyick actions,
Bearing a taste of his eternal virtue)
So semblably does he with terror strike,
In heavy vengeance sins detestable:
As in this tragike myrrour to your eyes,
Our scene did represent in Alexander,
Flagicious Caesar his ambicious son,
Reserved for more calamities to come,
After he was imprisoned by the Church,
Escaped into the kingdom of Navarre,
Unto King John then brother to his wife:
Where in an ambush at Viano slain,
^ust Nemesis repaide his treachery.

Epilogus.
HEroicke and beneuolent spectators,
Your gracious ears, and curious observations,
Iuditious censures, and sweet clemency,
Have thus addressed our Tragic Theater,
T'exchange contentment, ^or benignity:
Humbly devoted to your good desires.
For some delight, cause of discourse for others,
For all example, and for none offense,
Your favors are a royal recompense.
Which when our lofty Muses shall perceive,
Then in more pompous and triumphant state,
Your eyes with glory shall the deed receive
Of mighty Monarchs, Kings, and change of fate.
By me those persons which our Scene presented,
Kiss all your hands, and wish you well contented.
FINIS.

