Doce me Domine viam tuam ut ingrediar in veritate tua Teach me thy WAY O Lord
I will walk in thy TRUTH. Ps. 86.11.


THE PILGRIMAGE OF MAN, WANDERING IN A WILDERNESS OF VVOE.

Wherein is showed the Calamities belonging to man being borne in this World,
and how all the principal Estates thereof are crossed with Misery.

A gorgeous Iemme for Gentility.
That live in golden Felicite.
LONDON: Printed by I.B. 1635.

The Contents of this Book.
Chap. 1. Of the miseries of man in his birth, and of his first calamities.
Chap. 2. Of the misery of Man entering into his youth, and years of
discretion. Chap. 3. Of the Misery of Man being come to his full strength.
Chap. 4. Of the Misery of wicked Kings, Princes, and Monarchs. Chap. 5. Of
the Misery of vicious courtiers, and of their wicked lives. Chap. 6. Of the
misery of Magistrates that administer not true Justice: with a Discourse
against wicked Judges. Chap. 7. Of the praise of Marriage, and likewise the
miseries that ensue thereon. Chap. 8. Of the worlds general Misery, and the
vices of all sorts in the Communalty. Chap. 9. Of the misery of Age, and man's
Death: with his resurrection, and the terrible judgment of God at the latter
day.
THE PILGRIMAGE OF MAN, WANDERING in a wilderness of Woe.
CHAP. 1. Of the miserable birth of Man, and of his first calamities.
MAN being the Image of God, and the chief work of Nature, of all other
creatures is most miserable in his birth: For, both beasts and birds are
brought into the world, either covered with hair, feathers, or wool; not so
much as the seeds and corn of the ground, but Nature has clothed them with
ears and husk, man only excepted: for he being once come from the prison of
his mothers womb, seems no other thing, but the similitude of a poor worm,
that comes creeping out of the earth.

With what clothing is he covered (making his entry into the Palace of this
world) but only with blood, where in he is bathed and covered, the which
signifies no other thing but the image and figure of sin?

What is the first song that he sings at his coming into the world, but only
weepings and waylings? which are as messengers, and foreshewers of his
calamities to come, the which because he cannot express in words, he
witnesses by tears. Likewise pitiful cries in the beginning of Monarchs,
Emperors, and Kings, and others, that cause so many Tragedies to happen in the
world.

But now contrariwise, the worm (be he never so little) as soon as Nature
has brought him out of the earth, begins to craull and creep, and to seek
for food: The little chicken so soon as he is out of the shell, is found
clean, and needs not to be washed like unto man, but runs after the Hen,
and knows when he is called: he picketh and eats; he fears the Kite,
without proouing before her malice: he flies danger only guided by Nature.

But behold Man, so soon as he is come into the world, is like unto a little
monster, and a lump of flesh, which will let himself to be eaten of other
beasts, if he be not seen unto; and die for hunger before he can find his
mothers breast: and will as soon eat poison, as good meat: and handle hot
fron, before he can discern the good from the evil: yet for all this, he
names himself the Prince of all other creatures.

Thus man being brought into this miserable world, and plunged in the gulf of
miseries, he then requires to have norishment and clothing, to comfort the
infirmity of his nature: The office of which is appointed to mothers, in
consideration whereof nature has given them breasts, which are like two little
bottles, very proper and necessary for their sustenance.

But now to speak of the misery of Man in his nurriture, how many mothers are
there at this day in the world (nay rather we may truly call them cruel
stepmothers) who having according to Nature, brought their Children forth into
the world, and because they will not take a little pains to nourish them
themselves, they send them to sorry villages to be nursed of strange and
unknown nurses, which oftentimes do change their children and bring home
others in their stead: Yet for all this they will not be ashamed to hold a little
dog in their arms rather than the fruit that was engendered in their wombes.

This inhumane practice is not used amongst beasts be they never so brutish:
for their natures are such, that they never put their young ones in the keeping
of others, though nature give them never so many, but they nourish them
themselves, and are such zealous protectors of their young ones, that they
keep them almost always in their presence, till such time as they can avoid
danger: And that which is more to be marueiled at, there rises a certain
strife between the male and the female, which of them shall be the keeper: And
for that intent they many times quarrel and fight one with another: the which
may be seen not only in Apes, but also in Bears, which in nature are fierce
and cruel, yet they have so great affection to their young ones, that they are
not only content to nourish them with their milk, but as soon as they are
brought forth, having almost no form or fashion, they lick them and pollish
them to make them more perfect.

Likewise the little Birds, covering five or six under their wings, and having
neither grain nor other seed for their sustenance, notwithstanding they spare
neither art nor diligence, wherewith nature has endued them, for their
nourishment.

It is therefore a true witness of humane Misery, in that Children are forced
against Nature, to suck the milk of a strange woman; and many times of such a
one as may be found best cheap, what corruption or deformity soever she have:
the which many times is so contagious to their Children, that it were better
for them to be nourished by some bruit Beast in the wilderness, than to be put
into the custody of such a Nurse: as for example. The cruelty and infamous life
of Caligula the fourth Emperor of Rome, was not imputed to Father or Mother,
but to the Nurse that gave him suck: which woman was so cruel and barbarous
of her self, that she rubbed the Nipples of her Breasts with blood, causing
the child to whom she gave milk, to suck them: the which thing was so well
practiced of him, that he did not only commit an infinite number of Murvers,
but many time licked his sword and dagger being bathed and stained in blood,
and wished that all the world had but one head, to the end that with one blow
he might behead them, and then reign alone upon the earth.

Seeing then that the Child has not felt or suffered sorrow enough in his
Mothers womb, but as soon as he is borne, there is prepared a new sorrow for
him by the ingratitude of such mothers which are so delicate and tender of
themselves, that they will not nourish them, but cause them to suck the milk
of those that oftentimes do change their fruit, or else feed them with
corrupted milk; by the which means in process of time, there rises a number
of diseases, to the great hurt of poor children, and continual reproach of
their mothers.

This is of a truth and often verified, that if the Nurse be froward, the
Child will be froward, not by receiving of their Milk, but by often looking
upon it. If she be a Drunkard, she will cause the Child to be the like; as it
is read in the life of the Emperor Tiberius, who was a great Drunkard, for
that the Nurse the gave him suck, did not only drink vnmeasurably, but also
did feed the Child with Soppes tempered in Wine.

Here you may see that the Nurses have so much power as to form the manners
and body of the Child, so that if she be sickely, she rendereth the child
sickness: If she be wicked, she causes the Child also to be wicked.

But here I will leave Children in their Nurses keeping, and speak of their
following calamities: In how many dangers be they wrapped whilst they be a
nursing? some will burst with crying, some never rest in quiet all the night
long, so that their Nurses can take no sleep: Some when they can scant go,
will fall and break their faces, and their lims, so that many times there is
seen about them many grievous wounds, besides the diseases which they take by
Nature.

But who will not wonder to see the fantastical manners of little children, who
for the most part will dabble in the water and channels like a little Ducke:
making little houses of earth: counterfeting the horsemen in riding on a little
stick: running after Dogs and Cats: and will be angry with some, and pleased
with others: who would think that such a miserable creature (by succession of
time) would become so proud and lofty? therefore if we will consider it, we
have just cause to mourn at their births, and rejoice at their burials.

If the Prophet Jeremy bewailed the captivity of the Jews in Babylon; if
Anchises lamented the destruction of proud Troy; if the Consul Marcellus
lamented the City of Syracusa when he saw it on fire, and Salust the corruption
of Rome; we may well with so many men of fame, bewail the miserable entry that
man makes into this world, his dangerous advancement, and sorrowful
departure: All which being profoundly considered by the Prophet Jeremy, in the
20. Chapter, he bewaileth his birth, and murmureth against the knees that held
him up, and also the breasts that gave him suck.

Likewise the same Prophet Jeremy in the aforesaid chapter, considering that
man is made of dust and earth, conceived in sin, borne in pain, and at the
last made a prey for worms, does with that his mothers womb had served for
his tomb.

Job in his fourteenth Chapter, likewise sets man out in his right colors,
when he says: Man that is borne of a Woman has but a short time to live, and
is full of misery. Out of these words we may gather somewhat, for amongst all
the creatures whom God has created, there is none subject to more miseries
than a woman, especially those that are fruitful and bear children; for they
have scant a months rest in a whole year, but are continually overcome with
sorrow, and fear. Then he says, having a short time to live. Indeed what is
more shorter than the life of man? unto whom in stopping his nose and his
mouth, the life is gone, for his life is nothing but a blast of wind enclosed
therein.

I have read of many that have murmured against Nature for giving long life to
Hearts and Ravens, whose lives bring no profit, and unto man (King of all things
upon earth) but a short life, although he knows how to employ his time; and
yet the little time that he has to live, is shortened by sleeps, dreams,
sorrows and cares: therefore we may justly say, that man's life is full of
misery and sorrow.

CHAP. IJ. Of the misery of Man entering into his youth, and years of
discretion.
Ye have already heard discoursed and showed in order, what perils and
dangers Man has at his first coming into the world, now therefore let us
consider what he is when he is sprung up, and whether that there be an end of
his miseries or no: Of which, if we be equal Judges, we shall find that he
does rather increase than decrease the miseries: for this is the time of man's
life wherein Nature does rear against him a more furious combat, for his
blood begins to rise: the Flesh provoke him to his own pleasure, the
wicked world espyeth him, the Devil tempts him, and his selfe-wild
youthfulness leads him: so that it is impossible, but that he which is
assailed with so many vices, and succored of none, in the end is discomfited
and overcome: for in the body of youth, Riot, Liberty and deliciousness
abounds: For all the Uices in the world (says Marcus Aurelius) do there
plant their siege.

Therefore it behooves when the trees are young, to uphold them, and to loppe
the ouer-waighty branches, if afterward ye intend to gather any fruit.

Likewise it is necessary to reform and correct the Uices that reign in
youth, least afterward it return to the parents shame and reproach: But there
are at this day, many Fathers and Mothers, which for default not to have well
instructed their Children in their youth, do receive much sorrow and grief in
their age. Moreover, there are many Mothers, which in stead of giving them good
and godly instructions, nourish and bring them up in voluptuousness and pride:
and although they be nourishers of their bodies, so are they destroiers of
their souls.

If Hely was grieeuously punished with his Children, for that he did not so
sharply chastise them as their offenses did require, what shall become of
these Fathers and Mothers, which in stead of correctors, are their Childrens
corruptors? Such Parents may well be compared to Apes, which kill their young
ones by too much strayning them between their arms, and keeping them so
dear: and this is the cause that so many fall into the hands of the Hangman,
which are to them, reformers and correctors.

Many there be that in stead of giving good exhortations to their Family, do
show them first themselves naughty and wicked examples: for the first
commandment that they give them how to live well, is to blaspheme, swear,
exercise gluttony, and drunkenness: to spoil the substance of their youth, to
be fornicators, and to kiss women and maidens in their presence. There be also
many Mothers here in England, that learn their Daughters to dance, to use
rhetoric terms, to haunt companies, to scoff and flout, to paint and color
their faces, to deck their fingers with Ringes, and their necks with Jewels,
as though they were Jewel sellers, pretending to keep a shop: but in the end
it will happen to them as it did to the Prophet David, 2 King. 13. and 15.
whose sin was punished in his Children, which were most of them so wicked,
that the one of them deflowred his own sister, and the other killed his
brother, and afterward sought the death of his own father, and chased him out
of his kingdom.

The ancient Philosophers maintained this Argument, that all sins committed
in this world, were punished in the world to come, except the sin that man
commits in the bringing up of his Children, and for that, he suffers
punishment in this world: for the Father can give nothing to his Child but
frail and mortal flesh, by the corruption whereof the life takes end: but by
good learning and knowledge, eternal praise and memory is gotten: Therefore to
conclude, if that Children have been in great misery, being nourished with
spotted milk, yet the misery doubleth in those that should cause them to be
instructed: for the food of the body is more vile than the food of the soul.

But now when he is come to the seventh year of his age, it behooves his
Parents to have Tutors and Schoolmasters for to instruct him in good
learning: but growing further into years, and coming to his adolescency, it
is needful then to have more rigorous reformers for to tame his wild youth,
and to break him to labor.

CHHP. IIJ. Of the misery of man being come to his full strength.
Having finished this our second discourse, Man is grown to his full
perfection both of strength and discretion; in which time he enters into
deeper cogitations and travel in the spirit: It is requisite therefore, that
he frequent public places, that he haunt the company of those that are as
touchstones for to know the good from evil: If he be come of a great and a
noble stock, he must make many enterprises of war, put himself in perils,
hazard his life, and shed his blood for to die in the bed of Honor: or else he
shall be reputed a dastardly coward, and utterly despised of all men.

If he be of bare estate, and that he be called to the knowledge of Arts,
Sciences, and needful Trades, yet for all that, he runs into a thousand
dangers, travels, pains and troubles, as well of the body as of the soul: he
toyleth day and night, and sweateth water and blood to get a maintenance during
his life; and oftentimes it is seen that what pains soever man takes for his
living, yet it is scant sufficient to serve his necessity.

It is not therefore without cause that Marcus Aurelius was wont to say (when
he considered the misery of mankind:) I mused in my mind (said he) whether
there might be found in any age a man that could vaunt, that he never in all his
lifetime tasted adversity: and assuredly, if there might be such a one found,
he would be such a fearful monster upon the earth, that all living things
would be amazed to behold him. Then he concluded after this sort, saying: And
in the end I found mine own thoughts true: for he that was yesterday rich, was
to day poor. He that was yesterday in health, was to day sick: He that
laughed yesterday, to day did weep: He that was yesterday in prosperity, was
to day in adversity: and he that was yesterday alive, was to day dead*

But let us now return to our former matter, and set down our Discourses in
order. What living man is he in all the world, that has given himself to any
Science, or otherwise to live, but that at one time or other, he disliketh of
his own profession, and is weary thereof? And for the better understanding of
the same, we will particularly discourse the miseries, and troublesome lives of
all the principal Estates living upon the bosom of the sinful earth.

CHAP. IV. Of the misery of wicked Kings, Princes, and Monarchs.
SEarching into all estates of men, we shall find that Fortune above all
other mortal creatures, has provided for Kings most liberally: for what
makes man more happy in this world, than goods, honors, dignities, and rule;
license to do good or evil without controulement, power to exercise
liberality, and all kind of pleasure, as well of the body as of the mind: all
that may be wished for to the contentation of man, either in variety of meats,
magnificence in service, or in vestures: to raise at their pleasure the meanest
man to high place, and with a frown, disgrace the mightiest: All which
continually is at a Princes command: there is nothing that may please the
memory, or flatter the desires of the flesh, but is prepared for them even from
their cradles, only to make their lives more happy and full of felicity.

But now if we judge of their lives uprightly, and weigh them in a true
balance, we shall find that the self same things which makes them happy in
this world, are the very instruments of vice, and the cause of greater
sorrows: For what avails their costly ornaments, honorable services, and
delicate meats, when that they are in continual fear to be poisoned, wrong
seduced, and often beguiled by their seruitours: Have we not had experience
thereof many times? Does not Histories report, that some Princes have bin
poisoned with Papers, and with the smoke of Torches: We may read likewise of
certain Emperors that dust not lie down to rest in the night, before they had
caused their Beds to be lain on, and all the corners of their Chambers to be
searched, least they should be strangled or murdered in their sleeps. Others
that would not permit any Barbers to touch their faces, for fear that in
trimming of their heads or beards, they would cut their throats: And yet to
this day they are in such fear, that they dare not put meat in their mouths
before their Taster have tasted thereof.

What felicity can a King or Prince have, that has many thousands of men under
their governments, when he must watch for all, hear the complaints and cries
of every one, procure every man's safeguard, provoke some to do well by liberal
gifts, and others by terror and fear: He must nourish peace amongst his
Subjects, and defend his Realm against the invasion of foreign enemies,
besides many other calamities that are depending upon a Regal crown.

But now touching the unhappy states of wicked Princes, unto whom three kinds
of people are most agreeable, and familiar: The first are Flatterers, which be
the chief enemies to all Virtue, and they that impoyson their souls with a
poison so pestiferous, that it is contagious to all the world: their Princes
folly, they call Prudence: their cruelty, Justice; their Letchery, Wantonness;
their Fornications* Pleasures and Pastimes; if they be covetous, they call it
good Husbandry: if they be prodigal, they call it Liberality: So that there
is no vice in a Prince, but they cloak it under the shadow of some Virtue. The
second sort are such, who never rest night, but that in the morning they bring
in some new invention or other, how to tax and draw money from the poor
people, and generally all their study is employed to be wastfull and prodigal
in the exactions and miseries of the poor commons. The third and last sort are
such, that under the cloak of kindness and honesty (counterfayting good men)
have always their eyes upon other men's livings, and make themselves reformers
of vices. They invent wicked and false devices, not only how to get other men's
goods, but oftentimes their lives, who before God are most innocent.

Behold, here you may well see the manifold miseries that compass Scepters and
states of Princes: Here are the Thorns that they receive in recompense of
their brightness and royal Dignity, which ought like a Lamp to give light to
all the world: but when it is eclipsed or darkened with any vice, it is more
reproachful in them, than in any other private person whatsoever: for they sin
not only in the fault which they commit, but also by the example that they give.

The abundance of honors and pleasures that Princes enjoy, serves as a bait
to induce them to evil, and are the very Matches to give fire to Uice. What
was Saul before he was made King* whose life is showed in the holy Scripture,
whom God did elect? yet he made a sudden eclipse or changeing. How wonderful
was the beginning of the Reign of King Solomon, the which being overcome with
Royal pleasures, gave himself as a prey to women? Of two and twenty Kings of
Judah, there is found but five or six, that have continued in their virtue. If
we consider the estate of the Assyrians, Persians, Grecians and Egyptians, we
shall find more of them wicked than good. If we consider what the Kings and
Roman Emperors were (which has been the most flourishing Commonwealth in
the world) we shall find them so overcome with vices, and all kind of
cruelties, that I do almost abhorrs to speak of their corrupt and defiled
lives. What was the estate of their Commonwealth, before that Scilla and
Marius did murmr against it, before that Catiline and Catulla did perturbe
it, before that Caesar and Pompey did slander it, before that Augustus and
Marcus Antonius did destroy it, before that Tiberius and Caligula did defame
it, before that Domitian and Nero did deprave it? For although they made it
rich with many Kingdoms and Lordships, yet were the vices they brought with
them, more greater than the Kingdoms they gained: For their goods and riches
are consumed, yet their vices remain unto this day. What memory remains of
Romulus, that founded the City of Rome? Of Numa Pompilius, that erected the
Capitol: Of Ancus Martius, that compassed it with walls? Did not they show
what felicity remains in high estates, who are more subject to the assaults
of Fortune, than any other earthly creature? For many times the thread of life
breaks, when they think least of death: and then the infamy of those that
be wicked, remains written in Histories, for a perpetual memory thereof:
The which thing all Estates ought more to regard a thousand times, than the
tongue that speaks evil, which can but shame the living: but Books record a
perpetual infamy for ever. Which thing being duly considered of by many
Emperors and Kings in times past, they forsook their Scepters, and royal
Empires, and betook them to an obscure life, resting better contented with a
little in quiet, than to enjoy with full sail the crooked honors of the world.

CHAP. V. Of the misery of vicious Courtiers, and of their wicked lives.
WHat greater felicity can there be in this world, than to be in a Princes
favor, to be at his elbow at all times, to use courtly manners, and other
offices of humanity: of which number, there be some so subtle and crafty, that
they do play as the Fisherman, who as soon as he has gotten any thing in his
Net, gives over the Court, and goes his way. Othersome there are, that play
all out: and other that remain until they become wondrous rich; and in the
end, they are made to restore all back again. There are also others that do
nothing but invent means to enlarge their treasures, and become wealthy with
spoiling poor people. Princes do by them many times, as we do by our Hogs,
we let them fatten to the end we may eat them afterward: so likewise are they
suffered many times, to enrich themselves, to be disposed of afterward when
they are fat: and one that is new come, oftentimes is preferred in their places.

By this you may see that Courtiers oftentimes do sell their liberty to become
rich: For they must obey all commandments, they must frame themselves to laugh
when the prince laugheth, to weep when he weepeth, approve that which he
approves, and condemn that which he condemns. They must alter and change
their natures, to be severe with those that are severe: sorrowful with those
that are sorrowful: and in a manner transform themselves, according to the
nature of him whom they will please, or else he shall get nothing. To be brief,
they must frame themselves, to his manners and nature: and yet many times one
little offense staineth all the service they have done in their life time
before.

Many in Princes Courts put off their Cappes to them, whom they would gladly
see cut shorter by the head: and often bow their knees to do them reverence,
whom they wish had broken their necks.

Here you may see* the life of a great number of vicious Courtiers, which is no
life, but rather a lingering death: here you may see wherein their youth is
employed, which is no youth, but a transitory death: for when they come to age,
they bring nothing from thence but gray heads, their feet full of Gouts, their
backs full of pain, their hearts full of sorrow, and their souls filled with
sin.

CHAP. VJ. Of the misery of Magistrates, that administer not true Justice: with
a discourse against wicked Judges.
NOw our discourse of Courtiers being past, it is requisite that we speak of
things done in the civil life, and to how many miseries it is subject: For
although it be at this day a degree most Noble and necessary for the peace of
man's life, yet shall we find that it deserves to have his part in this
Pilgrimage, as well as others: and if there be any delectation, pleasure, or
honor, depending thereon, yet it is transitory and unconstant.

First, knowing that all the actions of Magistrates, pass before the eyes of
the common people, whose judgments in matters of state be but simple, yet have
they a certain smell or savor to know the good from evil: wherefore those
that be Judges and Magistrates, be subject (as in a Play) to be hissed at and
chased away with shame and confusion.

For the hare-brained people, which is compared to a monster with many heads,
are mutable, uncertain, fraudulent, apt to wrath and mutiny, ready to praise
or dispraise, without wisdom or discretion, variable in their talk,
unlearned and obstinate.

Therefore it behooves that the life of a Judge or Magistrate be sincere and
virtuous: for as he judges openly, so shall he be judged of the people
severally* not only in matters of weight and importance, but in those of small
consequence: For always the rude people will find somewhat to reform, as the
Lacedaemonians murmured at their Lawmakers Licurgus, for that he went always
holding down his head. The Venetians defamed wise Cato in his eating, and
accounted Pompeius uncivil, for that he would scratch with one finger only:
Yet these are but few in comparison of other good men that the common sort have
persecuted, banished, and in the end put to death. If that great Orator
Demosthenes were alive, he could say some what, who after he had a long time
been a just and faithful Governor of the Commonwealth of Athens, was in the
end (without cause) unjustly banished. Moses, and many other holy men have so
many times tasted the fury of the common people, that if they were this day
living, they would power out most grievous complaints against them.

Now we have showed and set forth the miseries that proceed from common
people, so must we in like sort put into the balance the errors and
corruptions that are found in wicked Judges: Of the which sort some are
corrupted with Fear, for such fear they have, that rather than they will
displease a Prince or a great Lord, they will violate justice like Pilate, that
condemned Christ, for fear that he had to displease the Emperor Tiberius.

Other Magistrates are corrupted by Love, as was Herod, who for to please the
foolish love of a Damsel that danced, condemned to death Saint John Baptist,
although he knew he was just and innocent.

Some are many times corrupted by hatred, as was the chief Priest, that
condemned Saint Paul to be stoned to death, though he deserved it not,

Some Magistrates are corrupted by Silver and Gold, and other Gifts and
Presents, as were the children of the Prophet Samuel: and this disease is so
contagious, that I fear (at this day) many are infected with it.

They all love Rewards says the Prophet) they all seek for Gifts: they do
not right to the Orphane, and the Widows complaint comes not before them.
And in an other place, Woe be to you that are corrupted by Money, by hatred or
love, and which judge the good to be evil, and the evil good: making the
light darkness, and the darkness light. Woe be to you that have not respect
to the deserts of things, but to the deserts of men: that regard not equity,
but gifts that are given: that regard not Justice, but Money. You are diligent
in rich men's causes, but you defer the cause of the poor: You are to them
most cruel and rigorous Judges, but unto the rich kind and tractable.

The Prophet Jeremy cries out against wicked Judges, and says. They are
magnified, and become rich: they have left the Orphans, and have not done
justice for the poor: Shall not, I therefore punish these things (says the
Lord) and my soul take vengeance on such manner of people*

Hear also the sentence that Saint James pronounces against them at the day
of Judgment: You have condemned and killed the just: you have lived in
wantonness in this world, and taken your ease; now therefore (says the Lord
of Hoasts) weep and howl in your wretchedness that shall come upon you: your
garments are moatheaten, your gold and silver is cankred, and the rust thereof
shall be a witness against you, and it shall eat your flesh as it were fire,
for the complaints of the poor are ascended up to my Throne.

These are the complaints that the Prophets and Apostles made against wicked
Judges and Magistrates: and likewise the censures that our good God has
thundered against them. And now I will speak of the misery of Marriage, with a
discourse of the same.

CHAP. VIJ. Of the praise of Marriage, and likewise the miseries that ensue
thereon.
THere is no joy nor pleasure in the world, which may be compared to Marriage;
for there is such fellowship between the parties coupled, that they seem two
minds to be transformed into one: likewise both good fortune and bad, is common
to both: their cares equal, and their joys equal: and to be brief, all
things are in common between them two.

If we account it pleasure to commit our secrets to our friends and
neighbors, how much greater is the joy, when we may discover our thoughts to
her, that is joined to us by such a knot of affinity, that we put as much trust
in her as in our selves, making her wholly treasurer or faithful keeper of the
secrets of our minds?

What greater witness of fervent love and vndissoluble amity can there be,
than to forsake father, mother, sister and brother, and generally all their
kindred, till they become enemy to themselves, for to follow a husband, that
does honor and reverence her, and having all other things in disdain, she
only cleaves to him: If he be rich, she keeps his goods: if he be poor,
she is companion with him in poverty: if he be in prosperity, his felicity is
redoubled in her: if he be in adversity, he bears but the one half of the
grief: and furthermore, she comfort him, assisteth and serves him: If a
man will remain solitary in his house, his wife keeps him company: if he
will go into the fields, she conducteth him with her eye as far as she can
see him: she desires and honors him: being absent, she complains and
sigheth, and wishes his company: being come home he is welcomed, and received
with the best show and tokens of love: and for to speak truth it seems that
a wife is a gift from heaven granted to a man, as well for the contentation of
youth, as the rest and solace of age.

Nature can give us but one Father, and one Mother: but Marriage presents
many in our children, the which do reverence and honor us, and are more dear
unto us than our own selves: for (being young) they play, prattle, laugh and
show us many pretty toys; they prepare us an infinite number of pleasures: and
it seems that they are given us by nature, to pass away part of our
miserable life. If we be afflicted with age, they show the duty of children,
close up one eyes, and bring us to the earth, from whence we came. They are our
bones, our flesh and blood; for in seeing them, we see our selves. The Father
beholding his Children, may be well assured that he sees their lively youth
renewed in their faces, in whom we are almost regenerate and borne again, in
such sort, that age is most grievous unto us, beholding the mirrours and
similitudes of our selves, the which does make our memories almost immortal.

Many are the joys and sweet pleasures in marriage, which for breuities sake I
pass over: but if we do well consider it, and weigh it in a just balance, we
shall find that amongst these Roses, are many Thorns growing: and amongst these
sweet showers of Rain, we shall find that there falls much Hail. But with
reverence now I crave pardon of all virtuous Women, that with patience I may
discover my intent, and that my presumption may not gain the least frown from
their chaste brows: for to the vicious I speak, and not to them whose breasts
harbors the liberal Fountain of virtue and wisdom.

The Athenians (being a people much commended for their prudence and wisdom)
seeing that Husbands and Wives could not agree, because of an infinite number
of dissensions that chanced between them, were constrained to ordain certain
Magistrates in their Country, whom they called Reconcilers of married ones:
the office of whom was to set agreement between the husband and the wife. The
Spartanes and Romans had also such like Laws and orders amongst them: so
great was the insolence and rashness of some women toward their husbands.

In this age there are but few I think, can bear patiently the charges of
marriage, or can endure the unbridled rage of some women; and to speak truth
without flattery, if thou take her rich, thou make thy self a bondslaue,
for thinking to marry thine equal, thou marriest a commanding Mistress: If
thou take her foul, thou can not love her: If thou take her fair, it is
an Image at thy gate to bring thee company: Beauty is a Tower that is assailed
of all the world, and therefore it is a hard thing to keep that, where every
one seeks to have the key: Then this is the conclusion, Riches causes a woman
to be proud, Beauty makes her suspected, and hard favor causes her to be
hated.

Therefore Hyponactes having tasted the martyrdomes of marriage, said that
there was but two good days in all the life of marriage: Whereof the one was
the wedding day upon which is made good cheer, the Bride fresh and fair, and
of all pleasures the beginning is most delectable: The other good day is when
the woman dies, for then the husband is out of bondage and thraldom.

Yet for all this a woman is to man a necessary evil, and one whom he cannot
well live without: Seeing that there is nothing more harder to find in this
world, than a good Woman, a good Mule, and a good Goat, who are three unhappy
Beasts. And to conclude, there is nothing more lighter than a woman's tongue,
unbridled: more piercing than her outrageous words: more to be feared, than her
boldness: more cruel, than her malice: nor more dangerous than her fury:
Besides many other hurtful discommodities of their huswiferie, which for this
time I pass over, and so return to our former discourse.

CHHP. VIIJ. Of the worlds general misery, and the vices of all sorts in the
Communalty.
OF all the miseries that happens to man in this Pilgrimage of woe, these
hereafter following, are the greatest: Of which Nature her self has
complained unto God, who says, that man for every Uice has a cloak of Virtue
to cover it: as for example, those that wound and kill one another, we call
them hardy and strong, and we say that they have a regard to honor, and
therefore deserve commendation. They that violate Women, and ravish Uirgins, we
call that bearing of love. Those that are proud, and seek by all unlawful
means to climb up to high Dignities, we call them honorable, grave, and men
of ripe judgment, Those that are covetous, and beguile their neighbors by
crafty subtilties and inventions, and so in short time become rich, those they
call good husbands, and men that will seek to live: besides many other vices
which are shadowed under the mantle of Virtue, the which is one principal
cause that so many miseries do fall upon the world: and to speak truth, the
whole earth is drowned in sin, that it seems to be the sink wherein all
the wickedness of the former age has been emptied.

Who ever saw the sin of Covetousness more deeper rooted in the world, than at
this present day? for all the Cities, Provinces and Kingdoms of the earth, be
very shops and storehouses of Covetousness and Avarice: this is the world
which the Prophets did foreshew, that men join house to house, and land to
land, as though themselves would alone dwell upon the earth.

Covetousness is the well spring of miseries, for from thence proceeds war and
destruction, and the great effusion of blood, with the which the earth is
overflowed: from Covetousness proceed Murders, Treasons, Thefts, Usuries,
Forswearings, the corruption of Witnesses, and perverting of Judgments: From
Covetousness the tedious delays in Law, and lingering of suits do proceed:
and to be short, from thence comes all wickedness.

This grievous sin is grown so familiar amongst men, that many live without
mercy, in such sort that now we may see the streets full of poor Beggars,
naked and clad with poverty, with an infinite number of banished women, driven
out of their Countries, bearing their children in their arms, wanting that
which covetous men hoord up with such cares, that they make it their God, and
will rather let a poor body dye at their gates, than refresh him with food.

Therefore let us now leave these wicked men, Idolaters of their treasures,
with the covetous rich man mentioned in the holy Scripture, and speak of an
other vice which is called Envy: the malady wherewith many minds in this new
world, is grievously afflicted.

The time is now come, that the whole earth is nothing but a very place of the
Envious: a vice which is the oldest of all vices, and has bin used in the
worlds infancy: the experience thereof was approved in the first age of Adam
and the Serpent, in Abel and Cain, in Jacob and Esau, in Joseph and his
brethren, in Saul and David, in Hammon and Mardocheus; the which pursued not
one another for their riches, but for the envy that the one bore to the other.

But all this is nothing to the Envy which is used amongst men at this day:
which wicked Uice, not only reigns amongst the common sort, but also amongst
the higher: for when they are mounted to the top of Fortunes wheel, and think
peaceably to enjoy the favor of Princes, behold suddenly the Envy of some
other, conspires against them, and causes them to be disdained, and cast out
of favor: Therefore I think there is no other means for to avoid Envy, but to
avoid dignity and rule: the reason is, that we are the children of envy; and he
that leaves most goods, leaves most Envy.

For this cause the Elders counseled the Rich, that they should not dwell
near the Poor, nor the Poor near the Rich: for the one are envied for their
Wealth, and the other for their Poverty.

Here will we now leave this grievous sin of Envy, and a little glaunce at the
ambitious Pride, that reigns amongst us. Who ever saw such excessive Pride in
all estates, as we see at this present? whereby we may well name this world, a
world of glistering Gold, of Silver, and Ueluet, of Purple, of Silk, with the
which we deck our bodies curiously, and have no regard of the sins that
ouerload the souls.

But let us beware that the same happen not to us, which the Prophets writ
against the Women of Jerusalem, who reproved their pride, their vnshamefull
Looks, their rowlyng eyes, their attires, their chains, Jewels and bracelets,
and other their vaineglorious fashions: It will happen to you (says the Lord
of Hosts) that in stead of perfumes, you shall have stink: in stead of curled
hair, baldness: and the fairest young men amongst you shall pass through the
edge of the sword, and the strongest shall be slain, and perish in the wars.

Many other vices could I largely discourse of, as the sin of Gluttony and
drunkenness, where with the whole earth is infected: and I greatly marvel,
that many insatiable belly-gods do not rot and burst in the midst of their
riotous excess, that will sit bowsing in Tauerns, spoiling that which might
comfort many succourlesse people, and in the mean time, the poor Lazarus
stands at the gate, and cannot have so much as the Crummes that fall from
their table: and to conclude, these wicked vices of Gluttony and Drunkenness
has continued upon the earth ever since the beginning of the world: as for
example. The liquorous lusting of Adam and Eve, was the cause that the gate of
Paradise was shut up against us, Esau sold his birthright, Saint John Baptist
was slain after Herod had banquetted: N^ah being overcome with wine, slept
with his privy parts uncovered: and was mocked of his Children: Lot being
drunk with wine, deflowred his own Daughters: with many other examples that I
could name touching these wicked vices, which for this time I pass over. And
now I will discourse of other miseries and calamities belonging to man's woeful
Pilgrimage.

CHAP. IX. Of the misery of Age, and of man's death: with his resurrection, and
the terrible Judgment of God at the latter day.
THus after man has waded in a Sea of misery, as it were therein overwhelmed
even from his birth, at last, Age comes creeping on, and then, when he ought to
rest, griefs and dolours are renewed, the heart afflicted, the brain troubled,
the face withered, the body crooked, the sight dimmed, the hairs falling, the
teeth rotten: and (to be short) the body is then, as it were a similitude of
death. For in age man is wonderfully changed, he is prompt to wrath, hard to
appease, sad, covetous and suspicious: the which being well considered by the
Emperor Augustus, said: That man, till fifty years, lived in pleasure and
felicity; and he that lives longer for the most part) passes his time in
sorrow and grievous sickness, death of children, loss of goods, to bury his
friends, with an infinite number of other worldly troubles: So that it were
better to have their eyes closed in youth, than to live to behold these things
in their crooked age.

Thus after man has sorrowed all his days under the heavy burden of his
sins, he is forced at last, to yield unto Death; yet by no means may he know
after what manner he shall end his life. Some there be that are forced to dye
by hunger, others by thirst, others by fire, others by water, others by poison,
others are smoothered, others are torn in pieces by wild Beasts, others
devoured of the Fowls of the air, others are made meat for Fishes, and
others for Worms: Yet for all this Man knows not his end: and when he
thinks himself most at rest, he suddenly perishes.

What a dreadful sight is it to see him lying in bed, that is oppressed with
the pains of Death? What shaking, and changing of all the bands of nature will
he make, the Feet will become cold, the Face pale, the Eyes hollow, the Lips
and Mouth to retire, the Hands diminish, the Tongue waxes black, the Teeth
does close, the Breath fails, the cold Sweat appears by violence of
Sickness: all which is a certain token that Nature is overcome.

But now when it comes to the last gasp, or at the sorrowful departure that
the soul makes from his habitation, all the bands of nature are broken:
beside, when the devil or wicked spirit is assured of our end, what furious
assaults will he make against our souls, to bring us in despair of Gods mercy:
it is the hour when as Satan does his power to strive against God, for to
hinder the salvation of mankind: and he is more boisterous in these latter
days, for that he knows that his time is but short, and that the end of his
Kingdom is at hand: and therefore he is the more inflamed: for he never more
tormenteth those whom he does possess, than when he knows that he must
depart.

But now when man has passed the bitter anguish of death, where is then become
his glories? Where are his pompes and triumphs? Where is his voluptuousness
and wantonness? Where is his majesty, excellence and holiness? they are
vanished as the shadow, and it is chanced to them, as to the Garment that the
Worms have eaten: or as the Wool that the Moath has devoured.

Let us behold man when he is in his grave: who ever saw a monster more hidious
than the dead Carcass of man: behold his excellence, majesty and dignity,
covered with a lump of earth: here you may see him that was chearished,
reverenced and honored, even to kiss his hands and feet; by a sudden
mutation, become a creature most abominable: And to them it happneth, as
Solomon writes in his book of Wisdom: What has it profited (says he) the
pride and great abundance of riches? All these things are passed, as is the
Arrow shot to the white, or as the Smoke that is dispersed with the wind.

Let us therefore now leave the body of man resting in his grave, as in a bed
for a season, and speak of his resurrection, and the judgment of God, which
was so much feared of the Prophet David, that he prayed God not to enter into
judgment with his servant.

Being dead in this world, he must then appear before the judgment seat of
God, with such a terror to those that consider it well, that there is no
member but trembles: It is the day that the Lord will come like a tempest, when
every ones heart shall fail them, and all the world shall be astonished: For
even as the Lightning that rises in the East, and extends to the West, so
shall the coming of the Son of man be. Tribulation then shall be so extreme
and great, as the like has not been since the beginning of the world, till
now, nor never shall be the like: the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall
give no more light: the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the waves of the
Sea shall rage, and men shall be amazed with fear, and the powers of heaven
shall move.

Woe shall be in those days to them that are with Child, and to them that give
suck: For as it was in the days before the Flood, they did eat and drink,
marry, and were married, even unto the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and
knew nothing till the Flood came and took them all away: So shall the coming
of the Lord be, and then shall all kindreds of the earth mourn, and shall
hide themselves in Dens and Caves, and in the Mountains, and shall say unto
them, fall upon us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the
Throne.

Blow out the Trumpet (says the Prophet Joel) that all such as dwell in the
world may tremble at it, for the day of the Lord comes, and is hard at hand:
a dark day, a gloomy day, yea and a stormy day. Before him shall be a
consuming fire, and behind him a burning flame: Then the dead that are in their
graves, shall rise and come forth: the bones, and the other parts shall find
out their joints, for to join again together with the body, that the earth
has putrified and corrupted*

All those that the Beasts and Birds of the Air has deuowred, all those that
the Sea has swallowed up, all those that are inuapored in the Earth, and all
those that the Fire has consumed, shall be reduced and brought to their former
state: All the blood that Thieves, Pirates, Murderers, Tyrants, and false
Judges, have unjustly shed, shall then appear before the Majesty of God: so
that there shall not one drop of blood be lost, from the time of Abel, that was
the first slain of men, unto the last: so that there shall not one hair
perish.

If the Uaile of the Temple did break, the Earth quake, the Sun darken and
change his brightness, for the wrong that was done to Jesus Christ being on the
Cross, although in nothing he did offend: What countenance may then poor
sinners show, that have offended him an innumerable times: Who then shall abide
the shining brightness of Gods Majesty sitting upon his Throne of Glory?

It is the dreadful hour when wicked Monarchs, Kings and Princes, shall give
account of their unlawful exactions that they have made upon their subjects,
and of the blood that they have wrongfully spilled: It is the hour wherein
Merchants, and such as have traded in the circle of the world* that have
beguiled and sold by false waights and measures, shall render just account of
the least fault that they have committed: It is the hour that covetous men and
Usurers, that have beguiled some, and undone others, shall pay themselves the
cruel interests of that which they have ill gotten: It is the hour when
Magistrates and wicked Judges that have corrupted, violated, and suspended
justice, shall be countable for their corruption and iniquities: It is the very
hour wherein Widows, Orphants, and other afflicted persons, shall make their
complaints before God, of the wrong and oppression that has been showed them:
It is the hour wherein the wicked shall say (repenting in themselves, troubled
with hor^ible fear) behold these which in times past we had in derision,
infamy and reproach, are now accounted amongst the children of God, whose
portion is amongst the Saints: It is the hour wherein many foolish and dumb
persons shall be more happier than the wise and eloquent; Many shepherds and
carters shall be preferred before Philosphers: many Beggars before rich Princes
and Monarchs: and many simple and ignorant, before the witty and subtle.

Let us therefore that are Christians, look to our selves, and take heed we
be not counted under the arrest and sentence of the most greatest misery of all
miseries: The which sentence is recited in the five and twenty Chapter of Saint
Matthew, where it is said: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,

FINIS.

