AN EXCELLENT Treatise touching the restoring again of him that is fallen;

Written by the worthy, Saint Chrysostom to Theodorus a friend of his, who by
lewd living, was fallen from the Gospel; fit to read for reclaiming their
hearts which are in like case.

Englished (out of an ancient Latin translation, written in Velume) by R.W.

With an annexed Epistle of comfort from one friend to another, where in the
Anabaptists error of desperation is briefly confuted, and the sin against the
holy Ghost plainly declared.

Heb. 3.13. Exhort ye one another daily, while it is called to day.

LONDON Printed for I. Helm, and are to be sold at his shop at S. Dunstans
Church

Of the profit of this Treatise.
THe prince of Surgeons, Phoebus son,
In curing famous was:
Machaon and his brother too,
By art brought much to pas.
The best of these in festered sores
Did all, and could no more:
To soul of man corrupt by sin,
Their skill denied a door.
But here behold against dreadful crimes
A sovereign medcine lies:
A Moly, Panaceia sweet,
To him that upward sties.
If fallen down thou feel despair,
Read through this pamphlet small:
It Theon cheiras, powerful salve,
In such assaults may call.
R. W.

1. Pet. 4.3. It is sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of the
life, after the lust of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts,
drun^ennesse, gluttony, drinkings, and in abominable idolatries.


To the Worshipful and his special good friend, Master JOHN KEMPTHORNE
Esquier, R.W. wishes in this life prosperous success in all affairs, and in
the life to come a crown of glory.
SEeing always it has bin accounted a superfluous work, either to commend in
Apollo wisdom, or to extol in Hercules puissance, or to praise in Minerua
knowledge: it may be thought no less needless for me, to praise in fined
words and garnished style (if so I were able to do) your ardent zeal in Gods
truth, and marvelous affection toward the true professors thereof. And
because among those that know you, it shines so oriently, as in words to set
it forth, were rather to imbeazle than illustrate it; and among those that
know you not, by commending it abundantly, may fear the censure of smoothing,
I think it better, at this time (as Salust says of Carthage) to speak
nothing at all of it than a little. Yet surely (though the envious happily
mislike it) this I affirm, when I bethought to find a meet protector for
this pamphlet, that might love it, as Antonius the Emperor was wont to love
books, as Alphonsus was accustomed to esteem the works of Cicero, that might
read it diligently as Erasmus did Terence, as Bishop Jewel did Horace, as
Lady Jane Graie did Platoes Phaedon: none came to my mind before your
Worship, under the wings of whose tuition, these my slender labors might safely
be shadowed, from all the malice of spiteful reproouers and taunting carpers.
Now concerning the work, some I know will find fault with my presumption,
that being a tender suckling and nouice in good letters, I would dare to put
forth ought in print, especially in such a plentiful time of books. Let
these take this answer; that I did it not voluntarily but enforced, and that
by the request, not of one or two, but of many, whose good will I have often
experimented, whose friendship in the Lord I will not (for a small cause)
violate, whose authority I may not despise. For lighting by chance on this
treatise of Chrysostom, reuerencing it at the first sight more for antiquity
than ought else, as soon as I had read it over, I did it faithfully for my
private utility into English, never thinking it should come to this pass. But
having lent it unto some of my friends, desirous of such a piece of matter,
they fell suddenly into that liking and loving of it, that they never ceased
exhorting, begging, compelling (I may say) until (maugre my head) I granted,
it should go forth for the benefit of many. Which now being newly borne and
come into the world, I beseech your courtesy to receive into your patronage:
and as it proceeded from a willing mind, so to take it with a gladsome
countenance. And notwithstanding this testimony of a grateful mind, do not
any way counterpoise the weight of your demerits, yet I beseech you to accept
of the poor widows mites. and of the cheerful giuers mind. Thus surceasing
any longer to enterrupt your Worships serious affairs, I suppliantly crave of
the Almighty, daily to augment his graces in you and the virtuous Gentlewoman
your wife, that after your race run in this dale of misery, you may for ever
enjoy the sight of Christ Jesus in heaven.

Your worships daily and humble Orator, ROB. WOLCOMB.

Of the restoring again of him that is fallen.
OH; Iere. 9.1.
that my head were (full) of water and mine eyes a fountain of tears Much
more fitly it is spoken of me now, The worthiness and integrity once of the
person to whom he writes. Ecclu. 16.3
then at that time of the Prophet of God. For howbeit not many cities, neither
a whole country is to be lamented of me, yet I must mourn for a soul of
more worth than many nations, of more price than many cities. For if one that
do the will of God, be better than a great company of the wicked thou also
wast better once, than many multitudes of the Jews. Wherefore let no man
wonder, if I peradventure use more large lamentations at this time, The cause
of the lamentation.
and power out were plenty of tears, than at that time the Prophet did (For as
I said) I do not bewail ye sacking of a city which is taken, nor the thraldom
of the common people little set by: but the downfall of an excellent soul, and
the ruin of a temple which Christ inhabited. If any ever knew the ornaments of
thy mind, which now the flame of the devil has consumed; if any ever beheld
the temple of thy body, when it glittered with the brightness of chastity;
soothly he would deem that lamentation of the Prophet small and much inferior:
wherein he bewaileth that the hands of Barbarians had profaned the holy
place, and that the enemies fire had destroyed the Temple, and that the
Cherubin and the Arc were defiled, and that the mercy seat, with the tables of
stone, and the golden pot, were polluted. For this lamentation which I use,
is by so much more piteous and bitter than the other; by how much more truly
and evidently all these things were to be seen in thy soul, than between
the walls of the Temple; the Temple which was in thee, was much holier than the
other. It shined not with the metals of gold and silver but with the virtues
of the mind, and gifts of the holy Ghost: it had within it the Arc and the
two Cherubins, that is, the faith of the father, and the son, and the holy
Ghost. The wretched plight whereinto this man was fallen.
Yet now naught of all these is left, all things are taken from thy soul, she
is bereft of all her beauty, and all the gifts which God bestowed on her, she
remains spoiled, deformed, foul, she has lost all her aid and safeguard.

No door now is shut in her, no entry is kept, but she lies open to all
naughty spirits, which corrupt the soul. No unclean thought, no filthy
desire is thence expelled but if the spirit of fornication come, it enters in,
if the spirit of pride, if the spirit of avarice, if more hellish and vnpure,
than these shall come none forbids them, none bears them back. For she
has no keeper, no Sexton. And as to the secrets of heaven there is no access
for an ungodly person; so at the first no infection could touch thy mind.

But perhaps I may seem to speak incredible things, to those especially that
knew not thy former estate, and only see the destruction wherein thy soul now
lies. This surely is the cause why I weep without remedy, because I knew
thee: and why I sorrow incessantly, because I remember how long it is, until I
see thee return unto thy wonted and pristine glory. Which for all that men may
judge impossible. Mat. 19.26
Psalm. 113.8, 9. 1. Sam. 2.8
For he it is, that raises the needy out or the dust, and lifts up the poor
out of the dunge. That he may s^t him with princes (^uen) with the princes of
the people He it is that makes the barren woman to dwell with a family, and a
joyful mother of children.

Let us not then doubt nor despair, If Satan draw to sin, God can pull back
to goodness.
but that thou may be converted into a better case. For if the devil could
do so much in thee, as to draw thee from the height of virtue to the depth of
wickedness, how much more shall God be able to reclaim thee to the highest pitch
of goodness, and not only make thee that thou wast once, but far more
blessed than thou did seem in thy own conceit. Only be of stout courage,
neither cast of the hope of goodness: let not, I pray thee, that betide thee,
which does the godless. Ungodliness without penitencie breeds to despair.
It is impiety not the multitude of sins, that brings a fool to
desperation: and therefore Solomon said not, that each one when he comes
into the depth of evils contemns, but, Pro. 18.3
the wicked (says he) if he come into the depth of evils contemns. It is
then a point of the impious to have no hope of salvation, Or, when the wicked
comes, the^ comes contempt.
and to contemn when they come into the depth of sins, ungodliness not
permitting them to have respect to God, and to return thither from whence they
fell So that this thought which cutteth away all hope of conversion, issues
from impiety, and as a most heavy stone accloying the soul, it perpetually
compels it to behold the earth and never to look upward on God. When we
sin we must not despair.
But a lusty stomach and lofty mind will cast down this hurtful weight of
his soul, and tread under feet Satan, that being his own governor he may
sing the Psalmists words of God, Psalm. 113 2.
As the eyes of seruans look upon the hands of their masters, and as the eyes
of a maiden upon the hands of her mistres, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God, till he have mercy upon us. Have mercy upon us, O Lord have mercy upon us,
for we have suffered too much contempt. And in these words of this heavenly
prophecy, there is singular doctrine, we have suffered too much contempt. This
is that he would have us say, that although for the multitude of our sins
we have suffered much contempt, and are surrounded with reproaches, yet our
eyes shall wait upon the Lord our God till he have mercy upon us, and that we
will not leave of beseeching until we be vouchsafed forgiveness.

We ought to be earnest in prayer when we sue for forgiveness, and not to rest
till God have fulfilled our petitions.
For this is the badge of a constant and settled mind that it is not weary of
perseuering in intrearie through despair to obtain, but continues and
persisteth in craving, until the Lord have mercy upon it. These two periods
following G.F. Capito has not in his translation.
And least you should think you offend greatly before the Lord, if not
vouchsafed to be heard, you continue importunately in prayers, call to memory
the Evangelical parable, and there you shall find, that the Lord shows, that
stiff and perseuering beggars are not unacceptable to him. For he says, Lu.
11.8.
Though he would not give him because he is his friend, yet because of his
importunity. he will rise and give him as much as he needs. Understand
therefore (dear friend) that the devil puts into our minds despair of
obteining, to this end, that he may cut from us the hope of the goodness of
God, which is the Anchor of our salvation, the foundation ^f life, the guide of
the way through which we pass to ^eauen: in brief, the Apostle ^aith. To.
8.24.
by hope we are saved. Insomuch that our salvation consists in hope, which
draw^th up our souls from out the earth, knit (as it were) to certain chains
hanging down from heaven, and calls again those to the heavenly dwelling
place which cleave to themselves, exalting them securely above the troubles of
this life, and earthly miseries. Wherefore if any encumbred with these
calamities, be dissolute, and let go out of his hands the anchor of hope, he
must needs fall, and be carried into the bottomless pit and profunditie of
evils. The dangers of despair
Which as soon as the enemy shall perceive, and see us loath the multitude of
our sins, and fear through remorse of conscience, straightway he draws
near, and casts before our eyes cogitations of despair, more heavy than
any lead or gravel which if we undertake, we must of necessity be drowned
in the depth or evils, because, with the very load, the stays of our salvation
are broken. Into the which depth because thou art cast, thou do throw behind
thee the precepts of a good and gentle lord, and thou do obey the beck of a
bloody and merciless tyrant, Mat. 11.30.
the enemy of thy salvation. Thou have shaken off the sweet yoke of Christ,
and have laid on thy neck for it, the hard and iron fetters of sin: thou
have shaken off the easy burden of a lowly and meek Lord, and for it have
hanged about thy neck a millstone, but how long do thou so continue? Stand
now at the last, and cease to drown thy unhappy soul, without any care,
without any advise how long do thou have it forth, and cast it down
headlong to thy own decay? Luke 15.
And truly the woman in the Gospel, which found again the lost groate, called
together her friends and neighbors, that they should rejoice with her: but I
will call your and my friends and neighbors together, and will entreat them to
meet, not that they should be glad, but that they should lament with me: not
that they should rejoice, but mourn with me, and greatly sorrow, lifting up
their hands to heaven, as they shall see me to do, and I will say unto them;
howl and lament with me, O my friends, power out and bring forth with me
fountains and floods of tears, not for that I have lost vnporzable weights of
gold, or innumerable talents of silver; not because I have lost threades full
of costly pearls, but for that my friend Amicus alter i^se.
dearer than any gold, and more precious than any stone, is (I know not how)
while he sailed with us over the large and broad sea of this life, fallen down
into the very depth of destruction. And if some one of my friends shall go
about to comfort, and will me to lean of sorrowing I will answer him in the
Prophets words: Or, let me alone, I will weep bitterly, you can not comfort me.
Suffer me to we^pe most bitterly, neither hold on comforting me: for I weep
not through the affection of the flesh, neither is my lamentation woman like,
wherein appear immoderate tears to be blamed. I mourn for that, which the
great and famous Apostle S. Paul says he mourns for when as he says: 2.
Cor. 12.22.
That I may mourn for them that have sinned, and have not repented.

The death of the soul is pitifully to be lamented, seeing the death of the
body is so bitterly taken.
Certes with reason shall one rebuke those that for the common death of their
friends weep without mean; but when the wounds not of a body, but of a soul
are lamented, and of such a soul, which in ^eath it self shows signs of
^er former beauty, and won^erous gainesse, and with liue^ tokens displaieth
the flower ^f virtues extinguished in her, ^ho is so cruel, and vnacquain^ed
with virtue, that would ^ot be provoked to tears? For it is a point in
Philoso^hie, to forbear weeping for ^ommon death: so in the death ^f a soul,
and such a soul ^o receive comfort. I adiudge ^oth ungodly and irreligious.
For ordinary death to keep ^he eyes from tears, is the ^hiefest thing in the
study of wisdom: but how shall not ^e seem to be lamented for without
intermission, who of ^ate reckned the whole braveness of the body, but like
^arued stones, who accounted gold as clay, who respected all ^elights as dirt,
and now ^ttached by the sudden fevers ^f lust and voluptie, being deprived of
the integrity an^ beauty of his mind, has shaken hands with virtue, and i^
become a slane to vice an^ pleasure? This man shall I not bewail? This man
shall I not moysten so long with river of tears, until wit^ weeping I stir
up feeling i^ him, and by the warmth o^ tears I raise some lively motions in
him, if mournin^ may do ought? And i^ mourners of the body ceas^ not from
lamenting, though they assuredly know, their weeping profit them nothing to
renew the life of him tha^ is dead: why should not we that know the soul may
be^ called from death by conversion, earnestly follow after the medicine of
repentance, tha^ (even the sepulcher being opened) with abundance of tears he
may be recovered? Yea also I think we are to be accused of sluggardie, since
the lamenters of bodies and ordinary death do weep so much and continually
(yet certain as we said, that they shall not raise again their dead,) if we
that know, that by repentance (lamentation coupled wc it) a soul may be
restored to his former estate (for the kingly Prophet said. Psalm. 65. Or, in
the grave who shall praise thee.
In hell who shall confess thy name?) do nothing so.

We know too, that diverse in the days both of us and our ancestors having
sliden out of the straight path, and straied from the entrance of the narrow
way, were so again restored, that their end answered their beginning,
obtaining the goal and crown, yea they were thought to have place among the
number of the Saints. But as long as one remains in the flame and furnace of
lust, these things seem inpossible to him although A thousand.
infinite examples should be alleged. But if some small conversion be begun, and
the penitent person cast upward his eyes that burning flame will tarry behind
him, and by how much more swiftly he shall take his pace, by so much more,
before him shall he see all things sumpled with the coal of an heavenly dew.
Despair the greatest enemy to our salvation.
So much worth is it that we beware of one thing, the greatest enemy to our
salvation, to our conversion, to our repentance, to wit desperation: which if
it take hold in our mind, how great desire soever we have of salvation, how
great purpose soever to live everlastingly, if (I say) despair come, all the
entry to salvation is stopped, the way to repentance is hindered, and the
beginning of anguish is engendered. And how then shall he, that is out of the
way, and to whom the door is shut, ve able to do any good work, when as
(because despair prohibiteth) he cannot come to the entrance of goodness? For
this cause the Devil goes about with tooth and nail, to plant in our hearts
such manner of cogitations. For if the fear of despair shall remove us from
the way of virtue, he has no long combat with us, for why should he assault
when none resists? And whosoever shall have the power to undo this knot,
incontinent his strength returns, the lustiness of his mind increases, he
shall be delighted with the renewing of those contentions: the reason is, he
shall see himself chase the chaser, and pursue the persecuter. And if in case
(as in wrestling it falls out) he faulter again and fall, let him not be out
of hope for shame, but remember, that is not the law of wrestling and iusting,
not once to fall (for he may not be said to be conquered that falls) but in
the end not to yield, for he that despair has maystered, how can he either
recover might in contention, or withstand and fight, seeing he takes his
heels, and does not at all return to the conflict? Neither think that I
speak of those alonely, that have trangressed in small and not much important
things, but my speech is of him that has made himself a villain to all
mischief, and has dammed to himself the way to the kingdom of heaven, and
was one of the number not of the incredulous miscreants, but of them that liked
God, and after this has either fallen into fornication, or into all sorts of
unchastity, which (as the Apostle says) Ephe. 5.3.
to name is unseemly. This man (I say) ought not to misdoubt of salvation,
though such wickedness enuiron him even to the last gasp. The anger of God is
not passible, and therefore though we sin, yet his wrath may be changed into
mercy.
But harken what the cause of this is. If the wrath of God were an affection
that did work a passion, we might rightly say, that the flame of it kindled
with so many and such evils, might not be quenched: but for as much as the
truth teaches that the nature of God is void of passions we must learn that
though God punish, though he plague, he does it not with a wrathful passion,
but with unspeakable gentleness, going about to cure us, not to confound us,
and therefore with gladness will receive the penitent. For the plaster of
repentance (if thou seek it) heals the soul, and defends thee from the
anger of God, which he conceived for thine offenses. God does not (as I said)
punish a sinner for his own fantasy, Why God punishes man.
when he reuengeth his wrong (for the nature of God is not capable of such an
affection) but for our profit; he does all things for our utility, and he
chastises and corrects not to avenge himself, but to amend us.

And if any persist in hardness, as the man that turns his eyes from the
light, damnifieth nothing the light, but damneth himself to darkness; so he
that contemns virtue through a heart that cannot repent, estrangeth himself
from salvation. And as a Physician that suffers wrong at the hands of
phrenticke and brainesicke men, sorroweth not, nor is displeased a whit at it,
but does all things that appertain to ease the malady of the patient, (for
the wrong is caused by pain:) and as you may see the Physician glad at a
little amendment of the sick person, and to execute the residue of his charge
with joy and cheerefulnes, not keeping in mind the wrong done, but respecting
the health of the patient: so, much rather God, God is willing to have us
return.
when we are become stark wood, is not greedy of vengeance for our
trespasses, but desirous to heal our old and putrified biles; for to this end
he says and does all things, thirsting after our safety, not our punishment.

And albeit reason sufficiciently show the contrary, yet least you should
stagger in the matter, we are able to avouch it out of the holy Scriptures.
Tell me what more wicked body was there ever then the king of Babylon? Who
having found out in many things the omnipotency of God, Dan. 2.46.
in so much that he worshipped his Prophet, and commanded Frankencense and
Myrrh to be offered to him: Dan. 3.
yet again in despite of God he returned to his wonted haughtiness, and did
cast jointly into the oven of burning fire, those that refused to worship his
image, because they preferred the service of God. Nevertheless, God allured to
repenpentance, and gave occasion of recanting to this so bloody, and wicked a
king. First in this, Dan. 3.
that with the three children he appeared unto him in the oven; afterward in
that he caused him to see the vision which Daniel interpreted, Dan. 4.
that was able to mollify even an heart of flint. But when he was warned by
works, the Prophet also exhorted him by words, and he received the counsel
of the Prophet, saying: Dan. 4.
Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be ecceptabe unto thee, and break off thy
sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor for,
let there be an healing of thine error.

What satest then to this, O thou wise and blessed man? Yet is there a
returning after so great slides? credit me there is, after grievous
sickness and from the door of death proceeds health, and after desperate
sins many wax wise. For lo (as we showed before) this king of Babel had now
stapped all way of salvation, in that he provoked the Lord to wrath, who made
him, and exalted him to the throne of a kingdom, who revealed also to him
heavenly mysteries who imparted on him the knowledge of things to come, and
disclosed to him the secrets of all his kingdom, who confounded by the divine
solution of his prophet, the iuglings of the wise men, Astrologers, Gazarens,
and Caldeans, and opened to the capacity of a child, by a divine interpretation
a hidden secret: insomuch that he seemed not only to believe in the highest
God, but to proclaim thoroughout all the world, that the God of Daniel was the
true God; yet after this he fell into such an outrage, that he threw headlong
into the hot burning oven the servants of God that would not worshis his image.
And yet ne here does the mercy of God forget to cure and remedy him, but in the
midst of the fire, when he had put to the flame, the children that worshipped
God, there he asswageth him not with quenching the fire with water, but with
working a wonder. For he could both extinguish the fire, and distill down a
shower from heaven, but this he does not, least he should increase the force of
his rage, but permits the flame to be made as great, as the fury of the
tortor desired, and he does not forbid him to punish, but takes away power
from the torment. And that no one that saw the children not burn, might
suppose it was a vain imagination, no fire in deed that he saw, he suffered
the executioners (namely those that stood about the furnace) to be consumed,
that he might make manifest, that not only fire in truth was seen, but that
Gods commandment was more forcible than any strength of fire. For every thing
that is, obeieth him of whom it had his beginning. That fire received the
bodies of those saints and by the ordinance and will of God forgetting his
nature whereby it burns, upon it showed only his nature of illumining,
rendering again the holy and faithful thing committed to his charge nothing
hurted; for they came forth out of the flaming furnace as it had been out of
a princes palace, worthy to be admited of all, of all to be reverenced. None
then cast his eyes on the king who glittered in purple, with a diadem on his
head, but he was forsaken of all, as though he had been no body, for that the
children had rapteu^ rich-one into an admiration. For who would not he
astonished that the fire was afrighted at the sight of the young men's bodies, and
that it did not only she from the flesh of those saints, but also did not touch
one hair of their head (which was but little) nor the uttermost hemine of
their garments?

Who would not admire, that their members were stronger then mountains, their
garments than metals, their hairs than diamonds? And herein is the wonder
aggrauated, that when they were in the midst of the fire, they sang a Psalm
to God, albeit experience teaches, that they that are committed to the flame,
be consumed as soon as they open their mouth. To conclude these bl^ssed
children remain with God glorious, with men wonderful; but the naughty king
was neither moved with these miracles, nor wondered at the vision and the
foretelling of his confusion, but abode hard of belief, neither yet was
punished. And hitherto Gods patience was not tried, but when he had forborne
him a long time, at length he uneath corrected him, not punishing the offenses
past, but respecting the amendment to come: in a word, he condemned him not
everlastingly, Dan. 4.33.
but chastised for a little space, but reformed for a few years he got again
his former estate, so that by the punishment he sustained no loss but by the
amendment gat great good.

Such (believe me) such is the goodness of God toward men, never rejecting
repentance if it be truly and uprightly offered; although one come to the top
of wickedness, Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via. Sen.
notwithstanding if he have a desire to return to the way of virtue, he gladly
receives and imbraceth him, and does all things whereby he may be reclaimed to
his wonted condition. Yea and that which is more worth the noting, although any
be not able wholly to abandon the ure of sin, he will not refuse how small soever
repentance, and in how little time soever undertaken, he will take it, and not
suffer the least conversion go vnreguerdoned. Is. 57. Or, for his sins I have
made him sorry a little while, etc. and I have bin sad, and I have walked
heavily, and I have healed him, I have comforted him.
For this (me thinks) Isaiah shows, where he speaks after this manner of
the people of the Jews, for his sin I have made him somewhat sorry, and I
have smitten him, and I have turned my face from him, and he was sorry and
walked heavily, and I healed him, and comforted him.

But the wicked king, that by reason of the naughtiness of his wife sought a
booty for his lust, may be a more evident testimony of this matter; who being
troubled with the heinousness of his sins, repented, and clothed in
sackecloth bewailed his doing, and here in so drew the mercy of God upon him,
that he pardoned all his trespasses. For so it is said, 1. King. 21.28.29.
and the word of the Lord came to Eliah the Tishbite, saying, see thou how
Ahab is humbled before me? because he submits himself before me, I will not
bring that evil in his days. Also after him again Manasses, who bare the
bell from all pitiless tyrants, who overthrew the service of God and the
worship of his laws, who replenished the Temple of the Lord with Idols,
thrusting out the worshipping of the Lord, this king (I say) surpassing the
wickedness that ever has been heard of, albeit repented, and after was
numbered among the friends of God. 2. Chro. 33.
Now if he or they of whom before we mentioned pondering the unmeasurableness
of their transgressions, had despaired of return by conversion and repentance,
doubtless they had lost all those good things which happened unto them by
amendment of life. But contrariwise they beholding the mercy that cannot be
uttered, and God his infinite and profound goodness, untied from their necks
the devilish bonds of despair, and spurring up themselves, were converted to
the way of virtue, and by withdrawing their foot from headlong ruin finished
a good course. And so far of the examples of the holy men.

Psalm. 95.1.
Now hearken how God by the Prophet allureth us in words to repentance, to day
(says he) if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: etc. And in
that he says to day, he means all our life time, even unto the last part (if
so it chance) of our old age; Short repentance loses not reward. Jonas 3.
for not the length of time but the truenes of repenting is considered, or else
how is it read that the Ninevites in the little space of one day not in long
time purged a most grievous sin. And the thief also which hanged on the
cross, Luke 23.
needed not a very long season to be made fit for paradise, but so much space
was enough as was spent in pronouncing one speech Insomuch that in a moment,
ha^ing all his sins cleansed, he was thought worthy to enter heaven before
even the Apostles. And semblably, do we not oftentimes see the martyrs in one
day, and percase in the space of one hour, to receive the crowns of great
rewards? Wherefore hardiness is all, and a boldness conioined with p^ompt and
ready minds, that moved (as it were) with a certain wrath, we be displeased
with lust our inueagler, and offer all our desire and love on the altar of
virtue. For this is that thing that God wills, and requires of us, he
seeks not continuance of time, nor vexation of us, he respects true and
unfeigned conversion. Seeing many that were last, have by earnest la our
exceeded those that were before the^.
It is not then so badde to fall, as after a fall to lie still, and be
unwilling to rise, covering the vitiousnes of our ill intent (taking no delight
but in sin) with desperate speeches For with indignation the Prophet cries out
against these; Does not he^ rise up that falls, and he return that is turned
away Jere. 8. Godly men may rise by repentance after their fall.
?

Now if thou say; What if one of the faithful should fall. may he be restored?
To this I answer; in that we say he has fallen, we confess he stood before
he fell: for it is an absurd thing to be spoken, that any man fell, that has
still lien and never stood. We will produce also out of the book of God
allegations, if ought has been spoken of this matter, either in parables or in
plain speeches, or if any thing may be found in the examples of our elders.
What represents that sheep which when it wandered from the ninety and nine,
Luke 15.
was sought by the shepherd, and brought home on his shoulders? does it not
evidently show the sliding and the repairing of a faithful body? For it was a
sheep like as were the ninety and nine, not of any other, but of the self
same flock, it had the self same guides, it was first fed in the same
pasture, with the same water, and the same fold contained it that did the rest.
But it straied not a little, and wandered through the mountains and hills, that
is, it went far from the right path, yet the good shepherd suffers it not
to pine away in straying, but seeks it, and calls it again, and he calls
it home, not driving it violently, neither beating it with strokes, but
supporting it with his own shoulders. For as all skillull Physicians by
mitigation of medicine deal more nicely and tenderly, with those that have
been long vexed with infirmity: so God does not reclaim those that have
been long corrupt with sin to the way of virtue with any tariance at all,
but by peece-meale, and little and little, bearing with their weakness in
many things, and assisting them often, that conversion on the sudden may not be
unpleasant to them, and that they may not go again to lewdnes, for the
difficulty of returning.

But not this parable only declares the moderatenesse of alteration, but that
likewise which is written of the prodigal son. Luke 15.
He was a son also no aliant, his natural brother that never went from his
father: he (I say) was a son that went far in the borders of iniquity: for
he went into a far country, and far from the Lord, he that was rich and of
good name, was made baser then a servant and hireling, but sorrowfully
returning, he was taken into his ancient estate and invested in his former
glory: Now if he had lost hope, and had been ashamed to come again to his
father, because of his mischanches, and had a^ode always in a strange and
foreign country, he had not gotten that he gat, but perishing for want of
food, had died a miserable death. You see therefore how great necessity
repentance has, what force in turning hope has, by repentance the prodigal
son recovered the old condition of his glory, which the elder brother had
without repentance. And if I might speak that I would in these matters, me
seems he gat more by conversion than the other had. ver. 26.30.
For so he himself says, lo these many years have I done thee service, and
yet thou never gave me a kid that I might make merry with my friends. Sinners
converted get more the^ they which stumbled not.
But when this thy son was come, which has devoured thy goods with harlots,
thou have for his sake killed the fat calfe. Why should I not then think, that
he that turns by repentance obtains more then other, since he had never a
kid given him, but for this the fat calfe was killed? Wherefore beloved having
these examples of repentance, let us not persist in evils, nor despair of
atonement: he will never (put affiance in me) turn his eyes from the
converted, if we our selves remove not our selves from God. Hier. 23.23. Our
sins separate us from God. Isai. 59.2.
For he says, I am a God at hand, and not a God far off. And again by the
Prophet, Or your iniquities have separated between you and your God
Your sins separate between me and you. If then our sins disseuer us from
God, let us take away this bar, and nothing may let us to be brought into the
favor of God.

Will you that I show it not only spoken in parables, but formed in deed?
There was a man among the Corinthians by all likelihood of no small calling, he
had committed such a sin, as was not committed amongst the Gentiles, being of
the numbe of ^he faithful, and Christ's his ^riends, for some report (me
^hinketh) that he was of the ^mage of the Priests. What ^hen? Paul never parted
him from the number of those, that ^ope to attain salvation. But when he had
sufficiently rebu^ed the Corinthians for him, ^urposing to show that there ^s
no wound nor disease, that may not be cured and made whole by repentance he
commands to deliver him over unto Satan, 1. Cor. 5.5.
for the destru^tion of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
the lord Jesus. But this he commands before he was done ^o wit of his
repentance; for when he had sorowed, it is ^ufficient (says he) to him, 2.
Cor. 2.6.
that ^e has been rebuked of many, and adds, 8.
Wherefore I ^ray you that you would con^irme your love toward him: ^est
Satan should circum^ent us, 11.
for we are not ignorant of his enterprises. The nation of the Galathians after
it had perfectly believed in Christ, and had received the holy Ghost, insomuch
that it wrought signs and miracles by the spirit, after, for the faith of
Christ it had sustained many things, after al these things (I say) it fell from
the faith, and was renewed again by the exhortations of the Apostle. And that
thou may know that by the spirit they had done wonders and miracles, hear
how the Apostle says: he therefore that ministers to you the spirit, Gal.
3.5.
and works miracles among you, does he it by the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith preached? And again, that they had sustained many things
after the receipt of faith, he testifies where he says: Verse. 4.
Have you suffered so many things in vain? Now after so great a step in
faith they committed a sin which was able to abalienate them from Christ, of
which the Apostle himself says: Gal. 5.2.
Behold I Paul say unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. And again, Verse 4.
whosoever are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace. And
notwithstanding after these slides in faith after so grievous a fall, he
reclaimeth them, and (as I may say) with motherlike compassion reformeth them,
saying: My little children, Gal. 5.19.
of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you.

What else therefore by all this is there taught, but that it may be, that
Christ may be formed anew in him, that has sold himself to work iniquity,
for he will not the death of a sinner, Eze. 18.32
but that he should be converted and live. For this cause (most entirely
beloved) let us go about to fulfill the will of God, therefore has God
created us, and caused us to be that we were not, that he may bestow
everlasting good things upon us, Heaven was made for man, hell for the diuils.
and enfranchise us into the heavenly city, for he made us not faggots for
hell fire. The kingdom of heaven was ordained for us, and hell for the devil.
And that this is true, the Gospel teaches: for the Lord shall say to them on
his right hand, Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world. Verse. 42.
But he shall say to them on his left hand, depart from me ye curs^d into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels By this
reason the kingdom of heaven was made for man and hell fire for the devil,
even from the foundation of the world.

So much does it concern us, yt by preseruering in evils, we do not
frowardly exclude our selves from the entrance of goodness. Repentance in this
life profits much, after this life naught.
And while we are in this life how great soever sins we commit, it is
possible by repentance to purge them: but when we are once dead, then though we
sorry (and we shall be very be sorry) yet there will be no profit of
repentance. Although there be gnashing of teeth although there be howling and
lamenting, although we pray and beg with innumerable petitions, yet none
shall hear us, none shall help us, no not our tongue tormented in flames
shall be wet with the tippe of a finger dipped in water. But we shall hear
that which the rich man heard of Abraham, Luke 16.26.
that there is a great swallowing pit set between us and you so that they
which would go from hence to you cannot: neither can they come from thence to
us. Therefore let us repent (my brother) and as good and profitable servants
seek our Lord Jesus Christ, neither let us be discouraged to obtain pardon
(while we live here) by repentance, for in hell (as I said) the medicines of
repentance will not be available, but in this life, though in the end of your
days and extreme old age you use it, it shall cure you. Which to stop, the
devil starreth and labors, that he may make us despair, for he knows
that even in a little time, if any be penitent, though it be a short turn^ng,
yet it will not be unfruitful. For as the man that gives a cup of cold water
loses not his meed; so he that has remorse for his evil deeds, though his
repentance seem not counter-poysable to his offenses, yet how little soever
it be, and in the twinkling of an eye, the recompense shall not be lacking.
No one good deed though very small, shall be contemned of the Lord a just
judge: for if he be so hard a computist of our misdeedes, as that every one
must be punished for his words and thoughts, Mat. 12.
how much more shall nor good deeds both great and small be rewarded in the day
of doom? Wherefore if thou think it vnposs^ble to be restored to thy
accustomed order of life, yet prune off a little from that great extremity of
riot and lust, which thou shall perceive not a whit vnfructuous. Make only a
beginning and smoth the way to goodness, which tread, albeit with the tips of
thy toes; and till thou begin, the way of virtue seems difficile and hard.
For such is the nature of all things, that all labor is thought grievous while
it is weighed only in our minds, but when we come to the matter and have
ouercommed some of the work, then all fear and fainting is shaken off, and
the success of the work breeds delight: so also the renewing of virtue
causes gladness to the mind, and then are we stronger, when we see the hope
of salvation approach.

For this cause also the enemy took Judas hence, least in case knowing there
was a return to salvation, he might reform his fall by repentance. And I say
not (although it be wonderful) that that sin of Judas might not be purged by
repentance: for which cause I entreat and beg of thee that thou abandon out
of thy mind all devilish cogitations, and quickly return thee to the way of
salvation. If I should suddenly and wholly call thee to that old height of
virtue, thou might not without cause tremble, not without reason d^ement
hard. But considering this only I desire at thy hands, that thou increase not
in iniquities, neither every day go nearer to perdition, that thou leave off
and make an end of offending, why do thou doubt and linger, drawing back
thy foot, for fear only to receive the thought of goodness? Has not the
superfluity of lust bred loathsomeness, as yet in thee? What has it bettered
them that abode in bodily sensuality and in the pleasures of this present life
until the end of their lives? Pleasure of the body vadeth away.
Look now on their sepulchers, and see whither there be any show of glorious
iollitie? Whether there be any token of dainties and sumptuous fare. Demand
where now their gorgeous weeds and strange perfumes be, whither the pleasure
of their games, the troops of their attendants, the daintines of their feasts
is gone? Whither their laughtures sports, immoderate and unbridled lust is
become and vanished? Where they themselves are with all these things? What was
the end of them both? Behold more narrowly and come more near to their graves,
look on the dust only and the filthy relics of worms, remember that this
is the end of bodies, although in delights and joy, although in labor and
chastity men spend their life. And would God all the matter were ended in dust
and worms, these losses would seem but little, and the state of nature might
easily be excused But now gl^^e thine eyes from these ashes and graves, How
ter^ible the ^udgeme^t ^eate of God shall ^e to the wicked.
and think upon, that horrible seat of the judgment of God, which is
environed with a burning river of fiery streams where is weeping and gnashing
of teeth, where is utter darkness, where is that worm of conscience that
never di^th, and the unquenchable fire Forget not the parable of Lazarus and
the rich man, ^uk. 16.
who being once an owner of great wealth, and clad in purple and silk, could
not find (afterward) one drop of water, and that when he was in the heat of
the fire. Tell me (I beseech thee) what is there in this lif^ but a dream? Our
life but a dream.
For as those that are condemned to live among metals, or afflicted with any
other punishment, when they take some rest, after the hard labors of their
troublesome life, believe themselves to enjoy the manifold dainties they see
before them; but when they arise they seele full well, there is nothing left of
the delicatenes of the dream. so the rich man who in a dream had the
voluptuousnes of this life, when he deceased, naught remained with him but
grief of the things past, and pain of the things present. Remember this (my
friend) and oppose hell fire to this flame of lust and concupiscence that now
tormenteth thee. And it is a strange kind of medicine that fire should be
quenched by fire; but if this fire shall not be stinted which now so troubles
thee, it will cause to thee that euer-enduring fire more fierce and
unquenchable.

The plea^ures of this life are momentarie, ^n respect of the punishment for
them.
Also, how long do thou judge the pleasures of thy present life may endure?
As I think thou can not live 50. years more, admit thy old age be long. But
in the mean while see what things befall, first in this behalf, that no body
is certain he may live till night; next, for that the condition of humane
affairs is still moveable, for many times life continues many years, but
wealth and riches fa^le, and often some make shippewracke of goods before they
die. But grant we, that thou may both live along time, and suffer no
al^eration of times; yet what is this space to everlasting pains; what is this
voluptie to those miserable and intolerable plagues? For in this life whether
it be good or evil, it has his limitation, and that speedily but in the
world to come both are everlasting. Over and besides, the state of the very
punishment is different: for the fire in this life consumes all things it
takes, but that fire whom it once takes hold on, it vex^th and always
reserueth to the torment. And therefore it is termed unquenchable, not only
because it cannot be quenched it self, but because it does not quench or sley
them it takes. For the Scripture says, that sinners put on immortality, to
wit, profitable, not to honor of life, but to perpetuity of correction.

Now the force of the punishment, and that punishment of that fire which is so
forcibl^ ^o voice will serve to declare, no speech will serve to utter: for in
good or evil things subject to corruption, there is nothing like them.
Nevertheless that we may conceive some motion of that fire and torment, The
torments of hell set forth in their colors.
call to mind, in him that has a burning ague, what tribulation, what anxietie
of the body and soul stands on each side, and by this temporal malady
gather what those torments be which are inflamed with an eternal fire, which
are watered before that horrible iudgem^nt s at with a fiery stream of
tormenting waves. There what shall we do? What shall we answer? Nothing
shall be t^ere but gnashing of t^eth, but schritching and weeping, and too to
late repentance, no way any help being found, and every way the torments
increasing without any comfort. We shall ^ee none but the executioners and
tortors dreadful to be beholden, and (which is woorst of all) we shall have
no solace of the very air. For utter darkness shall compass the place of
torments, and the fire which as it has not a nature of consuming, so has it
not of illumining, but it is a dark fire, the flame thereof giving no light.
So that to them that are in it, what fear what renting of their bowels, what
dismembring of their bodies, what crosses there be to every sense* no tongue
can tell. And as the sorts of torments do vary and differ, so proportionably
euerich one to his sins has his pain multiplied.

Now if thou should say, how can the body continue in so wretched and such
an endless tormenting? Consider what things now and then in this life betide
us, and by these small things conjecture great, How that some times we see some
troubled with long sickness, and yet their life to endure: and howbeit the body
be dissolved by some death, yet the soul is not dissolved nor consumed:
whence it is apparent that when the body shall also become immortal, no death
may kill the soul or body. For in this present life it cannot be, that the
punishment of the body should be both grievous and perpetual, but the one
yields to the other for that the body cannot abide both But when each shall
put off corruption, the corruption before received shall end, but the
incorruption gotten shall be endless. So let us not think the very exceeding
greatness of punishment will cause an end of dolor, but (as I said) our sins
shall aggrauate the chastisement, and the incorruption of the body or soul
shall not limite it.

Tell me now, what space of sensuality and dainties will thou liken to these
torments? Let us (if we list) bestow on delights an hundredth years, add
thereto an hundredth more, and ten times an hundredth, what benefit will there
be gotten of it, if we consider this euer-remaining pain? May not the whole
time of this life, wherein we seem to take pleasure in pastimes, and wallow
in wantonness, be reckoned as the dream of one night, in comparison of that
eternity? Is there any therefore, who to have a delightsome dream one night,
would undertake sempiternall pains? Or take that for this, or this for that?

I disprayse not as yet delights, nor unfold the bitterness of them, because
the time serves not for such speeches now, but then I shall be occasioned,
when I see thee able to avoid the same. For because thou art addicted to them,
thou may guess we doted, if we avouch that pleasure which all men reckon
acceptable and gladsome, were yrkesome and sour: But if by the mercy of God,
thou may escape out of this sort of sickness, at that time, yea at that time
thou shall find out what bitterness, yea what bane sensuality has. Now
m^ane while let us imagine, that pastimes and pleasure and voluptuousness are
honest and comely: What shall we say to the punishments laid up in store for
them? What shall we say to them, because the delights vade like a shadow, and
hastily fly away, but the pain abides for eu^r and ever?

Grant the time and space of pastime and punishment were all one, is there any
so foolish, or so deprived of his five wits, that would choose to tolerate one
day of pain for a day of pleasure? since the pangs of one hour, and every
vexation of the body, commonly causes us to forget all the time past consumed
in delight. Wherefore forasmuch as we may be rid (if in a moment we be
turned) from every of those tormenting chastisements, and enjoy eternal
goodness, why defer we? why stay we? why do we not use the bountifulness of
God? For this is provided by the unspeakable and infinite clemency of God,
that labor and toil should not be stretched far, nor be long or endless
but short, and (as I may say) for a minute of an hour. Such is this present
life, if it be conferred with that everlasting. 2. Cor. 4.
The clemency (I say) of God has provided, that in this fleeting and short
life, there should be labors and agonies, but that in the life eternal, there
should be crowns and rewards of good works, and that travel should soon be
ended, ^ut the reward of good deeds should last for ever. And even as this
makes them glad that through enduring of toil inioye a crown: so it shall
grieve and trouble those in the time to come, that see they have lost (for a
little and small time of delights) perpetual good things, and have sought for
still enduring evil things.

Let us not therefore incur this anguish of soul, let us awake while we
have time. And lo now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, now
is opportunity of repentance, and a time wherein repentance will not be
fruitless. But if we be careless of our life, we shall sustain in hell not
these calamities alone, whereof we have spoken, but a more grievous mischief.
For to be excluded from bliss, and to be debarred from the things prepared for
the Saints, causes such affliction, such woefulness, as (if no outward
punishment tormented) it were sufficient. It surpasses all pains of hell, to
want that beatitude, the fruition of which lay in thy power. For muse (I desire
you) on the state of that life, Heavenly bliss set forth.
as much as a man may consider ^t, for as it is in deed, no ^peech can utter.
Yet let us comprehend an image thereof, to the utmost it may be, by that we
have read, and the dark speeches we have received. It is said of it in a
certain place, Reu. 21.4. Isai. 35.
There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall
there be any more pain. What more felicity is there than this life, wherein no
fear of poverty, nor sickness hurts, none deals unjustly, none is
endangered, none conceiueth indignation, none enuieth, no desire inflameth, no
lust of meat, no greediness of honor and renown troubles: but every spot of
vice is blotted out and washed away, where all things are in peace and
ioyousnesse, all things in quiet and rest, where is light and brightness, not
such as is among us, but by so much more bright the sun is now than any
candle? There is no night, no darkness, no concourse of clouds, no extremity
of cold or heat; but such a temperature shall there be of all things, as they
alone shall know which are worthy to enjoy the same. There is no old age, nor
the misery thereof, but every corru^tible thing is done away, and the glory of
incorruption is every where But moreover to have society with the Angels and
Archangels, and of all the celestial and supernall powers to enjoy the
company, is much to be esteemed: but to obtain the radiant sight of our
Lord Christ Jesus, and to be lightened with the brightness of his majesty,
that cannot be described, it passes all such and such like honor.

But lest thou be daunted with these things on the sudden, I will allure
thee by little and little to the attain^ment of them. Behold now and look upon
the heaven, let thy thought also pierce a little above heaven, after yonder the
transforming of the whole creature. For it shall not abide in this quality
wherein it is, but it shall be changed into another much more fine and fair,
as much (let me say so) as gold exceeds lead. Saint Paul teaches this shall
come to pass, when he says that the creature it self shall be freed from the
bondage of corruption. Romans 8.21.
For now under corruption it suffers many things which corruptible bodies
must needs suffer: but when it shall cast off all frailetie and corruption, it
shall be adorned with wonderful beauty, for it shall not suffer corruptible
bodies, but it shall receive them (by resurrection) uoyde of corruption,
whereby the very creature shall be metamorphised into an excellenter habit.
There shall be then no dissension any where, but all things shall agree in
amity, for the agreement of the saints shall be one, there shall be no dread
of the Devil, no ambushes of unclean spirits, the tear of hell shall be
far off, there shall be death neither of the body, nor of the soul, but
fear by the means of immortality shall be shaken off.

Like as a kings son if first of all he be fostered up in a poor cottage
being apparalled in base raiment, lives under the fear of Tutors, and
governance of Masters, whereby his young-age under strait discipline may bring
his man's estate into good liking, and make it worthy his famous progenitors;
but when the time comes, that he must both enter into the Court of his
Dominion, and take in hand his fathers Scepter, all homely apparaile being
rejected, he arayeth himself in princely attire, and on a sud^aine puts on
the mitre of his father, the glittering of ^urple continually is added, ^he
brightness of his diadem, ^he rowte of his guard, the ^ower of his name is
increa^ed, and he is made a new man, ^o after such a manner shall ^he
alteration of Saints be.

And to the end you may be ^iuen to understand, that pain^ed words is not all
we speak, ^et us cast our eyes on that ^ountaine wherein Christ was
transformed, and let us ^ehold his brightness, that wherein (when he was
trans^ormed) he shined; neither ^or all that by this means, ^ll the glory of
the world to ^ome shall be revealed unto us. For that transformation was ^eclared
not fully as in deed ^he blessedness to come shall ^e, but as much as the
behol^ers eyes could bear. And ^he Gospel says Mat. 17.2.
his face did shine as the sun: but the glory of the incorruption shall not
only send forth such a light, nor such as the eyes of men can look on, but
such shall be the future brightness, as eye sight may not endure, although it
abode that in the transforming on the mount. Whereby it is clear, that so much
was revealed as the eyes of mortal men could suffer neither yet did they fully
suffer it, Verse 6.
for it is said, They fell on their faces.

Again, if thou should be brought into an assemble, where every one should
sit apparrelled in golden robes, in the midst of whom one should shine decked
in pearls and purple, and if he promised that thou might be one of the
number of those men of honor, would thou not assay and attempt all things
to attain unto it? So then open thy sight on the heavens, and behold there an
assembly gathered together, not in brightness of gold, neither in trimnesse of
garments, nor glistering in precious stones, but clearer in righteousness then
either the stars glitter, or the Sun shines. Behold there a company not of
men alone, but of Angels, Archangels thrones, dominions, principalities, and
powers; and of the King that sits in the midst of them, no speech may be,
for he surmounteth all speech and conceit of the mind of man, by reason of his
beauty, his strength, his glory, his royalty, his majesty, What then? Tell
me, shall we beguile our selves of all these honors, because of sloth in
sustaining some labor, and in resisting for a while the allurements of lust?
For if we should daily sustain torments, and suffer a little time hell fire
to the end we might see Christ coming in glory, and accompanied with his
Saints, were it not good to endure all sorrow, that we might be made partakers
of so great bliss, of so great glory? Hear what the blessed Apostle Peter
says; Matt. 17.4
It is good for us to to be here. If he seeing a slender glimse of the glory to
come suddenly rejected all things out of his mind, relying on the delectation
of the vision he saw, what will one say, if he beheld these things, as they are
in truth? Namely at what time, the court of heaven shall be opened, and the
King of heaven shall be revealed, not in a glass darkely, but face to face,
not by faith, but by visage.

Many ignorant folk think it a thing all suffici^nt, The torments of hell not
so grievous as the loss of the sight of Christ.
and to be wished for, alone to be delivered from the pains of hell; I say to
be removed and cast off from that glory, is a more grievous torment then hell:
neither judge I the torm^nts there so grievous, as it is to be driven from the
sight of Christ for th^s (I assure you) is more miserable then any punishment,
this only exceeds hell When we see an earthly king entering his palace, with
his adherents and guard, we admire, and call those great men who wait upon
him, and suppose our selves wretched, if we be not vouchsafed any place
amongst them: though we know the weakness and instability of th^se terrene
things, sometimes for foreign wars, sometimes for civil conterwaits, and
sometimes for malicious spite, yet howsoever it be, it grieueth those that
have fallen thence. How then shall it not much more vex us, if with the
highest king, who holds the whole globe of the earth, Isai. 40.
(not a part thereof only) yea, who holds it in his fist, who measures the
heaven with an hand breadth, who supporteth each thing by the word of his power
who reckons the Gentiles as nothing, yea as spettle, with this (I say) when
he bestows honor that shall last for ever, we have no place, neither be
numbered among his servants? Will it not pinch us more then any pain?

But peradventure thou say, it will suffice us to escape hell, albeit we
be not thought worthy of the sight of the King. What more unhappy and wretched
soul is there than to which this is sufficient? Supposest thou that the King
whereof we speak, shall come to judge the earth, carried in Chariots of Mules,
or in gilded wagons, or with the terrible power of a diadem? Nay harken how
the Prophets foretold (as much as might be declared to men) the coming of
Christ. One of them says thus: Our God shall come, Psalm. 50.3.
and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and a mighty
tempest shall be moved round about him, he shall call the heaven above, and
the earth to judge his people. And harken how another to wit, Isaiah, shows
the diverse sorts of punishments; these are his words; Behold the day of the
Lord comes, cruel, with wrath, Isai. 13.9.
and firce anger to lay the land wast; and he shall destroy the sinners out of
it. For the stars of heaven, Verse. 10.
and the planets thereof, shall not give their light, the Sun shall be
darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine,
Verse. 11.
And I will visit the wickedness upon the world, and their iniquity upon the
wicked, and I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease. I will make a man
more precious then fine Gold, Verse. 12.
even a man above the wedge of gold of Ophir. Verse. 13.
Therefore I will shake the heaven, and the earth shall remove out of her
place, in the wrath of the Lord of hoasts, and in the day of his fierce anger.
And again he says the windows from on high are open, Jsa. 24.18.
and the foundations of the earth do shake. The earth is utterly broken down,
19.
the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is exceedingly moved. The earth
shall reele too and fro like a drunken man, 20.
and shall be removed like a tent, the iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it
so that it shall fall and rise no more. And in that day, 21.
shall the Lord visit the hoa^t above, that is on high, even the Kings of the
world that are upon the earth and they shall be gathered together as the
prisoners in the pit, and they shall be shut up in prison. And the Prophet
Malachies words are consonant hereto; Malac. 3. Verse 1.2.
Behold he shall come says the lord of hoasts, But who may abide the day of
his coming? and who shall endure when he appears? For he is like a purging
fire, and like fullers s^pe. Verse 3.
And he shall sit down to fine and try the silver, he shall even fine the
sons of Levy and purify them as gold and silver. Chap. 4.1.
And again he says, for behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven,
and all the proud yea; and all that do wickedly shall be as stable, and the
day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hoasts, and shall leave
them neither root nor branch. And another of the Prophets says, Dan. 7.9.
I beheld till the thrones were set up, and the ancient of days did sit,
whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool.
Verse. 10
A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him, the judgment was set,
and the books opened. And a little after, Verse. 13.
as I beheld in visions by night, behold one like the son of man, came in
the clouds of heaven, and approached unto the ancient of these days, and
they brought him before him. And he gave him dominion, Verse. 14.
and honor, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations and languages, should
serve him, his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall never be taken
away, and his kingdom shall never be destroyed. Verse. 15.
I Daniel was troubled in my spirit, in the midst of my body, and the visions
of mine head made me afraid.

So then when these things shall begin, the gates of heaven shall be opened yea
rather the very heaven shall be taken away, as if the couerings of a pauilion
were drawn together, to wit, that it may be restored and transfigured into
better. Then all things shall be in fear, amazedness and trembling shall fill
every place. Then also fear shall shake the Angels, and not the Angels alone,
but perchance the Archangels, thrones, dominions, rules and powers. For this is
signified where it is said I will shake the heaven; Jsai. 13.13
for they are the fellow servants of them that must be judged and must give an
account of this life. If when one City is to be judged by the judges of this
world other fear and shake although it be not for great danger like to ensue
when the universal world shall come to be judged of him that lacks not
witness, that does not seek arguments, that does not require an orator for the
cause, but all these things being removed, that does reveal the deeds,
words, and thoughts of men, that places each thing in open sight, and heweth
every fact, as it wrre in a painted table, before the eyes, both of the
transgressors and the beholders, how much more shall every creature be moved
with fear? And if then no fiery stream should issue forth neither the
terrible Angels, or greesely executioners, should stand by; but if thus only
it were, that men should be called, before the king and some should be praised
and honored, other some without honor cast to confusion; if men did only
suffer this punishment, would it not surpass the torments of hell, that when
other were endowed with gifts of the king, they should shamefully suffer the
repulse? Which pain how intolerable it is, although speech now may not
declare, yet then shall we clearly perceive it, when we come to experience.

Furthermore, besides all these anguishes of torments fet before your eyes. not
confusion alone, and utter shame but the way how men are drawn to fire, and
delivered up to racking. Think upon those cruel and ugly tortors which throw
sinners down headlong and in that time, in which other that have done well, by
the bright and gentle Angels being carried before the high throne of the
everlasting king shall be rewarded with immortal gift.

These things are accidents to that day, judgment, and time, but that which
ensues, what tongue can tell? What pleasure, what joy shall it be to be with
Christ, when the soul camming to her proper vigor, shall with confidence begin
to look on God? none can declare the greatness of that joy. For she triumphs
not alone for the fruit: on of the things present, but she rejoices much more
because she knows, there shall be no end of her blessedness. And howbeit no
speech can set forth that gladness and mirth, nor any thought o^taine it yet
seeing (as it were) a certain shadow of the thing to come, we will also
endeavor to acquaint you with it Demand we of the rich and welthy of this
world. who vaunt in honors and power, with what gladness they are puffed out?
With how great delectation and pleasure they are in love with these things, so
that sometime they carry their noses very high in the wind? And that, though
they themselves know, that these things are neither right, happy, nor yet
everlasting, but vanish away sooner then a dream: which if they endure while
this life remains, if we make the most of them we can, they can endure no
longer. Wherefore if men are so exceeding joyous, for frail and transitory
things with what joy shall we think those souls to be filled, which have
gotten heavenly and eternal b^sse? In which both quantity and quallity
differs so much from the other in excellency, (for all that in this life we
account them good) so that neither eye has seen, Isai. 64.4 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear has heard, nor heart as yet has understood them. For as a little
one is in the belly of his mother; so are we in the world in wrapped straitely
in darkness, and cannot behold the light and liberty of the world to come.
But when the time shall come, Such corn as we sow here, such bread shall we
eat in the world to come.
that this world shall travel in birth with us, and shall bring forth into the
brighnes of the future world all it has conceived if any shall be found (by
the means of sin) putrified or not of full growth they go from darkness to
harkenes, from tribulation to more bitter tribulation. But they that shall be
perfect and like unto the king, she proffereth to the father, as a worthy issue
to be placed in the ministry of Angels, and in the seats of Archangels.

Therefore will you go that way (my friend) that the countenance, and kingly
beauty of thy soul may be polluted and this world at the last reiectt thee,
but repair quickly the Image of thy father, repair thy virtue, beauty, and
gallantnes, that among other thou may be known of thy father. The soul
must be pollished more the^ the body and God has thus appointed.
The beauty of the body, God has limited with certain natural bonds. but the
beauty of the soul he has made free, and subject to no necessity which
leaves far behind the comlines of the body. Insomuch that the trimnes of our
soul is at the back of God, yet in our power. For if the Lord had granted us
license to use our own fancy in our bodily bravery, we should have been
burdened with superfluous and naught inaileable cares, spending all the time of
our life in them, whereby the soul must needs not be docked Since even now
when we have no power over the trimnes of our bodies, we so carke and care,
that by all possible means we polish them, assaying by the painting of
colors, by the frisling of our hairs, by the roaling of our eyes by variety
of vestiments, by exquisite practices to augment our bodily b^auery. But how
much more convenient were it for us to go about to garnish the soul, wherein
the true beauty is and such as may by us daily be made more beautiful? Yet we
on the contrary, consume the whole race of our life in spoiling the mistress,
and in adorning the maiden: leaving the mistress (like a vile bondwoman)
untrimmed, bespotted, utterly covered with all unseemly sluttishnes. When as
God for this cause, exempted us from the carke of this body, and enclosed it
within the bonds of nature, least being occupied in needles cares, Souls
defiled with sin, may be trimmed again.
we should neglect the beautifying of our soul, whose beauty and braveness,
albeit it be brought to extreme pollution, yet by our labor and diligence
she may be restored to notable gayness, and be recovered so far, that she
may not only be admired of all good men, but be desired and loved of the king
himself, who is Lord of all. As the Prophet speaks to it in the Psalms* The
king shall have pleasure in thy beauty. Psa. 45.11


Often times experience proves, that of those women which have been inured to
common brothelrre, if any be somewhat handsome for fairenes sake she has
been united in matrimony to some good man, and has been drawn to honesty.
How much rather will not God contemn ne despise the souls which have fallen
from their divine excellency by the tyranny of the devil, into the brothelhouse
and stews of this present life: You shall find that the Prophets have used
these examples when they spoke to Jerusalem, for she played the dishonest
woman, and went a whoring after a strange sort, as shows the Prophet
Ezechiel, Eze. 16.33
saying they give gifts to all other whoores, but thou give gifts unto thy
lovers, and the contrary is in thee from other women. Verse. 34.
And again another says; thou have sitten upon the way waiting for them, as a
desolate C. quail Or thou have sit waiting for them in the ways, as the
Arabian in the wilderness, Iere. 3.2.
chough This people which had so played the harlot the Lord reclaimed to
himself, for their captivity was not so much for their punishment, as for
their amendment. For if in case God would have punished and destroyed them
withal he would not have brought them home again to their native soil,
neither would have caused them to reedifie with greater magnificency, their
City and Temple which were overthrown: the glory (says he) of this last
house, Hagg. 2.10
shall be greater then the first. So then if God do not forbid repentance to
those that have so manifoldly practiced whooredome, he will much more willingly
reclaim thy soul, which now first has grievously fallen. God is jealous over
our souls.
The reason is, for that no carnal lover, though never so hoate, can be so
ielous over the love of his de^ling, as God is kindled with the love of our
souls. Which albeit daily it may be gathered, yet it may be apparently proved
out of the word of God In a word, read that is spoken of God, in the beginning
either of Jeremy, or of the other Prophets, how when he was despised and set
light by of the people, yet he returned again to them, and thirsting after
their love, he continually followed them And this is that, which God himself
declares in the Gospel, Mat. 23.37 Luke 13.34.
where he says. Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent to thee how often would I have gathered thy children
together, as the Hen gathers her chickens, and ye would not. And Paul says
to the Corinthians: For God was in Christ, 2. Cor. 2.19
and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them, and
has committed to us the word of reconciliation. Now then are we Ambassadors
for Christ: as though god hid beseech you through us we pray you in Christ's
stead that ye be reconciled to God Let us think these things spoken to us, for
not only infidelity, b^t the polution and uncleanness of life makes this
excerable enimitie betwixt God and men, and so the Apostle says, that the
wisdom of the flesh is enimity against God. Romans 8.7.
Go too then, let us raze to the ground this wall of enimitie, let us smooth
the way to an atonement with God, that we may be loved and desired of him again

I am sure you wonder not a little at the beauty of Hermione, Hermione daughter
to Menelaus and Helena very beautiful, for whom Orestes the son of Agamemnon
slew Pyrthus the son of Achilles, because he married his betrothed minion.
and think the like may not be found on the whole earth. But if you would (my
friend) you may be so much fairer and comelier then she, by how much gold
exceeds dirt. For if many have in admiration the beauty of that body, and
fall in love therewith what fairenes do you think to be in a soul, if every
point therein were lively portraited? How much more amiable, how much more
wonderful would it be? For the substance of bodily beauty consists in naught
else, but in phlegm, blood, moisture, and Or melancholy.
gall, which are maintained by the corruptible iuyces of meats? Hereby the
aples of the eyes glister, hereby the cheeks are ruddy and hereby the whole
face is adorned. And unless they be daily moistened with such juice, which
ascends out of the liver, incontinent the skin is dried up, the eyes wax
hollow, al ruddines and beauty departs from the visage. Now if thou consider
what is hidden within that skin which thou iudgest beautiful, what is shut up
in the nostrils what within the jaws and belly, thou will protest that this
bravery of body, is nothing but a blanched sepulcher which without appears
fair to men, but within is full of filthynes and uncleanness. Moreover, if thou
see on a ragged cloth, the phlegm and spittle that proceeds from the body,
thou loathest it, and wilt not touch it with the tip of the finger, looking
askew thereon: and how then can thou love and desire the cel and seat of
phlegm? But thy beauty was not such. For by how much heaven is more beautiful
than the earth, by so much ^id the trimnes of thy soul ^urmount the beauty of
the ^airest body. And notwistan^ing none at any time has ^eene a soul
departed from the body, yet some other time I will attempt to delare the
comlines of it, by the powers thereof. At this time let it suffice to rehearse
the words of the Lord, which say, they are as the Angels of God in heaven.
Again, Mat 22.30 Mar 12.25
in that of bodies there is so great a difference, between those that are
thin, and those that are thick and heavy (as for example heaven passes the
earth, fire water, the stars stones the rainebowe all terrestrial flowers:)
wha^ would we say, if it might so chance that with corporal eyes, we might
behold ye gainesse of the soul? Would thou not scoff at all external
beauty and bravery, in consideration of that internal substance? I pray thee
then let us not contemn so great a felicity, nor regard lightly so great a
treasure that is in us, especially since a return is not hard and with no great
labor may all the beauty of our soul be renewed For as soon as thou shall
imagine the things to come, and thou shall be inamored with them, straightway
the soul retireth to her former brauenes. So it is written; 2. Co^. 4.17
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent. 18.
an an eternal weight of glory. While we look not on the things which are
seen, but on the things which are not seen, for ye things which are seen are
corporal but the things which are not seen are eternal. Now if Paul call
tribula^^ons light and easy, for that we look not on the things which are
seen, but on the things which are not save: how much more easy shall it be
for thee to shake of the foul burden of uncleanness? Neither now do I exhort
thee to those labors and dangers* or to those daily deaths, which the Apostles
suffered, or to those persecutions or stripes or bands, or imprisonments, or
the contempt of all worldly riches, or famine. or nakedness, or many watchings,
or perils of iourneying, or shipwrackes on sea, or dangers of robbers, or
dangers of thine own nation, or dangers of false brethren, for all those
afflictions the Apostles endured: nothing of all these I require of thee, but
this I desire alone, that servitude being forsaken, thou return to thy former
liberty, considering both the plague which follows riot, and the glory which
is laid up for virtues. It is no marvel if those which believe there shall be
no resurrection, neglect their life, fear nothing the judgment to come, and
are nothing pricked in heart: but we which look more certainly on future
then present things, ought we to live so miserably, and wretchedly, that we
not only should not fear at the remembrance of the judgment to come, but
utterly contemn it?

A part it is of extreme madness and no mischief is comparable, that believing
we be like the unbelieving. Yea amongst them not a few have been found, who
have flourished in this life, in the virtues of the mind, and what shall be our
excuse, what our solace, if in the day of doom those shall be brought forth
for examples against us? Some that exercise merchandise we see have suffered
shipwreck, and the loss of all their goods: yet for this they have not been
dismayed, but again have applied the same way and traffic. These did ^eese
their substance not by ^oth but by violence of winds But we which know before
undoubtedly, that if we our selves will we may incur neither shipwreck nor
damage of soul; should we not take in hand again our former exercises, and
renew our business by negligence ouerslipped? Nevertheless we lie retchlesly,
and fold our idle hands on our breast, after the manner of sluggards and would
God our hands were idle, and did not work our own decay, Which if they do it
has great affinity with most manifest outrage, as if (for example) a champion
leaving his adversary, should turn his hands on his own head, and buffet
himself. The devil has put us to flight, and has dashed us in sunder, we
have need then to rise and to resist him. When thou art once cast down, if
thou be willing not only to lie still, but to throw down thy self headlong
this is to assent to thine enemy, and to take in defense his part.

Blessed David fell after the same sort, thou did, neither so alone, but in
more grievous wise, for he combined murder, with adultery: and what did he
then? Did he lie so? Did he not rise and resist the enemy, and so overcame him,
that his good deeds profited his posterity ween he was gone? For when Solomon
had committed that heinous crime, and was deemed worthy of a thousand deaths,
yet for David's sake the Lord said he would bestow the kingdom on him longer.
These be the words; I will surely rent the kingdom from thee, 2. Ki. 11.11
and will give it to thy servant. Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do
it, 12.
because of David thy father, 2. Ki. 19.34
but I will rent it out of the hand of thy son. Hezechiah when he was much
endangered, (albeit he were a just man himself,) yet for blessed David the
Lord promised to help him, Or, I will defend this city to save it for mine
own sake, and for David my servants sake.
I will defend this City for mine own sake, and for David my servants sake, I
will save it. See what was the strength of repentance see what power conversion
had. But if he had thus thought, (which thou now think.) and had said it is
impossible that the Lord should now be merciful to me, he has greatly honored
me, and has endued me with the gift of prophecy, he has exalted me to a
kingdom, he has delivered me from manifold dangers, how then can I promerite
clemency at the hands of God, forasmuch as I have thus fallen? If David had
thus thought, he had lo^^ not only yt went before but that that followed also.
For not only the wounds of the body if they be neglected bring death; but the
wounds of the soul semblably. Are we so sottish to put a plaster to a bodily
wound, and never attempt to cure the soul? Many wounds of our body may not be
cured, yet we despair not, and though ye Chirurgions say ye wound is
vncu^^able, yet we earnestly and vrgently beseech them, that they would
mittigate some what the pain. But in the wounds of the soul; which are not
vnsanable, (for the soul is not tied to necessity neither abides any passion)
we are remiss, we are past hope, we are pricked with no care When there is no
hope our grief of body may be healed, yet we withdraw nothing from our care:
but here when no occasion is of desperation, without using any labor, we omit
all care. So you perceive, how that more ardently we love our body then our
soul, knowing not, that if we regard not our soul we cannot save our body.
For the soul was not ordained for the body, but the body for the soul: and he
that esteems not the higher but polisheth the inferior, marreth both. But he
that observes an order, and garnisheth the first admit he do not pass for
the second, by the salvation nevertheless of the first the seeond shall be
saved. The which is builded on the plot of Christ his words, Fear ye not them
which kill th^^ body, Mat. 10.28
but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him, which is able to
destroy both body and soul in Hell.

Think you we have done enough, and satisfied you in this thing, that no
infirmity of the soul is incurable? Or else is it needful we should use
other reasons, and confirm it yet further? For although a thousand times thou
despair of thy self, we will never despair of thee. Neither do we this
that we mislike in other, howbeit there be ods, whether one despair of
himself, or another of him. To despair of another is pardonable but to
despair of him self is not: because he is not master of another mind, this
rules his own purpose Wherefore we hope there is a return for you to the
state of your former life, and to the virtues of the mind, which we know are
in you. Besides these things this we add.

The Nineuits heard the Prophet saying definitely, Jon. 2.4.
yet forty days, and Nineueh shall be ouerthrown, notwitstanding they were not
discouraged No not when they were not certain, that the Lord would not bring
to pass his words, and when (in man's judgment) there was no hope of
forgiveness. And as soon as that abrupt saying was ended, they determined
repentance saying who can tell if God will turn and repent, Verse. 9. 10.
and turn away his fierce wrath that we perish not. And God saw their works
that they turned from their evil ways: and God repented of the evil that he
had said he would do unto them and he did it not. If Barbarians and ignorant
folk could understand so much of the mercy of God, does it not much more
behoue us to do so. who are instructed in the word of God, and know this
example was before our time and that many more like are contained in Gods
book, either in words, Isai. 55.8.
or in acts? For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, says the Lord. 9.
For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher the^ your
ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts

Farthermore if we receive our servants, who have offended us, when they
promise they will amend, and account of them as before, nay many times credit
them more after reconcilement; will not God much rarher deal thus with us? If
he had made us to punish us, thou might well despair, and doubt of thy
salvation: but if for his goodness, only he made us to enjoy his euer-during
bliss and rewards and does al things from the beginning of the world till this
day, to this end and purpose, that he may save us: what matter of despairing
what matter of misdoubting is there left?

We have offended him (say you) more than ever any man. For this cause
should thou more speedily and earnestly make satisfaction and be sorrowful
for thine offense, and abandon those deeds with which God is offended. Neither
does a grievous injury offend any body so much, as to continue in it, when
there is time and opportun^tie of satisfaction. To sin is humane, but to
persevere in sin, is diabolical. To conclude, Hier. 3.7. Or, and I said, when
she had done all this, turn thou unto me, but she returned not.
behold how God by the Prophet mistiketh this more then that: And I have said
(says he) after that she has in all this gone a whooring be thou turned to
me, and she is not turned. And other-where, when he had rebuked the
transgressions of the people, by his Prophet, and they had promised amendment,
he shows how lovingly he receives the conversion of sinners, who will grant
their heart may be so in them, that they may fear me, and keep my
commandments all the days of their life, that it may be well with them, and
rheir children for evermore? Moses likewise, when he would teach the people,
what God requires of men, Deu. 10.12
says thus: And now, Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but
to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
serve thy Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

God then, who is desirous that himself be beloved of us, and for this does all
things, not sparing his only begotten for our salvation, and the love he bare
toward us, would feign (after what fort soever, if I may so speak) we should
be reconciled to him; and how can it be, that he should not receive and love us
being penitents converted unto him, and that as cheerfully as he does his
children? For in what respect do you think, spoke he by the Prophet, saying*
Tell thou thine iniquities first, that thou may be justified? Was it not for
that he coueted to revoke us to his love, Amantium irae amoris redintegratio
est.
and tender affection? He that loves his friend, if perchance he suffer many
injuries at his hands, his love is not for that cooled toward his beloved, if
in case he will let the wrongs to be opened and discovered, and certes he that
is injured, does desire this for no other cause, but that their renewing of
love may be of more force and validity. Now, if the confession of sins
mattreth so much to atonement, how much greater may be our hope of
reconciliation, if by works of repenance we blot out the offenses we have
committed? For if God prohibited the fallen to return to the right way, either
none, or very few should enter the kingdom of heaven. Yea, the chief
Patriarchs whom we have in admiration, after backeslides in sins, they have
been restored. For they yt were earnest in evil, being turned to goodness use
the same forwardnes, knowing that their debt is great. In the Gospel this is
taught of the Lord, when he said to Simon of a certain woman See thou this
woman I entered into thine house and thou gave me no water to my feet, but she
has washed my feet with tears, Luke. 7.44
and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gave me no kiss, but she
since ye time I came in, 45.
has not ceased to kiss my feet, My head with oil thou did not anoint:
46.
but she has anointed my feet with ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, 47.
many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much. To whom a little is forgiven,
he does love a little. 48.
And he said unto her thy sins are forgiven thee. For which cause the devil
knowing that they which have sold themselves to work iniquity, if they revolt,
are diligent and serious and as in their transgressions they were hasty, so in
their amendment they are heedefull, (because now they know what they have
done,) he fears and shakes least any of them should make the onset to
repentance. For if they once begin, they may not be withstood, but kindled with
the heat of repentance, as it were with fire, they make their souls purer than
fined gold, and by the remembrance of their former misdeeds, and as it were by
the blowing wind of their conscience, having hope their pilot, they ariue in
the haven of health. And because of the horrors past, the circumspecter they
are in their journey; so that in this welnigh they may seem to pass those
that never faultered, because experience makes them more chary. Experientia
stultorum matter.
For (I know not how) we love more entirely the things we had and have lost,
then the things we have not and desire to get.

Then a hard thing it is, (as I said) to make a beginning in this lies all the
difficulty, to prepare the way to repentance. For straight way at the entrance
the enemy blows out threats and menacings, and in his rage drives us back,
when we would go forth. The smokie puffes, and cloud of whose terrors, if
thou contemn, when the way is entered, thou shall see thy self corroborated,
and obtaining the conquest thou will rejoice thine enemy menaced thee and thou
shall perceive the rest of this combat easy. Go too, go too, in the name of
God, now let us enter the path of life, let us return to the heavenly city,
seeing we are appointed and enrolled citizens. The gates of this City despair
shuts against us, hope and confidence will open them fully; the which if we
cast behind us we incur the crime, not of sloth alone, but of arrogance For
satan was made as he is by no other means but for that after his sin first
he despaired and n xt fell from despair into hautines and pride. So likewise
the soul if it once begin to despair of salvation, it understands not into
what mischiefs it runs, fearing not to speak or do whatsoever may stop
salvation. Commonly we see in those that are mad when once they have lost their
wit, they fear naught any longer, they blush at nothing, but licentiously they
dare speak and do every thing. If they fall into the fire, they avoid it not,
if they be going into a headlong place, they pull not back their foot. After
the same manner they that are in despair commit intolerable acts, they range
in all the ways of wickedness, shame is no let, fear hinders nothing, the
things present do not refrain them, the things to come do not terrify, death
only it is that they cannot escape.

Wherefore I humbly request thee, before the poison of this sin more infect
thee, arise and awake at the last, and lay aside this deuellish drunkenness. If
on the sudden thou can not gather thy wits together, yet do it leisurely,
although (in my opinion) it be the easier way at once to break off all the
stays of this evil, to sheere it in sunder fully, and to begin repentance
anew But if this be difficile unto thee, as thou will and art able, begin a
better conversation, and covet eternal life. Run therefore I pray and
beseech you dear friend, (I beseech you for those good deeds you have done
heretofore, I pray you for the liberty that first you had) let me see you clime
up to the top of virtue, as truly a repentant as you were before. Yield to me
thy friend, yield to all them that are offended through thee, and fall because
of thy fall, yield to all them that are in despair because of thy despair,
that they may not surmise they cannot tread the true way, unless they see thee
return. Regard (I desire you) the pensiveness of the whole congregation of
the faithful brethren, the great joy and triumphing of the faithless, the
usual by words of slothful youths, regard wbat authority thou art to many
to wallow in the mire of riot. And if so be that you return into the way of
your former virtues, all these things will be turned into the contrary. Our
shame and confusion shall light on them, we shall be joyful and glad. For we
will blaze abroad throughout the world, that thou art a subduer of lust, a
subduer of unclean and foolish voluptie and riot, and we will brute far and
wide thy glorious triumph. That victory is the greater that is gotten after a
fall, and that is restored after flight. And you shall not only be rewarded,
for your own labor and reformation, but shall receive a meede for the safety
of them, who leuelling their life to thy conversation have (without despair)
returned themselves to repentance. Neither any hereafter having fallen
howsoever, will not be greedy by and by to rise, and incontinently to be
restored Despise not (if you love me) these great profits, neither bring our
souls with sorrow to the grave: but vouchsafe us some rest, and chase away the
cloud of heaviness, which for thy sake has ouercouered us; for lo letting
pass our own evils, we bewail thy fall. But if you would a little look
upward, and be in love with celestial things, we should be eased of this
lamenting. and we might be caused to consider our own offenses.

That men may by repentance repair their pristine gainesse yea sometimes be
made more excellent than before they were, hitherto we have confirmed out of
the word of God. And to conclude this point, this is the cause why that harlots
and Publicans inherit the kingdom of heaven, and that many that were last,
shall be first, Henceforth I will add the things that have been done in our
age, of which thou G. F. C. of which my self may be a witness.
thy self art a witness.

G. F. C. I know.
You know that young man the son of Vrbanus, the chiefest of that province
whose parents died in his minority, but left him very wealthy in household
stuff, gold, silver and possessions. That youth contemning at the first all
pomp, and pride, (which that age and riches for the most part follow) he left
the schools of humane arts, and betook himself to a base life in which
putting on course and homely arayment, he departed to the mountains and desert
places. Where being exercised in the temperancy of true philosophy, he not
only matched (which is but seldom seen in those years,) but passed too,
great and wonderful men in the virtue of abstinency; yea when afterward he was
baptized he passingly increased in virtues At which thing all rejoiced, and
praised the Lord, that borne to so great wealth, and descended of such a
family, even in the April of his days he troad under foot at once all vanity
of this momentary life, and had an hungry desire of eternal joy.

Living after this sort, and in this admiration, among all, certain of his
kindred (but naughty persons) at the first came to see him, and after by
continuance of lewd talk, Evil speeches corrupt good manners.
drew him again to that he hated and loathed, so that all philosophy (which he
studied) being laid apart, he came from the hills to the market place. Then
carried on a palfrey through the midst of the city, and guarded with footmen,
he vauntingly began to wander up and down the streets. Insomuch that the
raines of chastity were also let loose, because it has no fellowshippe with
dainties and riot. After this he was snarled in the bait of filthy love, and
led into captivity by every lust, which caused all men to despair of his
salvation. For swarms of parasites environed this hope lost yonker the
adulterous rabble compassed him in. And what hope would a man think to be
remaining? Those also which were given very much to reprehending, found fault
with this likewise, that in the beginning he entered a course, he could not
continue in, and had aspired to that was above his reach, forsaking the study
of learning wherein he might have profited.

When these and such like things as touching his life being rumored abroad,
were known to all, and we also were ashamed of his doing; certain holy men,
expert in this kind of hunting, and who had found out by long use and
experience, that naught was to be despaired, putting on the armor of hope,
they began to watch him more narrowly. And if it fortuned he were in the
street, they approached near and courteously saluted him; but he on
horseback scarce greeted them again, or thought them worthy an answer, when
they went by his side; such was his pride and wickedness. But those merciful
men, accounting none of these an injury, respected only that they had intended,
that they might (if it were possible by any means) deliver the lamb out of
the teeth of wolves; which by patience was in fine achiued. For weighing they
did this often, and prying into his own life with the inward eyes of his mind,
he blushed somewhat at their boldness and tendering, and when he marked they
came a far off, he would dismount from his horse, and bowing his head toward
the earth, he harkened diligently to their speeches, and in process of time he
reverenced them more. And so reuolting by peece-meale, through the grace of
God, and their meek counsel, and rid from all the nets of death wherein he was
entangled, he went again to the wilderness, to the mountains, and to the
wonted exercises of philosophy, and after was of such humility, that his
latter doings exceeded his wonderful beginning. He learned by proof the
occasion of his fall, and the allurement of all his error. That also he did,
which (doubtless) was agreeable to Christ's commandment in the Gospel; Mat.
19.21
Selling all he had, and distributing it on the poor, to the end he might
remove his treasure from the earth to heaven, and his heart might be there,
where his treasure was. But because as yet he had somewhat left on earth, his
heart returned to the earth, and making an estimate of all his goods. (for he
cared nothing for them) he bestowed much on the needy, that so freeing himself
from care of mind, he might take away all occasion of stumbling. And thus
walking in the way to heaven by amendment he is come to each accomplement of
virtue: so you see, how this young man fell quickly, and arose speedily.

Another also after many labors he had sustained in the wilderness, having
only the company of one in his life and mansion place, continued an Angelical
life, from his young age, to his very old days. Good Lord, how much difference
is there between the Romish Masse-mongring Moonkes now being, and ye Monks
which were in Chrisostomes days? Those were continent, and sequestered
(although they should have had a care of the salvation of their brethren also)
themselves from the vulgar sort of men to the end they might give themselves
wholly to contemplation and meditation, (for this was the cause why Basil the
great went to Pontus, and invited his friend Gregory the Divine to him,) these
are lecherous and lustful, coveting that sort of life for idleness alone, and
belly cheer. Those a soon as they perceived their uncleanness (this fellow
here alleged is a witness) fell to repentance without stay: these through
sensuality committing gross and carnal sins, never truly repent for it, and
yet bear men in hand they are the holiest persons under the Sun. Of whom it
was said rightly though in a rithme, O monachi, vestri stomachi, sunt amphora
Bacchi!
Vos estis, Deus est testis, turpissima pestis.
Let none then of the ignorant sort suppose that this example makes ought for
the vprightnes of Moonkes now a days.
But (I know not how) drowsily yielding to the suggestion and first battery of
the devil, he fell into the desire of a woman, when as he never saw any,
sithence he became a Moonke. First, then he desired his fellow with whom he
lived, to bring him wine, and flesh to feed on, who making no have, he
threatened him, that he would go down into the city. Which he said not that he
might eat flesh, but that he might find opportunity to satisfy his lust. His
companion marueiling at this and fearing least he should do him more harm, if
he should deny his request, gave that he asked, and fulfilled his will. When he
saw no way to guile, openly and shamelesly, he reuealeth his desire, and
confesses he will go down to the City. The other by much persuasion not
able to retain him, let him go and followed him a far off, to se what he
would do and whither he would go. And when a great way behind he saw him
entering a brothel-house, and to have cooled his lust with the company of a
strumpet, tarrying at the door straightway when he came forth, he exhorted him
to repentance, he embraced him, and lovingly kissed him, and rebuked him not
for his fall, but desired him that now his lust being cooled, he would return
to his old habitation, and to the solitary wilderness. But he marking in him
such meekness and gentleness, was ashamed, and stricken through with the force
of his words and deeds, and condemning himself for his misdemeaner, goes with
his fellow (which was so good and humble) into the mountain. Whither when they
came he entreated of him, that when he was shut up closely in his cell, and
heremitage, he would G.F.C. daily.
every second day bring him bread and water, If any should seek him, he willed
him to say, that he was G.F.C. a sleep
dead. Which things obtained, he shut up himself, and thereabode, clensing the
foulness of his sin, with fasting, prayers, and weeping.

Few days passed over, when a drowth (because of the want of rain) had hurt
the country near about him, and all the inhabitants of that land lamented
much. But one of them was warned in a dream to go to that man enclosed in a
cell, that he might pray, and that by no other way rain might be procured, but
by his prayers, So departing with some other taken to him, he found this Monks
complice alone, and demanded where he was, whom the vision admonished him to
seek. When he heard he was dead, he deemed his vision false, and they returned
all to prayer, but the same vision told him again the same things. Whereat
earnestly entreating him, that before had deceived them, they requested him to
show them the man, affirming that by the authority of so marvelous a vision,
they were sent to him being alive, not dead. Seeing it was the will of God he
brings them to that godly man, and the wall being broken down, (because he had
shut the door,) they enter in and fall before his feet, desiring him (when
the truth of the matter was declared) to release the famine by intercession.
First, his excuse was, that he could not demerite so great a thing. at which
words, he burst forth into weeping for the offense he had committed, as if he
had seen it fresh before his eyes. At length for the importunity of the
requesters, (for as much as he perceived God would have it so,) he gave him
self to supplication, and out of hand there followed, great store of rain,
wherewith both the earth and men were refreshed.

Read Eusebius hist eccl, lib. 3. cap. 23.
What should I speak of him which first was the desciple of John the G.F.C.
son of Zebidaeus
Apostle, but after practiced robbing for a long time? Nevertheless afterward
the Apostle got hold on him, as he came out from the robbers den, and brought
him again (as you will know) to his former life, so that his beginning was not
to be conferred with his end. I remember when you read this story you admired
the incredible meekenes of this Apostle, and among other tokens of his sincere
love toward him, which he showed, this you said you most wondered at that he
kissed the hand of the young man besmeared with blood, and so with embracing
reclaimed him to everlasting life, when as by all likelihood he was near to
the brinke of death.

Saint Paul also not only loved and embraced Onesimus converted, who was an
unprofitable servant, and fugitive thief, but makes petition to his master,
that he should esteem him as himself, and that because he recanted. Philem.
from the 10. verse to the 18.
These be the Apostles words I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have
begotten in my bonds. Which in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now
profitable both to thee and to me, whom I have sent again, thou therefore
receive him, that is mine own bowels. Whom I would have retained with me, that
in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the Gospel. But
without thy mind, would I do nothing that thy benefit should be as it were,
of necessity, but willingly. It may be that he therefore departed for a season,
that thou should receive him for ever, not now as a servant, but above a
servant, even as a brother beloved, specially to me, how much more the^ unto
thee, both in the flesh, and in the Lord? If therefore thou account our things
common, receive him, as my self.

The same Apostle writes to the Corinthians, touching them that have sinned,
in this wise, 2. Cor. 12.22.
least when I come again, I shall bewail many of them which have sinned
already, and have not repented of the uncleanness, 2. Cor. 13.2
and fornication, and wantonness which they have committed And again, I told
you before, and tell you before, if I come again, I will not spare. You see
then whom the Apostle bewayleth, and whom he will not spare, not those which
have sinned, but those which have not repented, and not only not repented, but
once or twice admonished of their faults have refused to obey. For in that he
says, I told you before, and tell you before, as though I had been present
the second time, so write I now being absent, he signifies thus much, that
being warned they contemned counsel.

For which cause, I fear me, the same will fall out to us, and although the
same Paul, who threatened the Corinthians, be not at our elbowes, yet Christ
is present, who spoke by him, and if we persevere in hardness of heart, he
will say to us, I will not spare you, not only in the time present, but not in
ye time to come neither, Wherefore let us prevent his face by confession, We
will acknowledge our sins, and in confession intend not to com: mit them
again, assuring our selves of remission. Ecclus. 21.1 Pro. 18.17 Or, he that
is first in his cause is just.
and let us power out our hearts in his sight, * Have thou sinned? Says the
Scripture, do so no more, pray for thy fore-sins that they may be forgiven
thee, And again, * The just is an accuser of himself in the beginning of his
speech. Let us not then look till our adversary accuse us, but let us prevent
him by confession, and so make the judge more favorable toward us.

And surely this I assuredly know, thou confessest thy transgressions, and
mournest for thy self, but this I do not alonely require of thee; for I would
have the amendment of the things to come arise, of the confession of the things
past, and so I would have it done, that whilst thou do it be thou
ascertained of forgi enesse. For every one that does ought, unless he know the
thing he has in hand will profit him goes about it, either carelessly, or not
seriously. For example he that sows seed, unless he be sure and certain there
will be rain, that the earth will send forth the blade, and that the fruit
will ripen, he will never reap. And as none would feign spend labor in wast,
nor bestow diligence in that which shall not be beneficial unto him; so he
that sows sorrow, tears and confession which is without hope unprofitable,
cannot cease from sin, being holden fast by incredulity. But as the husband
man which has no hope to reap fruit cares not to drive off the birds from
his corn, or beasts, or any other nociue things, right so he that sows
confession with tears, and hops not it will be gainefull, puts and
drives nothing from his heart, which may hurt repentance. Repentance is
hurted, if it be enwrapped, in such evils as he was first; When one builds
and another breaks down, Ecclus. 34, 24.
what profit have they then (says the scripture) but labor? And he that is
purged from the touching of a corse, and again touches the dead, what
avails washing? So he that fasteth to decline sins, and goes back again
to them, who will hear his prayers? Ecclus. 26, 29.
And again it is said, when one departs from righteousness to sin, the
Lord appoynteth such to the sword. And as a dog is odious that licketh up his
vomit again, Prou. 26.11.
so is a fool^, when he returns to his transgressions.

So then this suffices not, to accuse thy self by declaring thy sins, but
do it with that zeal, that hope of justification may proceed of repentance,
and so you may bridle your soul to commit never the things again, of which
you have made confession. One for to give censure against himself, is common
to the faithful and faithless. Many actors on stage which represent unchaste
queanes and whormongers call themselves sinners and naughty folk, but not with
purpose to amend, and therefore in very deed it is no confession. For they
speak it not for grief of heart, nor with bitterness of tears, nor with
hatred of the things they confess, as if they would no more either hear or
do the like, but the words be all the matter, which they blab out with their
lips, not touched or pinched in mind, but after a sort hunting for praise,
through the elegancie and trimnesse of speech, which they use to their auditors.
Neither are sins so grievous when they are colorably declared, as when indeed
they are committed. Again some are so benumbed with ouer-great despair, and
are so deuoyde of sense, that making like account of good and illreport, with
great impudency they disclose their sins, as though they were another bodies.
But I would have thee to do nothing so, neither for despair to come to
confession but with good and sure hope of forgiveness, the very root of
despair being cut off. Now the root of despair is sloathfulnes, and not the
root only but the nurse too. A man is caused to think that any good thing is
hard, and not possible to be obtained by him or any other through too great
bashfulnesse: which when it rules in ones affection, he thinks it may be
eased by no good thing. And because sloathfulnes is a certain deiectiue
pensiuenes of the spirit, it comes to pass, that despair arises of sloth.
Thom. Aquin. lib. 2. s. p. q. 20. de desper.
For as a garment breeds mothes, and nourishes them also, so sloth does not
alone beget desperation but nourishes and fostereth it. Insomuch that they wax
and grow together, the one being cut off, the other (without question) maneth
and decreaseth, Wherefore separate this link of sins, and break their yoke.
By the yoke of thy soul, I mean vice, whereto as it were a yoke, the life
of man is tied. for when the thought of man is not right, the axle-tree of life
is carried headlong,

Harken yet what more we will say. Often times it falls out that a man
amendeth many and great sins by repentance, yet he commits faults after
the good he has wrought. And this is it, which lays chiefly despair on the
soul, because she seems to pull down that she builded, and vainly to have
spent all her travel, this cogitation (I say) depriueth the soul of hope and
confidence. Contrariwise we must think what way this bad and hurtful thought
may be expelled, namely, that unless the good we do, and the amendment gotten
by repentance prohibited, and were (as it were) a contrary weight to our
sins, there were no stay, but that we should be carried downward into the
depth of mischief. And as a strong habergion suffers not a keine and
poisoned dart to pierce the intrals of the body, but in some part stops ye
force thereof: so is it certain that he yt carries hence many good things and
many bad, shall find some ease in his punishment: and he that shall depart
without any goodness, and with great store of evil, what should I speak of
his punishment? For there (questionless) good and bad works shall be
rewarded, and each (as it were) shall be balanced, and the part that sinketh,
shall draw with it the worker. Rewards in the life to come of works both good
and bad.
If the multitude of evils shall ouer-poyse, it will pull the worker to hell;
but if the good works shall be greater, they will resist and repugne against
the evils, and will bring their worker to the place of the living, even from
the gates of hell, This is not phantastically imagined of my brain, the divine
Scriptures disassent not from it; for this the word of God speaks. Thou Psalm.
62, 12. Mat. 16.27. Differences of joys and plagues in the life to come.
Calvin. Iustitu. lib. 3. cap. 25. sect. 10. Bulling, in Comment. and Erasmus in
Paraphras. in 41, verse. cap. 15. 1 Cor.
rewardest every one according to his work. For not in hell only but in the
kingdom of God, there shall be many differences. John. 14.2
In my fathers house (says he) are many dweling places. And again, 1. Cor.
15.41.
There is another glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon. What is
more wonderful, then that he shows how exactly the measure of our deeds
shall be weighed? One star (says he) differs from another star in glory,
that by it he might show that amongst all and every one that shall be in that
kingdom, there willbe a difference. Therefore since we know all this, let us
not withdraw our selus from goodworks neither yield to sloth and sluggardie the
presence of despair. And admit we cannot attain to the clearenesse of the
Sun or Moon, yet we must desire the brightness of a star howbe^t inferior
to them, let us seek at the least for some light by our good deeds, let us
labor to be sound, worthy, to enlarge somewhat the shining of heaven. If we
cannot be gold, if we cannot be precious stones, yet let us be in stead of
silver, only let us now be turned into that matter, which fire may consume,
that we be not found to be wood, hay, or stubble, let us be even the last in
goodness, not the first in evil. By often adding a little, there will arise a
great heap as wittily said Hesiodus. (...),
(...).
Small good works conjoined with faith and repentance go not without reward.
And as worldly riches increase, when every small gain is regarded: so it
fares in heavenly riches, in increasing the which no little good deed must be
contemned. Surely it is an absurdity, (seeing our Judge does not deny a reward
for Mat 10
a cup of cold water) for us to say, that unless we do great things, it will
be nothing available. Yea this more I ad, that he that despises not small and
little things, will by little and little come to great things and Eccl. 19.1
he that contemns small things, (which concordeth with the Scripture) shall
fall by little and little. And therefore I think for this cause, our Lord and
Savior did ordain for small things great rewards. For what is less, than to
visit the sick? And yet for this small work, he has laid up a great reward.
And again, what is so easy, as to give the hungry bread, the thirsty drink,
the naked raiment, and to seek out him that is shut up in prison? Yet these
things that be so little and small, he reckneth so great as that he accounts
them ministered not to man, but to himself, and for them has promised the
celestial kingdom.

Wherefore (most dearly beloved) enter, enter the way to eternal life, and
put on again My yoke is light, and my burden light, This burden is not the
weight of him that is laden, but the wings of him that flies For birds have
burdens of their feathers, which on earth they bear, and of them they are
borne into the heaven. Augustine.
the yoke of Christ which is easy, and his burden which is light, recover the
virtues of thy mind, make thine end according to thy beginning, let not the
treasure of spiritual graces, gotten by such labor, decay, and they will
verily perish, if thou persist in evils, and exasperate the wrath of God
against thy deeds. But before thou loose much of thy treasure, and before thy
manured field be surrounded with hurtful deluges, if thou exclude the
entrance, and stop the ouerflowing of sin, thou may bring it again to his
pristine fertility, and by husbanding make it very battle.

Arise therefore, arise and shake off the dust from thee, arise from the earth,
and straightway (believe me) thine enemy will be afraid. For he threw thee
down, as though thou should never rise up, but if he shall see thee to rise
from the earth, and lift thine eyes toward the heavens, incontinent thy
boldness will out-countenance him, Resist the devil, and he will fly ftom you.
Jam. 4.7 If one fly the devil he is a Lion: if one resist, he has (for he is
Beelzebub, that is, a God of flies) no more power than a weak fly: according to
the old verse. Hostis non laedit, nisi cum tentatus obedit,
Est leo si cedis, si stas quafi musca recedit.

and the more ready thou art, the more fearful he will be, and the more thou
presumest, the more frail and infirm thou make him. Think also on this,
that the more hardiness God shall indue thee withal, the more he will weaken
both his boldness and might.

If so be thou have affiance in my words, me thinks I see toward thee the
mercy and aid of God, but thine adversary to be affrighted by reason of shame
and confusion. Me thinks I perceive now in my mind, that with all gratefulnes
and favor every virtue allureth thee to her, hold on then earnestly, labor
chearefully, run forward willingly. Thou shall find no want of me in that I
can, but I will still reason with thee in speech, I will continually exhort and
stir thee up, both present with lively voice, and absent with letters. Albeit I
persuade my self, if thou gladly read this I have now written, there will be
no cause, why thou should seek for farther medicines.

Deo soli sapienti, laus and gloria.
TO THE Reader.
IF the wicked would earnestly consider, the terriblenes of the day of the
Lord, it must needs be, that they would either wholly renounce sin, or at
least, not so much be delighted therewith. Which Chrysostom right well
perceived, for that so copiously, so lively (as it were with a pencile) he
depainteth that day and time. On the other side, to ponder equally the rewards
that in heaven abide for them, who in this life seek chiefly the setting forth
of Gods glory, and the benefitting of their neighbor, who bewailing their
sins with true and unfeigned repentance, by the hand of faith lay hold on Gods
promises, avails not a little, to the abandoning of sin and iniquity.
Wherefore (gentle Reader) in the sentences following I have used this order,
that those which appartaine to the second coming of Christ, and the punishment
of the ungodly are set first, in the second place those that show the joys of
the world to come, and in the last room those that teach, that by faith,
sincere repentance, and amendment of our lives, we may enjoy that heavenly
bliss. My petition to thee is this, that thou daine to accept my labor, which
if thou do, I shall be occasioned to judge my travel well bestowed, The Lord
of his mercy grant, that, since wickedness never more abounded, nor men never
less remembered, the coming of Christ, unto judgment, we may heartely repent
us of our sins, because the wrath of God hangs over our heads: and that we
may, as good Christians, live worthy of our vocation, (living so as though
every one particularly should say, with that holy man S. Hierome, as often as I
remember that day, every member of my body quaketh: for whether I eat or
drink, or do any thing else, me thinks always that dreadful trumpet
sounds in mine ears, arise O ye dead, and come to judgment, because the
last hour is at hand. Amen.

As desirous of thy profit, as of his own, in the school of Christ Jesus, R.
Wol.

OENIPODES. Non cistae, sed pectori.
Sentences collected out of the fathers works, which have such agreement with
the former Treatise, as that they are not unfit for this place. Of the
punishments of hell, and of the day of judgment.
IN that terrible ho wex of the death of a wretched sinner, Bernard in spec.
pec,
immediately there will come evil spirits (like roaring lions) to snatch away
their pray. When suddenly shall appear the horrible places of torments, the
Chaos and obscurity of darkness, the dread of misery and confusion, the
terror of that fearful mansion, where is the place of weepers, where is the
place of groaners, where is the voice of them that cry woe, woe, woe be to us
the children of Euah when the miserable soul departing from the body shall
hear, see, and seele these and se^blable things, yea a thousand times worse
then may be spoken, in what (I pray,) how great, and how wondrous fear and
trembling shall she be? what tongue can utter it, what book declare it? what
will now avail the boasting of knowledge, the pomp of the people, the vanity
of the world, the greediness of earthly dignity? what shall then avail the
appetite of riot, delitiousnesse of meat, exquisite drink, curiosity of
garments, niceness of the flesh, gluttony of the belly, superfluousnesse of
food, surfeiting and drunkenness, curious building of houses, possession of
terrene goods, scraping together of prebends, hoording of riches? whether can
these things deliver the wretched soul of a man from the mouth of the hydious
and horrible Lion, that is, from the iawe of the cursed dragon. when that
cunning deceiuer, Idem. ibid.
that son of iniquity, that most eager enemy of our souls, shall miserably
and dreadfully meet with thy soul, how will thou be able to abide the
fearful sight of his terrible countenance, the intolerable stink of his
mouth, the brimstone-like flames of his eyes? How then will thou be of force to
abide so great fear, of so horrible a beast? Be assured, that the fear of his
dreadful presence, exceeds every kind of torments, which may be devised in
this world. At which the Prophet quaking betook himself to prayer, saying,
hear my prayer O God when I call upon thee, deliver my soul from the fear of
the enemy. He said not from the power of the enemy, but from the fear of the
enemy. But alas, my brother, if the sinful soul be so much, and so greatly
daunted at the sight only of Satan, how great confusion or how great horror,
how great affiction, and how great lamentation shall she have through his
touching and tormenting? when the Lord shall be about to judge the sorrowful
world, Hierom. ad Heliod.
it shall make a great noise, and one kindred shall strike the breast to another
kindred. The Kings once most puissaunt, shall quake without a guard, foolish
Plato with his scholars shall be brought forth, then Aristotle's arguments shall
not be profitable, when that son of the poor woman which exercised a craft
shall come to judge the ends of the earth. That judge is neither prevented
with favor, Augu. li. 3. de symb.
nor moved with pity, nor bribed with money, neither will he be appeased with
satsfaction, or repentance. Here let the soul deal for it self while it has
time, as long as there is a place for mercy, because there will be a place of
justice. Greg. hom. 15.
In the last day of judgment, when the heavens being opened, the Angels
ministering, the Apostles sitting together, Christ shall appear in the seat of
his majesty, all the elect and reprobate shall see him, that both the just may
rejoice without end of the gift of their reward, and the unjust ever lament,
for the reuengement of their plague. Ansel. de similitudini bus mundi
On the right hand there shall be our sins to accuse us, on the left hand
infinite devils, beneath the horrible confusion of hell, above an angry Judge,
without the world flaming, within our conscience burning, there scarce the
just shall be saved. Alack wretched sinner, whither will thou flee? It is
impossible to be hidden, intolerable to appear. The joy of the time present
must be so used, Greg hom. 32.
that the remembrance of the bitterness of the judgment to come, may never
depart from us. Of the joys of heaven.
SO great is the beauty of righteousness, Aug. lib. de morb.
so great is the sweetness of the everlasting light, that is, of the immutable
wisdom, that although we might not tarry in it more then one day, for this
alone, innumerable years of this life replenished with delights and abundance
of temporal goods, were not without cause and reason to be contemned. Jdem. li,
3. de. symb.
We can easilier tell what there is not in that eternal life, then what there
is. There is not death, there is not mourning, there is not weariness, there
is not weakness, there is not hunger, there is no thirst, no parching heat, no
corruption, no lack, no sorrow, no sadness. Make haste thither, where you
may live for ever. I Would. devtil. again. poen.
For if you so love this miserable and transitory life, wherein you live with
such labor, and wherein by running, traveling, sweating, breathing, thou
scarce get things necessary for the body: how much more ought you to love the
life everlasting, where you shall sustain no labor, where always is great
quietness, great felicity, happy liberty, happy blessedness, where shall be
fulfilled that the Lord spoke in the Gospel, Men shall be like the Angels.
And that, the just shall shine, etc. Temporal life compared with eternal
life, Greg. in homil.
is rather to be called death then life. For the daily fainting of corruption,
what is it else, but a certain long continuance of death? But what tongue can
tell, or what understanding conceive, how great these joys are of that
supernall City, to be in the assembly of Angels, with the most blessed souls
to stand by the glory of the Creator, to behold in presence the face of God,
to see that immeasurable light, to feel no pangs of death, to enjoy the gift
of euer-enduring incorruption. Against despair.
THe thief acknowledged, Aug. in lib. de symb.
Peter denied. In Peter there is showed, that no just man ought to presume of
himself: in the thief, that no wicked man being converted, should despair.
Therefore let the good fear, least he perish through pride, and let not the
wicked despair through much naughtines. Idem de vtil. again. poen.
Let none despair as Judas the traitor: not so much the heinous wickedness
which he committed, was the cause of his eternal destruction, as the despair
of forgiveness. Let none distrust, Amb. sup. Luc. lib. 2.
let none in the priuitie of his old sins despair of the rewards of God.
God knows how to change his determination, if thou know how to amend thy
fault. Let no man despair of pardon, Isido. de su^. bon. lib. 2.
although about the end of his life, he be turned to repentance. God judges
every one according to his end, not according to his life past. To commit some
foul offense is the death of the soul: but to despair, Idem. ibid.
is to descend into hell. Of Repentance.
IF I proffer thee gold, Amb. in ser de eleem. and ieiun.
thou say not, I will come to morrow, but at the instant thou requirest it,
none prolongeth, none makes excuse: the redeeming of our soul is promised,
and none makes have. Conversion is never too late, the thief went from the
Cross to Paradise. Hier. in ep. ad Laetam Greg. hom. 34. sup. eua
There is greater joy in heaven of a sinner converted, then of a righteous man
that stands: for a captain also in war loves that soldier more, who
being returned from flight has valiantly slain his foe, then him, that never
fled, and has never done any manly act. So the husbandman loves more that
ground, which after thorns yeldeth forth plentiful corn: then that which
never had thorns, and never bare a fertile grain. In nothing to sin is only
the property of God, Amb. ep. 3 ad Simplicianum.
it is the property of a wise man, both to correct his fault, and to repent
for his sin. with God not so much the measure of time, Hierom. in quod sermon
as the measure of grief prevails, not so much the abstinencie of meats, as
the mortificatton of vices. Repentance is the medicine of our wound, Isid. li.
3. de sum. bon.
the hope of salvation, by which sinners are salued, by which God is provoked
to mercy. The which is not weighed by time, but by deepenesse of lamentation
and tears. O repentance, what new thing shall I speak of thee? Cyprian. de
laud. paen.
Thou loosest all things which are bounde^, thou openest al things which are
shut, thou mitigatest all adversity, thou healest that is bruised, thou
illuminest that is confounded, thou incouragest all that is out of hope, Be not
negligent because the Lord forbeareth you when you sin, Aug. in lib. de vti.
poen.
for how much the longer he waits that ye amend, so much the more grievously
will he punish if you be negligent, Idem de 10 chordis
Better is a little bitterness in the cheeks, then a perpetual torment in the
bowels. Id. de poen.
Although the thief was pardoned in his latter end of all his sins, yet he gave
not an example to them that are baptized to sin, and persevere in evil. For
then he was first baptized with the baptism of the spirit, in that then first
he professed Christ. The sweetness of the apple recompenceth the sowrenesse
of the root, Hier. super Mat.
the dangers of the sea for hope of gain delight us, the hope of health
asswageth the grief of physic. He that desires the kirnell, breaks the
nut, and he that will be partaker of everlasting goodness, repents. It is
no great matter to fall in wrestling, but to lie when one is cast down. Chrysostom.
in ep ad Heliod. Monach.
It is not deadly to be wounded in battle, but after the wound is inflicted,
through despair to be cured, to deny a plaster to the bile. And oftentimes we
see wrestlers crowned, after often slides, and many downe-casts. We see also a
soldier after many flights to be a stout man, and to overcome him that
discomfited him. Behold the kingdom of God is to be sold: Aug. de spir and
anima
buy it if thou will. Neither think of some great thing for the greatness of
the price, it is worth so much as thou have, seek not what thou have, but what
manner of body thou art. This thing is worth so much as thou art, give thy
self and thou shall have it. But I am evil, thou will say, and happily it
will not receive me, by giving thy self unto it thou shall be good. Idem in
soliloquijs.
That repentance is in vain, which afterward a fault polluteth, lamentations
profit nothing, if sins be doubled. It avails nothing to crave pardon of
evils, and anew to commit evils. He that knocks his breast, Idem in quoda^.
ser.
and corrects not himself, strengthens his sins, and does not take them
away. NAZIANZENVS. (...),
(...).
Sicubi chalcographus titubarit lector amice,
Da veniam lapso, sic petis ipse tibi.
FINIS.
AN EPISTLE OF COMFORT, From one Friend to another, wherein the Anabaptists
error of Desperation is briefly confuted, and the Sin against the Holy Ghost
plainly declared.

Whereunto is added certain effectual Prayers.

LONDON Printed for John Helm. 1609.

An Epistle of comfort from one friend to another, wherein the Anabaptists
error of desperation is briefly confuted, and the sin against ye holy Ghost
plainly declared.
Whereunto is added certain effectual Prayers
Sir, whereas it pleased you to require me to write unto you my mind,
concerning the true sense and meaning of this place of Saint Paul in his
Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 6.
It can not be that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of the
he^^enly gift, and were become partakers of the holy Ghost, and having tasted
of the good word of God, and of the power of the world to come, if they fall
away (and as concerning themselves, crucify the son of God afresh, and make
a mock of him) that they should be renewed again by repentance.

Sir, Many in time past, and at this present day, mistaking this text and not
truly understanding it, The error of the Nouatians and now of the Anabaptists.
both have been and are encombred with the Nouations error, which is, that
after man by baptism and the holy ghost is regenerated, and has tasted of the
grace of God, and has embraced Christ and his holy word, if he fall to sin
again, he is without remedy of salvation.

Undoubtedly this is a very damnable error, enough to bring all them that are
infected therewith to desperation. But albeit they ground this their error upon
this before alleged text of Saint Paul, and certain other texts: yet they
miss the cushion, because they take this scripture too straightly, not
referring it to many other places of scripture, which show: that whenever and
how often soever a sinner repents him truly of his sins, and commits
himself with a sure faith unto the mercy of God through Christ, God receives
him again to grace and salvation.

Doubtless no prophecy in the scripture has any private interpretation, 2.
Petri. 1.
but must needs be expounded according to the general articles of the
Christian faith and agreeable to other texts of holy scripture, and so must
this text be also.

Now truth it is: that there is almost innumerable texts in holy scripture,
that most plainly do declare: that whenever a true repentant sinner by
unfeigned faith returns unto God, and asks mercy for Christ's sake, he shall
undoubtedly have it. And albeit the holy scripture is full of such places, yet
here by Gods grace, I will show and rehearse to you some of them, to give you
occasion to mark them and such like places as you shall find almost in every
leaf of the Bible.

A just man falls seven times, Pro, 2-4
and rises up again. Mark the scripture says: he rises up again.

The wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him, Ezech. 33.
whensoever he conuerteth. Note that it says: whenever he conuerteth.

Let the ungodly man forsake his own way, Esa. 55.
and the unrighteous his own imaginations and turn again unto the Lord, so
shall he be merciful unto him:

Thou disobedient Israel turn again (says the Lord) and I will not let my
wrath fall upon you. Iere. 3.


Thus says the Lord: Jere. 8.
do men fall so, that they rise not up again? Or if Israel do repent, will
not God turn again to them? Zacha. 1.


Turn you unto me (says the Lord God of hoastes) and I will turn me unto
you.

Remember from whence Apoc. 2.
thou art fallen, and do the first workee.

Mark in the Gospel of Luke the example of the unthrifty son. Luc. 15.


Also Christ said unto Peter: Peter I have prayed for thee, Luc. 22.
that thy faith fail not, and when thou art converted, strength thy brethren.

Mark, he says: when thou art converted. Lo, if you weigh these places of
scripture before alleged, and almost innumerable mo of the same sort, you shall
perceive evidently, that though a christian have sinned never so often (as who
does not daily offend God) yet whenever he returns unto God by true
repentance (which consists of inward co^trition and a sure faith in Christ
Jesus) he is assured by the word of God to recover and receive again the
grace, favor and mercy of God, which through his disobedience he had worthily
lost, and immediately to enioyfull, absolute, and perfect remission and
forgiveness of all his sins through Jesus Christ, in whom he reposeth all his
faith, trust, and confidence of salvation. The Gospel assures him no less
saying: John. 3.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Moreover, if you mark well the examples of godly men, which are registered in
holy scripture, you shall plainly perceive, that albeit they were highly in
Gods favor, yet for all that, many of them had great falls, and committed very
heinous offenses, but they did rise up again returning to Gods mercy by true
repentance and faith, and so recovered again their former grace, which they
through their own folly had lost.

Aaron was so much favored of God, Aaron.
that by Gods calling he was made the high bishop and curate over his people.

And yet at the light request of the Israelites, he let them make and worship
the golden Calfe contrary to his conscience, by reason whereof, both he and
they committed that most detestable sin of Idolatry, and yet he by true
repentance and faith returning to grace was saved.

David David,
Gods dear darling, after he had yt knowledge of God, and had much tasted of
his grace, being endued abundantly with the holy Ghost and gracious gifts from
above, fell both into the sin of adultery and murder. And yet by true and
unfeigned repentance, returning to Gods mercy, was accepted and received again
into Gods favor.

Manasses Manasses,
also contrary unto his conscience fell willingly to Idolatry, but yet he rose
again by true repentance and faith, and recovered again the grace of God.

So likewise that wicked man of the City of Corinthus whom Saint Paul
straightly charged the Corinthians to excommunicate, The sinful Corinthian. 1
Cor. 5.
and exclude out of the holy congregation of Christian men, and that they
should neither eat nor drink with him, because of his open and abominable
crime of incest and outrageous whoredom: and yet when he declared himself to
be truly repentaunt for his great and infamous sin, 1. Cor. 2.
Saint Paul admonished them with all gentleness and christian charity to
receive him again into the congregation as a christian brother, and so to
esteem him and take him.

What shall I say of Peter Peter.
Christ's Apostle? had not he a sure knowledge of Christ, confessing him openly
before all the Apostles to be very Christ the son of the living God? was not
he even then endued with the holy ghost and grace from above, Mat. 16.
unto whom Jesus Christ said: Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for
flesh and blood has not opened that unto thee, but my father which is in
heaven: And yet after all this he had such a fall, that contrary to his own
conscience, willingly without any co^pulsion, threats, or imprisonment: he did
most cowardly and shamefully forsake and deny Christ not without blasphemy,
swearing that he never knew him, cursing and committing himself to the devil
if ever he had to do with him.

What would the Nouatian and Anabaptist say unto this? was it not a fall? could
there be any greater sin then this? was it not done of knowledge? was it not
done willingly? was it not against his own conscience? Yes doubtless, it was no
less but against his own conscience. But yet thanks be unto Almighty God, it
was not the sin of blasphemy against the holy ghost, neither the sin unto
death, the which Saint John speaks of, for he continued not therein unto his
end, 1 John. 5.
but immediately he went forth of the bishop^ house and wept bitterly, very
much lamenting his heinous offense, and by faith he returned again unto
Christ, knowing his mercy to be infinite and without measure, Mat. 26.
and so he was accepted unto grace again, and Christ appeared unto him (to his
great comfort) after he arose again from death to life, and afterward sending
down his holy spirit endued him with wonderful gifts of grace from above. And
then Peter became a strong champion, setting forth Christ to be the only
Savior of the whole world, preaching and openly confessing him before all men,
without any fear either of the Scribes Pharisees or Magistrates.

Now good sir, lay this example of Saint Peter to this text of Saint Paul to
the Hebrews. It cannot be that they which were once lightened. etc. If they
fall away, etc. that they should be renewed again by repentance.

If a man would apply the aforesaid example of S. Peter unto this text of Saint
Paul, he would think that Peter should utterly have been cast away from Gods
favor mercy and grace. For first in heaven. Which was, by the inspiration of
his holy spirit.

Finally, Peter had a taste of Mat, 17.
and so did James the more, and John the Evangelist also. Where, in the
presence of them all Christ was transfigured and showed himself unto them in
the form of a glorified body, so that his face did shine as the Sun, and his
clothes appeared as white as the light, there appeared also among the^ Moses
and Elias. And even there the clear voice of God the father of heaven, was
plainly heard among them out of the cloud, saying upon Christ, this is my
dearly beloved son, in whom I delight, hear him

Lo, all this and much more Peter both heard and saw, being almost continually
in Christ's company, eating and drinking with him, hearing daily his heavenly
Doctrine, preaching and teaching, seeing every where (as occasion served) his
great and wonderful miracles. And yet for all this, what a great fall Peter
had, it appears plainly by his denial of Christ his loving master and
Savior, and the circumstances thereof, which I touched before. But yet to make
Peter's fall more horrible, Christ said unto him, and unto all other his
Apostles, when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel of salvation, He that
denies me before men, I shall deny him also before my father. Alas good Peter,
what case standedst thou in now? How does this saying of Christ now touch thee?
Remembering this saying of Christ, art thou not at thy wies end? Is it not most
certain and true, yt thou have too horribly fallen after that thou had
tasted of al these gracious gifts before rehearsed? Have thou not contrary to
thine own conscience most shamfully denied thy master and Savior before men?
Ah good soul what shall become of thee? how wilt you answer for thy self? For
it seems here plainly, yt both S. Paul in the before aleadged place to the
Heb. and also Christ himself in the scripture before rehearsed, have given
sentence of condemnation against thee. Wherefore, the Anabaptists grounding
upon these scriptures will plainly pronounce thee to be a reprobate, and that
thou art dispatched and utterly cast away from all hope of salvation. But here
let us not too lightly pass over, but earnestly and deeply consider, what may
be said in this matter on Peter's behalf. And first it may be rightly answered,
that that place of S. Paul unto the Hebrews, Heb. 6.
makes nothing against S. Peter, neither yet against any Christian man how
grievously or how often soever he has sinned so that he has not utterly
forsaken Christ and fallen clean away from him.

For S. Paul says: It cannot be that they which were once lightened. etc. If
they fall away, etc. that they should be renewed by repentance.

Mark here diligently, It is not all one thing to fall, and to fall away,
that S. Paul says, if they fall away. He says not if they fall: but if they
fall away, for it is not all one thing to fall, and to fall away. For Peter did
fall, but did not fall away from Christ, but returned unto him again. And old
proverb A proverb,
it is: a man runs very far, that never return^th again. All we
Christians do daily fall, for we daily break Gods commandments, but yet we
do not fall away from Christ, neither refuse we him to be our Savior, but
acknowledging our manifold sins and offenses, we daily turn unto him again,
by true repentance, faith and amendment of life, nothing doubting of his great
and unmeasurable mercy toward us.

They fall away from Christ that utterly forsake him and refuse him, Who
falls away from christ.
to be their Savior, and never return unto him again to obtain his mercy,
but are become plain apostaes, utterly forsaking the christian faith, making
but a mock of Christ, perseuering in their obstinate apostasy and unbelief
even to their lives end. As did Judas the traitor, 1. Tim. 1. 2. Tim. 4.
Iulianus Apostata, Simon Magus, Porphyrius, Hymeneus and Alexander the
Copersmith.

Mat. 10. A good and general rule to be noted.
Secondarily, as touching that saying and threatening of Christ, saying: He that
denies me before men, I shall deny him before my father, etc. It is to be
considered, that all the terrible threatenings that are in the holy Scripture
threatened against great sinners are threatened conditionally, that is to say: if
the sinners do not truly repent and return unto God by faith and amendment of
life, this plague or punishment or that, shall light upon them. But if they at
the preaching, reading or hearing of Gods holy word, do repent and return
unto God, by faith and godly life, then that plague threatened shall not once
touch them. Example be the Ninevites upon whom Jonas Gods minister and preacher
(or rather God by him) pronounced this terrible judgment saying, Ion. 3.
there are yet forty days, and then shall Niniue, be overthrown. But there
as the scripture says, the people of Niniue believed God and earnestly
repented them of their great sins, and so was the sentence of God retracted,
and the City saved and not overthrown. So likewise this terrible sentence of
Christ, he that denies me before men, I shall deny him before my Father, must
needs have this condition joined with it, if he does not repent, neither
return again, A conditon.
but Peter did both repent, and return again unto Christ. For albeit his
faith was weak and faint (as was the faith of all the Apostles) yet it was not
utterly extinct: Luke 22.
for Christ had said unto him before, Simon, I have prayed for thee that thy
faith fail not.

And in any wise take heed, and note this well, Christ said not, he that
denies me, I shall deny him, though he repent and return, but remember well
that Christ said, Mat. 9.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto repentance. Peter
therefore repented, and returned unto Christ again, and so was received unto
grace, and was saved.

Paul unto the Hebrews, way well this condition, (if they fall away) for they
only fall away, which commit that most horrible crime, which is called in the
holy scripture the sin unto death, blasphemy against the spirit, and the
sin against the holy Ghost, which never shall be forgiven, neither in this
world, neither in the world to come.

But here it might be demanded what the sin against the holy Ghost is, and
wherein it differs from all other grievous sins. Mat. 12.
I say unto you, all sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the
blasphemy against the spirit shall not be forgiven unto men.

Lo, here is the matter plainly opened by our Savior Christ what kind of
sins shall be forgiven, and what never forgiven, blasphemy against the spirit
shall never be forgiven, all other sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven. And
Christ in saying all sin shall be forgiven, compriseth both original sin,
Three sorts of sins, Sin Blasphemy, Blasphemy against the spirit.
and also actual sin: moreover Christ speaks here of three sorts of sins,
the first he calls sin, the second blasphemy, and the third blasphe^
against the spirit: which the scripture also calls the sin unto death, and
the sin against the holy ghost. These three kinds of sins, and the
difference of every of them, I intend by Gods help severally to declare unto
you so shortly as I can, and so for this time tommit you unto God, And first
consider well what sin is.

Sin Sin.
is every wilful disobedience, act, or deed, that is done contrary unto the
Law and commandments of God, without murmur, grudge, or evil speaking:
either against the Law, commandments, or God himself, which is the maker and
giver of the Law.

As is Idolatry, superstition, perjury, swearing unadvisedly, breaking of the
holy day, dishonouring father and mother, murder, malice hatred, envy, wrath,
strife, treason, sedition, slander, whordome, theft, and such like.

All these and such other are called, and are indeed sin, so long as the
dooers of them do neither murmur, repine, grudge nor speak evil against God
or his holy law, neither allow in their conscience the thing and evil that
they do, but rather do utterly disalowe, accuse, and condemn in their own
conscience those their own damnable acts as evil and detestable.

The second kind of sin is blasphemy, mark it well, and consider how it
differs first from sin, and then from the sin against the holy ghost.

Blasphemy Blasphemy.
is more heinous then is sin alone, for all blasphemy is sin, but all sin
is not blasphemy, for truth it is that blasphemy compriseth in it self both
sin, and also a murmr, grudg, reuiling, evil speaking, slander, and
reproach of God and godliness, but it is always couple^ with ignorance and
unbelief, and proceeds not of such obstinate malice as continues to the end
of the life, as does the sin against the holy Ghost. In this sin of
blasphemy, Saint Paul offended before his conversion unto the faith of Christ
Jesus. For thus he speakkth of himself, before I was a blasphemer, 2. Tim. 2
and a persecutor, and a tyrant, but I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorantly in unbelief. Lo, here it is plain and evident, that this blasphemy
though it be a great offense, yet it is remissible, and forgiueable, and is not
excluded from grace and mercy, because it proceeds of ignorance and not of
knowledge, nor of obstinate malice, that does endure to the lives end, neither
is it the sin unto death, and therefore we may lawfully pray for such
blasphemers, As Saint John says, 2, John. 5
if any man see his brother sin a sin not unto death, let him ask, and he
shall give him life.

In this simple blsphemy (for so we may call it) many of the Jews offended,
taking Christ to be nothing less then the son of David, or Messiah, because
his parents were very poor, and himself supposed to be but a poor carpenters
son, which bare but a simple port in the world, yea and some of them that
crucified Christ, were overwhelmed in this simple blasphemy, and therefore
Christ prayed for them, saying, father forgive them for they know not what they
do. Luc. 23.
So Peter in his sermon excused the crucifiers of Christ saying, now dear
breethren I know that you have done it through ignorance etc. Act 3.
Repent you therefore and return, that your sins may be done away.

So did Saint Steven also pray for his persecutors whom before he called
stifnecked, Act 7.
adversaries of the holy ghost, traitors and murderers of Christ, doubtless
he would not have prayed for them so earnestly, unless their sins had been
forgiueable, and therefore their sin and offense was no more but simple
blasphemy.

The third kind of sin, is blasphemy against the spirit.

They commit blasphemy against the spirit, Blasphemy against the spirit.
or sin against the holy ghost, which willingly, upon knowledge, and advisedly,
contrary to their own conscience do deny, forake, impugn, slander, revile,
and persecute, the plain, open, manifest, and known truth, stiffly,
maliciously, and obdurately perseuering, and continuing without unfeigned
repentance, in that their wilful blindness and obstinate malice so long as
they live in this world, as did Pharaoh, Saul, Herod, Judas the traitor,
Iulianus Apostata, Porphirius, Himeneus, and Alexander the copper-smith with
other.

But mark this diligently, that we cannot (as far as I can perceive)
certainly judge of these blasphemers against the spirit, before the time of
their departure out of this present life: because we cannot certainly know,
whether at the end of their life they can repent and by faith return and take
hold of the mercy of God or not.

Conjectures are uncertain. Luc. 23.
We may conjecture, but we can not (as I suppose) certainly define of them.
Let us consider, that the thief that hung on the right hand of Christ, even at
the last hour repented, and with a strong and faithful prayer committed
himself wholly unto the mercy of Christ and was saved. In consideration
whereof, let us think it to be our bounden duty (as the Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles did) to revoke, and call back again open sinners and blasphemers
to earnest repentance for their own sinfulness, and to have a sure trust in
the mercy of God, and in the merit of Christ's passion and death, though they be
even at the departure out of this present life. for it is never too late so
long as life lasts. Let us therefore with all feruentnesse call upon them and
exhort them in any wise with a good courage, and a sure and vndoubful faith
ask, call and cry for Gods mercy, for his sweet son our Savior Jesus Christ
his sake, and undoubtedly they shall have it. For since the beginning of the
world hitherto, was there never one that in faith asked mercy heartely, but he
had it, through the gracious goodness of our aforesaid most merciful savior
Jesus Christ, unto whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor,
laud, and praise world without end Amen.

Yours at command to his power. T. C.

Give all the honor laud and praise to God only. 1. Tim. 1.

The prayer of Daniel turned into meter and applied unto our time. Daniel, IX.
O Lord thou high and fearful God
By whom all things do move
Thy mercies great are sure to such
As thy precepts do love.
We sinful men have sore transgrest,
Against thy laws divine
Full frowardly we have fled back
From these precepts of thine.
Thy Prophets dear to speak were pressed
In setting forth thy name.
Both rich and poor as bold were bent
For to gainesay the same.
To thee therefore thou Lord of hoastes
All justice does belong
To pour on us such shame and grief
In this we have no wrong.
Our shame is great and due to all
Our flight is but in vain.
To tread strange lands our sin has sought
Our shame does still remain.
But though such shame a reward just
To all in common be
Yet mercy Lord and to forgive
Does still belong to thee.
Indeed (O Lord) as for our selves
No less confess we can.
But that thy laws we set at naught
Much less have kept them than.
Thy Prophets spoke we would not hear
Ne of thee stand in awe.
Strange plagues from time to time we felt
For breaking of thy law.
The force whereof so fiercely bent
Was such as has not been.
For all the plagues in Moses law
Fell on this Realm for sin.
And yet to thee who made his suit
His path way so to guide.
That flying vice might learn thy law
And therein to abide?
Wwerefore thou saw all would not help
And could not hold thine hand.
But haste thy curse which now does fall
Upon this sinful land.
For as thou art a righteous God,
Thy works do so appear.
Consuming such as scorn does take
Thy loving voice to hear.
But yet (O Lord) thou broughtest forth
Thy flock from Egypt land.
Whereby thy name was largely spread
So now stretch forth thine hand.
But we have sinned more then they
Oh Lord yet stay thy rod.
As for this land was sometime thine
And thou also our God.
Our sins and eke our fathers faults
This day to pass has brought.
That all which border us about
They set us clean at naught.
Now then (O Lord) hide not thy face
Oh hear thy servant cry.
Behold thine house sometime full rich
How wast it does now lie.
Thy truth is fled, thy flock fast bound
As sheep led to be slain.
Thy foes prevail and prosper much
Though mischief they maintain.
And wilt not thou thy foes confound
That thus thy works reprove.
At least yet for thy great names sake
Their vile intents remove.
For why, as for our own deserts
We can no such thing have.
It is for thy great mercies sake
That we such things do crave.
Forgive us Lord, entreated be
To hear us make no stay.
We bear thy name, it is thy cause
Oh Lord make no delay.
A Prayer against Despair.
O Eternal God, most loving and gracious father in Jesus Christ, who art
always praised and magnified by thy children, in their great deliverances and
preservation from their perils and dangers: but especially when they perceive
themselves freede from ye power of Satan, death, and hell: from the which no
creature can save and deliver them, but thou only O Lord: And because no
chain of the devil, or evil temptation, is more strong to fetter the body
and soul of man, then despair: which is a wilful forsaking of faith and
confidence in thee O God: it arising and springing from fear and doubt: as if
thou were not faithful in thy promises, or able in thy power to preserve us:
Help Lord I beseech thee, and free and deliver me thy poor servant, from
this temptation and thraldom of Satan: and so strengthen (I humbly pray thee)
my faith and confidence ever more in thee, that in all my perils, necessities,
wants, sorrows and grief in this world, I may have a strong and steadfast hope
in thee, whereby I may overcome, repel, and keep back, the dangerous and
subtle suggestions of Satan, the world and the flesh: to thy great glory and
praise, and my eternal and unspeakable comfort, through Jesus Christ my only
Lord and Savior Amen.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord thou which couerest the night with darkness, and causest man therein
to take his rest, and by every day and night do show thy great glory in the
heavens, and also thy wisdom and power by governing and preserving all thy
creatures upon the earth: O Lord I thy poor servant and creature, do most
humbly thank thee from the bottom of my heart, for my sweet and comfortable
rest this night past, and for watching over me by thine eye of providence, and
keeping both my body and soul by thy grace from sin and death: beseeching
thee, O Lord God my father, Savior and comforter: to bless, to sanctify,
direct and preserve me in this thy new day, and that I may become a new
creature unto thee O God, in holiness and righteousness, laboring faithfully
and painfully in my calling: that so my labors this day may be sanctified and
blessed unto me and mine: and that I may show forth thy praise in all my ways,
and declare my love and charity unto men in all my works: that after the days
of this my life and pilgrimage finished and ended here in this world: I may
live with thee for ever in the world to come, through Jesus Christ my Lord and
Savior, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, ever one God
world without end. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O gracious and merciful God, I am most bound unto thy heavenly Majesty: for
my preservation this day, because I and al men, are continually subject unto
all dangers and perils, griefs and sorrows, sickness and death: yea we lie
open (unless thy grace and might do defend us) unto the temptations and tyranny
of the world, the flesh, and the devil: which daily seek and desire our hurt
and confusion, both of body and soul for ever. Wherefore O gracious and
everliving God, as thy right hand and saving health, has been with me this
day, and thou have directed, blessed, and comforted me, thy poor servant in
all my ways and labors, for the which I most humbly thank thee: so I most
earnestly entreat thy Majesty: in thy love and mercy for Christ Jesus sake, to
keep me and al mine in safety this night, and to cover us under the shadow of
thy wings from all perils and dangers whatsoever, and that our souls as well
as our bodies may take their sweet and comfortable rest and joy in thee: and
likewise that thou would grant that whenever thou shall knock at the
door of our hearts to call us unto thee O God: we may with the wise Virgins be
watchful, and have oil in our lamps, that we may be received into eternal
rest: through Jesus Christ thy dear son, and our only Savior: Amen.

FINIS.

