AN ANSWER TO MASTER H. JACOB HIS DEFENSE of the Churches and Ministry of
England.

By Francis Johnson an exile of JESUS CHRIST.



Though mine Adversary write a Book against me, would I not bear it upon my
shoulder, would I not bind it for crowns unto me. Job. 31.35.36. Printed in
the Year of our Lord. 1600.

The Title and inscription of Mr Jacobs book (because there is often relation
unto it hereafter, both in the Preface, and in the Book it selff, therefore) I
thought good here to insert it at first. Thus it was, word for word, as
follows:

[A DEFENSE OF THE CHVRCHES AND Ministry of England.

Written in two Treatises, against the Reasons and objections of Mr Francis
Johnson, and others of the separation commonly called Brownists.

Published, especially, for the benefit of those in these parts of the lovv
Countries.

MIDDELBVRGH. By Richard Schilders, Printer to the States of Zealand. 1599.]

To the Christian Reader, grace and peace from our Lord Jesus Christ.
THere came out of late (good Reader) two books, from one Master Henry Jacob,
a Priest of the Orders of the Prelates. The first was against his Lord, Mr D.
Bilson, now Prelate of Winchester, concerning Christ's sufferings and descending
into Hell. The latter against me by name, and others like minded, tovvching the
Church and Ministry of England.

Now although the Prelates could not well be offended at him, for publishing
the former against the doctrine of their Church, senig ( In K. Edw time, about
50. Years since.
long before him) Mr Carlill a learned man had both publikly disputed in
Cambridge, and printed a book, against that error of Christ's descension, and
that with great approbation of the most godly and learned at that time: Yet
belike fearing the worst, and knowing the hatred of the Prelates how deadly it
is, he did presently after send forth his other book, in defense of the
Churches and Ministry of England. So as whatsoever displeasure his Lords the
Prelates conceyved against him for the former, there was now some hope that
they might sooner be appeased upon view of the latter. Or howsoever it should
fall out, yet what like liar way could he take, to make all sure on his side,
then by the first book to get the forward Preachers and professors to take his
part against the Prelates, and by the other to have both them and the Prelates
themselves to stand with him against us?

Yet I hear some of his own coat give out, that he has dealt very simply, in
publishing so weak and raw a Treatise against us. And true it is in deed, that
his Treatise is such. In the publishing whereof, no wisdom has he showed at
all: unless it be in this, that he has thus let all the world see, that against
the errors of the Church of England there is plenty of Scripture to be had and
urged, but not a jote to be found for defense of their Worship, Ministry,
constitution, etc. For (if you mind it) Yet I deny not but he has scattered
some errors also in that book.
in his book against Bilson, about the question of Christ's sufferings and
descending into Hell, you shall see proof after proof readily brought from the
word of God. And on the contrary, in his book against us, not only no such
proof, but in stead thereof, either his own assertions and comparisons
obtruded unto us as oracles: or the Names of Mr Cranmer, Mr Ridley, and other
dead men, opposed to the word of the living God: or putting over his cause to
the State to be defended, himself being not able to speak one poor word in
defense thereof, etc. Such is his latter book, and such are the grounds of it.
A very great and strange difference, between two books, set out by one and the
same man, the one straight after the other, and both of them in matter of
Religion.

If I had first published these Replies and Aunswers which passed between us,
no doubt but many would have had a prejudice thereof, and all would have
thought I had done it purposely to show the weakness of that cause and falsehood
of that Ministry, etc. But now when he, a member of that Church, yea a
Minister of it, even a Priest of the Prelates creation, has first published
them: albeit the same thing be done, yet it is both without all prejudice, and
pretended by him for defense of the Churches and Ministry of England.

Be it, that he has not done it so well, as many would have it: yet it is the
best he could. And what if he thought by this means, either to stir up some
others more able hereunto. or at least to show his own good will? Doubtless
where there is want of ability, a man's good will is to be accepted. And why
should any then misinterpret so good a meaning? If any of the Prelates or
others of that Church like it not, they may learn by his example if not to
lay their hand on their mouth, yet to try if they can plead the cause any
better. For worse. I suppose they would be ashamed to do it.

I had thought in this case I should never have seen any more absurd writing,
then Mr Giffards and Bredvvels. But now to Mr Jacob may they well give place.
And if any can be found of all the Priests in England more senseless then
these, let such for their worthynes (as standerd bearers) be Prelates of their
chiefest Seas. And as for Mr Jacob, seeing he has done his best, let all men be
content to bear with his simplicity, who otherwise might well note his folly,
for undertaking ius how the defense of that, which yet in deed he leaves
altogether naked and helples.

By the title of his book, it seems he thought to carry away the simple
Reader, who either could not or would not mind what should follow after it.

In the book it self, he thinks his plea to be very good, if he can say for
the Ministry and other abominations of their Church, They are errors, but not
fundamental: sins against the Second commandment, but not utterly
abolishing from Christ, etc. And this is the sum of his whole book. A plea
which he counts unanswerable. Yet in deed no other, but such as opens a
wide door for all manner errors and sins to be receyved and nourished among
them which themselves shall presume not to be fundamental, etc. So that now
their Church is ready (when they please) to entertayne again the offices of
Abbats, Monks, Friars, Nonnes, Cardinals etc. the doctrines and practice of
Auricular confession: Prayer in an unknown toungue: Prayer for the dead:
Seven Sacraments: Holy water: holy ashes, holy palms, holy bread: Cream,
spittle, oil, and salt in Baptism: Consubstantiation: Denial of the cup to
the lay people: Denial off vvarres and Magistracy in Christians: Denial of
Marriage in Ministers, etc. For these and many mo errors of the Papists,
Lutherans, Anabaptists, it is like they hold not to be fundamental, And
therefore although their Church receyve them, yet is Mr Jacobs defense as sound
for them then, as it is now: Neither may any for these or the like separate
from their Church, worship, or Ministry, if you will beleev him. Yet note,
that for proof of this assertion, you must let them take day. For as yet they
can show you none.

And what now, if any of the errors which the Church of England at this day
retayneth be fundamental? What will Mr Jacob say to that? Then again he is at
a flat Non plus, and all his book is not worth a rush, save that it yields us
the cause, and graunts their Church to be a false Church, and their people to
be no true Christians in that estate. For this therefore see what is said in
the Treatise hereafter following, Page 22. 114. 147. 148.

What also if D. Bilson should answer Mr Jacob. for that point of Christ's
descension into Hell, as he answers us for their Church corruptions, that
though it be an error, yet it is not fundamental, yea and that they in K.
Edward's days held it, Mr Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc. Would Mr Jacob take
this of his word, or think it a sufficient warant for the holding thereoff, or
bynd others to be likewise minded etc.

But to let this pass, let Mr Jacob mind well the estate and practice of their
Church, but in such particulars, as I have named hereafter, Page 63. 64. 65.
and then let him answer as before God, Are they lawful, or unlawful? Are
they of Christ, or Antichrist? Of God or the Devil? Lead they to heaven. or
hell? May they be found in the Word and Churches of God, or in the Popes
Churches, Canons, Portuis, Pontifical? May they any manner way be approved and
communicated withal, or are they not wholly and with detestation to be refused
and abhorred?

For answer hereof I will wait, till Mr Jacob reply again. And in the mean
time I will now answer what he and his Prefacemaker have already published.
Where first I desire the Reader, in both of them, and in Bridges, Bancroft,
Bilson, Hooker, Sutcliff, and all such writers of that Church, to mind these
three things.

1. That all their reasoning and persuasions are no other, but such as may lead
men, either back again to Popery, or the ready way to Atheism, or at least
to receyve whatsoever religion the Prince pleases, so themselves account it
not to be fundamental. Thus are they all blind guydes: Thus do they all teach
to continue in sin. Thus do they shut up the kingdom of heaven before men,
neither entering in themselves, nor suffering them that would enter, to come in.

2. That they do even set themselves to carpe at the truth it self, and at the
mayntenance and practice thereoff. To which end they use they care not what
objections, and abuse they care not whom.

3. That they never do so much as offer to bring proof from the Scripture for
their estate and practice. See the particulars afterward rehearsed, Page 63.
64. 65. And mind if there be any of them all, that in any book they have
written* have brought warrant for them from the word of God. Only D. Whitgift
made an assay for some of them: but he was so taken down by Mr Cartwright, as
he was glad to lay down the bucklers, which since that time neither himselff
nor any other durst take up. And now Sutcliffe himselff can tell them, if Mr
Cartwright have the better hand of D. Whitgift, that then the Church of England
is no true Church of Christ, and that there is just cause to depart and
separate from it. Sut. Engl. b. Page 228.


These things noted, I do now come to Mr Jacobs book: and first to the Preface,
which his fellow and friend at a need has prefixed before it. Where I will for
more evidence of the truth and stopping of their mouths, first set down his
own words (as I do also Mr Jacobs afterward in the book it self) and then make
answer unto them. He that made or wrote the Preface, subscribeth his Name
thus, D. B. And thus he begins it:

The Publisher to the Christian Reader. Section. 1.
ABout Three Years since, Master Jacob having some speech with certain of the
separation before mentioned, concerning their peremptory and utter separation
from the Churches of England, was requested by them, briefly to set down in
vvriting, his Reason for defense of the said Churches, And they would either
yield unto his proofs, or procure an answer unto the same. Whereupon the
Argument follovving this Preface, was set down in vvriting by master Jacob:
which the said parties did send to Master Fr. Johnson, being then prisoner in
the Clinke in Southvvark, who made an answer unto the same, containing 3.
Exceptions and 9. Reasons in denial of the Assumption: whereunto Master
Jacob Replied. Afterward Master Johnson defended his said Exceptions and
Reasons: And finally, Master Jacob Replied again. As by the particulars
themselves appears.

The Answer. These two letters, Geuev. Scot. and Allobrog. Disc. Page 7.
D. B. I find to be set for Doctor Bancroft now Prelate of London in a *
shameless book of his, not long since sparsed abroad. In which respect, as also
considering many as godles things here again published, albeit some might
think it were therefore to be ascri^ed unto him, yet for other causes partly
appearing in the book, partly known of the man, I thinck this Preface was not
made by him: but rather by another Daniel Buck
D. B. a Scrivener of London, a man that has turned his coat and forsaken the
truth, as often as Doct. Pern^
D. P. the old turn coat did, if not also oftener. He it was, that by letters
desired of me, to answer Mr Jacobs Argument, as here is said: being himself at
that time separated from the false worship and Ministry of England, to which
vomit he is now again returned, wallowing in that ^^yer from which then he was
washed. Then also he could say, himself thought Mr. Jacobs Argument was
frivolous and of no weight, and that his desire with some others was to have it
answered for the stopping of Mr Jacobs mouth, who thought it unanswerable.

Hereupon I made answer unto it: and as there was occasion by Mr Jacobs doubled
Replies, have answered again and again. I have also, for sundry causes,
consulted with others therein: and namely, with Mr Henry Ainsvvorth Teacher of
our Church, my workfellow to the kingdom of God, approved in Christ: At
London. 1593.
and Mr Daniel Studley another off our Elders, who has given up his life for
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ: being first * ad^udged to death, afterward
exiled, etc. And now unto thee, good Christian Reader, I exhibit the whole
Treatise (containing beside that which was published before, my answer also to
Mr Jacobs second and last Reply) that thou may try the matter by the word
off God: and as it agrees therewith, so to receyve it, and no further nor
otherwise.

D. B. The publisher to the Reader. Section, 2.
Now having weighed and considered with my self, the great ignorance and
errors, vvherevvith those of the separation aforesaid, are and have been lately
carried away: namely, to affirm. That all that stand members of the
Churches of England, are no true Christians, nor in state of salvation, And
such like most ungodly sentences, which would grieve any Christian soul once
to think on, much more to publish to the view of the world: And vveighing
likewise vvithall, the great weakness of many Christians among us, who
(through want of experience, or due consideration of things as they are) may
easelie by their delusions be drawn away into those errors with them: I
have therefore: (Asvvell in hope of reclaiming of the said parties from their
said extremities, (which now I judge the most of them, for want of means
see not:) As also for the staying of others from running into the same grievous
excess with them) now published this discourse to the view of the world,
which has line buried in the hands of some fevv. Many being desirous of it,
who by reason of the largnes in vvriting out of the same could not obtain it:
Where unto I am so much the rather induced, For that the Reasons herein by
Master Jacob alleged, have (by Gods blessing) reclaymed many from their
former errors, and satisfied others, who have been doubtful, and subject to
fall into the same. In the examining of which Discourse, I shall desire the
Reader to observe a fevv notes for his better proffiting in the same.

1. And First, (among the rest) to note this, as a token of the strange and
obstinate dealing of Master Johnson and others of them, viz. That heretofore,
(until such time as the Argument hereafter mentioned, was framed against
them,) they never denied, That the doctrine and profession of the Churches of
England, was sufficient to make those that bel^eued and obeyed them, to be
true Christians, and in state of salvation: But alvvayes held, professed and
acknowledged the contrary: As by the public confessions of themselves,
namely Master Barrovv, Master Penry, and Master Johnson himself, in this
discourse mentioned in Page 167. 168. appears: But now, they seeing: That if
they should acknovvledge the said Doctrines and profession, to be sufficient to
salvation: That then this conclusion would of necessity follovv, that those
that hold and practice them, are a true Which yet Mr. Pen^y confessed, see
Page 168.
Church, And so their own former judgments should be crossed. Rather I say
then they would be drawn to that, They now stick not to deny their own
confessions (which they think to be the faifest way for them,) and like
unnatural children, so vehemently hate, contemn and despise their mother who
bare them, nourished, and brought them up: from whose breasts they sucked that
svveere milk of the means of everlasting life and salvation, (if ever they
had any taste of it at all.) Being notvvithstanding, not abashed now in a
desperate manner, in the hardness of their heart, to affirm: Which appears,
generally by denying the Assumption of Mr. Jacobs, and particularly in these
Pages, 29. 139. 140 141.
That none by the doctrine of the Churches of England can be a true Christian,
or saved: But that they all worship God in vain, Are abolished from Christ,
Are Babilonians, Idolaters, departers from the faith, worse then Infidels? And
such like most unchristian sentences, making them all one with the Church of
Rome, etc. Which impious affirmations, would cause any Christian heart to
lament and bleed for grief? Whose unchristian sentences, and false and
deceiptfull Reasons, (the very naming whereof were sufficient to refute them,
are most plainly taken away, and clean overthrown, by these brief Replies
of Master Jacob unto every of them, unto which I refer you. Only this I
add with all, which I would desire might be noted: That if they continue
in their former confessions, That the Doctrines and profession of the Churches
of England are sufficient to salvation: (As they ought, it being the very
truth) Then are they all in a most grievous schism, in so peremptorily
condempning, and separating, from such true Christians and Churches. And if
they deny it: (as they have begone to do:) Then do they run headlong, into
an intolerable sin and extremity, without all vvarrant of Gods word: And
besides give just occasion to be called fearful Which name they unjustly give
to those, that justly for this their extremity forsake their fellowship.
Apostates, in so wholy falling (and that advisedly, for advantage sake, as it
seems plainly to appear) from so notable a truth which before they
embraced, and acknowledged.

The Answer. All that the publisher has published here is either some foolish
conceits of his own, or some frivolous cavils and malicious calumniations
against the truth and us that profess it. His conceits, of his own
knowledge and our ignorance: of his own strength and others weakness: of
reclayming and satisfying many by publishing this discourse: of the force and
plainenes of Mr. Jacobs Replies etc. I omit, according to the rule which says,
Prove. 26.4.
Answer not a fool according to his foolishnes, least thou also be like him.
But his cavils and calumniations, against the truth and vvitnesses thereof
(being also objected by Mr Jacob in his Replies) I have answered in the
Treatise following, according to the counsel of the same Wisdom which says,
Pro. 26.5.
Answer a fool according to his foolishnes, least he be wise in his own
eyes. The Answer therefore to that which here he obiecteth, of our assertions
and sentences, of our former and present acknowledgement of the Church of
England her profession, doctrines, members, Assemblyes, etc. see it in the
Treatise following, Page 7. 16. 20. 22. 33. 60. 63. 73. 82. 86. 94. 103. 106.
116. 120. 147. 158. 162. 170. 177. 188. 196. 200. etc.

And here note withal, 1. That in all these things we are still of the same
mind, as heretofore Mr Barrovv, Mr Penry, my self, and the rest of us have been.
So far are we from crossing, denying, or any way altering our former judgment
and confession: as he falsely pretends. For which see: Page 177. 178. 179.
180. 181. 2. That we do not hate, contemn, and despise their Church which he
calls the Mother that bare us etc. but inasmuch as we have been members
thereof heretofore (in which respect she was then in deed our Mother) but now
do see her to stand in adulterous estate: we do therefore plead with her: that
she may take away her fornications out of her sight and her adulteryes from
between her breasts: And we go out of her: that we may not partake in her
sins: and that we receyve not of her plagues. Both which things we do: at the
commandment of God and by warrant of his word: wherein he has straightly
charged all his people, thus for to walk. Hos. 2.2. Rev. 18, 4. 3. That even of
the Church of Rome it may in some respect be said: The doctrines and profession
of that Church are sufficient to salvation: viz. if the truths they hold be
considered alone and apart from their errors and corruptions / and these other
also not imputed unto them. For confirmation whereof / see in the Treatise
following / Page 47. But now then I ask / Are they of England therefore in a
grievous schism / in so peremptory condemning / and separating from such
Christians and Churches? Let him answer in his next. 4. That this D. B.
himself has heretofore held and witnessed, that the Church of England stands
in Antichristian estate: vvorshippeth God in vain: puts from her the truth
and ordinance of Christ: is in her constitution a daughter of Babylon the
Mother of vvhoredomes etc. and therefore if now he deny it (as he has begun)
is both run headlong into an intolerable sin and extremity / without all
warrant of Gods word / and besides gives just occasion to be called a fearful
Apostate / in so wholly falling (and that advisedly / for advantage sake / as it
seems plainly to appear) from so notable a truth which before he embraced
and acknowledged. Advisedly (I say) as this Preface and his daily practice
declares. For advantage sake / because he has done it in love of himself /
seeking his own things (not that which is Christ's): that he might have praise
of men and account in the world / that he might be released from imprisonment
(where somtymes he has been a witness of Christ in bands) that he might enjoy
the favor of his Friends: that he might without fear and disturbance of the
Prelates or their Officers Rev. 13.1^.
buy and sell / that is, keep his shop / follow his trade / make profit and
advantage thereby for himself, etc. This by his course of dealing appears to
be his case. But both him and all others that either refuse or forsake the
truth / we leave unto God who tries the hearts and searches the reins / and
will give every man according to his works. 5. That the word of God being on
our side / for our profession and practice (as in the Discourse following is
showed): we neither do nor need regard this man's or any other their tales /
clamours / abuses / threats / reproaches / sclaunders etc. The mischief of their
tongues / God will bring upon their own heads / if they repent not. To him we
commit it.


D. B. his Preface to the Reader. Section. 3.
2. Secondly, I would desire the Reader not to be carried away with the
multitude of corruptions, from the Question or matter in hand, (viz. Whether
the good doctrines of the Churches of England are sufficient to salvation in
them that in simplicity of heart believe and embrace them, notwithstnding the
multitude of errors and corruptions which Master Johnson repeateth to the
contrary:) But to have an especial regard unto the same. Which is the maine
poinct that has and does altogether deceive them, viz. To have an eye to the
corruptions in the Ministry, worship, and government of the Churches of
England; But never to look unto the nature and force of them, whether simply
of their own nature, they overthrow faith and Christianity, or whether they be
held of obstinacy and a convicted conscience, or not. Therefore I pray you
mark and examine the errors which they reckon up, (and I desire the same also
of them, for whose good especially I published this Treatise.) And after due
consideration, see if those errors are simply of that nature which before we
have noted. If they be not, (as Master Johnson nor all the men in the world,
shall ever be able to prove they are:) Then do they get no advantage by those
errors, to this purpose which they urge them for, although they were Thrice as
many Notvvithsta^ding they are to many already.
more as they are. Thus they may see how they have all this while ben deceived,
and are now to seek a new for defense of their separation. For I hope they
will not say, That every error, held in simplicity by Christians, does cut
them off from salvation in Christ; Then should they condemn themselves,
unless they hold Anabaptisticall perfection, which surely though I think they
hold not simply in their consciences; Yet in their practice (by condemning
others so peremptorily, that jump not even with them in every poinct) they come
very near it: But let this pass; we see then, That of necessity, the nature
of the errors must be regarded, Every sin is not alike. Me thinks then, that
they should affoard that favor to others, which they would have others affoard
unto them: namely, That as they would be accounted true Christians, through
their faith in Christ, notwithstanding their errors (which they must
acknowledge Ps. 19.12. 1 Cor. 13.9.12.
are infinite many in this life.) So they should account of others in the like
case: which even common sense and humanity would require them to grant.

To impresse this thing a little better in their minds, I will a little turn
my speech unto them. And I would pray them, to call to mind the many errors
and corruptions which they bear with among themselves, and lay them and the
errors with us together, and they shall see their equality.

Some of you, hold it utterly and simply unlawful, to swear by a book, to
prove a will, take an administration or sue in the Ecclesiastical Courts: To
shut up your shops upon Holly days and Festival days, etc. And that these
are the inventions of Antichrist, etc. And others of you, hold these things
al^ogeather lawful, and have and do put them in practice, with many other
such like things which I could name. But these shall suffice.

Now the thing which I would from hence note is this. Can you among your selves
bear with such weighty poinctes as these, which you say are the inventions and
traditions of Antichrist that man of sin, which (in your account) are the I
would you knevv the marks of the Beast a little better.
marks of the Beast, Rev. 14.
which whosoever receives, shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and
shall be tormented in Hell fire for ever? And will not your stomachs serve you,
to bear with the Churches of England, in the like, or rather in far lesser
matters? what equity is there in this? Surely you are (for the most part) so
wholly given, and bend your wits and minds so much, to look into the estate of
other men and other Churches, and to apply the scriptures to them: As you
sildome or never look into your own estate, or apply the scriptures to your
selves: But look unto it, it will be your decay in the end. You may fee then by
your own practice all errors are not alike: are not all the scriptures and
commandments of God fundamental, and to be obeyed alike? etc. Let such
consider of this scripture 1 Cor. 3.12.15. amongst many other: which plainly
proves, fundation Christ Jesus, and yet be a true Christian still: For which
see further Master Jacobs answer in page 192. Again there are errors simply
fundame^tall, which of their own nature clean abolish from Christ such are
the errors of the Arians concerning the Deity of Christ: of the Anabaptists
concerning his humanity: of the Papists concerning Justification by works,
praying to, and trusting in Saints, and such like, which directly raze the
very foundation. But that any one, or all, of the errors in the churches of
England are of this force (as you would seem to hold by all your 9. Reasons) is
most impious and ungodly to affirm: And as Master Jacob very well notes in
his answer to every one of them: You thereby overthrow the Martyrs in Queen
Mary's days, from being christians, who held the very same corruptions in
their ministry, worship, etc. which is now held in England: But say you, the
Martyrs saw ne further. Then you confess against your selves, that our errors
do not simply abolish from Christ (as you every where affirm most ungodly,
especially in defense of your 7. Reason.) But that if men in these things see
no further, they are in the same estate with the Martyrs. Now if you would have
your Reasons hold, you must prove the churches of England all convicted in
conscience, which I hope you will not go about to do.

Thus much concerning the nature of our errors, whether they be of obstinacy,
or against the fundation directly: which is the Second note I desire to be
observed.

The Answer. This second note of his, is as foolish, as frivolous, as
contumelions, as the former. See it here, in his changing of the question
between us: in his lessening of their corruptions: in his mismatching of things
unequal: in his abusing our difference of judgment, and reviling off us: in
his perverting the Scriptures, and example of the Martyrs, etc.

The Question between us, is not as he pretends, but thus: First concerning
them, Whether the good doctrines of the Church of England being joined
together with their Antichristian errors and corruptions, do make their
Assemblyes and people in that estate to be true Churches and Christians. Then
concerning us, Whether notvvithstanding the good doctrines professed in their
Church, we may and ought to separate from their Antichristian Ministry,
worship, confusion etc. That thus the question stands between us, themselves
cannot deny: though they seek to alter and turn from it here and every where.
Therefore do we also desire thee (good Reader) to mind it well and not to be
carried away (with the view of their good doctrines alone) from the question
and matter in hand: but always to have an especial regard thereunto.

Notwithstanding if the question were as here he pretends, perthen both his
own and all Mr Jacobs defense of the Church of England is even thus also quite
overthrown. For now it appears that both of them do understand their
Argument following, as if it were thus propounded:

Whatsoever is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian and in
state of salvation: that is sufficient to make a company so gathered together,
to be a true Church, Mr Jacobs Argument: as it is now understood by themselves.
notwithstanding the multitude of errors and corruptions retained among them.

But the whole doctrine, as it is publikly professed, and practiced by Law in
England, is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian and in state
of salvation. viz. such a one as in simplicity of heart beleveth and embraces
it): And the publik Assemblyes of England are in their estate companyes so
gathered together (that is, they do in simplicity of heart so beleev and
embrace).

Therefore it is sufficient to make the publik Assemblyes of England true
Churches, notwithstanding the multitude of their errors and corruptions.

The Argument then being thus propounded, as by this note of his it must needs
be, mark (I pray you) what follows hereupon. 1. That as it has been
propounded hitherto, it concludes not the Question, but is lame both in the
Proposition and Assumption: as I have noted more particularly hereafter. Page
4. 10. 12. 13. 93. 97. 99. 106.

2. That in their estate we must mind, not their good doctrines alone, but
their errors and corruptions withal. Of which there is never a word in all
their Argument. See it, Page 3: 4. 63. 171. 172.

3. That the falsehood both of the Proposition and Assumption is now so
manifest, as the very propounding of them thus, is sufficient to refute them.
But for this also see further, Page 5. 11. 12. 13. Now to speak here but of the
latter branch of the Assumption only, let them tell us, if themselves think
their Assemblyes and members thereof, do in simplicity of heart beleev and
practice the good doctrines of their Church. Nay, will they say that the
Prelates (the chief officers and pillars of their Church) do so embrace them?
Not to speak of the many thousands of their Church, who do not so much as know
the doctrines of truth retained and (...) them. So far are they from professing
and practicing them in syncerity. And yet are they as well as the best, members
of their Church: partakers of their Sacraments: Ministers, Governors,
copartners, of their Worship, Assemblyes, procedings etc.

4. Finally, mind that the Argument and Replies following speak of the
profession and practice of all their Assemblyes and members thereof, as they
stand according to Law. Page 3.6. But here he speaks only of such among
them, as do in simplicity of heart beleev and embrace their good doctrines: and
therefore neither of all their Assemblyes, nor of all the members of them. See
then here how insufficiently they have reasoned, and how deceitfully they have
dealt all this while. Besides, the question being of a visible Church, he
speaks only of such as may belong to the invisible. Which is not to the
point in controversy. For the profession and practice according to Law (spoken
of in the Argument) may be known and discerned of men: the simplicity of the
heart (here spoken of) God only kooweth. Thus with wynding in and out, they
have lost both the question: and themselves too (I fear) if they return not
in time and with simplicity of heart unto the Lord.

The nature and force of their corruptions (derived from Antichrist the deadly
enemy of Jesus Christ) is purposely handled in the discourse following, in the
1. 2. 3. 6. 7. and 9. Reasons. The Apostle says, that even 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.
the forbidding of Meats and Marriage, is a departing from the faith. Mr Beza
speaking particularly of the Church of England, and but of four or five off
their corruptions, viz, plurality of benefices, licenses of Non-residency,
licenses to marry, and to eat flesh, says that Bez. Epist. 8
the Antichristian Church has not any thing more intolerable, yea that the
retayning of these is not a corruption of Christianity, but a manifest
defection from Christ. Now if four or five of their corruptions: yea if two of
them, be a manifest departing from the faith of Christ: what may we think of
their whole Hierarchy and multitude of Antichristian abominations retained
among them besides?

Yet this man's conscience is so feared, as he fears not to say though they
were thrice as many as they are / yet they are not to the purpose for which
they are urged, that is: to convince the Antichristian constitution of their
Church, and to warrant separation therefrom. Which is as much as if he should
say, more plainly, Let the Apostels say of it what they will: and let Christ
himself command us never so straightly to separate from such, and to towch no
unclean thing at all: (1. Tim. 4.1.2.3. 2 These. 2.3. Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.17.)
Yet it is to no purpose, if D. B. and Mr Jacob with their consorts agree
otherwise.

The Anabaptisticall perfection then, whereof he dreameth, he may well apply to
himself and his fellows: who will be perfect and holy in their way: if their
own faucyes persuade them so: albeit they stand in never so many known
errors: and those also of Antichrist: yea and peremptorily condemn all such as
partake not in their sins: but separate from their Antichristian worship and
Ministry / as Christ has commanded.

The way and co^stitutio^ of our Church, is according to the Testament of
Christ. Weakly in deed and with much imperfection do we walk therein by reason
of sin that does so compass and cleave fast unto us. Neither was there ever
in the world any Churches or Christians: whose case was not such. Nor can we
ever look for other upon the earth. Even the Prophets and Apostles have thus
acknowledged of themselves. Esa 64.6, 9. Psalm. 19.12.13. and 103.10. Job.
9.30.31. Hab. 3.1. Romans 7.14. etc. 1 Cor. 13.9.12. Heb. 12 1. Iam. 3.2. 1 Pet.
4.17.18. 1 Ioh. 1.8.9.10. and 2.1.2. But should we therefore be persuaded to
abide in known errors: or to justify such Churches as stand in the way and
constitution of Antichrist? Common sense might teach to reason otherwise, and
to discern between things that differ so much, as these do, one from another.

For our difference of judgment in some things, if it were as he says, yet it
would nothing avail them. The Act. 11. and 15. and 21. Chap. Romans 14. chapter 1
Cor. 8. and 10. chap. Phil. 3.15.16
Christians in the Primitive Churches differed in judgment among themselves in
diverse weighty things, some concerning Iudaisme: some concerning Paganism:
etc. And since that time: See the Acts and Mounuents etc.
the Martyrs in Queen Maryes days and former ages did in sundry things (and
those of great moment, and concerning Antichrists religion) differ in judgment
one from another. Should these therefore have approved and taken part with the
Jewish, Heathnish, or Popish Churches in their other errors: wherein they did
jointly see and witness the truth against them? Or will he say: there was
therefore no equity in their dealing: because they did it not? Or that they
were so wholy given and bent their wits and mynds so much, to look into the
estate of other men and other Churches, and to apply the Scriptures to them: as
they seldom or never looked into their own estate, or applied the Scriptures
to themselves? Yet thus absurdly and unconscionably does this man reason
against us. Off which more hereafter.

Now for the particulars here mentioned: the first which is of swearing by a
book: is an impudent untruth: so far as ever I knew or heard of any among us.
Not only some but all of us hold it simply unlawful to swear by a book. It
is Deuteronomy. 6.13.
the Name of the Lord only, by which all men ought to swear. Thus we do all
profess and practice. In deed about the ceremony of laying the hand upon the
book (thereby to signify that we do take the oath) there has been question some
thinking that it might be so done, as Genesis 24.2.3.9.
Abraham's servant (when he took an oath) put his hand under his Masters thigh,
and persware unto him only by the Lord God of heaven and earth: or as Abraham
did himself lift up his hand to the Lord, when he swear or vowed unto him as we
read: Genesis 14.22. Others thinking that because it has been superstitiously
abused: and still may nourish in the ignorant the error of swearing by the
book: that therefore it should not be done. 1. These 5.22. And notwithstanding
this difference yet all of us (for the reasons last alleged) think it better
to be left then retained still, and some other ceremony free from such
pollution and danger (as the lifting up of the hand to heaven: or such like)
to be used instead thereof.

For probates of wills, taking of administration, suing etc. some it may be
think: that the things themselves being in their nature merely Civil: and the
ordering of them being put over to the Doctors and Professors of the Civil
Law: they might thus far be admitted. And this so much the rather: because if
all the Popish Hierarchy and Canons were quite abolished out of the Land (as
they ought to be) Yet an order for these things notwithstanding were still to
be had, and such as are skillful in the Civil Law might be employed thereyn:
as well as any other of the Common wealth: being by the Prince and Magistrae^s
appointed thereunto. Others thinking / that inasmuch as these causes / Courts /
and Officers are now in their estate committed to the Prelates (whose functions
are merely Antichristian) that therefore they should not be admitted at all.
Yet here again / all of us agree in this / that the whole Hierarchy with
whatsoever belongs thereto, is wholly to be abandoned and refused, and no
spiritual communion to be had therewith at all.

For shutting up of shops on Holy days and Festival days etc. (as he does
Popishly term them): What if some think / that our bodies / goods / and lands:
being subject in the Lord (as they ought) to the Magistrates, that therefore
they may at their appointment then shift by their shops, as they do on the
Queens day or such like solemnityes? And others think, that forasmuch as their
Holidays both are popish days and popishly used for their divine worship that
therefore they should not shut up their shops on these days more then any
other. Yet all agree in this, that these days (though the Prince command it
never so straily) are no more to be set apart or used for publik worship, then
any other of the sir week-dayes: Also, that they need not leave their work any
more on those days, then any other whatsoever.

These are the particulars he names. If he could have mentioned any other of
greater moment, you may be sure they should not have been omitted. Let him know
then, that we ^o and ought to account it among the mercyes of God toward us
that our difference in judgment is but such: specially considering, that there
is so great a mostery of iniquity in the religion of Antichrist, throughout all the parts thereof, as (if it were possible) the very elect should be deceived:
that we are as it were but newly and as per weakly come out of that spiritual
Babylon: that the particulars here objected were never publikly debated and
disenssed among us: that as the Primitive Churches, so ours have been exercised
not only with many other questions and controversyes but with sundry perverse,
hypocritical, contentious, and fantastical spirits which have much troubled
us and caused the truth to be evil spoken of: they cree^ing in at first under
a show of Holones, and so for a time continewing, until God by one means or
other discovered them, and in his time cast them out from among us: finally
that than the best on earth know here but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.12.
and therefore no marvel, if discerning but according to the measure we have
receyved, and this measure bring diverse in every one, our judgments many times
and in sundry things differ, until God reveal more and further. Besides, that
even by this means, we might learn to bear one with another: and if any will
yet be contentious, that they might know we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God.

The use then that we are to make of such difference of judgment, is not that
we should therefore abide in known errors our selves or approve known evil
in others, or join with any false worship and Ministry in the service of God,
or refuse any truth revealed unto us (wherein we do all agree in one): but that
being delivered out of the power of darkness, which is in the Kingdom of Satan
and Antichrist, we should walk together as children of the light / holding
forth the truth whereunto we are come, jointly and faithfully, against all
adversaryes thereof, and waiting with pacyence till God reveal further for the
more uniting of our mynds wherein any shall yet differ one from another. And
this does the Scripture teach and warrant unto us, Phil. 3.15.16. Romans 14.5.6.

But now if any erring in their judgment, do not so rest in peace, but will
needs proceed further to spread their difference among the brethren, to urge
and pursue the practice thereoff, to disquyet the rest that are contrary
minded, to refuse communion with the Church unless they would join or consent
unto them therein: then are such being first convinced and remaining obstinate,
to be further proceeded withal by the Church, as the case and their carriage
shall requier. And that so, as if any be found but to be contentious, they are
even therefore to be reproved, and (if they cease not) to be cast out and
removed from the Church: For which see, 1 Cor. 11.16. Gal. 5.12. Math. 18.17.
Romans 2.8. Iam. 3.13-18. Thus we are persuaded, and thus we walk and practice.

Now let the Reader judge, how frivolous this his objection is: seeing there may
be sundry things wherein the brethren of the same Church may differ in
judgment among themselves, and yet notwithstanding walk together in the same
faith / testimony / and fellowship, wherein God has united their mynds: none
of them being contentious, to disquyet the Church or the members thereof: and
all being ready to receyve the truth, which God by his word shall further make
known, whatsoever it be. And this I dare boldly say, that whosoever shall not
thus hold and walk, they shall not only condemn the Apostles, and Primitive
Churches / together with the Martyrs (whose examples I alleged before): but
shall find by experience that neither any Churches, neither so much as two or
three men, shall ever be able to keep fellowship any while together among
themselves. Note also, that when such please themselves most in their
contentions and confusions: thinking they do God service therein / even then
they do most displease him, who is the God not of confusion / but of peace / as
we see in all the Churches of the Saints. 1 Cor. 14.33.

This I thought needful to write (being thus occasioned) concerning this
point. I could also put him in mind of the manifold and irreconcilable
difference of judgment which is in their Church and the members thereof,
between the Prelates, Reformists, Newters and Ambo-dexters / with the like. But
I will not stand upon it. Mind but here what Mr Jacob professes openly in the
Treatise following, Page 69.
viz. that the things which the State of their Church holds to be Christ's
own, he holds to be Antichrists. Then which what can be more contrary? Will
they now therefore affoard that favor to the Papists* Anabaptists / and other
Antichristians / which they would should be affoarded to themselves, namely:
That as they would be accounted true Christians / through their faith in Christ
/ notwithstanding their errors (which they must acknowledge are infinite many
/ even in their Church-constitution / so they should account of the aforesaid
Antichrists and others in the like case? Or will he now say / that even common
sense and humanity would requier them to grant this? When he is at leisure to
write such an other Preface in defense of Mr Jacob and himself / as he has
done this in defense of their Churches / then it will be time enough to
impresse this thing a little better in their mynds. In the mean time / this may
suffice to show how senceles and unreasonable their reasoning and dealing is.

By the marks of the Beast (spoken of Reu. 14.) we understand: the defection
and constitutions of the man of sin / spoken of 2 These. 2.3-12. 1 Timothy
4.1.2.3. And that for these causes: 1. Because these Scriptures speak of one
and the same estate and apostasy of Antichrist. 2. Because the Beasts marks are
in Rev. 14.9.12.
this place of the Revelation directly opposed to the commandments of God and
faith of Jesus. So that as Gods commandments for his people / so the
ordinances of Antichrist also / for his / are as signs and marks / by which
such as receyve or refuse them / may well be discerned and known. Exodus
13.7.9.10.12.16. and Deuteronomy. 11.18. with Rev. 14.9.12. 3. Because the Apostle to
Timothy names in particular the forbidding of meats and Marriage (which are
part of Antichrists constitutions) as undoubted marks of that departure from
the faith. 1. Tim. 4.1.3. 4. Because the many particulars concerning the
apostasy of the Man of sin / mentioned in the Epistle to the Thessalonians /
are such as are both opposed to the ordinance of Christ, and evident marks of
the defection and body of Antichrist. 2. These. 2.3-12. Towching which / and
other Scriptures ( viz. 1. Ioh. 4.1.3. and 2 Ioh. ver. 7.9.10. Dan. 7.8.25.
Rev. 13.11.) describing also the marks of the Beast, Antichrist: I have written
in A treatise of the Min. of the Char. of Engl. Page 7. 12. 26. etc.
another Treatise more purposely: which may there be seen.

Here I will only annexe the testimony of one of the Martyrs a good while
since / when Antichrist as yet was but a little discovered: in respect as since
that time he has been. One of the Articles against John Claydon, who was burned
at London in Smithfield: in the year 1415 was this, That the Bisshops license
for a man to preach the word of God, is the true character of the Beast, that
is Antichrist. Where mark / that albeit a man preach the word of God / yet he
says the Bishops license so to do / is the Beasts mark. Act. and Monum. edit.
5. Page 588. b.

Thus much I thought to write here also concerning this point. Yet if D. B. or
Mr Jacob for him (who do both of them receyve and carry daily the Beasts marks
in their foreheads and hands, and therefore may well have sure knowledge
thereof) can show them any better from the word of God, I shall willingly hear
it. And seeing that here he wishes we knew the marks of the Beast a little
better / we do also entreat him (if his leisure and ability will serve) to make
them a little better known unto us.

But I doubt, it will now be found in him and the rest of them at this day: as
Mr Ridley (that faithful Martyr) found and complained in his time: saying, I
fear me (nay it is certain) the World that wants the light of the Spirit of
God (for the world is not able to receyve him / says John) neither does nor
shall know the Beast, nor his marks, though he rage cruelly and live never so
beastly, and though his marked men be in number like the sand of the sea. Act.
and Mon. 5. edit. Page 1618. b.

To conclude this matter then / may I not well return their own speech upon
themselves and say, Surely they are (for the most part) so wholly given, and
bend their wits and mynds so much: to look into the estate of other men and
other Churches: and to apply the Scriptures to them: as they seldom or never
look into their own estate, or apply the Scriptures to themselves. But let
them look unto it, it will be their decay in the end.

That all errors are alike is a fancy of his own. We did never imagine it. We
know and profess otherwise. To give but one instance, The Jews, the Arrians,
the Papists, the Mungrell-protestants, the Lutherans, the Anabaptists etc. do
all of them at this day err very greatly concerning the Person or Office of
Jesus Christ, who is 1 Cor. 3.11.
the only foundation of the Church. Yet we know, their errors are not all
alike. Some are greater, some lesser: some in one point, some in another. But
this we say, that all their errors are such, as every faithful Christian ought
to eschew them, and to witness the contrary truth against them, unto death, as
they will answer to God at that day.

His objection likewise of all the commandments of God to be obeyed alike
etc. is of his own coining. I do not think that ever he heard it of any of us,
or that he did ever see it in any of our writings. If he did, he may show it.
We know / that Christ speaking of the duties of the first Table: says: This is
first and the great commandment. Mat. 22.39. And that therefore the du^^es of
the second table must always give place to the first / as to the greater ( Math.
10.37.39. Luke 14.26. Act. 20.24.) Except, when the mercy commanded in the
second / is to be preferred before the ceremonies required in the first, and
such like. Hos. 6.6. with Mat. 12.1-7. Luke 13.14.17. We acknowledge also
there is difference in the commandments of the first Table, when they are
compared together one with another. And in the commandments likewise of the
Second. And consequently therefore in the duties required in both: for our
obedience. These things are so well known, as they may learn them of very
children.

Note withal, that we are bound to keep not only the greatest of the
commandments of God, but even the very least (notwithstanding any persuasion
/ prohibition / or persecution to the contrary) because they are all from one
and the same God: with commandment to obey them all and every one: and that
under pain of damnation. Therefore also Christ said / The Second is like to
the first and great commandment / Math. 22.39. Now if any in this sense do
say that all the Scriptures and commandments of God are fundamental and to
be obeyed alike, it may well be understood according to that saying of our Lord
Jesus before alleged, Mat. 22.38.39.40. Otherwise there is difference to be
put (as is aforesaid) in the duties both of the two Tables themselves / and of
the several commandments of each of them.

His inserting of these two words / the Scriptures and fundamental (when he
says, that all the Scriptures and commandments of God are fundamental and
to be obeyed alike) I will not now further stand upon. It seems he did it for
some evasion: Which I doubt not but his next Reply (if he be not already at a
Non plus) will make more manifest. Till then / let this suffice which has been
said.

The place of (1 Cor. 3.12.15.) both he and Mr Jacob do misunderstand and
misalledge. The Apostel speaks not there / of any false doctrine or errors
built upon the foundation / but of the entising speech of man's wisdom and
vain eloquence off words. By which it came to pass / that although they
taught nothing but the truth and so buylt upon the foundation Jesus Christ /
yet they did it unworthily / and not as became the simplicity of the Gospel of
Christ. That this is the true and plain meaning of the Apostles speech /
appears thus:

1 Cor. 2. and 3 chap.
1. First / by comparing together the second and third chapters of this Epistle:
Where all may see / that he speaks not a word of any error or untruth that
was taught, but of the simplicity (on the one hand) and of the ostentation of
speech and humane wisdom (on the other) which was used by the Teachers of
Corinth in their building upon the foundation / that is / in their teaching of
the truth of Jesus Christ.

2. Secondly / for that the very term 1 Cor. 3.10.
here used by the Apostle / concerns directly the manner of teaching or
building upon the foundation / not the matter taught or built upon it. His
words are these: Let every man take heed (...) how he builds upon it. The
word which he uses here is (...), how, for the manner: not (...), what, for
the matter.

3. Thirdly / because for the matter taught / the Apostle does else where give
another rule concerning all teachers of errors and false doctrine (though they
should be Angels from heaven) viz. to give them no countenance at all / neither
to have any communion with them / but to separate from them / and hold them
accursed. 1 Timothy 6 3.4.5. Gal. 1.8.9. Romans 16.17.18: 2 Ioh ver. 10.11. Rev.
22.18.19. Note also / that of the teachers spoken of to the Corinthians / the
Apostle says themselves shall be saved: 1 Cor. 3.15.
albeit their work (of affected eloquence) do burn and vanish away as smoke:
Whereas contrarily of the teachers of erroneous doctrine he says, They have
not God: neither serve the Lord Jesus: but are accursed. For proof whereof /
see the Scriptures here alleged before.

4. Finally / because the Apostle writing else where to the same purpose and to
the same Church of Corinth / does himself plainly declare that this is his
meaning: As namely in 1. Cor. 1.12.13.17.19.20.21. and 2 Cor. 2.17. and 4.2.
and 11.3.4.5* 6 For which cause it may well be thought / that the Spirit of God
in this place did in great wisdom and of purpose compare their entising speech
and vain eloquence / to vvood: hay: and stubble: which are combustible and
cannot abide the trial of fire: that whereas they did much glory in this
course / they might even by this resemblance now see and consider the vanity
thereof / and how unworthy it was to be suited with the foundation / which is
Jesus Christ. As on the contrary / he resembles the teaching of the Gospel in
simplicity and plain evidence of the Spirit / to gold and silver / which will
abide the fire / and to precious stones which are of great value: to teach them
by this comparison / that albeit such manner of teaching seemed base in outward
sh^^^ and were of small account with men / yet it is in deed precious / such as
will endure the trial / and is accepted with God / as being the right handling
of the word / and suitable with the foundation / Jesus Christ.

Thus much I thought to write here / for the clearing of the true sense and
meaning of this Scripture. Which by reason of misunderstanding / is perverted
not only by the Papists to mainteyne their feyned Purgatory: but by many
Protestants also / partly to uphold such errors annd doctrines as they hold
against the word of God / partly to defend their estate / notwithstanding that
such errors and false doctrines be retained among the^. Now by this which has been said / the Reader may see / both how ignorantly this Scripture is
misapplyed by Mr Jacob and his Scribe: and that being disappoynted hereof /
they have not so much as the apperance of any one Scripture to allege in
defense of their Church Estate. But it comes well to pass (as Beza in 1 Cor.
3.10.
one says of Purgatory-fyer) that their Church constitution is built of
stubble wood and hay / so as the flame of God being now kindled again / there
is no marvel that in our memory it is for the most part already set on fire.

For Mr Jacobs answer in Page 192: As also for the exceptions he brings here
/ of errors simply fundamental etc. of the Martyrs: of the Church of Englands
conviction: obstinacy etc. For these (I say) because they are all borrowed from
Mr Jacobs Replies following (whither himself refers us) I have there
purposely handled them / and therefore will I not here stand upon them / but
thither refer the Reader for them. As namely / for Mr Jacobs Reply in Page 192.
to the answer thereof in Page 203. etc.

For the exception of errors simply fundamental etc. to Page 22. 51. 114.
144-147. etc. For, that of the Martyrs / to Page 8. 29. 40. 41. 44. 46. 54. 67.
79. 162. 182. For the Church off England their conviction / obstinacy / etc. to
Page 42. 53. 78. 103. 108. 126. 127. 130. 131. 132. 140. 161. 174. 175. 203.
etc. Finally, for these and all such like / to the whole Treatise following /
where Mr Jacob (this man's Rabbi) both speaks himself / and is answered
again. Yet before we proceed unto it / let us see what the third note is /
which he would further have here to be observed.

D. B. His Preface to the Reader. Section 4.
3. Thirdly, I would desire the Reader to observe, the wresting and
misaplying of certain places of scripture, which (partly in this Treatise, and
also in other their vvritings) they allege for their absolute and peremptory
separation from the Churches of England: Which I have thought not amiss here
to set down, that thereby the Reader (and themselves, upon better
consideration off the end and scope of the holy Ghost in these places) may
see, how they wrest and misapply them, clean contrary from the true and
natural sense thereof.

The scriptures which they allege for their separation, are these. Then the
sons of God saw the daughters of men. Genesis 6.2. Ye shall keep therefore all
mine ordinances and all my judgments and do them, that the land whither I
bring you to dwell therein spew you not out, therefore shall ye be holy unto
me, for I the Lord am holy, and I have separated you from other people, that
you should be mine. Lev. 20.22.26. So the children of Israel which were come
again out of captivity, and all such as had separated themselves unto them
from the filthiness of the Heathen of the land, to seek the Lord God of
Israel, did eat, etc. Ezra. 6.21. Depart, depart ye, go out from thence,
and touch no unclean thing, go out of the midst of her, be ye clean that
bear the vessels of the Lord. Esa. 52.11. Fly from the midst of Babell, and
depart out of the land of the Caldeans. Ier. 50.8. And fly out of the midst
of Babell, and deliver every man his soul from the fierce wrath of the Lord.
Ier. 5^.6.45. Come not ye to Gilgall, neither go ye up to Bethauen. Hos.
4.15. Come to Bethell and transgress, and to Gilgall and multiply
transgression, etc. Seek not Bethell nor enter into Gilgall, and go not to
Beersheba. Amos. 4.4.5. Save your selves from this froward generation. Act.
2.40. And when certain were hardened and disobeyed speaking evil of the way of
God before the multitude, he departed from them and separated the Discipels,
etc. Act. 19.9. Therefore come out from among them, and separate your selves,
says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you. 2 Cor.
6.17. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, go out of her my People,
that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye receyve not of her plagues.
etc, Rev. 18.4.


These are the very main grounds, on which their separation is builded,
which being duly weighed with the scope of the text, you shall very easily
find, that not one amongst them all, will hold in proportion with this
time, nor bear the separation they gather from them. First because either they
concern such times and states as the people that lived in them, were
professors of, or subject unto, open gross Infidelity, and either Heathen or
Antichristian Idolatry, not in some particular customs and outvvard
ordinances, but in the whole body and power of Heathen and Antichristian
religion, such as could not possibly stand with true faith and religion at
all: Which can not be said of these times and present standings, without open
untruth. 2. Or else because if they be not of that sort, they affoard no such
absolute separation at all but only from wilful / rebellious / and obstinate
disobeyers, and evil speakers, and from apparent gross corruptions, but not
from the whole public body of those assemblies, nor from the lavvfull and
good things used in such times and standings as have not wholy svvarued from
the faith, though there were diverse grievous faults, both in doctrine and
practice, suffered among them. As by the example of the Jewish Churches in the
times of the Prophets, especially of Christ himself, may plainly appear. The
Evangelists make mention in diverse places, That they worshipped God in vain /
teaching for doctrine men's precepts. They made their proselites the Children
of Hell two fold more then they were before. They made the commandments of
God of none effect by their traditions / such as believed in Christ they
excommunicated. etc. Yet were they a true Church, notvvithstanding these and
many other grievous enormities: with whom Christ himself and his Apostles,
had communion and fellowship, sometime in those good things that were among
them. And so might they with the Churches of England, without justifying or
allowing these things, which they see to be evil. All which things do more
fully appear in the conference it self, as it follovveth hereafter.

The Answer. May it not fitly be said and applied to D. B. in this case /
which Christ has spoken concerning all such: How say thou to thy brother /
Suffer me to cast a mote out of thine eye / and behold / a beam is in thine
own eye. Hypocrite / first cast the beam out of thine own eye / and then
shall thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brothers eye. Mat. 7.4.5.
Even the very last thing / yea and all the show from Scripture that he brought
for defense off their Church Estate / what is it else / but the wresting and
misapplying of that Scripture to the Corinthians ( viz. 1. Cor. 3.12.15.) as
before may be seen in his Second note? And now again for those Scriptures
which here in his Third note he sets down either as alleged by us / or
noted by himself out of the Evangelists for defense of their estate: what other
thing does he in answer of the one / or allegation of the other / but only
pervert and misapply them / against the true sense and purpose of the Spirit of
God therein? Yet ^o: so impudent is this Baal^e become / as having so great a
beam in his own eye / he will yet pretend as if he saw a mote in another
eye, and think he has said enough in defense of himself and his Churches
estate / if he can but pretend that others misapply the Scriptures against
them. But as Solomon says: Better is the poor that walks in his vprightnes
/ then he that abuses his lips and is a fool. Prove^. 19.1. Therefore will I
here both show the vprightnes of our walking / and withal convince the foolish
abuse of his lips.

First then note / that there are three things specially for which we allege
these and many other Scriptures which he concealeth. Namely / 1. That in the
constitution of every true visible Church / even from the beginning of the
world / this has always ben one special thing to be observed / that it was
separated from the world and abominations thereof. Neither otherwise could
there ever be any true visible Church upon the earth. And yet with the Church
of England it is not thus / in their estate.

2. That the Church of England now standing in confusion with the world / and
subjection to Antichrists Ministry / worship etc. we therefore (as all other
the people of God) are bound to separate and depart from it / because otherwise
we could not but partake in her sins / and so be subject also to receyve of
her plagues.

3. That being thus separated from them / we are bound to join to the true
Church of Christ in the communion of his Gospel / to keep all his ordinances /
whatsoever he has in his word prescribed for his Church / notwithstanding any
persecution or exception of Man to the contrary.

These three things are so evidently and undeniably taught in these and the
like Scriptures throughout the book of God / as it is strange and lamentable
that any having them thus applied / should yet be so piteously blind as not to
see it / or so impudently bold as to deny it, For other the like Scriptures
therefore / teaching the same things / see these also / Genesis 9.27. and
12.1.4.7. and 19.12-16. et 35.2.3. Exodus 4.22.23. and 8.25.26.27. and
10.8.9.24.25.26. and 19.5.6. and 20.4.5.6. Numb. 16.26. Deuteronomy. 7.3.5.6.11. Lev.
18.30. Ezra. 9.14. Psalm. 110.3. and 119.21.113.128. Esa. 2.2.3. and 8.12-18.
and 9.16. and 44.5. Ier. 4.18 and 15.19. and 18.12.15. and 50.4.5.8. Ezech.
16.44. and 22.26. Micah. 2.10 Zach. 2.7. and 8.21.22.23. Mal. 1.6.7.8.12.13.14.
ct 2.8.9.13. and 3.16.17.18. Mat. 28.20. Ioh. 7.17. and 10.1 5. Act. 2.41.47.
and 5.29. and 9.26.27.28. and 17.4.7.34. and 28.24. Romans 16.17.18. 1 Cor.
5.6.7. Phil. 1.5.27.28. and 3.2. Col. 2.8.22.23. 1 These. 5.22. and 2 These.
3.3-12. 1 Timothy 6.3.4.5.13.14. and 2 Timothy 3.1.2.3.13.14.15. 2 Ioh. ver. 9.10.11.
Jude, ver. 3. Rev. 14.9.12. and 17.14. and 19. 9. and 20.4.6. and 21.7.8.27.
and 22.10-19. The words of these and the like Scriptures / I need not here set
down. The godly Reader will search them (I doubt not) after the example of the
Be^eans / so much commended by the Spirit of God / Act. 17.11.

Next I answer / that the Apostles do themselves so allege and apply the
Scriptures to the matters which they handle / as we after their example do in
this. For proof hereof / see but these places following, and mind them well, 1
Cor. 6.16. and 9.9.10. and 10.7-18 and 14.21. Romans 9.25.26.27, 28.29. and
10.18. Heb. 2, 13.14. and 3.7. etc. and 12.26 29. and 13.2.5.6. Iam.
2.8.9.10.21.22.23. and 4.5.6. and 5.16.17.18. 1 Pet. 1.16. and 2. to and
3.20.21. 2 Pet. 2. chapter Ioh. 19.36. 1 Ioh. 3.12.15. Jude, ver. 5.6.7.11.14.15.
Rev. 11.8. Now compare herewith the places in the old Testament from whence
these are borrowed / and you shall find that diverse differences might be noted
between the one and the other. Shall we therefore say / that they are wrested
or misapplyed by the Apostles? God forbid. To give an instance or two. The
Apostle Paul alleges that against fornication / which by Moses was first
spoken of lawful marriage / 1 Cor. 6.16. compared with Genesis 2.24. And in the
same Epistle / albeit the Corinthians which were of the Church there / did not
worship God by the Idols of Corinth / but did only eat at the feasts in the
Temple / which were after the sacrifices done: yet the Apostle alleges
against them the example of the Israelites, who both made a golden calfe / and
by it worshipped the Lord. 1 Cor. 8. and 10. chap. with Exodus 32.5.6. And the
Apostle James / speaking but of one particular breach of the Law / viz, the
accepting of men's persons / alleges and applies against it, the sum of the
whole Second Table. Iam. 2.8.9.10 with Let. 19.18. And Jude / against
Apostates / Schismatiks / disbounders of themselves / raylers / murmurers /
malicious / covetous / presumptuous / lascivious / hypocritical / unstable /
discontended / and such like persons / alleges the Prophecyes / Scriptures /
examples / which were before / of them in Enochs time / of the unbelieving Jews
/ the Sodomites / evil Angels / Cain / Balaam / Corah / etc. Iud. Epist.
with. Genesis 3.1. and 4.3-16. and 19.1-25. Numb. 14. and 16. and 22. chap. etc.
Now in these / as in the rest and many other so alleged in the Scriptures /
may diverse differences be observed. Yet are they all notwithstanding / fit and
pertinent for that whereunto they apply them. Neither can any be ignorant / but
that there will be difference either of time / place / cause / sexte / persons
/ things / manner / or such like circumstance / in any allegations / and yet
they be pertinent nevertheles.

It is not material then / though some differences might be noted between the
case of England / and theyrs of whom those Scriptures speak: seeing
notwithstanding they do fitly prove that / for which they are alleged. Let the
Reader also mind here / an old Popish shift / whereby they labor to turn away
the evidence of any Scripture that is urged against their corruptions / viz, by
noting some difference between their case and such as the Scriptures alleged
speak of. This you may see every where in their Rhemish notes on the New
Testament / and in all the rest of their books and defense of their Church and
religion.

But now further / to make the abuse of his lips yet the more manifest, mark
that the very Scriptures here mentioned by himself / speak not only / of the
whole body and power of Heathen and Antichristian religion (as he pretends)
but of every particular ordinance and unclean thing belonging thereunto. For
thus they speak expressly. Tovvch no unclean thing: Keep all mine ordinances
and all my judgments: Be ye clean: Partake not in her sins, etc. By all
which is most plainly forbidden all manner of partaking not of the whole only
/ but of every parcel of Antichrists or any other false worship whatsoever.

As to the second difference which he notes here / of their vvilfulnes:
rebellion: obstinacy: partaking with the lavvfull and good things used among
them etc. it is handled and answered in the Treatise following. Page 42. 43.
88. 108. 130. 132 161. 170. 171. 175. 180.

The particulars which he cites out of the Evangelists towching the Jews /
are the speeches and testimony of reproof / given unto them by Christ / when
now he threatened to take away from them his kingdom / because of those sins
and other the like among them. Mat. 21.43. This man himself knows / we never
doubted but true Churches might fall into error / and the members thereof walk
corruptly (in which respect they are subject to be reproved) And yet
notwithstanding the Church constitution and functions be lawful and joined
withal / until they refuse the voice of Christ and will not be reclaymed (
Rev. 2. and 3. Math. 21. and. 23. Act. 2. and 13. and 17. and. 28. chap.)
Whereunto when once they come / then are all taught to separate and save
themselves from such a froward generation. Act. 2.40. and 13.46.47. and 19.9.
Esa. 8.12.-16.

Now if we may separate from such as have been true Churches / when they so fall
into sin and persist as is aforesaid / notwithstanding that otherwise they
profess many Doctrines of truth: how much more may and ought we to separate
from all false Churches which stand in the apostasy of Antichrist / that Man of
sin / howsoever they profess some truth withal? 2 These. 2.3-12. with Rev.
18.4. Ezech. 16.44. But of the difference both of the estate and dealing with
true Churches and false compared together / as also of the weakness and
falsehood of this manner of reasoning which here he uses / I have other where
spoken sufficiently / both in this Treatise following to which he refers us
( Page 92. 161. 195.) and in another already published viz.: A Treatise of the
Ministry of England: Page 45. 61 62.

Note withal / that none of the Evangelists / neither any other Scriptures do
show / that Christ or the Prophets did at any time communicate with the Jews
in any evil / but always reproved them. Whereas it is not possible / that any
should communicate with the Church of England (though it be in their best
things / even of the Ministry of the Word / Sacraments / Prayer / etc.) but
they must needs partake in evil: As namely / with the Hierarchy / Leiturgy /
confusion / and other sins of Antichrist / that son of perdition. Let him
show the contrary in any one thing among them / if he can. And of this also
see more hereafter / Page 170. 171. 180.

Finally / let him tell us if he have said any thing here / which they in K.
Henry the eight his days might not have alleged / when the Popes supremacy
with much of his religion besides / was cast out of the Land / and yet they
oppugned the truth in many things / and became drunken with the blood of the
Martyrs notwithstanding.

D. B. his Preface to the Reader. Section. 5.
Those Churches (say they) were in a true outward constitution. And therefore
were the true Churches of Christ, notwithstanding those gross errors which
they held in other poincts of doctrine and practice: But contrariwise (say
they) the Churches of England have a false outward constitution, and therefore
they are no true Churches of Christ / notwithstanding their truths of
doctrine, etc.

9. Reasons
writings to allow them to be lavvfull by 2 Chro^. 24 2.3.
Zadok and Abimelech, and by 2 King. 24.18.
Seruiah the chief Priest, and Zephaniah the Second: which make against
themselves:) For there was never but one high Priest, as they confess Answer
to Mr Hild. Page 50.
(Ergo not two as here were) the rest were indeed inferior to him: And yet
amongst those, there was a chiefly also, who were called, sometimes Second
Priests, or Priests of the Second order. 2. King. 23.4. and sometimes chief
Priests, Math. 27.1. These Scriptures being compared with those in the margin
by them cited; do make it more plain. Now, if the chief offices, were so
corrupted and altered through covetousness, as the Histories make mention: It is
not likely, that the inferior offices did remain sound, but were as much or
more altered: The Priests (generally) being such covetous wicked persons,
their offices being very gainefull: and besides they living under the
authority of the Heathirish Romans, who ruled over them. All these things
considered, it is very likely that the offices and outvvard constitution (on
which they so much depend) were wholy altered from the right institution,
and therefore would make nothing for them. As for their allegation of Mat.
23.1. Where they say, Christ testifies that they had true offices, by saying
they satt in Moses chair: It will not help them, any whit at all. For Moses
was no Priest, as they were, but a Magistrate: and therefore Moses chair
must be understood of somevvhat else: and themselves Mr Barrovv and Mr
Gree^vvood, in diverse Letters and Treatises.
have understood it heretofore, of Moses doctrine.

The Answer. Do not they err that imagine evil? And does not a deceyver
speak lies? Prove. 14.22.25. What then may we think of him that counts it a
small thing to lie against Man, if he do not also open his mouth against heaven
and give the lie to the holy Ghost himself? See both, in this man here.

Against us (and I fear against his own conscience) he forgeth a lie / when he
says, we do wholy depend on their outvvard constitution etc. For he knows
/ we object against them besides and separate from them, for much false
doctrine publikly taught and mainteyned among them: and for their wretched
persecution of the truth and Martyrs of Jesus. (Therefore do we not wholly
depend on their outward constitution: From which (it is to be noted, that) he
severeth their publik doctrine, as himself shows in the next Section: and so
therefore here we speak accordingly.) And that he knows these things /
appears both by this Treatise first published by himself, where we have
declared it in diverse particulars ( Page 66. 108. 157. 158 159. 160.) and in
that himself has seen and alleges in this very Section / another treatise,
written in answer of Mr A. H. where mo instances are given concerning this
matter: As may be seen in that book. Page 10. 11. 12. 13. 22. 23. 37. 90. 91.

To the holy Ghost he gives the lie / yea and makes Christ our Lord a sinner,
in that which here he speaks first of the constitution of the Jewish
Churches. For the Scripture teaches that the constitution of that Church was a
true one / and that Christ did himself / communicate therein with them. Yet
this man besides that he says afterward, that it is very likely the offices
and outvvard constitution thereof were wholy altered from the right
institution: Even here at first he says peremptorily, that it was as greatly
altered and corrupted, as is the constitution of the Churches of England. Which
how shamefully false it is / may appear even by this / that in those very
times the estate of the Jews Church yet was such as they were a people
separated from the world / having the true Ministry / ordinances / worship /
and administration / which God by Moses had commanded: As these Scriptures do
plainly testify / Luke 1.6.8 9.10 11. and 2.22.23.24.27.46. Mat. 8.4. Ioh.
1.19. and 4.22. and 5.1. and 11.55.2. Tim. 1.3.5. Yea they would not at any
hand admit either of confusion of people or of any other Ministry then God had
ordained: As may be seen / for the first / in Act. 21.28 29. and for the
latter, in Job. 1.19-25. Mat. 21.25.26. How shameless then is it to say as here
he does, that their constitution was as greatly altered and corrupted as that
of the Churches of England, which to this day stand confused of all sorts of
people (as well the prophanest as the best among them) and have no other
Ministry or Leiturgy, but such as they have receyved from Antichrist the man
of sin, and from Babylon that mother of whoredoms and abominations of the
earth? Rev. 17.5.

And further, if the Jewish Church had been thus corrupted (as he fears not to
affirm) how could Christ have communicated with them as he did, but he must
needs have sinned and that highly against the Law of God: viz. if he had (as it
is now in England) joined to such a Church as were vnseparated from the World:
or had partaken with a false Ministry: or had sent others to a strange
Priesthood and Service: or had approved by word or deed any other ordinances
then those which God had commanded etc. This Scribe then must either approve
the Church-constitution of England by the word of God: or else confess that it
and the Jewish Churches are in this point nothing alike, or (if neither of
these) that then Jesus Christ was a sinner: Of whom the truth itself and work
of our redemption testify / that he knew no sin at all, but was like to us in
all things / sin excepted. 2 Cor. 5.21. Heb. 4.15. and 7.26. This man then
does thus also both blaspheme the Son of God / and make the holy Ghost a liar.

But there were (he says) two high Priests at once, whereas by the Law of
God there should be but one. 1. If it were so, albeit thus they offended in the
number yet still there was that office and function of Priesthood which God had
ordained / not a new one of man's devise as is the whole Hierarchy of England /
from the highest Archbishop to the lowest Parish Priest. And so there is no
comparison between these two.

2. This was the personal sin of the men / not the constitution of that
Church / neither of the Offices wherein they were. See it in another example:
Judas an Apostle of Christ / yet betrayeth him. Does it therefore follow / that
his office of Ministry wherein he was set by Christ himself / was unlawful?
Nay / that was the sin of the Man not of the Office wherein he was. What is
this then to the question in hand / when as the Ministry of England is charged
to be strange / unlawful / false / in the very offices and functions thereof?
Yea and this man himself does here by the whole course of his speech grant as
much.

3. Is there any thing here said for the Priests and constitution of the Church
of England / which the most popish Priests / Prelates / Monks / etc. may not
as well allege for theyrs? Is their Ministry or constitution therefore such as
man be joined withal?

4. See how straungely these men forget and contradict themselves. T. G. first
Reply. Page 83 84.
Mr Cartwright writing against D. Whitgift says / If the whole practice of
the Church under the Law be looked upon, it shall not be found that any other
ecclesiastical Ministry was appointed then those orders of hy Priests and
Levites etc. which were appointed by the Law of God. And further, that as it
was not lavvfull to bring in any strange doctrine, so was it not lavvfull to
teach the true do and rine, under the Name of any other function then was
instituted by God. Yet this man with an whores forehead shameth not to
persuade, that the offices and outvvard constitution of that Church were
wholy altered from the right institution. Thus the truth of God is with them
become Yea and Nay / so as they may seem to say any thing for defense of their
Churches estate.

5. And from whence proves he that which here he speaks of two hy Priests
at once etc. Does he show it from the word of God? No. But he says / the
Historyes make mention of it. So then from the Scriptures he can not bring
proof for that he says. For indeed by them we find (even in the corruptest
times) but one at once to be by Priest: Albeit that of old also there were two
which were chief over all the rest, the one being principal / the other
Second. See for that of one hy Priest in such times / these Scriptures, Mat.
26.57.62.63.65. Mar. 14.53.60.61.63. Luke 22.50.54. Ioh. 11.49. and 18.13.24.
Act. 4.6. and 7.1. and 23.2. Heb. 5.1. and 8.3.4.5. And for the other point /
these, 2 King. 25.18. 1 Chronicles. 24.2.3. 2 Samuel 8.17. with Numb. 3.32. and
4.16.18. Yea this is so clear and certain / as for any thing written in the
Scripture thereahout, this man is driven himself (when he looks thither) to
confess and confirm it too: As here may be seen in Scriptures which himself
has noted down.

6. Why also does he not name the Histories that mention these things, together
with the Persons / time / place / and such like circumstances as might give
light to the point in hand? Is it because he would walk in the dark / and hide
the truth as much as he can? Or is it for that he sees / if these particulars
were mentioned / there might yet more be answered concerning this matter?

7. Finally / what manner dealing is this / when he knows that I have other
were written of this very point (yea and here alleges both the Answer to Mr
H. Pa. 50
book and page) yet not to answer any one of all the particulars: which there
I have noted out of the Scripture / towching this question? To that Treatise
therefore (till it be answered) ^ may and do refer him in this behalf.

Next where he says, If the chief offices were so corrupted and altered
through covetousnes, it is not likely that the inferior offices remained sound
etc. And, It is very likely that the offices, and outvvard constitution were
wholy altered from the right institution etc. First I wish the Reader to mind
his manner of reasoning. A little before / he said he doubted not plainly to
take away that which we object of their outvvard constitution. Yet behold
the issue of his first and chiefest proof is all come to this, It is not
otherwise likely: It is very likely, etc. Thus his plain demonstration (if it
fitted his turn / yet) is no other but a mere likelihood and presumption: And
that also gathered from other writers / not from the Scriptures. Is not this
the^ (think you) as plain a taking away of our objection, as it is a sound
defense of their Church-constitution? Neither barrel / better herring.

But what now, if by the Scriptures it be not only likely / but indeed
certain / that it was otherwise with the Jews, then here he says concerning
their offices and outvvard constitution? How has he then plainly taken away
our objection / as he pretended? Let him search therefore / and he shall find
that they were so far from admitting any straung functions among them / as
they John. 1.19-23.
urged John the Baptist to show warrant for his Ministry from the word of God:
And besides, by their silence to Christ's question about John's baptism / do
plainly testify that Mat. 21.25 26.
themselves judged no Ministry lawful / but that which is from heaven: that
is / such only as is of God, not of Men. If here now we would use his manner
of reasoning / how great likelyhoods might we justly allege from these
Scriptures / to the contrary of that he says.

But to put the matter out of all doubt / the Scripture witnesses of Zachary /
John Baptists father / that he being then one of the Priests / executed the
Priests office, and vvalked in in all the commandments and ordinances of the
Lord without reproof. Luke 1.5.6.8.9. Which how could it possibly have been /
if the offices and constitution of that Church had been wholly altered: as this
man here pretends? Note also / that all the Priests then / were of the tribe
of Levi / of the posterity of Aaron / consecrated to their functions / sitting
in that seat which God by Moses had appointed for the Ministry and regiment of
that Church. Ioh. 1.19. Act. 4.6 Heb. 5.1.4. Mat. 23.2. with Deuteronomy. 33.4.8.10.

Finally / Christ himself gives testimony to the lawfulnes of their Ministry
and constitution / when he said to the cleansed Leper, Go show thy self to the
Priest, and offer for thy clensing as Moses has commanded. Luke 5.14. By
which is most plain / that they had at that time both the true Ministry and
ordinances which God by Moses had appointed. How false then must it needs be,
that this man says their offices and outvvard constitution vve^e wholy
altered from the right institution? But who is so bold, a^ blind Bayard?

Of their true offices / imported by sitting in Moses chair, I have A treatise
of the Man* of England. Page 54. 55.
else where spoken / and proved it by diverse reasons and testimonies out of the
word of God: To which D. B. can find no answer, but yet is loath to yield to
the truth. Moses (he says) was a Magistrate. What then? Therefore Moses
chair must be understood of somevvhat else. But why so? Does he not know, that
Moses in that his government of Israel, even by the commandment of God /
appointed Aaron and his sons to the Priests office, for the burning of
incense before the Lord / etc. Whereupon also when Corah and his company did
afterward murmr / and presumed to take the Priests Office upon them / it is
said they rose up and gathered themselves together not only against Aaron (to
whom it belonged) but against Moses also / who from God had appointed him and
his sons thereunto. Lev. 8. and 9. chap. with Numb. 16. and 17. and 18. chap.

Note withal / that Moses a little before his death blessing the tribes of
Israel, when he had the heads of them assembled together, spoke thus of Levi
(turning his speech unto God), Let thy Thummim and thine vrim be with thine
Holy one etc. They shall teach Jacob thy judgments and Israel thy Law: they
shall put incense before thy face and the burnt offering upon thine altar etc.
Deuteronomy. 33.4.5.8.9.10.11. With which Scripture and speech of Moses / if we
compare that of Nehemiah / where he speaks of Neh. 9.3.4.5. etc.
the Levites stayre or hy seat, and their standing upon it when they taught
the Law etc. And that of Christ where he said, Mat. 23.2.3.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, observe therefore whatsoever
they speak etc. And that of John / where he says: Ioh. 1.19.24.
the Pharisees which were sent to John Baptist about his Ministry were
Priests and Levites: If (I say) we consider and compare these Scriptures
together / how plain is it and undeniable that Christ's speech of sitting in
Moses chair etc. does necessarily imply the true offices and functions which
God by Moses ordained for the teaching and guyding of Israel in his worship and
service? Thus also may Moses doctrine which they taught in those offices / be
fitly understood and comprised in the same speech. And what variety then is
there betwee^ this exposition / and that which understands it of Moses
doctrine / as he says some of our selves have done heretofore?

Finally how ignorant and frivolous is it / that here he pretends against
this, viz. that Moses was, no Priest, as they were, but a Magistrate: Whenas
all the Scriptures aforesaid do reach that God by Moses appointed them to this
function and service? And that so / as Moses himself though he were not a
Priest ordained by solemn rite / yet by the appointment off God did anoint
not only the Tabernacle and all that was therein / but Aaron also and his
sons / consecrating them to the Priests office, and offering all the
sacrifices appertayning thereunto: Which afterward belonged only to the
Priests for to do. Lev. 8. and 9. chap. and Psalm. 99.6. with Heb. 5.4.

But perhaps there is a pad in the straw / more lurking in his speech then all
men are aware of. For what if by these words (Moses was no Priest, but a
Magistrate, and therefore Moses chair must be understand of some what else) he
insinuate that it is meant of the Magistrates authority and seeing Christ
infers upon the sitting in Moses chair / All therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do, that all people therefore are bound to keep
whatsoever the Magistrates do command them? Will not his words here bear and
import thus much? Yea may not his understanding it, of some what else) joined
with the Magistrates authority, seem directly to imply it? and that so, as what
they command / he thinks it is to be observed, be it lawful or unlawful?
Which if it be his meaning / has he not here then covertly sowe^ most
detestable doctrine / both shamefully helping Christ himself, and wickedly
crossing the whole Scripture and practice of the faithful in all ages? For
proof whereof see but these and the like testimonies. Exodus 1.17. 1 Samuel 22.17.
Dan. 3.14-28. and 6.12.13. Mat. 22.21. Act. 4.18.19. and 5.28.29. and 17.6.7.
Heb. 11. chap. Reu. 2.10.13. and 12.11.17. and 13.7.15. and 14.7.12.13. and
20.4.

D. B. his Preface to the Reader. Section. 6.
2. Secondly (to let their constitution pass, which yet as I have said,
would be found as badde or worse then ours) we will examine their corruptions
in doctrine: Wherein I would know of them, which are the greater sins, of
these two sorts, viz. 1. A false and corrupt outward constitution: 2. Or false
and corrupt doctrines. I think they will say, the corrupt and false doctrines
are the greater, as they are indeed: For that they do vvound, fester and
corrupt the very conscience, and do deceive the hearers thereof, Whereas the
errors in the constitution of a Church, (especially in some circumstances (as
the errors with us are) and those of no small controversy, in matters also not
fundamental) are nothing nere so hurtful: by how much the Tithing of Mint
Annis, and Commin, are of lesser force then the other vveightier matters of the
law. Now from hence, I Reason thus.

If the greater sins (namely in doctrine) do not simply overthrow a
company of Christians, from being a true Church: Then much less will the
lesser sins (namely in the outvvard constitution, etc)

But the false doctrines (which are the greater sins) themselves confess by
the example of the said Churches do not. Therefore neither will the lesser.

For the better explayning of this poinct, I would pray them resolve me of this
question. What if a company of Arians, Anabaptists, or Papists, should be
gathered and established in a true outward constitution, and still reteyne
their fundamental errors before Sectio^. 3
named: Whether should their outward constitution make them a true Church, yea
or no? I think they will say no. Thus I hope then it appears, that the
outward constitution whether falty or true, avails nothing to the
overthrowing or making of a true Church, unless other doctrines of the
foundation, either false or true, do concur therewith. And thus their
Objection of the Jewish constitution, is (I trust) fully ansvvered: So that
still their peremptory separation and condempning of the Churches of England,
for some outvvard corruptions, remains still a grievous sin upon their
heads for which (without hearty repentance) they shall one day answer before
God, which will be too heavy a burden for them to bear.

The Answer. That which Christ said to the Scribes and Pharisees / VVo be to
you blind guydes which say, Whosoever svveareth by the Temple, it is nothing:
but whosoever svveareth by the gold off the Temple, Mat. 23.16.17.
he offends. Ye fools and blind, whether is greater, the gold, or the
Temple that sanctifyeth the gold, etc. May it not in this case also fitly be
applied to this Scribe? Specially / seeing the Church in the constitution
thereof (if we sever it from the doctrine, as here he does) may in diverse
respects be compared with the Temple / and the doctrine of truth taught and
vpheld in the Church, with the gold of the Temple: As both by these Scriptures
does plainly appear (2 Cor. 6.16.17. with. 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor.
14.5.6.19.23.24.25.33. 2 These. 2.4.4. Rev. 11.1.2.) And by this also, that God
has made the promise of his presence and blessing to his Church (as to the
Temple wherein he will dwell) it being so constituted, and walking / as he has
commanded. Lev. 26.11.12. with 2 Cor. 6.16.17.18. Esa. 52.11.12. Ezech.
37.26.27.28. and 48.35. Mat. 28.20. Yea and this man himself did Section 3.
here a little before allege, that by gold and silver (spoken of, 1 Cor. 3.12.)
the Apostle means true doctrine. Which if it were so there / then by his own
exposition may that saying of Christ to the Pharisees / well be applied to him
in this case.

Secondly I ask / Does not the constitution (be it true or false) always
include the whole body of the Church, whereas the false Doctrine is often found
but in some members thereof? This may be seen in the Churches of Israel /
Corinth, Galatia / Pergamus / etc. In which respect also the false and corrupt
constitution may be of greater weight and more danger / then the false and
corrupt Doctrine: inasmuch as the wounding and infecting of the whole body is
far worse then of some parts only: and because the parts so infected, if they
cannot otherwise beholden / may be cut of / and yet the body preserved: Not
contrarily. For the better explaning whereof / let him resolve me which of
these propositions is the truer, viz. Where there is in a Church false
doctrine, there is a false Church: Or this, Where there is a false
constitution there is a false Church. And contrarily.

Thirdly I ask / Is not the Hierarchy and Church constitution of Antichrist /
the most detestable anarchy of Satan that ever was? And does not Satan far
more commonly and readily part with his false doctrine / then with it / when he
must needs part with the one, 2 These. 2.9.
and yet can retain the other? He is subtle and of long experience / he can
mind and knows full well that so long as he holds his own constitution of
a Church / he can quickly (upon any opportunity) bring in his doctrine again
/ even with a trice. For why? He has both the people ready for the receyving
of it / being yet still in the confusion and bondage of Antichrist: and his
own Ministry also to be employed in the publishing and serving thereof: their
Offices / Callings / Ministrations / Maintenance / being all ready at hand and
fit for the purpose. Whereas on the contrary / when the false constitution is
abolished / then false doctrine wants both he woonted place of receipt, and
her nimble wings by which she should spread and fly abroad. And here I could
allege for proof hereof / the prefer Ministry and estate of the Church of
England, which being of Antichrist Satan's graundchild / and he now having
spyed his time / and found some opportunity / begins apace by this means to
bring in again such doctrines of his / as had for a time ben suppressed: As
namely / Free Will, Auricular Confession, Christ's soul to descend into Hell:
The Church of Rome to be a true Church, etc. Witness the Books and publik
Sermons of Bilson: Bancroft: Hooker: Androes: Harsenet: Barret: and other the
Priests and Prelates of that Church / the Merchants of these and the like wares
off the Beast / in Court / City / Country / University / and where not?

The same thing you may mind also thus / So long as the house stands still /
and is furnished with servants and Ministers / it is ready for the implements
and furniture (though removed for a time) to be brought in again / and soon
to be set up in their woonted place. And if you would see an example of these
things yet in memory / look but at the Churches estate in K. Edwards and Q.
Maryes days compared together. The popish constitution of the Church being not
abolished in King Edwards time / how soon was the Popes doctrine / yea and his
supremacy / in Queen Maryes days spread and acknowledged throughout the Land?
Yet the same doctrines of truth were in K. Edwards time published and receyved
/ which now are in England. And very like also that it was then with more zeal
and love of the truth / the^ now it is: specially considering the general
coldness of men / and the cruel persecution of the truth / to which this age
since is come.

Mind further / that the Offices / houses, and maintenance of the Friars and
Nuns being before (in the time of K. Henry the eight) quite taken away / they
were not able in all Q. Maryes raigns to rear them up again. No, albeit they
judged them lawful and necessary as well as the other points of Popery / and
did also very earnestly desire and labor to have them reestablished. So great
a matter it is to have a thing abolished in the whole constitution thereof:
Even as when an house is rased and pulled down to the very foundation.

And here / upon this occasion let me also ask, Whether if the Callings and
Livings of the Prelates and Priests / together with the Idol Temples / and
confusion of all manner people in the body of the Church / now had in England /
were so dealt with / as the Abbats / Monks / Abbeyes and Nunryes then were:
there would not fewer Jesuits and Seminaryes come into the Land: Popery less
increase: treason against her Majesty be less attempted: and finally / all the
means and hope for the full replanting of Antithrists religion again in that
Church / be utterly removed and taken away?

Let this Scribe then go and persuade such as himself / that the outward
constitution of the Church is but as the tithing of Mynt: Annise, and Commin,
etc. Whosoever have their (...) exercised to discern good and evil / will
plainly see / that notwithstanding any thing he pretends / yet it is and
ought to be accounted among the weighty matters of the Law of God. Yea, that it
is of far other importance and consequence, then most men think or will yet be
persuaded: albeit even experience (the Mistress of fools) might in all this
time and trial have taught them sufficient / if enough were enough for men /
In cases of Religion.

Now for his Reason here / any may see by that which has been said that it is
very frivolous and of no weight at all. The Proposition (or first part) has
nothing for the ground of it, but that which is in question, and neither is
always true nor can be yielded unto for very great and weighty causes here
before declared. Unto which add these also: 1. That many errors in doctrine
are and may be far less / then the errors of the outward constitution / when
they are truly compared together. 2. That the true outward constitution of the
Church always implies both a separation of the people from the World / and the
joining of them together in the fellowship of the Gospel / and both these to
be voluntary. Which particulars being considered with the former / will teach
him not barely to set down / but duly to prove the Proposition in his next
Reply.

The Assumption (or second part of the Reason) is in some fence true, in some
sense false: and in both, against himself and their Churches estate. When
Churches are set in the constitution and way of Christ / if afterward they fall
into some error of doctrine / they are notwithstanding for the former to be
reputed true Churches, until being admonished they refuse to hear the voice
of Christ and to yield to the truth. Thus the Assumption is true / and of us
confessed, by the example of the Churches of the Jews, etc. But when their
case comes to be such, as they will rather abide in error then obey the truth
and voice of Christ / this so wilful persisting simply overthrows such a
company from being a true Church in such estate. And thus the Assumption is
false / and so proved to be / by the example of the said Churches. And both
ways it is against him and their Church: as will yet further appear by that
which is now to be spoken of his question wherein he would be resolved.

He asks, What if a company of Arrians, Anabaptists, or Papists should be
gathered and established in a true outvvard constitution, and still retain
their fundamental errors before named: Whether then their outvvard
constitution should make them a true Church, Yea or no. I answer / 1. Not
only false constitution / but false doctrine also retained, make a false
Church. If it were so then / that they could have a true constitution as he
supposes / yet by reason of their false doctrine they should be a false Church.

2 I ask also of him / Whether these companyes of whom he speaks / were true
Churches when they fell into those errors (as were the Churches of Galatia /
when the errors about Circumcision and the Law crept in among them): Or whether
they were Heretics, Sectaryes or the like (such as were Hymeneus, Philetus,
Alexander, the Apostates of Rome, etc.) falling from the true faith and
Churches of God, when they came to be gathered and established as he fancyeth.
If they were of the former sort, then they are to be esteemed and admonished as
true Churches, till by despising the voice of Christ / the Kingdom of God be
taken from among them Gal. 1.2. with. 5.2.4. Mat. 21.33.43. 1 Cor. 1.2. with
15.12. Rev 2. and 3. chap. If of the latter then are they no true Churches at
all but false and detestable Synagogues of Satan whatsoever truth in
constitution or otherwise they shall pretend. Rev. 2.9, Act. 20.30. Col.
2.8.23. 2 These. 2.3.7. 1 Timothy 1.19.20. and 6.20.21. and 2 Timothy 2.17.18. and
3.5.6.13. and. 4.14. Heb. 10.38.39. 2 Pet. 2.1.2.3. In de. ver. 18.19. Rev.
13.11. and 17. and 18, chap.

3. In a true constitution must always be minded, a calling by the word of God:
a separation from the world: a joining together in the fellowship of the
Gospel, and that by a voluntary profession thereof, and submission thereunto.
Now these things considered / how is it posible that the Arrians, Anabaptists,
or Papists retayning their errors, should yet be gathered and established in a
true outward constitution? Can the light of truth have communion with the
darkness of falsehood? Or can Christ in his constitution, agree with Belial in
the errors of Arians, Anabaptists / Papists, etc. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16.

4. Finally, if he will not hear our answer nor the Scriptures testimony /
let him ye^ hear Mr Jewel (a Prelate of their Church) resolve his question,
in this manner, Jewels Reply to Harding. Page 99
Without Christ the Church is no Church, neither has any right or claim
without his promise, no^ any promise without his word. Now this D. B.
affirms himself / that these of whom he speaks are without Christ: For he
says, Before in Sect. 3.
their errors do of their own nature clean abolish from Christ. Therefore by
his own assertion, and Mr Jewels laid together, they can be n^^eue Church /
whatsoever faith or constitution they should pretend: neither have they an^
right in such estate to his blessing: Which yet is promised to them that are in
the true wa^ and constitution of Christ. Mat. 28.20. 2 Cor. 6.17.18. Lev.
26.11.12.

Thus then appears, that he does both ignorantly fever the doctrine wholly
from the Churches constitution: and that yet when they are considered apart (as
some times and ^ some respects they may be) each of them, that is / both the
doctrine and constitution / according as they are true or false, avayle
directly to the overthrowing, or making of the Church to be likewise true or
false / so as has been declared before. (His crafty putting of faulty here, for
fal^ will nothing help him / but bewrays his corrupt dealing the more. Else
let him show in his next, if he can whether ever there were true Church / that
stood in false constitution.) Neither is the objection of the Jewish
constitution answered at all / but remains of force against them still. And
that so much the more / as the Churches of England remain both in fal^
constitution and in false doctrine: for both which they are under the wrath of
God / and all ^ound to separate from them. And whosoever will not so do / it
remains a grievous sin upon their heads: for which they must answer to God
in that day / when he will cast the Beast and false Prophet / with all such as
have been seduced by them / into utter destruction / to have their part in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone / which is the second death. 2 These,
^.10.11.12. Rev. 14.9.10.11. and 17.1.2. and 19.20.21. and 21.8.

D. B. his Preface to the Reader. Section. 7.
Lastly, concerning our corruptions: As we cannot justify them to be no
corruptions, (but must needs acknowledge, that there are many yet remaining in
our land, which were left by that man of sin and are as thorns unto our
sides, which we hope God will in time abolish): Judge. 2.3.
So dare we not run into your extremities, to condemn our Churches for
such corruptions, but weight the appointed time of God for the redress
thereof. Yet in the mean time, so long as those most excellent truths and
doctrines of salvation, (for which God make us thankful) are still retained
and held, as soundly as by any Church upon the face of the earth (the other
errors not simply ouerthrovving the same, being not held of obstinacy, and
being also for the most part, of great controversy and disputation among the
learned:) So long I say, communion in things lavvfull, is to be kept with them,
as before is noted in the example of other Churches: Otherwise, it will come
to pass, (by reason of the Mat. 25.13 10.23.
dieuersitie in opinions and judgments which by the corruption of our nature
we remain in, in this tabernacle, as has Lev. 4. Psalm. 19.12.
been in all ages, and 1 Cor. 13.9 12.
shall be, so long as this life of imperfection indureth,) that no communion can
ever be had with any Church living, no nor any one Christian with another:
Which to affirm, were most absurd and ungodly.

These observations being considered, I doubt not but the Lord will add a
blessing to this work, That such as are simple hearted, and have exceeded in
eagerness of zeal: may see their extremity, in so rashly and unadvisedly
separating from, and condempning the Churches of England, sometimes their
Nurses and Mothers, as before is noted: Whereby God may have the glory, and
themselves the comfort, even the salvation of their souls through Christ.

D. B.

The Answer. Now at length D. B. yields the cause himself. So great is the
truth / and so greatly it prevayleth against every oppugner thereof. To omit
that he confesses / they cannot justify their corruptions (and yet they can
abide in them): he says also, they must needs acknovvledge that they have many
corruptions remaining, which were left by that man of sin, and which are as
thorns unto their sides. Blessed be God / which makes the enemies themselves
bring glory and testimony to his truth. They are so convinced / as he says
plainly they must needs acknovvledge it. Now therefore let him name them in
his next: or confess those to be of them which I have noted hereafter / Page
63. etc. Till then, I will only infer this herevppon that seeing they are
such as himself here grants them to be / viz, corruptions of the Man of
sin / and thorns to their sides, even therefore are all bound to separate
from them as being condenmed by the word of God. For has not the Lord
commanded all his people, wholly to leave the Man of sin with all his
corruptions / not to partake in any of his sins / not to rest in any of his
unrighteousness, neither to towch any unclean thing at all? 2 These. 2.3-12.
with Rev. 18.4.5.6. Isa. 52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Yea in that very Judge. 2.3.
Scripture which is here quoted by himself / the Angel of the Lord joyneth with
thorn to their sides, destruction by there Gods / that is / by their worship
and religion.

But they hope God will in time abolish them. And so do we have too. Yet we
must remember that the Scripture says, this abolition of them shall be, by the
Spirit of the Lords mouth a I (...) of his Gospel in the testimony of his
servants. 2 These. 2 8. Rev. 12.11. and 14.6.7.8.12. It is not then the yielding
unto them / but the witnessing against them / by which we can hope it faith for
the abolishment of them. Neither do we doubt, but they being thus discovered,
God will also stir up the hearts of Kings and Rulers of the earth (as already
in part he has begun) to hate that whore of Babylon with her abominations, and
to make her desolate and naked. ( Rev 17 16.) Yet too, before they come to do
this, they have given their power and authority to the Beast, and have also
fought but not prevayled, against the Lamb Jesus Christ and them that are on
his side / his called, and chosen, and faithful witnesses. Rev. 17.13.14.

Therefore dare not we run into their extremityes, to allow either by word or
deed the corruptions of Antichrist that Man of sin / to receyve in our
forehead or hand the print of his Navy or mark of his ordinances, to pursue
to death the witnesses of Christ, or any way to approve thereof etc. But we
wait the appointed time of the Lord / for the full abolition and redress of
all these impietyes. And in the meanetyme / through the grace of Christ we
witness against them: Yet being both thankful to God for any truth they hold /
and sorry also that with it they join the abominations of the Man of sin /
and do so set a wall between the Lord and themselves. 2 These. 2.3. Rev. 17.5.
Ezech. 43.8.

Where he says they hold most excellent truths and doctrines of salvation, as
soundly as any Church upon the face of the earth: albeit by this it might seem
they have very ill neighbors / and for so large comparison due proof also may
well be desired: yet for the present I will but ask how this speech of his
agrees with the testimony of others among them (men of far riper judgment and
better discerning) who have testified of their estate / and published that
Demo^stration: in the Preface to the Reader.
Albeit many nations which have renounced the whore of Rome are heynously
sinful against the glorious Majesty of Jesus Christ, yet there is none in the
world so far out of square as is England* in retayning the Popish Hierarchy
first coined in the mystery of iniquity, and that filthy sink of the Canon
Law which was first invented and patched together for the confirmation and
increasing of the Kingdom of Antichrist. Also, that with them Mr Gilbyes book.
Pa. 29
many religions are mixed together, off Christ and Antichrist, of God and the
Devil. That Letter to Mr Hooker. Page 4
under the show of inveighing against Puritanes, the chiefest points of Popish
blasphemy, are many times and in many places, by diverse me^ not obscurely
broached, both in Sermons and in VVriting. That 2 Ad non. to Parliam. Page, 6.
although some truth be taught by some Preachers, yet no Preacher may without
great danger of the Laws utter all the truth comprised in the book of God.
Ibid.
That their own Injunctions. Articles, Canons etc. may not be broken or
offended against, but with more danger then to offend against the Bible: That
Ibid.
the Bible must have no further scope, then by these it is assigned. That
Demonstr. in the Prefa, to the Gover
they give leave to a man to be any thing saving a sound Christian. That Admon.
to Parliam. Page 21.
their publik Baptism is f^ll of childish and superstitious toys. That Mr
Gib^yes book. Page 2.
they eat not the Lords supper, but play a pageant of their own, to blind the
people and keep them still in superstition, to make the silly souls beleev
that they have an English Mass: and so put no difference betwixt truth and
falsehood, betwixt Christ and Antichrist, betwixt God and the Devil.

Thus do the best of them profess and testify of their estate. Shall we then
think (as D.B. would persuade) that there is not any Church upon the face of
the earth, which does more soundly retain the truth and doctrine of
salvation? God forbid. Or does he mean / as Mr Hooker (a rare conceyted man of
the Prelates crew) speaks of the Church of Rome / Hookers Ecclesiast. Policy.
Book 3. Page 130.
that it does still constantly persist in main parts of the Christian truth
and is of the family of Jesus Christ: Yea Ibid. Book 5. Page 188.
that it is do unto her to be held and reputed a part of the house of God, and
a limme of the visible Church of Christ. If such be D. B. his meaning here /
for their Church / yet this does but verify the Proverb which says / As is
the Mother, so is the daughter. Ezech. 16.44.

But no matter / so long as he can with an hard forehead pretend, that their
errors do not simply overthrow the truth, neither are held of obstinacy, but
are also for the most part off great controversy and disputation among the
learned. Yet mark that he says, for the most part. Of them all belike he will
not speak it. Or if he should / might he not likewise plead for the holding or
intertayning again of Auricular Confession / Seven Sacraments / Setting up off
candels Reservation of the Sacrament / Denying of the Cup to the common people
/ Images in Temples for ornament or remembrance / Monks / Friars / Nuns, etc.
Or will not the Lutherans (when they are driven to a strait) thus allege for
themselves? Yea does not P. Ma^t. Loc. com. Epist. ad Pereg. Land. Page 1128.
etc
(...) (against whom Peter Martyr did therefore write very sharply) thus plead
for the very Anabaptists? And will not Hooker (think you) pretend as much for
his Romish Bethal? Or does he it not in deed / when he says even of
Transubstantiation, Ho^k. Ecclesiast. pol. book. 5. Page 1^6.
that it is a thing which no way can either further or hinder us, howsoever
it stand? And Ibid. Page 186.
that the very thing which separateth utterly, and cut^eth of clean from the
visible Curch of Christ, is plain apostasy, direct deny all, utter rejection
of the WHOLE Christian faith, as far as the Son is professedly different
from infidelity. Now compare with this also / Mr Jacobs Replies following /
Page 57. 101. 105. 109. 141. 156. 192. And see if their plea for the Church of
England be not off the the very same stamp with Mr Hookers for the Church of
Rome.

Thus what by the Prelates and their Proctors on the one hand / and these
Pharisaicall dawbing Reformists on the other / their case is come to be such /
as all may justly fear least the end of that Church will be / to look back not
only in part / but even wholly to the Romish Egypt and Sodom, and to wallow
again in the same myer / from which they would seem a^ this time to h^^^e ^en
washed. For it is just with God, to make such eat the fruit of there own way,
and to fill them with their own devises. Prove. 1.31. And what other thing do
the books / pretenses / practice / and declining of all sorts both Ministers
and people among them ^^rtend? Yet Lord / thou God of power, and Father of
mercy, work better things for them and among them / if it be thy will.

To that which D. B. pretends next of keeping communion with them in things
lavvfull (it being likewise objected by Mr Jacob) I have answered in the
Treatise ensuing, Page 88. 170. 171. 180. Here only I ask, First what one
lawful thing they have, that we have not? Secondly / in what one thing which
he counts lawful / we can have communion with them in that estate, and not
sin against God by partaking withal in the apostasy of the man of sin? Of
all other things it is most like he will say / that we might hear many
comfortable truths taught by their Preachers / and many good prayers conceyved
by them. Yet such is their case / as we can not do this neither / but we must
needs partake with the Ministry of Antichrist: all their Preachers (even the
best) being Priests and Deacons / so made by the Prelates. Of which see more in
the latter Treatise following, Page 188. etc. Not to speak here any further of
it: or of their Book-worship / taken out of the Popes Masse-book, according to
which they administer the Sacraments / marry / bury / pray, etc. or of the
compulsion of all manner people / even the most wicked / to be members of their
Church: or of their Church discipline, being in the hands of the Prelates / and
by the Canon Law: or finally / of the several offices / entrance /
ministration / maintenance / of their whole Hierarchy. To none of which can any
join or submit / in any part of Gods worship / but they must needs partake in
evil / even in the sins of Babylon / and of Antichrist that son of
perdition. Such is their constitution / and such is the standing of all that
continue therein.

Of his last pretense, tovvching diversity of judgment, by reason whereof he
would persuade to keep communion with them / I have spoken In the Answer to
Section. 3.
here a little before. To which now I will add this only / that his collection
hereupon, viz. that we should therefore keep communion with the Ministry / and
confusion of Antichrist (for of what else speaks he / if he speak to the point
in question) is most absurd and ungodly. And will not Hooker (think you) for
his Christian Papists / and some such as Hadrianus for the Anabaptists /
persuade likewise? And what then are we the nearer? Or what will these men do
in the end hereof? Ier. 5.31.

This then is not rightly to use that diversity of judgment, whereunto in many
things all Churches and Christians in deed are continually subject here on
earth / but ignorantly to abuse it. But hereunto (it may be) Da. Buck.
this man was driven / either by weakness of judgment in himself, or by
eagernes of contention and malice against us: of whom he has sometimes ben /
but now for his revolting from the truth and so persisting / is (according to
the 1 Cor. 5.4.5.11.12.13. 1 Timothy 1.19.20. Mat. 18.17.18.20.
Scriptures / and ordinance of Christ) cast out from among us / and delivered
unto Satan / for the destruction of the flesh / that the spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord. Which mercy the Lord Almighty vouchsafe him in Christ /
from whom he has declined unto Antichrist. And this is all the harm I wish
unto him or any such, even their repentance and salvation in Christ Jesus.

Hitherto of the Preface prefired to Mr Jacobs book. Which I have answered,
somewhat largely / from point to point / rather for the satisfying of others /
then for any weight I judged to be in it my self.

Now it is time that I return to Mr Jacob himself / and deal with him in
particular: by whom I am spoken unto and challenged by Name / almost in every
page of his book: As if he had forgotten the old Proverb which says, Let not
him boast himself that girdeth his harness / as he that puts it off. Here
then seeing that this discourse came first from him to the view of the world,
and that also without my answer to his last Reply, let the Reader call to mind
that which is written / He that is first in his own cause, is just: then
comes his neighbor, and makes inquiry of him. Prove. 18.17. So as he now
having told his own tale / first / and seming to some (no doubt) to be just
therein / it is needful that I therefore come in the next place / and make
inquiry of him.

Which I do in the Treatise following: submitting it now to the judgment of
others / to be examined of all by the word of God. 1 Cor. 2.12-16. 1 These. 5.21.
By it therefore do thou (Christian Reader) try all things therein / and keep
that which is good. Have no prejudice (I pray thee) either of Mr Jacob or my
self: but hear us both speak / and then consider what is spoken on either side
/ from point to point. And the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

There is but one way / of truth / to life eternal. And that is in no other
but the Lord Jesus Christ, Ioh. 14.6.
who has said, I am the way, the truth, and the life, If therefore the
Churches of England (as now they stand) be in that good and old way prescribed
by Christ / wherein the Primitive Churches were planted by the Apostles / then
doubtless then are in the way of truth / that leads unto life. (Yet this has
not Mr Jacob showed in all his discourse.) Ier. 6.16. But now on the contrary /
if the Churches of England in their estate / have in the Ioynes off the Church
of Rome and with it departed from that ancient and good way of Christ / and do
even unto this day stand in the apostasy of Antichrist / and that in their
publik / Ministry / worship / ordinances / confusion of people etc. then can
they not so standing / be assured by the word of God / that they are in the way
of truth which leads unto life / but in the by-ways of error which carry
headlong to death and perdition. 2 These. 2.3.10.12. 1 Timothy 4.1.3 Rev. 13.11.
and 17.1.2. and 22.18.19. with Exodus 20.4.5. For which cause / all the people
of God are bound to separate from them / and not to partake in any of their
sins / least they receyve also of their plagues. Rev. 18.4.

And if it be well minded / Mr Jacob himself (howsoever he pretend otherwise /
yet in deed) yields thus much / when he is driven to confess that their
constitution is such Page 37. 61 69. 70. 84. 154.
as they stand in error: and that of Antichrist: against the Second
commandment: in vain worship: departing from and denying the faith, in
their Ministry, etc. But for these and all the rest / thou may see / and I
pray thee (good Reader) well to mind the Arguments / Replies / and Aunswers
following. From the reading whereof I will not not now any longer hold thee.

The God of peace tread Satan under thy feet / and by his word and Spirit lead
thee into the way of truth / to the conservation of thy soul unto life
eternal. And if thou reapest any fruit of my labors / give praise unto God /
and pray for me / the weakest of his servants / and vnworthyest of the
witnesses of Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Amen.

Thine in Christ, Fran: Johnson,

AN AVNSWER TO M. H. JACOBS ARGVMENTS AND REPLIES concerning the Churches and
Ministry of ENGLAND.
Chap. 1. Of the Title of Master Jacobs Book, which is thus. A DEFENSE of the
Churches and Ministry of ENGLAND.
FRAN. JOHNSON his Answer. THe defense of the Churches and Ministry of
England were an enterprise worth the taking in hand, if Master Jacob effected
in deed what the Title of his Book pretends in show. But he that reads his
book and minds it well, shall find him promise mountains and perform
molehils. Let the sequel show it.

Now I would that Master Jacob should speak himself (without stammering) what
Churches and what Ministry of ENGLAND he defends. All, or some only? It is
a point needful to be known and mentioned. All may see, it would give great
light for deciding the controversy between us. And who would not think, he
should readily declaer it? Yet he flies from it every where. Therefore that he
may not always so do, but may be drawn to answer directly unto it, (as also
for the Readers better help, and more clearing of the truth) I will particulerly
and as plainly as I can describe how the Churches and Ministry of England
are to be considered: And the^ expect his answer. If I be mistaken, or if
master Jacob and such as live in that Church (who therefore have better
occasion to know it) can do it more fully and plainly, I shall willingly hear
it. In the mean time, this is my judgment: First for the Churches, to consider
them as follows.

1 In respect of the Conuocation-house, which consists of the Prelates, and
some other of the Priests, assembled together with them. And so they have but
one Church in the Land: And that when there is a Parliament, or like occasion.
I take it also that out of this Church the Prince, the Nobles, and people are
excluded. Save that when they have determined their matters, they have for some
of them the consent of the Parliament.

2 According to the number of their Archbishops: and so they have two
Metropolitan Churches, under which all the rest are subject and comprised.

3 According to the number of their Arch and Lord Bishops: and so there are
about 26. Churches, comprehending all within their several Diocesses. Hither
also I refer the Cathedral Churches.

4 According to the ecclesiastical Courts of the Archbs. Lordbs. Chancelors,
Archdeacons, Commissaries, and Officials (under which all the other Ministers
and people stand subject) and so according to the number of those Courts, there
may be some 200. Churches, or thereabout.

5 According to the number of the Parish assemblies (of which all stand
members:) and so there are many thousand Churches in the Land. Hitherto of the
Churches.

The Ministry may be considered two ways: Either more generally, as they are
all Priests or Deacons; or more particularly, as they are superior or
inferior.

Superior, as Archbishops, Lordbishops, Suffraganes, Deanes, Archdeacons, and
the rest of that sort.

Inferior, as Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Stipendary Preachers, Household
Chapleynes, and the like.

Then in all these consider four things, 1. their office, 2. their entrance, 3.
their Administration, 4. their maintenance. This for the Ministry.

Now let M. Jacob tell us in his next, 1. whether he defend all these Churches
and Ministry of England, or but some of them.

2. If not all but some only, which then they are that he defends, and which
he leaves as utterly unlawful without all defense.

3. For those he defends, let him show in what place and pages of his book we
may find the defense of them. For whether it be that I perceive it not, or that
he does it not, of this I am sure for my self, that I cannot find in all his
book so much as any one of them defended. As others find, let the^ speak. And
to put al out of doubt, let M. Jacob show it.

Lastly (if he will be entreated) let him tell the cause why his book, being
entitled A defense of the Churches and Ministry of England, came not out Cum
priuilegio. Yea why it was printed beyond sea, and not in England. It is a
shrewd token (considering the title) that his Defense even at home among his
neighbors is accounted very weak and simple.

For the name Brownists, by which we are reproched in the forefro^t of his
book, note these things. 1. That in like manner long since by the Priests and
Pharisees were the Apostles and Primitive Churches termed Act. 24.5.
a sect of Nazarites: and at this day by the Papists are the Professors of the
Gospel called Calvinists, Zuinglians, Huguenotes, and the like. 2. M. Brown
(from whose name this byword was first taken up) is a member and Minister of M.
Jacobs Church, not of ours: yet holding (as we hear) in his judgment the truth
we profess, but for his practice standing in the apostasy and false worship
wherein they are. So then not we, but M. Jacob and such like may fitly be
called Brownists, inasmuch as in their judgment they hold the things we stand
for to be good, yet in their practice (like Brown) are other men, walking with
the Church of England in her evil way. 3. For our selves, we acknowledge (with
the disciples in the Primitive Churches and the faithful in all ages since) that
we are Act. 11.26.
Christians, striving now for our time and estate against the remainder of the
abominations of Antichrist, to keep the commandments of God and faith of
Jesus. Therefore does it not trouble us, that by M. Jacob or any other we are
thus reviled for the name of Christ.

It is enough for us, that the 1 Pet. 4.14.
spirit and truth of God, which on their part is evil spoken of, is on our part
glorified. But yet let him and all such take heed unto it in time. Now I
proceed to his maine and maimed Argument. Which is as follows.

Chap. 2. M. JACOBS ARGUMENT (as it is now propounded and printed) by which
he would prove the Churches of England to be the true Churches of God.
Whatsoever is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian and in
state of salvation: That is sufficien^ to make a company so gathered together,
to be a true Church.

But the whole doctrine, as it is publikly Book of Articles published Anno 1562.
professed, and practiced, by law in England, is sufficient to make a
particular man a true Christian, and in state of salvation ( See for the
addition of these words in Page 6.
and our public Assemblies are therein gathered together.)

Therefore it is sufficient to make the public Assemblies true Churches.

H. Jacob.

Fr. Johnson. THe answer of this Argument follows. But first I will proposid
another, proving (by better reason) that the Church Assemblies of England are
in their constitution so far from being true Churches of God, as they stand in
Antichristian estate, and are therefore subject to wrath.

The ARGUMENT is this:

But the Hierarchy, Leiturgie, and confusion ecclesiastical, as they are
publikly Their Ecclesiastical constitution, Courts, Injunctions, practice,
canon Law, Books of articles, of common prayer, of ordering Priests and
consecrating Archbishops etc.
professed and practiced by law in England, are sufficient to make a As for
example, the Prelates, the Priessts, etc.
particular man stand in Antichristian estate, and in that respect to be
subject to wrath: And the Church Assemblies in England are in their estate
companies so gathered together.

Therefore are these also sufficient to make the Church Assemblies of England
likewise to stand: though they profess vvithall in their constitution many
doctrines of truth otherwise profitable to salvation.

This Argument I propound, as being more sound then M. Jacobs, both for matter
and manner. Let others judge. Now I come to examine his. Where first it is
needful so to set it down, as it was heretofore propounded by himself. And
that was thus, as follows.

Chap. 3. M. JACOBS ARGUMENT, as it was first propounded and answered.
Whatsoever is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian and in
state of salvation; That is sufficient to make a company so gathered together,
to be a true Church.

But the whole doctrine, Book of Articles published Anno 1562.
as it is professed and publicly practiced by law in England, is sufficient
to make a particular man a true Christian.

Therefore it is sufficient to make the public assemblies true Churches.

H. Jacob.

Fr. Johnson his Answer. TO omit the Proposition, until it better appear by
the defense of the Assumption how to take and understand it, we will for the
present only show the weakness of the Assumptio^: And this also the rather,
because they seem wholly to depend upon it.

H. Jacob his Reply. THe Au^svverer omitteth the Proposition, for in deed it is
most certain: But he denies the Assumption, (which yet is as certain also)
That the doctrine in our book of Articles is sufficient to make a true
Christian.

Fr. Johnson his 2. Answer. IN the former answer, I omitted the Proposition,
not because of the certeinty of it (as the Replier dreameth) but till we might
see by his defense of the Assumption how to take it, as then I noted. Now
therefore (having seen in his reply the This I wrote when I had seen Mr.
Jacobs first Rep^e herafter follovving. which now he has seco^ded with
another of like sort. Whether it be not so as here I say let the indifferent
Reader upon trial judge.
unlearned and unconscionable pretenses, by which he would seem to defend the
Assumption, when in deed he does nothing else but cast a mist before the eyes
of the simple): I give him to understand, that the whole Argument is lame and
faulty in every part.

The Proposition is not absolutely true, as now (by his defense of the
Assumption) it appears he understands it. The Assumption is not only false,
as was proved in the My first au^svver was the 3. Exceptio^s and 9. Reasons,
which here do follovv.
former au^swer, but also lacks a foot whereon it should go, if it were
perfect and entire.

For whereas in the Proposition, mention is made not only of the making of a
true Christian, but also of a company so gathered together: he should in the
Assumptio^ (if he would have had it sound and perfect) not only have assumed,
that the doctrine etc. is sufficient to make a true Christian: but have added
also, that their assemblies be companies so gathered together. Which being not
done, both the Assumption wa^teth one of the feet, and the Conclusion infers
more then was in the premises, and so the whole Syllogism is faulty and
disfigured.

Thus might we, without any further answer, return this Argument to the first
framers of it, to be better fashioned: Yet in hope to do them good (by the
blessing of God) we will more particularly lay open the weakness of this Reply.

And first, where he says the Proposition is most certain, and yet in his
defense of the Assumption, declares that he so takes it, as whatsoever
amongst them, be jointly together held, and joined with that which otherwise
might make a true Christian or true Church, yet notwithstanding they are so to
be reputed, as if there were no such additions or commixtures: we answer that
in this sense, the Proposition neither is nor can be absolutely true. For who
knows not, that Gal. 5.2.4.
such things may be joined with Christ, as do abolish from him? And again, 2
cor. 6.14.15.16.17.
that Christ and Antichrist cannot accord together? Either therefore the
Proposition is not general, but admits limitatio^, and the^ is not the
Argument good: Or if it be general, without any limitation (so as whatsoever
be added to or commingled with that which otherwise might make a true Christian
or Church, yet it hinders nothing at all) then is it not always true: as may
appear by the former exceptions and many mo that might be alleged.

Next touching the Assumption, besides that it is same, it is also untrue as
has been proved. Some balm in deed this man brings to cure it: but it has
no other effect, save only to manifest so much the more, that the soar of
their Assemblies cannot be healed. In our former answer we first took 3.
Exceptions against the^, comparing together their profession and practice, then
we alleged 9. Reasons directly concluding the falsehood of the Assumption.

H. Jacob his 2. Reply. Before I examine this your answer, I will desire you
and all others, to note that all your Ecceptions and Reasons, with your defense
of them, hereafter following, do consist of these three general points.

1. That every person in England, holding our public faith, is no true

2. That all the Christians and Churches in King Edwards time, and namely
Master Cranmer, M. Ridley, M. Hooper, M. Latimer, M. Philpot, M. Saunders, M.
Rogers, M. Tailor, etc. were all lims of Antichrist, and no true Chaistians.

3. That every soul in England, is convicted in conscience, that the
Praela^cie

The First of these, is our maine question, and the ground of all our
reasoning: which you gainsay. The second, though it be not expressly spoken, yet
it is directly, evidently, and undeniably concluded, by all and every of your
arguments against us. As in the seueralls hereafter we shall see. The third you
are driven unto, for defense of your former Assertion, which else falls to the
ground. And this you affirm flatly in your defense of your 1. 6. and 7.
Reasons.

Now my desire is, that all men would take notice of these your 3. Assertions,
and consider indifferently, whether they proceed from an honest, a sober, or a
Christian mind. And you M. Johnson, if you list hereafter to say any more,
defend these 3. points directly and plainly, that your aunswers may be
briefer, and more certain, then now they are.

And now I come to the particular examination of your former answer. You
omitted the Proposition before, not for the soundnes of it, but only, because
you would see how I meant it. Why? He that has but half an eye, may see the
meaning of those words, where is no darkness nor doubtfulnes of sense at all.
What fault find you in it now? Forsooth, first a want in Assumption, and then
untruths, both in the Proposition, and Assumption of my Sillogisme. There
wants (you say) that I should express in the Assumptio^. That our
Assemblies be companies gatherd together in the doctrines and ordinances which
we all by law publicly profess and practice. Who but a wrangler would not
understand that I meant so much? Nay do not my express words implie as much:
when I say, We by law publicly profess and practice them? Then are not our
Assemblies (which are by law) gathered together in this profession and power?
Fie forshame these are senseless cauilations. But because what in me lies, I
would not have you any more to stumble at a straw, Not that the Argument is
unsound without this addition: But because the Reader may see how you vvil
play at a small game rather then sit out, ^^a^unt.
I have to satisfy you withal, now added those words to the Assumption
aforesaid in a contrary letter which you desire, viz. and our public
assemblies are therein gathered together.

Secondly, you say, that my proposition means, that whatsoever is held
together with that which otherwise might make a true Christian or true Church:
Yet notwithstanding they are so to be reputed, as if there were no such
additions or commixtures. O strange dealing: in all my writing I have no such
word, no syllable, no letter sounding to that sense. I have directly contrary,
in my answer to your fourth Reason, as your self notes there. Yet you M.
Johnson, without all shame, in the view of the world, do Father on me this
foul untruth, and most senseless error, in your first entrance.

Further, whereas it seems you reprove my Proposition, requiring to to have
it set thus: Whatsoever is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian
(and has nothing added with it destroying the foundation of faith) That is
sufficient to make a company so gathered together, a true Church.

You must know M. Johnson, that that were an idle and vain addition: for
wheresoever there are any such things added destroying faith, there whatsoever
else seems sufficient, indeed it is not sufficient to make a true Christian.
Wherefore nodum inscirpo quaeris, this is to find a knot in a rush. Thus much
concerning the trunes of my Proposition.

The Assu^ption examined by the Exceptions and Reasons follovving.
Lastly you come to deny my Assumption, or rather to maintain your denial
heretofore given. Where first note that by denying my assumption, you affirm
the first general point noted in this beginning:

That every particular person in England, holding our public faith here, is
no true Christian. Which (O Lord) who would not tremble to think on? Even that
which this man above two yeates ago affirmed, and now again advisedly and
wilfully defends. I take Heaven and Earth to record this day, whether this be
not desperate madness, yea or no. But let us examine your exceptions, and
reasons against my Assumption more particularly, and we shall see what stuff
it is. Your first exception against the same is as follows.

Fr. Johnson his 3. Aun^wer. What M. Jacob? Does your mouth so run over, as
you could not but eue^ at first speak untruth and forge deceit? When your
beginning is so bad, it is an ill token the end will not be very good. You
would here father upon me three things, which I never imagined, as they are by
you collected. Therefore to clear the truth and s^op your mouth, I will
declare what my mind is and has been concerning them.

For the first, your words are, That every person in England, holding
Touching this point, I mind the estate of your people two ways: The one
concerning their several persons considered a part from the constitution of
your Church; the other concerning their estate and standing in that
constitution. Concerning the former of these, (that is, considering them apart
from the constitution) I acknowledge that in diverse of them there appears
such knowledge and faith of the gospel with the fruits thereof, as they may well
be thought, in regard of Gods election in Christ, to be heirs of salvation,
and in that respect to be true Christians: God pardoning unto them their
standing under Antichrist, which they do not see or mind. But withal, I fear
least many mo heretofore were pertakers of this grace, then be now since your
Antichristian estate and the unlawfulness to abide therein has bin discovered.
Concerning the latter, (that is, in respect of their estate and standing in
that constitution of your Church) I am persuaded whosoever so stand holding
your public faith and multitude of Antichristian abominations withal, they
cannot by the word of God be judged true Christians, as touching their outward
estate in that church of yours: but stand all subject to wrath, God imputing
this their sin unto them. And that all therefore who will be assured of Gods
mercy and salvation, ought with speed to go out of your Church, it still
remaining in Antichristian estate.

To make this matter more plain, take out of Israel an example in Abiiah the
son of Jeroboam. If you consider him, as standing with the rest in that
apostasy and Church-constitution of Israel, he is subject to like
condemnation with them in that estate. But if you consider him apart from it,
as there is found in him some goodness toward the Lord God of Israel, he may
be counted a true Israelite finding mercy at the Lords hands. 1 King.
14.1.5.13. By this you may see what my mind in this first point is and always
has been. And if you do mark, wheresoever I speak of the members of your
Church to be under wrath, in Antichristian estate, no true Christians, or
jointly together no true Churches, or the like: I speak it still with this
caution, in respect of such estate or constitution as they stand in under
Antichrist. To which end you may every where in my aunswers mind these and
the like clauses, In that estate, In that constitution, In respect of the
Ministry and constitution of the Church, Being subject to Antichrist, Being
so considered, Being Antichristian, and other of like sort.

That all the Christians and Churches in King Edward's time, and namely M.
Cranmer. M. Ridley, M. Hooper, M. Latimer, M. Philpot, M. Saunders, M. Rogers,
M. Tailor, etc. were all lims of Antichrist and no true Christians. Now as
touching this matter, although you may easily see what my mind is by that I
have said concerning the other going before: yet for this in particular, know
also that I am thus minded, viz. That all the christians and churches in King
Edwards time, and namely M. Cranmer, M. Ridley, etc. stood as touching the
outward constitution of that church in Antichristian estate: Yet considering
the mercy of God unto the^, and their faithfulness in those things which in
that time of ignorance were revealed, inasmuch as afterward they loved not
their lives unto death, but in many weighty points resisted unto blood
striving against Antichrist, I hold them in this respect true Christians, and
now to be at rest with the Lord.

And tell me your self M. Jacob, whether you judge not thus of Arnoldus de
villa noua, Johannes de rupe scissa, John Wicleff, John Hus, Jerome of Prage,
Sauanarola, Dominicus, Siluester, Thorpe, Swinderby, Bilney, etc. the faithful
witnesses of Christ in their several ages, and therefore in this respect true
Christians: whereas yet notwithstanding as touching their ministry and
Church-constitution wherein they were, they stood in Antichristian estate, some
of them being Friars, some popish Priests, some saying Mass, some
communicating in it, etc. until the day they were martyred and put to death.

That every soul in England, is convicted in conscience, that the Prelacie is
unlawful and intolerable. Touching this likewise, I never did nor can affirm
as you have set down. Only this I know and affirm, for the general state of
the Land, that a greater light is risen unto them in these days, but they love
darkness more then light: Also, that many times and sundry ways has been showed
and convinced unto them, that the Prelacie, Priesthood, Leiturgy etc. are
Antichristian, and therefore unlawful and intolerable: Finally, that the
Witness their Acts in Parliament against us. Their present estate, practice,
etc.
universal face of the Realm has refused the truth by us professed, and
retains still the Antichristian abominations aforesaid. For which I fear
their judgment will be the heavier. Ioh. 3.19 and 15.22. Act. 13.45.46.

This is that which I have bin and am persuaded touching these particulars. The
latter branch of the first of these, is our maine question, and the ground of
all our reasoning: which I have proved by many arguments both from the word of
God and your own men's writings. Unto which M. Jacob you have not given one
word of sound answer in all your book, but continually fly from the point in
question: as knowing (I fear) in your self, that there can be no just defense
of your Churches estate in this behalf. And touching all three, your self could
not but know that my judgment therein was as I have declared: you and I have so
often had speech together thereabout. Yet behold to make the truth of God and
my defense thereof more odious to the world, and so to prejudice your Readers
judgment, you have here at first unjustly and falsely fathered upon me these
three assertions, being not able to show them in my words or writings any
where. Remember you not, how the enemies of Gods grace dealt of old with the
Apostles, Romans 3.8.
blaming them (unjustly) as if they had taught, we should do evil that good
might come thereof. Or mind you, how the Papists, Anabaptists, and the like do
at this day charge us (though falsely) that we make God the author of sin,
whiles we maintain against them the truth touching Predestination, Freewill
etc. In like manner deal you with me. See Mat. 26 60.61. with Ioh. 2 19.21.
Act. 6.13.14.
And thus at first you become a false witness, both in perverting the sense of
my words, and in altering, diminishing, and adding unto them. Every of which
you know is to bear false testimony, not only against me, but in this case
even against the truth it self.

That all men take notice both of these positions, and of our dealing therein,
I also am content and desirous. My aunswers (I confess) are somewhat long,
partly because I would make the truth manifest even to the most simple, partly
for that I would more fully discover your manifold shifts and leave you no
statting hole any where. In your replies (which may well be pinned up in a
narrow room, seeing they have nothing of weight in them) I desire more sound
and upright dealing, together with demonstration of your cause from the
Scripture. That I have cause thus to desire, these three points following
(which I wish the Reader to observe in your Replies) will testify.

First that you being to prove your cause and Argument, Three things to be
noted by the Reader in Mr Jacobs Replies.
never proceed (though you be still called upon) to make due proof thereof, but
put over all proof unto me: and busy your self in aunswering (after your
fashion) the Exceptions and Reasons I brought against your Argument.

Secondly, that in aunswering my Reasons and Exceptions (finding them all to
heavy) you never directly refute them as they were propounded: but some times
leave most weighty points in them wholly vnaunswered; sometimes labor to wash
your hands of the matter, and to turn over the plea from your self that have
vndertake^ it, to the state of your Church on whom you leave it; sometimes
transform them into other shapes framed by your self, and so answer not me,
but fight with your own shadow: and thus every foot yield the cause by
necessary consequence.

Thirdly that in steed of Gods word (which is very rare with you in all this
dispute) you press us with the authority of Man: never going about to approve
your Church Estate by the Scriptures (which only must end this controversy)
but always leading us to the view and errors of the Martyrs. For let it be
minded, whether every of your Replies have not this for their foundation and
vndersong, M. Cranmer M. Ridley, etc. as if for our faith and worship of God,
we should turn from the living God to dead men, Esa. 8.20.
from the law and testimony of the Lord, to the opinions and aberrations of
Man. I might besides wish the Reader to mind the unsavory salt of your raising
and reproachful speeches scattered throughout your book: but I omit it.

And now I come to the particular examination of this Reply of yours.

You say, He that has but half an eye, may see the meaning of the words of
your Proposition etc. Well Mr. Jacob: then your self having two eyes might
easily see, I omitted the Proposition, not for the darkness or doubtfulnes of
the words, but because it yet appeared not how your self understood them:
whether so, as you make the Proposition general, admitting no exception: or
particular and to be restrained. And why do you not yet tell us how you take it?
Are you afraid to say either the one or the other? either that it is general,
or that it is particular?

If you make it general admitting no limitation, then is your Proposition
false, Page. 5.
as I showed in my last answer, which you cannot gainesay. If it be
particular, then is your Syllogism a mere Sophisme, your Argument of no
moment, neither in any Mood or Figure. How think you Mr. Jacob? Is not your
reason very sound and Clerklike? But you perhaps with two eyes see not so much
as others may with half an eye.

Touching the Assumption (to follow your words in order) I showed that whereas
in the Proposition you spoke of a company so gathered together, you should
for your purpose have assumed that your Assemblies be companies so gathered.
And tell me, ought you not so to have don, seeing you make but one Syllogism?
If you ought, is it wrangling to show what is wanting in your Reason? If you
ought not, why have you now made an addition to your Assumption which was not
before? Is it because I should not stumble at a straw? or is it not because the
Argument is unsound without it, though you note the contrary in the margent?
If it be sound without this, why do you not so prove it? If it be not, why do
you not confess it? Nay, why are you both so conceited in your self, and so
desirous to blind your Reader, as when the fault is showed you, yet you will not
only not accknowledg it, but lay the blame upon him that would draw you to see
it? This in deed is not to stumble at a straw, but wilfully to fall down, when
you might be helped up. Now although you be unworthy of any further help: Yet
because I I would have you see it, I will once again labor to make it plain
unto you, if I can beat it into your head.

You make but one Syllogism, and in it you conclude your public Assemblies
to be true Churches. Now you know (I suppose) that always in a good Argument,
whatsoever is in the Conclusion, must needs be in one of the premises before.
But in yours it is not so. Your conclusion is of your public assemblies, and
yet you never spoke of them before in either of the premises. Can you by this
perceive how extremely faulty and unsound your Argument is.

But you think to help your self by saying, you meant so much. Sure you are
near driven M. Jacob. For what wrangler could not so help out any matter? Yet
here you stay not. Even your words (you say) imply as much. And do they indeed?
Tell me then, whether here you include and defend all the public Assemblies
of the Land as they now stand, or but some of them? whether those, that have
dumb Ministers, as well as those that have Preachers? whether those that have
non residents, as well as those, that have their Incumbents? whether the
Cathedral Churches as well as the Parishes? For all these are by Law Churches
among you: the Cathedral, the Parishionall, those that have non residents, or
humbe dogs, with four Sermons a year, Pluralities, etc.

Then tell me, whether all these Assemblies of yours be companies by Law
gathered together in that profession and practice, whereof you speak? Besides,
where the words in your Proposition were of companies so gathered together etc.
and you in your addition to the Assumption have in steed thereof, companies
gathered together in the doctrines etc. why are you so unconstant and fearful
in your words? why do you not keep the same terms? why made you not the
addition, as was showed you it ought to have been? Did you think, that then I
would and might the more call upon you for proof thereof? That belike was the
matter. For in deed I do and must needs so much the more call for it. And how
will you ever prove it, that your Assemblies are companies so gathered
together, that is, by a free voluntary profession of the truths among you (
Act. 2.41. and 11.24. Psalm. 110.3. Esa. 44.5. 2 Cor. 6.17.18. and 9.13. Zach.
8.21 23. 1 These. 1.6.
such as is in true CHRIstians, and in the manner of gathering every true
Church): when as you are by Law compelled so to profess, or rather to submit
to that profession? Yea and by compulsion of Law are gathered not only in and
unto those truths, but in and to Antichristian errors, which cannot stand
therewithal? I pray you M. Jacob justify by the Scriptures such profession to
be that which is in true Christians, and such gathering to be that which is in
true Churches.

Next, where you charge me with strange dealing for saying, your vvriting
declared that you so took the Proposition as whatsoever These words (among
them) Mr. Jacob leaves out.
among you be jointly together held and joined with that which otherwise
might make a true Christian or true Church, yet notvvithstanding you are so to
be reputed as if there were no such additions or commixtures: First, speak
plainly whether you do so take your Proposition, or not. Whatsoever you
answer, it will be against your self and manifest the weakness of your
Argument, as I have declared a little before. Secondly, why wrote you not all my
words, but left out some of them? was it because you thought that would have
cleared me of strange dealing, and left it upon your own head? Thirdly, where
you say, in all your vvriting you have no such word, no syllable, no letter,
sounding to that sense: Lift up your ears Mr Jacob, and tell me how these
words of yours do sound in your hearing, M Jacobs 1. Reply to the 1. Reason
follovving.
Christ and some outward ceremonies and orders of Antichrist are joined
together among us, which things yet we think to be Christ's own. Again, The
His 1. Reply to the 4. Reason f^llovving.
outvvard manner of calling to the Ministry and some outvvard ceremonies used
by Mahomet and the Pope, do not destroy faith and true Christianity. And yet
more plainly, when you say, His 1. Reply to the 7. Reason folloing
The Papists forbidding of marriage and meats, if they had done no worse, does
not make them departers from the faith totally. No more could their Hierarchy
and ceremonies simply: Neither do these things make us the Protestants to be
such. These and many mo you have in your first Reply, besides an hundred the
like in the second, not only sounding to that sense, but directly and
necessarily implying it. And whereas you have sometimes the contrary (as I
noted His 1. Reply to the 4 Reason follovving.
else where:) that does but so much the more show your inconstancy and
contradiction of your self. Shall I therefore now turn upon you your own
words and say, O strange dealing: without all shame, in the view of the
world, to father on me this foul untruth etc.

Yet I am glad M. Jacob, the truth prevails so much with you, nill ye will
ye, as you are driven to confess, that this assertion is a foul untruth and
senceles error. For hereupon it follows, first that your Proposition is not
general, and therefore your whole Argument faulty and to no purpose at al for
the question in hand: secondly, that of necessity there should be some clause
a^nexed to your Proposition touching the Antichristian abominations among you,
if you would have your Reason good for the estate of your Churches. But you
account such addition would be idle and vain. I easily believe, you are so
minded. But why (I pray you) think you so? Is it because you did not at first
mind it, or because now you see it would discover to every man the vanity of
your Reason? Howsoever, it must be expressed. And if your self either know not
how to do it, or be unwilling, I will show it. Mark now therefore.

How Mr Jacobs Argument should be propounded.
Whatsoever is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian and in
state of salvation: that is sufficient to make a company so gathered together
to be a true Church of Christ, though they retain vvithall in their
constitution the Hierarchy, Leiturgy, and confusion of Antichrist.

But the whole doctrine, as it is publikly Book of Articles published Anno 1562
professed and practiced by Law in England, is sufficient to make a particular
man a true Christian and in state of salvation: And the publik Assemblyes of
England are in their estate companyes so gathered together.

Therefore it is also sufficient to make the publik Assemblyes of England true
Churches of Christ, though they retain vvithall in their constitution the
Hierarchy, Leiturgy, and confusion of Antichrist.

Or thus rather:

If the whole doctrine, as it is publikly professed and practiced by Law in
England, be sufficient to make a particular man standing member of that Church
which retains the Hierarchy, Leiturgy, and confusion of Antichrist, yet
notvvithstanding to be a true Christian and in state of salvation as tovvching
his estate and standing in that Church: then is it also sufficient to make a
company so gathered together, and consequently the Church of England to be a
true Church of Christ as towching the estate and constitution thereof.

But the former (say you) is true. Therefore also the latter
But the former (say I) is false. Therefore also the latter.
Thus M. Jacob, should your Argument be framed in right form of reasoning, for
the estate of your Church, and for the question between us. Which now being
done, who is so simple as cannot plainly see the falsehood of both the
Propositions in the former, and of the Assumption in the latter, and
consequently the vanity of your Reason every way. If you still hold otherwise,
then must we still call upon you for proof. Bare saying will not serve, we
look for due proof. Mind further, that (now as your case stands) you are to
approve the estate of your Church and the members thereof, not only as they
retain the abominatio^s of Antichrist, but as they withstand also the contrary
truth and way of Christ, which has been a long time made known and offered unto
them. Otherwise he that has but half an eye may see you defend not the present
estate of the Churches of England, as the title of your book pretends.

In that you say, wheresoever there are any things added destroying faith there
whatsoever else seems sufficient, in deed is not sufficient to make a true
Christian: you are again mistaken. There may be in the constitution of a
Church, things added destroying faith, and yet so much truth be held and taught
as to some particular men (considered apart from the constitution) is
sufficient to make them true Christians and in state of salvation, the other
being not imputed unto them by the Lord. Thus I doubt not has Thus have I
spoken to you Mr Jacob many times: Yet see how you have now dealt with me
contrary to your knowledge.
God saved some in the most popish Churches, and many mo in yours, from time to
time. Yet notwithstanding this does not justify the estate either of their or
of your Church, neither does it warrant any to abide therein. But it argues
partly the riches of Gods mercy, partly the greatness of his power, who as at
first he brought light out of darkness, so in the worst times and even in the
dark kingdom of Antichrist saves them that are his. But of this, besides
that already spoken, there will be occasion to speak more In the handling of
the second Exception and 7. Reason folloing.
hereafter.

Your bad dealing about the first and rest of the general points above named I
have declared before. In deed your self may tremble to think thereon, as on
your Antichristian estate also in that Church: You I say, M. Jacob, who cannot
be ignorant of both these things: howsoever you have advisedly, if not also
vvilfully now written otherwise. Mind therefore if you have not here took
heaven and earth to record against your self: and whether this be not desperate
madness, yea or no. But let us proceed to your Replies upon the Exceptions and
Reasons heretofore alleged against your Assumption. And let the Reader mind
without partiality (as before God) which of us have the truth: and accordingly
let him walk in all good conscience before God and men.

Chap. 4. The first Exception against the Assumption aforesaid.
Fr. Johnson. FIrst consider the 19. Article of that doctrine and Book, which
by your self is alleged for your defense, and see by it if your profession
and practice be not contrary one to an other: Yea see if it be not manifest
even by it, that you have not a true visible Church of Christ.

The words of the Article are these. Artic. 19.
The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

These are your own words and doctrine: Now if you cannot prove your
Assemblies to be such, you may see your own witnesses (even your own doctrine
and book) give verdict against you. If you can prove them to be such: where
and what are your proofs, touching the particulars, mentioned in this your
own description of a visible Church?

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 1. Excep. THis your first Exception, is the 19.
Article of this very book which we allege, wherein a visible Church is
described to be a Congregation, where the pure word is preached, and Sacraments
ministered, according to all those things, that of necessity are requisite.
Now this description, you reject not, but our practice (say you) is contrary:
and therefore we have no true visible Churches, nor Christians.

I answer: wherein is it contrary? in what things that of necessity are
requisite? does not all this Christian world see and confess, that our
public practice, is agreeable to our profession in that book? Nay (say you)
but prove you your assemblies to be such, and if you can prove them, where and
what are your proofs? if you do not, you are confuted. A worthy confutation
sure, and very Clerklike: As if my Tenant should deny me rent for my house
and land, yea and go to Law with me for the fee simple, which he has
holden in ferme of me these 40. years: and I have hitherto, quietly enjoyed
from my Ancestors, time out of mind. Now he suing me at law, for that
which I thus possess, says, prove your right to this land, which you have;
if you can, what, and where be your proofs? let me see them: Or else I your
Tenant will have it: This were goodly dealing, were it not, and very
lavvfull. Eue^ so do you, asking proofs of us for that which we possess,
and have possessed before you made any question about it, nay you your selves,
held part of this possession of us and with us, till yesterday, when you
began first to lay claim in this sort to the whole. Now your reason is, let
us prove it to be ours, where be our proofs? Or else you will not accknowledg
us any longer: see I pray you your own equity. If this suffice not to make you
desist, I leave it to the Judges to give sentence.

Secondly note further: Our Article says, A Church is where the word is
preached, and Sacraments ministered according to all things that of necessity
are requisite. Where vve^ plainly insinuate, that many errors may be added,
and truths wanting in a visible Church: but nothing which is absolutely
necessary: Now, what does our practice, in Preaching, or Sacraments, want,
that is absolutely necessary, without which, there cannot be any true
preaching or Sacraments at all, show it us because we see it not our selves I
assure you: until then, your first reason has no reason in it.

Fr. Io. his Answer to M. Jacobs 1. Reply upon the 1. Excep. HOw fit or unfit
the description is, I neither did, nor do examine. Only because it is your
own profession, and your practice is contrary unto it, I did from hence take
the first Exception, requiring of you to prove your Assemblies to be such, or
else to know that your own doctrine, is a witness against your selves. Now in
your Reply, have you according to the particulers of that description,
justified your Church assemblies? Nothing less. Let this therefore be first
observed. But what then have you done?

First pretending as if you repeated our exception, and your own description,
you leave out diverse particulers, of special moment, there expressed. As
first, where the visible Church is described to be a congregation of faithful
men, you leave out these words (of faithful men) belike knowing that your
Congregations, which are holds of all foul spirits, and cages of every
unclean and hateful bird, Revel. 18.2
cannot therefore justly be accounted congregations of faithful men. Secondly,
where the description speaks of the Sacraments to be duly ministered, you /
leave out this word (duly): because it crosses your women's Baptism, private
Communion, receiving of the most profane and their seed among you, etc.
Lastly, where in the description it is required, both for preaching the pure
word and due administration of the Sacraments, that they be don according to
Christ's ordinance: you leave out these words (according to Christ's
ordinance): belike because this clause quite overthrows both your
Antichristian Prelacy, from whih all the inferior Ministers among you receive
power and authority to preach and minister the Sacraments; and your Preisthood
and Deaconry, wherein you all administer; and your stinted imposed prayers,
exhortations, crosses in the forehead, questions to Infantes, use of the same
words in English in ministering the Lords Supper, which the Papists used and
still use in Latin, not retaining the words of Christ's institution: and such
like.

Thus having left out such particulers as were of special moment against you,
yet you demand wherein your paactize is contrary to your profession, and
description of a visible Church, in what things that of necessity are
requisite? We answer, in all the particulers of that description aforesaid.
For first, your Church Assemblies, are not congregations of faithful men, but
a confusion of all manner of people though never so wicked and profane. The D.
VV^i^g book page, 176. and 178
Prelates and Formalists affirm, that your Church is full of Atheistes,
Papists, Idolaters, Drunkards, Whoremongers, and such like. The Sermon on Romans
12 page 65. and 66. Demonstration: in the preface.
forward Preachers likewise, that in your Church are svvarmes of Atheists,
Idolaters, Papists, erroneous and heretical Sectaries, Witches, Charmers,
Sorcerers, Murderers, Thieves, Adulterers, Liars, etc. Finally, that a man may
be any thing among you saving a sound Christian. These things being so, as both
your estate and writings bear witness: judge your selves, whether your
Assemblies can be accounted Congregations of faithful men, or no: which is the
first point of the description aforesaid.

Secondly, in the same description is required, That the pure word of God be
preached, according to Christ's ordinance. But with you are allowed besides the
word of God, the Apocrypha books: and in steed of preching the word, the
reading of Homilies: as may appear in that Book of Articles published Anno
1502.
book of Articles alleged by your self. Yet who knows not, that in those
books are diverse untruths, errors, contradictions, blasphemies, and such like?
So far are they from being the pure word of God, or agreeing therewith.
Moreover, when and where the word is preached among you, it is done by virtue
of a false office and calling, never appointed by Christ. And the Ministers
that preach it, do in your constitution always stand subject to be silenced,
suspended, excommunicated, and degraded by the Prelates and Ordinaries, to whom
(when you are made Priests, you promise, and (when you enter upon a benefice)
you swear, Canonical obedience. Neither are you suffered any further to
preach the word, and truth of God, then agrees with the Articles, Iniu^etio^s,
Aduerticements and Caueates, in that behalf provided. If any preach the word of
God any further, they are subject to be sile^ced, banished and put to death.
That these things accord with the ordinance of Christ, or with your own
description of a visible Church, I suppose your self will not for shame affirm
it.

Lastly in your description it is required, That the Sacraments be duly
ministered, according to the ordinance of Christ, in all things that of
necessity are requisite to the same. Now by the ordinance of Christ, in the
administration of the Sacraments, there are necessarily required, 1. A lawful
Minister; 2. A lawful people; 3. A lawful administration, according to the
Testament of Christ: In all which your practice is contrary to the ordinance of
Christ, and your own description aforesaid. Your Ministers all of them are
either Prelates, Priests, or Deacons (which among you is a step to the
Priesthood): none of which Christ has ordained in his Testament for the work
of his Ministry. Your people are not separated from the world, See John
15.19. and 17.14 1^.
but stand in confusion with it, and in subjection to the Antichristian
Prelates and Prelacie: and therefore cannot be deemed a true Church of God and
the people of Christ, unto whom in such estate the Sacraments (which are
seals of the covenant of grace) do apperteine, and may be administered. 1 Job.
4 ^.5 Act 2 40. and 19 9. Rev. 18.4. and 14.9.
Finally your administration is according to the inventions and precepts of
men, with s^inted prayers, exhortations, Epistles and Gospels: and besides
these, in Baptism, crossing on the forehead, and questions to the infant: in
the Lords supper, translating and using out of the Mass book, other words the^
the words of Christ's institution: and such like, as may be seen at large in
your book of common prayer, which is picked and culled out of the Mass book,
full of abominations, as Admonition to the Parliament.
your selves have confessed heretofore.

These things we have been forced thus to mention at large, both because you
twice demand (as if you knew not your selves) wherein your practice is
contrary to that description aforesaid: and because you blush not to affirm,
that all the Christian world sees and confesses your practice to be agreeable
to your profession in that book. Whereas the contrary is most true. Touching
which, what your selves have heretofore written to the contrary, See in the
Admonitions to the Parliament, Replies of T. C. against D. Whitgist,
Demonstration of Discipline, etc. And what the reformed Churches profess to
the contrary, see in the French, Belgicke, and Heluetian Churches, in the
Harmony of confessions, Se^ct. 10.11.

Thus also appears what just cause we had, to put you to prove your
assemblies, to be such, as your selves describe visible Churches to be. Which
seeing you have not yet done, and seeing your practice is contrary to your
profession, as now (at your request) we have showed in the particulars
aforesaid: If you still be minded as before, we do also still ask, where and
what are your proofs, touching the particulars mentioned in your own
description of a visible Church?

Your similitude of a Landlord and Tenant, is against your selves: so worthy
and Clerklike is your Reply. If any have usurped, or otherwise made a false
claim never so long, to a piece of land or other possession: may they not
justly be called upon to show their title and bring forth their evidence? Let
the Judges give sentence.

If you deny your claim to be such, show your evidence from the Apostles
writings: Let us from thence see your evidence for the offices of Archbs, Lord
bs, Archdeacons, Priests, Parso^s, Vicars, etc. For your entrance into these
offices; according to your Canons, and book of ordering Priests, etc. For your
administration by your scinted imposed Leiturgy, and by your Popish Canons,
Officers, proceedings, etc. For your maintenance by Tithes, Chrisomes,
Offerings, etc. For your confused communion of all sorts of people, though
never so wicked, in the body of your Church, etc. Let us (I say) see evidence
for these, from the Apostles writings, if you deny your claim to be such, as
we have noted. Otherwise if you speak not according to this word, Esaias. 8.^^.
it is because there is no light in you, neither any right to that you
challendge.

Where you say, we held part of your possession with you hertofore: If you
mean, that we with you received the beasts mark and drunk of the cup of
Babels abominations, we deny it not: but acknowledge Gods mercy, that passing
over our sins, has given us grace and strength Rev 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.17.18.
Act. 2.40.
at his commandment to forsake that way of Antichrist, and to come out of
that spiritual Babylon, to the salvation of our souls. Which mercy we wish
also to you, that being saved from that froward generation, you may become the
sons and daughters of the Lord almighty.

Touching your Article, Preaching, Sacraments, Ministratio^, etc: Enough is
said before. Only where you say, you see not your selves wherein you fail,
touching Preaching or Sacraments, in things necessary, It is too impudent
untruth, as your Admonition to the Parliament. T. C. his replies in defense
thereof. Demo^stration of discipline. Defense of Ecclesiastical discipline,
etc.
former writings do and will always testify to your face, which we will not
stand here to relate. That shall suffice which we have touched before: which
till it be answered, the Exception has both reason and weight in it,
whatsoever you do or can pretend to the contrary.

H. Jacob his 2. Reply to the 1. Excep. HEre is much ado to no purpose. You
observe 4. points in our Article omitted by me, wherein our practice is
contrary to our profession. First, our Article requires a visible Church to
be an assembly of faithful men: But our ossemblies (say you) are not so. This
is false, they are so: you shall never prove in us the contrary, more then
appears was in the Church of the Jews, both Ancient and in the time of
Christ, and yet they than were the true Church: As I have elsewhere in this book
sufficiently proved and showed against you. That which you bring of D.
Whitgift and other writers amongst us of the profaneness of many in our
assemblies, you deprave their meaninges utterly: for though they grant very
many such to be amongst us, yet they say not, that all our assemblies are such,
nor our whole assemblies: Neither deny they our assemblies to be companies of
faithful men, or utterly to be separated from: Nay, the contrary do they: even
that only they ought to be reformed. Therefore you too grossly abuse them.

Secondly, The Article requires the pure word of God to be preached. But (say
you) the the pure word of God: Neither does the Article mean, that in a
visible Church, every jot and title, both of our profession and practice, must
needs be out of the pure word. They knew that every visible Church might and
did err in somewhat: Only it means, that a visible Church might not err in
any poinct, that of necessity is requisite, as their words express. It rests
then that you show, that the pure word is not preached in our assemblies by
law, sufficiently to salvation: which yet you do not, nor can do. Therefore
you say nothing. For, I for my part know well, that our Churches fail from the
pure word in sundry lesser points, which though they be errors, yet are they
not Fundamental, neither do they in their own nature abolish from Christ.

Thirdly, the Article has, according to Christ's ordinance: But you say, that
we preach in strange and false functions, such as are not Christ's ordinances.
This is false too, Our In my avnsvver to the 1. reason of that treatise
follovving in the e^de of this book.
comparing of the condition of a Ministry with Mariadge. Now this ordinance
of Christ, to have a true Pastor to a faithful people, is sufficient for the
being of a true Church, though not for the perfection of it. Contrary to the
which, you have nothing but words.

Lastly, the Article requires (due administration of Sacraments:) But our
practice (say you) herein is not due or in^ier, because there concur diverse
corruptions withal: as I answer: all these simply of them selves do not
abolish our Sacraments. If you think they do, say so, and you shall be refuted.
If nay, then this very Article signifies so much, That corruptions and faults
might be in the Sacraments, but nothing amiss that of necessity is requisite.

Now, all these 4. poinctes I have omitted (say you.) True: in words I have,
but in sense I express them all and every one, when for breuities sake, I
comprehended all in this general clause of this Article, according to all that
is of necessity requisite. How say you, have I not herein contained and
signified all these your exceptions, and that according to the meaning of the
Article? If I have (as it is most true) then do you unconscionably abuse me,
in saying, I pretended to repeat our description in the Article, and yet leave
out diverse particulars of special moment. And let this therefore be first
observed, I have omitted nothing material in that Article. Yea let this be
here noted, that in all this you have most fondly abused yout pen and tongue.

Yet vyill you still demand how our practice agrees with our profession in
that 19. Article? Still I annsvver you with that similitude of a foolish and
importunate Tenant against his Landlord. If I have held possession, and my
ancestors before me time out of mind, indeed the King laying claim to it, he
may call for my evidence, because Time prescribes not against the Prince.
nullum tempus occurrit Regi, But against my fellovv subjects, possession and
inheritance (so long without interruption) is of it self evidence in law good
enough, except the plaintiff can bring better to the contrary. Therefore it
were absurd and senseless before any Judge in England, for a Tenant to put
such a Landlord to show his evidence in such a case. Even so as absurd it is
for you, seeing at first you were of us and now are gone out from us, to put
us to prove our selves to be such as heretofore you never doubted of. If now
you doubt and contradict it, show you your reason as better evidence, or else
all men will condemn your folly.

Where you put me to prove all our offices of the Hyerarchie, their ceremonies
etc. What needs it? I never took it upon me: Except you do show, that these
corruptions all or any of them absolutely in their own nature do abolish us al
clean from Christ, and make us impossible to be saved, which until you do,
still I say, I see not any piece of reason in all your words.

And Lastly where you say, it is an impudent untruth, that I say we see not,
that anything necessary is wanting in our Church, And to this end you quote to
convince me, The Admonition. T. C. his Replies, Demonstration, Declaration, and
the Defense of Discipline, etc. This is indeed too bold an untruth, and a
wilful perverting of all your allegations. None of all these do gtaunt any
thing to be wanting with us that is necessary to the being of a Church simply,
nor to the being of a true Ministry or Sacraments: But only to their well
and convenient being. How honest then are you to falsify your own
vvitnesses so openly?

Fr. Io. his Answer to Mr. Jacobs 2. Reply upon the 1. Excep. I Have often
heard such things, M. Jacob. Yet they are but words of wynd. And now belike you
tell us here aforehand, what we are to look for in this and the rest of your
Replies following, even much ado to no First where your Article describes a
visible Church to be a Congregation of faithful men: you say, yours are so. I
did and do deny it. Now therefore must you prove it, who made the first
Argument, and still continue to reply. If you know not this, you know little or
nothing either of the rules or of the use of sound reasoning. Let any that have
knowledge, judge. Secondly, whereas you would I should prove the contrary
(although in putting this over to me you manifest your own ignorance and
weakness, yet) know that both Mr. Barrovves Refutation of M. Giff^rd. The
Discovery. The Conferences published etc.
others of us and In the aunsvvers to M. A. H. to M. T. C. to M. VV. Smith, and
to your self.
my self have done it sundry times; and taken away the objections drawn from
the corruptions in the Jewish or any other Churches. Unto which who is there
of you that ever gave us sound answer? Thirdly, I take the whole Land to
witness against you, that it is most false which here you are not ashamed with
such boldness to affirm, viz. that your Church Assemblies are Congregations of
faithful men. But by this may all men see you make no conscience what you
affirm or deny, so you may seem to say somewhat. Fourthly, your own men of
all sorts confess it to be as I have said and showed in my former answer.
Unto which I might add an hundred mo testimonies of theirs, if the case were
not as clear as the Sun at noone day.

But you say, I deprave their meanings utterly. Why so, I pray you? Because
they say not, that all your Assemblies are such, nor your whole Assemblies,
though they grant very many such to be among you: that is, many of your
Church to be Atheists, Papists, Drunkards, Whoremongers, Thieves, Murderers,
Witches, etc. Alas M. Jacob, it pittieth me to see your extreme folly and
evil conscience. Your folly, that see not how both they and you give the
cause in this grant: and thereby also testify that I do not at all deprave
their meanings. Is it possible, that your Church Assemblies should be full of
such known ungodly persons, and yet be Congregations of faithful men? It never
entered into my thought, much less did I ever say it, that your whole
Assemblies are such. I know and willingly accknowledg many of your Church not
to be so: for which I praise God. (Always I except your public worship and
Idolatry, wherein all, even the best among you, are inwrapped.) This I said,
that your Assemblies are not congregations of faithful men, but a confusion of
all manner of people, though never so wicked. And this you see do your own
men testify.

Add hereunto, that both they and your self grant your Assemblies herein
ought to be reformed. If they be already Congregations of faithful men, what
reformation would you have in this behalf? But if their

Where you speak of your own men, that they deny not your Assemblies to be
companies of faithful men, or utterly to be separated from: it is to no
purpose at all save against your self. For first, though they speak it not in
these very syllables, yet the thing it self necessarily follows upon their
words. It is without question that the heathen Poets did themselves worship
Idols: yet notwithstanding sometimes they so spoke in their writings, as Paull
does Act. 17.28.29.
from thence conclude that not Idols but the true God only is to be
worshipped. Had it now ben of weight, for any of them to have alleged against
the Apostle, that theit Poets did not deny Idols to be worshipped? Yet you
think it sufficient, to withstand the truth with any such pretense. Let this
once spoken, serve for answer to all your reproaches wherewith you burden me
many times for the collections which I deduce necessarily from your own and
other men's writings. Secondly, you are to know that it is not material against
me, whatsoever your men do grant or deny. But against you it is, who abide
in the same Ministry and of the same Church with them. For that which you
speak of the Church of the Jews both ancient and in the time of Christ,
referring us to another place hereafter in this book for proof of your
comparison, look you there also for answer thereunto. And hitherto of the
first point of your Article and profession differing from your practice and
constitution.

For the second, if you profess to preach the pure word of God (as this
Article requires) and yet again both in profession and practice (as here the
Apocrypha books and your Homilies: what is or can be more contrary? If your
Article mean otherwise (as you pretend) it is full of deceit. Neither shall
any ever know what your profession is, if your Articles do thus cross one
another, and your practice also agree with the worst.

But to clear this point, I answer furthermore: 1. that it is a point of
necessity requisite, that Gods word only be taught. For which see these
Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Psalm. 119.113. Prove. 30.5.6. Esa. 8.20. and
59.21. Ier. 23: 16.28. Ioh. 5.39. Col. 3.16. 1 Timothy 6.3.4.5. and 2 Timothy
3.16.17. Gal. 1.8.9. Rev. 22.18.19. Thus by your own exposition of this
Article, the Assumption of your maine Argument falls, and your Churches
remain in false constitution: which is the question between us. See the third
Exception follovving, In the answer to Mr, Jacobs 2. Reply.
2. The Apocrypha books maintained in the Church (which you say is both your
profession and practice) overthrows the truth of Christian religion, and
brings in Iudaisme, Popery, Atheism, and what not? 3. Even in the Church of
Rome where these books also are received, yet withal the pure word is so
preached among them by Law, as no doubt to some is sufficient co salvation. For
proof whereof see the Rhemes Testament, in their note upon 1 Timothy 2.5. Yet this
hinders not but that their Church maintains false doctrine (as in that place
also may be seen) and stands in false constitution. Neither therefore can
this help you. It rests then that you show, the pure word only to be
preached among you by Law, and that also according to Christ's ordinance.
which yet you do not, neither can do. And therefore it is your self that say
nothing: but that you both profess and practice errors.

Now it is well, the truth so shines in your heart, as you confess your
Churches fail from the pure word in sundry lesser points. Yet I pray you
reckon up these points in particular, that by the word of God it may be seen
whether they be lesser or greater then you would bear us in hand. Then tell
us, in whose power it is in your Church, to redress them. Also, why they are
not redressed, seeing you know them, and have Rev. 2.16.17. and 3.3. Mat.
18.15.16.17.20. 1 Cor. 5.4.5 Lev. 4.13. 2 Cor. 10.4.5.6.
rules given by Christ for such cases, if your Churches be his? Lastly, why you
for (your part) abide in known errors, and keep not the truth and
commandments of Christ?

As touching that you say, though they be errors, yet they are not
fundamental, neither do in their own nature abolish from Christ: the fit
place of handling this point follows in the second Exception and seventh
Reason, to which places I refer it. Yet in the mean time, because here we
are treating of the Apocrypha books, tell me whether in retaining them, you
retain not such errors as your self account fundamental etc. For example, the
book of Tobit teaches that Tob. 12.12.15.
Angels do present and bring to memory our prayers before the Lord. Now this
honor (you know) is peculiar to Christ, who 1 Timothy 2.5.
only is the Mediator of Intercession. That Apocrypha doctrine therefore is
blasphemous, and an error (in your sense as I take it) fundamental. Add
hereunto that 2 Match. 12.43.44.45.
offering up of a sin offering to God for the dead, to make reconciliation for
them thereby, spoken of in the book of Machabees: And according to your second
sense of fundamental, that 2 Machab. 14.41.42.
commending of vvilfull murder, taught in the same book of Machabees. Not to
speak of the Magic in the Job. 6.6.
book of To bit, for healing any that is troubled with a Devil or evil
spirit, by a perfume made of a fishes heart and liver. These sweet doctrines
with other the like do those books afford. But it skils not, so long as with a
bold face notwithstanding you can bear it out and say still, your errors are
not fundamental, etc. Is this your conscience, Mr. Jacob? Will you thus still
plead for Baall?

But to proceed, in the third place you speak of those words, ( according to
Christ's ordinance. Where first mark, that these words in your Article are to
be referred to all the particulars going before. So as to your Assemblies to be
so gathered, the pure word so preached, anh the Sacraments so administered
among you, as Christ has ordained. Thus might you more persuade us, and defend
your selves better, in one half sheet of paper, then in a thousand such
frivolous pamphlets as you sparse abroad, to no purpose at all, except it be to
lay open your own nakedness so much the more.

Whereas I alleged, that when and where the word is preached among you, it
is done by virtue of a false office and calling, never appointed by Christ:
this you say is false too. Often have I heard you say so, but never could I
hear you prove it. To help you therefore, I will show you the way how to do
it, if any such thing could be. And that is thus: first, syncerely (as before
God) to reckon up all the offices of Ministry which your Church by Law
enjoys; and then to note the Scriptures which teach that Christ ordained
those offices in his Church: secondly, to show the manner of entrance into your
several offices prescribed by Law; and then, to name the places of Scripture
where such calling is appointed by Christ. This you see is a plain and ready
way (touching these two points) to stablish the conscience and to confound your
adversaries, not with show of words, but with substance of matter. I hope it
will do you some pleasure Mr. Jacob, that I have showed you so good a way. All
the thanks I ask for it is, that you would walk uprightly in it.

Now if you list not take the pains, or find the way all to hard, for your
Archbs, Lordbs, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, Stipendaries, and the rest of
your Priests and Deacons: yet at least for your self show it in defense of your
own office and calling, first when you were made Priest and Deaco^ by the
Prelates; and the^ when you became an House-Priest in the country, and since a
Mercenary-Priest in the city. Now (I hear) your Lords the Prelates have
commanded you silence, and you as an obedient child of such reverend Fathers
do readily submit to their Antichristian authority. Yet let this be no excuse
to put of the clearing of the former matter: but seeing you have so much the
more leisure, do it the more soundly and speedily. Doubtless it would give great
light in this case.

Next you say, your ordinary Preachers are true Pastors, as touching the
substance of Pastoral calling: but whom mean you by ordinary Preachers etc.
Your Prelates (I remember) are by Law your Ordinaries. Do you mean it of
them? your treatise shows it not. Tell us then who they be of whom you speak:
1. whether all or some only of your Preachers: 2. whether you have any
extraordinary Preachers that have some other office: 3. what you judge, of
those that are not in the number of the ordinary Preachers you speak of,
whether they also be true Pastors: 4. what you account (according to the
Scripture) the substance of the Pastoral calling, whereof you speak. All these
points you see must be cleared, before we can understand what you speak, or
whereof you affirm. So mystical, or rather in deed so fearful and
deceitful is your manner of speech.

Touching the question, what is substantial in the Ministry (if you put it
over to me to declare, as your manner is) I have already showed my judgment and
reasons in A treatise of the Minist. of the Churches of Engl. p. 83. 84. 85.
another treatise. Which you may either refute, or approve your Ministry
according to those particulars, or (if you can do neither of these) yield to
the truth against which you have so long strugled in vain. In vain, I say:
for proof whereof mark what follows next in your Reply.

Your self confess that even the Preachers for whom you plead, have a wrong
ordination from the Prelacy. Thus your own mouth (M. Jacob) is witness against
your self, that al your labor is in vain. Shall I yet make it more plain
unto you? Mark then. Your maine defense is from See before, page 3. and 6.
the doctrine of your Church, as it is publicly professed and practiced by
Law. Now your Law admits no other ordination, but that of the Prelacy. And
this your self here confess is vvrong. In what case now your Ministry
stands, let others judge. And take you heed, you please not your self any
longer in such unrighteousness. The 2 The. 2.12
end thereof is fearful. But besides this estate of your Ministry, you
confess here also for the body of your Church, that you have a confusion of
people: that is (in deed, though you speak it not in word) a spiritual
Babylon. For Babel, is in English, confusion. Thus both for Ministry and
people, you give the cause, having wearied your self in the defense of Babylon
all in vain. Which is and will be the fruit of your and all other men's labors
in this case. So the Ier. 51.58.64.
Scripture has foretold.

Your other writing, See the next treatise follovving at the end of this.
touching the comparing of the condition of a Ministry with Marriage, long
since delivered, was also long since answered. Unto which I have not yet
received any Reply: not so much as words, which is the most I look for from you
at any time.

Where next you grant, it is Christ's ordinance, to have a true Pastor, to a
faithful people: hold you there, M. Jacob, and you overthrow at once all your
Churches and Ministry. For you neither have proved, neither ever will, that so
you have. Begging of the question (though you use it never so often) is nothing
but words, not any proof at all.

due administration of the Sacraments according to Christ's ordinance. First
mind, that diverse other particulars were related (wherein you fail) besides
those you have here mentioned. See them in my Before. Page 15. 16. 17.
former answer. Now if the corruptions of the Jews Mal. 1.6.7.8.12.13. Amos.
4.4.5. Esa. 1.12.13.
polluted the table of the Lord and made their oblations to be in vain; yea,
if the abuses in Corinth about the Sacrament made that 1 Cor. 11.20.
it was not the eating of the Lords supper: what then shall be thought of the
heinous abominations of Antichrist retained among you in the Sacraments? Your
distinction of simply abolishing is but leaven of your own, borrowed from your
Prelates, and by them from the Papists. We plainly affirm that your abuses
and corruptions are such, as the Sacraments among you are not duly administered
according to Christ's ordinance; and that it cannot be showed by the word of God
that they seal up Gods covenant of grace to your Church and the members
thereof in that estate. Now see that (according to your promise) you refute
this. And prove that notwithstanding all your corruptions mentioned, yet Christ
acknowledges your Sacraments for his: also, that the good things and
ordinances of Christ wanting among you, are not of necessity requisite. In the
mean time know, that none can partake in the administration of your
Sacraments, but they must needs withal partake in your sins before
rehearsed. Which the Lord has most straightly forbidden: Rev. 18.4. and
14.9.10.11. Exodus 20.4.5. Psalm. 119.21. Mal. 1.7.8.13.14. 2 Cor. 6.17. Amos.
4.4.5. and 5.5. Ephesians. 5.11.

The particulars of your Article, you say, you omitted for breuities sake. Let
others beleev you that will: for mine own part, I neither do nor can beleev
it. You have here taken pains to write an whole book, and in it a multitude of
words to no purpose. Is it likely then, that for brevity sake you would omit
the most special points of the Article, which may be written in a line or two
at the most? Nay M. Jacob, these clauses (of faithful men; duly; according to
Christ's ordinance) are so full and pregnant against you, as you thouht it no
wisdom to mention them at all: but rather in silence to bury them under some
general term, or (as your self speak) to comprehend them in a general
clause. This in deed was the best way to darken the truth and help your self,
if any way you could. But any that mind your manner of dealing may easily see,
that if these clauses had made but a tenth part so much for you, as they are
fully against you: then you would have been so far from omitting the^, as we
should have had them noted down in greater letters then the rest.

For your Article it self, if the meaning of it were to comprehend those points
in your general clause: why then did it so particularly mention them besides?
Were the framers of your Article so ignorant or careless (think you) as in a
brief description of such a weighty matter, they would commit so many vain and
needles tantologies? Nay rather they judged all these particulars absolutely
needful: specially, that Christ's ordinance be had and observed, and that also
in all things of necessity requisite. How say you, is not this the meaning of
the Article? How fondly then and how unconscionably have you abused not only
your pen and tongue, but even your Church and book of Articles, whereon you
seem for to rely? How just cause also have I then still to demand, where and
what your proofs be, touching the particulars of your own description of a
visible Church?

Your parable of a Landlord and a Tenant, besides that it is popish and
against your selves (as has been showed) it is also false. You have not had
possession time out of mind, as you pretend. It is but yesterday since this
your Samaritane and misceline religion began, viz; since King Henry the eight.
Now also Christ the King and Lord of his Church does by his servants lay claim
to his own right, and disclaimeth your false worship and Ministry. So your
own saying is against your self, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, No time does
prejudice the King. If you plead your right by any more ancient date, as from
Christ and his Apostles, the evidence may soon be showed from their writings.
If you do it not, all men of wisdom will not only condemn your folly, who
take upon you the defense of so bad a cause, but will also perceive the
impiety of your Churches estate, for which no warrant can be showed from
Apostolik writ.

For our going out from among you, when before we had held part of possession
with you, I brought warrant from the word of God: which you touch not at all.

That it lies upon you, yea and that your self have taken it upon you, to
approve your Hierarchy, Leiturgy, confusion of people etc. appears not only
by the title of your book, which is called A defense of the Churches and
Ministry of England: but by reason also that you began the first Argument and
continue to reply. Whereupon you are bound to prove what is denied or in this
case put unto you to be proved. We then in answer to your Argument noting the
falsehood of your Hierarchy, worship, etc. it is your part now to approve them
by the word of God, or to convince that they abolish not your constitution from
being Christ's. If you cannot do this, confess it, and give glory to God. That
your case is thus, has been often showed by us, both in other writings and in
these aunswers to your self. And of this point there will be occasion afterward
to speak again.

Touching the impudent untruth wherewith you were charged, first you said, your
selves see not wherein you fail, touching Preaching or Sacraments, in things
necessary. I alleged your own men, as witnesses to convince you therein, The
Admonition, T. C. his replies, the Demonstration, etc. Now you answer that
none of all these do grant any thing to be wanting with you that is necessary
to the being of a Church simply, nor to the being of a true Ministry or
Sacraments: but only to their well and convenient being. By which bold
assertion of yours, you both prove and persist in the impudent untruth laid to
your charge. For hearken now, and you shall hear themselves testify thus much.

The first Admonition in the Preface says thus, In a fevv words to speak
what we mean, Either must we have a right Ministry of God, Admonition to
the Parliam. first and second.
and a right government of his Church according to the Scriptures set up (both
which we lack) or else there can be no right Religion, nor yet for contempt
thereof can Gods plagues be from us any while differred. And again in the
treatise it self are these words, We in England are not yet come to the
outvvard face of a Church agreeable to Gods word. Or as it is written in the
margent of diverse of those books, we are scarce come to the outvvard face of a
Church etc. Take which of these you please: the best is bad enough.

Touching the Ministry in particular, the same book and men say thus, We have
an Antichristian Hierarchy and a popish ordering of Ministers strange from the
word of God and the use of all well reformed Churches in the world. And
further, Although some truth be taught by some Preachers, yet no Preacher may
without danger of the Laws, utter all the truth comprised in the book of
God.

Then touching the Sacraments, thus they write, The Sacraments are wickedly
mangled and profaned. Also, In the primitive Churches they administered the
Sacrament simply as they received it from the Lord, we sinfully mixed with
man's inventions and devises. Yea they charge the Prelates, that they do
superstitiously and wickedly institute a new Sacrament (which is proper to
Christ only) marking the child in the forehead with a Cross, in token that
hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ.

And of your book of common prayer, according to which your Sacraments and
other divine service is administered, thus also they write, we must needs say
that this book is an imperfect book, culled and picked out of the Popish
dunghill the Mass book, full of all abominations.

To conclude withal, thus they testify concerning these things controverted
between them and the Prelates, Neither is the controversy betwixt them and us
as they would bear the world in hand, for a cap a tippet or a surplus, but
for greater matters concerning a true Ministry and Regiment of the Church
according to the word. Which things once established, the other melt away of
themselves. Being (once established) say they. Therefore yet they did not
account they had them. And whereof speak they? All may see, of a true Ministry
and Regiment of the Church.

Now speak your self, Mr. Jacob. Do not these men testify to your face, that
you have avouched a bold and impudent untruth, wilfully striving against the
clear light? Yet I have cited but a few, and those only out of the
Admonitions to the Parliament. Out of which and the rest of their writings I
might allege a thousand mo, to convince you herein. But that would be too
tedious. And these (I doubt not) will clear the point, and suffice any that
are indifferent and godly minded. For your self, I say no more but wish you had
not verified the Orators saying, He that once passes the bounds of modesty,
becomes impudent out of measure. Hitherto of the first Exception.

Chap. 5. The second Exception against Mr. Jacobs Assumption aforesaid.
Fran. Johnson. SEcondly, tell us whether you hold and profess Jesus Christ to
be the Prophet, Priest and King of his Church, to be obeyed in his own
ordinance only, and in no other. And if you do, then show us how your practice
agrees with this profession.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the 2. Excep. TO this second Exception That Christ is
our Prophet, Priest, and King, I answer: The Book of Articles, our Ministers
now, and Congregations generally, do hold and profess the same (our practice
being answerable likewise thereunto) even as before time Master Cranmer,
Ridley, Latimer, and such like, with their Congregations did then: viz. That
Christ is our Prophet, Priest and King, and to be obeyed in his own ordinances
only and in no other. This I say we generally profess and practice.

Howbeit this note with all, we hold Christ's ordinance to be of two sorts,
written or vnwritte^, the first necessary, the second arbitrary. The first
touching doctrine, that is, touching faith and the inward opinion only, such
as these, The doctrine of God, his Nature, his Persons, his Properties, of the
Messiah Christ Jesus, of Justification, of Sanctification, of the Resurrection
etc. Wherein stands the 1 Cor. 3.12.13.
foundation of saving faith. All these must be in the written word or else to
be none of Christ's. The second touching outvvard orders in the Church, which
are truly called and counted Christ's own also, although particularly
devised and appointed by the Church, whom Christ has authorized thereunto,
even as it shall be thought most fit and profitable for the present times,
places and persons: such we hold all outvvard government and ceremonies to
be, because they be not simply of the foundation, neither written, nor certain,
nor perpetual, but at the arbitrarie appointment of the Church and Magistrate,
and yet to be Christ's own nevertheless, who has left this liberty for
the Church to use. Thus we hold and thus we practice, and we are persuaded
no Scripture to be against all this, but rather for it. I speak now concerning
our Ministers and Congregations generally; that is our public Church state.
If you say, but there are diverse amongst us that think otherwise, I answer,
But this is the general estate both of our Ministers and Churches, howsoever
one or two amongst hu^dreths or thousands may think otherwise, show the
contrary if you can. And our Churches, they certainly must be deemed after their
general estate and constitution, not as one or two men think. If you say,
this general opinion and practice is an error. Therefore they obey not Christ's
ordinances in truth herein, though they think they do. I answer, let it be
so, it is now An error, though not fundamental.
the error of their judgment, as it was in Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc. Not
pregnaunt rebellion and disobedience to Christ, not a convicted or seared
conscience, so that their other 1 Cor. 3.1^.15.
truths of the foundation are not frustrat, nor Christ made to none effect in
them. And this is all our question, whether they remain Christians still for
all these faults, yea or no.

F. Io. his Answer to M. Jacobs 1. Reply to the 2. Excep. IN this Exception
we demanded first, if you held Jesus Christ to be the Prophet, Priest, and
King of his Church, to be obeyed in his own ordinance only and in no other;
then, how your practice agrees with this profession. One would have thought it
had been needful (if you could) to have cleared this poinct by the Scriptures,
and from thence to have proved your Ministry, worship, Church government,
etc. (which are called jn question) to be no other then the Lord Jesus Christ,
that Prophet, Priest and King of his Church has in his Testament given and
appointed thereunto. But this you have not done. And let the Reader note it.
But what then do you say?

First you tell us, That touching this poinct, your profession and practice now
is so as before time it was with M. Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, and their
Co^gregations. But what of this? Can the persons or age of these whom you name,
nay can any person or ages prejudice the truth? Were not they subject to error
at all? Or must their errors bind us? Did not John Hus (that champion of
Christ) and others also of the Martyrs in former times, say and hear Mass,
even to their dying day, See their historyes in the Acts and Monuments
not seeing the abominations thereof? And did not diverse of them acknowledge,
some the Popes calling and Supremacy, some 7 Sacraments, some Purgatory, some
Auricular confession, and such like grievous errors? And yet notwithstanding
dyed constantly for the truths they saw, some for one, and some for another,
as God made manifest unto them. But may we now therefore so profess, and
practice in these things as they did? Or if we should, were their ignorance and
errors a sufficient defense for us? Yet thus would you bear us in hand.

Furthermore tell us, if M. Latimer and others did not forsake the Prelacy and
functions they had before time received? And Master Ridley at his death repent
that he had been so earnest for the remnants of Popery in his time retained?
Besides, who knows not that when M. Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc. died
Martyrs for the truth of Christ, they neither had them selves, nor joined in
spiritual communion with such as had the Prelacy and Ministry now pleaded
for? And not that only, but were members of that persecuted Church in Queen
Mary's days, which was separated from the rest of the Land as from the world,
and joined in covenant by voluntary profession, to obey the truth of Christ,
and to witness against the abominations of Antichrist. As they also did unto
death in the truth they saw, though otherwise (being but as it were in the
twylight of the Gospel) they had their wants and errors.

Yet who is so blind or besotted, as not to see that their errors may not be
our rules, neither can be our warrant: but rather that we ought after their
example, faithfully to stand in and for whatsoever truth God reveals unto us
by his word? And that otherwise those holy Martyrs shall rise in judgment
against all such, as either withhould the truth in unrighteousness, or in any
respect refuse to walk therein.

Finally, seeing GOD has given us Psalm. 119.105.128. Gal. 1.8.9. and 6.16.
Deuteronomy. 12.32. Rev. 22.18.19.20.
his word to be the light of our feet, and rule of our lives and religion:
What mean you to lead us from it, to the aberrations of any men whatsoever?
Should not Esa. 8.19.
all people enquier at God, or would you have us go from the living to the
dead? From God and his word, to men and their errors? This doubtless is that
whereunto you would bring us, and whereby you mislead your favorites: as will
yet further appear by that which follows. For what say you next?

Secondly, you tell us, and wish it to be noted (as we also do) That Christ's
ordinances be of two sorts, either written or unwritten: the first necessary;
the second arbitrary: the first touching doctrine, that is touching faith and
the inward opinion only, These (say you) are writtten; The second touching
outward orders in the Church, and all outward government and ceremonies: These
(you say) are not written, but arbitrary at the appointment of the Church and
Magistrate. Thus (you say) you hold and practice, and think no Scripture is
against it.



Secondly, we alledg against it, these Scriptures, and the like. 1 Timothy 3.15.

all the outvvard government and ceremonies of your Church, are invented and
arbitrary at the pleasure of man, and not written in the word of God.
Whereupon it follows, that they are none of Christ's, and therefore not to be
joined to at all.

possession time out of mind: now you tell us of ordinances unwritten etc. Are
not these mere popish shifts, even the old worn arguments of Antiquity and
Unwritten verities, so often and so much stood upon by the Papists? Alas that
you should plead to be true Christians, and yet thus openly take part with
Antichrist? What shall we say to these things? Surely God is just and will
verify his word, That they which receive not the love of the truth, 2 These.
2.10.11.12.
that they may be saved, he will send them strong delusion, to believe lies,
that they may be damned.

Fifthly, you make the ordinances touching outward government and ceremonies,
to be no matters of faith, neither written at all. This is very that Christ is
Lord and King thereof: Is it therefore no matter of faith? It concerns the
outward governeme^t, whether the Pope be (under Christ) head of the Church or
no: Does it not therefore concern faith? Public prayer, preaching of the
word, and hearing of it preached, administration and receiving of the
Sacraments, are matters concerning the outward government and orders of the
Church: Do they not therefore touch faith? Admonition and excommunication
concern also the outward government of the Church: Do they not therefore
concern faith? Finally, by this Divinity, the Sacraments of Baptism and of
the Lords supper, being Ceremonies, shall with you be no matters of faith at
all.

Yet here you stay not, but add moreover, That the outward orders,
government, and ceremonies of the Church, be arbitrarie at the appointment of
the Church and Magistrate, not written nor certain etc. Whereupon it
follows, that it is not certain nor taught in the Scriptures, but arbitrarie
at the Churches and Magistrates pleasure: Whether Christ, or the Pope of Rome,
or Canterbury, be head and Archbishop of the Church of God? 2. Whether Jews
only of the Tribe of Leui, may now minister the holy things of God in his
Church? 3. Whether Christ has given any gifts, and set any Offices in his
Church for the Ministry and guidance thereof: 4. Whether prayer must be in a
known or unknown tongue: 5. Whether the teaching and ruling Elders be to be
had and honored: 6. Whether the Church may excomunitate: 7. Whether the Popes
or any other Prelates excommunication be to be regarded: 8. Whether there be
two, or three, or seven Sacraments: 9. Whether the Passover, Circumcision and
other Ceremonies and Sacrifices of the Law, be now to be used: 10. Whether the
Heathenish sacrifices and worship be to be joined withal: 11. Whether cream,
oil, salt, spittle, crossing and coniuring, may be used in Baptism: 12.
Whether the bread only and not the cup, is to be given to the lay people (as
you call them) 13. Whether holy water, holy ashes, holy palms and such like, be
of the holy things of the Church: 14. Whether the Jewish and the Popish
Vestments, Fasts, and holy days are to be observed. And a thousand such like,
which are all of them, concerning the outward orders, government and
ceremonies of the Church. By your Divinity, these and infinite such like, are
unwritten and uncertain, but left only to the pleasure of the Church and
Magistrate.

Yea if it please you, the Princes and civil Magistrates may them selves be
the public Ministers of the word, Sacraments, and Censures of the Church: 2.
Any that will may without a calling take upon him to be a publque Officer in
the Church: 3. Women may baptize, or administer the Lords supper: 4. The
Jewish, Romish, or Heathenish Priesthood may be retained: 5. Auricular
confession may be used: 6. The Keys of the kingdom of heaven may be
appropriated to the Pope of Rome, or the Prelate of Canterbury, or any other
who^soever: 7. The Prelates and their Officials exco^munications do bind in
heaven: 8. The Apocryphal books and Decretall epistles are Canonical
scriptures: 9. The Popes Portuis and the English book of prayer taken out of
it, are the true and lawful worship of God: 10. The Prelates and Priests are
the true and lawful Ministers of God: 11. Orders, Penance, Extreme unction,
Matrimony, etc. are the Sacraments of the Church: 12. Surplus, Cope, Cap,
Tippet, Rotchet, etc. are ornaments of the Ministry. Finally, all rags and
trumperies of the Romish religion, are good and lawful, if it please the
Church and Magistrate. For why: They concern the outward government, orders
and ceremonies of the Church: And touching them (you say) Christ has left no
ordinances written, certain, not perpetual, but left them at the arbitrary
appointment of the Church and Magistrate. Is not this strange Divinity?

Yet you stay not here neither, but as men that have bent their tongues like
bows for lies, you fear not to add further, that when the Church and
Magistrate appoints any ordinances (whether these or any other) touching the
outward government and ceremonies of the Church, we are to account them
Christ's own, who has left this liberty to the Church for to use. O shameless
mouth. O unchristian heart. Can any Papist or Atheist say more? Or can any
desire a more evident proof then this, that you and your Assemblies thus
holding, professing and practicing (as here your self affirm) cannot in this
estate by the word of God, be deemed true Christians and Churches?

That the things which concern outward government and ceremonies, are not of
the foundation simply. But this will help you no more then the other. For first
we ask, are they of the foundation at all, though not simply? If they be, then
seeing they are not written, nor certain, nor perpetual (as here by you is
affirmed) it will follow that neither the whole foundation is written, certain,
or perpetual, neither the Apostles were faithful and skillful master
builders in the laying thereof. If they be not, then why is this word (simply)
added, as if you granted they were of the foundation, though not simply.

Secondly we ask, whether the outward government and ceremonies ordained by
Christ for his Church under the Gospel, be not of the foundation, as much as
the outward government and ceremonies appointed by Moses for the Church under
the Law? Or if they be, whether they are not as faithfully set down by Christ,
as the other were by Moses, and as carefully to be observed by us, as the other
were by the Jews: or rather more, inasmuch as Heb. 3.2.3.
Christ the Son is worthy of more glory and honor then Moses the servant.

Thirdly we ask, what fundamental poinctes Moses and Aaron with the rest of
the Jews joining with them held, that Number. 16. chap.
Corach, Dathan, Abiram, and their companions held not: differing from them and
erring only touching the Priesthood and Ministry, which concerned the
outvvard orders and government of the Church. Was therefore Corah, Dathan,
Abiram, and their company in that estate the true Israel of God? Or were not
the other truths they held, by this means frustrate and of none effect unto
the^? Nay, were they not therefore wholy to be separated from, and left to the
judgment of God, which overtook them and all that joined unto them? Yet was
their error only in matters of order and outvvard government of the Church.
This may serve to convince your untrue assertions in this place. To that of
Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc is answered before.

For conclusion I add concerning this poinct, That all such assemblies and
people, as hold profess and practice (as does the Church of England) these
abominations following: can not by the word of God, be esteemed in such estate
truly to hold Christ, their Prophet, Priest and King: viz. 1. The confusion
of all sorts of people (though never so wicked) and their seed in the body of
the Church: 2. The offices and callings of other Archb. and Lordb. then Jesus
Christ: also of Archdeacons, Priests, half Priests, Parsons, Vicars, etc. 3.
The entrance into the Ministry by another way, and other Lords, then Jesus
Christ: 4. The executing of it under these strange Lords, and leaving it at
their pleasure: 5. The preaching of the word, administration of the Sacraments,
and governing of the Church, by virtue of the offices and callings aforesaid,
and according to the Popish Canons and constitutions: 6. The power of
Excommunication in the Prelates alone and their Officialls: 7. The confounding
of Civil and Ecclesiastical offices and authority in the Ministers of the
Church: 8. The forbidding of Marriage at certain seasons: 9. The imposing and
using of stinted devised Leiturgies: The English Portuis, taken out of the
Popes Latin one, word for word, (save that a few of the grosest things are
left out) yet keeping the same frame and order of Collects, Psalms, Lessons,
Pater nosters, Pistles, Gospels, Persicles, Respondes, etc. 10. Appointing holy
days to all Saints and Angels, to the Virgin Mary, John Baptist, Mark, Luke,
and twelve Apostles severally: 11. together with Fastes on the Evens and on
Ember days, Fridayes, Saturdayes, and Lent: 12. Prescribing the Ministers to
pray over the dead, over the Corn and Grass at some season of the year, and
over Women at their Churching or purification: 13. Enioyning them to marry with
the King, which they make a sacramental sign: 14. And to Baptize with the
sign of the Cross; with Godfathers and Godmothers; with questions demanded
of the infant that cannot speak nor understand: 15. Giving power to Women to
baptize: 16. And ordaining that the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper be
celebrated kneeling, as when they received their maker; and with change of the
words of Christ's institution, taking in steed of them the words of the Popes
Mass book, translated into English, etc. Finally, the upholding of these and
all such amongst them only by carnal weapons, of imprisonment, death,
confiscation of goods, ba^nishmen, and such like. The Assemblies and people (I
say) which hold profess and practice (as does this Church of England) the
abominations aforesaid (concerning the outward order and government of the
Church) whatsoever trueths they hold besides, yet can they not by the word of
God be deemed truly to hold the Lord Jesus, their Prophet, Priest and King, in
such constitution of a Church. Neither therefore can they in this estate by the
word of God be accounted true Christians, nor the true constituted Churches of
Christ. And this is all the question between us.

7. Lastly, let the godly and indifferent Reader judge, whether it will the
Scriptures are not sufficient for the building up and guidance of the Church
here on earth. Which is contary to 1 Timothy 3.15. 2 Timothy 3.16. Deuteronomy. 12.32. 1
Cor, 4.6. Rev. 22.18.19.

Secondly, that the man of God can not by the Scriptures be made absolute and
fully furnished to every good work. Which is contrary to 2 Timothy 3.17. 1 Timothy
3.15. Pro. 2.1.9. Psalm. 119.105.113.

Thirdly, that Christ himself (in whom the treasures of vvisdome and
knowledge are hid, yet) was so foolish careless and unfaithful, as having an
house and kingdom (which is his Church) he has not in his word appointed unto
it any Offices, Laws, and Orders, for the due governing and ordering thereof.
Which is contrary to Col. 2.3. Heb. 3.1.2.3. Esaias. 33.22. Ephe. 4.11.12.13. 1
Cor. 11. and 12. and 14. Romans 12.3.4.5.6.7.8. Mat. 28.20. 1 Timothy 6.13.14.15.

Finally, that the Hierachy, Worship, Sacraments, Traditions, Canons, and
whatsoever constitutions of Antichrist (concerning the outvvard orders and
government of the Church) being appointed by the Church and Magistrate, are to
be accounted Christ's own. (Which is contrary to 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16. Psa.
94.20. and 119.21.113.128. Rev. 9.1.2.3. and 14.9: 11.)

O shameless impiety. This doubtless is that strange passion and mere
desperatenes, wherewith you do hereafter unjustly charge us: which we will not
here prosecute as it deserves: but exhort you only to take heed least that
vvo come upon you which is written: VVoe unto them that speak good of evil,
and evil of good: which put darkness for light, and light for darkness: that
put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter. VVo unto them that are wise in their
own eyes, and prudent in their own sight. Esaias. 5.20.21.

H. Jacob his 2 Reply to the 2. Excep. IN this your defense of your second
Exception, it pittieth me to see your extreme folly: which is the more
miserable, because it appears to be not of weakness, but of wilfulnes. You
would know of us if we hold Christ to be out Prophet, Priest and King, and if
we profess to obey him in his ordinances and in no other. I ansvvered we do
constantly profess so, and as we profess so we practice. But to make our
profession and practice in this poinct more manifest, I noted how our state
means Christ to be our Prophet, Priest, and King, and how he is to be
obeyed: viz. That the written word ought of necessity to show us our inward
and mere spiritual belief and obedience. As for the outvvard Church order, our
state holds that it is arbitrary to be appoincted and abrogated again at the
liking of the Church and Magistrate, And that the word no where forbids
this liberty: Where note in this explication two things.

First, it is foul vvrong to our Churches and to my words, to say as you do,
That they mean, no outward orders at all, be matters of faith, or constant in
the Scriptures. Nay it was never doubted, but to preach, to pray, to
administer Sacraments etc. though external, yet are perpetual things and
necessary and unchangeable by the Scriptures. My express words, and our
Churches meaning is, That any reasonable kind of Church-gouernement, and
rites, and orders, are arbitrary and changeable, no matters of faith, nor
written in the Scriptures; And yet still Christ to be our only, and absolute
King and Prophet nevertheless. Whosoever does urge upon our Churches further,
or on my words; does slander and cavil, and maliciously deprave them and
nothing else.

Secondly, note in my explication, that I justify not this opinion of our
state, but I say, Thus to believe and practice, simply, destroys no man's
salvation in Christ, which you denying generally and vehemently in your sixth
answer, you deny directly Master Cranmer etc. to have held the foundation,
or to be saved: wherein, you openly profess and proclaim, that second
general poinct which in the beginning I charged you with: That all Churches
and Christians here in King Edward's time, and namely Master Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, Hooper, Philpot, Saunders, Rogers, Tailor, etc. held not Christ their
Prophet, Priest and King, and so consequently they were lims of Antichrist
(for they bare his mark even to their deaths) and no true Christians. Alas to
see how malice and prejudice has blinded you. Is there not greater cause for
us to cry and say against you, O shameless mouth, O unchristian heart, which
terms, you vainly charge upon me? Is this you that white the Toombs of those
Martirs, and yet in fine, condemn them for no true Christians, nor their
Assemblies for Churches?

You add a clause, They that profess and practice as does the Church of
England, etc. If you mean hereby to put a difference between those good men's
holding this opinion, and our Churches now, Yea between your own lately, and
ours now, speak out what is it? You can imagine none but this. Those good
men Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc. and your self of late, held these very same
errors of the outvvard Church order which we do: But they and you, did (it
seems) of simplicity, we maliciously, they of ignorance, we of plain
obstinacy, and having a convicted and seared conscience: whereby, they and you
might be true Christians for all these errors, but we now cannot be so. If
this be your meaning, then you grant us our Assumption, against which all
your dispute here is bent. You grant it I say, That the whole doctrine, as it
is by law in England, is sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian.
Secondly we now err not in these poincts of simplicity, but of wilfulnes and
malice.

Say you so? Speak that plain then. Our whole assemblies? all and every of
our assemblies? of wilfulnes and of a convicted conscience? Are you sure of
this? Do you know every man's heart and conscience so well? If you do, then you
say somewhat indeed. But you are then near as wise as God himself, to know
men's hearts so perfectly, whose faces you never saw; You will say, you know
diverse, whom you dare say are convicted in conscience. That is much also to
affirm. But if you do, that serves not your turn, unless all be so
convicted. Christ knew a great many in the Church of the Jews yea of the
learned and chiefest in authority, that were convicted in conscience, that he
was the Christ, who blasphemed in denying him, and yet the Asse^blies then were
not convicted, they still were true Churches. Wherefore in this saying, if you
say to the purpose, you then affirm the Third general poinct that I noted in
you at the beginning of this my last Reply: That every soul in England is
convicted in conscience.

But here I marvel that you say, Master Hus and other of the holy Martirs
did hear and say Mass till their dying day, Also that others did acknowledge
the Popes supremacy. I ask you, do you mean that they held and used the
Popish Mass, according to all the abominations that are in it? If you think
so, then surely neither Hus nor any of the rest, were holy Martirs. For therein
are found errors plainly fundamental, which of themselves abolish from Christ;
They are not to be compared to our public errors now in England, The like I
say of the Popes supremacy. If you think any of the Martirs acknowledged it in
the large and ample meaning thereof, as the Popish Doctors do set it down;
Then verily neither were they any Martirs. The book of Acts and Monuments
whither you send us, affirms not that they held these errors in the largest
and grossest sort. It may be therefore they held many and grievous errors of
ignorance, both in the Popish Mass and in the supremacy, which might
nevertheless stand with Christ crucified, And so they might be and were holy
Martirs: But I affirm, that according to the damnable grossenes of the very
Papists, they neither did nor could hold them. Therefore in these instances you
say nothing to us, nor against the question in hand.

Further, you said before in the beginning of your defense of this Exception,
page 29.
That Master Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer and the rest of the Martirs then,
neither had themselves, nor joined in spiritual communion, with such as had
the Prelacy, and Ministry now pleaded for. Now I see you make no conscience of
untruths, yea you are bold to avouch open and known falsehoods. Did not
Master Cranmer hold him self for Archbishop still, and that he was by the
Pope unjustly and insufficiently deposed, and by Queen Mary forcibly
restreined from it? Did he ever repent of holding that Office till his death?
Also did not Ridley stand upon his right to the Bishopric of London though
ready to dye? Latimer though he renounced his Bishopric, yet he kept his
Ministry, and never repented him of it. Philpot never misliked his
Archdeaconry: Yea when he refused bloody Bonner, yet he appealed to his
ordinary the Bishop of Winchester. The like mind is to be seen in Bishop
Farrar. And generally whosoever were Ministers then of the Prelates
ordination, they never renounced it, though they dyed Martirs. Thus appears
your bold untruth in this behalf.

Further in your Sixth answer Page 32. First you will not see what I mean in
saying, That these outvvard orders be not of the foundation simply: I meant,
not at all of the very 1 Cor. 15.2 3.4. Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 3.10.11.12.13.14
foundation, neither are they. Secondly you ask if our outward orders under
Christ be not fundamental as well as the Jews under the Law, I answer,
neither were the Jews outvvard orders of the very foundation, without
which they could not be saved. Thirdly you ask how Corah etc. differing from
Moses and Aaron only about the Priesthood and Ministry, were separated from,
and damned. I annsvver, not that the matter was fundamental, but the manner
was rebellious, with consciences a thousand times convicted, and so done
with a high hand against God himself.

But now this considered, How vainly do you charge me in your entrance into
this Exception pa. 29. That I and others of my mind, go about to justify
these matters of order in controversy, by Cranmer, Ridleys and Latimers
example, and their congregations then. For shame do you not see the contrary,
that I call them errors. I only justify by their example that these
corruptions abolish us not from Christ, as theirs did not, And that I trust is
sound. Which thing also you might have remembered, if you had been so charitable,
by that which I wrote in In the next treati^e follovving, of the comparison of
the Ministry with Marriage. Auns. to your first Reason.
another place.

Then in your first answer, Page 30. How vainly do you ask us for
Scriptures to prove these orders, seeing I expreslie called them errors.

The like in your Second, where you load up Scriptures to disprove them.

Also thirdly, you charge an unconscionable untruth on me (if you mean this
answer unto me) that I should grant and cannot deny, that all outward
ceremonies and I only said that our state holds that general opinion, Not
that I my self held it. If you mean them, write to the^, and speak to them:
if you mean me, you do me foul injury.

Fourthly, whether they are Popish shifts or no, let our state, which
maintains these things, answer you.

Your Fifth is answered in the first poinct of my explication noted before

Your seventh in page 34. is also against the state of our Church, and not
against

Fr: Io. his Answer to M. Jacobs 2. Reply to the 2. Excep. Pity not me, but
pity your self (Mr. Jacob) and your Churches estate. Your self, who are
miserably weak, and yet foolishly wilful: as all may see by this Reply. Your
Churches estate, which is such, as by the word of God cannot be approved to
have Christ your Prophet, Priest, and King

Therefore still you tell us, your Church holds Christ to have left written
what is needful for your inward and mere spiritual belief and obedience: but
that for the outward Church Order, he has not so done, but left it arbitrary
to be appointed and abrogated again at the liking of the Church and
Magistrate. As if Christ had abolished the Exodus 20.4.5.6.
second co^ma^dement, which directly concerns the outward worship and order
of the Church, as the Exodus 20.3.
first does our inward and spiritual belief. Or as if the Scripture did not
every where teach that Col. 2.3.5.8.19-23. Esa. 33.22. Heb. 3.1.2.3. 2 Ioh ver.
9. Epist. to Timoth. Tit. Cor. etc.
he has fully furnished the Church, not only for inward faith; but also for
outward order and obedience. Either therefore you must approve the outward
order and worship of your Church to be ordained by Christ in his word: or else
you have not him for your Prophet, Priest, and King, in that estate. Choose
which you will.

The liberty you speak of, is nothing else but a cloak of licenciousnes, or in
deed mere Antichristian slavery, howsoever you account it liberty. That the
word of God forbids it, I have showed both here and in my Page 30
former answer, against which you can say nothing. Now therefore when this will
not serve the turn, you begin to comment and make notes upon your own
explication, that is, to seek new shifts and euasions. Which yet are to no
purpose at all, except against your self and your Church.

For the first, you say it is foul wrong to your Churches and to your words,
to say, That they mean no outward orders at all be matters of faith or
constant in the Scriptures. If it be any wrong, it is done by your self. Are
not these your own words, towching your Churches opinion in your Page 28.
former Reply, We hold Christ's ordinance to be of two sorts, written or
unwritten: the first necessary, the second arbitrary, the first touching
doctrine, that is, towching faith and the inward opinion only etc. the second
towching outvvard orders in the Church, which are truly accounted Christ's
own, though particularly devised by the Church: such we hold all outvvard
government and ceremonies, because they be not simply of the foundation,
neither written, nor certain, nor perpetual etc. How say you to these words,
All outvvard government and ceremonies? Are they not your own? And is it not
your Churches opinion, by your own saying? Have I then gathered or written
otherwise, then your self affirm your Church holds? If I have, then lay your
words and mine together, and let them speak for both. If not, let the Reader
judge whether you have not done me foul vvrong, and (if there be any to your
CHVR^ch) whether your self have not committed it. Quitte your self of it, as
well as you can.

Besides, you forget your self wondrously, and speak things contradictory. For
now speaking of your Churches opinion and your own words, you say, it was
never doubted, but to preach, to pray, to administer Sacraments etc. though
external, yet are perpetual things and necessary and unchangeable by the
Scriptures. Yet before you told us your Church holds all outvvard
government, ceremonies, orders to be unwritten, uncertain, not perpetual,
but arbitrary to be appointed and abrogated again at the liking of the Church
and Magistrate. Either there fore to preach, to pray, to administer Sacraments
etc. are not outward, neither concerning the government, ceremonies, nor
orders of the Church: or else without question you Mendatem oportet esse memo^em.
forget your self straungely, and speak daggers, which run into your own
bowels.

But to take that which now the evidence of the truth has wrung from you:
seeing to preach, to pray, to administer Sacraments, though external, yet are
perpetual necessary and unchangeable by the Scriptures, you must either from
the Scriptures show that you have these according to Christ's ordinance, or else
yield that your practice is contrary to the professing of Christ for your
Prophet Priest and King, to be obeyed in his own ordinance only and no
other: And consequently that the Assu^ption of your main Reason is false.
Which is to yield the cause.

And mind withal, that Ephesians. 4.11. and 6.18. Romans 12.7.8. 1 Cor. 11. and 12.
and 14. c. 1 Timothy 3.15. and 5.17.8.6.13.14. Mat. 2^.19.20. 1 Pet. 5.1-4. Heb.
3.1.2.3
Christ's ordinance is not only for these things to be done, but for the
offices wherein, and the manner whereby they are to be performed. If you will
not beleev me nor the Scriptures alleged, yet hear your own men what they
teach in this point. Mr. Cartwright says, T. C. first, Rep. page 83
God has not only ordained that the word should be preached, but has
ordained also in what order and by whom it should be preached. And again
speaking of the Jews Church he says, as it was not lavvfull to bring in any
strange doctrine: so was it not lavvfull to teach the true doctrine under the
name of any other function then was instituted by God.

The Admonitions, Counterpoyson, Demonstration, and many other your writings
affirm the same both for preaching and Sacraments and other points of the
outward order and governeme^t of the Church. And now I remember my self, your
self have confessed it Page 19
before in plain terms, when you grant it is Christ's ordinance to have a
true Pastor to a faithful people: and would have us beleev that it is false to
say, you preach in strange functions, or have not the Sacraments duly
ministered, etc. I hope therefore in your next we shall have proof, not that you
have Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments (which we know the Papists also and
Anabaptists have) but that you have them in those offices, and after that
manner, which Christ has ordained.

Now where you say, your express words and Churches meaning is that Any
reasonable kind of Church government, rites, and orders, are arbitrary and
changeable, no matters of faith, nor written in the Scriptures: And yet still
Christ to be your only and absolute King and Prophet nevertheless. For answer
hereof, besides that already brought, I will say no more to this Popish
assertion but only infer hereupon as follows:

But the Church-governement, rites, and orders which Christ in his Ttestament
has ordained unchangeably, are a reasonable kind of Church-gouernement,
rites, and orders:

Therefore these so unchangeably ordained by Christ, yet (by your own express
words and your Churches meaning) are arbitrary and cha^geable, no matters of
faith, nor written in the Scriptures. And yet (forsooth) Christ is still your
only and absolute King and Prophet nevertheless. Let us now see Mr. Jacob, what
answer you will make hereunto, without sclandering, cavilling, and malicious
depraving.

The second note in your explication is, that you say, you justify not the
aforesaid opinion of your State. But how then do your book and the title of it
agree? Nay how do your self and that title agree, when you will not defend that
which is the very point of the controversy between your Churches and us? Was
there ever a more absurd defense heard of? But now leaving your Church in the
briers, yet speak for your self. How do you Mr. Jacob hold Christ your Prophet
Priest and King, when seeing your Church to err in so many and so weighty
points, and that so as you can not justify: yet you have not all this time
admonished them, and by due order either brought them to repentance, or left
them as obstinate in sin and wilfully disobeying the voice of Christ?

Where you say, that thus to beleev and practice (as your Church does) simply,
destroys no man's salvation in Christ: you take that for granted, which you
should prove. Besides that the Papists, Anabaptists, and others may say as much
for other outward things among them. Yea no doubt but Jeroboam him self and his
Priests and people said likewise, that for Jerusalem to be the place, and the
sons of Aaron the Priests and such like, these were outward things, and not
to observe them or to beleev otherwise then Judah did concerning them, simply,
destroyed no man's salvation in Christ. Was this therefore a sound defense of
their apostasy? Or might any under such pretense have continued and joined
with them therein?

Of your second general point, and so of Mr. Cranmer Ridley, etc. I have
spoken before. But now because you bid me speak out what difference I put
between your Churches and the Martyrs, as also between you and my self holding
these things of late with you: hearken, and I will tell you again. First for
the Martyrs in former times, mark these differences.

Differences betvveene the Martirs and Church of Engl.
1. Greater light of the truth is now come into the world, then was in those
days: but you love darkness rather then light. For still you walk in darkness.
Ioh. 3.19. Ephesians. 5.11.

2. They witnessed against the abominations of Antichrist (then called in
question) to the loss of their liberty and lives: Your Church does not so
against the remnants of Popery (now co^troverted) but do either openly defend
them, or fearfully submit unto them.

3. They consisted not of swarms of Atheists, adulterers, drunkards and all
sorts of people good and bad, even known wicked ones, mixed together in one
body: as your Church does.

4. Such of them as were Ministers were degraded from their Antichristian
functions: so are not yours.

5. They died not members of Antichrists Church, nor for any error they held,
but for the truth: You still remain members of Antichistian Churches, both
withstanding the truth and maintaining errors.

6. They were and died members of a true visible Church ( viz: that persecuted
Church in Queen Mary's days) which was separated from the rest of the Land as
from the world, and joined together in fellowship of the Gospel by voluntary
submission thereunto: though in that time of ignorance they had their wants and
errors. You continue members of a false constituted Church, vnseparated from
the world, yielding subjection to Antichristian enormityes, against the
ordinances of Jesus Christ.

7. They refused not the truth offered, neither resisted those that did justly
reprove their errors: but your Church does both, as appears by your
continual practice, and by the books and Acts of Parliament made openly and
with authority against us for witnessing the truth.

8. Your Prelates, Priests, and people (that is, your Churches) in your estate,
are no Martyrs, but children of them which killed the Martyrs, and do at this
day fill up the measure of your forefathers, persecuting to death such as have
the testimony of Jesus. This did not the Martyrs.

Are not you then the men that white the toombes of the Martyrs which were in
former times: and yet your selves imprison, banish, and kill the witnesses of
Jesus that are among you at this day? Take heed you hearden not your hearts,
but tremble at your fearful estate, and please not your selves in
unrighteousness (by the error of any) neither bless your selves still in
iniquity. Hitherto of the difference between the Martyrs and your Churches.

Now for my self, I confess (as I did Page 8.
before of the Martyrs) that whiles I was Minister and member of your Church in
that constitution, I stood in Antichristian estate. Yet doubt I not, but even
then, being of the elect of God, I was partaker through faith of the mercy of
God in Christ to salvation. And this I hope is the case of diverse among you.
But for my self, I have now the more assurance, in that God has both drawn me
out of that Antichristian estate, giving me to see and to forsake it, and has
planted me in his true Church and household giving me to receive his truth in
much affliction with joy of the holy Ghost. 1 These. 1.6.

But as for you in your estate, besides that yet you are not members of any
true visible Church, you do moreover abide in gross confusion, false
Ministry, Antichristian worship, and other abominations, by the word of God
already discovered. Now whiles you thus remain, you cannot in that estate
approve your selves to have the promise of salvation, whereof by the word of
God you can be assured, until you depart out Rev. 18.4.5 Act. 2.40.47. Micah.
2.10. 2 Cor. 6.17.18. Ephe. 2.12.19.
of that Babylon, and save your selves from that froward generation: being also
by the Lord added to his true Church. Which mercy I hope God daily does and
will vouchsafe many among you, belonging to his election.

Thus you see, how notwithstanding any thing we either do or can acknowledge
touching the Martyrs or ourselves heretofore, yet still we affirm and prove
your estate to be Antichristian. So far are we from granting your Assumption,
as here you fancy with your self.

Your vain questions, Whether your whole assemblyes; all and every of your
assemblyes? err of wilfulnes and of a convicted conscience? whether we know
the heart and conscience of men, etc. How fond and frivolous are they? All of
you err by your own grant. Whether any of you do it with a convicted
conscience, let God judge who knows the heart. Your self it seems deny not
this to be the case of some among you. Howsoever, seeing you confess that you
err, why do you and the rest being so persuaded still abide in error? Is it
because you Ioh. 3.19.
love darkness more then light? Or because Act. 28.26 27.
when you see, yet you wink with your eyes, least you should convert to the
Lord, and be healed? If you would not leave such as you imagine see it not: how
will you ever know whether they that refuse, do see it, or not? And why have you
not all this time made it known to them, and done what lies in you to draw
them from error? Or having done it, and finding them obstinate in evil, yea
persecuters of the truth revealed: why have you not (after the Act. 2.40.41.
and 13.45.46.51. and 18.6. and 19.9. and 28.24. etc.
example of the Apostles) separated from such and taught others to do the like?
Above all, why plead you for their estate to be good, warrantable, in the way
of salvation, notwithstanding their errors and abominations? Is not this to
dawbe with untempered mortar? Is it not to prophecy peace to the wicked, and
to promise them life? to sow pillowes under their elbowes, and to strengthen
their hands in evil, that they should not return from their wicked way? Ier.
23.16.17. Ezech. 13. Chap. Mal. 2.17.

Where you say, if we knew some convicted in conscience, yet it serves not our
turn, unless all be so convicted: sure you mind not what you speak. Did Christ
ever give such a rule to his Church? Or should there ever be Church separated
from the world, if this course were kept? Besides, what mean you by all being
convicted? Whether all in a house, or all in a town, or all in a kingdom, or
all in the world? Whether all of echser, men and women; of all ages, young and
old; of all estates, hy and low, rich and poor, bond and free, etc. What also
by being convicted? Whether when sufficient is showed to convince men, though
they see it not? or when they see it, yet acknowledge it not? or when they see
and acknowledge it, yet notwithstanding persist in their former estate? or if
unto all these they add the persecuting also of such as do convince them?

Now when you have showed, how your self understand, and how we are to walk in
these, according to the Scriptures, from point to point: then apply hereunto
your example of Christ here alleged, and see if you do not abuse it. Mind
withal, that if you say, Christ knew this as he was God, you speak nothing to
the question, which is how men must walk toward men. If you say, he knew it as
he was man, then must you prove, 1. that these Jews were convicted in
conscience that he was the Christ, and yet denied and blasphemed him: 2. that
Christ knew this as he was man: 3. that still he joined in spiritual communion
with them thus convicted: 4. that the estate of your Ministers and people is
such as theirs was then, as touching a true Ministry and constitution of the
Church: 5. that the same rules and proceeding is to be used toward your Church
and members thereof (before they can be separated from) that was to be used
toward that Church and People at that time.

Mind also, that the Apostles preaching to the Jews, though they knew not who
were convicted in conscience, who not: yet Act. 2. et 13. et 17. et 18. et 19.
chap
upon their refusal of the truth offered, did separate from all where they
were. And so Christ before had required them to do. Mat. 10.14.

Finally mind, that men's consciences are blind, ignorant, corrupt, and the
heart of man deceitful and wicked above all things. Who can know it, but the
Lord only which searches the heart and tries the reins, to give every man
according to his ways, according to the fruit of his works? Ier. 17.9.10.

It is erroneous therefore (to hold as you do) that we may not separate, till
we know all to be convicted in their conscience. If this were to be done, then
neither separation from any people, neither any true Churches should ever be
upon the earth: because such conviction can never be either known of men, or
had in the world. It does and must suffice us, that the truth on the one hand,
and the errors on the other be made known and convicted, that is, be laid open
and proved from the word of God, by the testimony of his servants: and that we
see men by words or works refuse the truth and embrace error, and so judge
themselves unworthy of everlasting life.

Thus for your Churches (M. Jacob) it suffices us, that in your Hierarchy,
Leiturgy, and confusion of people, they be proved the daughters of Babylon that
mother of whoredoms. Out of which God has Rev. 18.4. and 17.5. we Ezec.
16.44.
charged all his people (without exception or delay) presently for to depart.
If you or any other will not obey this commandment of God, but will still
partake in the sins of your worship and Ministry: what is it to us? We must
follow Christ, Heb. 5.9.
who is made author of salvation to such only as obey him. Neither may we Ier.
15.19.
return unto you, but we must wait till God bring you to us, and make you
partakers of the same grace in Christ.

Of your third general point (here idly mentioned and absurdly gathered) I
have spoken before. Page 8.

Next instead of aunswering, you fall a marveling: because I say, Mr. Hus and
other of the holy Martyrs did hear and say Mass to their dying day, and some
of them also acknowledge the Popes supremacy. But why do you not also marvel,
that I said diverse of them acknowledged, some the Popes calling, some 7
Sacraments, some Purgatory, some Auricular confession, and such like grievous
errors? For these I joined with the other, and of them you speak not a word.
Belike you think they may stand with the Gospel well enough: and if your
Church had retained or now should resume them again, you would judge of them as
of the other corruptions remaining among you.

Yet mind withal, 1. that thus you make a way for mo popish enormities to be
maintained and to prevail apace in your Church, as How say you to those
Popish doctrines now spreading among you, of Christ's soul desce^ding into
Hell. of free will etc.
begins already very fast. 2. And that you can no better nor otherwise defend
your present Church Estate, then you could, if it also retained seven
Sacraments, Purgatory, Auricular confession, etc. Let the Reader observe this.
And beware you in time, least a woe come upon you for such halting and pleading
for Baall.

Now for your marvelling at me for saying thus of Mr. Hus and other the
Martyrs: I ask you, Says not the book of Acts and Monuments the same? yea,
say not the Martyrs thus much of themselves? Why do you not then marvel also
at them? For these particulars it were needles to go through all the history
of the Martyrs: specially seeing they are so plainly noted in their stories,
and every where among you the books are in your hands. Yet because Mr. Hus is
here spoken of by name, and you are not far from rasing him out of the number
of the Martyrs: I will first note some particulars concerning him, and then
clear him and the rest from your rash condemnation.

In the history of the Martyrs before mentioned, we find that John Hus unto
his death held, 1. Act. and Monu. edit. 5. page 561.
seven Sacraments; 2. Ibid. page 581. a. 584. b
the Popes office, and the authority of the Church of Rome; 3. Ibid. p. 566 b.
et 574.
Auricular confession to Priests, and was himself (a little before his death)
confessed and absolved by a Monk; 4. Ibid. p. 577 a. et 581. a.
said Mass himself; 5. Ibid. p. 546
held that the substance of the bread was altered into the body of Christ, and
that Christ's body which was borne of the virgin Mary, is really and totally in
the Sacrament of the Altar; with other the like popish opinions. Now you (Mr.
Jacob) stick not upon some of these to infer, that then surely neither Hus
nor any of the rest that so held and did, were holy Martyrs. Your reason is,
because therein are found errors plainly fundame^tall which of them selves
abolish from Christ. Among which no doubt but you reckon the Mass and
transubstantiation specially.

Thus have you clean put out Master Hus and other the servants of Christ
(faithful in that which they saw) from being any longer in the Catalogue of
the Martyrs, or accounted true Christians. May I not then justly return upon
your self your own saying, Is this you that white the toombes of the Martyrs,
and yet in fine condemn them for no true Christians, for no holy Martyrs?

But you say, the book of Acts and Monuments vvhither I send you, affirms,
not that they held these errors in the largest and grossest sort. Let the book
it self speak for us both. In the end of John Hus his story, thus it says,
Act and Mon. edi^. 5. p. 581. ^
He neither denied their popish transubstantion; neither spoke against the
authority of the Church of Rome, if it were well governed; nor yet the 7.
Sacraments; and also said Mass himself; and almost in all their popish
opinions was a Papist with them. Thus has that book, word for word. What say
you now unto it? What think you of these particulars? and of that conclusion,
that not only in these but almost in all their opinions He was a Papist with
them?

Again in the same book, Hierom of Prage (another Martyr) speaking of John Hus
says, Ibid. page 584. b.
he never maintained any doctrine against the Church of Rome, but only spoke
against their naughty life. To which purpose may be minded also, that the
Hussites in Bohemia (so called to this day for following John Hus) are for
trausubstantiation and most of the popish errors and worship, as gross as the
Papists themselves.

And (to give an instance of our own countrymen) the same history speaking of
Thomas Bilney who was burnt at Norwich, has thus, Ibid. pa. 921. b.
As touching the Mass and Sacrament of the Altar, as he never varyed from
himself, so he never differed therein from the most grossest Catholics. Mark
these words, he differed not therein from the most grossest. How now will this
and your speech agree, who blush not to say, that the book of Acts and
Monuments affirms not that they held these errors in the largest and grossest
sort?

Besides this bold untruth of yours, let the Reader mind, how plainly you
insinuate, that if your Church had the Mass and the Popes supremacy, so it
were not in the largest and grossest sort, you could defend their case as well
then as you do now, by bearing the world in hand, that these things might stand
with Christ crucified, etc. Let the Reader mind and remember it. I say no more.

It remains that now I clear M. Hus and the rest of the Martyrs from your
rash censure. You judge, if any of them held any errors that be fundamental,
they are no holy Martyrs, but abolished from Christ. This I deny. And you to
prove it, should from the Scriptures have showed first, what it is to be
fundame^tall or of the foundation: then, that whosoever holds such error is
abolished from Christ. But you have done neither. I know that here and every
where you give us your bare word, and obtrude unto us your own fancies. But
your words are no Oracles, nor your fa^cies rules for any to follow. Handle
these things therefore more soundly in your next. And what you speak, speak it
from the word of God. In the mean time for better clearing of the truth and
Martyrs, I will show you my mind: being ready notwithstanding to hear any that
can show better from the word of God. And so I pray you take this and all my
writings.

First, the word foundation is used in the scripture, and therefore is of us to
be considered diverse ways. One is, in respect of God and his election; Of the
foundation, and fundamental points.
or of his Church and people called and sanctified in Christ. 2. Tim. 2.19.
Psalm. 87. Pro. 10.25. Another is, in respect of the only ground of all true
faith and Churches, which is Jesus Christ; or of the first principles and
special heads of Christian religion. Mat. 16.15.16.17.18. 1 Cor. 3.11. Esa.
26.16. 1 Pet. 2.6. with Heb. 6.1.2. A third is, in respect of the Apostles and
Prophets doctrine concerning Christ; or of our receiving it and building
thereupon. Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 21.14. 1 Cor. 3.10-15. 1 Pet. 2.7.8. Luke 6.48.49.

Now which way soever you take it, there is no question but the Martyrs,
although they erred (through ignorance of that time) in some weighty points of
Christ's Religion (which you call fundamental) yet were notwithstanding holy
Martyrs. For touching the first of the exceptions aforesaid, Gods foundation
remained sure and sealed unto them; so as the Lord knew them to be his, and
they also were sanctified both to witness unto death the truth then called in
question, and to depart from the contrary iniquity. Touching the second and
third, they both believed in Jesus Christ, as it pleased God to reveal him in
their age by the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; and they built firmly
thereupon (not stumbling at the word and disobeying it, as is the manner of
most now a days, but) obeying and holding it forth unto death. So as when the
storms and floods of persecution beat upon them, they were not shaken from the
truth they testified, but remained constant to the end: even when the politic
Statutes of Princes; the subtle arguments of the learned; the earnest
persuasion of their friends; the great loss of their goods, liberty,
estimation in the world; finally the most cruel usage and tirannie of the
Adversaries; as it were so many waves and tempests, strongly assailed to drive
them a contrary course. Thus were they faithful to God, and loved not their
lives unto death as their Martyrdom proclaims to all the world: howsoever
you could be content it seems (for any the more advantage to your selves) to
lay their honor in the dust.

Secondly in this question we are to discern, betweeen the errors them selves,
and between the persons that hold them. The errors may in their nature be
fundamental (as you speak:) and yet the persons erring therein (of ignorance,
not striving against the light revealed, but indevoring to walk faithfully in
the truth they see) may through Gods mercy in Christ be saved. For example,
some of the Corinthians that denied 1 Cor. 15.12
the resurrection of the body, and some of the Galatians that erred about Gal.
4.9.10.21. and 5.2.3.10. and 6.12.13.15.
Circumcision and the Law, although the errors were in their own nature
fundamental (as you will not deem,) yet might they that dyed in them, before
Paul's epistles came to those Churches thereabout, be saved of God: As we 1
Cor. 11.30.31.32.
read that some were dead and chastised of God aabout their abuse of the
Sacrament, yet not condemned with the world.

Likewise of Abijah the son of Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, the 1
King. 14.1.13.
Scripture records that God showed him mercy, because in him was found some
goodness toward the Lord God of Israel. Where mark those words, some goodness.
By which appears, that although he were as the rest in that general
apostasy of Israel (which your self account fundame^tal) yet having some
goodness in him toward the Lord, he found mercy at his hands.

Furthermore at this day, concerning the errors of the Lutherans about
co^substantiation and the person of Christ; of the Anabaptists about Christ's
humanity, and denying Baptism to the seed of the faithful; of the Papists
about tra^substantiation, the Popes supremacy, etc. I suppose that you will
grant both that these errors be fundamental (as touching the nature of the
errors themselves) and that yet notwithstanding God saves some Luthera^s,
Anabaptists, Papists, erring in the points aforesaid.

If you deny it, let us have a sound answer to that profession of the Papists
touching Christ's Mediation, which by themselves is mentioned in their
Annotations upon the new Testament: where they profess that they hold Rhem^^
Annot. upon 1 Timothy 2.5.
Christ by nature to be truly both God and man, to be that one eternal Priest
and Redeemer, which by his sacrifice and death upon the cross has reconciled
us to God and paid his blood as a full and sufficient ransom for all our
sins, himself without need of any redemption, never subject to possibility of
sinning: again, to be the singular Advocate and Patron of mankind, that by
himself alone and by his own merits procures all grace and mercy to mankind
in the sight of his Father, none making any intercession for him, nor giving
any grace of force to his prayers but he to all: none asking or obteyning
either grace in this life, or glory in the next, but by him. This do even the
Papists profess: which you are well to mind. Now though with it they hold
diverse fundamental errors (as in that and other their writings may be seen) by
which the multitude of them is turned out of the way of truth and salvation:
yet doubt I not but by this faith God has saved some of them (and mo at the
first creping in of that Churches apostasy, then since) who in simplicity so
beleev as is here set down, never hearing of the other opinions to be errors,
nor withstanding any truth revealed unto them. Now of the Luthera^s and
Anabaptists I hope so much the better, as they hold mo truths and fewer errors
then the Papists.

But to let those alone, what say you to such of the Fathers of the Greek
Church, as held Freewill, an error which D. VVhi^. book pa. 83.
your selves teach and have published to be fundamental and of it self
damnable? Or rather what say you to the Israelites in Egypt, who though they
were Exodus 4.22.23.
Gods church, yet sinned in points (by your own account) fundamental, even
with Ezech. 20.6.7.9.
the Idols of Egypt? Will you say, they were all condemned?

Either therefore we must discern between the errors themselves, what they are
in their own nature, being so considered; and between the persons holding them
of ignorance and weakness, what mercy God may show them in Christ: or else you
will condemn all of every Church wheresoever any fundamental errors have
crept in, being through ignorance generally received: and so inwrap the
Martyrs in like condemnation with their persecutors. To give instance but of
John Hus, it cannot be denied but he and they who martyred him, agreed both in
one touching the Mass, transubstantiation etc. Yet was Hus a faithful witness
of Christ in the truth he saw, and his adversaries vassals of Antichrist that
son of perdition.

This (I trust) will suffice for the present to clear the Martyrs of that
unjust condemnation which you insinuate against them. Now upon this occasion
note also, that not only some who err in fundame^tall points, may be saved,
as is proved already: but 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
some who err not in any fundamental point (as you take it) yet shall perish
notwithstanding. But of this see more hereafter in the handling of the 7.
Reason following.

Further where I said, that when Mr. Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc. dyed
Martyrs for the truth of Christ, they neither had themselves nor joined in
communion with such as had the Prelacy and Ministry now pleaded for: You
insult greatly, as if I spoke known falsehoods. But stay a while Master Jacob:
and see if it be not your self that make no conscience of untruths. First, why
Page 36.
left you out those words of mine, when they dyed? Did you perceive that these
words make the case plain, and witness the truth with me against your
assertion? Or know you not that all the Martyrs then, were first excommunicate
out of that Church, and (if they were Ministers) degraded also from their
Ministry, before they were put to death? Must it not needs then be true which
I said, that when they dyed, they neither had nor joined in communion with such
as had the Prelacy and Ministry now pleaded for? Yea, say not the Martyrs
themselves and the book of Acts and Momuments as much? To name but one,
Laurence Saunders, when the Bishop of London had disgraded him, said unto him,
Act. and Mon. edit. 5. p. 1301. ^.
I thank God, I am none of your Church. And this was the case of them al, being
likewise dealt with, as that book witnesses.

Your Exception, that Mr. Cranmer and Mr. Ridley stood upon their right to
their Bishoprics, is of no weight against that I said. It is not unknown,
that men do often stand against the unjust dealing of their adversaries, in
such things as notwithstanding they are willing enough to leave. Whether it
were so or not with them, God knows. Of this I am sure, that where I spoke of
their not having, you do in your Reply in steed thereof speak of renouncing.
And so you change my speech: Which is not good (though it be your usual)
dealing. But yet by this appears that you can prove no untruth in my speech,
howsoever you pretend and would gladly do it. For if you could, what needed you
so alter and pervert the sense of my words? And for my self, if I had meant
that Mr. Cranmer and Mr. Ridley had renounced (as you pretend) I could have
joined them with others in the sentence going before where I spoke of Mr.
Latimers forsaking his Prelacy: which your self do here confess to be true.
Besides, I spoke of the time when they dyed Martyrs, you of the time before
that.

But now what will you say to Mr. Ridley, who (as the Act. and Mon. edit. 5. p.
1604. a.
story witnesses) at his degradation being bid to put on the surplus, refused
to do it: and when they did put it upon him with This was, because he had been
a popish priest
all the trinckets appertaining to the Mass, did vehemently inv^y against the
Romish Bishop and all that foolish apparel, calling him Antichrist, and the
apparel foolish and abominable, yea to fond for a vice in a play? This gives
more evidence of renouncing, then of approving those things which before time
he had liked to much. Yet I deny not, but even then he might be ignorant of
the unlawfulness of the Prelacy, as since that time God has revealed it by his
word: and by that means (it may be) did like and stand for it more, then
otherwise he either ought or would have done.

But you say, whosoever were Ministers then of the Prelates ordination, they
never renounced it, though they dyed Maryrs. If this were true and of weight,
you might by the same reason as well plead for the Romish Priests at this day
as for your own. You know that very many of the Martyrs were popish Priests.
And if there were no other proof, even their degradation from that Priesthood
does testify it. You might also thus plead for retaining and allowing of Monks
and Friars, because some of them have died Martyrs, and yet not renounced their
callings and functions. This I alleged In the answer to your 1. Reply to
the 1 Reason follovving.
heretofore: but you cannot yet find any leisure to answer it.

Yet now for that you speak here, what will you say to Act. and Mon. edit. 5.
p. 934. a.
such as being degraded of their Ministry received from the Prelates, thanked
God that they were delivered from the maligna^t Church of Antichrist. Did they
not by this and such like speech and carriage, noted in their stories, declare
how willingly they left both that Church, Ministry, worship, and whatsoever
belonged thereto? Although through ignorance of the time they saw not some
things, wherein since their days God has given a greater light.

To end this point then, howsoever it be for their renouncing, certain it is
(as their stories show) that such of them as had receved Ministry from the
Prelates, were before their death not only excommunicate (as were the rest of
the Martyrs) but degraded also from the functions and Ministry they had
received. So as it cannot but be, as I said, that when they dyed Martyrs they
neither had nor joined with the Prelacy and Ministry now pleaded for. See the
Act. and Mon. edit. 5. p. 895. b. 934. a. 1361. b. 1385. a. 1604. a.
story in the degrading of Richard Bayfield, Henry Forest, Mr. Saunders, Mr.
Tailor, Mr. Ridley, etc. Thus the bold untruth wherewith you charge me falsely,
is returned justly upon your own head.

Next after this which was in the beginning of my defense (as your self have
noted) you come to the sixth point of my answer, passing by the other things
which come between. Is this to reply soundly? Is this your worthy Confutation
which your followers judge unanswerable? What (I pray) may be the cause why
you snatch thus here a piece and there a piece, and prosecute not my answer in
order from point to point, as I gave it? Is it because I handle things
disorderly, or pass by any thing in your Reply vnaunswered? If I do, show it.
But in deed, is it not because you are not able to reply against my answer, as
it is given: and therefore are glad to lay hold, sometimes of one thing,
sometimes of another, as you think you can best deal with; that so you may
trouble the Reader, and seem to say some thing, when in deed you say nothing
at all? Let the Reader but well mind this Reply of yours, and then judge if
ever he saw any thing more raw, frivolous, co^fused, absurd. Yet such as it
is, let us see now what you say to that point of my answer whereof you speak
next.

First you tell us, that where you said before, the outward orders of the
Church be not of the foundation simply, you meant, not at all of the very
foundation. I see your meaning now Mr. Jacob, which before I neither did nor
could. Sure you had need make a Commentary upon your Reply, if you expound
your words every where, as you do here. But now that you have told us your
meaning, will you stand unto it? Do you indeed by not simply mean not at all?
Then mark what strau^g assertions lurk in your writing, which before we could
not perceive. In one place you say Mr Jacobs 1. Reply to the 7. Reason
following.
, The Papists forbidding of marriage and meats, if they had done no worse,
does not make them departers from the faith: that is, not totally or (as you
have it in the Margent) not fundamentally, not simply: And then you add, No
more could their Hierarchy and ceremonies simply. Now by your own exposition,
your meaning is, that none of these make them departers from the faith at all.
For by not simply, you say you mean not at all. Thus you teach most shameful
false doctrine, and make the holy Ghost a liar, who even 1 Timothy 4.1.3.
for these things says, they do depart from the faith. Again you say, Your 1.
Reply to the 1. Reason following.
The doctrine, Canons, Articles, Injunctions, and practice of your Church do
not join together Christ and Antichrist simply: that is, not at all, by this
your new coined meaning. And yet in the same place you confess, they join
together Christ and some outward ceremonies and orders of Antichrist. It is
false then, that they join not Christ and Antichrist at all, as by this
interpretation must be your meaning. And even here a little before, you said
Page 35.
to believe and practice as your Church does, for your Church-gouerneme^t rites
and orders, simply destroys no man's salvation in Christ: that is, by this
exposition, not at all. But your Church so believes and practices these
things, as is derogatorie both to the office of Christ, the faithfulness of the
Apostles, and the perfection of the Scriptures; and such as do not so believe
and practice, but witness the truth against them, they imprison, banish, kill,
and thus become guilty of innocent blood. Yet you are bold to bless your
self, your whole Church, and greatest persecuters, in all these mischiefs:
affirming that thus to beleev and practice, destroieth not at all any man's
salvation in Christ. For when you say, not simply, you will have us understand
your meaning to be not at all. Yea you take it ill, because I will not see this
to be your meaning. But now I doubt you will be more grieved, because I see it
so well. Yet it were better Mr. Jacob, if in time you were grieved at your
self, for using such ungodly elusions to turn away the truth. See you not what
pesriferous doctrine your Reply by this means yields every where? Marvel not
at it. It is just with God to make your own pen the publisher of your own
folly and impiety, seeing you will needs plead for Antichrist against the
clear light.

But let us come to examine the point it self. You say, the outward orders of
the Church are not at all of the very foundation. What say you then to that
which is written Heb. 6.1.2. Does not the Apostle, speaking there Heb. 6.1.2
of his laying the foundation, mention in particular, the doctrine of
Baptismes; and laying on of hands; besides repentance from dead works, and
consequently from men's traditions in Gods worship? How say you? Do not these
concern the outward orders of the Church? And does not the Apostle reckon them
with the rest there named in his laying of the foundation? I could also put you
in mind, how it concerns the Churches outward governeme^t, whether the Pope
be head of the church or Christ only: whether Circumcision be now to be
observed, or not, etc. But these and the like I have mentioned before, and you
I suppose will answer them at leisure.

Now where you quote some Scriptures in the margent, See also for this, in the
Preface: Section, 3.
it is to general for your purpose. You must prove your assertion by them.
Which yet you do not. When you go about it, say if there be not of the
foundation, not only the particulars in 1 Cor. 15 2.3.4. Romans 4.25. 1 Cor.
3.10, 11 12, 13, 14.
these Scriptures expressed, but many other also here comprised, though not
named in particular. As for example, 1. that there is a God, and but one; 2.
that there are three persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; 3.
that the Son, not the Father or holy Ghost, took unto him our flesh; 4. that
the true God alone must be worshipped, and that only according to his word,
and no otherwise; 5. that Christ as head and King of his Church has given
offices and ordinances for the work of the Ministry, which are to continue to
the end of the world; 6. that he is to be obeyed therein upon pain of
damnation, and no other to be received; 7. that we must not only profess in
word but practice indeed the commau^dements of Christ, whatsoever persecution
follow thereon, etc. Tell us (I say) whether these and the like, which other
places of the word lead us unto, be not both of the foundation, and comprised
in the Scriptures quoted by your self? How idly then and absurdly do you cite
them here?

To give an instance, does not the Apostle from the death of Christ (mentioned
in these Scriptures) deduce in other places the necessity of our dying from the
ordinances of the world, from the traditions of men, from voluntary religion,
finally from all dead works whatsoever, which he reckneth up as a fundamental
point in that place to the Hebrews before alleged? Yea does Col.
2.8.18.19.20. etc.
he not from hence prove, that we cannot hold Christ the head, and increase
with the increasing of God, if we will together with him retain the
traditions and precepts of men for the service of God? And are then no outward
Church-orders of the foundation at all? We will look for your proof and answer
hereof in your next.

In the second place I propounded two questions, upon comparing together Moses
and Christ. You answer not one word to the latter. And in the former, you
keep not my words (which is a thing to common with you) knowing belike that the
weakness of your answer would then the more readily have been seen. My question
was, whether the outvvard government and ceremonies ordained by Christ for
his Church under the Gospel, be not of the foundation, as much as the outvvard
government and ceremonies appointed by Moses for the Church under the Law?
Your answer is, Neither were the Jews outvvard orders of the very
foundation, without which they could not be saved. But speak out man, were
they of the foundation at all, or not? And when you have told us this, then
know for your learning (besides that already spoken touching the foundation)
that the outvvard orders, that is, the outward ordinances, ceremonies, and
government, which God prescribed to the Jews, were unto them so of the
foundation and necessary to be observed, as Deuteronomy. 27.26.
curse and death was threatened to all that brake them. Yea, severe punishment
even unto death was executed upon the transgressors of such things as seemed
but small: Levit. 10.1.2. 1 Samuel 6.19. and 2 Samuel 6.6.7. 2 Chronicles. 26.16.19. Now
these things are written for our instruction, to admonish us upon whom the
ends of the world are come. If yet notwithstanding you and your Church will
presume otherwise, be it at your peril. Our souls shall not enter into your
secret.

The third question here was about Corah and his accomplices. Wherein in you
deal as with the former, not keeping mine own words. It may be you thought by
this means to hide the vanity of your au^swer. Howsoever, all the answer you
give to the several branches of it, is only this, that they were separated
from and damned, not that the matter was fundamental, but that the manner was
rebellious, with consciences a thousand times convicted, and so done with an
high hand against God himself. But how prove you this which you say? And why
answer you not to the several points of the question, in order as they were
propounded? It may be you will do this in your next. Then in the mean time
know that even the matter wherein they sinned was fundamental, if we consider
it thus: Their sin was, that not being Priests they would offer incense to
God. Now the Priehstood and offering up of incense led them as it were by the
hand to the Priesthood and Intercession of Christ. Either therefore, you must
deny Christ's Priesthood and Intercession to be of the foundation, or else you
must grant they sinned in a matter in this respect fundamental, that is,
being thus considered. Yet it was (you see) touching the Priesthood and
Minjsterie, which concern the outward orders and government of the Church.
Thus al your defense falls to the ground.

Touching the manner also, Corah and his accomplices had pretense for them selves
as well as your Prelates and Priests now have. Read and mind well what great
reasons they pretend, Numb. 16. Number. 16.2.3
And see if you can show any greater, yea or any the like for your selves. Then
speak, whether that considered, it be not as hard for you to affirm them so
convicted in conscience, as for us to affirm it of you in England. And now
that I mind it, let me ask of you (Mr. Jacob) in this case, as you Page 36.
erewhile did of me in your own. Did their whole assemblies sin thus? all
and every of their assemblies? of wilfulnes and of a convicted conscience? Are
you sure of this? Do you know every man's heart and conscience so well? If you
do, then you say somevvhat indeed. But you are then near as wise as God
himself, to know men's hearts so perfectly, whose faces you never savv. etc.
How like you now your own manner of reasoning? Is it not very proper think
you, and to great purpose?

But perhaps you will say, the Scripture speaks as much as you do concerning
them. If it do, why show you not the places? Why prove you it not from thence?
Nay then, what say you Mr. Jacob, to the little children which perished in that
condemnation, as the Number. 16.27.32.
Scripture there witnesses? Will you say that they in that action were so
rebellious (as you speak of) with consciences a thousand times convicted? Or
will you now confess your Reply to be of no weight at all, save against your
self?

To which end I wish both your self and the Reader to note (for a conclusion)
that here you grant, even for outvvard orders of the Church, when men see the
truth in their consciences and yet stand against it, the estate of such to be
damnable. It is high time then for you M. Jacob and for D. B. who made the
preface to your book, and for all such whose consciences are convicted of the
Antichristianitie of your Prelates and the rest of your abominations (as diverse
times in this book your self accknowledge:) it is high time, I say, for you and
all such to be warned by Corahs destruction. And we now have as good warrant
(by your own grant) to separate from you and all such, as the Israelites had
from Corah and his company. Except peradventure you think the Ministry and
ordinances of Christ to be of less moment then those of Moses, or Christ the
Son to be worthy less honor then Moses the servant. But see more yet hereof
in the 6. Reason following.

After this you turn back to somewhat handled in the entrance of this
Exception. Thus you run in and out, a man cannot tell where to have you. For
the point you speak of I leave it to the Reader to judge, comparing your
writing and mine together, whether I have not justly charged you, for going
about to justify your estate by the example of Cranmer, Ridley, etc. Now I am
glad to see you acknowledge the matters controverted between us to be your
errors. For by this it follows, that you see the contrary truth, which
discovers these to be errors. And then your self (I trust) will not deny
but that you are bound utterly to forsake these, and to walk in the truth
revealed unto you: unless you had rather err with Antichrist to destruction,
then follow Christ to salvation.

But you trust it is sound, to justify by the example of the Martyrs, that
these corruptions abolish not you from Christ, as theirs did not them. Nay Mr.
Jacob, it is very unsound for you or any the like to reason thus. For besides
the many differences between you and the Martyrs already declared: tell me
your self, if the Hussites (so called) should at this day reason after this
manner, viz. Although we retain the Mass, transubstantiation, seven
Sacraments, Auricular confession, and such like, yet these corruptions abolish
us not from Christ, any more then they did John Hus and the other Martyrs that
held and used them: If (I say) they should now reason thus for themselves,
would not your self say, their reason were unsound?

But further, if the Martyrs you speak of had seen these things to be errors,
and continewed in them, pursued those that reproved them, and against the
known truth sought to have dawbed up their erroneous building, as you Mr.
Jacob and the like among you do at this day: we could not then have so esteemed
them as now we do. This therefore will help you nothing at all. We have better
hope in this respect of such in England, as to this day have not discerned the
Antichristian abominations among you, then of you and the like struggling
Pharisees: for whom we fear it will be harder in the day of judgment, then
for them.

Page 28.
you held Christ's ordinances to be of two sorts, written or unwritten, the
first necessary, the second arbitrary, etc. and that you thought no Scripture
was against this, but rather for it. In my answer hereunto, first I asked,
Page 30.
what Scripture you had for this: that is, for this opinion of yours touching
Christ's ordinances. Now so, besides that you bring no Scripture for it, you
would make the Reader beleev, that I asked for Scriptures, to approve those
orders which you expressly called errors. But who sees not that I demanded
Scripture, for that opinion of your Church, against which you were persuaded
there was not any? And how then will those two stand together, unless you would
have us think you are so sottish, as to believe there is no Scriptures against
errors?

The like folly and evil dealing you show again in your Reply to the second.
When you said, you thought no Scripture was against your was it not meet, that
of so many as are against it, I should at least mention some? Now it had been
your part either to have renou^ced that false opinion, with acknowledgment that
the Scripture is against it, or else to have answered the Scriptures by me
alleged. But I easily beleev they load you, and are to heavy for you to
bear or withstand.

I^ your Reply to the third, let all men judge if you deal not exceeding
Before, in page 28.
This we generally profess and practice; We hold Christ's ordinances to be of
two sorts; Such we hold all outward government and ceremonies to be; Thus we
hold, and thus we practice, etc. When you do so often say, We profess, We
hold, We practice, Will not the Reader understand your self to be one with the
rest that do so hold, profess, and practice? Again when you say (Thus we
practice) is it your meaning that the State does practice thus, but not your
self? How is it then, that you preach by virtue of your Priesthood received
from the Prelates? that you are silent at their pleasure? that you appear
before them at their Courts and appointment? that you administer and receive
the Sacraments with them according to their book, etc.

Or if your meaning be in these words (thus we practice) to include your self
with the rest, why should we not also take you to be included in the other when
you say, thus we hold, thus we profess, etc. Would you have us think, that in
these things your judgment is one, and your practtse another? Fie of such
halting. Howsoever you blind the eyes of men, be sure God is not mocked. He
sees and will bring upon you that wretched hypocrisy, if you still persist.

Further it is to be minded, that now you disclayme your Churches opinion
towching Christ's ordinances, and consequently towching his Prophecy,
Priesthood, Kingdom, as he is there receyved. Why can you not then endure,
that we should do likewise? Or how is it that you have pleaded for it all this
time, and now leave it without help when it needs most? But by this is
evident that your Churches estate is a Mat. 12.25
Kingdom divided against it self, and therefore ruinous, not like long to
endure. The state holds one thing, you another, a third sort agrees with
neither. Babylon Rev. 16.19.
the great city, when it is ready to fall, shall be divided in three parts. To
conclude, by this opinion and practice you make your state to stand in such
case as Ieroboams was, who altered but the outward ordinances of the Church, as
taking them to be things arbitrary at the pleasure of man. Some of them (I
doubt not) will think you do them foul injury. And if any be done unto you,
it is done by your self. I say no more.

In the fourth likewise, who is it of your own Church that will not
maintainers of Popish shifts. To your self, in that thus you bewray you are at
a Non plus, and yet yield not to the truth. Did not your self in your first
Reply use these as good and sound reasons? And now they are convinced to be
Popish, have not a word to speak in defense of them, but put us over to the
State for an au^swer? Babell is sore wounded, when all her best Physicians do
thus give her over.

fifth, you refer us to the first point of your explication before. Which is
answered.

sixth, you refer us to the second. Which also is answered. Neither is there
any thing of weight in either of the places whither you send us, for answer of
the particulars here contained. Let others mind (if you will not) what I said
in the fifth and sixth answer before, and see if your explications have any
thing against them to any purpose.

seventh you confess to be against the state of your Church. This I wish the
Reader to mark. And then having minded what I answered in the page 34
seventh place, let him consider how woeful the estate of your Church is. But
now M. Jacob, why defend you not your Church, seeing this is against the very
state of it, by your own confession? Is not your book called, A defense of the
Churches and Ministry of England? Why do you not then perform what the title
of your book does promise? A worthy Champion sure you are to defend a Church,
that leave it thus in extreme misery without any succor at all. At first you
seemed as if you would strike all down before you, in defense of your Churches
and Ministry. Now lo, you can be content to leave them on the plain field to
shift for themselves, so your self may have hope to escape by running away.
Before you told us of the defense of your Churches, Now you think it enough to
say, It is against the state of our Church, and not against me.

Yet tell us Mr. Jacob, are you not a member of that Church? And is not that
then which is against the state of your Church, also against you? Otherwise it
must needs be, that your Church has a strange estate, or that you are a
strange member thereof. Can the hand or eye say, I am not of the body? Or,
that which is against the state of the body, yet is not against me? Yet such
is your answer, as senseless, as absurd. Besides that thus whiles you think
to pull your own neck out of the collar, you plunge both your self and your
Church deeper in.

And note withal: Howsoever you and such like disagree from the state of your
Church in any thing, yet in this you can all agree well enough, to conspire
against Christ and against his Church. But so it has been of old. Manasseh Esa.
9.20 21.
and Ephraim (though they were each against other) were both against Judah. The
Pharisees and Sadducees (though adversaries one to another, yet) Mat. 2^.15.23.
Act. 5.17
handed together both of them against the Lord Jesus.

Hitherto of the seven particulars I objected. Which all of them remain
untaken away. And thus far of the second exception and your Replies against it.
In which I have stayed the longer, because the discussing hereof will more
plainly and without all question end the controversy between us.

Chap. 6. The third Exception against Mr. Jacobs Assumption aforseid.
Fr. Johnson. Thirdly, show by Scripture, how the 36. Article of your doctrine
and book alleged, agrees with the Gospel of Christ and true Christianity.
The words of the Article are these as follows:

The Book of consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests
and Deacons, does contain all things necessary to such consecration and
ordering, neither has it any thing that of it self is superstitious or ungodly
And therefore whosoever are consecrated or ordered according to the Rytes of
that book: we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated
and ordered.

Also how it agrees with the Gospel and true Christianity, That the
Apocrypha books and Homilies are enioined to be read in the Church by the
Ministers diligently and distinctly. As may be seen in Art. 6 and 35. of that
doctrine and book aforesaid.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the 3. Excep. YOur third Exception is this. That the
36. Article of ordaining Bishops, Priests and Deacons: Also the reading of
Apocrypha books and Homilies in the Church, agree not with true Christianity:
Ergo, the Assumption above is false, that is the whole doctrine of that book
of Articles is not sufficient, to make us true Christians.

I answer, you should have said, those poincts destroy utterly true
Christianity Ergo, etc. Else the Argument follovveth not: But then we deny
flatly the Antecedent or first part of the Reason. But your Reason you will
say shall go as you have put it. Then mark these reasons even as good as
yours and all one. An Ethiopian is white of his teeth, therefore he is a
white man. A Svvanne is black of his bill, Fr. Io.
therefore a Svvann is black. Note, that Mr. Jacob has added this, since he
received answer to the former. It was not in the copy before. Such also are
almost all his notes in the Margent, and some alteration in his Replies,
specially in his first Reply to the Seventh Reason following, Let the Reader
observe this dealing.
My Brother has an eye of glass, or he has a vvodden leg, therefore my
brother is no true man.

Fr. Ioh. his Answer to Mr. Jacobs 1. Reply to the 3. Excep. What the third
Exception is, you see. Have you now (as was before required of you) showed
these things by the Scriptures? Not at all. First then mark, that although we
call never so much for proof and evidence from the Scripture, yet you never
bring it, but labor to put it off with other shifts and devices: As if our
consciences were to be built upon your fancies, and not upon the written word
of God.

But what do you say to our demand? First you tell us, these things do not
utterly destroy true Christianity. Next, you grant notwithstanding, that they
agree with it as black does with white, that is, they are clean contrary
unto it: For this your similitudes do import.

Where you allege, That these things destroy not true Christianity, we answer,
that even that Hierarchy, worship, co^stitution, and government, which you
profess and practice (as appears by those and other your Articles and
Injunctions in our former answer alleged, to which yet we have received no
answer) being directly Antichristian, do utterly destroy true Christianity,
so as the people and Churches so professing and practicing, can not Nota.
in that estate by the word of God be judged true Christians, or the true
constituted Churches of Christ.

Your similitudes, are not against us but against your selves, in as much as
co^paring the doctrines of the Gospel which you profess, with the whitenes of
an Aethiopians teeth; and your Antichristian Ministry, worship, Courts, and
confusion of people, with the blacknes of an Aethiopians body: this and such
like similitudes do fitly declare your estate. And the approving of your
Churches black constitution by some white doctrines of the Gospel professed
among you, is as if you should reason thus, An Ethiopian is white of his
teeth, there fore he is a white man: A black Raven is white of her bill:
therefore a black Raven is a white bi^d.

Now when you had received this answer, and saw these compariso^s turned upon
your self, then you devised another, being not able to maintain the former.
And this last you have published in your printed book as if it had been in your
written coppie which I answered: where it was not at all. The abuse is great
not to me only, but to the Reader: inasmuch as these things were by you so
published, as if your last comparison neither were nor could be answered. Let
the Reader note this manner of dealing for such as it is.

The similitude now added to the rest, is this: My brother has an eye of
glass, or he has a wooden leg, therefore my brother is no true man. I
answer, that after your woonted manner you take for granted that which you
should prove: viz, that your Church in that constitution is as a man with an
eye of glass or wooden leg. This I deny to be your case. Prove it so to
be, if you can. The Scripture describes the false Church in their constitution
(specially touching the Ministry) not under the similitude of men with
wooden legs, or the like: but under the similitude of Rev. 9.7.8.9.10. and
13.11. and 19.20
Locusts, whose form is like unto horses prepared to battle, with crowns on
their head like gold, with faces of men, hear of women, teeth of Lions,
habergions of iron, vvings like charets, tails of scorpions, and stings in
them to hurt vvithall.

Now I would know of you Mr. Jacob, whether these be men with wooden legs,
or monsters with men's faces. In like manner, whether the Churches which in
their constitution (chiefly of Ministry) do resemble these, be like to men
with some defects, or to beasts with some resemblance of men. Either therefore
must you p^ove the constitution of your Church to be a true one, as the man you
speak on is (which all may see you cannot do) or this comparison fitteth not
your turn. We must mind and beleev what the Scripture teaches, not what you
would bear us in hand without any proof.

But it may be you would be understood of the man of sin, spoken of 2 These.
2. or of the whorish woman, mentioned in the Revelation. 2 These. 2.3. Rev. 17.1.
If that be your meaning, it is against your self, and so apply it. If you
mean otherwise, it fitteth not your case, as I showed before. And thus the
comparison applied to your estate, is wooden, that is, absurd; and glassie,
that is, brittle, such as will not bide a blow.

H. Jacob his 2. Reply to the 3. Excep. YOur Third Exception is, That the 16.
Article of consecrating Bishops and Priests, and the 6. and 35. Article of
Apocripha and Homilies, do not agree with the Gospel.

What then? Ergo, our Churches profession and practice differ. Most false: For
our Churches do profess, that these things do agree with the Gospel well
enough: Also their practice is thereafter. Or do you conclude, Ergo our
Churches hold not Christ to salvation. In deed so I took your purpose at the
first: but now in plain categoricall terms you avouch it; That these things
being directly Antichristian, do utterly destroy true Christianity. So then
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, etc. were very Antichrists, and no true Christians.
As before also, I trow, you affirmed.

Surely, this gross and wicked absurdity, I could not open better then by
this similitude: This man has a wodden leg, an eye of glass, his nose
deformed, add also if you will, both his arms not natural, but framed to him
of wood or what you will: Ergo this is no true man. Yes Sir, for all this he is
a true man. For as much as all this concerns not the very life and being of a
man, though these be most unnatural additions, and very many. The like do I
affirm of these external corruptions in the Church: Which my sentences you
go not about to refute, but only with words, with bare yea, and nay, and no
more.

Fr. Johnson his answer to Mr. Jacobs 2. Reply to the 3. Exception. YEt suffer
me, that I may speak, and when I have spoken, mock on. You say, your Churches
profess that the consecrating of Bishops and Priests, and the 6. and 35.
Articles of Apocrypha books and Homilies, do agree with the Gospel well enough:
and that your practice is thereafter. Mark now what follows hereupon. The
Apocrypha books (to speak first of them) have Judith 9.2.3.4. compared with
Genesis 49.5.6.7. Ester Apocrypha 12.5. with Ester Canonical 6.3. and Est. Apocr.
15.9.10. with Ester Canon. 5.2. Ecclesiasticus 46.20. with Esa. 57.2. Eccles.
12.7.
contradiction to the Scriptures, Tob. 6.6.7.8. and 8.2.3. with 3.7.8.
magik, 1 Tob. 12.12.15. compared with 1 Timothy 2.5.
blasphemy, Esdras. 14.21.22.23. etc. 2 Match. 2.4-8. Tobit. 5.11.12.13. with
12.15. 1 Machab. 6.4.8.9.16. with 2 Machab. 1.13-16. and 9.1.5.7.9.28.29.
fables, 2 Machab. 12.44.45. and 14.41.42. Ecclesiastic. 46.20. and 48.10.
errors, etc. Therefore your Church (by your own confession) professes all
these to agree with the Gospel well enough, and practices thereafter. A very
Christian profession and practice in deed, well beseeming the daughters of
Babylon that mother of all abomination.

The like may be said of your blasphemies in the book according to which you
consecrate Prelates and ordeine Priests: receiving other Lordbishops and
Priests (in office of Ministry) besides Jesus Christ, to who^ this 1 Cor.
12.5. Ephesians. 4.5.11.12. Heb. 7.23.24. 1 Pet. 5.4.
honor does only belong. And not that only, but ordeining your Priests with
further blasphemy, when the Prelates say to every of you kneeling at their feet
to be ordained, Receive the holy ghosts whose sins thou do forgive, they
are forgiven: and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained.

These things being so (to omit many other that might be alleged out of
those and the rest of your books) how can we but think, as we do, of the estate
of your Church? Would you have us beleev, that Magik, lies, blasphemy,
contradiction to the Scriptures agree with the Gospel well enough? or that
they destroy not true Christianity? I mean, so as I expressed in my former
answer: that is, so as the people and Churches thus professing and practicing,
cannot by the word of God be judged in that estate true Christians or true
constituted Churches of Christ. And more yet, when withal there be found many
abominations directly Antichristian, yea and blasphemous as I have noted of
your Hierarchy, worship, etc. Will you make Christ and Antichrist accord
together? It 2 Cor. 6.14.
cannot be. If you will not receive it, then prove by Gods word either that
these things are not directly Antichristian, nor blasphemous; or that being so,
yet they do not utterly destroy true Christianity, so as before is declared.
For Master Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer etc. is answered already. Page 8. and 40.

The gross absurdity of your comparison of a man with a wooden leg and the
like, referred to your estate, I have showed in the end of my former answer.
Against which if you can say any thing, let us have it in your next Reply. And
remember withal, that the body of your Church besides the shameful confusion
it stands in, has a number of monstrous and deformed heads, on whose
foreheads are written Rev. 17.8. with 14.11
names of blasphemy (viz: your Archbishops, Lordbishops, Priests etc.) Which by
the confession of the best among you were never borne in Sion, but in Babylon,
by descent the sons of Anak and Nimrod, mighty hunters ^f Gods people, as
their estate and practice in all ages even unto this day does testify.

These and other abominations heretofore mentioned, you would still conceal,
and in steed thereof take for granted, that your Church in her constitution is
as a body which has the life and being of a man, not of a beast. Now this you
know we deny, and you should prove. But that you let alone as being all to
hard. And I perceive already that rather then you will do it, you will leave
your wooden leg to shift for it self, as you have left your Aethiopians teeth
and Swannes bill.

Let the Reader judge, whether of us it is, that goes about to refute only
with words, with bare Yea and Nay, and no more. And hitherto of the three
Excepttons gathered out of your own doctrine, against the A^sumption of your
maine Argument. Now follow some other Reasons brought against the same, with
your Replies and my Aunswers thereunto.

Chap. 7. The first Reason against Mr. Jacobs former Assumption.
Fr. Johnson. THat which joins Christ and Antichrist together, can not make
a true Christian. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16. with Ezech. 43.8. and 2 Kings
17.33.34.40.41.

But that does the whole doctrine as it is publikly professed and practiced by
law in England. As may be seen, 1. By the Book alleged co^paring the 35. and
36. Articles with the rest. 2. By your profession, to be seen likewise in your
other books of Articles, Canons, Injunctions, Advertisements: etc. 3. By your
practice, as witnesses your Ministry, Leitourgy, and Church-gouernement, even
to this day.

Therefore, etc.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the first Reason. THis your first Reason is thus:
That which joins Christ and Antichrist together, cannot make a true
Christian: But that does our Book, etc. Ergo.

I say you must mende your improper speech, that Christ and Antichrist is there
joined together: you mean Christ and some outvvard ceremonies and orders of
Antichrist: then so speak, and say not Christ and Antichrist simply. Which
things yet we think to be Christ's own, as we Page 28.35
showed in the Second Exception before. Therefore, this reason is answered as
the last Exception before. The Svvanne is black of his bill, Ergo, the Svvan
is black, and my brother has a vvodden leg: Therefore my brother is a
vvodden man. So here this book joins Christ and some orders of Antichrist:
Therefore it joins Christ and Antichrist together, which are most fond
conclusions.

Furthermore, the Scriptures alleged 2 Cor. 6. Ezekiel. 43. 2 Kings 17. are
wholy mismatched: the joining there forbidden, is unto such idolatry, as can
not stand by any means with Christian faith, and breaks most directly the
First commandment: Our transgression your selves do judge to be but against
the Second, and such as has stood and may stand together with true faith, as
in M. Cranmer etc. Namely, the Idolaters in these places spoken of.
They did not so much as profess the written Law to be their rule, neither
for outvvard orders, nor their inward doctrines of faith. But your selves
know, we profess and practice that, namely, so as is shevved before in the
Page 28.35.
Second Exception. Therefore to apply those Scriptures in this unto us, is
your great sin even against the third Commandment, vwhich is your common
custom, as all do see and pity, viz. To take the name of God in vain, by
mifusing his word.

Fr. Iohson his answer to Mr. Jacobs 1. Reply to the 1. Reason. YOur answer
is first concerning the Proposition, then concerning the Assumption. For the
Proposition you say, the speech is improper that Christ and Antichrist is among
you joined together. Then you take upon you to expound our meaning to be thus,
Christ and some outvvard ceremonies and orders of Antichrist. To this we
answer, First, that the speech is fit and proper: Secondly, that it is meet
that we (not you) expound our own meaning: Which together with the propriety
of the speech, will now appear in that which follows.

Concerning the Assumptio^, first you say, the things among you which we charge
to be of Antichrist, you think to be Christ's own: for proof whereof, you
refer us to your Reply to the Second exception before, whither also we refer
your self and the Reader for answer again. Then forgetting your self you
grant that in deed they be orders of Anticrist: yet that they are but as the
blacknes of the Swannes bill to the rest of the body. So by you own confession
they are of Antichrist, and therefore not Christ's own, as Page 28.
before you said and labored to prove. Thus at once you both contradict your
self, and overthrow that which you answered before to the Second exception.

This were sufficient to manifest your deceitful and evil dealing. But that
it may more fully appear, specially seeing you would dazell the peoples eyes
with these mincing words [of some outvvard ceremonies and orders of
Antichrist] comparing them with the blacknes of the Swans bill, as if they were
but a few, and of small moment: therefore will we reckon up some of them (for
it were infinite to number them all). By which the Reader may better see and
judge both of the sleightnes of your answer, and of the black constitution of
your Church.

Sorry we are that we should thus trouble the Reader, or our selves: specially
considering that already we have mentioned diverse of them. But seeing we are
here constreyned unto it by your sly and colorable answer, therefore can we
not but do it, for the clearer manifestation of the truth, and better
discovering of your deceit. In which respects we entreat the Reader to take in
good part, and duly to weigh the rehearsal following.

Antichristian abominations yet retained in England.
1. The confusion of all sorts of people in the body of the Church, even the
most profane and their seed, being members thereof. 2. The retaining and using
in their public worship the Apocrypha books, which have in the^ much error,
untruth, blasphemy, Magic, and contradiction to the Canonical Scriptures. 3.
Their stinted prayers and Leiturgie, taken out of the Mass Book: with the same
order of Psalms, Lessons, Collects, Pater nosters, Epistles, Gospels,
Versicles, Respondes etc. 4. The forbidding of Marriage, in Lent, Advent, Ember
days, Rogation week etc. Which the Apostle calls a Doctrine of devils. 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3. 5. Forbidding of meats, as of flesh to be eaten in Lent, Ember
days, Saints Evens, Frydayes and Saturdayes throughout the year. Another
doctrine of devils noted in the scripture aforesaid. 1 Timothy 4.1.3. 6. The oath
ex officio in the Ecclesiastical courts, making men swear to accuse
themselves. 7. Their Pontifical, or book of consecrating Bishops and of
ordeining Priests and Deacons, taken out of the Popes Pontifical. Antichrist
corruptions yet had in the Church of England.
8. Their intolerable abuse of the word of God therein. 9. Their making and
being made Priests, with blasphemy, the Prelates saying to every one of them,
whom they make Priests, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins thou do
forgive, they are forgiven etc. And they that are made Priests, then humbly
kneeling upon their knees at the Prelates feet. 10. Their confounding of civil
and Ecclesiastical offices and authority in Ecclesiastical persons. 11. The
offices and callings of Archbishops. 12. Lord-Bishops. 13. Suffraganes. 14.
Priests. 15. Half Priests, or Deacons, as they call them. 16. Subdeacons. 17.
Archdeacons. 18. Parsons. 19. Vicars. 20. Curates. 21. Vagrant and Mercenary
Preachers. 22. Churchwardens. 23. Chauncellors to the Prelates. 24. Deanes.
25. Subdeanes. 26. Prebendaries. 27. Canons and Peticanons. 28. Chaunters and
Virgerers. 29. Epistlers and Gosplers. 30. Queristers, men and boys. 31.
Organ-players and blowers. 32. Clerks and Sertous. 33. Chapleines and
House-priests 34. Doctors of Divinity. 35. Bachelours of Divinity. 36.
Doctors of the Arches. 37. Proctours in the Prelates courts. 38. Commissaries.
39. Officials. 40. Registers. 41. Summoners, with the rest of that
Antichristian and viperous generation. 42. Their Ministration of the Word,
Sacraments, and Church-governement, by virtue of the officer aforesaid. 43. The
titles of Primate, Metropolitan, Lords grace, Lordship etc. ascribed to the
Prelates. 44. The inferior Prelates swearing obedience to the Metropolita^ Seas
of Canterbury and York. 45. The inferior Ministers, when they enter into the
Ministry, promising obedience to the Prelates their Ordinaries: and when they
are inducted to Benefices, confirming it with their oath of Canonical
obedience. 46. The prese^tatio^ of the Priests and Deacons to the Prelate by
the Archdeacon, when they are made Ministers. 47. Their receiving of Orders at
the hands of the Prelates or their Suffraganes. 48. The Prelates Confirmation
or Bishoping of children, to assure them of Gods favor, by a sign of man's
devising. Which is to malte a new Sacrament. 49. The Cross in Baptism: of
like nature. 50. The hallowed Font. 51. Questions at Baptism to the infants,
that can neither speak nor understand. 52. Godfathers and Godmothers. Their
promising that the child does beleev, forsake the Devil and all his works,
etc. 53. Women's baptising of children. Which mainteyneth that heresy That the
Children are damned, which die unbaptized. 54. Their houssing of the sick, and
ministering the Communion to one alone. 55. Their giving it for two pence, to
all comers. 56. Their ministering of it, not with the words of Christ's
institution, but with other taken out of the Popes Portuis. 57. The receiving
of it kneeling: Which teaches still to make it an Idol, and nourishes that
popish heresy of worshipping it, receiving their maker etc. 58. The King in
marriage, making it a Sacrame^tall sign, and marriage an Ecclesiastical action:
thereby nourishing the Popish heresy, that Matrimony is a Sacrament. 59. Their
Churching or purifying of women. Which sauoreth of Iudaisme. 60. The standing
at the Gospel reading. The putting of the cap, and making a leg when the
word (Jesus) is read. 61. Their Saints, Angels, and Apostles days. With their
fasts and prescript service. 62. The Gang-week, praying then over the corn and
grass, etc. 63. Their praying over the dead, at burial. So nourishing the
Popish error of prayer for the dead. 64. Burial, and the solemnizatio^ of
marriage, etc. made part of the Ministers duty. 65. Their absolving the dead,
dying excommunicate, before they can have (as they call it) Christian-buriall.
66. The ring of peales at burials. 67. Beadmen at burials, and hired Mourners
in mourning apparel. 68. The hanging of Churches and heerses with black (to
help forward their popish show off mourning) at burials. 69. The Idol Temples,
retained and used for the worship of God. 70. The popish vestments: as Rotchet,
Square-cappe, Tippet, S^rplus in Parish-Churches, and Coap in Cathedral. 71.
The visitations of their Lord-Bishops and Archdeacons. 72. The Court of
Facultyes. From w^eace are had dispensations, Licenses, Tolerations, etc. 73
Dispensations to eat flesh at their times forbidden. Which dispe^satio^s also
have this clause [ sana conscientia, that is, with a safe conscience]: plainly
showing, that they make it a matter of conscience. 74. Dispe^satio^s likewise
to marty in their times forbidden. 75. Licenses from the Prelates to marry in
places exempt. By means of which dispensations and Licenses is mainteyned that
wicked practice, that many are married without their Parents knowledge or
consent. Yea many often stolen from their friends, and so married. 76.
Dispensations for boys and ignorant fools to have Benefices, and charge of
souls. 77. Dispensations for Non-residents. 78. And plurality of benefices: As
the having of two, three, four, or mo: even tot quot, as many as a man will
have and can get. 79. Patronages of, and presentations to Benefices, with
buying and selling of advowsons. 80. Their Iustitutions, Inductions, Prories,
etc. 81. The Prelates, Chauncelours, Co^missaryes, Officials courts, etc. 82.
Their power to excommunicate alone, and likewise to absolve. 83. Their Penance
in a white sheet. 84. Their commutation of Penance, and absolving one man for
another. 85. Their Suspensions, Deprivations, Degradations. etc. 86. The
Prelates Lordly dominion, revenewes, and retinew. 87. The Priests maintenance
by Tithes, Chrismes, Offerings. etc. 88. The Popes accursed Canon Law. 89. And
the Prelates like Articles, Canons, Injunctions, etc. from time to time newly
devised and published for the Laws and ruling of their Church, according unto
them. 90. The Churchwardens oath, to present to the Prelates and their Courts,
all the offenses faults and defaults committed in their Parishes against the
foresaid Articles, etc. 91. Finally, the imprisoning, banishing, and killing of
such as renounce or witness against these abominations aforesaid, and the rest
yet retained among them.


Thus being constreyned, we have reckoned up diverse Antichristian enormityes,
still remaining in your Church. Now let the Reader judge of your answer, how
fond it is: and of your estate, whether it be not more like the black Raven
with a white bill, then the white Swan with a black; and liker Rev. 9.7. and
13.^^.
a beast with a man's face, then a man with a wooden leg. By this also
appears, that the speech is not improper (as you except) but pertinent and
proper, fitly declaring your estate, when I said you join Christ and
Antichrist together. And therefore your answer here is frivolous and of no
weight.

Next, you come to the proof of the Proposition, which was confirmed by these
scriptures. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16. with Ezekiel. 43.8. and 2 King. 17.33.34.40.41. The
Proposition which I proved by these Scriptures, was this: That which joins
Christ and Antichrist together, can not make a true Christian. Now let all men
judge, Whether these Scriptures do not so evidentlie prove this Proposition,
as none can deny it, but such as are wilfully blinded, and strive against the
light of their own consciences.

But what say you to them? Forsooth that they are wholly mismatched. And why so?
Because the joining there forbidden, is unto such Idolatry, as can nor stand
by any means with Christian faith and breaks most directly the First
commandment: whereas your transgression is but against the Second, and may
stand with true faith, as was in Cranmer, etc. First, this answer of yours
concerns the Assumptio^, whereas those scriptures were the proof of the
Proposition. But to let this pass, let us consider the answer it self: These
Scriptures (say you) forbid joining to such Idolatry, as cannot stand with
Christian faith, and breaks most directly the First commandment. 1. If
this were so, what then, Do they not therefore forbid joining to Antichristian
idolatry, and that false worship which breaks the second commandment?

2. Secondly, you cannot deny, but as we judge of your way and estate, so it is
a transgression against the Second commandment. Now Samuel says, ^ Sam.
15.23.
Rebellion is as the sin of vvitchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and
Idolatry. See then what advantage you get by your own answer.

3. Thirdly, as the Pagans Idolatry breaking the First commandment, cannot
stand with true christian faith, so neither can the idolatry and false worship
of Antichrist breaking the Second. To that of Master Cranmer, etc. is already
answered. Whereunto also may be added, that your case now, is nothing so as
theirs was then: both for that they suffered to death for the truth they saw;
and because the things now controverted, were not then so called in question
and convinced by the scriptures, as now they have been: neither were then by
them so resisted and persecuted as they are by you now adays, even to hands,
bannishment, and death it self. Otherwise we might justify the callings and
estate of the Monks and Friars, and of the most Popish Priests and Prelates,
and the having of communion with them in that estate, because diverse such have been Martyrs, and laid down their lives for the truth they faw, who yet never
doubted of the lawfulnes of their callings and estate in this behalf.

4 Fourthly, as there is a double Idolatry and false worship, the one against
the First commandment, when any have others besides the true God for their
God; the other against the Second commuandment when any having the true God for
their God, yet worship him not as he has commanded, but after the inventions
and prescriptions of men: So the scriptures alleged, and the whole course of
the word of God, condemyne joining and having fellowship with either of these,
as well this which is against the Second commandment, as that which is against
the First. See the Reasons alleged by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. Are they not
strong and weighty against joining together righteousness and vnrighieousnes,
light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, 2 Cor. 6.14. etc.
whether it be in the breach of the First or Second commandment? Says not
the Lord there, That his Church is his Temple, in which he dwells and
walks: and therefore requires of them, that they be his people; that they be
his sons and daughters; that they be separated from the world; that they
touch no unclean thing, whether it be of Antichrist, or of the Heathen or
whomsoever breaking the law of God?

And touching the place of Ezekiel, who sees not, Ezec. 43.8.
that he speaks directly of the breach of the Second commandment, for
joining together in the worship of the true God their thresholdes with Gods
thresholds, and their posts with Gods posts, that is, their inventions with
Gods ordinances? which though it be done to the name and for the service of
the true God, yet as the Prophet says, It is abominations in the sight of God,
and they that do so worship him, put a wall between God and themselves and
defile his holy Name with their abominations. Lo here the use and fruit of
joining together the inventions of men (chiefly of Antichrist that man of
sin) with the ordinances of God in his worship and service. As you and your
accomplices Master Jacob like this, so may you hold on in pleading for it, and
practicing of it.

The third place is out of 2 King. 17. where it is most plain, that the
scripture speaks of the breach of the Second commandment. For there we read
that the Samaritans worshipped the 2 King. 17 28.32.41.
same God, and after the same verse. 26.27 29.33.34.40.
manner that the Israelites of the Ten Tribes did, that were carried from
thence: That is, they worshipped the true God, but not as he had commanded,
but by having Images of sundry sorts, by which they thought God was
represented, as Exodus 32.4.
of old they thought of the calfe that Aaron made, and by other inventions
devised by the Israelites in their defection, and joined to Gods ordinances for
the worship and service of him. That this was the sin of those Samaritans
against the Second commandment, will appear by comparing together with this
chapter, these scriptures following, to which we refer the Reader, Ezra 4.1.2.
with Exodus 20.4.5.6. and 32.1.4.5.6. Judge. 17.2.3.4.5.13. Ezekiel. 20.39. Hosea.
2.16. Amos. 5.21.22.23. and 8.14.1. Kings. 12.27. and 18.21. and 21.29. and
22.12.24. Esaias. 10, 11. John. 4.19.20.25.26.29.30.

By these also, as by that of Ezekiel may appear, how false it is, that you say
further, They did not so much as profess the written law to be their rule,
neither for outvvard order, nor their inward doctrines of faith. If this were
so, how could it be true, which Ezechiell says of thou of whom he speaks,
Ezech. 43.8.
that they set their posts and threshalls by Gods posts and Treshalls, that is,
their inventions by Gods ordinances. How also was it that the Samaritans
(spoken of 2. King. 17.) sacrificed to the true God, even Ezra. 4.2.
the Lord God of the Jews, offering unto him burnt offerings and meat
offringes, and peace offringes? Or how came it, they still used Circumcision,
and waited for the Messiah to come, as he was promised in the written word of
God? yea knowing also and believing, not only that the Messiah should come
which is called Christ, Ioh. 4.25.
but also that when he came he would tell them al things? The Corinthian
infidels in deed, as the rest of the Heathen, knew not the true God by his
written word. But so it was not with the Samaritanes or Ten tribes fallen
from Judah: as is evident by the scriptures and reasons before alleged. To
that which you speak of your profession and practice, referring us to your
answer to the Second Exception going before, I have there answered it.

Only this I add here, That seeing it cannot in truth be denied but the
public constitution of your Assemblies, and estate of your Ministers and
people therein, is a most impious transgressio^ of the Second co^ma^deme^t,
which the Lord himself calls Nu^b. 15.39 Revel. 11.8. and 17.1.2.3.4.5.
spiritual whoredom against him, yea grievous iniquity and hatred of him,
threatening also to Exodus 20.5.
visit it upon the Fathers and children so remaining, to the Third and Fourth
generation: Therefore by it are the truths you profess, made frustrate unto
you in this estate. Neither will it help you to pretend that it is your error
in judgment. For what abomination is there that might not thus be colored?
And further seeing your publik profession and practice is (at the best) a
joining of Christ and Antichrist together, as has been showed, therefore can
you not by the word of God be deemed in this estate to be true Christians or
true constituted Churches: And the Scriptures applied to prove this consequent,
are fitly alleged.

False therefore it is, that you say we sinned against the Third commandment,
in the application of the Scriptures aforesaid. That is your own common
custom and lamentable sin, to break this commandment by taking Gods name
in vain, not only in falsifying and perverting the Scriptures for your turn,
but in your administration also of the Word, Sacraments, and Church-gouernment,
by virtue of such offices and callings as Christ never appointed, but were
first devised and are retained by Antichrist. Hitherto of your answer
concerning the proof of the Proposition.

To the proof of the Assumption, you Let the Reader therefore mind in Mr Jacob
this his sound and Scholler-like dealing.
answer not a word: Fr. Io.
which yet most of all required answer, if you would in deed soundly defend
your estate, as you pretend. That your profession and practice joins Christ
and Antichrist together, I showed by your Articles, Canons, Injunctions,
Aduertisements, etc. and by your present Ministry, Worship, and
Church-gouernement according thereunto. If it be not so, why bring you not
warrant for these from the Testament of Christ, and so take away the proof of
the Assumption? If it be so (as by your silence you grant, and we are sure by
the Scriptures the contrary cannot be showed) then the Assumption stands
firm: and consequently in this constitution you cannot be accounted true
Christians, nor your Assemblies (so gathered) true constituted Churches.

H. Jacob his 2. Reply unto the 1. Reason. IN this your defense of your first
Reason, you would first of all fasten on me a contradiction, for granting,
that our Church corruptions are from Antichrist, which against your Second
Exception, I said we hold to be Christ's own, viz. Because we hold, Christ
has given his Church that liberty to devise them. Alas it pittieth me to see
your simplicity, or it greeueth me for your malice; who could not see, that
there See Page 28. 35.
I spoke in the person of our whole Church and state, and shevved what they
held: And here I speak as I thought my self. This is a silly contradiction.

Then you say, Page 62. I dazell the peoples eyes, in saying some outward
orders and ceremonies are from Antichrist as if they were but few and of small
moment. Therefore you are content to reckon them up full tediously God knovveth
even 91. in number: numero Deus impare gaudet. And what of all these? will
you say therefore, that whosoever holds these, cannot hold Christ unto
salvation. And so Mr. Cranmer and the rest of the Martyrs were damned. But if
not: Then I say again, These some, these 91. are too few and too slight, and
of too small moment of themselves and of their own nature to abolish us from
Christ. This ought you to have proved, which you never do, but still your
speech is most false, and not improper only, that we join Christ and
Antichrist together: As in the maimed man before Page 57. 62.
noted, there is not life and death joined together, but living things and
dead things are, and yet the man alive and a true man.

Then you will justify your applying the 2 Cor, 6.14. etc. Eze. 43.8. 2 King.
17.33.34.40.41
Scriptures which I said were mismatched and were meant against the Idolatry of
the First commandment, not against the Idolatry of the Second only, and
meerlye, as our Church orders in question are. Therefore these Scriptures
cannot infer any abolishing from Christ by simple holding of the corruptions
in our Church: which they do prove by the simple holding of those Heathenish
Idolatries, whereof they speak. To this you reply in Four points. (1) If
these places be meant of Heathenish Idolatry, which could never stand with
Gods truth together: Yet they forbid all other corruptions against the Second
commandment also. That I never denied to be true after a sort. These places
indeed do forbid the breach of the Second commandment, but not principally,
directly and of purpose, nor in that measure of fulness. But their immediate
purpose is against the Heathenish Idolatry breaking the First commandment. So
that they forbid the breach of the Second commandment, consequently and
proportionately, but not in that full manner as they do the First, They forbid
the First so as that they show there is no communion with God, whilst men
join in such Idolatry: they simply forbid the Second, but deny not all
communion with God to whom soever erreth therein.

(2) To your Second Reply I say, make much of it: for my part, I never thought
other but our church corruptions are against the Second commandment: 1 Samuel
15.
Your second Scripture here applied, is of Saull, a presumptuous and vvilfull
offendour: if you make our whole Churches so, your sin is the greater.

(3) Thirdly, if you mean, any of Antichrists Idolatry and false worship,
and namely this in question (the outward corrupt orders and ceremonies only
and no more) does abolish us from Christ, and that this can not stand together
with true faith, like as the Pagans idolatry against the First commandment,
cannot. Then I deny it utterly, you have no proof in the world for it. And
this inwrappeth Master Cranmer, Ridley, etc. in the same course. Your excuse
here in Page 67. That Cranmer, Ridley, etc. forsook all the corruptions they
saw. This belongs to many Thousands in England now, no less then to them:
Yea surely there are infinite, that know not so much of the corruptions, as
those learned men did, which yet are not ignorant of redemption by Christ,
etc. Yea your self Master Johnson, though a man of learning, yea knowing our
corruptions, and misliking them a long time before you forsook us, yet I think
you stood not abolished from Christ all that while. I pray be so good to poor
men as you may: yea to us now also, as well as to your self and them in those
times. Where you say in Page 67. That since that time we are convicted by the
Scriptures. If you mean some fevve, that here and there you could pick out,
and do sin still, speak to them, threaten them: throvv out your damnatory
sentence against them, But smite not all whosoever comes near you: Beware how
you judge, least you be judged: The heart belongs to God, therefore censure
not every man's conscience too hastily.

(4) Fourthly, you would prove in your Third Exception before noted, Page 67.
That both the breach of the first co^maundment, and of the Second also, is
forbidden: I have told you before, Page 69. 70. how it is true, and how not:
Nothing at all to serve your turn. 2 Cor. 6.14.
That which you say, Page 67. touching your first Scripture, 2 Cor. 6.14. etc.
in that sense and manner as I said, it is true, and not otherwise.

That which of your Second Scripture (Ezekiel. 43.8.) Page Ibid. you say, Who
sees not but it speaks directly of the breach of the Second Commandment,
joining together in the worship of the true God their inventions with Gods
ordinances. Ezec. 43.8^
I say it is most manifest, that he speaks not of the breach of the Second
commandment only, but also of the first, wherein men have their inventio^s
also. The Prophet shows verse. 4. and 7. That God returned to his Temple
again, whence he was departed for the abominable idolatries that had been
there committed before, to show that he would restore Jerusalem, and the
Temple, and worship of God again: He means this literally, of the returning
of the Jews after Babylons captivity, and of the reedifying of the Temple, and
the appointing again of Gods holy worship there: Also spiritually he may
mean, the erecting of the Christian Church when they should not fall to such
impieties as the Jews had done now in that time before, for the which he
had departed away from them. Now if we ask, what were those Idolatours in
Jerusalem and in the Temple before Ezekiels time, for the which the Lord
forsook them: it is manifest in Ahas, in Manasses, and Amon: and in the Kings
after Josiah, That the Jews idolatry was very Heathenish, not only against
the Second, but against the First commandment also, in joining the Heathen gods
with the true God of Israel in their Divine service and Worship: Therefore
this place of Ezekiell, is (as I say) not of the breach of the Second
commandment only and simply, as our church corruptions are, but ioinctlie
touching the breach of the First also.

The very same is that your third scripture page 67. 2 Kings 17.33.34.40.41. of
the Samaritans Idolatry, wherein because you are large, 2 King. 17.
I will defer to explain it till your Sixth Reason follovving: where is a
proper place for it.

Lastly, in page 68. you agrauate the breach of the Second Commandment: as
being spiritual whordome, etc. But I would have you to know: Things may be
mismatched to cruelly, asvvell as too gently. There is a sin both vvayes,
when things are not called by their proper and right names. It is true in some
sense, every breach of the Second commandment, is spiritual vvhordome, as every
vvanton word, every light gesture and countenance, every immodest thought in a
Woman, is Adultery: yet who so shall angerlie and continually so call a
Woman whore, harlot, or band, that but thinks, or looks, or speaks too
vainly, shall do her great vvrong, and incur the just danger of law.
Neither can she, nor ought she, in such case, be divorced, as an Adulteress
ought. And thus it appears true still, that you sin against the Third
Commandment in misapplying of Scriptures.

In the end in page 69. where you say, To the proof of your Assumption I
answer never a word, which most of all required answer. This I tell you, that
it is your fancy and not my meaning here, to answer to your Proposition
first, and then to your Assumptio^ to say nothing. Nay, if you had not dreamed,
you might easily have perceived that all my first words ( viz. where I say your
speech here is improper etc.) are bent directly against your Assumptio^ and the
proof thereof, although at this time I expressed not those terms, Secondly, I
show, that your scriptures applied to prove the Proposition are altogether
unfit, and intollerably abused, if you mean them in that sense as your
Assumption must be meant, that is to say, as they touch us. This, a very
child might have seen Master Johnson. So that your marginall scoff at my
sound and scholler-like dealing does light on your self, and bewrays either
your deep skill or your ouerflowing charity. As for the rest, that I should
justify our corruption, it is no part of my mind, neither belongs it to our
present cause so to do.

Fr. Io. his Answer to Mr. Jacobs 2. Reply to the 1. Reason. IN deed you are
the people that have skill, and wisdom must die with you. Yet let us a little
examine this your wise handling of the matter. Being taken here with manifest
contradiction, you say, you spoke the one in the person of your whole Church
and State, the other in your own. If it were so, yet thus you yield both that
there is contradiction in your speech, and that in stead of defending your
Church you are driven your self to contradict it. And who can give the cause
more cunningly? Even your self (Mr Jacob) are drawn now at length to confess
you do the same thing we do, that is, contradict the assertion of your Church
towching Christ's ordinances.

Now albeit this were enough to show the simplicity and weakness of your
defense, yet still I urge the contradiction to be yours. And I prove it,
because in the Page 28.
first place your words are, we hold, we practice, etc. and in the " latter, we
thinck, we shevved, etc. For who will otherwise judge, Page 61.
but this word (We) includes your self for one among the rest? Again, when in
the first place you say [thus we practise], and in the latter [we shevved
before], and both these are true of your self, who could exclude you from being
one of the number in both the places?

Further, it is here to be noted, how plainly you affirm these two things
again, 1. That your Church-corruptions are from Antichrist: 2. That yet your
Church holds them to be Christ's own. A most silly, absurd, and godles defense
of a Church, as ever was seen.

That it is tedious unto you to have your corruptions reckned up, it is no
marvel. Yet if they be so odious, as it grieve you to hear them but named:
why does it not more affect you to practice them, to partake in and with them,
and so to increase your sins and judgment before the Lord? Heretofore when
you preached against them, and sued to the Parliament to have them removed, it
was a pleasure to you and all the Reformists, to name them, to print them, to
make your pulpits ring of the^ and every where to cry out against them as most
filthy and abominable. Then if any reckned up Admon to the Parl. Miles
Monopodius. The R^gisur etc.
above an hundred of them together, one after another, they were nothing
tedious, but very welcome. Now to mention or hear but some of them, is
altogether yrksome. A very great and strange alteration: yet in deed not to be
marveled at, if it be well minded. For then you seemed to seek and stand for
the truth, now you resist and strive against it: then you would profess Christ
against the Prelates, now you do hand your selves with them against him.

And yet behold, in all these evils you bless your selves and them to^. For
what else is this that you say, these multitude of Antichristian abominations
abolish us not from Christ? Is it not as if you said, Deuteronomy 29.19.
We shall have peace though we walk according to the stubbernes of our hearts?
Alas Mr Jacob* that you should come to this height of impiety, thus to bless
and please your selves in the unrighteousness of Antichrist, that some of
perdition: then which, what greater judgment could have come upon you? 2 These.
2, 12. This is not to break and teach to break one of the least commandments,
but many of the greatest. Mat. 5.19.

Now unlike are you and such other false Prophets of the Beast, which say,
these are to fevv, to slight, of to small moment etc. How unlike (I say) are
you to the Prophets of God and Martyrs of Jesus, who did always cry out and
witness against the least Idolatry they saw among the people? They did not sow
pillowes under their elbowes, as you do: but denounced the judgments of God
against them, and refused to partake in their iniquity. So do not you. But
this belike is your following of Christ, this is your obedience of faith, even
to plead for Antichrist and to do the works of darkness and abomination, and yet
to say with your hypocritical forefathers, Is not the Lord among us? No evil
can come unto us. Micah. 30 11.

Yet you would have us bele^^, that you go not about to dazell the peoples eyes
etc. Yes Mr. Jacob, you do it and proceed in it daily from evil to worse. But
flatter your selves and them, towching the constitution of your Church, as long
as you will, with your lying words, of Christ, of faith, Ierem. 7.4.
etc. like as the Jews amidst all their impieties still vaunted of the Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord etc. yet this remains upon your heads
notwithstanding, that these abominations of Antichrist retained among you, do
of themselves and of their own nature abolish your Assemblies from being the
Churches of Christ, or holding his faith in that constitution and practice.
This I have proved Page 3.16.60.63. etc.
before: wherein if you rest not, you may reply again. Or if you desire more
evidence, see these Scriptures, 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3. and 6.3.4.5. 2 These. 2-12. Col.
2.8.20.21.22.23. Psalm. 119.21. Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Ioh. 4.3. and 2 Ioh. ver.
9.10.11. Rev. 13.11. and 14.9.10.11. and 17.1-6. and 18. and 19. chap. and
22.18: 19.

And for man's record, see Mr Beza who is as plain, as plain may be. In an
epistle written in the year, 1566. to Mr Grindall then Bishop of Lord ^^,
concerning the present estate of the Church of England, thus he says: If those
things be true, Bez. Epist. 8.
which I think have not likely hood of truth, viz, that the Metropolitans
retain in use those most filthy abuses, then which the Church of Antichrist
has not any thing more intolerable, namely pluralityes of benefices, licenses
of non-residency, licenses to marry and eat flesh, and other the like: this
were certainly, which I speak with horror, not a corruption of
Christianity, but a manifest defection from Christ: and therefore they not to
be condemned, but praised rather, which should oppose themselves to such
endeavors. These are his words. Where note, 1. That the things are most true
and rise among you, which he thought were not so much as likely. 2. That he
speaks but of four or five of your corruptions, and yet says they are a
manifest apostasy and departure from Christ, yea such as he affirms he
speaks not without horror.

How miserable then is the estate of your Church, which has not only these
four or five, but even an huge mass and endless multitude besides? And how
fearful is the case of you all, who will yet notwithstanding still abide in
that Church, and therefore cannot but partake in her sins, Rev. 13.4.
and be subject to her plagues? Most of all, what an heavy Woe hangs over your
head (Mr Jacob) who fear not yet so boldly to affirm, that these some, these
91. are to fevv and to slight, and of to small moment, of themselves and of
their own nature to abolish you from Christ? Is not this to strengthen the
hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by
promising him life? Is it not to say unto him, Thou art righteous: every one
that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he deliteth in them? Yea
is it not to please your selves in unrighteousness to condemnation? Ezech.
13.22. Mal. 2.17. 2 These. 2.12.

Then also why prove you not that which you say? You hear beside the
Scriptures before alleged, that Mr Beza speaking but of four or five of your
abominations, says they are a manifest defection from Christ. Now I suppose
you will not deny, but manifest defection from Christ does of it self and of it
own nature abolish from Christ. Besides if it be true of four or five of your
corruptions, how much more of your 91. yea of your hundreds? Specially when to
the retayning of them you have now a long time added persecution against the
truth for the maintenance of them.

Or what will you answer to your self (Mr Jacob) who have here confessed them
to be Page 37.
errors, and Page ^1.69
orders of Antichrist, Pa. 70.71.
sins against the Second commandment, etc. Every sin (you know) does of
it self and of it own nature make subject to the curse. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Psalm.
119.21. Romans 6.23. So if there were no other thing, yet even by your own
confession, the curse of God hangs over your heads. And how woeful then is
your estate? Mind withal, that when your self can not deny but your
corruptions are of Antichrist, and it is certain that Antichrists Church even
through the corruptions of their constitution is abolished from being Christ's,
you had need clear this point well, or else you leave your Church in a
miserable taking even in this behalf. Help it now, if you can. Your stale
objection and abuse of Mr Cranmer and the rest of the Martyrs, is answered
before, Page 8. 40. 41.

That the speech is both true and proper when I say, you join Christ and
Antichrist together, I need not further prove, seeing your self can not deny but
all the abominations of Antichrist before rehearsed, with many mo, Page 63. etc.
are still retained in your Church. And tell me Mr Jacob, May not I as well say,
you have not Christ but some truths of Christ, as you say, you have not
Antichrist but some corruptions of Antichrist? Or if I say so, will you then
grant that the speech is proper?

Your comparison of a white Swan with a black bill, I perceyve you can not
defend. Therefore you leave it, and betake your self to another of a maimed man
with a vvoodden leg: Which yet fitteth not your estate neither, as may be
seen before, Page 59. 61. You must put the case of a deformed boast, with the
likeness of a man's face, woman's hear, lions teeth, Rev. 9.7-2.
horses body, etc. And then may all see plainly, that although this have the
likeness of some parts of a man, yet it is not therefore a true man, but a
monstrous beast notwithstanding. Yea although you join your dead wooden leg
to the foresaid living parts thereof, yet still it is no other but as it was,
even a very beast. That it lives, will nothing help you: for beasts have their
life, as well as men have theirs. And you will not deny (I suppose) but
Antichrist the man of sin has now lived and ^aged, as a fierce and cruel
beast, by the space of many hundred years, 2 These. 2.3. Rev. 13.11.
one after another. If your comparison then be meant of this beastly man (as to
pleasure you withal, I will not deny but it may very well) yet still your
wooden leg will help it to go for no other but as it is, a man of sin and a
monstrous beast.

Next, you come to the Scriptures by which I proved the Proposition, and
pretend as if you would make a direct answer, and yet in deed do nothing
less. Answer me therefore in your next, Whether do those Scriptures prove the
Proposition, or not? If they do, why do you not grant it? If they do not, why
do you not say so, and show it? And tell we, why you handle them, as if they
had been brought to prove the Assumption: and yet in deed leave vntowched that
which was brought for the proof thereof? Such ignorant and double dealing, ill
beseems a man professing so deep skill and syncerity, as you do. Yet least
you please your self therein any longer, I will note the folly and falsehood of
your answer in the particulars.

1. To the first, you say, you never denied it to be true after a sort. Now
that which there I said was this, Page 66.
that these Scriptures forbid joining to Antichristian Idolatry, and that false
worship which breaks the second commandment. And such even Page 70.
here you grant your Church corruptions to be. So by your own confession,
these Scriptures forbid to join unto them. Expound your (after a sort) as you
please: and alter my words after your manner, as you think good. All will not
help. Sure I am you do thus give the cause. For those Scriptures forbid not to
join to the true worship and Churches of God.

And all your minesing speeches, when you say they forbid the breach of the
Second commandment, but not principally, directly, of purpose etc. what are
they but so many testimonies of your miserable halting and deceitful dealing?
For if it were as you say, were it not enough to make you detest those sins,
and never to partake with them any more? Has not God to the Second
commandment annexed this severe threatening, Exodus 20.5
I a^ielours God, will visit this iniquity etc. Doubtless God foresaw how the
breach of this commandment would be finally regarded and lessened among men
professing the true God: and therefore here annexed the threatening after the
Second, not after the First going before.

And tell me further, if you could not th^^ plead for the popish Orders,
confession to Priests, extreme Unction, prayer in an unknown toungue,
Purgatory etc. To end this point then, I say again (as I have showed page 67.
68
already) that the immediate purpose of Ezec. 43.8. 2 King. 17.32. etc.
two of these places is aagainst the false worship which breaks the Second
commandment, proving such worship and worshippers to be rejected of God: And
the reasons used in the 2 Cor. 6.14. etc.
third Scripture, are as well against the breach of the Second, as the First,
convincing every such estate (against whether commandment soever it be) to be
in that case as cannot stand and accord with Christ and his Church. The
Scripture it self, and the arguments deduced from thence in my former answer,
are so evident as I need not bring any further proof, unless you brought other
manner Reply against them, then yet you do.

2. For the second, you bid me make much of it. Therefore to pleasure you I
mean so to do. To begin withal, here you say directly, you never thought
other but that your Church corruptions are against the Second commandment.
And did you never think other in deed? How is it then that you plead for your
Churches retaining and practicing of them, yea holding of them to be Christ's
own: that is, holding the transgressions of the Second commandment to be
Christ's ordinances?

More specially for your own part, how is it that you were made Deacon or
Priest of the Prelates? Or being made in ignorance (as many be) that yet
knowing these things since, you will still execute those offices under them,
And submit to their Injunctions, Canons, Articles, etc. Yea even to this day
partake with all the Antichistian filth and corruption of your Church, which
you know to be against the Law of God? Have you for gotten or do you not regard
the E^o. 20.5.
heavy sentence an^ered to the Second commandment? Or is it only against
some, and not against all the transgressions thereof? Or will it take hold of
others, and shall you stay free?

Howsoever your self seem careless what you say or do, yet let others mind their
fearful estate in that Church, which retains such a multitude of
Antichristian corruptions (here granted by your self to be) against the Second
commandment: the breach whereof God has threatened to punish most severely.

And let it be observed, that you who have taken upon you the defense of your
Churches and Ministry, yet cannot deny that to be your estate. Behold then to
what issue your Defense is come in the end. And now that you see how much I
have made of this point at your request: forget not to thank me for it in your
next Reply.

The Scripture here alleged, you would turn away from your selves by saying,
it is of Saul a presumptuous offender; 1 Samuel 15.23
But that Scripture is not for Saul only, but for 1 Cor. 10.11 Romans 15.4.
others likewise. And how will you show that Saul was a more presumptuous and
wilful offender, then your self and your Church, Nay how will you show that
his sin was merely of presumption and wilfulnes? The Scripture mentions two
other cause^ alleged by himself, 1 Samuel 15.15
an intent to sacrifice to the Lord; and verse. 24.
fear of the people (...) and your Church can hardly yield like reasons for
your selv^s. ^et if you could they (...) not s^^nd before God, as this
Scripture witnesses.

Your clause, of making your whole Churches so, imports that you take the
case of some (the (...) not of all) among you to be as Saul's was. Then take you
heed Mr. Jacob, and the rest of like judgment and practice as you ^re. What I
think of your whole Churches as towching their constitution, I have often
showed before.

3. For the third, I mean it of the Antichristian abominations remaining among
you, and the like. Neither could you be ignorant hereof, seeing I had a little
Page 63.64.65.
before reckned up so many of them in particular. But you would not seem to
know it, because you can not prove the contrary against it. For proof of my
assertion I alledg these Scriptures Exodus 20. (...) compared with 1 Timothy
4.1.2.3. and 6.3.4.5. Col. 2.8. Revel. 1^.^0.10.11. with ver. 4. and ver. 12.
and Revel. 17.1-6. with Hos. 2.2. and Prou. 6.27, 28.32. and 7.22.23.27. and
9.13-18. 2 These. 23-12. 2 Ioh. verse. 9.10.11.

Your inwrapping of Mr. Cranmer, Ridley, etc. I have unfolded before. Page
8.41. Of all the reasons and differences which I named concerning you and them,
you pick out but one or two, and the rest you pass by. Now of them which you
except against, the first is, that they suffered to death for the truth they
saw. Which my words you have altered thus that they for seek all the
corruptions they saw. But beside the alteration your answer also is to be
noted. I alleged: hat the Martyrs suffered to death for the truth they saw: you
answer, this belongs to many thousands in England, no less then to them. Can
you now justify either your dealing or your answer? Or can you show seem
hundreds of your Church in stead of your many thousands?

For mine own part, if you had thousands of such, I wish they were many
millions. But I fear that the contrary of your speech is to true: viz, that
there are many thousands in England so far from suffering death for the truth
they see (like those Martyrs) as they will not (...) impriso^ment,
bannishement, loss of goods or the like, for that truth which they do not
only see, but which themselves have heretofore professed, preached, sued for
to the Parliament etc. So far are they from for ^al^ing all the corruption they
see (that I may use your own words). Yea who can think otherwise by their
estate and practice, but if a Que^^ Mary came again which God for did) the
(...) of the Land would (...) as the Prince beleveth and be ready to receive
again the points of Popery now rejected, as it was heretofore after King
Edwards decease?

Mark, that I speak of the face of the Land generally, not of ever it
particular person therein. Of diverse among you I have better hope, as I have
showed before. page 7. Yet for your general state (as the question is) who can
say but you are ready to receive any religion, or any thing in religion, to go
forward or backward, even as pleases the Prince, and best fitteth your turn,
for avoiding of trouble, and enjoying your ease, wealth, safety, etc. And where
then be the many thousa^ds you speak of? Or may we think this is to forsake
corruption and hold forth the truth, as the Martyrs did? Nay Mr. Jacob, it is
far from it. And this you may note as a great difference between your estate
and the Martyrs, and join it to the other mentioned before. page 40.41.

Now where you say, there are infinite of your Church that know not so much of
the corruptions, as those learned men did, which yet are not ignorant of
redemption by Christ etc. How show you this to be true? Although if it be, it
is no great commendation to your Church, considering what means of further
knowledge God has vouchsafed since that time. But of this point I will not
stand so much. I answer, that to make your comparison hold, you must compare
with those learned men, the learned among you; and with the unlearned then, the
unlearned of yours now. So shall your self and others see how untrue your
speech is. Although I doubt not but even many of the unlearned among you who
have knowledge of redemption by Christ, know also more of the corruptions
aforesaid, then those learned men did. Towching that you speak of my self, I
have answered before. Page 41.

The second thing you except against concerning the Martyrs, is that I said,
the things now controverted were not then so called in question and co^vinced
against them by the Scriptures, as now they have been against you. So I said.
Now speak you, were they, or not? If they were, show it. If not, yield it. But
you would have me to mean this, towching some few among you, and not of all.
If it were but so, yet then the thing is done more since, then in those days.

But in deed the calling in question and conviction of these things, has not
ben only to some few, as you would persuade. The Admonitions have been to the
whole Parliament, which are as the body of the whole Land, and gathered from
all the quarters thereof. Your preaching likewise against those corruptions
has gone throughout the whole Realm. So have your books written and printed
against them. Finally, our testimony by word, writing, imprisomnent, exile,
death, is known throughout the Land. Why then would you have me speak this of
some few, that here and there might be picked out?

And whereas you cannot deny but the case of some among you for these things is
such as damnatory sentence may be threatened against them: take you heed Mr.
Jacob that God being it not upon your head for one, if you proceed in those
sins still as hitherto you have done. And let your disciple D. B. that
Apostate take heed of it for another: and likewise all the rest whomsoever you
mean to be of those some you speak of.

It is the word of God that does and must judge both now and in the great day.
Ioh. 12.48. Psalm. 149.9. 2 Chro^. 19.6. 1 Cor. 5.3.4.12.13.
The judgment that is done according unto it (by whomsoever it be) is not man's
but the Lords. Your hearts and consciences, I leave them to the Lord. It is
your constitution and practice I speak of, and of the sundry means of
knowledge and conviction in these things vouchsafed to you, which the Martyrs
in former times had not. This you knew (I doubt not) though you would not see
it, because you know not how to answer it.

And thus the two differences between you and the Martyrs excepted against, do
both of them stand firm against you. But why say you nothing at all to the
other differences which in the same places I noted as well as these? Can you not
bring so much as color of exception against them? Why then do you not yield
unto them? Or will you that we take your silence for a consent?

Also, why answer you not that objection when I said Page 67.
you might thus justify the callings and estate of the Monks, Friars, etc. and
the having of spiritual communion with them: because diverse such have been
Martyrs, giving their lives for the truth they saw, who never doubted of the
lawfulnes of their callngs and estate? Do you therefore hold their offices and
functio^s to be lawful? Or will you deny, that this has been the case of such?
If you do, then I allege for proof, Eckhardus a Dominican friar; Thomas
Rhedonensis a Carmelite friar; Henry Voes, John Esch, William Neel, Doctor
Cacalla, Augustine friars; Ioannes Mollius a gray friar; Jerome Savonarola,
Dominicus, Siluester, etc. All of them being Friars and Monks, yet Martyrs of
Jesus, faithfully witnessing the truth which they saw even unto death. Act.
and Monum. 5. edit. Page 387. 613. 672. 799. 829. 850. 854.

4. For the fourth point, it is so very plain and pregnant as you can say
nothing against it, but refer us to that you have said before: which I have
showed to be nothing at all to the purpose. So it remains firm against you.
And so also do the reasons mentioned, 2 Cor. 6.14. etc. Against which you
neither have said nor can say any thing to serve your turn. Say but yourself
(and speak plainly) whether that general clause [Towch no unclean thing]
include not both your and all other abominations of Antichrist breaking the
second commandment?

One of your selves Trial of Subscriptio^: Page 7.
alleging this scripture but against the ceremonies retained in your Church,
reasons thus from it, and a^nexeth that note in the Margent which I have here
set down withal: 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16.17. This forbids the whole corruption
in religion of heathen or Antichrist, although principally their false doctrine.
What communion (says he) has the light of the word, with the darkness of
man's inventions? What concord has Christ our Savior, with Belial, the
Antichrist of Rome? And where greement has the Temple of God (which is our
selves) with Idols of humane traditions? Wherefore Rev. 18.2.3.4.
come out of Babylon (that is, the confusion, or confused worship and
government of Rome) and tovvch no unclean thing. These are his words. Now tell
me, I pray you, is this Scripture and reason strong against your ceremonies?
And is it not much more against your confusion, Leiturgie, Hierarchy etc.
which are merely the inventions of man, even of Antichrist, that man of sin?
Or will you be like the Papists also in this, to limit the bounds of the
Scripture, that it may be applied no further, nor otherwise, but as pleases
you?

That the place of Ezechiel is directly of the breach of the Second
commandment, Ezec. 43.8.
is as clear as the Sun at noone day. Beside the reasons which I alleged
before, those so many clauses (My thres holds and theirs; My posts and theirs;
Me and them; Mine holy Name with their abominations) these, I say, so many
concurring in this one verse, make it without all question, that he speaks
directly of joining their inventions with Gods ordinances in the worship of the
true God. Which is the direct breach of the Second, not of the First,
commandment.

The First is directly towching Gods inward worship, as to have, love, trust,
fear him only as God, etc. The Second is directly of outward worship: For
Images and bowing down to them ( Exo. 20.4.5
there mentioned) are outward things. If this distinction be not observed, the
first and second commandment will be confounded: as the Papists (whom you
follow) would have it. But if it be observed, it confounds both you and them
(M. Jacob) and all your vain pretenses.

By this also it is evident, that the Idolatry of Ahas, Manasses, Amon etc.
whereof you speak, was directly against the Second co^ma^dement. Ahaz (to give
an instance in one of the grossest) is said to have 2 Chro^. 28 23.
sacrificed to the Gods of Damascus: because he 2 King. 16.10-15.
made an altar like the altar of Damascus: though yet notwithstanding he
offered thereon to the true God, both such offerings and at such seasons, as
the Lord had appointed. His sin then was against the Second commandment
directly, in that he made and used another altar then God had prescribed.

But your ignorance of the Scripture Phrase deceives you. For when you read
that Ahaz, Manasses, or others sacrificed to the Gods of the Nations, you
understand that they worshipped some other then the true God against the First
commandment* whereas the Scripture means they worshipped the true God after
the ^er as those nations served their Idols, and so brake the Second
commandment. You may see it in that example of Ahaz before: and most plainly
in Deuteronomy. 12.30.31.32. And likewise if Naaman worshipping God, had bowed down
before the Idol in Rimmons Temple, but in heart honored the God of Israel, he
had broken the Second, not the First commandment: and might be said to have
worshipped the Idol Rimmon. 2 King. 5.17.18.

The reason of all these is because God accounts them to be served, whose
ordinances are observed: and himself not to be had as God, when his true
worship is not had. Now so must we esteem things, and so the Scripture
speaks (not as men judge, but) as God esteems. Mind this well Mr. Jacob,
for your worship of Antichrist.

But of these things more hereafter, when we come to speak of the third
Scripture (2 King. 17.) in the sixth Reason following, 2 King. 17.
whither you refer us for it: though there the Reader shall find you answer
not the several Scriptures here alleged for proof of it. In the mean time
let this be noted, that here again you grant your Church corruptions are
against the Second commandment. Therefore may none that fear God and will be
assured to escape his wrath, bow down unto them. Exodus 20.5.6. Deuteronomy. 5.9.10.
and 6.10.11. and 28.15.16. etc. Psalm. 106.29.

Next, where I speak of your breach of the second commandment, as being
spiritual whoredom: you except against it, as if I mismatched things
otherwise then they are in deed. But how can that be, seeing the Scriptures Page
68.
there alleged prove that which I said? Or will you say your case is not
spiritual whoredom, which God in that commandment has straightly forbidden
and severelie threatened to punish?

This then being so, it is your self Mr Jacob, that mismatch things otherwise
then in deed they are. For your case is not as you would pretend by your
similitude, like a wanton word, a light gesture or contenaunce, or an immodest
thought of a woman. But I will tell you what it is like: Even as when a woman
unfaithful to her husband, is found to commit filthynes with other men, after
whom she goes a whoring. Now such a one (whatsoever smooth speech,
countenance, or excuse she pretend, yet) is in deed an whore, and for this
cause to be divorced.

That your case is such, your going a whoring after Antichrist (whose
ordinances, Hierarchy, worship, confusion etc. are retained among you)
testifies to your faces. Fitly therefore do we apply the Scriptures against
you: and your selves it is that sin against the Third commandment in
misapplying of them, as I showed sufficiently in my former answer, against
which you can say nothing.

To the proof of the Assumption you yield now at length. Neither can I
otherwise think of your answer, seeing I have proved my speech to be proper,
and the Scriptures fitly alleged: and, you refuse to justify your own
Articles and estate. Yet least you should again cavil and delude the Reader,
I ask you, Have I not concluded the question in a Syllogism? Why then do you
not answer directly to some part of it? Have I not proved the Proposition by
Scripture, and the Assumption by your own Writings and practice? The
Conclusion then must needs be true, unless one of the Propositions could be
disproved: which you are so far from, as you never go about to do it.

The marginall note then is no scoff, but a just reproof of your ignorance:
which in deed deserves much more. But I spare you: and leave it to others to
judge, whether you do any thing else in all you say, but wind in and out, to
hide the truth and blind the Reader, if you could. The Scriptures which I
alleged for proof of the Proposition, you handle as if I had brought them for
proof of the Assumption. Who is it now (think you) that is in a dream? Again,
your own Books, profession, and practice, by which I proved the Assumption,
you towch not at all. Nay you say plainly, it is no part of your mind to
justify them. Whether it be for that you see, they can not possibly be
justified, or because you want skill in your self or charity toward your
Church for the doing of it, let others inquire. Sure I am that thus you give
the cause. For this belongs directly unto it, as all may see that have any
understanding, and your self (I suppose) will not deny, when you have called
your wits a little better together.

Chap. 8. The second Reason against Mr Jacobs Assumption aforesaid.
Fr. Io. THat which appoints and ratifyeth the worshipping of God in vain,
that cannot make either true Christians or true Churches.

But the doctrine publicly professed and practiced by law in England,
appoints and ratifieth the worshipping of God in vain, Therefore, etc.

Of the truth of the Proposition, none can doubt. And the Assumption is thus
proved:

That which appoints and ratifyeth the worshipping of God by the precepts of
Man, that appoints and ratifyeth the worshipping of God in vain. (This
Christ affirms out of Esaias the Prophet, Mat. 15.9. with Esaias. 29.13.)

But the doctrine publicly professed and practiced by law in England
appoints and ratifieth the worshipping of God by the precepts of man. (This
appears by the 35. and 36. Articles of the book alleged, and by their other
books of Articles, Canons, Injunctions, Common prayer, their Holy days,
Fasting days, Censures, Hierarchy etc. All which are the precepts of men and
authorized by Law in England.)

Therefore the doctrine publicly professed and practiced by law in England,
appoincteth and ratifyeth the worshipping of God in vain. And consequently
cannot make a particular man a true Christian, nor the assemblies so gathered
together, true Churches.

H. JACOB his 1. Reply to the 2. Reason. THis your Second Reason is: This
book and others appoincteth and ratifyeth the worshipping of God in vain,
Ergo etc. 1. This also has answer in the third Exception Page 57. 2. Also,
note I pray you, this Scripture [Mat. 15.] is verified of such as were then of
the true visible Mark his open contrariety with himself, granting this in
Reas. 6
Church, with whom Christ and his Apostles, both in Christ's time and after his
death, did sometimes join and communicate. This therefore makes for us and
against you most notably.

FR. Io. his Answer to Mr. Jacobs 1. Reply to the 2. Reason. THe Reason is as
you see it propounded before. N^w what proposition do you deny? Not any at all.
What defense then bring you of your book of Common prayer and the particulars
therein; of your books of Articles and Injunctions; of your Prelacy and other
Ministry receyved from then according to your popish Pontifical; of your
Canons and Excommunications etc. Surely none neither. What then do you answer?
Not a word, but that you refer us to your answer before in the last Exception:
whither also we refer the Reader with this note, that there he shall find
nothing, either for answer of any proposition of this argument, or for defense
of your worship, Prelacy, Ministry, and Church government called into
question. Is not this then a worthy and Clerck like answer? Have you not (may
we think) good proof for your present estate and Church-constitution, which
thus leave it altogether without defense, even when it most needs, and as it
were, beggeth your help and succor, if you could affoard it any. Yet now having
no answer to any part of the Argument, you bid us note, that this Scripture
(Mat. 15.) here alleged; is verifyed of such as were then of the true visible
Church, with whom Christ himself and his Apostles both in Christ's time, and
after his death, did sometime join and communicate. This therefore you say
makes for you and against us most notably.

1 But first tell us, if As that of Lev. 10.1.2.3. Number. 16 1. etc. Esa.
1.11.12.13.14.15. Zeph 1.12. 1 Cor. 11.19.
many things, which are verifyed sometimes of the members of a true Church, may
not also fitly be applied, and alleged against a false Church, and yet not
justify their estate and constitution, neither make for them, but against them
altogether. Otherwise you condemn at once all the Martyrs heretofore, who
usually alleged this Mat. 15.9
very Scripture against the false worship of the Romish Church, as as your self
cannot be ignorant. Yet in your learning it seems the Papists might well have
answered the Martyrs again, that this Scripture was verifyed of them that
were of the true visible Church, and therefore made for them and against the
Martyrs most notably.

2 Secondly, when you say, This Scripture is verifyed of such as were of the
true visible Church with whom Christ and his Apostles communicated, tell up,
whether you mean that Christ and his Apostles communicated with them in their
vain traditions, or no. If you think they did, that very Chapter shows the
contrary besides that the whole Scriptures testify, that Christ was altogether
free from sin, Mat. 15.2.
which he could not have been, if he had joined with them in those their
inventions. If they did not, (as it is without all question) then what does
this help you, who do all of you join and co^mmunicate with the fa^se worship
of your Assemblyes?

3 Thirdly I answer, that your note is not worth the noting, being nothing at
all to the purpose for the question in hand. For first, who knows not, that
^e the Jewish Church; the doctrine publicly professed and practiced by their
Law, did not appoint or ratify any of those vain traditions, but utterly
forbid them? Whereas contrarily, the very doctrine publicly professed and
practiced by law in England, appoints and ratifieth the false worshipping of
God by the inventions of men. Secondly, those vain traditions aforesaid, were
the personal sins of some particular men in the Jewish Church, not
publicly established by law, nor generally received and practiced in that
Church: Luke 1.5.6 8.9.10. and 2.21.22.23.24.25.27.36.37.38.39.41.46. Mat.
5.17. and 8.4. and 15.2. Ioh. 10.34.
Zachary and Elizabeth, Symeon, Anna, Mary, Joseph, Christ himself, and his
Apostles, with many others kept the ordinance of God given by the hand of
Moses, and observed of that Church. Neither did they join or pollute
themselves with that vain worship aforesaid: whereas in the Church of England,
the false worship thereof devised by men, even by that man of sin, is not the
personal sin of some particular men in it, but is publicly established by
law, and generally received and practiced in your assemblies, of all the
members thereof. So then this scripture makes nothing for you, but against you
most notably.

Now whereas in the margent, you wish the Reader to mark an open contrariety,
comparing this and the Sixth Reason together: we do also refer it to the
Reader to judge, whether there be not even an harmony with this, and a direct
confirmation of it.

H. JACOB his 2 Reply to the 2 Reason. TO this your defense of your Second
Reason, I say, you have answer in your last Exception, page 57. You ask what
proposition I do deny? I answer, I distinguish your assu^ptio^ as being a
fallacy called (...). concluding a thing simply, from that which is after a
sort, like unto that Reason which I framed against you in page 57. A man has a
wooden leg, an eye of glass, etc. Therefore he is no true man. Cranmer,
Ridley, etc. held as much as we, aftet men's precepts: Ergo they worshipped in
vain. Geneva holds her wafer cakes in the Supper, Ergo, Geneva worshippeth
God in vain. Even so your Assumption runs. Our doctrine (say you Page 82.)
appoincteth Gods worship by men's precepts. This is false, unless you mean it
(...), after a sort, not simply. For our doctrine appoincteth not all Gods
worship by men's precepts, nor the chiefest part of it: as the preaching of the
Gospel of life, Sacraments, and Prayers, etc. So that it concludes nothing
in that sense. Therefore here you play the false Sophister, not the Chistian
and conscionable Disputer. Thus you have answer enough to this in the answer
to your last Exception, though you would not see it.

Page 82.
Further I noted Secondly, That this your Scripture of Mat. 15. Yields the
offenders to be of a visible Church, with whom Christ did communicate, though
they held also traditions of men: Therefore it affirms nothing against us. Is
not this true? Why then do you not admit it? We never denied, but this
Scripture condemned our corruptions: But this only we affirm, it
disanulleth not our Churches: Even as Christ here condemns the Jews corrupt
traditions, but he meant not there by (...) their Church* Therefore all this
is not against our purpose, but notably for us is before observed.

1. Concerning your First answer in Page 83. I know this Scripture may be
applied against false worshippers which are no true Church: But it proves
not I say, all them, to whom it may be applied, to be no true Church:
Therefore you abuse it against us, Except you had first proved us no true
Church nor Christians, which yet is in question.

2. Where in your Second answer page 83.
you say That this helps us not except we say that Christ communicateed with
the Pharisees in these traditions, like as we do in the vain traditions now.
For shame leave this folly. I say again, I seek not to justify our partaking
in our traditions, but I renounce it in sobriety as much as you, yea better
then you do: Yet I say this place shall admit those who do in simplicity
partake of them, to be true Christians nevertheless, like as it admits the
Jews then.

3. In your Third answer page 83. 84
You deny that those Jewish traditions of washing, etc. were with them received
generally, or by Law in their Church. Whereto I answer, That they were
generally received, as Mark in his 7. Chapter and 3. verse does testify, and
that they were rebuked who used rhem not: which is sufficient to make it
their Churches doctrine and practice, though no express law commanded it. But
I suppose verse 5. where they say, [why walk thou not after the traditions
of the Elders] he means, the ordinances of their Forefathers, which were to
them as laws, besides the law of Moses. What else is their Thalmud, which is
till this day, even like to the Canon law of Popery, and the Alcoran of
Turkey. Some also understand this of the ordinances of the Elders, that is,
their present Governors: and then doubtless it was law. And though Zachary,
Elizabeth, Symeon, Anna, Mary, Joseph, Christ and his Apostles, did not
actually join in these corruptions, yet they were general no doubt and by
law never the less, and a number of the Jews simply used them, and yet fell
not from God, as The Six waterpots of the Iewishe purifyings.
John 2.6. Therefore your Replies here are most vain and false.

Lastly, in page 84. you will not confess your contrariety, that is to say,
between this your Second Reason and certain words in your Sixth Reason. But the
greater is your sin, to do evil and defend it too. Here in this Reason
page 82. you would have this scripture Mat. 15. to be meant against such vain
worshippers, that they become hereby no true Church. (Or else what do you urge
it against us?) But in your Sixth Reason following, you say, That the Jews even
now when these words were applied to them, were the true worshippers of God.
Are not these contrary, I pray you, then reconcile them.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr. Jacobs 2. Reply to the. 2. Reason. VVHhatsoeuer
you brought against the last Exception before, is there answered. Page 58. 59.
60. 61. Your wooden leg will not make your Reply go for current, neither can
your glassy eye see how to take (...) my answer. The vanity of this
comparison of yours applied to your estate, I have already discovered. And for
Mr Cranmer, Ridley, etc. I have answered before. Page 40. 41. 59. 60. Diverse
of the differences there noted may likewise serve for Yet if it be still with
Geneva, as you say: the thing as of very ill note. If it be not so, note M.
Jacob.
Geneva. Besides that the constitution of that Church is in the way of Christ:
whereas yours is in the apostasy of Antichrist. And so there is no comparing of
your estate and theirs together: although in some things it may be they walk
corruptly, and you in other with some show of piety.

Your (...) (M. Jacob) would as well help the Jews to have confuted the Prophet
Esaias and our Savior Christ, as it does you. For I pray you, did the doctrine
and Law of their Church appoint all Gods worship by men's precepts, or yet the
chiefest part of it? Or had it ben of weight, if they had thus answered Christ
and his Prophets, as you do here? Shall I now say, you play the ignorant
Sophister, yea and the false Sophister too.

And where you say next, Your Preaching, Sacraments, Prayers etc. are not
appointed by men's precepts, Is not this also a manifest untruth? Let your
Offices of Ministry by virtue of which these are administered; your Prelates
silencing of you at their pleasure; your Injunctions, Canons, Articles, Common
prayer book, according to which you are appointed and bound to administer all
your holy things: Let these (I say) speak indifferently between us. Yea let
your own men speak, and they will testify against you. In the second
Admonition to the Parliament they affirm, 2 Admon. page 6.
That although some truth be taught by some Preachers, yet no Preachers may
without great danger of the Laws utter all the truth comprised in the book
of God. It is so circunscribed and vvrapt within the compass of Statutes,
Penalties, Injunctions, Articles, Canons, etc. Also, that these may not be
offended against, but with more danger then to offend against the Bible. Yea,
that the Bible must have no further scope, then by these it is assigned.

Add hereunto your Book of common prayer, by which you are enjoined how to
administer your Sacraments, what to pray when to exhort etc. Which likewise you
may not break, but with more danger then to offend against the Bible: as in the
Admonition aforesaid is testified. Mind also, that your Church is enioined in
the service of God publikly to read the Apocrypha books which have errors,
fables, magik, blasphemy etc. and to leave altogether unread some parts of the
Canonical Scripture as being (you say) least edifying, and might best be
spared: as the book of Canticles and other parts of the Old Testament; And in
the New also, part of the first Chapter of Matthew, and of the 3. of Luke, and
almost the whole Book of the Revelation: Of which the Spirit of God says
expressly, Blessed is he that reads, Rev. 1.3.
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy etc. For proof hereof, see the
Calendar and Rubric in your book of Common Prayer, for the order of reading
the Scripture in your Church throughout the year.

Speak now your self Mr. Jacob, Is it not clear, that your Preaching,
Sacraments, Prayer etc. are appointed by men's precepts? Unless you will say,
Your Injunctions, Canons, Articles, Statutes, Common prayer book etc. be not
the precepts of men. As it may be you will not stick much at it, if you can
color the matter with a (...), or like deceit. So Christian a Disputer and
conscionable you are.

Again, Is the Papists whole worship or the chiefest part of it otherwise by
the precepts of men, then yours is? It may be you will take pepper in the nose,
that I ask you this. For I perceive your little pacyence is already much
moved. You shall not therefore hear it of me, because I would not put you out
of all quiet. I will but tell you what your own men say of it, at whose hands
I doubt not but you will take it better. Thus then they say, speaking of your
estate: 2 Admon. page 7.
He that could not abide strange fire in the old Law but burnt them that used
it, what will he do to us in the new Law that erect a new and strange
course or word to rule his Church by? What did the Pope but so? He did suffer
Gods word to have a course as far as it pleases him, so that he might have
the whole authority above it.

What now Mr Jacob? How will you answer your own men? Or will you be so good
to the Papists your grandsiers, as a little to help them at a dead lift with
your (...)? So may they plead for their worship against this Scripture (Mat.
15.9.) opposed unto them by the Martyrs, as you do for yours. Specially, seeing
your Book of common prayer was taken out of their Portuis; and your Book of
consecrating Bishops and Priests, out of their Pontifical. So that if theirs,
then yours also must needs be according to the precepts of men, yea of
Antichrist that man of sin. Thus you have answer enough to this, if you have
eye enough to see it.

In your Second note, because this Scripture was spoken to them that were of a
visible Church etc. you say, Mat. 15.9.
Therefore it affirms nothing against you. This is a very strange
consequence. Have not your selves alleged it against the Papists? and would
you admit of such an answer? I showed heretofore, that the things verifyed
sometimes of the members of a true Church, may fitly be alleged against a
false Church. and yet not justify them in such estate to be a true one. See the
Scriptures Page 83.
there quoted, which by the Martyrs and others are often so alleged against
the Papists. Unto which you can say nothing.

Besides also, the Jews being a true Church, and yet their worship unto many
of them by their traditions proving to be in vain: it follows more strongly
against the false Church and her abominations, which are far mo and of another
nature then those in Iewry. Thus should you apply it to your selves.

Lastly mind that now you are driven to say, you never denied but this
Scripture condemns your corruptions. So by your own confession, your worship
of God is in vain. No part of it is free from your corruptions. Let such then
join with you therein as have pleasure in vain worship. 2 These. 2.12. with
Exodus 20.5. Christ never communicated in any such, but rebuked it and all them
that worshipped God in such manner, even this Scripture being witness. Therefore
it makes notably against you and for us, as is before observed.

1. In your Reply to the first point of my Answer next following, you can
not say a word against it. Yet will you not yield. Still you would have me
grant that which I deny, and you should prove: viz, That in your estate you
are a true Church etc. The contrary whereof I have proved Page 3. 12. 16. 22.
33. 59. 60. 61. 63. etc.
before. Therefore is it not yet in question.

2. To the second you yield with shame enough: though your folly be so great,
as you see it not. For first, you neither do nor can answer (but against your
selves) to that which I asked concerning Christ and his Apostles, whether they
communicated in those traditions of the Ieevves, or not. If by your silence you
consent that they did not (as in deed the truth is) then by their example are
we also bound not to partake in yours. If you say they did, then you both
blaspheme Christ, making him a sinner, and give the holy Ghost the lie, who in
Mat. 15.2.13.14.
this very Chapter testifies the contrary. Thus whatsoever you shall answer,
it makes against you excedinglie. And because you answer not, it imports
that you yield. So also does that most plainly, which here you speak for your
self.

You say you seek not to justify your partaking in your traditions etc. Yes Mr
Jacob, you seek it, but you are ashamed to profess it. Else why condemn you us
for not partaking therein? I know you will say (as is in the Preface of your
book) that your mind is, we should partake with you in your lavvfull things,
not in your traditions. But for shame leave this folly. None can join with
any of your Churches or Ministry, but they must needs partake with your
Antichristian traditions. Show the contrary in any Minister or Church of the
Land, and we yield. Otherwise, what do you but yield?

The renouncing you speak of, is in word, not in work. You renounce evil with
your lips, but approve it in your deeds. And thus is verified upon you that
which Christ out of the Prophet spoke in the Mat. 15.8.
place aforesaid, This people draws near unto me with their mouth and
honoreth me with the lips, but their heart is far from me.

And where you speak of such as do in simplicity partake of your traditions, to
be true Christians nevertheles, Albeit in your constitution they can not by the
word of God so be counted, Page 3. 7. 16. 33. 63. etc.
as has been proved: yet I pray tell us, what then you think of those that
partake with your traditions, not of simplicity, but as your self do: that is,
knowing them to be against the Second Commandment; of Antichrist; vain
vvorshipp; never but naught etc.

3. In the third point of my answer, I noted two differences between your
case and the Jews: the first towching the Law it self, the second towching the
observation of it. For the Law, I showed that the ordinance of God given by
Moses (even the written word) being the Law of that Church, it did not appoint
but forbid those traditions: Yours contrarily. For the observation, I showed
that the traditions were not generally observed of all the members of that
Church, as yours be. Both these I proved by the Scripture, Luke 1.5-10. and
2.21. etc. Mat. 5.17. and 8.4. and 15.2. Ioh. 10.34. Where mark in John those
words of Christ to the Jews [In your Law] speaking of the written word. Now
unto this so plain evidence you answer nothing at all to the purpose.

For the former, you seem at first to yield, that these traditions were not
commanded by the Law of that Church? But yet being so generally received, and
they rebuked who used them not, you count it to be as good. Which I deny. Then
you would prove these to be the Law of that Church, because they are called
Mar. 7.5.
the Traditions of the Elders. But even by this appears, that they were not
the Law of that Church, but a Tradition received from hand to hand from their
forefathers. Which therefore bound not any, neither were observed by all, as
it is with you. Neither was their case then, as the Jews is now with their
Thalmud; or as the Turks with their Alcoran; neither as the Papists or yours
with the Canon Law. If it had been such, then could they not have been a true
Church. And to understand this to be the ordinance of their present Governors
(as to serve your turn you could be content) is altogether without ground. It
is both against the common use of the word Tradition here urged, and against
the true meaning of the word Elders in this place: Mat. 5 21.27.33.
which plainly appears by another word used in Mat. 5. in such sense as
this is here, and in stead thereof, signifying Them of old time, or the like.

For the latter, that is the observation, you would prove out of Mar. 7.3.
Mark, that they were generally received. If you mean, they were received of
very many, but not of all, you speak nothing against that which I said. If you
mean they were received of all among them (as the words seem to sound) then
you misunderstand and misalledge that Scripture. I will show it by a like
speech used also by Mark in another place, where he says, all the country of
Judea and they of Jerusalem came out to John, Mar. 1.5.
and were all baptized of him etc. Now by the word All in this place he
means only a great many, and not every one, as the word might seem to
import. For that all were not baptized of him, is evident both by Mat. 21.32
Luke 7.30.
other Scriptures; and by this reason, that if all Judea and Jerusalem had been
baptized of him, then had they all confessed their sins and become disciples.
Which all men know was far otherwise. Likewise in this place, although he say
All the Jews, because they were many, yet even in the Mar. 7.2.
next verse going before he says the Disciples (who also were Jews) observed
them not, and therefore the Pharisees complained.

Thus you see they were not received of all the Jews: as heretofore I showed
not only in the Disciples, but in diverse other by name. Page 84.
Of whom you cannot deny but it is true. They were the personal sins of
some, not the publik established Law, neither generally received and practiced
in that Church, as I noted yours to be in your Assemblies, that is of all the
members thereof. Neither is there any comparison between yours and theirs: as
(besides that which I have showed before) may appear even by the vvaterpots
here mentioned by your self. Of the lawful or unlawful use whereof I need not
stand to speak, it being evident that they were no way so unlawful, or of
such nature, as your corruptions are. Let this then which has been said suffice
to show how true and pertinent my aunswers be.

That there is no contrariety between any thing spoken here and in the sixth
Reason following, the Reader may see. And that it is your self who do evil,
and defend it too, there need no other witness, but the title and contents of
your book, together with your estate. Concerning the thing which here you
object, I have proved already, that Mat. 15.9
this and See before Page 83.
other Scriptures being spoken of vain worshippers in the true Church, have been and may be alleged much more against all vain worship in the false
Church: whether it be yours, or the Papists, or any other whatsoever. And say
your self, if the Martyrs have not both ben persuaded that the Jews were a
true Church, and yet alleged this Scripture against the Papists, as against a
false Church. Are these contrary, I pray you, that they need be reconciled?
Then do you reconcile them, for the Martyrs. For sure I see no need of it.

Chap. 9. The third Reason against Mr Jacobs Assumption aforesaid.
Fran. Johnson. IF the whose doctrine, as it is publicly professed and
practiced by Law in England, be not sufficient to make a Galatian a true
Christian, that should with all submit unto Circumcision: Then much less, is
it able to make him a true Christian, that together with it, submits unto a
false Ministry, Worship, and Government of the Church devised by man, even
the man of sin. But the first is true: Therefore also the latter.

The consequence of the Proposition is good, because Circumcision was once the
holy ordinance, and appointment of God himself to his Church and people,
whereas the Ministry, Worship, and Government aforesaid, never was so, but
is man's device in religion, even Antichrists, that capital enemy of Jesus
Christ.

The Assumption is proved Gal 5.2.3.4. where the Apostle speaks of them that
held, not only such trueths of the Gospel, as are in that book of Articles,
but more then those: Yet if they should withal submit to Circumcision, he
says, they were abolished from Christ, Christ would profit them nothing.

H. Jacob his first Reply to the 3. Reason. THis your Third Reason is from the
more to the less negatiuely to this effect, A Galatian using Circumcision, is
a likelier Christian, then one of our English holding the Hierarchy and other
traditions: But a Galatian is a false Christian, Ergo, An English professor is
much more.

We answer, We deny the Assumption: Galatians were then true Christians, and
their Assemblies true Churches, Gal. 1.2. Therefore this Reason is naught. If
you object, The Apostle says, such are abolished from Christ. That is in deed
some amongst them, as held Moses ceremonies, necessary absolutely to
salvation, as Act. 15.1. And that Gal. 5.3 4.5 Romans 10.3.4
Justification was by the moral works of the law. Now the Churches of
Galatia generally were not such, but held the saving faith sound doubtless,
though many amngest them were tainred with that infection, by reason of some
mischeuous teachers that were crept in, and too well interteined among them.
Howbeit, with the Church, Communion was kept, and therefore, so with us you
ought to deal. If you say we are worse Christians then those grosest
Galatians, It is utterly false: prove it if you can, and it must dravve in
Master Cranmer, etc. with us also. If you say, there are many amongst us as
bad, or worse then those vvorst Galatians, you may say it, but prove it, you
cannot. Also, if it were so, yet this disgraceth, it destroys not the
Church, like as has been said of the Galatians.

Fr. Io. his Answer to Mr Jacobs 1. Reply to the 3. Reason. YOur first answer
is, that you deny the Assumption. Which in plain terms is as much, as if you
had given the holy Ghost the lie, who by the Apostle Paul affirms it, Gal.
5.2.3.4. As in the proof of the Assumption was showed before. But for the more
evidence of the truth, I will set this down in a Syllogism, thus:

If a Galatian submitting to Circumcision, though he hold all the truths of the
Gospel professed in England withal, yet be notwithstanding abolished from
Christ, and fallen from grace, Then is he not in this estate a true Christian.

But the former is true, as the Apostle testifies, Gal. 5.2, 3, 4.

Therefore also the latter. And yet the former you deny, that is the
Assumption. Therefore you give the lie to the holy Ghost, who affirms it.

Next you answer, that the Galatians were then true Christians, and their
Assemblies, Churches, Gal 1.2. Therefore (say you) this Reason is naught. But
you may not thus run away with the matter and deceive your self and your
simple favorers. The question is not, Whether any Galatians were true
Christians, or any of their Assemblies, true Churches. For who ever doubted of
that? But this is the question, Whether a Galatian holding all the truths of
the Gospel now professed in England, and vvithall submitting to Circu^cisio^;
were in that estate a true Christian. Or putting the case that there were
whole Assemblies consisting of such: Whether those Asse^blies then in that case
were by Gods word to be deemed the true Churches of Christ. The Apostle
testifies and says No: You say, Yea. Now whether of you two it is meet we
believe, let all men judge.

But what is it then (will you say) that the Apostle terms the assemblies of
the Galatians true Churches? Gal. 1.2. You show the reason your self, the
light of the truth is so clear and manifest: There were but some of the
Galatians that were infected with this error of Circumcision. True in deed, and
of such only is the supposition made in the case aforesaid.

But the Churches of Galatia generally were not such, but held the saving faith
sound: This also is most true: they being set in the way and order of Christ.
And therefore although there sprang up some heretics and schismatikes among
them (which is the 1 Cor. 11.19. Act. 20.30.
lot and trial of the Church of God in all ages) yet was there not cause to
break Communion with those Assemblies, but to proceed with them in the faith
and order of Christ, and to Gal. 5.12. 1 Cor. 5.7.11.13.
cut off and cast out such troublesome leaven from among them.

Now this being duly weighed, it is nothing for but altogether against the
having of communion with the Asse^blies of this Land, which are not set in the
way and order of Jesus Christ, (as were those Churches of Galatia) but in the
Apostasy and confusion of Antichrist, as has been at large declared before, in
the defense of the former Reasons, where also that of Master Cranmer, Ridley,
etc. is answered.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 3. Reason. TO this your Defense of your Third
Reason, I answer. First it is too impudent a cavillation " That you charge me
to give the H. Ghost the lie, in denying your Assumption. I meant not your
Assumption, but that which I had made briefer, containing the effect of yours.
This was the Assumption denied by me, But a Galatian is a false Christian. As
he that has but half an eye may see.

Secondly, to cease needles strife, I deny therefore your Proposition. Though a
Galatian that is, so holding it as the worst did or else this is a sophistical
aequiuocatio^
holding Circumcision, cannot be a true Christian, yet an English Christian
holding the Hierarchye etc. may. The Reason of this denial I gave you then,
but that you would not see it: Namely, because such Galatians, held
Justification by the works, and ceremonies of the Law. Gal. 5.3.4.5. Romans
10.3.4. Act. 15.1. Like the Papists, who by their ceremonial and moral works
do hold the same, and so do err Fundamentally. But our Churches and state,
hold not the Hierarchye so, but only as an indifferent thing in it self. This
blasphemous opinion of Circumcision, makes it infinitely worse (though once
it was ordained of God) then our indifferent opinion of the Hierarchye, though
in deed it were never but naught.

Thirdly and lastly, you have no where cleared Master Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, and the rest of those holy Martyrs, from being abolished from Christ,
if the Hyerarchie be simply worse then Circumcision, so held as those Galatians
did hold, Gal. 5.2.3.4.5.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 2. Reply to the 3. Reason. IS it of
simplicity, or of impudency, or of both (Mr Jacob) that thus you do write? Your
simplicity is more then Dunsicall, to say you denied not my Assumption, but one
of your own. For with whom I pray you, do you dispute? With your self, or with
me? Your impudency is to shameful, not only to give the holy Ghost the lie,
but when it is showed you, yet not to acknowledge it.

Therefore to hide it (if possibly you could) you say when you denied the
Assumption, you meant not mine, but one of your own made briefer etc. Yet even
thus appears, that you can not say otherwise but to deny my Assumption (which
I proved by Scripture) were to give the holy Ghost the lie. Now that you did it
before, your own words here again will testify against you. For you say, Your
Assumption made briefer, conteyneth the effect of mine. Then in denying your
own, it must needs be that you denied mine in deed and effect, and so now by
your own confession it is true (as I said) that you gave the lie to the holy
Ghost, who by Paul affirms it. Gal. 5.2.4.

Simple Sir Priest, Had you no more wit nor better defense, then to answer
thus as he that has but half an eye may see you do nothing else but impudently
cavil? Is this the Christian and conscionable disputing you speak of? Or is it
the deep and Cler klike skill in argumentation which every where you will bear
us in hand is locked up in the chest of your breast? Content your self (Mr Jacob)
to keep hereafter within your line, and strive no longer against the truth, but
for it.

Secondly you say, to cease needles strife you deny the Proposition. But if
your former denial of the Assumption was good, why do you not stand to it? If
it were evil, why do you not confess it? If your mind be in deed to cease
needles strife, then show it in deed, not in word only. The Proposition (which
now upon better advisement you choose to deny) I have proved before. Against it
you except, Page 90.
that although a Galatian holding Circumcision cannot be a true Christian, yet
an English Christian holding the Hierarchy etc. may. But you should say thus Mr
Jacob, if you answer me, He that submits to a false Ministry, worship, and
government of the Church devised by Antichrist the man of sin, etc. is a
true Christian in that estate. For these were the words I used in my Argument
and proof thereof. But you delight to answer your own words and Arguments,
not mine. Yet why prove you not then from the Scripture that which you say
towching Antichrists Hierarchy etc. Will you have us beleev it on your bare
word?

Mind also that now you confess, the whole doctrine, as it is publikly
professed and practiced by Law in England, is not sufficient to make a Galatian
a true Christian that should with all submit to Circumcision, which once was
Gods own ordinance. Had I not cause then (think you) to deny the Assumption of
your main Argument? Yea and to put you in mind of the defects and lamenes both
of your Proposition and Assumption*

And where you say, the Galatians could not be true Christians, because they
held Justification by the works and ceremonies of the Law, like the Papists who
by their ceremonial and moral works do hold the same, and so do err
Fundamentally: Whereas your Churches and State (you say) hold not the Hierarchy
so, but only as an indifferent thing in it self. 1. First what say you to the
Damianus a Goes, de fide, Religione, et moribus Aethiopion. Page 63. etc.
Ethiopian Churches which together with the Gospel hold and use at this day
the ceremonies of the Law, Circumcision, etc. only as things indifferent: and
therefore condemn not the Churches which use them not at all? Are they in this
constitution by the word of God now to be judged true Christians and true
Churches? Or may not any separate from people so walking, to keep the faith of
Jesus without such commixtion? By your marginall note, it seems you are so
minded. Let us have your reasons and proof in your next Reply.

2. Or how will you prove for your Churches that it is as you say, viz, that
you hold as a thing indifferent your Hierarchy etc. Do you not see that such as
hold and walk otherwise, are imprisonned, banished, condemned, killed among
you? Is this to hold things as indifferent? What then (I pray you) may be your
holding of the other points of Religion among you which you count not
indifferent?

3. And what say you to your forbidding of Meats and Marriage at certain times:
which the Apostle calls Doctrines of Devils? Does your Church hold them as
things indifferent? Or will not this prove a blasphemous opinion, even in your
own judgment?

4. Mind withal how the Dispensations given by your Prelates for eating of
flesh in times forbidden, run still among you as they did and do among the
Papists, with this clause, fana conscientia, that is, with a safe conscience;
and your Excommunications with this clause Ad salutem anio^e, that is, for the
salvation of the soul. Does not this show that your Churches hold not these
things as you pretend, but agree with the Papists therein? Or hold you matters
of conscience and salvation for things indifferent?

5. Likewise for your Ministry, and book of common prayer etc. hold you them
as matters indifferent, or as necessary for the service of God and salvation
of your souls?

6. And what say you to the blasphemy, magik, errors, lies, in the Apocrypha
books retained among you for the service of God? Count you them also for
indifferent things?

6. Finally, towching the Popish opinion of works (whereof you speak) know you
not how they hold that their works merit not for the work sake, but for
Christ's, being dyed with his blood? Yet (notwithstanding this color) the point
being well considered, it does highly dishonor Christ and derogate from his
office of sole Mediation. In like manner the Hierarchy etc. that is, the
government, worship, confusion, and Ministry of Antichrist retained among you
(whatsoever you pretend for them, yet) being duly weighed, do as towching your
Church constitution, abolish the government and Mediatio^ of Christ: except
you could prove him to be Mediator of another Testament then his own. Behold
what your Indifferent opinion will prove, when it comes to be thoroughly
scanned. As you like it, you may hold it still.

To end this point, let the Reader note (and not forget it) how your self do
here in plain terms confess, that your Hierarchy (that is, your Churches
government, Ministry, etc.) was never but naught. This suites ill with the
title of your book, and gives small encouragement for any to serve God by such
Ministry, worship, etc.

For Mr Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer etc. Page 40.41.
I have cleared them before from your hasty censure. Now only let the Reader
observed how this is always the foot of your song, Mr Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer
etc. As if their errors were better warrant for you, then Gods word for us.

CHAP. 10. The fourth Reason against M. Jacobs Assumptio^ aforesaid.
Fr. Johnson. THe doctrines of faith contained in that Book alleged, would not
make him a true Christian who holding them, should also still execute or join
unto the Ministry of Mahomet, that open Antichrist and enemy of Jesus Christ.
2 Cor. 6.14. etc.

Therefore neither can they make him a true Christian, that holding them, yet
does still execute or join unto the Ministry and worship of the man of sin,
the covert Antichrist and enemy of Jesus Christ.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the 4. Reason. THis your 4. Reason is, Mahomets
Ministry and Antichrists Ministry are both bad alike. But the good doctrines
of our book of Articles cannot save a man that ioineth also to Mahomets
Ministry.

Ergo, the good doctrines of that book cannot save a man that ioineth also to
Antichrists Ministry: which thing we in England do.

I deny neither the Proposition, nor Assumption: And yet the Argument is too
bad. It is a fallacy of Equivocation, as we call it: We must therefore
distinguish: Mahomets Ministry, and Antichrists Ministry, have a doubtful
meaning. If you mean, the whole function and exercise of public worship
performed in Mahomets or Antichrists assemblies, that is in the Turkish or
Popish Churches: Then I grant your whole Argument is Both are naught alike as
touching abol^shing us from Christ.
true. But that we do so in England, (which comes in the Co^clusio^) Or that
any Christian amongst us thinks so: That I utterly deny. And thus indeed,
that Scripture alleged 2 Cor. 6.14. is rightly understood. But if you mean
by Ministry, the outward manner of calling to the Ministry, and some
outward ceremonies, used by Mahomet or the Pope: Then I flatly and absolutely
deny your Assumption, and your Scripture is answered before in the First
Reason. For I affirm, and it is manifest: That such errors being joined with
the good doctrines of that our Book, do not destroy faith, and true
Christianity, as before was showed in the Second Exception.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 1. Reply to the 4. Reason. Here (Mr Jacob)
the light of the truth does so dazell your eyes, as you freely confess you
cannot deny any whit of the Reason. And yet forsooth the Argument is too bad.
But why so? There is (you say) an Equivocation in it, and therefore you will
distinguish. I answer, There is no equivocation at all in the words: they are
all plain, to him that has a single eye and will understand the truth.
Therefore your distinction here is idle and frivolous.

Yet let us see between what things you do distinguish: It is between the whole
function and exercise of public worship performed in the Turkish or Popish
Assemblies, and between the outward manner of calling to their Ministry and the
outward ceremonies used amongst them. An absurd distinction towching the
matter in hand. For first, who knows not,

Secondly, who sees not, that the Argument here is not of whatsoever of the
public offices of Ministry retained among them; of their manner of calling
and entrance into them; of their administration of them; of their stinted
imposed Liturgy; their ecclesiastical government, Canons, proceedings, etc.
All which in the Church of England are taken out of Rev. 17.4.5. 2 These.
2.3.4.7.8.9.10.11.12.
that golden cup of abominations, wherewith Antichrist that man of sin has
made the Nations of the earth to be drunken. As may appear by comparing their
Pontificals, Canons, and constitutions together. If you will needs be
otherwise minded, then prove the particulars aforesaid, by the Testament of
Christ.

And mark here that you grant, the doctrine of faith contained in your book
of Articles cannot make him a true Christian, who holding them does withal
receive and join unto the public worship performed in the Turkish or Popish
Assemblies. This you say you grant as most true. Wherevpo^ it follows (even
by your own confession) 1. That such things may be joined with the doctrines
of faith received among you, as in such estate you cannot be deemed true
Christians, or true Churches; Neither the truths which you hold, be avayleable
unto you. 2. That therefore the Proposition of your first and maine Argument,
is not general, but admittet limitation: and so your greatest defense is of no
weight, as is showed before. 3. That your answer to the Second Exception is of
no force, howsoever here and every where you refer us to it. Page 5.
For which also we refer the Reader, to what is said in that place, in defense
of that Exception: And for the allegation of 2 Cor. 6.14. unto that which is
said concerning it in defense of the First Reason. Page 67.

H. Jacob his 2. Reply to the 4. Reason IN this your defense of your 4. Reason,
you renew your Sophistry, and that which is worse, you will not be told of it.
Is it because of the goodness of your Reason that I deny no Proposition? Nay, it
is for the badnes of it: because all is naught, all deceitful and
sophistical. Therefore I must distinguish even so still as I did before, and
my distinction is good, cleerelie discovering all your fraud. What say you
against it: First (you say) Are not their outward callings and ceremonies
false, Antichristian and accursed, as well as the rest of their worship and
service? As Well? Forsooth, I trow not, (that is, not as much). Their inward
impiety and false faith against Christ, the only all-sufficient Savior, is
far more accursed and devilish then their bare outward orders, separated from
the rest of their faith. But whosoever joins simply, and indifferently,
either to Turkish, ot Popish Assemblies, does join with their whole and
vvorst abominations, which have no communion or coherence with Christ in
deed, Neither can we also, if we join therein. The case is not like, when
we reteyne and use, some of their outvvarde orders in our Assemblies.

And here you note that I grant Some thing may be joined unto our Christian
faith in England, which would utterly destroy it. Most true, And here I note
your most unchristian and false dealing with me, in affirming otherwise of
me, As I have

Lastly, my reference to the answer of your First Reason, is a fit and full
Refutation of you here, Neither is your Defense any thing against it, as there
appears. Also this your Reason includes Master Cranmer, Ridley: etc. to be
no true Christians neither, as has been often alleged.

FR. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 2. Reply to the 4 Reason. Sophistical
distinctions (all men know) are the woonted refuges of bad causes. That yours
is such, I showed before. Now as it was, so you leave it still, even idle and
frivolous. It was between the whole function and exercise of publik worship
performed in the Turkish or Popish Asse^blies; and between the outvvard calling
to the Ministry and ceremonies among them. The first thing I brought against
it was this, Who knows not that these latter are of the very same nature
with the former? Now this you pass by, like a smooth Priest, as if you saw it
not. And that which follows after, you say is the first of my answer. Look
again, and see if you speak truth: and leave this dealing.

Yet what say you now to that which I asked next, whether the one were not
asvvell as the other false Antichristian and accursed? Your answer is, they are
not asvvell, that is not as much. But is not this mere Sophistry? Is not
Antichrists forbidding of Meats and Marriage asvvell Antichristian and accursed,
as his Mass, Supremacy, Justification by works etc. Yet in the Mr Jacobs
Replies to the 7. Reason.
seventh Reason following you say, they are not as much. Does not he that
steals but one horse, steal asvvell horseflesh, as he that steals five of
six, though he steal not as much? When you say in the sixth Reason Mr Jacobs 2.
Reply to the 6. Reason.
The Samaritans accounted the Idols of the Heathen to be Gods asvvell as the
God of Israel, do you mean that they counted them as much? Or if Mr Jacob be
deemed a learned man asvvell as Mr Cartwright, shall we think it as much? By
your leave, I deny it. Asvvell (properly taken) respects the quality of a
thing; As Much the quantity. Yet so, you confound them as all one. Thus
traveling with a distinction, you have brought forth confusion.

Page 95. 96. 97.
Further where your words and mine were before [of the rest of their worship
and service] now you change them into these [their inward impiety and false
faith against Christ]. Belike you see your cause to be very bad, when you will
not keep either my words or your own, but change them every foot as you do.
But now if after all this chopping and changing I grant all this which you
say, what are you the nearer? Be it (as you say) that the one of these is more
accursed and divelish then the other (as all sins are not equal but one more
grievous then another): yet eve^ this makes against you, and thus you give the
cause. For now you can not deny but they are both of them accursed and
divelish, though the one more, the other less. Can you then as you stand in
that constitution which is accursed and divelish yet be reputed for true
Christians and true Churches? If the Papists for to justify their outward
constitution, should thus allege, That the Turks inward impiety or whole
publik worship were more accursed and divelish then that outvvard
constitution of theirs, would this any whit help them? Nay, should they not
thus yield their own case to be accursed and divelish, though the other to be
more? Behold then how well you defend your Church, and how cu^ningly you yield
the cause.

Where in the next place I asked, if God in his word has given any
commandment more for the latter (mentioned before) then for the other: Page
96.
At this you are as mute as a fish: you have not a word to speak for your self.
Now seeing Gods word approves neither but condemns both, seeing also both of
them are of Antichrist that son of perdition, is it not evide^t that they are
of the same nature, and that the one asvvell as the other is false,
Antichristian, and accursed before God? It skilleth not then for the question
in hand, whether of them be more or less. They that have the least of Gods
curse, will find it heavy enough: howsoever you flatter your self and speak
peace to others, when there is no peace.

To the second point by which I showed your distinction to be idle and
frivolous, you answer not a word neither. Unless it be that you yield to it, in
those words, where you confess you retain and use some of their outward
orders in your Assemblyes. For if you mean it of the particulars Page 96.
there mentioned, then you yield unto it (except you had showed by the word of
God, that having communion with Antichrist in those things, yet you are
notwithstanding to be judged in this constitution true Christians and true
Churches: which hitherto you have not done, neither ever will). If you mean it
not of them, then you keep not the point: and besides you must prove the
contrary to that I have said. Which you never go about.

For the note I gave, you grant it is most true, that such things may be
joined with the doctrines of faith received among you, as will utterly destroy
it, or (to keep the words of my answer, which you love not to do) that in such
estate you can not be deemed true Christians or true Churches; neither the
truths which you hold, be avayleable unto you. Thus all the defense you bring
of your Church proves to be quite nothing in the end. For hereby is evident (as
heretofore I noted) that your Proposition is not general; that both it and the
Assumption are lame and imperfect; and so your whole Argument faulty, and
nothing else but mere Sophistry. Your vnchristia^ and false charge rests upon
your own head: as is proved already in the handling of your Proposition. For
which see, Page 11. 12. 13.

Lastly your reference is nothing else but a refuge whither still you fly to
hide your self, when you can no longer stand in defense of your Church. What
you answered to the first Reason, is there taken away. Now to shut up all, you
sing again the Cuckoes note, your old under song, Mr Cra^mer, Ridley, etc.
Towching whom I have showed before, Page 40. 41.
how they may he counted true Christians, and yet your estate be Antichristian
nevertheles.

Chap. 11. The Fifth Reason against Mr Jacobs Assumption aforesaid.
Fran. Johnson. AS the golden vessels taken out of the Lords house, had and
used in Babylon of the Caldea^s, did not therefore make the Babylonia^s true
Jews touching the faith: Nor their bankets wherein they used them, to be any
of the Lords Feasts (spoken of Leu. 23.) but they still remained Babylonish
people and banquets notwithstanding.

So the truths of the Gospel (vessels as it were of the Lords house) holden and
received in the spiritual Babilo^ (whereof that other was a type) do not make
the people so standing, to be true Christians, Neither their Ministry and
co^stitution to be Christ's. But they still remain the people, Ministry, and
co^stitution of Babylon notwithstanding. See the proofs hereof in Dan.
5.1.2.3.4. compared with Prove. 9.17.18. and Rev. 17.4.5. and 18.4. with
14.8.9.10.11.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the 5. Reason. YOur Reason is this: The material
vessels of Ierurusalem, were of the like power and virtue, to sanctify the
Heathen Babilonians, As the holy christian doctrines in that Book, are to
sanctify us, that hold together with them some Popish ceremonies and orders
as indifferent things:

But those vessels were not sufficient to sanctify those Babilonians.

Ergo, Neither these truths of the Gospel can sanctify us.

An absurd comparison: The Proposition is most false, and so the scriptures
quoted (Dan. 5.1.2.3.4. compared with Pro. 9.17.18. Revel. 17.4.5. and 18.4.
with 14.8.9.10.11.) are as idely and vainly applied. See the Answer to the
allegations in the First Reason before.

FR. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 1. Reply to the 5. Reason. MY Reason is
a comparison between the Caldean and the Romish Babylon, also between the
vessels of the Lords house and the true doctrines of the Gospel. Now this you
say first is an absurd comparison. So belike (if your grave judgment might go
for good payment) the manifold allusions which (in describing the spiritual
Babylon) the Spirit of God makes to the material Babylon of the Caldeans are
to be accounted absurd allusions and comparisons. As also the often alluding
and likening together the * holy things of the Law with the holy things of
the Gospel, and the transgressions then with the transgressions now (which are
so often used in the Scripture) are in your account absurd allusions and
similitudes. Rev. 17. and 18. and 19. chap. compared with Ierem. 50. and 51.
chap. Esaias. 13. and 14. and 21. and 47. chap. * Esaias. 66.20.21. Zach. 14.20.21.
1 Cor. 5.7.8. and 10.2.3.4. Col. 2.11.12. Heb. 13.15.16. 1 Pet. 3.20.21. Rev.
15.3. and 21.10. and c. 2 Timothy 3.8.9. 1 Cor. 10.6. and c. Heb. 12.16.17. Jude,
verse. 11. Rev. 2.14.20. and 20.8.9.

Secondly, you say the Proposition is most false. But in deed it is most true,
and most plainly taught in the fifth of Daniel, Verse. 1.2.3.4. and Lev. 23.
chap. As was alleged before when I first propounded the reason, whereunto yet
you have given no answer. So soundly you defend your cause.

Thirdly you say, These scriptures (Dan. 5.1.2.3.4. with Pro. 9.17.18. Revel.
17.4.5. and 18.4. and 14.8.9.10.11.) are idely and vainly applied. But how do
you show this? Very profoundly sure. You bid us see the answer to the
allegations in the First Reason: And this is all the proof you bring. Well: we
have seen your answer to the allegations there, and find, First, that the
Scriptures here alleged, are not so much as once mentioned there: Secondly,
that your answer to those which are there, is most frivoulous and of no
weight, but against your self, as there is declared. Page 67. 68.

Lastly, in your propounding the Reason here, otherwise then I did myself
(which is a thing very common, but nothing commendable in you) it seems, that
being not able to answer any part thereof, as I had set it down, yet you
thought to help your self by this exception, that the material vessels of
Jerusalem were not of like power and virtue to sanctify the Heathen
Babylonians, as the true doctrines received among the Spiritual Babylonians,
are to sanctify them. But you shall find (if you will consider and compare
together the Scriptures here alleged) that the golden vessels being holy to
the Lord, and taken out of his Temple, did as much sanctify the Caldean
Babylonians and their Feasts: As the holy doctrines (vessels as it were of the
Lords Temple) had among the spiritual Babylonians, do sanctify them and
their constitution: That is, neither of their estates and Assemblies, are
sanctified thereby at all.

For says not the Lord, That the setting of men's posts and thresholds, (how
much more of Babylons enormities) by his Posts and Thresholds, that is, by his
truths and ordinances, is so far from sanctifying, as it defyleth his holy
name, yea is abomination in his sight, and sets a wall between him and them
that do it? Ezech. 43.8. And says not the Scripture again, that the true
doctrines in the false Church are among them as stolen waters and hid bread,
which though they be svveet and pleasant, yet there also the mouth is filled
with gravel and the guestes of those feasts and Assemblies, are so far from
being sanctified by those truths in that estate, as they are before God, even
dead men, and in the deapth of hell. Prove. 9.17.18. and 20.17.

To conclude this poinct, has not an Angel from heaven proclaimed with a
loud voice, that Rev. 18.1.2.3.4.11. etc and 17.1.2.3.4.5. and 14.8.9.10.11.
the spiritual Babylon (notwithstanding any truths she holds, yet) is so
vnsanctifyed and abominable. as she is become a cage of all unclean and
hateful birds; and that all her children and Merchants that will not depart
out of her, shall receive of her plagues and damnation, and drink of the wine
of Gods wrath, and be tormented in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels
and before the Lamb for evermore? Lo here your fearful estate, which you
notwithstanding will needs account holy and acceptable before God.

H. Jacob his 2 Reply to the 5. Reason. IN this your defense of your Fifth
Reason, you mislike that I call it an absurd comparison: Where you affirm that
the golden vessels of the Jews were as available to sanctify the Babilonians,
as the truths of the Gospel which we hold are to sanctify us. In deed your
own words be, holden and received in the spiritual Babylon. By which
terms you mean us of England I trow. But mark sir. Is not this gross
Sophistry again? Is not this childish vanity, open beggerie, and craving of
that which is the whole question? that is, That our Churches are spiritual
Babylon, and as deeply infected in Babylonish impiety as those old Caldeans.
If they were so infected, I grant in deed your Reason would follow: But seeing
it is the question, and seeing we profess our selves true Christians by those
truths of the Gospel which we hold (and as by Gods grace we are in deed) Say
I not well, that this is an absurd Comparison? Yes Master Johnson, it is a
most To match those outvard vessels, (of no sanctity of themselves) with our
inward doctrines of salvation.
impious, absurd, and senceles comparison, and void of common Reason: And it
inwrappeth wrappeth Master Cranmer, Master Ridley, etc. within the same
injurious, you irreligious consequence likewise.

All that you have of allusions, and alluding, between the Typical and
spiritual Babylon, are mere delusions, and vain cavils. Prove us first to be
spiritual Babylon: Or else you fight with your shadow.

So that still I say, those Scriptures quoted of Dan. 5. etc. As also all the
rest here packed together, they are miserably and desperately abused,
according as I rightly referred you to my censure to your First Reason: which
for all your words, you have not refuted. The very same I say of your other
two scriptures toward the end, Prove 9.17. etc. Rev. 18.1. etc. As for Ezech.
43.8. I answered it before Page 71.
in your First Reason.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 2. Reply to the 5. Reason. HAve you said
any thing here first (Mr Jacob) but denied the Conclusion? If you have, show
it. If not, confess your own childish vanity and open beggary, etc. For which
the name of Sophistry is to good, though otherwise it be bad enough, and the
cognizance of all your Replies. Now that this you say is but the denial of the
Conclusion, thus I show, That which I conclude towching your Churches is this,
that they are not constitute according to the ordinance of Christ but according
to the apostasy of Antichrist, that is, that your Churches in their estate are
spiritual Babylon. This (I say) is that which I have concluded heretofore, and
still do throughout my Reasons, Exceptions, Aunswers: and now of purpose have I
set it down at the beginning of this treatise. Page 3.
Your denying of this then, what is it else but the denial of the Conclusion?

But this now being proved, you are driven (nill ye, will ye) plainly to
grant that in deed my Reason will follow. Well Mr Jacob, though it were long
first, yet thus you yield now at length. Better late thrive, then never. Abide
but by this, and I trow you will not now any longer stand member or Minister of
your Assemblies in that estate, neither condemn us any more for separating
from them.

Next, howsoever it were for the question between us, yet the Proposition of
the Comparison cannot but be true, which in your first Reply you said was most
false, and now you would pass by, because you can say nothing against it. Yet
mind Mr Jacob, that in denying it you did there again give the lie to the holy
Ghost, whose doctrine it is, in these Scriptures, Dan. 5.1.2.3.4. Levit. 23.
chap. Prove. 9.17.18.

By all this then you may see, it is your own dealing that is most impious,
absurd, senseless etc. thus to strive (as you have done) against so clear a
truth, and every where in your Replies to fight against God and his word.
Which even here again you cease not to do, whiles you call such allusions and
comparisons as the Scripture uses between the typical and spiritual Babylon,
mere delusions and vain cavils. How I matched together on the one hand, the
vessels of the Lords Temple and the truths of the Gospel; on the other, The
Caldean and spiritual Babylon, may be seen in my former answer. Which may
suffice for any thing you say here, both your marginall note, and all the rest.

I could tell you further (if it needed) that Babel in English is confusion:
And that such is the estate of your Church, even a confusion of all sorts of
people good and bad. Besides that your tounges are divided and your language
confounded (as it was in Genesis 11.9.
Babel of old) whiles the Prelates, the Reformists, your self and the like (as
Neuters between both) speak some one thing, some another, towching your
Hierarchy, worship, Canons, etc. some The Prel. and Formal.
that they are of God and to be kept and obeyed for conscience sake; some The
Sekers of Reform.
that they are of Antichrist, and to be removed and witnessed against unto
death, though every hair of the head were a life; some Mr Jacob and the like.
that they are neither of God, neither of Antichrist, simply, fundamentally,
indifferently, etc. And thus as men confounded in your selves (by the just
judgment of God) your toungues are divided, you know not your selves what to
make and account of these things, or one of another.

I could also put you in mind, that as the Caldean Babylon was, so the
spiritual Babylon is, notorious for false worship toward God, and for
persecution of his people, keeping them in thraldom and captivity. See M.
Iacob^ Repl. before,
And that now the estate of your Church is such ( viz, worshipping God after a
false manner never prescribed by himself, kept in subjection to your
Antichristian Prelates, and persecuting the people of God by prisonment, exile,
death, etc.) it is so evident, as when you are called upon to show warrant for
these among you, your usual answer is no other but after this sort: Page 37.
Let the State which mainteyneth these things, answer for them; Page 70.
For my part, I never thought other but our Church corruptions are against the
Second commandment; Page 72.
It is no part of my mind to justify them; Page 84.
Our doctrine appoints Gods worship by Men's precepts after a sort; Page 92.
Our Hierarchy was never but naught; Mr Jacobs 2. Reply to the 6. Reason
following.
I never intended, much less professed to justify our whole Ministry, estate,
and manner of worship; His Replies to the 7. and 8 Reasons.
We depart from and deny the faith in our Ministry etc. but not totally,
simply, fundamentally; His 2. Reply to the 9. Reason.
I list not to meddle with them, I have no leisure etc.

Now then Mr Jacob, say I not well that your Churches in this estate are
spiritual Babylon? And have I not made a fit comparison between it and the
Caldean Babylon of old, between the doctrines of truth in the one and the holy
vessels in the other? If the comparison be good, strive no more against it, but
yield to the truth, as you have begun. If it be evil, convince it by Scripture
whence I borrowed it, as the testimonies I alleged declare. Until you do this
(which will not be in have) know that the Scriptures here cited are fitly
applied to the purpose in hand. If you see it not; fear least you be miserably
and desperately blinded. And take heed you do not still run on wilfully to
destruction. Remember what is written in Esa. 6.9.10. Mat. 13.14.15. Ioh.
12.37-43. Act. 28.25.26.27.

Towching the place of Ezech. 43.8. I have answered in the handling of the
first Reason. Page 80.

For Mr Cranmer, Mr Ridley, etc. I have also answered, Page 40. 41. You that do
so often tell us of them, if you had but so much as how of any Scripture for
your estate, is it like you would be silent therein? Nay sure you would not
spare much more to tell us of that again and again. And so let the Reader
mind it.

Chap. 12. The Sixth Reason against Mr Jacobs Assumption aforesaid.
Fr. Io. THe Samaritans (those counterfeit children of Abraham Isaak and Jacob)
did publicly profess that most excellent doctrine of the Messiah to come
(the truth of which doctrine how powerful it was to salvation the Scriptures
testify). Yet does our Savior Christ repute them false worshippers of God,
because their worship was a mixed one, framed after the inventions of men and
traditions of their Forefathers. Therefore says Christ unto them, Ye worship
that which ye know not, we worship that which we know, for salvation is of the
Jews. By which appears, 1. That although the Samaritans professed this
saving truth, yet (being false worshippers of God) they could not truly
challendge unto themselves in such estate, the benefit thereof. 2. That the
Jews and they which held their faith, being then the true Church and people of
God, to whom his Oracles were committed, and to whom his Couenantes and service
did appertain, Christ therefore accounted the Jews (and not the Samaritans)
to be the true worshippers of God and heirs of salvation. John. 4.22. compared
with ver. 20.25.29. and with 2 King. 17.24. etc.

In like manner, the people of these Ecclesiastical assemblies standing subject
to a counterfeit Ministry and worship, (being also commingled together of all
sorts of people:) Though they profess some truths which otherwise are
available to salvation, yet can not in such estate by the word of God be deemed
true Christians or true Churches. Neither can (so standing) challendge unto
themselves the benefit of those true doctrines which they profess: because God
has not made his promise unto any false Church or worshippers of him: neither
committed unto any such (but only to his true Church and worshippers) his
service and holy things of his word, prayer, Sacraments, Censures, etc.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the 6. Reason. THis your Sixth Reason is, The
Samaritans (believing that Messiah should come, John 4.25.) were as near
salvation as we of England are. But they were false worshippers for all that.
Ergo, so are we, for all our holy doctrines believed according to that Book of
Articles.

I deny the proposition. The Samaritans might know by hearsay and believe, the
Messiah should come, and Balaam did know it, Nomb. 24.17. and the Devils do
now know and believe, Iam. 2.17. Yet none of these believed [in] him. It
follovveth not therefore, that they were as nigh salvation as we of England.
In a word, there is a Reason manifest. These Samaritans joined Heathenish
Idols with the God of Israel. 2 King. 17. Which wholy destroyed the truth in
them, though they did reteyne some memorial amongst them of Messiah to come.
Page 62
Wherefore here take the Second Answer to the First Reason before. But I will
help you with an Objection, surely one fitter then all these.

The Israelites under Jeroboam at Dan and Bethell served not Pagan Idols,
Jerusalem. 2 King. 12.32. Amos. 4.4. Howbeit they were false worshippers,
only for their false Ministry and outward false worship, for all that they
believed in the God of Jerusalem otherwise rightly.

Ergo, so are we of England only fot our false Ministry and outvvard
worship.

To this we aunsvvere also, what additions of devices, My meaning was, the
Levites were not of Aarons line, but the Prists only.
Aarons line the only Priests and Leuits. Therefore they could not be indeed
true worshippers, nor within the covenant, nor near to salvation, when they
all openly rebelled, and forsook them desperately, whom the Lord had so
expressly chosen. Now our assemblies throughout England have not their
consciences so convicted in the Hyerarchie and Ceremonies. Ergo, we may be in
the covenant, which they were not, for all our corruptions.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 1. Reply to the 6. Reason. THis Reason
(as the rest) you neither propound as we did, nor make answer directly and
soundly to any part thereof. Now that the nakedness of your answer, and light of
the truth may better appear, we will propound the Reason more plainly in a
Syllogism, thus.

The people and assemblies, whose Ecclesiastical constitution is such as to
them in that estate the Covenantes, holy things, and service of God do not
appertain, they can not in such constitution by the word of God be deemed true
Christians or true Churches, whatsoever truths they profess besides.

But such is the Ecclesiastical constitution of the people and asse^blies of
England, as unto them in that estate the Covenauntes, holy things, and service
of God do not apperteyne.

Therefore the people and Assemblies of England, can not in that co^stitution,
by the word of God, be deemed true Christians or true Churches, whatsoever
truths they profess besides.

The Proposition none will deny. The Assumption is proved thus:

The people and Assemblies whose Ecclesiastical constitution is such, as they
worship God after a false manner, never appointed by himself, nor approved in
his word: their constitution is such, as unto them in that estate, the
covenaunts, holy things, and service of God do not apperteine.

But such is the Ecclesiastical constitution of the people and Asse^blies of
England, as they worship God after a false manner, never appointed by himself,
nor approved in his word.

Therefore the Ecclesiastical constitution of the people and Assemblies of
England is such, as unto them in that estate, the Couenaunts, holy things, and
service of God, do not apperteyne.

The Proposition was proved by the example of the Samaritans, and by Christ's
speech concerning them in such estate, Ioh. 4. and 2 King. 17. whereunto you
answer nothing to any purpose, save that what you say, is against your self.
For where you grant, That the Samaritans, and Balaam knew and believed the
Messiah should come, yea and that the Devils know and beleev there is a God,
and that Jesus is the Christ, the holy one of God: Who sees not, that most
excellent truths may be acknowledged, and yet they which so profess, be not
therefore in their estate true Christians or true Churches, to whom the
Couenauntes, holy things and service of God do apperteine?

And where next you say, The Samaritans believed not in the Messiah, it will be
heard for you to prove it, seeing you take belief in Christ so, as it is had
in the spiritual Babylon and her daguhters; and seeing also the Samaritans
professed and believed, not only that the Messiah should come, but even he
which is called Christ, and that when he came he would declare unto them all
things. In so much as when Jesus was come, and had spoken but to a woman of
Samaria, the Scripture witnesses, that many of the Samaritans of that city
beleved [in him] for the saying of the woman which testified, he has told me
all things that ever I did. John 4.25.26.29.30.39.

Thirdly where you say, The Samaritans joined Heathnish Idols with the God of
Israel, whih wholly destroyed the truth in them: By this again it is evident,
even in your own confession, both that such things may be joined with the
doctrines of truth, as (in that estate) they which profess those truths, can
not be judged true Christians or true Churches, to whom the promises and holy
things of God do belong; and that therefore also, the Proposition of your
principal and maine Argument is not general, but of necessity admits
limitation. So then your maine defense falls to the ground. Of which see
further Page 5. etc.

Moreover, in that you say, The Samaritans joined Heathnish Idols with the God
of Israel (2 King. 17.) If you mean, that they worshipped the Idols
themselves, ^ King. 17.
sacrifycing to them, and accompting them to be Gods as well as the God of
Israel, and so brake the First commandment, as before you affirmed in your
answer to the First Reason: then I take it, that here again you are deceived.
The scripture says they worshipped and sacrifized to the Lord God of Israel.
So as their sin was against the Second commandment, in that worshipping the
true God, See before, Page 67. 68.
they did it in, and by those Images, as also by other devices of their own
and traditions of their predecessors.

That this was their case (besides that it appears in the chapter alleged)
it is most plainly testified, 1. First by themselves, in the book of Ezra,
where they speak to the Jews of the captivity, that builded the Temple,
saying: Ezra. 4.1.2
We will build with you, for we seek the Lord your God as ye do, and we have
sacrifyced unto him since the time of Esar Haddon King of Ashur, which brought
us up hither. 2. Secondly, by the speech that was between Christ and the woman
of Samaria, Ioh. 4. where it is manifest, the Ioh. 4.20.21 22.23.24.25.29.30.
contention between the Jews and the Samaritans, was not whether only the
true God was to be worshipped, but (both of them agreeing in that) whether
the solemn place of his worship was in Jerusalem, or in the mount of
Samaria, etc. 3. Lastly, by your own confession, when Page 105.
you say the Israelites under Jeroboam at Dan and Bethel, served not Pagan
Idols but the true God after their own devices. For the Samaritans (as the 2
King. 17.28.32.33.
Scripture testifyeth) worshipped the same God, and after the same manner that
the Nations did which were carried from thence. Now the nations thence
carried, were the ten Tribes of Israel that fell away from Judah to Jeroboam.
Who likewise 1 King. 12.27.28.29.30.31. with 2 King. 17.32.33.40.41.
feared the Lord and served their Images, that is, God in and by their Images:
As now also the Samaritans did that were come in their stead. Hitherto of your
answer which seems to concern the Proposition of the latter Syllogism.

The Assumption was showed by this, that your Assemblies being commingled
together of all sorts of people, you have also for your worship of God, a
counterfeit Ministry and service, devised by man: This you do rightly
understand (as we mean it) of your Hierarchy and other abominations before
rehearsed. Page 63. etc.
Which deceiptfully here again you would smother up under the name of
ceremonies. Touching which sleight of yours, sufficient is said before in the
handling of the First Reason.

But what say you now concerning the Assumption or proof of it? Do you deny it?
Not so. What then do you say for your counterfeit Hierarchy, worship, etc. Not
a word but this, That your assemblies in England have not their consciences
convicted in these, as the people under Jeroboam could not but have their
consciences convicted then, touching their worship and Priesthood. But first
if this were so, is it any just defense of your Ministry, worship, or estate,
that yet you see them not to to be unlawful, as it could not be but they under
Jeroboam saw theirs to be? If this were a sufficient reason, might not the
grossest Papists plead likewise for their Ministry, worship, and estate: as
also the Usurers, extortioners, and persecutors, for themselves and their
wickedness? And by this reason, God should not have sent Lions among the
Samaritans, 2 King. 17.26.
because yet they knew not the manner of worshipping the God of Israel, neither
had their consciences convicted therein.

But Christ has taught us otherwise, Luk 12.48.
that even that servant, which knovveth not his Masters will, and yet
commits things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten, though with fewer
stripes, then he that knovveth and does it not. And of those Israelites
aforesaid the Lord himself testifies Hos. 4.6.
that they were destroyed for lack of knowledge. So then your peoples
ignorance (which you plead) can be no sufficient defense for your estate. Or
if it could, yet it seems they of Israel might as well have alleged it for
themselves, seeing the Lord witnesses of them Hos. 4.1.
that there was no knowledge of God in the land. And thus the Objection also
here brought by your self, remains still vnaunswered.

Where you say, Aarons Line were the only Priests and Levites, you are also
mistaken therein. In deed Aarons Line only was the Priests, but the Levites
were generally of the Tribe of Levi, though not of Aarons line.

But to let this pass: We would know a sufficient reason, why the true
worship and Ministry appointed by Christ in his Testament, should not be
as well known unto you in these days, as in the defection of Israel? You say,
They could not but know that Jerusalem was the only place, and Aarons line
the only Priests. Well then: Have not you the Scriptures as much as they had?
Or has not Heb. 3.1.2.3.4.5.6.
Christ the son ben as faithful in the house of God, and as plainly set
down his will for his true worship and Ministry in the time of the Gospel,
as Moses the servant was and did for the time of the Law? Yea and have not
Witness the publik Treatises, Sermons, Admonitions, Co^plaintes, Supplicatio^s
and Demonstrations, to the Parliament, beside the bands and sufferings of many
in this behalf.
these by the word ben made manifest to the consciences of men in these days,
and even to the high Court of Parliament, representing the whole body of the
land: as the other were to the Israelites in the time of their defection?
Finally does not this Land stand in as open rebellion against, and forsaking
of the true Ministry, worship, and order appoincted by Christ to his Church
now, as they did then (if not more open and greevous) not only for the causes
aforsaid, but because you have also Witness the Pontifical, Porruis, Canons,
and Constitution of the popish and your assemblies, compared together.
received and still retain a false Ministry, worship, and confusion of the
Man of sin, that son of perdition, and capital enemy of the Lord Jesus
Christ? And yet moreover least you should be behind them in any thing, and not
every way far exceed them, do also Witness your prisons gallovves Statutes
and c
persecute unto bands, exile, and death, such as bear witness to the truth of
Christ, against your abominations.

By this then is manifest, that you have neither justified your estate in
respect of the Apostate Israelites, nor answered the Objection page 105.
here framed by your self against your present constitution. So that it also
still remains upon you as a testimony against your present estate. We indeed
neither did nor needed propound it, as a several Reason among those we set
down, because it is of like nature with those which we have already mentioned
in the Second and Sixth Reasons here before alleged. Page 82. and 104.

H. Jacob his 2. Reply to the 6. Reason. IN this your defense of your 6. Reason
you say, That the Proposition of your last syllogism, [They that worship God
after a false manner, Page 106.
are no true Christians] is proved by the example of the Samaritans, and that I
answer nothing against it.

First I say there you sophisticate again. And it seems you can do nothing
else in argumentation. For your Proposition is aequivocall and ambiguous. If
you mean they that worship God after a false manner, that is totally or else
Fundamentally. Then I clearly grant it, and that the Samaritans do prove the
same, seeing they erred Fundamentally. But your Assumption touching us, is then
utterly false. You bring not a syllable or one letter, to prove either of these
two against us, in all your writing, neither can you, but bare begging of the
controversy which is infinite often. If you mean in your Proposition, They
that serve God after a false manner, that is, in part, not wholly nor
Fundamentally, As namely in the Hierarchy and external ceremonies as Cranmer
etc. Then I say and a vouch confidently in the presence of God, that such may
be true Christians, though imperfect in many things. Yea infinite, such have been, are, and may be hereafter, true Christians. The contrary whereof, is no
less then horrible blasphemy against God and his Saints, wherefore your
Proposition is showed to be again sophistical, as also those were in your
Third Exception, and First and Second Reasons.

Secondly where you say, the Samaritans prove it, and I say nothing against it.
Mark you. First I said, the Samaritans might know by hearsay, and yet not
faithfully believe [in] the Messiah. You cannot be ignorant, that there is a
great difference between an obscure rumor, which some of them might receive
from their neighbor Jews, and yet not have it constantly believed, and held
publicly among them, as their common faith. If thus the Samaritans believed
the coming of Messiah, they are in no comparison with us, we hold our most
holy faith and doctrine by the word professedly, as the public ordinance of
our Churchs shows. But further let it be howsoever they held the coming of
Messiah, yet I answered, The Samaritans joined Heathenish Idols wih the God of
Israel which wholly destroyed the truth in them. And this is the very truth
indeed, howsoever you will not yield it. For you say, that they broke not the
First commandment, they worshipped not the Idols themselves, nor sacrifised
to them, etc. This is proved apparently false in the Text. 2 kings. 17.29, 30,
31. Every nation made their Gods and put them in the houses of the high places
which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their Cities wherein they
dwelt. 2 King. 17.
For the men of Babel made Succoth-Benoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergall and
the men of Hamath made Ashima. And the Auims made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the
Sepharuims burnt their children in the fire to Adramdech and Anammelech the
Gods of Sepharuim: Therefore they worshipped the Idols of the Heathen and
sacrifized to them, and accounted them to be Gods asvvell as the God of
Israel. And so broke the First commandment, and therefore they touch not us
in this question, As the like I page 71.
have truly and well declared before, against your First Reason. Your
proofs, page 107.
that the Samaritans brake not the First commandment are nothing. (1) That of
Ezra. 4.1.2. that they sought the Lord as the Jews did etc. was their
counterfeit hypocrisy and false brag, yea their divelish co^spiracy against the
worship of the Jews God. Do you beleve their words here in this place, that
they are true indeed? I grant as I noted before out of 2 Kings 17. they had a
mixed worship, something of the Jews God, but very much and (as by the
Chapter seems) most of the Heathens Gods.

Page 107.
2. Secondly, where you say out of John. 4. That it is manifest, there was no
contention between the Jews and the Samaritans, whether only the true God was
to be worshipped. There appears no word of any such thing. A bold assertion.
Our Savior indeed notes verse. 21. One difference between them, that was,
but about the place of worshipping on occasion of the vvomans words: But
that there was no difference between them in the observing of the First
commandment, he says not. The contrary you savv before proved in 2. King.
17.30.31.

3. Thirdly you urge my confession, That the Israelites under Jeroboam served
not Pagan Idols but the true God after their own devices. And you would prove
it too, by 2 King. 17.28.32.33. Seeing the Samaritans worshipped after the
manner of the nations that dwelt there before they came, who were the Ten
tribes that Jeroboam drew away. I aunsvvere, First it is great shame, that you
make this my confession, when I expressly bring it in as your Objection, Page
105.
whereunto I set mine answer, that the Idolatry under Jeroboam seems far
grosser anb filthier then the vvorst is with us, which I make manifest by the
scripture, not only 1. King. 12.28. where Jeroboam erected visible Idols, and
very filthy ones, even calves and brute beasts: which if they were but to
worship God by, yet who would compare our Ecclesiastical orders to them,
which (...) viz. the general state.
we profess are but indifferent things, for order and comeliness only.
Further I allege 2 Chronicles. 11.15. where Jeroboam is said to appoinct Priests,
for the high places, for Devils, and for the Calves that he had made. So I
confess little to your advantage. Secondly, if the Samaritans worshipped (as
they did indeed) like the Ten tribes before them, then you are clean gone.
For though Jeroboam at the First had not joined in the Heathenish Idolatry, Yet
Ahab did 1 King. 16.32.33. and his Son Ahaziah had further Baalzebub the God
of Ekron. Yea the Israelites, as they of Jerusalem afterward, were Idolaters
much alike 2 King. 17.19. But we read of the Jews under Ahas 2 Chro. 28.23.
and Manasses and Amon. 2 King. 21. and 23.4.5.10.11.12.13. That they used the
very Pagans Idolatry. Yea it is expressed, 2 King 17.8.11.16.17. That these
Ten Tribes used the very same. Therefore the Samaritans doing as the Israelites
did, held such gross Idolatry as could by no means stand with the true
serving of God. Finally as before is noted 2 King. 17.29.30.31. does express
this gross Heathenish Idolatry of the Samaritans. Page 109.
Surely it appears more gross and worse then the Israelites before them. And
therefore you are greatly deceived both here and in the defense of your First
Reason before: Page 67.68.
where you expreslie maintain these Samaritans to hold no Heathnish Idolatry
but only to cleave to the God of Israel in an outward devised corrupt
worship. They acknowledged him I grant, but him only I deny, as has been
proved.

Page 68.
Further you affirm in your defense of your First Reason, That they professed
the written law to be the rule, both for their inward belief, and outward
manner of worship. Where you would prove it For that the Apostate Israelites
did so of whom Ezeck speaks. Ezekiel. 43.8.
First this follows not, because the Heathnish Samaritans were further from
sincerity, then the natural Israelites commonly. Secondly, Israel it self in
this vvretched Apostasy, held not the written law for their rule, seeing
professedly they left this rule, and did constantly worship Calves, and
sacrifized at Dan and Bethel. Thirdly, Ezechiell shows, even there, cap.
43.7.8. they kept not this rule, but departed therefrom, and that as appears
professedly, and constantly. Which most of all is scene in Ahab, Ahaziah, Ahas,
Manasses, and Amon, as is before noted. Page 71.110
Wherefore in these your sayings Master Johnson, you are intollerably too
blame and foully deceived. As for example, They professed that which they did
in 2 Kings. 17.29.30.31. was that after the rule of the written Law?

Next you oppugn me, for that I alleged our Assemblies throughout England,
have not their consciences convicted in the Hierarchy and ceremonies, you say"
If this were so, is it any just defense of your Ministry, worship, Page 107.
estate etc. I tell you it is a just defense for our Ministry, worship, and
estate to be as touching the substance and foundation of Christianity, sound
and acceptable to God. Refute it if you can. I know it is no just defense of
our whole Ministry, estate, and manner of worship, which I never intended,
much less professed to justify.

Where you would snatch at an advantage about Aarons line, my meaning was,
that they of Aaron were only for Priests, and their brethren of Leui, only for
Levites.

But you pass this, and you set your self in earnest, to prove us all
convicted in conscience about our Hyerarchy and ceremonies. So that here you
avouch openly, Page 5.
that third general poinct which I observed in my very beginning above, for
the which you have this Reason. Have not we the scriptures as much as the
Apostate Isralites had? Or did not Christ as fully and plainly set down our
Ministry and worship in the Gospel, as Moses in the Law? I answer, this is
true, as touching the word it self. In the Gospel we are taught as plainly and
as fully for the word it self, as the Jews were in Moses: But it is not yet so
plain for our understanding and use. Why? Because we have had a
discontinuance of the The Pastors of the Churches since, have had many
corruptions mixed in their callings, they have not ben pure and simple ever
since or at last we cannot prove it otherwise, by any records now extant.
simple offices of Pastors, Teachers and Elders for the space of a Thousand
Three hundredth, or a Thousand Four hundredth Years, and a continuance of the
Prelacie all this while hitherto. Also, for that many ancient, and late
learned, and Godly Christians, have believed it, at least convenient, if not
necessary in the Church. And they have expounded the Scriptures so that they
carry no small ambiguity in this matter, in infinite Thousands judgment. Thus
it has pleased God in his providence, to suffer this mistaking amongst
Christians, thus long, and thus universally. Whereby it comes to pass, that
infinite Thousand consciences are not easily convicted, though they be
mistaken in this case. With the Jews it was not so in this matter that we
talk of. As Moses and the Prophets were most plain, that Jerusalem must be
the only place of solemn worship, Arons line the only Priests, no Calves,
nor any visible kind of Image or means to worship God in: So also they
constantly and perpetually practiced that course, even from Moses till the
Apostacy of Jeroboam. When any sqared from this course, these were not only
rebuked expreslie by Gods voice in his Prophets, from time to time: but also
the obstinate, were most fearfully smitten with Gods miraculous hand from
heaven. So that for any to offend in these poinctes as Jeroboam did, it could
not possible be but in presumptuous rebellion, with a high hand against God,
and with a convicted and seared conscience. Which I say cannot with any show
of sense, be said of many Thousand Christians in this case touching the
Praelacie, etc.

Further you urge these Reasons, That this cause has been made manifest to the
consciences of men, page 108.
yea to the Parliament of late times. You say well to the consciences of men:
but not to the consciences of all men, or the most men throughout the land. Yea
or the most of them that know and fear God, according to the religion now
mainteyned, This is the very question. If you mean so, that all men's
consciences are co^uicted in this matter, all men surely will either pity
your simplicity, or laugh at your folly. I pray you Master Johnson, consider
your self, you were a true Christian, long before you fell into this
separation. Yea moreover you were learned, yea you knevv and acknowledged
these very corruptions a great while, and yet condemned us not, Nay you
condemned the separation earnestly. I pray you is it not possible that numbers,
who see not so far as you did then, should still condemn your separation,
and yet be true Christians, as you acknowledge that your self then was? meipso
test.

That which you add page ibid.
of persecuting unto bands exile and death, to prove our utter abolishing from
Christ generally: It is a toy. First if you were merely innocent, yet this
could not make us worse then the Jews in Chrstes time: who for all that they
persecuted, yet were they not wholly fallen from God. Secondly you suffer indeed
more then you need, H. ^a.
if that you would but acknowledge the grace of God with us so far as it is.
It is therefore not Christ's Cross in that regard, but your own that you
bear.

Finally let it be noted, if M. Johnson his contrariety proved b^tvvene his 2.
Reason and his 6. reason.

Fr. Io. Not proved, but pretended. See my Answer here following.


here in this your 6. Reason you be not directly contraty to your self, as I
hue observed in your 2. Reason: Page 85. For you say here, Page 104. That not
the Samaritans, but the Jews, were then by Christ counted the true worshippers
of God, and heirs of salvation, Ioh. 4.22. But in your Second Reason, Page 82.
you say: They that teach for doctrine men's precepts, as Mat. 15.9.
there Christ says the Jews then did, those in particular are no true
Christians, nor their assemblies true Churches. Therefore you infer, (or else
you pretend it) that those particular Jews were not then true worshippers,
nor their Assembles true Churches: which is a flat contradiction, Or else what
is. But if you mean not this of the Jews, then you abuse the scripture and
us, turning it clean from them, whom in your Reason you speak of, and whom
Christ therein expressly means.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to M. Jacobs 2. Reply to the 6. Reason. MAny such
things (Mr Jacob) I have often heard: Yet God forbid, that I should justify you
or your estate. He that justifyeth the wicked, and he that condemns the
just, even they both are abomination to the Lord. Therefore dare I not either
justify your Churches wicked estate and persecution, Prove. 17.15.
or condemn the righteous servants of God which witness the truth against you.
But you Mr Jacob have done both, in this Reply of yours: the abomination
whereof will further appear in the discussing of the particulers hereafter.

Words in deed you have enough, as thinking belike that at least you have some
show on your side: but they are all to no purpose, save against your selves. I
will now examine them from point to point.

First for the Reason it self, the Proposition of the first Syllogism being so
clear as you can with no color deny it, you come therefore to the latter.
Where you pretend first to set it down, and then to answer it. Yet in deed
you do neither. Thus first you set it down; They that worship God after a
false manner, are no true Christians. But put on your spectacles, or (if you
please) your eye of glass, and try again if you can read any better. He that
has but the half eye you speak of sometimes, may see I propounded it thus,
Page 106.
The people and Assemblies whose ecclesiastical constitution is such as they
worship God after a false manner, never appointed by himself nor approved in his
word: their constitution is such as unto them in that estate the covenants,
holy things, and service of God do not appertain. This you see is the latter
Proposition; Why then did you not thus propound it? Why do you still transform
my words and Arguments into others of your own? Is it because you can find no
answer to them, as I have propounded them? Or because men should see in deed
that to be in your self, which you do vainly object unto me, viz, That you do
sophisticate, and can do nothing else in argumentation?

Towching your answer to the Proposition, If you had kept my words, what needed
(I pray you) this vain distinction of yours? Specially where there is no
ambiguitie at all? Was there ever any professing to worship the true God in
Christ that did worship him after a false manner totally, that is, in all the
particulars of their worship? Look to the Ethiopian Churches, to the Papists,
to any other false worshippers of God professing Christ: and see if their case
be such. Do they not hold and preach much truth? Do they not baytize in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost? etc. If you say, where the
constitution of a Church establishes a false worship of God never prescribed
by himself, there though they seem to have some good things, yet by reason of
such constitution and practice their whole worship is false before God totally:
then say I also your case is such, and therefore so of us to be esteemed. Thus
if there be any thing in your pretended distinction, it is against your self.

But you have another clause in it, of worshipping God after a false manner
fundamentally. This you say you do not in the Hierarchy and external
ceremonies: and therefore you avouch confidently that such may be true
Christians, and that the contrary hereof is no less then blasphemy etc. 1.
First Mr Jacob this is but your bare affirmation, without any warrant produced
from the Scripture. 2. Secondly you say, such may be true Christians: whereas
for the point in hand you should have said, all such as towching the
Church-constitution wherein they stand are true Christians. If you thus
affirm, prove it by the word of God. If you cannot, it will appear to be
blasphemy rather in your self so to affirm, then in others to deny it.
Remember, it is Of this see Before, Page 7. 8.
one thing for men to say, such may be accounted true Christians (being
considered apart from the Church constitution wherein they stand); and another
to say, such as towching their Chur-constitution are to be accounted true
Christians. 3. Thirdly set the Reader mind, how under the term of external
ceremonies, you would still hide the impiety of your false worship, and most
filthy heap of your Antichristian abominations. 4. Fourthly, set you down by
the word of God what is fundamental: and see if I prove not the Antichristian
errors among you to be such. They subvert Christ's office; they are doctrines of
Devils; Col. 2.8. 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3 Rev. 14.9-12. 2 These. 2.3-12
marks of the Beast; lies and unrighteousness of Antichrist; the mystery of
iniquity; the apostasy of the son of perdition etc. Consider now with your
self, what will follow hereupon. 5. Fifthly although your errors were not
fundamental, yet for the Proposition it skilleth not, so as your constitution
be such as is there spoken of. Either therefore must you prove your
constitution to be otherwise, or else both the Proposition and the Assumption
stand firm against you: as I have proved for both. 6. For Mr Cranmer etc.
(whose errors you oppose more unto us then any word of God) I have answered
already, and showed how their case and yours is not alike. Page 40. 41. Besides
that I doubt not but some erring in fundamental points (as diverse of the
Martyrs have done) may yet be partakers of salvation. Of which point see more
in the second Exception Pa. 44. etc
before, and the The answer to Mr Jacobs 2. Reply to the 7. Reason.
next Reason hereafter following. 7. Lastly, concerning your confident avouch
in the presence of God, know you not that the Friars and Monks for their
callings, and all false worshippers for their service of God, will avouch as
much and as confidently as you do here? Yea and allege that it is no less
then horrible blasphemy against God and his Saints, to say the contrary? Is
this therefore of any weight for their defense? No more then for yours. To
turn your own words then upon your self, you bring not a syllable or one
letter in all your writing, neither can you, for warrant of your estate,
neither against that I have said to the contrary, but bare begging of the
controversy which is infinite often, and mere sophistical dealing every
where rife throughout your Replies. Of the third Exception and first and second
Reasons enough is said before in the handling of them. All the Sophistry you
have, will not prove them sophistical. If you think good, you may try your
skill once again. Yet remember how you are foiled already, and know that
still you shall find the light of the truth to shine and the power thereof to
prevail against you, as always it has and will against all adversaries
who^soever.

For the Samaritans (whose example proves the Proposition) I noted first, that
most excellent truths may be acknowledged, and yet they which so profess not
be in their estate true Christians or true Churches, to whom appertain the
covenants etc. This you pass by, as if you saw it not. Belike that your Reader
might the less mind it. Next I required proof for that you said, The
Samaritans believed not in the Messiah. Now in stead of proof you bring us, it
might be, if it were so, let it be howsoever etc. But Ifs and Ands cannot be
received for proof. Specially when such evidence is showed for their faith in
the Messiah, as may be seen in Ioh. 4.25.26.29.30.39.

Where you say, you hold your faith and doctrine by the word professedly, as
the publik ordinance of your Church shows: I neither hear you prove it, nor
see the ordinance of your Church show it. The contrary I have declared before,
and occasion there will be to speak of it again. In the mean time tell me,
whether you hold by the word professedly your faith and doctrine towching the
Hierarchy, the forbidding of meats and marriage, and the other particulars
mentioned before, Page 63. etc.

Tell me also whether your Churches faith and doctrine, for Christ's descension
into Hell, be held by the word professedly among you, viz, That Christ's soul
went down into Hell, whiles his body lay in the grave. I know (Mr Jacob) for
your part you will not stick to say, your Churches doctrine is not thus. For
so I remember you have answered D. Bilson now Prelate of Winchester in a
treatise which you wrote against him concerning this point. But how do you show
it in that book of yours? H.I. his treatise of Christ's sufferings and descending
into Hell. Page 172. 173
Thus forsooth. The Articles of the Synod holden in K. Edwards time have thus,
As Christ dyed for us and was buried, so also it is to be believed that he went
down into Hell. For his body lay in the grave until the Resurrection, but his
spirit gone out from it was with the Spirits which were detained in prison or
in Hell, and preached unto them, as the place of Peter testifyeth. But your
Synod holden since in the year 1562. you say corrects it, and has thus
only, As Christ dyed for us and was buried, so we are to beleve also that he
descended into Hell: Which you translate thus, that he went unto the Dead. The
rest following in the Article of the former Synod, your latter does not
mention. Hereupon you gather thus. It repeateth and ratifyeth part of the
foresaid Article in express words: but part of it, even Not all.
all and every whit that contains this doctrine expressly of Christ's going
down to the Hell of the damned, it cutteth of, it puts out, it casts away.
Therefore you conclude, that the publik sentence of your Churches, yea the Law
of the Land confirming the same, is against this opinion of Christ's descending
into Hell.

But in earnest (Mr Jacob) do you think this reason is good? Then for your
learning mark this which follows, as good as yours and all one. The Letany
See the Books of Common Prayer and Ordering Priests etc. printed in K. Edw.
time.
in K. Edwards time ran thus, From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and all
his detestable enormityes, good Lord deliver us. But your Letany since in this
Queens time corrects it, not mentioning this clause at all. It repeateth and
ratifyeth part of that Letany in express words; but part of it, even all and
every whit of the clause aforsaid concerning the Bishop of Rome and his
enormityes to be prayed against, it cutteth of, it puts out, it casts
away. Look in all your books of Common prayer now published, and you shall find
it as I say. Therefore by your Logic it will follow, that the publik sentence
of your Churches, yea the Law of the Land confirming the same, is against this,
that any should pray to be delivered from the Bishop of Rome and all his
derestable enormityes. If you will have your reason go for current, then let
this also go with it hand in hand.

Now because you would here persuade us, that the publik ordinance of your
Church shows you hold your faith and doctrine by the word professedly, I will
further prove unto you that it is the faith (or in deed an heresy) of your
Church, that Christ's soul went down into Hell, while his body was in the
grave. First the third Article of Book of Artic. published 1562.
your faith agreed upon in the year 1562. has this title, Of the going down
of Christ into Hell. Then the words of the Article follow thus, As Christ dyed
for us and was buried, so also it is to be believed that he went down into
Hell. Your translating and changing of the words of the Article otherwise then
they do themselves (as I noted before) shows not their meaning, but your
perverting thereof. I omit, that in your answer to D. Bilson you set not the
words of the Article of K. Edwards time in English at all. Belike you saw, it
would sooner have discovered your fraud. Secondly M. Nowell in his On the
Artic. of the Creed, He descended into Hell.
Catechism says as much as your Article does. And this Catechism is
authorized in an whole Syn. Land. Anno. 1571.
Synod, and comanded to be taught throughout the Land. Thirdly (to put the
matter out of all doubt) the singing Psalms printed with privilege and
authorized to be sung in all your Churches In the Psalm. beginning thus, All my
belief and confidence etc.
have it expressly, thus, And so he dyed in the flesh, but quickened in the
spirit:
His body then was buried, as is our use and right.
His spirit did after this descend, into the lower parts:
To them that long in darkness were, the true light of their hearts.


Note also that the title of this Psalm is, The 12. Articles of Christian
faith. Is not this then your Churches express faith and doctrine? Yea, is not
that also expressed here, which in the Article in K. Edwards time was
mentioned? How badly then and sophistically do you plead about your Churches
faith and ordinance herein? Towching which (I mean, the ordinance of your
Church) you may see D. Bilson has the better of you: though otherwise, by the
word of God, it is plain he has the worse, and stands in a detestable
error, both against all proportion of faith, and against the express evidence
of these Scriptures, Luke 23.46. with Psalm. 31.5. Ioh. 19.30. Luke 23.43. with
2 Cor. 12.2.4. and Rev. 2.7. and 3.21. Heb. 12.23. Col. 2.14.15. Ephesians. 4.8.9.10.
1 Pet. 3.18.19.20. 2 Cor. 13.4. Psalm. 16.8.9.10.11. with Genesis 5.24. and 37.35.
2 King. 2.1.11. Eccles. 12.7. Act. 7.59. Luke 16.26.

But tell me now Mr Jacob, what power of Christ your Church has, and in whose
hands it is to excommunicate D. Bilson for teaching and mainteining this or any
other false doctrine a mong you? Your self are a member of that Church together
with him: You have written against him, and by the word of God convinced him.
He notwithstanding persisteth, and leaveneth others as much as he can. Now if
you be the Church of Christ (as you would bear us in hand) why do you not
proceed with him by the Mat. 18.17 1 Cor. 5.4.5.6.7.11.12.13.
rule and power of Christ? Or if your Church have not that power of Christ (as
all may see), why do you not confess it to be none of Christ's? Even by this
then (if you note it well) you may perceive what your Churches faith and
ordinance is. Not to speak here, of other most erroneous doctrines and filthy
abominations maintained among you.

In the third place, I proved the Samaritans sin to be against the second
commandment, inasmuch as worshipping the true God, they did it in and by the
Images they framed. Now your answer is, that they worshipped the Idols of the
Heathen, and sacrificed to them, and accounted them to be Gods as well as the
God of Israel, and so brake the first commandment. And to prove this
assertion of yours true, and mine false, you allege 2 King. 17.29.30.31. Where
it is said, Every nation made their Gods etc. But are you no better divine,
then so Mr Jacob? Are you a teacher in this light of the Gospel, and
understand not yet this phrase of Scripture? Know you not that the Lord "
accounts them to be made and worshipped as Gods, whose ordinances, Images,
Altars, places, Ministeryes, rites, ceremonies etc. are kept and observed:
though it be for his worship and service? Or mind you not that 2 King.
17.29.30.31.
these and the like speeches in the Scripture are sacramental? (" Deuteronomy.
12.30.31. Judge. 17. chap. 2 King. 16.10-16. with 2 Chronicles. 28.23. 2 King.
17.7.8. etc. Hos. 2.16. Ezec. 14.3.4.5. etc. and 20.39.40. Exo. 32.4.5.)

When the Exodus 32.4.
Jews and 1 King. 12.28.
Jeroboam said of their golden calves, These be thy Gods o Israel, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: Do you think they meant those golden
Idols now made by them selves, were in deed the God of Israel that brought
them out of Egypt? Or do you not thus understand it, that they made and used
those only for signs and representations of that God? That this was their
purpose, appears both by the * occasion of making them, and by their Exodus
32.4.
use of them being made, whereas still they intended their feasts and worship
before them and by them, to be to Jehovah the true God. (* Exodus 32.1. 1 King.
12.26.27.28. Exodus 32.4.
Exodus 32.5. 1 King. 12.28.32.33. with Amos. 4.4.5. and 5.22.23. and 8.14.
Micah. 6.6.7.)

The same may be seen in Michahs example of mount Ephraim, and in his mother,
Judge. 17. In her, that when she made a graven Image, even then she prayed to
Jehovah the true God, and dedicated to him the silver whereof she made that
Image. Judge. 17.2.3.4. Judge. 17.5.10.
In Michah himself, that he Exodus 32.4.
made an Ephod and Teraphim, and had an house of Gods, and took first one of
his own sons, then a Levite for his Priest: Yet by all these intended the
worship only of the true God. As appears both by his own speech, Judge.
17.13.
when he said, Now I know that the Lord (Jehovah, not Idols) will be good unto
me, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest: and by the history following, Judge.
18.5.6.

Yea of the Samaritans themselves (of whom the question is) when they had made
their Gods and put them in the houses of the hy places, the Scripture here
cited by your self says, Thus they feared [Iehovah] the Lord, and appointed
out Priests etc. 2 King. 17.32.

The words then (when it is said, they made Gods etc.) are not literallie to be
taken, but sacramentallie, attributing that in phrase of speech to the sign,
which in deed is peculiar to the thing signified. And this manner of speaking is
usual throughout the Scripture, both towching the true and false worship of
God. The Altar which Jacob set up at Shechem he called, the mighty God of
Israel. Genes. 33.20. Gedeon called the Altar he made, the Lord of peace.
Judge. 6.24. The Arc is called, the Lords strength and beauty Psalm. 78.61. The
bread in the Lords supper is called, the body of Christ. Mat. 26.26. And many
the like speeches in the Scripture are every where to be found. Now as these
in the true, so the other before in false worship of God, are sacramental
speeches. When it is said then, that 2 King. 17.29.30.31
every nation made their Gods etc. the meaning is, they made Idols or Images
for the representatio^ of God, by them to be put in mind of him and so to
worship him.

Mind further, that the Scripture relating the sin of the Samaritans uses
the very same words and like phrase of speech as is in the second
commandment: It says, they made them Gods, that is, Images (as it is
expounded, 2 King. 17 29.33.41.
verse. 41.) and served them. Which are the words also of that commandment.
Exodus 20.4.5. And note that whereas the first commandment is directly of
Gods inward worship, viz, to love, trust, fear him etc. The Second is of
outward, as the very terms of making, of Images, of bowing to them etc. which
are things outward, do specify. This being noted, it gives light for the true
understanding of both these commandments (which will otherwise be confounded,
Page 80.
as I have showed else where) and proves the sin of the Samaritans directly
to have been the breach of the Second, not of the First.

Now let us come to the proofs alleged in the former answer, and to your
Reply here made against them. 1. By that of Ezra it is evide^t, they
sacrificed to the Lord God of Israel. Ezra. 4.1.2
The words of the Text are so plain, as cannot be withstood. Neither is it
any thing to the question in hand, that in hypocrisy they conspired against
the building of the Temple, and so against the true worship of God. When your
self or any other among you do by counterfeit hypocrisy and false brags set
your selves against the synceritie and observation of Christ's ordinauce (and so
against the true worship of God) will it follow, that therefore your false
worship is to some other then the true God; and not against the Second, but the
First commandment?

2 That the contention between the Jews and Samarita^s was not, whether the
true God only was to be worshipped, but in what place and manner, is so clear
by Ioh 4. as it must needs be a bold assertion of yours to deny it. Does not
the woman of Samaria acknowledge Christ to be Ioh. 4.19
a Prohet of the true God whom she worshipped? Is not the question and speech
between them of this only, ver. 20.21.24.
Where and How God must be worshipped? Now if the controversy had been of the
Person (whether the true God only or Idols also were to be worshipped) to
what purpose had it ben to contend about the Place, when as yet there had not
ben agreement about the Person? Why did not she, taking him to be a Prophet,
inquire as well Whom as Where we are to worship? Nay why did she not ask this
first and specially? To what end was it for her to allege the example of
Ibid. verse. 12.20.
Jacob and the Fathers, for the place, if they had not worshipped the same God
that Jacob and the Fathers did? Or was it ever heard, that any people but such
as worshipped the true God only, did know and look for the Messiah to come,
spoken of by the Prophets, as the Samaritans did? Ioh.
4.25.28.29.30.38.39.40.41.42. Likewise in Ibid. verse. 21-24.
Christ's speech and instruction of that Samaritane woman, how plain is it that
the controversy was as before I have noted? What commandment (I pray you)
does the place and manner of Gods worship properly concern? Is it not the
Second? Or would Christ (think you) instruct her so carefully about the
Second, and omit the controversies of the First (being the most weighty) if
therein they had differed? The case is so clear, as if you have your eyes in
your head, you can not but see it. Therefore will I spend no more time to
confute you in it. Your misvndersta^ding and misalledging of 2 King. 17. I have
also discovered here a little before.

3. Your own confession I did and will still allege, until you do as
plainly revoke it, as you did at first affirm it. I deny not but you
brought the whole Reason in as our Objection. Yet that point of the Israelites
worship under Jeroboam and other clauses of the Objection, any may see you set
them down, as being true also in your own judgment. Otherwise how said you,
that it is fitter then all our Reasons? Page 105.
Or how did you acknowledge that their worship resembled the ordinances at
Jerusalem? And to what end else did you confirm it by those two Scriptures, 1
King. 12.32. Amos. 4.4. A shame then it is and great shame for you Mr Jacob, at
first to confess the truth, and now when you see what follows upon it against
you, to draw back again. But to clear the point from all your double dealing,
I ask, Is it not true, that the Israelites under Jeroboam at Dan and Bethel
served not Pagan Idols, but the true God after their own devices etc. Is it
not true also, that the Samarita^s coming after them so feared and served the
Lord, as those Israelites before had done? If you deny either of these, see
here the proof of both from the word of God: Of the first towching the
Israelites, in these Scriptures, Hos. 2.16. Amos. 5.21.22.23. and 8.14. 1 Kin.
12.27. and 21.29. Of the latter towching the Samaritans in these, 2. King.
17.28.32.33.41. Ezra. 4.1. 2. Ioh. 4.19.20.25.26.29.30. Both these then being
true, who sees not that their sin was directly against the Second
commandment, as yours also is, by your own confession? Page 70. 71.

But you say Ieroboams seems far grosser and filthier then the worst is with
you. You say, it seems. You say not, it was. But be it that it were so, what
would it avail for the question in hand? Does such answer any whit help the
Papists when they alledg it? Your self do here a little after in this Reply
jnsinuate as if the Idolatry of Jeroboam was not at first so ill, Page 110
as afterward Achabs was and Manasses etc. If it were so, was this any defense
of Ieroboams estate: seeing he notwithstanding stood in transgression of the
Second commandment, though the other might exceed him in grossenes or
otherwise?

Now for the comparison between yours and Ieroboams, you tell us he * erected
visible Idols, 1 Kin. 12.28
and very filthy ones, even calves and brute beasts. The same you might allege
of the Israelites with Aaron: Exodus 32.4. whose sin notwithstanding was
directly against the Second commandment, as you confess yours also is.
Besides (Mr Jacob) have not you and your Church too your visible Idols? What
else (I pray you) are your Service book; your books of Canons and Homilies; your
Book of ordering Priests and Prelates taken out of the Popes pontifical; your
Idoll-shepheards, Zach. 11.17
even the Prelates and Priests themselves: such as to whom (for any sound
knowledge they have in themselves, or good instruction they give or receive of
others) may fitly be applied that saying of the Prophet concerning Idols, They
have a mouth and speak not, they have eyes and see not, Psalm. 115.5.6.
they have ears and hear not etc.

Where in the next place (to lessen your sin in respect of Ieroboa^s) you say
you profess your Ecclesiastical orders to be but indifferent things, for
order and comelines only: how absurd again and shameless is your pretense? Do
you in deed profess that your Book of common prayer with the other aforsaid
are but indifferent things, for order and comelines only? If so, then are they
not the true worship and service of God, commanded in his word, to be observed
of his Church. For that is not an indifferent thing, but straightly enjoined to
be kept without spot or change until the appearing of our Lord Jesus. Exodus
20.4.5.6. 1 Timothy 6.13.14. Col. 2.8.22.23. Rev. 22.18.19. Again, do you
profess the confusion of all manner people in the body of your Church, to be an
indifferent thing, for order and comelines only? If so, then you might as well
tell us, you profess darkness to be light, disorder and confusion to be order
and comelines etc. Or do you profess that your Archbishops and other Prelates
and Priests, with their offices and callings taken out of the cup of Babylon;
your forbidding of meats and marriage (called by the Apostle, doctrines of
Devils); your retaining the Apocrypha Books in your publik worship, Page 63. etc
which have many lies and great blasphemy in them: Do you (I say) profess that
these with the rest of your abominations before rehearsed, are but indifferent
things, only for order and comelines? And is this in deed the profession of
your general State, as here you note in the margent? Then sure you are not far
behind Jeroboam: Page 110.
if not far worse in some respects. And by this it is evident (to note it by
the way) that your general State is convinced of great impiety: inasmuch as
(howsoever it stood for the controversy otherwise, yet) none can be so gross
as to deny, but thus far you are convinced that these are not indifferent
things etc. You had need also look well about you, what to answer for speaking
in such manner of your general State.

Now for Jeroboam, what will you say if he also held this, as the chief and
main thing, that the true God, who is infinite and every where present, be
worshipped: but whether at Jerusalem or at Dan; Joseph. Antiq. Iud. lib. 8.
cap. 3.
whether in Salomons Temple, or at the Calves* which he had now made; whether
by the Levites, or by others consecrated to that service etc. that these and
the like he accounted and used as indifferent things, as might seem best to
serve for the opportunity of their dwelling, for that estate etc. See Josephus
Antiquityes, if he do not testify thus much concerning him: affirming further,
that by these means he deceyved the people and drew them from the true worship
of God: which in the end was the cause of their utter ruin. Lo here the fruit
and issue of such pretenses.

Further you allege 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Where Jeroboam is said to appoint Priests
for the high places, and for Devils, and for the Calves he had made. So have
you also appointed Priests (such as God never ordained) and that for your high
places and Calves, that is, for your Idols Temples and Service, the places and
manner of your publik worship to this day. Of which three points, viz, your
Priesthood, Idoll-temples, A treatise of the Ministry of the Church of England.
and false worship, I have written in another treatise, to which I refer you.

Where it is said, Ieroboa^ appointed Priests for Devils, you are to know (if
already you do not) that this is spoken mystically, in respect of Gods account,
and as it was in deed, not that Jeroboam and the people did so think and esteem
it themselves. And that you may have less prejudice of this which I say, hear
it of Peter Martyr who writes thus of it: Jeroboam and his accomplices said,
they worshipped not the Calves, but Jehovah in that figure and visible sign:
but the Scripture in the Chronicles witnesses their imagination to be
frustrate, because in deed they did that service not to Jehovah, but to Devils.
P. M. Lo. com. p. 1130. Epist. ad Eccles. peregrin. Land. I will also help you
to understand this point by a like example, to which I suppose you will yield.
The Papists in Gods account are worshippers of Devils, Rev. 9.20. Yet in their
own judgment they do not so, but pretend to worship God himself. Even so it
was with Jeroboam.

Further for the more clearing of this matter, see what it is in deed thus to
worship Devils: And hear it of Mr Iunius, whose judgment (I know) in this
case you will judge less partial. He in his notes upon Lev. 17.7. says thus,
Men sacrifice to Devils, if they sacrifice either in other place or after other
rite and manner then the Lord has prescribed: See Deuteronomy. 32.17. and 1 Cor.
10.20. And this he shows was the sin of the Jews, both in Egypt, and in
the wilderness: first by Exodus 32. chapter: then by Lev. 17.7.
this verse, where the word ( hereafter, or, no more) is used; and lastly by
Stephens testimony, Act. 7.42. Jeroboam then worshipped Devils (not in his own
purpose and judgment, but in Gods account) because his worship of God was in
other place and after other manner then the Lord had apppointed.

Now seeing you grant this here to be true of Jeroboam, how will you deny it
either for the Papists (from whom you have borrowed your worship) or for your
selves, the children of their fornications? And that you may see, it is a thing
needful to be minded in your Church-constitution, note for your selves, that 1 Timothy 4.1.3.
the erroneous doctrines of Antichrist are by the Lord accounted and in the
Scripture called doctrines of Devils; Rev. 9.20.
the worship of Antichrist, the worship of Devils; Rev. 16.13.14.
the Ministers of Antichrist, the spirits of Devils; Rev. 18.2.
the confusion of all profane people and abomination in the body of
Antichrists Church and religion, the habitation of Devils etc. Either therefore
you must approve your Church-constitution to be such, as it reteineth not the
erroneous doctrines, worship, Ministry, and confusion of people brought in by
Antichrist; but the truth and way of Christ prescribed to his Church: or else
you see by evidence of Scripture, how like your case is to Ieroboams also in
this respect. Not that you do so esteem it (any more then he did) but that God
does so account of you and of all such Churches whose constitution is to
worship him otherwise then himself has ordained: howsoever your devices may
rese^ble his ordinances, Page 105.
as * you confess Ieroboams also did. (1 King. 12.32. 33. Amos. 4.4.5. and
5.21.22, 23.) So you confess enough against your self.

Next you allege the examples of Ahab; Ahaziah; the Jews under Ahaz,
Manasses, and Amon, to whom the Israelites were like in Idolatry: also the Ten
tribes: and finally the Samaritans themselves. These examples and the
Scriptures cited about them, speak of Baall and like Idols, and their Altars,
houses, Priests, etc. Now I have proved before that in and by these Idols and
their appurtenances, Page 117. etc.
they intended the worship of the Lord God himself. And yet further by these
testimonies of Scripture it is most plain, viz. Hos. 2, 16. Micah. 6.6.7. 1
King. 21.28.29. and 22.12.24. Exodus 32.1.4.5. Judge. 17.2.3.5.13. and
18.5.6.17.18.19.20. Amos. 5 21.22.23. Yea in the Scriptures which here your
self allege, they are said to worship after the fashion of the Heathen (though
it was to the true God) because they sacrificed in their hy places: Page 110.
or on the Altars and before the Idols, either of the Heathen or their own,
set up for the representation and service of God. Finally none of these
Scriptures do show, that the Samaritans did so worship the Idols of the
Heathen, as accounting them to be in deed Gods as well as the God of Israel.
Which is your assertion. So it is your self Mr Jacob, that are clean gone.

Your perventing of my words I omit. But now what will you say, if the case of
the very Pagans Idolatry be not so clear as you take it, for the worshipping
of the Idols themselves, and esteeming them to be so many several Gods?
Augustine says the Pagan Doctors defend their many Gods to be but August. de
Civit. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 11.
one and the same Jupiter, that is, one God: of whom the Poet says, He is
throughout all the earth, the sea, and the heaven. Virgil. 4. Geo
Again, he testifyes that they themselves did thus answer him: Aug. Ibid.
cap. 24.
What, Should we beleev that our forefathers were so exceeding foolish, as to
think Bacchus, Ceres, Pan, and the like, were Gods? Nay they believed only one
God: whose name because they knew not, therefore did they honor his gifts and
functios under diverse names etc. Plato a Pagan himself, in one of his Epistles
says thus, Hereby you shall know whether I write in good earnest, Plato Epist.
13. ad Dion.
or not. If in earnest, I begin my letters with the only one God: If
otherwise, with many. Yea Phocylides an heathen Poet could say, Phocylides.
(...), There is but only one God, wise powerful and very happy. And
Epictetus a Stoic, thus, It is before all things to be learned, that there is
but one God: that he rules all things: Epictetus apud Arria^.
that he provideth for all: that whatsoever we do, speak, or think, nothing can
be hid from him: that we should worship him as our Creator and Father, and the
only author of our felicity: And that if we call upon God aright, we
shall be advertised of the best things by his Angels at his commandment. Calvin
also says, the profane men thought not to dravv the only God from his
heavenly throne, when they feyned to themselves many Gods: Calv. in Hos. 2.17.
but reserving a supreme Godhead over all, they would have Patrones, whom to
use for obteyning grace and favor of the most high God. And by Plato himself
it appears they took the Angels for such, whom he calls (...), Plato in
Epinom. e^ in Cratylo.
Spirits: and therefore thought they were to be honored, (...), as being the
means of or, prayse-worthy.
prosperous intercession or proceeding. Whom therefore they used as helps for
better access unto God, as now do the Papists their many intercessors, who yet
hold there is but one God. Thus they thought of God, and of his gifts, works,
Angels, etc.

Then for the Pagans use of their Idols or Images, Calvin (writing against such
men as in excuse of their Idolatry pretend, Calv. Inst. lib 1. ca. 11. se. 9. 1^
they account not the Images to be Gods) shows that neither did the Jews
think their Calfe to be God, nor the Heathen their Images: but that as the
Papists now, so the Heathen and Jews then, were persuaded they worshipped
God in and by those Images. Thus writes Calvin. Then which what can be more
full and pregnant against you? And Plutarch records that Numa Pompilius (a
Pagan) forbad the Romans to think that Gods Image had either the likeness of
Man or the form of any creature. Plutar. in vita Numae.
Neither was there before with them (says he) any Image or representation of
God either painted or feigned: but in the first hundred and seventy years they
built in deed Temples and erected holy Chapels, but consecrated no Image at
all: Even as if it were detestable to resemble better things to worse, and
because God can not otherwise be perceived but in the mind and understanding.
And yet further, Plutarch also in an other place has to this effect, that the
Sun, Plutar. de Isid. et Osyrid.
the Moon, the Heaven etc. are not to be worshipped; that they in deed are
but looking glasses wherein may be seen the workmanship of God that adorneth
the whole world: And that the world is no other thing but his Temple. Yea
moreover (towching both these points now treated of) that the several nations
have not their several Gods, so as we should think the Grecians have theirs,
the Barbarians theirs, the Northern people theirs, the Southern theirs: But
like as the Sun, the Moon, the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, are common to
all, yet are called by several names of several people; so likewise that one
divine Spirit, which framed this whole world and whose providence is over it
all, yet has several honors, and several names, attributed unto him,
according to the laws of several nations etc. Behold then what the Pagans
themselves do testify. Albeit I neither doubt nor deny but some among them
(specially in later times) were far more gross then others: even as now we
may see in the Papists a great difference, among themselves, both for their
judgment and practice, in their Idolatry. Yet notwithstanding by the
testimonies aforsaid you may see, you had need clear this point even for the
Heathen, far orherwise then yet you have done. To which purpose I might yet
allege many mo testimonies out of other Writers, which I will not stand to
relate. Only, to take away all scruple, Arnob. co^tra Gentes. lib. 6.
take this withal, That Arnobius writes the Heathen themselves said, they
worshipped not the Stones (or stony Idols) but the presence of God exhibited
at those Images. Thus you see what the writers of all sorts, Christian and
Heathen, testify concerning this matter.

I could now allege from the Scripture also, that the Apostle Paull affirms
of the Gentiles, Romans 1.21.22.23.
they knevv God, yet glorified him not as God, but turned the glory of the
incorruptible God to the similitude of the Image of corruptible man etc. Again
where he says 1 Cor. 10.20
what the Genttils sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not unto God, it
appears they thought themselves that they sacrificed to God, when as indeed
(before the Lord) it was to Devils. As already the like has been showed in
Ieroboams and Antichrists worship. Otherwise if the Heathen themselves had
professed their service to devils and not unto God, what needed the Apostle
have been so earnest in affirming it, and in persuading the Church of Corinth
therein? Why did he not also urge the Heathens own profession against them?
Yea, what pretense any manner way could the believing Corinthians have had, to
be partakers with the Idolaters in their Feasts and Temples, if they had
professedly appointed them to Devils, and not unto God? Further we read that in
Athens (a chief City of the Heathen) Paul found an Altar wherein was written,
Act. 17.23.
Unto the unknown God. Whereupon he reasoned thus with them, Whom ye
ignorantly worship, him show I unto you. God that made the world and all
things therein etc. Now you will not deny but Paul preached unto them the only
true God. And Paul himself testifyes, he preached the same God whom they did
worship before (though ignorantly): and of whom their own Poets said, * We
are his generation. Then which what can be more plain? Act. 17.2^. ex Arato.


Finally consider, that an Idol or Image is not the thing itself which is
intended, but a representation or likeness thereof. So as even this very term
of calling them Idols or Images, shows that they took not any of them to be
God, but all of them to be types or resemblances of him. T. C. Rep. 1. Page 42.
and Rep. 2. page 184. etc.
I could here also put you in mind how Mr Cartwright has set D. Whitgift at a
Non plus in this very point: so as you might well have learned by your
Archbishops foil, to have laid your hand upon your mouth.

But to leave this, I conclude by that which has been said, that whether we
mind the nature of the word Idol, or the testimony of all kind of writers, or
the Scriptures themselves: the matter is far otherwise and nothing so clear
for the very Pagans Idolary as you pretend, viz, that they should worship the
Idols themselves, and take them to be so many several Gods. How much les may
we admit it to have been the case of the Israelites, yea or of the Samaritans,
as you would persuade us? Your self then Mr Jacob are greatly deceived both
here and in your Rtplie to the first Reason before: Where I proved that which I
said, so as you are not able to take it away. In deed " there you referred us
hither, Page 71.
as to the proper place for it: yet here now you bring nothing of weight more
then before, either for the point it self, or for the Scriptures which there I
alleged. See them, Page 68. And Let the Reader note it.

Where you say I affirm, that they professed the written Law to be the rule,
both for their inward belief, and outvvard manner of worship: Show in what
words I affirm this? In what sentence? In what clause? Set down my words, and
consider your own dealing. In deed the falsehood of that which you said
concerning this point, I showed both by other Scriptures (which you pass over
without any Reply unto them at all) and by Ezech. 43.8. Now against this you
except, Ezech. 43.8.
first That the Samaritans were further from syncerity then the Israelites
commonly. Unto which I oppose both the Scriptures-testimonie, and your own
confession. The testimony of Scripture, in that which is written 2 King.
17.33.34.40.41. which shows both their estates herein to have been alike. Your
confession, Page 110.
who granted here a little before that the Samarita^s did in deed worship like
the Ten tribes of Israel that were before them. Thus still you forget your
self.

Secondly you except, that Israel it self in this apostasy held not the
written Law for their rule, seeing professedly they left this rule, and did
constantly worship Calves, and sacrificed at Dan and Bethel. This being
granted, yet you both contradict and condemn your self. Your contradictio^ is,
that here you say Israel it self held not the written Law for their rule; and
yet in the very next sentence before preferred them before the Samarita^s in
this respect: Or else you speak nothing to the purpose. Your condemnation of
your estate is, that by this reason of yours, neither does your Church hold the
written Law for your rule: seeing you have as professedlie (as they) left this
rule, and do as constantly worship according to your Sevice beast taken out of
the Popes porruis, and by your Priests and Prelates, unlawful as the Calves
and Priests of Jeroboam. Not to speak of your Idol Temples, a breach of the
second commandment, as Dan and Bethel were. Besides, although the Israelites
in their apostasy left the written Law of God (as you also have done in yours)
yet did they not in word profess so to do (any more then you) but contrarily:
As I proved before out of Josephus, Peter Martyr, and the Scripture it self.

Thirdly you except, that Ezechiel shows even here, cap. 43.7.8. they kept
not this rule, but departed therefrom, and that as appears professedly and
constantly etc. But mark how both here and before you change the question:
which is not whether they kept this rule, but whether they professed to keep
it, so as they did. I showed that the joining of Gods Thresholds and their
own together, did argue their profession in word, but breach in deed. Their
profession in word, whiles they pretended to retain Gods thresholds: their
breach in deed, whiles they added their own withal. To make the case more
plain, see it in your own estate. Do not you profess in word the written Law
to be your rule? Yet do you not also break it in deed, whiles you join your
tresholds with Gods, that is, your invencio^s with his ordinances? To the
examples of Ahab, Ahaziah etc. Page 122.
is answered before. Apply therefore to your self Mr Jacob the intolerable
blame and foul error whereof you speak. As for example, you profess the
forbidding of meats and marriage at certain times: the worship prescribed in
your Service Book and other the like, by read prayer; devised Homilyes: Saints
days: Communion to one alone: women to baptize: Ministry of Priests, and
Prelates: Apocrypha; and the rest before mentioned, Page 63. etc. Are these
after the rule of the written Law?

Next followed the Assumption to be answered: which was this. Such is the
ecclesiastical constitution of the people and Assemblyes of England as they
worship God after a false manner, Page 106.
never appointed by him self nor allowed in his word. This was proved by your
confusion of People, counterfeit Ministry, Service etc. Now neither this
Assumption nor proof thereof, did or do you deny. So here again you yield the
cause. And whereas you were told of hiding the foul heap of your Abominations
under the term of Ceremonies, you neither deny it nor amend it, but do still
use the same fraud. Mind it and amend it hereafter.

Now where you say, it is a just defense of your Ministry, worship, and
estate to be as tovvching the substance and foundation of Christianity sound
and acceptable to God, if your Assemblies throughout the Land have not their
consciences convicted therein: You may blush for shame to speak so
sencelesslie. If you mean, that your Ministry, worship, and estate is not in
truth of the substance and foundation of Christianity, then by your own words
you stand in a strange and fearful estate: besides that you speak not to the
point in hand, and so there is in your speech no sense at all. Or if you mean,
that howsoever your Ministry, worship, and estate be, whether approved of God
or not, whether Antichristian or whatsoever else, yet your Church-constitution
is for substance and foundation of Christianity sound and acceptable to God:
then is your speech again most senceles and absurd. For how is it possible,
that your Ministry, worship, and estate should be condemned by God,
Antichristian, or the like: and yet your Church-constitution either have the
substance and foundation of Christianity, or be in such a way sound and
acceptable to God? To be disallowed of God, and to be acceptable to him, are
contraries. Finally, howsoever your meaning be, yet still your speech is
senceles and untrue. For Luke 12.47.48. Hos. 4.1-6. 2 These. 1.8. Rev.
14.9.10.11.
sin is sin before God, and so to be esteemed of us, though not so grievous
before, as after conviccion. And men's consciences often are convinced, when
they will not acknowledge it, but withstand the truth notwithstanding. Esa.
6.9.10. Act. 14.2. and 28.23-27. Ier. 17.9.10
For both which see the Scriptures here quoted: Which refute your assertion
sufficiently. Besides that you have without all sense fancyed to your self
such a manner of conviction, as cannot either be known or expected. Of which
point I have spoken before. Page 42.43.

How strange is it also that you say next, you know this is no just defense
of your whole Ministry, estate, and manner of worship, which you never
intended (you say) much less professed to justify? How agrees this with the
title of your book which you call, A defense of the Churches and Ministry of
England? Or will you seem to plead for that which you know can not be
justified? Or will you have us admit of an unjust defense? For your self
confess this is not a just one. Or is the Office, Entrance, Administration,
and Maintenance of some of your Ministers lawful, of others unlawful? and so
likewise some parts of your estate and worship? For you say here, this defends
not the whole. Deal plainly then Mr Jacob, and show which you hold lawful,
which unlawful, and your proof of both. So will appear (I doubt not) even by
your self, both that our separation is just and of necessity to be made from
your Ministry, worship etc. and that your defense of them is most silly and
senceles.

That which you speak of Aarons line, I said before was a mistaking: now I say,
it is a gross error. And you may be ashamed thus to hide it, whenas you should
rather acknowledge it, when it is showed you. As for the meaning, Page 105.
which you have now coined and newly added in the margent, your words will not
bear it. Let others judge. Thus the defense you make for your self is as
absurd, as that which you make for your Church.

After this you are earnest to persuade us, that the word of God (though it be
as plain and full in it self, yet) is not so plain for our understanding and
use now, as it was for the Jews under the Law. An assertion most false,
most impious, such as the very Papists (I think) would be ashamed of. Was it
ever heard before, that the Gospel of Christ should be more obscure for our
understanding and use now, then the Law of Moses was for the Jews then? Was
not Christ (think you) as willing, as able, as careful to explane it for our
understanding and use, as Moses was for theirs? Or does not Christ give his
Spirit to his people now, as well as he did then? Or has he taken away those
dim shadows and ceremonies, to bring now a cloud of darkness in stead
thereof? Or is it false which the Prophets foretold and the Apostles testify to
be accomplished, for abundance of knowledge and understanding in the time of
the Gospel, far above that which was in the time of the Law? Compare together
these Scriptures following, and see if the contrary to that you say be not most
true. Esa. 11.9. Ier. 31.33.34. with 2 Cor. 3. cap. and 4.3.4. Heb. 8.10.11.
Joel. 2.28.29. with Act. 2.17.18. Hab. 2.2. 2 Pet. 1.19. 1 Ioh. 5.20. Rev.
1.3. and 22.18.19.

But you pretend three reasons of this your assertion. So also did Saul of his
action, 1 Samuel 13.11.12. Neither was Jeroboam himself without color for his
devised worship, as I noted before. But this is the ancient cloak of sin,
with which it has been wont always to hide it self, even from the time of our
first parents. Genesis 3.6.12.13. And tell me your self, If pretenses would serve,
what Schismatickes, Heretics, Apostates, factious or contentious men ever was
there, that had not store of such, so both deceiving others and being deceived
themselves?

Yet let us now examine yours. You pretend (1) discontinuance a long season of
the simple offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and continuance of the Prelacy
all that while. So might Israel have alleged, 2. Chron. 15.3. Had it
therefore ben of weight? And this pretense might far better serve the Papist,
then it can you who confess Rome to be Babylon, and know that your Prelacy,
Priesthood, and worship came from thence, not from Jerusalem. Besides how will
you prove this continuance and discontinuance to have been so many thousand
years, as you speak of? Yet if it were, the word of God is still as plain to
discover error, as it was at first to reveal the truth.

You pretend also (2) the opinion of many ancient and late learned godly
Christians: and (3) their exposition of the Scriptures so as herein they carry
ambiguity, in infinite Thousands judgment. To both which I answer: 1. That
great antiquity was alleged by the Samaritans, Ezra. 4.2. Ioh. 4.20. and is
also by the Papists at this day for their Prelacy, Priesthood, worship, and
other their errors of Purgatory, Mass, Prayer for the dead, mixing water and
wine in the Cup, Justification by works, Extreme unction, Transubstantiation
etc. And the Scriptures too are so expounded, as they carry no small ambiguity
in these points, in the judgment of infinite Thousands. Page 44. 45.
2. I have also showed before, how even some of the Martyrs, learned and godly
Christians, held diverse of these popish errors unto death: And therefore
doubtless so took and expounded the Scriptures as upholding them. 3. And be sure
whenever you bring the many ancient and late learned and godly Christians
(you speak of) for your assertion, that as many such, if not far mo, both
ancient and new may he brought to the contrary. And what then are you the
nearer? 4. But in deed I deny this which you say. There is not testimony from
such antiquity as you speak of, for your Prelacy and the rest of your
abominations before rehearsed: Page 63. etc. If you can therefore, show it in
your next. And mind (as for the rest, so) for the Prelacy in particular, that
you show it to be such as yours, in office, entrance, administration,
maintenance, etc. For although the mystery of iniquity began to work betimes,
yet it was both withheld a while from being revealed, 2 These. 2.3.6 7.8. with
Rev. 13.11.
and coming up out of the earth, it appeared and was exalted, not all at once,
but by degrees. So as it was a long season in this rising of Antichrist, ere
the Prelacy came to that height, which now it has with you and in Rome the
mother thereof. Search, and see if it be not thus. And in the mean time
(because I know you have a prejudice of whatsoever I say) hear a little what Mr
Cartwright (one of your selves) has written of your Prelacy against D.
Whitgift now Archb. of Canterbury. Our Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons etc.
(says he) besides the names have almost nothing common with those of elder
times. Again, If those Bishops were alive, they would not know each other.
For that they would think ours Princes, and ours would esteem them as hedge
Priests, not worthy of their acquaintance or fellowship. T. C. first Rep.
Page 124. etc. and his 2. Rep. Page 660. And in the same place comparing them
together, he shows unanswerably in many particulars how far they differ
the one from the other. So as your Archbishop in this point also has ever
since ben at a Non plus. Now if you please, you may take your Archbishops
quarrel in hand, and strive with as good success, as he, for these and the
rest of your Romish traditions. 5. Finally, remember on the one hand how our
grandmother Eve, at the first entering of sin into the world, insinuated
ambiguity in the word of God, which yet in deed was most clear and plain:
Genesis 3.3. with Genesis 2.17. And mind well on the other hand, if at this day the
Papists themselves bring not greater show of Scripture for their grossest
heresies of Iam. 2.21.24.25. Dan. 4.24. Mat. 25 35.36.
Justification by works, Mat. 26.26. Ioh. 6.51.53.
Tra^substantiation, Iam. 5.14.
Extreem unction, 1 Timothy 3.15 Ioh. 14.26. and 16.13.
Impossibility of the Church to err etc. then you or any other either have
brought or can bring for your Prelacy and other impietyes before mentioned.
Shall we therefore conclude as you do, that they are not easily convicted,
though they be mistaken in these things, God having so disposed in his
providence to suffer this among Christians, so long and so universally? God
forbid.

Or shall we think, that Jeroboam and the Jews (of who^ you speak) had not
their pretenses and excuses, as well as you and the Papists? I have showed
before that they had. Besides also, as Moses and the Prophets were plain
against their corruptions, so are both they and the Apostles as plain against
yours. As for example, that there should be no forbidding of meats or marriage;
no read or stinted prayer; no men's inventions to worship God by; no Priests in
office of Ministry, neither any Lord Bishops, but Christ only; no baptizing
by women; no Idol Temples, no Apocrypha books, or prescribed Homilyes, for the
worship of God; no Popes Canon Law, or Prelates decrees, to rule the Church by
etc. Compare now with these, the Calves, Images, Priests, and places, whereof
you speak: and see if the word of God condemn not the one as well as the other.
Mind also how against these, Gods voice has sounded in your ears by the
testimony of his servants, from time to time: and how his hand has fearfully
smitten you with hardness of heart, and given you over to false worship and
persecution of the truth, besides all other impietyes reigning among you. Then
which what greater judgment can there be in this life?

Consider also the example of Corah and his companions, whom the earth
swallowed up, and fire devoured from heaven: Number. 16. chap. and 26.9.10. Whose
case although it be handled and compared with yours in the Second Exception
before (Page 33. 52. 55. 3.): yet because of the childish excuses which you
shame not still to plead under pretense of want of conviction, darkness of the
word unto you etc. and because Before, Page 37.
your self also do judge their case to be most wretched and altogether
inexcusable, therefore will I here again put you in mind to consider well with
your selves and to examine by the word of God, whether your sin may not be
esteemed in some respects greater then theirs. 1. The Office and function which
they usurped was a true one (Numb. 16.10) Yours false. 2. The things which they
took and offered were such as God had commanded (verse. 18.) Yours, such as man
prescribes. 3. The people to whom they would administer, were a true Church
(verse. 2.3.) Yours a false. 4. The reasons which they alleged, diverse of them,
were more seeming-good, then any you bring. (verse. 3.14.) 5. They thought they
did well and as was meet (verse 3.13.14.18.19.) You, at least many of you, know
and have professed that your Ministry and worship is Antichristian, and
therefore evil and abominable. 6. They had not the written word, so as you
have. (verse. 5.7.9.10.28. etc. and Lev. 8. and 9. chap. wiih Heb. 1.1.2. and
2.2.3.) 7. They sinned in one thing (verse. 10.): You in an hundred. 8. They
were twice or thrice admonished and reproved (verse. 4.5.8. etc.) You ten times.
9. They stood up against Moses and Aaron (verse. 3) You against Jesus Christ.
10. They, as they pretended, for the liberty and service of the Israel of God
(verse. 3.13.) You (as your selves do know and acknowledge many of you) for Rev.
13.16. and 17.4.5.6. and 18.3.
the slaverie and abominations of the Whore of Babylon. Of which see before,
Page 63. etc. Now your case being thus Mr Jacob, it is high time for you to lay
it to heart, and to look unto it betymes. Or if you will not, yet let such
among you as fear God and tremble at his word, be warned by this example of
Corah and his partakers, that they do with speed depart from the tents of such
ungodly men, and that they towch nothing of yours, least they perish in all
your sins. Numb. 16.26. with Rev. 18.4.

Neither need you or any among you flatter your selves in this (as it seems
you do) that the punishements of sin are not now under the Gospel so outward
and miraculous with Gods hand from heaven, as they were then under the Law. For
first this argues the more clearenes of the word now revealed (as less
needing such outward work to be joined withal for help thereof). Which is
contrary to that you spoke before of greater darkness in the word for our
understanding and use now, then for theirs then. Secondly, the judgments that
then came upon them, were for ensamples, and are written to admonish us, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. 1 Cor. 10.11. with Number. 26.10. Thirdly,
even since the time of the Gospel there are some examples in the Scripture
(though not so many as in the time of the Law) of Gods miraculous hand smiting
both Act. 5.1-11
hypocrites in the Church, and Act. 13.6-11
oppugners of the truth without. Which should teach all men to take heed to
their ways, as well as if there were a thousand mo besides. Not to speak here
of such examples, as the Elclesiasticall stories in all ages, older and later,
do abundantly afford. Fourthlie, the less outward punishment is now in this
life brought upon Idolaters, persecutors, despisers of the truth etc. the
greater is reserved for them in the world to come. Else the Papists and the most
profane might pretend this for themselves, as well as you. And yet too, In the
year, 1593. etc.
take heed you forget not * the great plague and famine by which God has
pleaded against England already. Neither do you know what other judgment he
has in store for you even in this life, if you still persist in your
Antichristian estate, and will not be reclaymed. Finally, for full answer of
all you say here, read and mind well that which is written, Eccles. 8.11.12.13.
and 9.1.2.3. and 12.13.14.

Towching the estate of Jeroboam and the Israelites compared with yours, I have
spoken enough before. Page 110. etc.
I wish your case were not in diverse respects worse then theirs.

Where I said, this cause has been made manifest to the consciences of men, to
the high Court of Parliament etc. you grant in this I say well. If so, then
your self have done ill in resisting it so long. But now it is well you yield
it at length. Yet behold, as if you feared to yield to much to the truth at
once, you do by and by except, that it is not made manifest to the consciences
of all men, or the most, no not of them that know and fear God among you etc.
1. If it be not, where is the fault? In the manner of conviction, or in your
selves? That it is not in the conviction, your self testify, seeing you grant
it is such, as thereby to some men's consciences the cause is made manifest. Why
then should it not be likewise to the rest, if your own blyndnes or wilfulnes
(through the just judgment of God) were not the hindrance?

When Paul at Rome testified to the Jews the kingdom of God etc. some were
persuaded with the things that were spoken, but some believed not, Act.
28.24.25. etc. Had it now ben any exception of weight to have said as you do
here, it is made manifest to the consciences of some, but not of all etc. Nay
the Apostle so rests, telling such as were not persuaded, that this came to
pass through their own wilful blindness and hardness of heart, by the just
hand of God upon them, And to this end he alleged against them that saying of
Esaias the Prophet, Esaias. 6.9.10. Which you in this case of yours may fitly also
apply unto your selves.

2. Further you can not deny but it has to the Parliament ben made manifest.
Now that being gathered out of all the parts of the Land, and representing the
whole body thereof (as I noted in my former answer) by this is evident that
the whole body of the Land have had it manifested unto them. Exodus 3.16.18.
Deuteronomy. 21.2.6.7.8. 2 Samuel 5.1.3 1 Chronicles. 13.1 2.4. and 28.1. 2. Act. 28.17.
And this in such cases is sufficient, yea the best course that can be taken,
for the general State. Of which the question is. (In the place before
alleged, we find that Paul judged it the best course, and sufficient, to call
together but the chief of the Jews, and to testify his cause unto them. Act.
28.17. etc.) And otherwise how will you prove the Religion now maintained among
you to be the profession and consent of the whole Land? Do all and every one
that is member of your Assemblies so profess? Nay do they so much as know what
it or any Religion is? As then it stands for your profession, so must it for
your conviction, that what is done by or to the Parliament, it is reputed as
done by or to the whole Land.

3. The books also that are published, and our testimony otherwise, not only
by word and practice of us all, but (as is come to pass in many) even by
death, exise, imprisonment, etc. are offered to all alike, and known so to be
throughout the Land. If any then be ignorant or vnconvinced, it lies upon
themselves, who either beleev not what they know, or might know further if they
would. Ier. 9.6.
But we may fear it is with you (as Jeremy said) that in deceit you refuse to
know the Lord and his truth. Beware therefore, least that come upon you, which
is spoken of in the Prophets, Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and vanish away:
for I work a work in your days, a work which ye will not beleev, if any
declare it unto you. Hab. 1.5. with Act. 13.40.41.

4. Finally, can you give us a rule or instance of such conviction as you
insinuate? Would you have us go to all your parishes and Assemblies one after
another, yea to every Prelate and Priest, man and woman, old and young, high
and low, bond and free, throughout the Land, and convince them in particular?
If you mean so, all men surely will either pity your simplicity, or laugh at
your folly. I omit that the Papists might thus plead, as you do. And that so
much the more, as they bring more show of Scripture, Page 129.
then you. More show (I say) as before I noted. For otherwise I know both they
and you pervert the Scriptures to maintain your errors. I wish it be not to
your destruction. Consider these things Mr Jacob, and return a sounder
answer, or else learn to lay your hand on your mouth.

To that which you urge next concerning my self, I have answered already.
Page 41. But that which I urged next to you, viz, your forsaking the true
ministry, Page 108.
worship, and order appointed by Christ (as the Israelites also did); and your
retayning a false Ministry, worship, and confusion of Antichrist etc. This
you pass by, and answer not a word unto it.

Then where I alleged, that you were not behind, but rather exceeded the
Israelites, in persecuting unto bands, banishment and death, such as bear
witness to the truth of Christ etc. To this you answer, It is a toy. Thus
first you make a mock of sin, and so carry your self as if you had been
Chapleine to Boner, Bancroft, Gardener, Whitgift, or some such Caiphas. Pro.
14.9
By this also you testify, that not only the Prelates and Formalists (as
some would bear us in hand) but even the Reformists among whom you reckon your
self, have your hands in our blood, consenting unto and approving that which is
done against us. Further you do thus become like the Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites, upon whom Christ pronounced a most heavy Woe, Mat. 23.29-35.
for that whiles they builded the tombs of the Prophets slain by their
Fathers, themselves did kill and persecute the witnesses of Christ sent unto
them. And yet they blessed themselves in their evil, even as you do. Behold to
what height of impiety you are come, and in how fearful estate you remain.

But yet you comfort your selves with two things: 1. that this can not make you
worse then the Jews in Christ's time, who for all that they persecuted, yet
were not wholly fallen from God. O most woeful estate: Though yet your case be
worse then theirs, inasmuch as their Church was in a true constitution, yours
in a false: Mat. 21.^3 etc. Act. 2. and 13. and 17. chap. and 19.8.9.
And therefore they to be admonished (which was done by Christ and his
Apostles) before any were required to separate and save themselves from that
froward generation. Whereas the rule and commandment concerning your and all
false Churches is, forthwith to go out from such and to witness the truth
against them. (Rev. 18.4.5.6. and 12.17. and 14.12. 2 Cor. 6.17.18. Phil.
1.28.29. Hos. 4.15. Amos. 5.5.6. Micah. 2.10.) And thus far your estate is
worse then theirs, so as both other account is to be made of it, and other
manner of walking to be used toward it. But suppose you were both alike in this,
yet most miserable is your case, when for your persecution you are driven to
plead the example of the Jews, 1 These. 2.15.16. Mat. 23.33.34.35.
who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets; and did by persecution
drive away the Church and Apostles of Christ; and brought upon themselves all
the righteous bloodshed upon the earth from the beginning of the world; and had
the kingdom of God taken from them; neither could escape the damnation of
hell, wrath being come upon them to the utmost: as both Christ and his Apostles
testified against them. How woeful then and miserable is your case, though it
be no worse then theirs?

2. The second thing is, that you say we suffer more then we need, if we would
but acknowledge the grace of God with you so far as it is: and that therefore
it is not Christ's cross in that regard, but our own that we bear. 1. But
what if the Jews or Papists did or should say thus much unto them they
persecuted? Were it of any moment? Nay did not Boner and other of the Papists
often so speak to the Martyrs? 2. What think you also of the sufferings of Mr
Vdall; Mr Cartwright, Mr Fenner, Mr Dearing, Mr Merbury etc. Did they suffer
more then they needed? Or di^ they not acknowledge the grace of God with you so
far as it is? Or was it not Christ's cross, but their own that they bare? 3.
Tell us next what grace of God is with you, which we acknowledge not so far as
it is? Hold you any truth of doctrine, which we hold not? Or reject you any
errors, which we reject not? Approve you any way of righteousness, which we
approve not? Or refuse you any evil, which we refuse not? If thus we do not,
convince us by the Scripture 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
which is profitable to these uses, that the man of God may be absolute being
fully furnished to every good work. But if we do thus (as by the grace of God
we do) then your speech against us is untrue, and your persecution of us
unjust. 4. Show withal in what particulars we suffer more then we need. 5. And
prove that the things we suffer for, are not good but evil: Being careful
alwaie that your proofs be from the word of God, which only is the rule of
truth. 6. Finally we testify in all good conscience before God and men, that
we suffer only for bearing witness to the truth of Christ, against the
abominations of Antithrist. And this the Confession of our faith already
published in English, Dutch, and Latin, does and will testify to the ages
present and to come. As also our other writings, Examinations, Aunswers,
Conferences etc. For which you have already condemned and put to death diverse
of us, and others you have imprisonned, impoverished, banished etc. It is then
Christ his cross, which we bear, through his grace. And you are become
fighters against God, and persecuters of Christ in his members. Yea even this
writing of yours proclaims, that you are now already become drunken with the
blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Else could you
never have pleaded so wickedlie, nor blessed your selves so foolishlie, as you
do. But we will leave you and our cause unto God, who judges righteous
judgment, and will give every man according to his works. When he makes
inquisitio^ for blood, he will remember all that you have done unto us, and
will not forget the complaint of the poor. Therefore will we wait on him and
say no more, but with Zechariah (when he was put to death) 2 Chronicles. 24.22.
The Lord look upon it and requier it.

In the last place you urge again that there is contrariety betvveen my speech
here, and in the second Reason before. (1) But I pray you tell me, Says not
the Scripture both the things that are spoken in these two places? Read we not
for the one, that Christ accounted the Jews, not the Samaritans, the true
worshippers of God. Ioh 4.22. etc. And for the other, that Christ
notwithstanding said to some of the Jews, Man. 15.9.
they worshipped God in vain, teaching doctrines men's precepts. Mat. 15.9.
How say you Mr Jacob, is the Scripture therefore contrary to it self? Or were
Christ's speeches contrary the one to the other? Page 83.
(2) Besides, are you so dull as you can not conceive (no not when it is told
you) that the sins and corruptions of the members of a true Church, may
fitly be alleged against whole false Churches: and yet neither condemn the
true constitution of that Church wherein the one stand, nor justify the false
constitution of the other? (3) Yea, know you not that a Church in true
constitution jointlie considered may be said to be true worshippers of God
etc. and yet some, yea many of that Church be said also through their own
default in other respect to worship God in vain, or to be tainted with
Idolatry, or the like? And yet no contradiction be employed in so saying. Seeing
you cannot understand it in Christ's words concerning the Jews, see if you can
perceive it in Paul's to the Corinthians. When he speaks to the whole Church
jointlie considered, he commends them for keeping his ordinances, and
acknowledges they call on the Name of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 1.2. and 11.2.
But when he speaks in respect of some that sat and eat of the sacrifices in
the Idol-temples, he bids them fly from Idolatry, and tells them they
cannot be partakers of the Lords table and of the table of Devils. 1 Cor.
10.14.21. and 8.10. Yet is he not contrary to himself for all this. Mind
withal what I aunswerd before concerning this point, in the Second reason. Page
90. And so again I leave it to the Reader to judge whether the contrariety you
speak of be not in deed an harmony, and that therefore you abuse both the
Scripture and us.

Chap. 13. The seventh Reason against Mr Jacobs Assumption aforesaid.
Fr. Johnson. If the Spirit of God account them to be departers from the faith
(and consequently no true Christians) who though they hold other truths of
the Gospel, yet forbid to marry, and command to abstain from meats, which
God has created to be received with thankesgiving: Then such account must
needs be made of the estate of the Church of England, which not only both
these things, but withal forbids the true Ministry and worship of God,
and commands a false: Whose Ministers and people also do all of them partake
therein. (For proof whereof, besides their practice of these, and persecution
of the truth, see their own Canons, Articles, Statutes, Injunctions, etc.)

But the former is true, 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3. Therefore etc.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the 7. Reason. ^^, 1^.
THis yout seventh Reason is: They are departed from the faith, that forbid to
marry and command to abstain from lawful meats: Also this is worse, then
that: viz. to forbid the true Ministry and to command a false: which we in
England do. Ergo we are departers from the faith.

( I deny this Antecede^t, that is your Assumptio^ with a distinction.) The
Papists See ^h^^^, Testam. in Mat. 15.18. Fr. Io. See D. Fulke^ answer
thereunto.
forbidding of marriage and meals, if they had don no worse does not make them
departers from the says (that is, not) or not fu^damentally, not simply,
which vvord^s I think ^itter to be here used, as in my next Reply is further
declard.
totally. No more could their Hyerarchie and ceremonies simply: Neither do
these things make us, the Protestants, to be such. The Papists fall from
Christ ( That is fundame^tally, and simply: see in the 2. Reply follovving.
wholly) in other poincts, namely 1. The Papal supremacy. 2. The sacrifice of
the Mass. 3. Justification by works: Which blessed be God we are far
from. Therefore the Apostle in saying, They departed from the faith, means, in
vid. in abstayning from Marriage and meets.
these poincts they (erred or) departed from the faith, but not absolutely and
wholly. 2. Furthermore (touching your Proposition) if you understand Paul, of
Martion the Heretic, and Tatianus, who did absolutely condemn Marriage and
certain meats, they even therein might wholy fall from the faith, (I mean)
somewhat like to Balaam, Judas, and those Apostate Israelites Page 105.112.
lately spoken of, namely for having their consciences convicted, and seared
with a whot iron. And thus are they in no comparison with us of England (nor
with the Papists neither, if they had erred in nothing else).

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 1. Reply to the 7. Reason. HEre, being
not able with any color to deny the consequent of the Proposition, neither to
justify your present Ministry, worship, Canons, Articles, Iniunctio^s, etc.
(which you must do Mr Jacob, and still we call for it, if you will justify your
present estate): yet being desperate sure, for else you would never have done
it, you fear not to gainsay the Assumption, that is the very words and
testimony of the Scripture it self, 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3. The Apostle says, that
they which forbidd Marriage and Meats, are departed from the faith. You say, No.
Now whether (I pray you) shall we beleev. You, or the Apostle?

But what color have you for your denial? This forsooth: That they which do
so, do not depart from the faith totally, and that the Apostles meaning is,
that in these poincts they depart from the faith, but not absolutely and wholly.
So by your conceit, none may be accounted departers from the faith, that depart
only in some poincts, but they which do it totally from all. And thus may no
heretics or Antichrists that ever have been, or shall be in the world, be judged
departers from the faith, because they depart from it but in some poincts, and
not absolutely from all. Thus have you justified at once the Arians, Nestorians,
Sabellians, Papists, Familistes, Anabaptists, and whom not? because they
depart but in some, not wholly from all poincts of faith. Is it not great pity
that Antichrist has so long wanted such a stout Champion, as can thus in one
word justify his forbidding of meats and marriage, yea and his most detestable
Hierarchy and superstitions withal?

By your learning (Mr Jacob) all the Martyrs and writers heretofore, which by
evide^ce of this Scripture convicted the Synagoges of Antichrist to have
departed from the faith, and therefore separated from them, were utterly
deceived: Yea and the Apostles themselves were wholly mistaken, when they call
Antichrists Church and Religion 2 These. 2.7.
a mystery of iniquity; which 1 Timothy 4.2.
speaks lies through hypocrisy; 2 Pet. ^.1.
prively bringing in damnable heresies; and having a show of godliness, but
denying the power thereof: And John's eyes, it seems, were not matches, 2 Timothy
3.4
when he saw in the whores forehead (that is in Antichrists Church and
Religion) a name written, A mystery, great Babylon, the mother of vvhoredomes,
and abominations of the earth. Rev. 17.5. For now I would know of you who are
so deep a Clerk, how Antichrists Church and Religion should justly be
accounted a mystery of iniquity, and truly be said to speak Lies in
hypocrisy, also prively to bring in Damnable heresies, and to have a Show of
godliness: if they did absolutely and wholy depart from the faith, and not
only from some points thereof?

But over and above all, it seems by this reason, that not only the
Apostles were mistaken, in giving us marks how to know false teachers and
false religions: But also Christ himself when he said, Mat. 7.15.
Bevvare of false Prophets, which come to you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves. And again Mat. 24.23.24.
If any shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not. For
there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, so that (if it were possible) they should deceive the
very elect. Now if they should totally depart from the faith, what sheep
clothing (I pray you) should they have to come in? Or how should either
themselves be said to come in the name of Christ, affirming their Religion to
be Christ's, and showing signs and wonders to draw men thereunto: Or the elect
be in such unspeakable danger to be deceived by them? This might suffice to
show the falsehood and impiety of your answer. But yet I will note a few
things mo therein.

First it being granted, that the popish forbidding of Marriage and meats, so
they were no worse, does not make them depaxters from the faith totally: yet
tell us, if holding never so many truths besides, and yet forbidding these,
they could by the word of God truly be said in that estate to hold the faith
of Christ, and to be true Christians? 1 Timothy 4.1.3.
If they could not (as the Apostle * testifies) then is your answer in this
respect also nothing to the purpose, but against your self, both for the popish
forbidding of meats and marriage, and for the English Hierarchy and other
abominations among you received from the Papists, which under color of this
answer you would defend.

Next, see in Bales Votaries, and in the Acts and monuments etc. what
abominable filthiness the forbidding of marriage, and what foul superstition the
forbidding of meats, has wrought in the kingdom of Antichrist: And tell me
then, what man fearing God durst once open his mouth for such divelish
doctrines and estate.

Again, where you say, The Papists fall from Christ in other poincts besides
the aforsaid, Namely, 1. The Papal supremacy. 2. The sacrifice of the Mass.
3. Justification by works: which England now is far from: Tell us first,
whether in this sense the Papists can for these be said to depart from the
faith totally? If they can not, what weight is there in this for defense of
your estate, that the Papists could not allege for themselves, viz, that in
these poincts, they depart from the faith, but not absolutely and wholly.

Secondly tell us, whether there are no other poincts but these three in the
Papists Religion, which make them in their estate to be departers from the
faith, and consequently false Christians and false Churches? If there be (as
you can not deny) of what weight then is your answer to defend the present
constitution of your people and assemblies, seeing there are diverse other
things besides these, that do and may cause, that you can not be deemed true
Christians or true Churches in that estate. Many Servetus, Sabellius, Arius the
Anabaptists, etc.
heretics heretofore have, and at this day do reject these three aforsaid: Are
they therefore in their estate to be accounted true Chrestians or true Churches?

Thirdly your manner of reasoning here for your defense, is as if the
Adulterers, to justify their course of life, should allege thus, We are (1) no
Blasphemers (2) no Persecutors (3) no Murderers, as such and such are:
therefore we depart not from the way of life, but our estate and course of life
is good, and such as may be continued in. Yet the Scripture says, Iam. 2.10.11.
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one poinct, is
guilty of all. For he that said, Thou shall not commit adultery, said also,
Thou shall not kill. Now, though thou do no adultery, yet if thou killest,
thou art a transgressour of the Law: and contrariwise. So that whatsoever
sins the Adulterer be far from, yet (as Solomon says) committing adultery
with a woman, he fails in heart and destroys his own soul. Prove. 6.32.
The same is the case of all spiritual Adulterers: who (whatsoever sins they
be far from) yet in the worship of God run a whoring after their own
inventions, embracing the bosoms of strange women, and drinking on their cup
of fornications. Number. 15.39. with Prove. 5.20. and Rev. 17.4. Ier. 4.18.

Fourthly show us sufficient warrant from the Scriptures, why (setting these
three aside) the Hierarchy and other popish abominations received among you,
can not be judged to make you in such estate departers from the faith, and
therefore false Christians and false Churches, whatsoever truths you hold
besides. Number. 16.1.2. etc.
Corah, Dathan, Abiram, and their partakers, were far from the Abominations of
the Heathen; they held also the poincts of faith that Moses and Aaron held,
differing only from them (and departing only from the faith) in a matter
concerning the Priesthood, whereof notwithstanding they verse. 3.
showed their reasons why they were so persuaded. Yet will you not deny (I
trow) but they departed from the faith, and were in this estate neither to be
accounted true Israelits, nor their assemblies true Churches, with which
communion might be kept. If you should, the Scripture is witness against you,
Number. 16.26. Now compare case with case, and time with time, and you shall find
the estate of your people and Assemblies to be far more grievous. As has been
showed already in the Second Exception before, and in other Treatises to which
we have yet received no answer. viz, The answer to Master A.H. and The 9.
Reasons concerning not hearing the Ministers of these assemblies of England.

To conclude this poinct, if your Abominations in England were far fewer then
they are, yet so long as you retain that poisonfull leaven of your Hierarchy
and worship, we must tell you as the Scripture says, and experience teaches,
That 2. King. 4.39.40.
a little poison brings death unto the whole pot of potage, A 1 Cor. 5.6.
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, And Eccl. 10.1.
a fevv dead flies cause the oyncteme^t of the Apothecarie to stink and
putrify. Although indeed your abominations are not a few, but swarm in
abundance among you. Some whereof see before, Page 63. etc.

In the next place (fearing belike that the evidence of 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3.
this Scripture could not by these shifts of yours be avoided, but that still
the reason deduced from thence is of force against you, now you would have us
pass by you and not to apply it unto you or your mother Church of Rome, but to
understand it of Martion and Tatianus, of whom you say, that they absolutely
condemning marriage and certain meats, might indeed even therein wholy fall from
the faith, somevvhat like to Balaam, Judas, and those Apostate Israelites
lately spoken of, namely for having their consciences convicted and seared
with an hot iron: And thus (say you) are they in no comparison with you of
England. But first if your former answer were of any weight, it might be asked
why the followers of Martion and Tatianus might not likewise have defended them
thus and said, that their departure from the faith, was but in some poincts,
not wholy from all?

Secondly, if this scripture was verifyed (as you grant) in Martio^ and
Tatianus, for their condemning of marriage and meats, then we must needs think
it verified also in the Romish whore and her apostate children, which are
fallen into the very same sins that are here mentioned. The Apostle names
Martion and Tatianus, no more then he does the whorish Babylon and the
children of her fornication: but comprehends here all such (who so ever they
be) as shall fall into this Apostasy.

And further, if the words of this scripture be duly weighed, and either other
scriptures or the estate of the Romish harlot and her children compared
therewith, it will be found as lively to describe these as either Martion or
any other that ever were in the world. 1. First when the Apostle says, that
this shall be in the latter times, who sees not that it does most directly
point at the Romish Whore? (Though we doubt not but Martio^ and Tatianus, who
lived 1400. years since or thereabout, may also be comprehended therein.)

2. Secondly when it is said, they shall depart from the faith, thereby
signifying that once they held the faith, how plain is this of the Romish
harlot, which in the Romans 1.7.
Apostles time was the spouse of God, and since is fallen into Apostasy, and
become the Mother of vvhoredomes and abominations of the earth. 2. These. 2.3.
and Rev. 17.1.2.3.4.5.

3. Thirdly when it is said, they shall give heed to spirits of error, and
doctrines of Devils, how fitly agrees this to the Romish Babylon which (as the
scripture else where testifies) is become the habitation of Devils, and hold of
all soul spirits? Rev. 18.2.

4. Fourthlie when it is said, they shall speak lies through hypocrisy (not to
reckon up the infinite particulars that might be alleged for proof hereof)
how fitly does this describe the Religion and practice of the man of sin
(the Romish Antichrist) which the Scripture also calls " a mystery of
iniquity: as pretending to be with and for Christ, and to draw men unto him,
when indeed it is opposed against and exalted above the Lord Jesus, and all his
holy ordinances. 2 These. 2.4.7.

5. Fiftlie when it is said, they shall have their consciences seared with an
hot iron, how true is this found upon the throne of the Beast and his
Kingdom, concerning which the scripture also testifies, that when the vials
of Gods wrath shall be povvred out upon them, and they convinced of their
jmpieties and abominations, they shall be so far from acknowledging and
forsaking them, as they shall gnavv their tongues for sorrovv, and rather the^
they will forsake their wickedness, shall fight against God and his truth, Let
their raylings, sla^ders, Edicts, Articles, injunctions, finally their
continual oppositio^s and madness against the truth and people of God be
witnesses of all this.
blaspheming the God of heaven for their pains and for their sores, and not
repenting of their works. Rev. 16.10.11. Lo here a seared conscience in the
Beasts kingdom.

6. Finally, when the Spirit of God gives here two particular instances of
this apostasy, 1. The forbidding of marriage, 2. And the commanding to abstain
from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving: How
directly does he in both these, as it were with the finger point at the
Romish Babylon and her daughters? In the one, that is, the forbidding of
Marriage, when as the Romish Babylon forbids it to Priests, Friars, Nuns,
and such like; and the English her daughter, to fellows of Colleges, and
pre^tises; and both these Churches to all men and women in Lent, Advent,
Rogation week, etc. In the other, that is, the forbidding of meats, when they
forbid the eating of flesh, on Fridayes, Saturdayes, Emberdayes, Lent, Saints
eves, etc.

Thus you see this Scripture (which you would turn over to Martion and
Tatianus) does most fitly agree unto, and most plainly describe the Romish
Apostasy, whether we apply it thereunto, or compare this and other scriptures
together speaking of the same Apostasy and defection. By this also may
appear, that as you say of Martion and Tatianus, that they might be said wholly
to fall from the faith, somewhat like to Balaam, Judas, and those apostate
Israelites lately spoken of, namely for having their consciences convicted and
seared with an hot iron: So may be said also of the Romish Babylon and her
daughters. Touching which point, see moreover what is said before in the sixth
Reason. (Neither will your marginall additions, nor your new clauses in the
Reply it self, help either you or the Papists any whit. They are all as
foolish, and as contradictorie to the Apostles express words, as be those
which you used before. So the same answer may serve them all still. And whereas
in the margent you refer us to your next Reply follovving, thither also do I
refer you for answer of whatsoever you can there allege. In the mean time
let the Reader mind here, that both all your marginall notes, and such clauses
also in this Reply of yours as are now included in a parenthesis, be newly
added in your printed book, and were not before in your written copy which I
answered. Your self belike do now see the folly and insufficiency of your
former pretended distinctions and excuses. This by the way I thought now to
add, by reason of these your new additio^s.)

Now if seeing the evidence of this Scripture so full and plain against your
selves, you would therefore except, 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3
that in deed in the Romish Church it is so, but not in yours of England: First
by this means you should overthrow your own answer here, who have denied it
of the popish forbidding of meats and marriage, and would turn it over from
them to Martion and Tatianus: Yea and fear not now again to give the holy
Ghost the lie, when you pretend that the very Papists themselves, if they erred
in nothing else, have not their consciences convicted nor seared with an hot
iron, which yet the Apostle affirms expressly of all such. 1 Timothy 4.2.3.
Seco^dlie, this would not hinder but that the consequent of the Proposition,
and the Assumption are good, and therefore the Argument strong and of force.
Thirdly, the particulars before mentioned, being found in your Church of
England, will testify it also to be verified of you. Lastly, although many of
the abominations of the " whores cup of Babylon be now cast out of England
(for which we praise God) yet so long as you retain the Hierarchy, Leiturgie,
confusion of people, Canons, Rev. 17.1.2.3.4.5.
Excommunications etc. derived unto you from that mother of vvhoredomes and
abominations of the earth, we must needs believe and allege against you the
Scripture and common proverb which says, As is the mother, so is the
daughter. Ezech. 16.44.

For a conclusion let it here be observed, how to defend your estate you are
glad to run into the Papists Tents, and to take up their worn and rustie
weapons, which have been of no force to defend themselves, but have often and
justly ben turned into their own bowels. Rhemes Annot. upon 1 Timothy 4.3.
Read the Rhemes Annotations upon this place, and see if here you would not
avoid the evidence of this Scripture against you, by the very same shift and
answer, as the wretched Jesuits there would turn it from their mother of
Rome, that is, by posting it over from themselves to Martion and Tatianus. Read
it and note it well.

H. Jacob his 2. Reply to the 7. Reason. TO this your defense of your Seventh
Reason, I say, Though every where you are very unreasonable, yet no where you
seem more unconscionable and wilful then here. A strange untruth.


First, do I say No to the Apostles Yea, 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3. That they who forbid
Marriage and Meats do fall from the faith. Do I say noe? Is this your
conscience? Say I not expressly, They do in these points depart from the
faith, but not Absolutely and wholly.

Secondly, does it follow by my words, as you affirm, That none depart from
the faith but those that depart totally, wholly, and absolutely, whereby all
the vildest Heretics should be justified, as Arrians, Nestorians, Anabaptists,
etc. Do I say so? Is this also your conscience? Again do I say, The text
does not reprove all the Papists in their forbidding of Marriage and Meats, but
only Martion and Tatianus of old? Do I say any such thing? Nay, say I not
expreslie the contrary? Are you then a man of conscience? Do you suffer for
conscience? Know therefore that this I say, and my words before do import so
much. That whosoever do forbid marriage or meats, do depart from the faith.
But note: some do more, some less. There are some that do simply and
fundamentally, and others in some sort. Men depart from the faith Simply and
Fundamentally two ways. First they which do err in such maine poincts as do
utterly abolish us from Christ and destroy the Foundation: thus do Arrians,
Manichees, Seruetus, Papists, etc. Secondly, such as holding the Foundation in
doctrine sound, do desperately profess and teach some what else, against the
manifest light that is in them: so Martion and Tatianus, do Fundamentally and
simply fall from the faith, because they simply forbid those good ordinances of
God, Marriage and Meats even against the light of conscience and nature:
together wherewith, a lively saving faith cannot possibly stand. Now the
Papists in this do depart from the faith also, but that is only in some sort
or in part: because they forbid these things (not absolutely, but) unto some,
and sometimes. They that depart thus from the faith, may be true Christians
notwithstanding, yea they are certainly, if they be no worse in any thing else,
albeit you deny it here most fondly and without all sense. To which end you
most vnlernedly and ungodly apply those scriptures, A little leaven leueneth the
lump, A few dead flies make the ointment to stink, Scriptures abused.
and a little poison brings death. Will you have no tainte of evil in a
Christian but it quenches the life of God in us needs? Is it not possible
your selves might hold some such errors, and yet remain true Christians
notwithstanding? Then if Papists were no worse but in those errors only they
might be true Christians notwithstanding. But Martion and Tatianus do wholly
depart from the faith, not but that they believed some truths: but in that
they The same did Corah, Dathan and Abiram likewise. See before in answer to
the 2. Exception, the 2. Reply.
presumptuously quenched the instinct of nature and conscience, as I have said.
Here then it appears how wicked a sclaunder it is that you say, I run into
the Papists tents, and fight with their weapons, and do iump with the Remists
annotations, on 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. Judge now by this that I have said, whether I
do or no.

And note, that I save, that they be either Apostates or departers from the
faith, not only who fall totally, as you sclaunder me that I say: but also
who fall fundameneally, that is, either the first way or second, as I have
before said. And so do these gross Heretics whom you mention, 1 Arius,
Servetus Papists etc. 2. Martion, Tatianus, Judas, Corah, Balaam, the Apostate
Israelites etc. Thus then your questions and demaundes about the Papists and
their errors, I pass by, as more vain, then pertinent. Only note vvithall,
if this reason of yours were good, it makes Mr Cranmer, Ridley, etc. to be
departers from the faith, and no true Christians.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 2. Reply to the 7. Reason. LEt others
judge (Mr Jacob) whether in your self this be not in deed found true and
undeniable, which you do vainelie charge me withal, Though every where you
are very unreasonable, yet no where more unconscionable and vvilfull then here.

You have contradicted the Apostle, and yet have neither conscience nor will to
acknowledge it, no not when it is told you. I proved my Assumption by the
Apostles Yea, 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3. Your denial thereof then must needs be as much,
as to say No to his Yea. Neither is there any help for it in your vain
additions of totally, simply, fundamentally, absolutely etc. They are rather so
many witnesses against your self: as any men of understanding may and will
discern. Page 136. etc
But for this see further in my former answer. Against which you cannot say a
word, but in stead of replying fall to plain railing.

For the conclusions I gathered from your words, about Departers from the
faith, the Papists, and other Heretics: let the judgment be the Readers,
whether they follow not necessarily upon your erroneous and most absurd
assertions and distinctions. Yea see both for them, and for your contradiction
of the Apostle, if even here where you seek to color and avoid them, you fall
not into them again. Here you would have me know that this you say, That
whosoever do forbid marriage and meats, do depart from the faith. Well: I hear
you say so. But a while after I hear you say this too, Page 142.
If Papists were no worse but in these errors only, they might be true
Christians notwithstanding. A most false and heretical assertion. As if the
doctrines of Devils were not bad enough to make them Antichristians? Or as if
they could both be true Christians, and yet depart from the faith of Christ,
give heed to spirits of error, maintain doctrines of Devils etc. All which
they do, even in these errors, as the Apostle says expresselie 1 Timothy 4.1.3.
Now then do you not thus still both contradict the Apostle, and forget your
self? Will not the conclusions also which I gathered from your words, still
follow hereupon? And who then is it Mr Jacob, that speaks strange untruth,
and is unreasonable, unconscionable, wilful, etc.

Yet mind further, Whosoever (say you) do forbid marriage and meats, they do
depart from the faith. But both the Papists Church and yours (say I) do forbid
marriage and meats. Therefore both the Papists Church and yours do depart from
the faith. What part of this Reason now do you deny? The Proposition or first
part is the 1 Timothy 4.1.3
Apostles saying, and now at length yielded unto by yourself. The Assumption or
second part is the estate and practice both of your Church and the Papists: As
I have proved before, and you have left vnaunswered, being not able to speak
one word in defense either of their Church or your own. The Conclusion or last
part then is and must needs be true. This all men know, that know any thing in
sound reasoning. And yet behold, to show your self a notable Dunse, you shame
not to try about the Conclusion, yea and to deny it, whiles you say, they are
true Christians notwithstanding. Which is as much as if you should say, they do
not depart from the faith notwithstanding. And what is this else, but to deny
the Conclusion? Lo here your Clerklike skill in Argumentation, your Christian
and conscionable disputing.

But you note that in departing from the faith, some do it more, some less.
What then? They that do it least, do they it not to much? Because your case or
the Papists is not worse then the Jews, Turks, Arrians, Manichees etc. is it
not therefore bad enough? Yet thus you reason, There are that depart from the
faith more then we and the Papists. Be it so. What will you conclude thereby?
That the Papists case and yours is therefore good enough? 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3.
or that you are not within compass of this Scripture? Or not subject to wrath
in and for such estate of your Church? If this be your meaning, speak it out
plainly, and fumble not still in the mouth as you do. But then note for your
learning: Mat. 11.20-24.
Chorazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, had more great works of God done among them,
then Tyrus, Sidon, or Sodom had. Yet these who had less, perished
notwithstanding in the wrath of God. To what purpose then do you reason in this
manner? I will show you a better way. Either justify (by the word of God) your
estate, that in it you depart not from the faith: or else yield to the truth,
which all may see so dazels your eyes, as you can not go on, but are driven to
a flat Non plus.

Where you say, Men depart from the faith Simply and Fundamentally two ways:
Although I might yield to both, and your case be never the better: yet you must
prove, first that the Scripture teaches this distinction of yours. For else
what weight is there in it? 2. Prove that there are no mo nor other ways of
such departing but these two. Else your division is imperfect. 3. Show that such
may be found as holding the foundation in doctrine sound, yet do desperately
profess and teach somewhat else against the manifest light that is in them.
Which is one of the ways you speak of, and for example of it you bring Martion
and Tatianus. But in these you prove it not: neither (I think) will you prove
it by any other in have. For is it possible that any should both hold the
foundation in doctrine sound, and yet desperately profess and teach somewhat
else against the manifest light that is in them? If this be not a Paradoxe, what
is? 4. Yet mind that now you grant, Men may hold the Foundation in doctrine
sound, and yet err fundamentally other ways. Thus you are quite gone Mr
Jacob. For heretofore you bare us in hand, that you err not fundamentally, so
long as you hold the foundation in doctrine sound. (Page 28. 91. 92. 109. 111.)
This also was the ground of your maine Argument, from your book of Articles.
Which now your self have overthrowen. 5. Your distinction and acception of
Fundame^tall errors here and every where is such, as whosoever hold them, are
utterly abolished from Christ, and cannot possibly have a lively saving faith
vvithall. This you must prove by the word of God, if you will have it receyved.
Your words and distinctions (without such proof) cannot settle the conscience.
I have showed before that some of the Martyrs dyed in such errors, as your self
account Fundamental. Page 44. etc. Shall we therefore say (as here you teach)
that they were utterly abolished from Christ, and could not possibly have a
lively saving faith withal? God forbid.

(1) Some may err in fundamental points, and yet through the mercy of God in
Christ be saved: failing therein of ignorance, and not striving against the
light of truth, but laboring to walk faithfully with God in that he has
revealed unto them. For proof hereof I have Page 44. 45. 46.
before alleged, not only the example of diverse Martyrs, but such also in
the Churches of Corinth and Galatia, as before they receyved admonition and
better instruction, dyed in their errors which page 28. 92.
you acknowledge to be fundamental: And the like among the Israelites that
dyed in Egypt, Ios. 24.14. Ezech. 20.5.7
where they had and used Idols, which page 105. 109.
your self esteem to be a fundamental sin, wholly destroying the truth in
them that do so. Yet dare I not say but some of these might be saved, by the
mercy and in the truth of God which they embraced notwithstanding: and namely
such who erred and dyed, before that admonition came to them, as did to the
rest, whereof we read, Ezech 20.5.7. 1 Cor. 15. Gal. 5. chap.

Much more may and ought we to think thus of Terah Abraham's father (of whom
Christ came according to the flesh): Genesis 11.27. with Ios 24.2.14.15. Not to
speak of Haran, Bethuel, Rachel, and the like then, who did all of them serve
the Lord by Idols. Yea though it had been so, that Rachel had dyed before (as
she did presently after) that commandment given by Jacob to his household and
to all that were with him, for putting away the strange Gods or Idols that
were among them. Genesis 35.2.3.4.16.18. with Genesis 31.16.19.30.34. and
24.4.15.50. and 11.27.28. Ios. 24.2.14.15.23.24. So far am I from being of your
mind, who think the truth wholly destroyed in all such as have served Idols, or
held any other fundamental errors.

Consider also the Ethiopian Churches, which retain many of Moses ceremonies
and of the gross points of Popery: And the Greek Churches, erring greatly of
old about Freewill, and since that time about the Person and proceeding of the
holy Ghost, besides other very great errors among them. Not to speak of the
Lutherans, holding (with other errors) that of Consubstantiation, which by
necessary consequence overthrows Christ's humane nature, and therefore is
fundamental in your own account. Will you now say, that none of these can
have a lively saving faith? I dare not be of your mind. I hope and am persuaded
otherwise. Nay even for the Papists and others of whom you speak; I dare not
with you, say peremptorily of them all, from the first arising of their
errors, they are utterly abolished from Christ. My reason I showed before out
of the Papists own doctrine. To which I refer you, with this note: Page 47.
that as on the one hand I acknowledge Exo. 33.19 Romans 9.15.
God shows mercy to whom he will; so on the other hand I am persuaded
(neither can I see otherwise by the word of God, but) whosoever lives and
dies a Papist and member of that Church of Antichrist, in the knowledge,
profession, and maintenance of that Religion, in the parts thereof, can not of
us be esteemed to live and die in the state of salvation. (And this I speak as
of all such generally, so specially of them which have lived since the height
and clearer manifestation of that apostasy.) 2 These. 2.3-12. Rev. 13.8.11. and
17. and 18. and 19. chap. Such also take I to be the case of the Anabaptists,
Arrians, and the like, departing from true Churches, and being once co^victed.
Tit. 3.10 Heb. 10.25.38. 1 Ioh. 2.19. Iud. ver. 19.

This being noted, I could now further allege, against your peremptory
condemnation of all such as have held any fundamental errors, that even your
selves, yea the chiefest pillars of your Church, are of a contrary judgment
herein. And for proof I could cite D. Whitgift (now your great Archb.) in his
last book against Mr Cartwright. page 83.
But because where sound judgment is needful in question of Religion, his
testimony is but of small value, I will not stand upon it: but refer you rather
to Mr Jewel, a Prelate also, yet a man otherwise worthy to be reverented both
for his sufferings in Q. Maryes days, and for his gifts and labors employed in
defense of sundry points of the truth against the Papists. This Mr Jewel
alleging the examples of Papias, Apollinarius, Victorinus, Tertullianus,
Jewels defense of the Apology. Page 337. 338.
Lactantius, and others in former times, confesses that both they defended the
heresy of the Chiliastae which said, that Christ after the general judgment
should dwell here a thousand years together upon the earth: and yet
notwithstanding were godly, and worthy members of the Church of God. So also he
thought of Irenaeus, though he held besides the former heresy, this also Ibid.
that Man at the beginning, when he was first created, was imperfect. And of
Hilary, who affirmed both that Ibid. page 353.
Christ received not flesh, of the blessed Virgin, and that the flesh of Christ
was impassible and could feel no grief. Also of the Picardes, concerning whom
when Harding the Papist objected, Jewels Rep. to Harding. Page 119.
that sometime they pulled out their eye and cast it from them: he answers,
it was an error of simplicity, if they did it, much like the error of Origin
and others who ghelded themselves for the Kindome of heaven. Which two last
things, of the Picards and Origin, it may be you include in your second sort of
fundamental errors, and the other before in your first: and so account them
all without saving faith, and utterly abolished from Christ. Yet you see, the
chief governors of your Church, are otherwise minded. Yea and your Church it
self: for Mr Jewels books were published with consent and special privilege
thereof. Note this well.

(2) Some again who err not in any f^ndamentall point (as you distinguish)
yet no doubt shall perish and be condemned. As, for not relieving the poor and
people of God; for not yielding obedience to Christ, but fearing of man more
then God; for want of sanctification; for hypocrisy, contention, wicked life
etc. Mat. 25.41-46. Ioh. 3.36. Mat. 23. chap. Romans 2.8. 1 These. 4.3-6. Ephesians.
5.3-6. Gal. 5.19.20.21. Neither can you be ignorant but that Deuteronomy. 27.26 Romans
6.23. Ezec. 18.10.11 Iam. 2.10.
curse and death by the Law of God is threatened to all sin, even to the
least. Yea and that the very infants, through original sin alone, are
subject hereunto. Romans 5.14. 1 Cor. 7.14.

For your defense then it is not sufficient, though it were granted, that you
hold the Foundation, and err not in any fundamental point. Your persisting in
false worship and disobeying the ordinance of Christ (howsoever you consider
it) suffices to make your estate unlawful, and subject to condemnation, God
imputing it unto you. Thus at once all your building and defense of your Church
falls to the ground.

But yet (that you deceive not your self nor your Reader in this point any
more) mind if your Church do not also hold and maintain sundry Fundamental
errors, against the true faith of Christ. For example, Fundamental errors in
the Church of England.


1. Your self say before, page 28. 35.
that your Church holds all outward government and ceremonies to be
unwritten and uncertain, but at the arbitrary appointment of the Church and
Magistrate etc. That this is a fundamental error appears thus, 1. It does
wholly take away and annihilate the Second commandment. 2. It makes Christ
the Son inferior to Moses the servant. 3. It vpholdeth these and the like
fundamental errors, viz, That it is not written nor certain, but at the
Churches and Magistrates pleasure, Whether the Pope be to be head of the
Church, or Christ only; Whether now we may retain the Priesthood of Levi,
the Passover, Circuncision etc. For these concern the outward government and
ceremonies of the Church.

2. Your Church holds that Christ in his soul descended into Hell. Which I
have showed before to be your Churches opinion. Page 116.
And who knows not, that Whitgift P. of Canterbury, Bilson P. of Winchester,
Chaderton P. of Lincoln, with other the pillars of your Church, do thus hold
and maintain? And that it is Fundamental, your self I suppose will not deny.
See but your own book against D. Bilson, about this question: Page 92. 127.
133. 148. 156. 162. 165. 174.

3. Your Churches Ministry, worship, confusion, and government are such, as
they profane and disanull Christ's office of Mediation, that is, of his
Prophecy, Priesthood, and Kingdom. That this is Fundamental, against the true
faith of Christ, these Scriptures prove, Deuteronomy. 18.18.19. Heb. 3.1-6. Mat. 6.24.
Luke 10.27. Romans 6.16. Col. 2.8.19.20.21.22.23. 2 These. 1.8. and 2.3.12. Ioh.
3.36. Ier. 4.18. That your Churches co^stitution is such, I have proved in
another treatise both by the Scriptures and your own writings. viz: In a
treatise of the Ministry of the Church of England. Page 30-35.

4. Your Church forbids Marriage and Meats. Of which the Apostle says
expressly, it is a departing from the faith of Christ: and therefore
Fundamental. See 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3. Col. 2.8-23. And before, Page 137. 140.

5. Your Church persisteth (and persecuteth such as refuse) to worship the
beast and his image, or to receyve his mark in the forhead or hand. That this
brings damnation, and is Fundamental against the commandments of God and
faith of Jesus, see Rev. 14.9.10.11.12. and 17.1-6. and 18.2.3.4.5. 2. These.
2.3-12. Exodus 20 4.5. That it is your case, appears by your Hierarchy,
Leitourgy, confusion of people, Courts, Canons, Dispensations, Licenses,
Suspensions, Excommunications etc. practiced, maintained, and yielded unto, by
your Church, Ministers, and people, framed also according to the image and
fashion of the Romish Apostasy: Which your selves confess to be that Beast,
spoken of in the Revelation.

6. Together with these, remember also the particulars which I noted before
concerning this point. Page 22. 31. 60. 63. 73. 94. 103. 114. 122.. 126. 129.
133. In which places you may mind diverse the like, with further proof thereof.
And so for the present let this suffice, till we see what your next Reply can
bring against it.

The Scriptures alleged against you, what man of conscience knowing your
estate, durst ever open his mouth to say they were abused or misapplyed? When
the Corinthians did but neglect to excommunicate one wicked man from among
them, the Apostle fitly alleged this saying, A little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump. 1 Cor. 5.6.
How is it then abused when we apply it to your estate, which swarmeth with so
many known wicked men, and yet has not the power of Christ to cast out any
one from among you? That I say nothing of the other infinite corruptions among
you towched before. Page 63. etc.

But in deed if these Scriptures be in any respect not fitly applied, it is
in this that your corruptions are so many and so abominable as you had need of
far sharper corasives and other more deadfull sentences of Scripture to be
applied to your estate. Such as these be, If any man worship the Beast and his
image, and receive his mark in his forhead or on his hand, the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God etc. Rev. 14.9.10.11. They that receive
not the love of the truth that they might be saved, God will send them strong
delusion to believe lies, that they may be damned etc. 2 These. 2.10 11.12. He
that obeys not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him. Ioh. 3.36. To them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness: shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon the
soul of every man that does evil. Romans 2.8.9. Those mine enemies (says
Christ) which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay
them before me. Luke 19.27. I protest to every man that hears the words of
this book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book. And if any man shall diminish of the
words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life etc. Rev. 22.18.19.

And mark these clauses well, If any man worship, If any man add, If any man
take away, The soul of every man, I protest to every man, etc. None is
excepted. Let every man therefore mind your estate, betymes to deliver his
soul from the fierce wrath of God. Your estate (I say) wherein there are so
many things added, and so many things taken away from the ordinance of
Christ. And those also, marks of the Beast, even a multitude of abominations,
derived from Antichrist, that son of perdition.

And will you yet persuade men, that this is but some taint of evil in a
Christian? Can you put no difference between the sins and infirmityes of
Christians walking in the faith, and the impietyes of Antichrist and doctrines
of Devils making departure from it? Know you not that even Luke 22.24 Romans
7.23. Gal. 2.11.12.13.14. Iam. 3 2. 1 Ioh. 1.8.10.
the Apostles themselves were subject to the former, and yet were wholly free
from the latter? Or are you grown so presumptuous against the holy Ghost, as
what it directly teaches to be 1 Timothy 4.1.3 Rev. 17.4.5. 2 These. 2.3.
doctrines of Devils; fornications and abominations of the whore of Babylon;
Apostasy of Antichrist the man of sin: that you dare say, is but as the taint
of evil in a Christian? Belike you would have us see this very Prophecy
fulfilled in your self, viz, that you are led with the Spirit of error, and
have your conscience seared with an hot iron. 1 Timothy 4.1.2. Otherwise how
could you thus lewdly speak lies in hypocrisy, if you were guided by the spirit
of truth, and made any conscience of that you say?

But yet further to show that you have gotten the very habit of falsehood you
shame not to call that a wicked sclaunder which all the world may see is most
true. For proof whereof compare but your Replies here, with the Jesuits Notes
upon 1 Timothy 4. Thus they write, Rhem. Te^^. on 1 Timothy 4.
first in their marginall notes, We see plainly by these words such abstinence
only to be disallovved, as condemns the creatures of God to be naught by
nature and creation. Then in their Annotations following they labor to prove
that here the Apostle speaks of the Manichees, Encratites, Marcionists etc.
Towching whom they say, They thought that Marriage was of Satan, and condemned
diverse creatures, as things by nature and creation polluted and abominable. And
then they add, Lo these were the Heretics and their heresies which S. Paul
here prophecyeth of that forbid marriage and meats, as you have heard etc. These
are their own words. And thus they labor in vain (as D. Fulk in his answer
tells them) to post over the crime from themselves to the old Heretics, who
with as good reason might post it of from one to another, the Manichees to the
Tacianists, and the Tacianists to the Manichees etc.

Now let the Reader well mind your Replies in this place, and compare them with
this dealing of the Papists: and then let him judge how you are sclandered with
a matter of truth, when I said you run into the Papists tents, and fight
with their weapons, to shift of the evidence of this Scripture against you,
by posting it over from your selves to the Heretics of old, Martion, Tatianus
etc. But thus in deed you do still show your brazen forhead and seared
conscience.

Towching Corah, Dathan, Abiram etc. besides that I have answered to your
Reply in the Second exception (Page 53.) I have also purposely in many
particulars compared their case and yours together, in the Sixth Reason: Page
130. Which if you can, you may refute in your next: or by silence give place to
the truth.

Where I proved by sundry other Scriptures, compared with this to Timothy, Page
139. 140
that the Romish harlot and her children are here properly and specially
deciphered, you answer not one word unto it. Nay you are so turned out of all
your shifts, as even now when you would shift it of to Martion and Tacianus,
you give more evide^ce that it rests on your own heads, rather then on
theirs. And this I prove by comparing together your saying here, with the
Apostles there. You say here that Martion and Tatianus did Fundamentally fall
from the faith, because they simply forbad those good ordinances of God,
Marriage and meats, even against the light of conscience and nature,
presumptuously quenching the instinct thereof. Now if this were so Mr Jacob,
then (by your own saying) they did not speak falsehood in hypocrisy, but in
open and presumptuous blasphemy. Whereas the Apostle notes such expresselie,
as speak lies in hypocrisy. 1 Timothy 4.2.3.

And such in very deed I proved your case and the Papists to be, in my former
answer. Page 137. etc. Against which you can bring nothing at all. Yet you
blush not to say you pass by my puestions and demands about the Papists and
their errors, as more vain then pertinent. Whereas in deed the truth is, that
the questions and reasons do so nearly concern both the Papists and your
selves, as you dare not meddle with them. Otherwise if you could, you should at
least not only have said, but some way proved them to be vain. But this
labor it may be your reserve to your next Reply. If so, then examine them in
particular, and show the vanity of them from point to point. Else know they are
so pertine^t, as here again you are brought to a plain Non plus.

And because in my former answer I did but briefly towch that point of your
speaking lies through hypocrisy, I will for further evidence of this Scripture
against you, mention here some few particulars mo. 1. It cannot be denied but
you worship God by a Service book taken out of the Popes portuis, and by many
other the inventions af men: Yet you pretend that you worship God in spirit and
truth according to his word. A lie in hypocrisy. 2. Your Churches, Ministers,
and people, stand subject to other Archbishops and Lordbishops then Jesus
Christ, and to their Courts, Canons, Excommunications, etc. Yet you bear men
in hand that you receive Christ only as Lord and King of the Church, and obey
his Laws and ordinances. Another lie in hypocrisy. 3. Your Hierarchy and whole
Ministry from the highest Archbishop to the lowest Priest, is Antichristian in
you offices, entrance, administration, maintenance: Yet who knows not that in
all these you persuade the world you are the Ministers of Jesus Christ?
Falsehood in hypocrisy. 4. You still, banish, and imprison us because we
separate from your Antichristian estate, and endeavor to keep the faith and
ordinance of Christ: Yet you give out that we suffer more then we need, that we
are justly punished as enemies to the State, as Schismatics, Heretics,
seditious etc. Another lie in hypocrisy. 5. Finally, even the truths which you
teach and profess, what are they else in your estate but the sheeps clothing of
your wolvish Hierarchy and Priesthood, by means whereof you deceive and
devour the more? Lo here a taste of your speaking lies in hypocrisy; and if you
will also of your consciences burnt with an hot iron.

Besides these in your Church, note also in your self in particular, how even
here you do sclaunder me, and yet pretend that it is I which sclaunder you.
Neither suffices it you in this one place to do it once, as I showed before:
Page 149. But here again you will needs double it, that we might the better
note this property in your self, which yet you shame not falsely to lay upon
me. And because you will not seem to want color for it, you pretend this, that
I say the words of your first Reply imported such only to depart from the
faith, as fall from it totally: To depart from the faith (I say) so, as in that
estate they cannot by the word of God be esteemed true Christians. Reason. 7.
Page 135.
For this was the point which I proved, and you denied. Now towching this
matter the case is so very plain, as I neither need nor will do any more
(for your conviction therein) but set down your own words, as they were at
first, and then with a note concerning your dealing since, leave the judgment
thereof to the Reader: when he shall have compared together the words of your
Reply and of my Answer. Neither of which you love to keep unto.

For your words then, thus it was: When against your Church I had proved by the
Apostles testimony, that forasmuch as all such depart from the faith, as
forbid Marriage and Meats: therefore also your Church so does, which not only
forbids these things, and the true Ministry and worship of God vvithall,
but also commands a false, etc. You did then answer thus, word for word, The
Popish forbidding of Marriage and of Meats, if they were no worse, does not
make them departers from the faith totally. No more could their Hierarchy and
ceremonies simply: Neither do they make us (the Protestans) to be such. The
Papists fall from Christ in other points, namely, The Papal supremacy etc.
These were your words then. The other clauses which now you have annexed in the
Margent and Reply it self (though they help you no whit neither, yet) were they
added since you receyved my Answer: as I noted before, Page 141. Let the Reader
mind this: And withal, these two things, 1. That now you note in the margent
both " here and in the Eight Reason following, Page 136.
that you think the word fundamentally fitter to be here used, then the word
totally. And why fitter, I pray you, but because this word totally implies
that directly which I inferred thereupon in my Answer, Page 136. etc. 2. That
whereas you did at first annexe a clause concerning the Apostles meaning that
in these points they depart from the faith, not absolutely and wholy this also
is so far from helping you, as it makes altogether against you, howsoever you
would persuade otherwise in this your latter Reply (both in the beginning and
end thereof.) Page 141. 142. Which will yet more fully appear even to the most
simple, whenever you shall answer the particular questions and obiectio^s,
which I propounded in my former Answer, concerning the Papists and your selves.
For which cause also it may be, you were the more willing to pass by them,
being in deed afraid and unable to deal with them.

But to let this pass, let others now judge (by that which has been said) on
whom the sclaunder lies. And note you by the way, that it is the common wont
of sclaunderers, to impute that to others under some pretense or other, which
in very deed they do themselves, yea and that often with an impudent forehead.

Of vour vain distinction of fundamental errors, and of the necessity which
lies upon you to answer the particulars which I objected about the Papists and
your selves, I have spoken here before. If it stop not your mouth (as I suppose
it will) yet let it teach you at least to take heed, page 144. etc.
that your next Reply be less vain, and more pertinent, then these former
have been.

In the last place (when all other shifts fail) you would hale in again, to
help at a dead lift, those good but dead men, Mr Cranmer, Ridley, etc. whom you
do never linne calling upon, as if you would give them no rest, till you had
brought them up even from the dead, to bear witness on your side. But I have
showed before so great difference between your case and theirs, as they can not
help you at all. And now I tell you further as Christ has said of old, Luke
16.31.
If you hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither would you be persuaded,
though one rose from the dead again.

All these things considered, I hope in your next you will either by the word
of God justify, that you depart not from the faith, in your leitourgy,
Hierarchy, confusion of people, forbidding of Meats and Marriage, persecuon of
the truth etc. or else yield, that in such estate you do in deed depart from the
faith, and therefore cannot therein by the word of God be esteemed true
Christians.

Chap 14. The Eight Reason against Mr Jacobs Assumptio^ afoersaid.
Fr. Johnson. IF the Apostle account them denyers of the faith, and worse then
Infidels, and consequently no true Christians, who (though they do hold other
truths of the Gospel, yet) provide not for their household: Then how are such
to be accounted, who (though they profess some truths of the Gospel, yet)
are not true worshippers of God, but execute or submit unto a false Ministry,
worship, and government ecclesiastical? (Which to be the estate of the
Ministry and people of the Church of England, appears as aforesaid, in their
Canons, Articles, Book of Common prayer, etc.)

But the first is true. 1 Timothy 5.8. Therefore etc.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the 8. Reason. THis your Eight Reason is thus much:
viz. Like as it is for a professor, not to provide for his household: so is it
to hold the Hierarchy etc. But that is to deny the faith, and to be worse then
an infidel. Ergo so are we in England.

Those very answers to the last Reason, do fully and flattly satisfy this also:
Either against the Assumption, namely that it is not meant simply of denying
the faith, nor I mean Fu^damentally, as in the last Reas. before I have showed.
wholly, but in this poinct only: Or else the Proposition, as being meant of
such, as neglect their families against the light of their consciences, and the
manifest instinct of nature.

Er. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 1. Reply to the 8. Reason. FOr answer of
this Reason, you refer us (both for Proposition and Assumption) to your answer
to the last Reason. But there I have proved those your aunswers to be untrue.
Therefore yet we have no answer either to that Reason, or this.

(As for your new meaning, now (and not before) noted here in the margent,
although it help you no more then the other, yet tell me in your next, where
you learned thus to confound things that differ so much one from another. For
now your Reply to both these Reasons is such, as if wholly and fundamentally
were all one. Or else what have you said? But this (Mr Jacob) is to confound,
not to distinguish, as you pretended before, Page 135. 142. Men may err
fundamentally in some points of the faith, who yet err not wholly in all. Page
92. 136. 142.
The Papists at this day (you confess your self,) do err fundamentally in
some things, as in Justification by works, the Popes supremacy, the Mass, etc.
Will you therefore say, they err wholly in all? Do they not, howsoever they
err otherwise, yet notwithstanding hold also these and many other truths,
viz, That there is but one God, and three persons in the Godhead; That he made
heaven and earth and all other things, and that of nothing; That the Son (not
the Father, or holy Ghost) took flesh of the Virgin Mary; That the bodies of
the dead shall rise again at the last day, etc. Likewise for the Corinthians
and Galathians of old, Page 28. 92
of whom also you confess that they erred fundamentally in some points, as
about the Resurrection, Circumcision, etc Shall we therefore think that they
held not any one point of truth, but erred wholly in all? The Scripture it self
does witness the contrary: as may be seen throughout the Epistles sent to those
Churches. How senseless then and confused is this your new coined meaning?
Towching which I thought to add thus much here, besides that which I spoke
concerning it in the last Reason before.)

Let the Reader moreover observe, that both there, and here, and in your Reply
to the Reason following, the power of the truth so prevails against you, as
you cannot but grant, you depart from and deny the faith, in your Ministry
worship and government ecclesiastical: As appears in your Canons, book of
Common prayer, Articles, Iniunctio^s, persecution, etc. All which being
mentioned as proofs thereof, in these several reasons: when now they should
be defended, if you would maintain your standing, behold you are as mute as a
fish therein. And not that only, but in your Reply to the next Reason
following, Page 156.
you grant that in these things we may and ought to separate from you. Which
is directly to yield us the cause: Thus soundly you answer us, and dispute
for your selves.

H. Jacob his 2. Reply to the 8. Reason. TO this your Eight Reason and defense
thereof, I answer as before: if you take the Apostle to mean, such neglecters
of their household as deny the faith, not Fundamentally nor against the instinct
of nature, but only against convenient Christian providence, and no otherwise:
then I deny your Assumption. If the Apostle mean of such, as neglect their
families against the light of conscience, and natures instinct, then I deny the
Proposition. This I say, because the Apostle may very well mean both these,
but in diverse measure and proportion of sin: but then this concerns not
us, Even so as I have said to your former Reason. Note also, if this were a
true Reason, it makes Master Cranmer, etc. denyers of the faith, and not true
Christians also. For maintenance whereof, you have here not one poor word at
all.

Tovvching that you say we cannot deny, but grant, that we depart from and
deny the faith in our Ministry: I have told you how, in my answer to your 7.
Reason, Also see my Replies to your 2. Exception.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 2. Reply to the 8. Reason. NOw that all
your shifts fail, you come with Ifs and Ands, If the Apostle mean this, and
If he mean that etc. As if the Apostles * words were not plain, 1 Timothy 5.8.
so as the meaning may easily be discerned of any that is not wilfully blind.
Read and mind in all such cases and Scriptures that which is written, Prove.
8.9. with Act. 28.26.27.

But you say the Apostle may very well mean, both such as neglect their
household against convenient Christian providence, and such as do it against the
light of conscience and natures instinct. If the first, then you deny the
Assumption, that is, the Apostles own saying. And thus again you give the
holy Ghost the lie. If the latter, then you deny the Proposition. And then you
must prove, that thus they do it. For who knows not, that such will not (for
this case, any more then you for yours) confess that they do it against light
of conscience etc. Nay will they not say, as stiflie as you, that this
concerns not them? And moreover is not that also which is light in one man's
conscience, often dark in another man's by one means or other?

See it in an example. One of your professors in London runs to all your
Sermons and Lectures from place to place throughout the City, every day and
every hour. By this means he neglects his family. You tell him he does it
against light of conscience and natures instinct. He denies it, and says he
does it not so, but as being persuaded in his conscience that he must first
seek the kingdom of God, and that then all outward things shall be cast to him
and his. Hereupon (in a blind zeal) he does, as aforesaid. Now tell me, Is not
this man notwithstanding within compass of the Apostles rule here spoken of?
Yet will he stand against it for his case, as stiff as you for yours: yea and
allege for himself more color and show of Reason, then you do or can for your
Hierarchy etc. So then both the Proposition and Assumption stand firm against
you, and therefore also the whole Reason.

Now here again, being loath (belike) to give them any rest, you call for Mr
Cranmer etc. As if they were your Pages, to wait at your heels on every call,
and to serve your turn at every need, whether they will or not. Never were
poor men in all the world (I think) made such a stale. But they serve you
accordingly. They let you command, and go without. For every where you
command their names, and yet always go without their fellowship. As I have
showed before in particular: Page 40. 41.

Towching your grant, let the Reader note here again, that you yield, you
depart from and deny the faith in your Ministry etc. You say, you have before
told us how. But what you have said before is there answered and taken away.
And besides, for us it is sufficient, that it is done. Look you unto it, how
you do it. It may be, some of you do it of ignorance; some of knowledge against
the light of your own consciences; some for fear of men; some for love of the
world; some of contention, or vain glory; some for their profit, pleasure,
ease, honor, quyetnes, or the like. Thus I deny not but in the manner of doing,
there may be among you in these respects a diverse measure and proportion of
sin. But this concerns not us; but your selves to look unto: and that
greatly.

Chap. 15. The Ninth Reason against Mr Jacobs Assumption aforesaid.
Fr. Johnson. THey which do otherwise teach, and condescend not to the wholesome
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, all such by the rule of the Apostle are to be separated from, and
therefore cannot in that case by the word of God be deemed true Christians, 1 Timothy 6.3.4.5.

But such is the case of all the Ministers and people of the Church of England,
in their ministry, worship, and Church constitution: As appears both by the
several points of their false doctrine Points of false doctrine.
else where noted, and by the proofs Page 61. 63. 135. etc.
here before alleged out of their own Canons, Articles, Injunctions, etc.

Therefore all the Ministers and people of the Church of England, in their
Ministry, worship, and Church constitution, are by the rule of the Apostle to
be separated from, neither can in that case by the word of God be deemed true
Christians.

H. Jacob his 1. Reply to the 9. Reason. THis your last Reason is: Separate
from them that teach otherwise then the truth. 1 Timothy 6.3.4.5. We holding those
Articles, do teach diverse things in the Hierarchy etc. that be otherwise then
is truth. Therefore we must be separated from, and consequently we are no true
Christians.

This is a fallacy also, Separate from such, Ergo separate wholly. See my 1. and
2. Reply before to the third Exception, also the Answer to the two last Reasons
of all, the 7. and 8. We grant therefore, so far forth as we hold otherwise
then truth, so far separate from us, but not any farther at all: not wholly,
or absolutely. And so the Apostle here means. Wherefore briefly: Because you
prove us not wholly to deny the truth, nor fundamentally, nor obstinatly,
perversely, and desperately any part thereof, like those Jews Act. 19.9. whom
Paul separated from, which he did not from all other Jews, Act. 13.14. and
16.3. and 21.23.24.26. and 3.1. Therefore you ought not wholy to separate from
us, Neither to condemn us wholy as abolished from Christ, no more then
Master Cranmer and Ridley were with their Congregations in King Edwards time.
And thus our Assumption in the beginning, stands firm, The doctrine in the
book of Articles, is sufficient to make a true Christian.

Conclusion
The contrary whereof, is such a Paradox, as has not ben heard of till this
day: All reformed Churches in Europe do and have alvvayes held otherwise.
Themselves M. Barrow Mr. Penry. Mr. Johnson
heretofore have acknowledged and professed it. The holy Martyrs that lived in
King Edward's days, and dyed in Queen Mary's days, must be otherwise cut of
from Christ, who were true Christians by virtue of this doctrine and the
practice thereof, or verily not at all. But now it is vvonder, what extreme
passion has driven them to this denial. Surely they see that it conuinceth
flatly (as indeed it does,) their peremptory separation: And therefore, rather
then they would seem to have erred in so main a poinct: we cannot but think
that mere desperatnes, has driven them to it. Nevertheless, all this we
leave to the Lord, with the judgment thereof, who has the hearts of all men
in his hand: not only to search the secrets; but also to turn and dispose
them, even as it pleases him.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr Jacobs 1. Reply to the 9. Reason. TO this
Reason you answer, It is a fallacy, Separate from such: Ergo separate wholy.
But how show you any fallacy therein? You bid us see your Replies to the third
Exception, and two last Reasons of all. Well we have seen them, and find
nothing there but against your self, as has been showed. So this Reason and the
rest stand still unanswered, and strong against you.

And that we may not doubt, but your self also see it, howsoever you seem to
plead the contrary before, therefore now you grant it (and so yield the cause)
both in express words, and by not defending the points of false doctrine,
wherewith you were charged, neither your Canons, Articles, Injunctions, etc.

In express words, when you say, you grant, that so far forth as you hold
otherwise then truth, so far we may and ought to separate from you. Lo here
what the evidence of the truth (against which you have strugled so long) has
now at length drawn from you. The truth is mighty, and prevails.

But you add, that we must not separate from you any further, then as before:
not wholly or absolutely: and so (say you) the Apostle " here means. 1 Timothy
6.3.^
First of all, let us know what your self mean hereby. If you mean that we
must not for your other defection forsake the trueths which you hold, I answer
that we do it not, and this your self know well enough. And in this sense your
meaning comes nothing near the Apostles. You say your selves, you have
separated from the Papists: yet you neither can nor will say, that you have
forsaken the truths which the Papists hold: As, that there is a God; that
there be three persons in the Godhead; that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the
world; that God made heaven and earth; that there shall be a resurrection of the
just and unjust etc.

But if you mean, that because of the truths which you profess, therefore we
should not separate from you: then first you contradict your self, having
granted that we must separate from you, so far forth as you hold otherwise
then truth. Secondly, you condemn your own practice in your separation from
the Papists, notwithstanding the truths they profess. Thirdly, in this sense
also your meaning comes nothing near the Apostles meaning. Thus therefore is
evident, both that there is no fallacy in the Reason, but that it is plain and
forceable against you: And that you have directly in express words given us
the cause, See the particulars before, Page 63 etc.
and acknowledged our separation to be lawful from your * Ministry, worship,
Assemblies, etc. because in these you hold otherwise then truth.

And as in express words you yield it, so in deed you show it, in that you
leave without all defense (as unlawful and to be separated from) your
Ministry, worship, Church-governement, Doctrine, Canons, Articles,
Injunctions, etc. mentioned both here, and more particularly in the First and
Second Reasons before: which thing we wish the Reader well to observe. And
because we are fallen again into mention of your false doctrine, to the end
that the Reader may yet more see the deceitfulnes of your dealing and
insufficiency of all your answers: therefore it shall not be yrkesome to set
down here, some such poincts of false doctrine as heretofore have been objected
against you. They are as follows:

1. That though the open notorious obstinate offenders be partakers of the
Sacraments, yet neither the Sacraments, False doctrine in the Church of
England, and in the defenders thereof.
nor the people that join with them, are defiled thereby. Which doctrine is
contrary to the truth of God in these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 10.17. Hag. 2.14.15.
1 Cor. 5.6. and 10.28. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16.17.18. Gal. 5.9. Mat.
18.8.9.15.16.17.18.19. Exodus 12.43. Levit. 15.4.5.6.7.31. and 11.24. and
13.45.46. and 19.7. Number. 5.2.3. and 19.21.22. Joshua. 7.11.12. etc. Ezra.
6.21.22. Ier. 3.1.

2. That the planting or reforming of Christ's Church must tarry for the Civil
Magistrate, and may not otherwise be brought in by the word and spirit of God
in the testimony of his servantes, except they have authority from earthly
Princes. Which doctrine is against the Kingly power of Christ, and these
scriptures. Mat. 28.18.20. Acts 3.23. 1 Cor. 1.27. Psalm. 2.6.9.10.12. Esa.
9.6.7. Zach. 4.6. and 6.12.13. Dan. 2.44. and 7.27. and 9.25. Mich. 5.7. 1 Cor.
14.27. with 1 These. 4.8. Phil. 2.6.12. 1 Timothy 6.13.14.15. Rev. 1.5. and 12.11.
and 14.12. and 17.14. and 19.16. and 20.4.

3. That the true visible Church of Christ is not a separated company of
righteous men and women, from the Idolaters and open wicked of the world, but
may consist of all sorts of people, good and bad. Which doctrine is contrary
to the pattern of Christ's Church, throughout all the scriptures, Genesis 4.26.
with 6.2. Exodus 4.22.23. Levit. 10.10. and 20.24.25.26. Psalm. 24.3.4. Ezra.
6.21. 2. Chron. 11.13.16. Nehem. 10.28. Eze. 22.26. with 44.23. Zeph. 3.4. Mat.
3.10.12. Act. 2.40.41.42. and 19.9. Romans 12.1.8. 2 Cor. 6.17.18. 1 Pet. 2.9.10.
Rev. 14.9.12. and 18.4. and 21.27. and 22.14.15. etc.

4. To maintain this error of their confused order and mixture of all sorts
of persons together, they pervert the Parable of the tares, Mat. 13.24.
teaching that all are the Church, and that they may be retained and
communicated withal, in the Church. Which doctrine is against the truth of
the scriptures, yea against our Saviors own interpretation in the 38. verse,
who teaches, that by the field is meant the world, in which his Church is
militant here on earth. And as therein there is the good seed, the righteous,
the Children of the Kingdom; so there are also tares, hypocrites, the children
of the wicked: who as they are often espied in this life by the righteous
servauntes of God, and being discovered are here cast out of the Church in the
Name and by the power of Jesus Christ; so shall they in that great day be
perfectly severed from the godly by the Angels: howsoever here in the mean
time making profession of the truth and having a show of godliness, they be
suffered to grow together with the good seed, and be with the upright of heart
reputed members of the Church on earth. Note also, that the Church because it
is the Temple, House, and kingdom of God on earth, wherein he dwells by his
spirit and rules by the scepter of his word, as also the gate of heaven
through which he brings us into his kingdom of glory after this life, is
therefore by Christ in this place called the Kingdom of heaven, though yet it
be here in the field of this world. Mat. 13.19.24.37.38.41.43.52. compared with
Genesis 28.17. 1 Cor. 3.16.17. 2 Cor. 6.16.17.18. Ephesians. 2.21.22. Mat. 8.12. and
16.18.19.28. and 21.43. and 22.12.13.14. and 25.1. etc. Luke 8.1. and 11.20.
and 13.18. and 17.20.^1. Ioh 1.49.51. Act. 1.3. 1 Timothy 3.15. and 5.24.25. and
6.3.5. and 2. Tim. 2.20.21. and 3.5. And further, if Christ's meaning were that
men should here still dear and partake with the known wicked and profane,
notwithstanding that their estate, then by this it would follow that there
should neither be use of Excommunication in the Church, nor punishment of
malefactors in the Commonwealth. Which could not but be the destruction of
both: And is directly contrary to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, in
other Scriptures: As namely, in Mat. 18.17.18. and 26.52. Romans 13.4. 1 Cor. 5.
chap. 1 Timothy 1.20. Finally, this their doctrine aforsaid, is against the
express commandment of God, the heavenly order of Christ in his Church, and
the continual practice of the Prophets Apostles and faithful in all ages: For
which see these Scriptures, Genesis 17.14. and 19.12-16. Lev. 18.29.30. and
20.22-26. Numb. 16.23-26. Ezra. 6.21. and 9.14. Esa. 8.12.18 and.44.5. and
52.11. Ier. 15.19. Ezeh. 22.26 zach. 2.7. and 8.21. 22.23. Mal. 3.16.17.18.
Mat. 18.8.9.15.16.17.18. Act 2.40.41.47. and 5.28.29. and 17.4.7.34. and 19.9.
Romans 16.17. 1 Cor. 1.26.27. and 5.4-7. 2 Cor. 6.17. 1 Timothy 6.3.4.5. 2 Ioh.
verse. 6.10 11. Iud. verse. 3.21.22.23. Rev. 2. and 3. chap. and 14.9.12. and
17.14. and 18.4. and 20.4.

5. That the people may tolerate and join with open iniquity in the Church,
until by the Magistrate it be redressed. Which doctrine is contrary to these
Scriptures, 2 Cor. 10.4.5. Mat. 28.20. Act. 2.40. and 3.23. and 4.19. and 9.26.
and 19.9. 1 Timothy 5.22. Deu. 5.32. and 12.32.

6. That the gifts of interpretation and application of the Scriptures are a
sufficient and lawful calling to the Ministry, etc Which doctrine is both
false and Anabaptisticall, contrary to the Scriptures, Heb. 5.4. Romans
12.6.7.8. Levit. 22.25. Ezech. 44.8.9. etc Numb. 1.51. and 3.10.38. and 16.40.
and 18.2.3.4. Act. 1.20.26. and 13.2.3. and 14.23.

7. That the Church may yield obedience unto other Laws, Canons, traditions,
officers and offices, then God has prescribed in his Covenant. Which doctrine
is contrary to Genesis 49.10. Mat. 6.24. John. 10.4.5. Rev. 14.4. and 22.18.19.
Heb. 3.1. etc.

8. That the Church may read other men's words upon a book, and offer them up to
God as their own prayers and sacrifices in the public Assemblies. Which
doctrine is contrary to the scriptures, Esaias. 29.13.14. Romans 8.26. 1 Cor.
14.15. Mat. 6.6.9. and 15.9. Mar. 7.7. Exodus 30.9. with Psalm. 141.2. Rev. 5.8.
and 8.3.4. Iud. verse. 20. Ephesians. 4.7.8. and 6.18. 1 Pet. 2.5.

9. That it is lawful to join with the Ministry of dumb and Idol Priests,
and to receive the Sacraments at their hands. Which doctrine is contrary to
Mat. 15.14. and 7.15. and 24.24.25. Esa. 56.10. John. 10.1.5. Number.
16.5.9.24.26.39.40. etc. 1 Timothy 3.2. and 6.5. 2 John. verse. 6.11.

10. That it is lawful for a Minister of Christ, to cease preaching, and
forsake his flock, at the Commandment of the Lord Bishops. Which doctrine is
contrary to 1 Cor. 9 16. Esaias. 62.1.6.7. Ier. 48.10. Zach. 11.17. John,
10.11.12.13. Act. 4.18.19.20. and 5.29. Amos 7.12.13.14.15. 2 Timothy 4.2.

11. That the Church of Christ has not always power to bind and loose, to
receive in, and to cast out by the Keys of his Kingdom. Which doctrine is
contrary to Mat. 18.17.18. Psalm. 149.9. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.12. Number. 5.2.3.

12. That it is lawful for the people of God to hear notorious false
Prophets in their Ministry. Which doctrine is contrary to Deuteronomy. 18.15. Mat.
17.5. and 7.15. 2 John. verse. 10 11. 1 Cor. 10.18. Gal. 1.8.9. Rev. 14.9.10.11.
and 18.4. John 10.5.

13. That it is the Church and house of God, the body and kingdom of Christ,
where he reigns not by his own Ordinances and Officers, but the highest
Ecclesiastical authority is in the hands of strange Lords and Antichristian
Prelates: who also govern by Romish Cannons, and not according to the laws of
Christ's Testament. Which doctrine and practice is condemned by Luke 19.14.27.
John. 15.14. Romans 6.16. Luke. 22.25 26. 1 Pet. 5.3. 2 These. 2.3.4.8. John.
3.35.36. Rev. 9.3. and 14.9.10.11. and 19.14.15.19.

14. That there may be a prescript Leiturgy and set form of service in the
Church, framed by man. Which doctrine is contrary to Deuteronomy. 5.8. Esa. 29.13.14.
Mat. 15.9. Mar. 7.6.7. Gal. 3.15. John. 4.24. Romans 8.26.27. Ephesians. 4.7.8. Col.
2.23.

15. That an Antichristian Prelate, notwithstanding his dignity (as it is
called) spiritual, may be a Civil Magistrate, and obeyed of the people as
their lawful governor. Which doctrine is contrary to Romans 13.1. etc. Mat.
20.25.26. Mar. 10.42.43. Luke. 22.25.26. Rev. 14.9.10.11. and 17.14.16.18.

16. That men may give the titles of Christ Jesus to these sons of men, his
mortal enemies, to call them their Archbishops, Lordbishops, Fathers, Lords
etc. Which doctrine is contrary to 1 Pet. 5.3.4. with 2.25. Mat. 23.8.9.10.
Esa. 42.8. and 48.11. Prove. 17.15. and 24.24. Esaias 5.20. 2 Cor. 6.14.17.

17. That it is lawful for a Minister of Christ to be mainteyned in his
ministry, by Jewish and Popish tithes, Chrisomes, offerings andc. Which
doctrine is contrary to Heb. 7.12. 1 Cor. 9.13.14. 1 These. 5.12.13. Pro.
27.26.27. Phil. 4.10.18. Romans 15.27. Gal. 6.6.

These are the points of false doctrine mentioned * before in the proof of this
Reason. Page 155.
Which you have left altogether unanswered: as also your Canons, Articles,
Injunctions, etc. And thus are you driven again and again (whether you will
or not) to yield the cause.

That which you add in the next place, of your not wholly denying the truth,
nor fundamentally, nor obstinatly, perversely, and desperately any part thereof,
is answered before in the second Exception, and sixth and seventh Reasons.

Where you say, you are not herein like those Jews (Act. 19.9.) whom Paul
separated from, which he did not from all other Jews, Act. 13.14. and 16.3.
and 21.23.24.26. and 3.1. you say nothing to any purpose. For what though you
be not in all respects like those Jews? Are you not therefore to be separated
from? So in deed you would conclude. But then tell us, if Corah, Dathan,
Abiram, the Apostate Jews under Ieroboa^, the corinthian infidels, Papists,
andc. might not allege some particular exception, wherein they were not like
to those Jews, Act. 19. Might not therefore separation be made from these? The
Scripture teaches otherwise, Number. 16.25.26. 2 Chronicles. 11.14. 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev.
18.4.

Secondly, consider the case here spoken of (Act. 19.9.) and compare it with
your estate and practice, and see if there be not now as great and just cause
to separate from you, as was then from them. The words are these, When some
were hardened, and disobeyed, speaking evil of that way before the multitude,
Paul departing from them, separated the disciples. Act. 19.9. Compare now your
case with theirs, and answer for your selves. Are not you hardened against the
truth? Let your writings against it, your imprisonning, banishing, and killing
for it give evidence. Do you not also disobey it? Let your constitution and
practice be witness. And do you not speak evil of the way of God before the
multitude? Let the Sermons of your Ministers bear record, your books also and
ill speeches of your Prelates, Judges, people, etc. Therefore (by that
Scripture) you are to be separated from. Whereunto may be added in this case
that which Peter says, Act. 2. Save your selves from this froward generation.

Thirdly where you object, That Paul did not separate from all the other
Jews, as he did from these, Act. 19. and show it by Act. 13.14. and 16.3. and
21.23.24.26. and 3.1. I answer, that the Apostles had good and just cause so to
do. For first the Jews were the people of God, separated from the world, and
set in the true way and order of God. Romans 9.4. Levit. 20.22.24.26. Luke 16.8.
andc. Secondly, Christ commanded the Apostles, when he sent them to preach
his Gospel throughout the world, that they should first preach it to the
Jews. Luke 24.47. Act. 1.8. and 13.46. Thirdly, the Jews ministry and
ceremonies being the ordinances of God him self, and given in writing by Moses
the man of God, were therefore now (when they should cease) to be buried with
honor. Act. 15.21. and 21.30.21.22.23.24.25. Heb. 8.5.13. and 9.1. andc. These
things considered, we see the Apostles had just cause so to do, as they did in
those places mentioned.

But what is this to the assemblies of England, which never yet were separated
from the world nor set in the way and order of Christ, but stand in the Rev.
13.16.17. and 18.2. 2 The. 2.3.4.8
confusion and defection of Antichrist; whose Ministry and worship were never
the ordinances of God, but taken out of Rev. 17.2.4 and 18.3. and 9.3. etc.
the whores cup of Babylon; for which God never gave Commandment to go unto
them, but to depart from them, as being daughters of the great Babylon, that
mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth. Rev. 18.4. with 17.5.

Add hereunto, that even from those Jews (notwithstanding the reasons
aforesaid) when they put from themselves the truth and would not receive it,
the Apostles departed and separated themselves, yea and shook of the dust of
their feet against them, teaching others to do so likewise, Act. 13.46.51. and
18.6. and 28.25.26.27, 28. and 19.8.9.

To that of Master Cranmer, Ridley, andc. is answered before.

And hitherto of your general Assumption: which was this, That the whole
doctrine as it is professed and publicly practiced by law in England, is
sufficient to make a particular man a true Christian. Which by the Exceptions
and Reasons aforesaid, is proved to be untrue.

Touching the Conclusion.
Now let the godly Reader (trying all things by the word of truth) judge,
whether we or you hold Paradoxes.

In that which you speak of the reformed Churches, you are deceived, if you
think they allow your present estate and Church constitution. Both their
public profession and practice witness the contrary: In the answer to Mr
T.C. Mr A.H. etc.
as is declared at large in other treatises, which yet remain unanswered.

Where you say, we our selves heretofore have acknowledged and professed it,
(viz your general Assumption to be true) you are again deceived. We have
always testified the contrary, both by our profession and practice, and were
and are therefore cast into prison, appointed to exile, and to death: besides
many other injuries and grieuances inflicted upon us for this very cause. We
have in deed acknowledged and do acknowledge, that you profess diverse
excellent truths, but that the whole doctrine, as it is publicly professed
and practiced by law in England, does make you in that estate true Christians,
never any of us (that I know of) did once acknowledge. Therefore till you show
the contrary, I must needs think you do falselie burden us all, and
specially such of us, as you have mentioned here in particular.

To that of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days is answered already. Yet for
more evidence of the truth, I will annexe some particular speeches and
testimonies of the Martyrs themselves, both then, and in former times.

Master Bradford, (speaking of the days before Queen Marie) said. Act. and
monum. In the conference with Archb. Heath.
The time was, when the Pope was out of England, but not all popery. And
moreover, In his first speech with D. Harpsfild.
That the scripture knows not any difference between Bishops and Ministers,
which men call Priests. And that the Scripture speaking of Bishops, cannot be
understood of Bishops that minister not, but lord it.

Master Hooper held, Hooper on the eight commandment.
That a Bishop should be Bishop but of one City: and that till the Magistrates
bring them to this poinct, it shall be as possible to hear a Bishop wade godly
and simply through the Scripture in case of Religion, as to drive a camel
through the eye of a needle. And again he says, The primitive Church had not
such Bishops as be now a days. And again, What blindness (says he) is there
befell in the world, that cannot see this palpable ill, that our mother the
holy Church had at the beginning such Bishops, as did preach many godly Sermons
in less time then our Bishops horses be a brideling.

John Bale (an exile for the testimony of Jesus) writing upon the Revelation
affirms, The Image of both churches: upon Rev. 13.1. and 17.3.
That the names of Blasphemy written upon the Beasts head (Rev. 13. and 17.)
are none other then the proud glittering tytles, wherewith they garnish their
usurped authority, to make it seem glorious to the world, having within them
contained the great mystery of iniquity. What ^her else (says he) is Pope,
Cardinal, Metropolita^, Primate, Archbishop, Diocesan, Archdeacon, Official,
Chauncelour, Commissarie, Deane, Prebend, Parson, Vicar, and such like, but
very names of blasphemy? For offices they are not appoincted by the holy Ghost,
nor yet once mentioned in the scriptures. This John Bale held and published.
Then which, what can be more full and evident against you?

And writing upon the 14. of the Revelation, he has these words: To receive
the beasts mark in their forheads and hands, Ibid. upon Rev. 14.9.
is both to agree to such decrees, traditions, laws, constitutions, acts, and
proclamations, as they under those titles have made only for their own
covetousnes and pomp, and neither for the glory of God, nor yet for the right
maintenance of the Christian common wealth: And also to be sworn to the same,
to subscribe to it, to give counsel or aid to it, to maintain it by learning,
to minister in it, to execute under it, to accuse, punish, and put to death for
it, or to think it lawful and godly, with such like.

And " afterward upon the 16. of the Revelation, Ibid. upon Rev. 16.12.
expounding the drying up of the waters of Euphrates to be this, That the
welthy Popes possessions and pleasurs of the Clergy (their false feats once
known) are and shall be clearly taken away from them: He says thus, In England
by the Mark by this, of what time and estate he speaks, even of such when
the Gospel was preched, the Monasteries suppressed, etc.
Gospel preaching have many of these waters been dried up in the suppression
of the monasteries, prioryes, couents, and Friars houses, yet are not all
things brought unto Christ's clear institution. A sincere Christian order
cannot yet be seen there. And a great cause why. For all is not yet dried up
there. The Bishops reign still in as much vain glorious pomp, and with as
many Heathnish observations, as ever they did, as cruelly hearted and as bloody
minded are they yet, as ever they were before. No mischief unsought to hold in
the waters. Mark how Winchester, Durham, York, London, and Lincoln work
(let us also add Canterbury) with such other pleasant disposed Euphratines.
But be of good confort, and pray in the mean time. For the holy Ghost
promises here, that they shall wither away with all that the heave^ly Father
has not planted. All which generation will the Lords breath consume etc.

And (to speak also of others in former times) John Wickleff held, Acts and
Mon. 5. edit. page 414. b.
That Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officialls, Deanes, Canons, andc. be
disciples of Antichrist.

William Swinderby said, Ibid. page 431. b.
that what Pope, Cardinal, Bishop, Prelate, or Priest, in manner of living, or
teaching, or Laws making, contrary to Christ's living and his Laws, or any
other ground, put in ruling of the Church of christ, but by Christ and his
Laws, is very Antichrist, adversary to Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

Sir John Oldcastle (Lord Cobham) witnessed, Ibid. ^ag. 518. a. and b.
that the Bishops, Priests, Prelates, and Monks, are the body of that great
Antichrist: And that the possessions and Lordships of the Clergy, are the
venime of Judas shed into the Church.

John Claidon (burnt in Smithfield) professed, Ibid. page 588. b.
that the Archbishops, and Bishops, speaking indifferently, are the seats of
the beast Antichrist, when he sits in them and reigns above other people
in the dark Caves of errors and heresies. And that the Bishops license for a
man to preach the word of God, is the true character of the beast, that is
Antichrist.

Finally In his treatises called* The obedience of a Christian man, and. The
practice of prel.
William Tindall and In his Preface before his Antithesis betvveen Christ and
the pope.
John Frith published, That Archbishops, Lordb. Archdeacons, Deanes, Officials,
Parsons, Vicars, and the rest of that sort, are the disciples of Antichrist,
yea very Antichrists themselves.

These are the speeches and testimonies of the Martyrs in former ages,
whereunto diverse other such like might be added. But these may suffice for the
matter in hand. Now compare therewith, the public profession and practice of
England (even as it is by law at this day) and see whether your own proofs be
not so many witnesses against your selves.

But if it were so, that the reformed Churches, we our selves, and the Martyrs
of former time, gave allowance of your present estate and Church co^stitution,
what would this help you, when as the word of God condemns you, as we have
showed in the Reasons aforsaid and defense thereof. Whereunto (if you will
still justify your estate) we require direct answer from point to point, and
that from the Scriptures, which only can stablish the conscience.

Furthermore, that the truth it self and your estate may better appear what it
is, as also that you may not turn away or obscure the truth by your shifts
and evasions, as your manner is: I will here propound a few questions
concerning the points now in controversy, desiring your plain and sincere
answer thereunto, by the word of God, as you will answer to him at that day.
The questions are these.

Seven questions containing the whole controversy betvveen us: yet vnansvvered.
1. Whether the Lord Jesus Christ have by his last testament given unto and set
in his Church sufficient ordinary Offices, with their Callings, Works, and
Maintenance, for the administration of his holy things, and for the sufficient
ordinary instruction, guidance, and service of his Church to the end of the
world, or no?

2. Whether the Offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and Helpers, be
those offices appoincted by Christ in his Testament, as aforesaid. Or whether
the present ecclesiastical Offices of Archbishops, Lordbishops, Suffragans,
Deanes, Prebendaries, Cannons, Petticanons, Priests, Deacons, Archdeacons,
Doctors of divinity, Batchelers of divinity, Chaplens or Housepriests,
Commissaries, Officialls, Proctors, Apparitors, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Vagrant or Mercenarie preachers, Churchwardens, Side men, Clerks, Sextons, and
the rest now had in the Cathedral and parishionall assemblies, be those
Offices appoincted by Christ in his Testament as is aforsaid, or no?

3. Whether the Calling and entrance into these Ecclesiastical offices
aforesaid, their Administration, and Maintenance, now had and retained in
England, be the manner of calling, administration and maintenance which Christ
has appoincted for the offices of his Church above named, or no?

4. Whether every true visible Church of Christ be not a company of people
called and separated out from the world and the false worship and ways thereof
by the word of God, and joined together in fellowship of the Gospel, by
voluntary profession of the faith and obedience of Christ? And whether the
Ecclesiastical Assemblies of this Land be such, or no?

5. Whether the Sacraments (being seals of righteousness which is by faith) may
be administered to any other but to the faithful and their seed, or in any
other ministry and manner then is appoincted by Jesus Christ the Apostle and
high Priest of our profession? And whether they be not otherwise administered in
the Cathedral and parishionall Assemblies of England at this day?

6. Whether the Book of Common prayer with the Feasts, Fasts, Holy days,
stinted prayers, and Leiturgy prescribed therein, and used in these Assemblies,
be the true worspip of God commanded in his word, or the devise and invention
of man, for Gods worship and service.

7. Whether all people and Churches (without exception) be not bound in
Religion, only to receive and submit unto that Ministry, Worship, and order,
which Christ as Lord and King has given and appoincted to his Church? Or
whether any may receive and join unto another devised by man, for the service
of God? And consequently, whether they which join to the present
ecclesiastical Ministry, worship, and order of the Cathedral and
parishionall Assemblies, can be assured by the word of God that they join to
the former ordained by Christ, and not to the latter devised vy man, even the
man of sin, for the worship and service of God?

Unto these questions and the particulers thereof, for the causes aforesaid, we
desire your direct answer, with proofs of your answers from the scriptures.
According to which word if you speak not (as I said before, so I say again)
Esa. 8.20.
it is because there is no light in you.

And now to conclude, where you would in the end of your writing (being not
able to answer our Reasons) fasten upon us some strange passion, yea mere
desperatnes, for separating from you, and answering of you as we have done: we
refer it to the godly and discreet Reader to judge by that which has been said
on both parts, whether it be not your selves that are taken with the strange
passion you speak of, and driven thereunto by mere desperatnes: when for to
mainteyne your own estate; you will have the scriptures to fall and exalt the
Church and Magistrate above Christ himself, even flesh and blood above God
blessed for ever. Your practice whereof see before, Page 28. 91. 100. 105. 135.
etc.

But for this and all your unrighteous dealing against the truth and people of
God, we leave you to the Lord, who searches the heart and tries the raynes,
to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his
works: That is, to them that by continuance in weldoing seek glory and honor
and immortality, eternal life; But unto them that are contentious, and
disobey the truth and obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath. Ier. 17.10.
with Romans 2.6.7.8.

H. JACOB his 2. Reply to the 9. Reason. IN this your defense of the last
Reason, you mislike that I say it is a fallacy: and you say I show none. Mark
what I say, Every one of your Reasons, I say every one, is a very proper
fallacy, and an artificial part of Sophisterie, as by my several answers to
them may appear. Your First Reason is called in the schools Fallacia ab eo
quod est secundum quid ad simpliciter proving a thing to be simply, by that
which is but after a sort. The Second is the very same. The Third Fallacia
equiuocationis, A fallacy of Ambiguity. The Fourth is the very same. The Fifth
is petitio principij, a begging of the question. The Sixth the very same
fallacy that was in the First and Second Reasons. The Seventh, Eight, and
Ninth, have all the Fallacy of Equivocation, and if you will, the same with
that, in your First, Second and Sixth Reasons, also.

Further, where you say, that here I grant you the cause, it is very absurd.
The Apostle 1 Timothy 6.3.4.5. saying, separate from such, has a two fould sense,
Either such as teach otherwise then the truth fundamentally, and then separate
wholly: Or not fundamentally, but erring only in poincts less then the
foundation: and these diuersely also, Either presumptuously, obstinately, and
of a desperate conscience: and then if that appear, separate from such wholly:
Or else, erring in simplicity and of oversight, and former prejudice, from
such, separate nor wholly, but only from the very error or errors, in no wise
from their Christian communion and society, seeing these are true Christians.

Seeing therefore our corruptions of the Praelacy and Ceremonies, be of these
latter sort: which thing hitherto, you have not nor cannot overthrow, (and
withal you must utterly overthrow Mast. Cranmer and the rest of the Martirs
their Christianity like wise): Therefore we in England, by the grace of God,
are still true Christians: and you ought so to acknowledge us, as you will
answer unto God: All which you may do, and yet touch no part of our
Ecclesiastical corruptions at all to give allowance unto them: And in all
this, there is no contradiction with my self, it is but your distempered
conceit, that seems contrary. Nither is our absolute departure from the
Papists, hereby any whit impeached. We have justly forsaken them clean,
because by their very profession and doctrine, we cannot esteem them true
Christians, neither in case of salvation, while they so remain, but indeed
very Antichrists, as the scripture proves. Which thing also if you say of us,
you say falsely: it is our present question, and you do not prove it, nor ever
can do.

As for your 17. poincts of false doctrine, which you most falsely lay to our
chardge, what have I to do with them? I list not to meddle at this prsent, but
with that which we have in hand^, namely to justify, that our public book
of Articles of Religion (so far forth as that it erreth not fundamentally,)
conteyneth sufficient to make a true Christian: As it does not.
Against the which, hitherto you have brought nothing worth the hearing, as we
have seen.

After you would prove us to be like those Jews Act. 19.9. whom Paul separated
from: But without all good reason. They were not so many but they were easily
certified of the truth that Paul preached: but how infinitely many more are there
in this land, that know nothing of this controversy. 2. Secondly Paul was
better able to convince them by the scriptures, and did more effectually, and
apparently, then you do (or can) our whole Realm. 3. Thirdly how many learned
are there in this land, that have many probable and seeming reasons, and
allege them, and publish them for the Praelacy against you: and are
unanswered. And yet will you say they are convicted, and those infinite others
depe^ding on them? I say co^uicted as well as those Jews? What if these speak
evil of that which you hold for truth, but they hold to be errors and schism?
Are they all yea all the land therefore abolished from Christ? Might not all
this at least, be said of the whole estate of the Jews in Christ's time, and
after as well, yet they ceased not to be Churches? why then are you so partial
against us?

Lastly, you would show Reasons why the Apostles wholly separated not from the
Jews Synagogues after Christ, Act. 13.14. etc. Which you will in no wise have
to serve us. But alas for all your Exceptions against us, you have never a
reason but one, and that is petitio principij, That we were never separated
from the world, nor set in the way and order of Christ, but in the confusion
and defection of Antichrist, whose Ministry, etc. were never the ordinances
of God, etc. This is but craving the whole question. And I have refuted these
quarells in a short writing (hereafter following) about the comparison of the
Ministry with Marriage, which yet you have no leisure, to answer, this whole
three years together, and upward.

And further you do not show any utter and apsolute separation from the whole
Church of the Jews a great while after Christ: but the contrary is seen Act.
21.23.24.26. though from some one or two synagogues they separated after full
experience of their obstinate and malicious resistance of the truth, which we
deny not.

Touching the Conclusion. In the conclusion of my former Reply, to prove your
utter separation from us a Paradox: First, I alleged all the reformed
Churches: For who knows not but they all hold Communion with us as Churches
of God? yet you dare either deny this or utterly pervert it. You tell us of
your Answers to Master Cartwright and Mr. Hildersam that are unanswered. If
they be like to this your answer here, verily they do wisest in yielding
silence to such frivolous and wandering words.

Secondly I alleged your selves to have acknoledged heretofore, That our
public doctrine allowed, would and did make many of us true Christians. You
too shamefully deny it. And say you are for witnessing against it, imprisoned,
banished, etc. Whereto I answer, that if for these things you are troubled, I
know none can pity you. And because you say, none of you ever acknowledged
it, I will therefore repeat your own words.

Mr. BARROW (in his last answer in writing to Mr Gifford, entitled, A fevv
observations to the reader of Mr. Giff. last Reply: Sect. 4.) says thus:

The next calumniations whereby Mr Gifford indeuoreth to bring us into hatred
with the whole Land, is, That we condemn all the persons both men and women
of England, which are not of our mind, and pluck them up as tares: wherein me
thinks he does us open wrong, if not against his own conscience, yet against
our express writngs every where, etc. Have we not commended the faith of the
English Martyr, and (...) thousand, notwithstanding the false offices and g^^^^
corruptions in the worship they exercised, not doubting but the mercy of God,
through their sincere ^aith to Jesus Christ extended and super abounded above
all their sins seen and unseen. And what now should let, that we should not
have the same hope, where the same precious faith in syncerity and simplicity
is found? So that they neither neglect to search out the truth, nor despise the
truth when they see it, etc.

Afterward in the same Section. The faithful servants of Christ (denying the
whole constitution and government of this Church of England) may justly deny
the people whilst they remain in that constitution to be members of a true
constituted Church, yet hereby not condemn them with any such peremptory
sentence as Master Gifford suggesteth, Nota, from Christ.
to cut them of from Gods election, or from Christ.

Mr PENRIE (in his confession of faith published in writing a little before his
death,) says thus.

The truth of doctrine touching the holy Trinity, touching the Natures and
Offices of Christ, Justifying faith, Sacraments, Eternal life, and the rest,
established by her Majesty's Laws, and professed by her self, their Honors,
and such as have knowledge in the Assemblies of this land: I acknowledge from
my heart to be such, as if I maintained not the unity, and held not the
communion of the same doctrine with them in these poincts, I could not possibly
be saved: For out of the communion of the true profession, which her Majesty
has established in these and the like truths, there is no hope of salvation
l^ft: But join notwithstonding with the public worship in the assemblies of
this Land, I dare not, for the former causes.

I do moreover willingly confess, That many, both of the Teachers, and also
of the Professors within these Parish assemblees, have so embraced this truth
of doctrine, established and professed in this Land, as the Lord of his
infinite goodness, has granted them the favor, to show outwardly many tokens,
whereby (in regard of the Lords election) I profess before men and Angels,
that I judge them to be members of that body whereof the son of God Christ
Jesus is the head. Only herein the Lord be merciful unto them, (as to my self
in regard of my sins:) That they are not under that outward form of
government that Christ has left, etc.

And in his examination before Master Fanshaw, lately published by your selves
in print, he confesses the Churches of England to be the true Churches of
Christ.

And what say you, Master Johnson? Have you not affirmed this thing your self,
to me, and to Master Philips, namely towching your own self, when you were
of us, That then you doubted not, but you were a true regenerate Christian. By
virtue of what doctrine? By extraordinary revelation? Nay, but by our public
doctrine of our Church, when you stood and continued a public Minister of
the same. If you believed so of your self, (and that truly) what lets but
you may believe the like of many Thousands now?

Further where you say, my applying of the Martyrs, is answered before, Let
the Reader judge. You show here, that some of them misliked the Hyerarchie.
But it makes stronger against you, seeing for all that, they themselves
refused not to communicate, and partake with them, as true Christians: as
Hooper, Bale, Bradford etc.

After where you say: though the reformed Churches, your selves, and the
Martyrs, had thought otherwise then you now do, yet all this is no so und proof
against you. Yes in deed, that now you hold a Paradoxe, those vvitnesses are
sufficient for that: where unto may be added, the whole Churches judgment and
practice, with all the ancient learned Fathers these 1300. or 1400. years,
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Nazianzen. Hierom. Austen. Ambrose, and c. They all
have thought, that under the Prelacie, and humane ceremonies, men may be true
Christians. Then these witnesses are sufficient, that your denial hereof, is a
strange and unusual opinion, that is, a Paradox.

Finally to try us, you propound a many of questions. But I leave all this
superfluous stuff to your self to be pondered. First let us clear this
present question, and your Reasons hereabout: Till then, we have no leisure to
meddle further. The Lord of his mercy open your eyes to see your extremity,
whereby you do greatly hinder, not help the truth, Not a Fir^^^ for victory
but a lover of truth.
which you would seem to suffer for. That you may indeed show your self as
becomes a Christian Pastor, not impossible to err, but no lover of error, *
(...), not regarding your own, but the praise of Christ in all things. AMEN.

Fr. Johnson his Answer to Mr. Jacobs 2. Reply to the 9. Reason. AS if your
bare word were proof enough, still you say, but never prove, that this Reason
is a fallacy. Yea and all the Reasons before in your schoole-learning are
likewise. But the best is, you are not the greatest Clerk the schools have
known. Every of the Reasons is proved before to be true, direct, sound, and
strong against you. And in all your Replies against them, what else have you
done but played the Sophister, and that notably? Apply therefore to your self
what you speak here. And of all these things, now let the Reader judge.

It seems very absurd unto you that I say, you do here grant us the cause.
But what if the absurdity be found in your self? Mark then first your own
words before, Page 156.
We grant (say you) so far forth as we hold otherwise then truth, so far
separate from us. Now you hold otherwise then the truth, in all the particulars
before rehearsed towching your Prelacy, Priesthood, Sacraments, Book of common
prayer, Page 63. etc.
confusion of people, etc. Thus far therefore you grant we may and ought, to
separate from you. And further we do not at all. For there is not any truth
you hold, which we also hold not with you. So then in express words you yield
us the cause. And yet further you yield it again, in that you do not defend by
the Scripture your Hierarchy, worship, doctrines, Canons, Articles, Injunctions
etc. received and joined unto by all in your Church. How absurd then and
ungodly is your denial of so manifest a truth? And how distempered is your
brain, that can not perceive so plain a contradiction with your self?

Your two fould sense of the Apostles words, is a silly fiction of your own
head, without any ground or proof at all. If you will have us think otherwise,
bring warrant for the particulars of your distinction from the book of God. But
I pity you, Mr Jacob. For I see you are brought to a low ebb. Who knows not
that this is the very last refuge of all enemies of the truth, when they are
pressed with evidence of Scripture so as they can not avoid it, then to feign
distinctions and to cast about for the sense, as if that were hard and obscure
which in deed is most plain and easy? Look in Bellarmine, Bilson, Whitgift,
Bridges, and whosoever else have written against the truth, if their dealing be
not such. This then does not answer the Argument, but proves it rather to be
unanswerable.

Tim. 6.5.
As for the words, The Apostle saying, from such separate thy self, if now you
would know, from whom, Himself tells it as plain as may be, If any man teach
otherwise and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ and to
the doctrine which is according to godliness etc. from such separate thy self.
verse. 3.
But such is your case in particular: As has been proved, in your Prelacy and
the other abominations of Antichrist, yet taught and mainteyned among you.
Therefore are we bound by this rule of the Apostle, to separate our selves from
you. Else should we answer it to God at that day.

Of your continual vain distinctions of fundamentally, wholly, presumptuously,
simply, etc. enough is said already in the handling of the for mer Reasons. As
also of Mr Cranmer and the rest of the Martyrs: Whom here you set before us
again, as coleworts, not twice but ten times sodden. Leave this usage of them
Mr Jacob, for they have left you long since. See before, Page 40.41.

Next, you tell us we may join with you, and yet towch no part of your
ecclesiastical corruptions at all, to give allowance unto them. Prove this,
and you say somewhat. But I doubt we shall find you as slow in proving, as you
are rash in speaking. Mind but these particulars following, which I will name
for example. Can we receive your Priesthood from the Prelates, or execute it
under them? Can we join to your Service book, or any part of your worship and
Ministry? Can we receive the word or Sacraments from your Ministers in that
constitution? Can we remain members of your confused Assemblyes? Can we stand
subject to your Prelates, and their Courts, Canons, censures etc. Can we (I
say) do these, or any of them, and yet towch no part of your ecclesiastical
corruptions at all, to give allowance unto them? In your next Reply (Mr Jacob)
declare us this riddle, if you can. And in the mean time, I will attribute it
to your distempered conceit, that you do thus every foot forget and contradict
your self, and yet discern it not.

But what will you say too, if such as join with you in any part of your
worship (suppose it be the best) become thereby partakers of your whole worship
and constitution, even of the worst things that are among you therein? To make
it plain and certain unto you, mind these proofs. In Israel, 1 Cor. 10.18.
they that did eat of the sacrifices (as 2 Samuel 1.4.5
the people might) were thereby partakers of the whole Jewish religion, yea
even of the altar: Unto which yet they might not come at all, but the Priest
only. Lev. 1. chap. etc. Numb. 18.7. Luc. 1.9.10. In Corinth, the Christians
that abhorred Idols and Idolatry, yet when after the sacrifices were offered, 1
Cor. 10.14-22. and 8.4.10.
they sat but in the Idol Temples to eat of the meats that had been sacrificed
(which in 1 Cor. 10.25.26.27.
other places they might have done) became thereby partakers of the whole
Idolatrous wprship: though they were not present at it, but (as they thought)
abhorred it. In like manner, they which connnunicate in any part of your
worship, become thereby partakers and guilty of the whole: though it may be,
neither you nor they so think. So false it is (which here you give out) that we
may join with some of your worship and Ministry, and yet towch no part of
your Ecclesiastical corruptions at all, to give them allowance.

For the Papists (to omit that you answer not what I objected) you see and
grant readily that they are no true Christians but very Antichrists etc. Yet
for your selves, though your Hierarchy, Leitourgy, confusion of people, false
doctrines etc. be meerlie Popish and Antichristian, you will not see and
acknowledge it. Take heed least when you see, yet you wink with your eyes, and
though you understand, yet you harden your heart; because you will not be
converted and healed. Esa. 6.9.10. Act. 28.26.27.

For the question between us, let the Reader judge how I have proved it, and
how you have quitted your self and your Churches.

Where you say, the points of false doctrine in your Church are most falsely
laid to your charge, all may see here again you have an hard forehead to deny
any thing, and yet are so sottish you can prove nothing. But you say you list
not meddle with them at this present. I easily beleev you. They are so pregnant
against you, as it is no marvel if you have no list to do it. Otherwise you
show list enough to meddle with any thing that you think may carry any show
against us.

But you must mind, the point is not, what you list, but what you ought to
meddle withal. You have taken upon you the defense of your Churches in the
estate wherein now they stand. Therefore must you answer as well for the false
doctrines, as for the true, maintained in your Church. Else would the Papists
justify their case against you well enough.

For this cause then must you answer as well for your Book of common prayer and
other your books of Articles, Canons, Injunctions etc. as for that book of
Articles which was published in the year 1562. For they contain the doctrine
and constitution of your Church as well as the other, if not also more. They are
publicly authorized among you as well as the other, whether you respect the
Prelates and Clergy in the Convocation house, or the whole body of the Land in
the Parliament. They are generally receyved professed and practiced of all the
people in every Parish and Cathedral Church throughout the Land, as well as the
other: Yea and more too, your selves being witnesses. One of your own
Prophets, Mr Giff. Di. of the strife of the Church. Page 100.
writing of your estate says, There be thousands which be men and women
grown, that if a man ask them how they shall be saved, they cannot tell.
Neither can your felf deny this to be true. How do they then know and profess
the faith of your book of Articles? Or will you say, they are as ignorant of
your Service Book and of your Prelates other Articles, Injunctions, Courts etc.
unto which they join and submit daily?

Either therefore you must meddle with the false doctrines and other publik
books of your Church, as well as with that book of Articles whereof you speak:
or else you meddle not at all with the question between us, neither defend your
Churches estate. The question between us is, Whether the truths you profess
together with the false doctrines and abominations of Antichrist retained among
you, do make you true Churches and I true Christians in that estate. If you
keep not to this point, you may make as fair a plea for the Church of Rome and
all other Heretics, whilst you meddle not with their errors and false
doctrines, but look only at the truths they profess. Mind but the Papists
profession concerning Christ, and his full and sufficient satisfaction for all
our sins, whereof I spoke before, Page 47. And consider now with your self,
how well and soundly you have defended your Churches estate.

How your doctrine and constitution erreth fundamentally, I have declared
before, Page 22. 114. 147.

But now though you have no list to meddle with your Churches doctrine, yet let
us see in your next Reply, if your list will be to deal with your own. Your
own (I say) which I had from your self, and take to be private to your self. I
had it from you, in a Conference which passed " between you and me, April. 3.
1597
in the presence of diverse that can witness it. Yet for more certainty and
better remembrance, I desired and obtained of you to write it down your self.
So you gave it me then under your hand, in writing, which I have with me yet to
show. Thus it is, word for word: A power borrowed from Antichrist to
excommunicate, may externally be committed unto a people and used by them who
have power to excommunitate from Christ. Henry Jacob.

When you had thus set it down, I desired your proof of it from the
Scriptures. But none could be had: I could not obtain that at your hands.
Thereupon I took the paper, and wrote underneath your assertion, thus: This is
against the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 5.4.5. compared with 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16.17.
Ezech. 43.8. Mat. 18.17.18.19.20. and 1 King. 18.21. Fran: Johnson.

It is a good while Mr Jacob, since this passed between us: and like, that you
have had leisure enough to consider of it all this time. Therefore in your
next, I hope you will have some list to meddle with this doctrine of your own,
though you have none at all for your Churches.

Yet for the doctrines of your Church also (because I am fallen into the
mention of them again) let me put you in mind of two things mo.

Mat. 13.24. etc.
The first is towching the parable of the tares (spoken of before, Pa. 158.) of
which, because it is straungelie and daily perverted among you for the
maintenance of your confused and wicked estate, therefore will I here in
particular add a word or two more, besides that which I annexed before, for
the further explication of this point, and conviction of your error. As first,
that you do consider with your selves, if with this parable agree not also the
Apostles doctrine, where he calls the Church the house of God, and says that
in this house are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and
earth; and that as some of them be for honor, so some be also to dishonor, from
which therefore if any purge himself, he shall be a vessel unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the Lord, and prepared to every good work. 1 Timothy 3.15.
and 5.24.25. and 6.3.4.5. and 2 Timothy 2.16.17.18.19.20.21. and 3.5. Next, that
howsoever the parable be understood by any, whether of (1) the general estate
of the Church, from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, how Satan
always has his tares, his wicked ones (sometimes more open, sometimes more
secret) even as God always has his righteous children and servants, until the
day of that final and everlasting separacion (Mat. 13.35.40.): (2) Or the
particular estate of the Church, in the time of Antichrists apostasy, wrought
by Satan, until the discovery and full abolition thereof (2 These. 2.3.-14.):
(3) Or the Churches continual being and co^versing in the world, with the
children of the wicked: Which they must needs do, or else they must go out of
the world (as the Apostle affirms, 1 Cor. 5.9.10.). Howsoever (I say) the
parable be understood, whether of these or any the like, yet does it no way
make for the receiving or reteining of the known wicked (whosoever they be) in
the body of the Church: The scope of the parable, by these interpretations also
leading to no such thing: but only to comfort and instruct the godly how to
carry themselves, with patience and wisdom, in such estate of things in the
world.

And the Apostle (whose doctrine doubtless is not contrary to Christ's) teaches
expressly, in that place to the Corinthians and the other mentioned before,
both that the Church is a distinct body separated from the world, not partaking
in their evil ways; and that if any of the Church will not so walk, but
commit iniquity, and repent not, that then they be so far from being suffered to
grow or remain any longer in the Church, as they be forthwith cast out of it,
and delivered unto Satan, the Prince of the world and children of
disobedience, even the Enemy that sows the tares here spoken of. And thus
also was the Apostles practice. For both which, that is, both his doctrine and
practice herein, see these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 5. chap. and 2 Cor. 2.6-11. and
6.14.-17. Act. 19.9. To. 16.17. Ephesians. 2.1.2. Gal. 5.12. 2 These. 3.6.14. 1 Timothy
1.20. and 6.3.4.5. and 2 Timothy 2.16-21. and 3.5. and 4.14.15. Tit. 3.10. Heb.
10.38.39. To conclude then, albeit that such having crept into the Church, do
both before and after their excommunication, as do also the other of the world
who never received the faith, offend and trouble the Church and children of the
kingdom, yea and do often flourish also in outward prosperity in the world:
yet the godly notwithstanding must learn neither to fret at them, nor to faint
in themselves, but always to walk faithfully in the truth, and to wait
patiently on the Lord, looking for the great harvest of the world. At which
time God will for ever free his people from them all, both casting the wicked
into a furnace of unquenchable fire, and making the righteous to shine as the
sun in the kingdom of their Father. Mat. 13.37-43. compared with ver. 47-50.
Rev. 2.20.-26. and 7.14-17. and 10.7. and 11.15-19. and 14.14-20. and 17-22.
chap. and with the other Scriptures noted before, Page 158. 159. 173.

The second is, that besides the false doctrines mentioned before (Page 157.
158. 159. 160.) your Church has also many mo. Some whereof I have noted in *
another Treatise, A treatise of the Minist. of Engl. page 10. 11. 12. 13.
to which I refer you for them. So as if your list and leisure will serve in
your next Reply, you may let us have your defense of them also. Or else provide
(Mr Jacob) that you change the Title of your book, and call it not any
longer, A DEFENSE OF THE CHVRCHES AND MINISTRY OF ENGLAND.

Now to proceed, there follows next the comparison between you and the Jews
from whom Paul separated, Act. 19.9.
Act. 19. To which you can not reply a word to any one thing I answered.
Only you bring some new exceptions, but not any of them all worth a rush.
You might as well except, that Paul was an Apostle and a Jew, we not; that the
people he dealt withal, were in Asia, you in Europe; they at Ephesus, you at
London etc. Such pretenses, as they are very common among you, so are they
most absurd and frivolous, not worthy the hearing or any refutation at all.
Only note, that the very Papists themselves may likewise allege against any
that witness the truth unto them: (yea and do they not daily thus pretend as
you do?) viz, that they be infinitely many mo, then Paul had there to do
withal; 2. That Paul was better able to convince them etc. then any such are
the whole Popish Church; 3. That there be many learned among them, which have
many probable and seeming reasons etc.

Where you say, there be some of you that have published some reasons for the
Prelacy against us, and are unanswered, it is most false. Name but one Reason
(if you can) to which we have not given answer, to the stopping of all your
mouths. But in deed (Mr Jacob) you and your fellows have let the * the
Prelates and their proctours insult over you, Bancroft. Bilson. Sutcliff. etc.
with book upon book, and yet answer not a word. You that ere while cried out
so earnestly against dumb dogs, are now become dumb your selves, not moving
the tongue against any that writes for the Hierarchy and leitourgy of
Antichrist retained among you. But (to leave this to your selves to be better
minded hereafter) tell me now, if it were any thing to the purpose, though
that you say here were true? By your own confession, the Reasons which are
published against us are but probable and seeming, not true and undoubted. And
this also seeming so but to you, not to us. What matter then, though they were
never answered by us?

Where you ask, What if these speak evil of that which we hold for truth, but
they hold to be errors and schism? We ask again, Do not the Papists also say
so unto you? Yea and did not the Jews (think you) say so unto Paul? Why then
are you so partial against us? But for us it skils not, what you or they think
of our cause, unless you speak according to the Law and testimony of God: which
is far from you.

Let the Reader also note here, the manner of your speech. You say, that which
we hold for truth, they hold to be errors and schism. They (say you) as
speaking of others, not of your self. You belike do not so hold it, as they do,
but are persuaded it is truth, and not error. Why then do you not obey and
practice it? Why are you become our ennemy for bearing witness unto it? Why are
you so partial against us in it?

Towching the estate of the Jews Church, I showed three reasons why the
Apostles neither did nor might wholly separate from them at first. Against which
you are not able to open your mouth. Page 161.
Petitio principii (whereof you speak) is the sum of all your Replies. Show
otherwise, if you can. Do you not every where beg, and no where prove, that
you are separated from the world, set in the way of Christ, free from the
defection of Antichrist etc. So your self are guilty of that wherewith you
charge me falsely, all that you say being nothing else but to beg the question
and deny the Conclusion. As for your short writing about the co^pariso^ of your
Ministry with Marriage, I did answer it * above three years since. But you
have not yet replied again, neither (I think) will in have. In the year 1596.
When you first acquainted me with the purpose of publishing these things you
know (besides other things then spoken of) I did in particular desire you to
publish that answer of mine with the rest. Therefore you have done me the
greater wrong, both in leaving it unprinted, and much more in giving out that I
have not answered you these whole three years together and upward. But I
perceive, you will have your book suitable one part with another, and therefore
you will end as you began, that is, Page 5.
with lies and untruths.

Of that which you annexe of the Jews Church, in Christ's time and after, and
of separation from them and communion with them, I have already spoken
sufficiently. Page 161. Neither can you with any Reason deny or stand
against any thing I have there said: as I noted before. Tell us yet I pray
you, when and how that full experience of obstinate and malicious resistance of
the truth (whereof you speak) may be had and discerned in any, either
Ministers or people. For your selves, you cannot deny, but this is your case,
that you resist and refuse the truth, many times and sundry ways, witnessed
unto you; that you rail and speak evil both of it and of us that profess
it; that you persist in the errors and defection of Antichrist; that you
bereave us of our lives, liberty, goods, country etc. And all these, because
we will not run with you to the same excess of impiety. Now seeing this is
the case (as your self, I think, will not deny) of your Prelates and many
other of your Priests and people, and seeing all the rest of you stand with them
in one body and estate of a Church, cleaving unto them in the same way,
worship, Ministry etc. therefore even in this behalf can we not possibly
separate from some of you, but we must needs do it from all. And for your
resistance, whether it be such as you speak of, or not, we leave to the Lord,
who knows the hearts and ways of all men. It suffices us (as it did the
Apostles, and must do the servants of God in all ages) that the Reasons of
separation include and belong unto you all, even all your Churches, Ministers,
and people, in that estate: As I have declared before throughout this Treatise.

Towching the conclusion. Therefore until you prove the contrary (which will
never be, mark what I say) the Paradox still remains upon you and your Church.

Towching the reformed Churches, some of * your selves (men of far better
judgment and learning then Mr Jacob) have confessed and published, In the
first Admonition to the Parl.
that you have all the best reformed Churches throughout Christendom against
you: And further, that you have an Antichristian Hierarchy and Popish ordering
of Ministers, strange from the word of God and the use of all well reformed
Churches in the world. Yet you (like blind Bayard) stick not boldly to say to
the contrary, that all men know they hold communion with you as Churches of
God. First then reconcile your self (Mr Jacob) with your fellow Reformists at
home: And then your Churches Hierarchy and constitution, with the Ministry
and constitution of the reformed Churches abroad.

And remember here, that the Ministry of those Churches is not esteemed
sufficient by yours: As the Priesthood of Rome is. (The proof of both which,
you may see in the answer to Mr A.H. Page 96.) With whether of these then (I
pray you) do you hold communion? Or do you not in deed halt, as newters,
between both? Mind further, that Mr Beza (whose judgment, you know, is
worthily reverenced and approved in all the reformed Churches) speaking but of
four or five of your corruptions, affirms that in the Antichristian Church
there is nothing more intolerable, Bez. Epist. 8.
yea that (your case being so) it is not a corrupcion of Christianity, but in
deed a manifest defection from Christ. His own words I noted before, Page 73.
Now when themselves do thus witness and write of your estate, how should any
think that they hold communion with you, as the Churches of God, unless you
could prove they do also hold it the Church of God, which stands in manifest
defection from Christ?

I know in deed that you have long deceived them, by the Apology, which you
published for your selves against the Papists. In which you concealed from them
all your corruptions and abominations. By means whereof, not having knowledge
of the truth of your estate, they have thereupon for a time thought much better
of it, then it does deserve or will bear: As even some among them already,
upon better information since, have acknowledged. But of this matter, and of
your dealing therein, Mr T. C. And therefore for these things I do still refer
you, as I did.

The Answer to Mr Hild. (such as it is) now is published. And so may the answer
to Mr Cartw. be in time: specially seeing you do thus provoke thereunto. In the
mean time, diverse copies thereof are abroad in men's hands. In which, as also
in the other Treatise, A ^revis^o ^f the Minist. of Engl. Page 67. 68. 69.
I have noted in sundry particulars, the testimony of the reformed Churches,
against your present estate. You (Mr Jacob) may account of these or any other
our writings, as you please. Your toungue is no sclaunder. Yet till we be
answered, and that soundly from the word of God, all men of conscience will
see and mind how you bring nothing at all in defense of your Churches and
Ministry, but frivolous and wandering words.

Next follows our own acknowledgement to be discussed. For towching that
bloody mind and speech of yours when you say, if we be troubled for witnessing
against your Church estate, none can pity our imprisonnement, banishement etc.
I leave you and it unto God, See the like before, Page 112.
who sees and will judge. Only let the Reader note here " again, that not
the Prelates alone, but you also (the forward preachers and professors) have
wittinglie and willingly your hand in our blood.

Mr Barrow is the first you name: Whom together with Mr Greenwood you At Ty^um
by London, in the year 1593. Apr. 6.
killed in time of Parliament: that the ages present and to come may know, it
was done with knowledge of the whole Land. In all his speech there is not one
word, that the members of your Church are true Christians in that estate. He
testified unto death and sealed with his blood, that you do all stand in
Antichristian estate. I think your self will not be so shameless, as to deny it.
Now in his speech here alleged by your self, mark four things, which all do
show it is against you.

1. That speaking of the Martyrs false offices and corruptions, he deemeth them
saved notwithstanding, through the mercy of God which superabounded above their
sins etc. By which is evident that he thought them under the wrath of God in
respect of their false offices and corruptions, had not the mercy of God
superabounded above those their sins. For mercy (you know) presupposes
misery, and superaboundance thereof a great measure of sin.

2. He intimates as if he thought that these their sins were unseen of them:
as doubtless they were of many of them, yea and of all of them as towching that
measure of knowledge which God has since by his word revealed therein.

3. He declares that he was far from cutting of all among you (as Mr Gifford
suggested) from Gods election or from Christ. Where mark that he speaks of
Gods election (under which we also trust that many of you are) not of your
present outward estate. In his Disco. of the false Church Ref. of Mr Giff.
Conferen. etc
In respect whereof here he says, the servants of Christ may justly deny you
in that constitution to be members of a true constituted Church. A case very
woeful and miserable. Yet add hereunto, that which else where often he
testified, that your Ministry, worship, estate, are Antichristian etc. For
which cause he could not join with you in such estate, but separated from you,
and witnessed this against you unto death, himself so signifying at the very
time and place of his execution. So far was he from judging you to be in that
estate true Christians. To make the case yet more plain, know that we dare not
condemn them of the Church of Rome with any such peremptory sentence as Mr
Giffard accuses us, to cut them all from Gods election or from Christ. Does
it therefore follow, that in the constitution of there Church, we judge them
true Christians? Nothing less. Yet thus you shame not to reason.

4. He asks, what now should let, that we should not have the same hope (as
of the Martyrs) where the same precious faith in syncerity and simplicity is
found? So as they neither neglect to search out the truth, nor despise the
truth when they see it etc. We also ask and say the same. But now if you say,
this is your case, both we and your own works deny it. For proof whereof see
the differences between you and the Martyrs before specifyed. Page 40. 41.

At Thomas a Waterings by London, 1593. May 29
Mr Penry (whom you martyred also the same year) his speech follows. In which
likewise note four things, not one of them for you, as towching the question
in hand.

1. The true doctrines established by Law and professed by her Majesty, their
Honors, and such as have knowledge in your assemblies, he acknowledges to be
such, as if he did not mainteyne and hold them likewise, he could not possibly
be saved. We also are like minded. And to put you out of all doubt, we tell you
further, that if we did not hold and maintain the true doctrines professed in
the Church of Rome, towching the only true God, the holy Trinity, the Mediator
Christ, the Resurrection, Life eternal etc. we could not possibly look to be
saved. Yet do we not therefore approve their Assemblies to be true Churches, or
the members thereof true Christians in their estate.

2. He separated from your Church as remaining in Antichristian co^stitution,
and professes here that he durst not join with the publik worship of your
Assemblies. The causes thereof he mentions in the same confession, which you
conceal. Of which see further in his answer to Mr Fanshaw hereafter following.

3. He confesses that many of the Teachers and professors in your assemblies,
have so embraced the truth of doctrine established and professed in the Land,
as the Lord has given them to show outwardly many tokens, whereby (in regard
of the Lords election) he judged them members of that body whereof Christ is
the head: and prayed God herein to be merciful to them (as to himself in
regard of all his sins) that they are not under that outward form of
government which Christ has left in the Church. Now mark here, 1. that this
is no other thing, then as we always did and still do profess likewise. Of
which see before, Page 7. 41. 2. That he speaks but of some, not of all the
members of your Church. Whereas your Assumption and Conclusion are of your
whole publik Assemblies, and so of every member of your Church, as towching
their outward standing therein. 3. That the persuasion he had of such among you
was (as himself notes) in regard of the Lords election, not of their estate in
your Churches constitution. For towching this (which is the question between
us) here he prayed God to be merciful to them, as to him self in respect of
all his sins. Now I suppose you will not deny but his sins (as also the
sins of all Gods people) deserve in their own nature the curse of God, if
they were not forgiven in Christ. So that by praying thus, he acknowledged the
estate of all (even of the best among you) to be such, as for this very cause
you are every one subject to Gods wrath, because you are not under that
outward form of Government which Christ has left in the Church. Consider
withal that even for Papists we may pray thus, that the Lord would be
merciful to them in this, that they are not under that outward form of
government which Christ has left in his Church: and yet not hereby justify
them to be a true Church in their estate, but rather the quite contrary. For
Christ his Church (wheresoever and among whomsoever it be) is under Christ his
government, not under Antichrists. Neither have any people, promise of
salvation, in such estate. 4. By all this it appears, that he spoke of them,
as judging them to be members of the invisible and Catholic Church, which
conteyneth all Gods elect, not only among you, but among the Lutherans,
Anabaptists, Papists, and all other people whatsoever. Now what is this to the
poinct of the question controverted, which is not of men as they belong to the
Catholic invisible Church, but as they stand members of some particular
visible Assemblies in this or that constitution?

4. His speech in examination before Mr Fanshaw, why do you not set it down in
his own words, as you did the other before? Belike you see your self, it is
against you, howsoever you would pretend otherwise. That all may know it, thus
it was. Mr Fanshaw asked him this question, Do the Martyrs teach you, that
there is no Church in England? Mr Penry answered, If you mean by a Church (as
the most do) that publik profession whereby men do profess salvation to be had
by the death and righteousness of Jesus Christ, I am free from denying any
Church of Christ to be in this Land. For I know the doctrine of the holy
Trinity, the natures and offices of the Lord Jesus, free justification by him,
both the Sacraments etc. published by her Maiestyes authority and commanded by
her Laws, to be the Lords blessed and undoubted truths, without the knowledge
and profession whereof no salvation is to be had. These are his words. By which
you may see he says no other thing here, then what he spoke in his Confession
before objected. So as the answer given for it, may serve for this also. Or if
that please you not, you may mind it thus, If he had been demanded by Mr
Fanshaw whether there were no Church of Christ in Rome: and had answered thus,
If you mean by a Church, that public profession whereby men do profess
Christ Jesus, by nature to be truly both God and man, that one eternal Priest
and Redeemer which by his sacrifice and death upon the cross has reconciled
us to God, and paid his blood as a full and sufficient ransom for all our
sins etc. as the Papists do publikly profess: Rhem. Annot. on 1 Timothy 2.5.
then am I free from denying any Church of Christ to be in Rome. If (I say) to
this question he had thus answered, would you have concluded upon his words,
that he acknowledged the Church of Rome to be the true Church of Christ, or the
members thereof to be true Christians, in their constitution? Or do you see for
the Church of Rome, but not for your own, that such conclusion can not be
pressed out of his words?

But yet further, for the more clearing of this matter, let us mark what Mr
Fanshaw next asked, and he answered, towching the estate of your Church and
his separation from it. Upon his former answer Mr Fanshaw said thus unto him,
Seeing you acknowledge that her Majesty has established the truth in so many
weighty points, seeing she has commanded the true Sacraments to be
administered, what mislike you in our Church, and why will you not be partaker
of these truths and Sacraments with us?

Mr Penry answered, I mislike 1. the false ecclesiastical offices; 2. the
manner of calling unto the offices; 3. a great part of the works wherein these
false offices are employed; 4. the maintenance or livings whereby they are
maynteined in their offices. All which I will be bound to prove (by the Lords
help) to be derived, not from Jesus Christ, but from the kingdom of Antichrist
his great enemy. And therefore forasmuch as I can not be partaker of the former
holy things of God, but I must be subject unto the power of Antichrist in these
officers, and known by those marks whereby his subjects are noted, therefore I
am enforced and bound to seek the comfort of the word and Sacraments where I
may have them without the submitting of my self unto any ecclesiastical power
in Religion, save only unto that which is derived from Christ Jesus the Lord,
in whom all fulness of power dwells (Col. 1.19.) and from whom all those must
derive their power and office, unto whom the Saints of God are to submit their
consciences to be wrought upon in Religion. Again, seeing the aforenamed 4.
enormityes of this Church, are marks which properly belong unto the Kingdom of
the Beast, that is, the Roman Antichrist, we dare not have any communion and
fellowship with them, nor be known by them, least we should be partakers of
those most fearful and most dreadful judgments, which are denounced by the
Spirit of God, against all those that have communion with any of the
irreligious inventions of the Beast. Rev. 14.9.10. These are the things,
together with the want of Christ's true order, which I especially mislike, and
the special causes why I dare not join with the Assemblyes of this Land etc.

Thus was his answer. In which you may see, how he professes your Church
offices and estate to be such as he dare not join therewith, both because they
are not derived from CHRist Jesus the LOrd of his Church, and for that they
belong to the kingdom and body of Antichrist, and are marks of that Beast
against which and all that partake therewith God has denounced most fearful
judgments in his word. Unto these most plain declarations of his mind, I
might add many mo out of his letters and other writings. But what needs it,
whenas the laying down of his life in testimony against the Antichristian
estate of your Church, is and will be always as a thousand witnesses against
you, whatsoever you pretend otherwise.

And now (Mr Jacob) let me upon this occasion ask you this question, whether
you think Mr Barrow, Mr Greenwood, Mr Penry, etc. dyed Martyrs and witnesses of
the truth against your Antichristian estate; or whether you account them evil
doers, justly deserving to be put to death. The thing is a publik actio^, and
concerns the publik state of your Church which you would seem to defend.
Therefore is it needful that you declare your mind fully and plainly
therein: which yet I think you will be loath to do. You love so to walk in
darkness: and yet would seem to defend your Church, when in deed you do nothing
less.

Next you allege mine own acknowledgement to Mr Philips and your self for the
approbation of your estate. Of which, being also objected before, I have spoken
already, Page 41. To it therefore I refer you.

Yet before I end this point, I will note here three things more, for the
Reader to observe. The first is, towching Mr Barrow, Mr Penry, and my self,
that seeing you spare not to wrest our words, whose meaning all men know and our
own practice proclaymeth, we can not therefore look for any other at your
hands but that you will much more pervert the Scriptures and word of God, about
the meaning whereof men make so many doubts and controversyes from time to
time.

The second is, towching your own words in these Replies: That whereas in the
Conclusion of your first Reply (Page 156.) you said, we our selves acknowledged
your Assumption to be true: now in the Conclusion of your second Reply (Page
167.) you change your own words, and say, we acknowledged your publik
doctrine would and did make many of you true Christians. By which you clear
us, and contradict your self. For if your Assumption were true, then not only
many, but all and every member of your Church, should thereby be deemed true
Christians, as towching their outward estate: even all your Prelates, Priests,
Dumb dogs, Non-residents, Thieves, Coniurers. etc. Which you may speak with
shame enough. Sure I am, none of us did ever acknowledge it, and I trust never
shall.

The third is concerning some things spoken to me, in the presence of others,
at one time by Mr Philips (whom here you name) and at another time by your
self. Of Mr Philips, when once he had speech with me about our cause, I asked,
If her Majesty should permit, both that way wherein the Prelates and you now
are, and the way wherein we are, to be free for all men to walk in either of
them as they should be persuaded, In which of the two then he would walk
himself, as being persuaded it was the truth of God: Whereunto he answered,
that then he thought he should walk in the way wherein we are.

Of your self also among other things once I asked this, Whether you were so
minded for the Ministry which Christ has appointed in his Church, as you
thought you ought and would die for it, God assisting you: To which you
answered, Yea. Thereupon presently I asked again, Whether you were so minded
for the Ministry of the CHurch of ENgland, as you thought you ought and would
also die for it: To which you answered, No.

If now (Mr Jacob) I would press conclusions out of Mr Philips words and your
own, as you do out of mine and others: might I not gather from your selves
(far better then you do or can any thing from us) that in your consciences you
see your Churches estate and Ministry to be unlawful, and none of Christ's at
all? But I spare you.

The Martyrs (whom next you allege) I showed to be against you by their own
testimony. Unto this you answer, That it makes stronger against us, seeing
although they misliked the Hierarchy, yet they themselves refused not to
communicate and partake with them then as true Christians; as Hooper, Bale,
Bradford, etc. But are you in deed so simple, as not to perceyve that this is
of no moment at all? What if the Papists should so answer, when we bring
against them the testimony of the ancient Martyrs, towching the Mass, the
Hierarchy, Auricular confession, and other corruptions of that Church? Or are
you ignorant that See before, Page 44.45.
John Hus, John wickleffe, William Swinderby and many other of the Martyrs in
elder time did in these things communicate with the Popish Church unto their
dying day? If this answer then be frivolous for them in such case, how should
it not be likewise in yours? Besides that you may by this reason persuade
as well to communicate with the Popish Church in their Mass and Ministry, as
with yours in your worship and Hierarchy.

But further, by this answer you yield, that the Martyrs spoke and wrote
against your Church estate. Which being so, whether do you or we (I pray you)
the better? You in following the error of their practice? Or we in receyving
the truth of their testimony? And then if all that you say be granted, is it
ought but this, that you have the weakness and sin of their practice, for a
cloak of your standing in evil: whereas we have the truth and soundnes of
their judgment, for our walking in that which is good? Now let others judge,
which of us follow them best, and have the best interest in them. And let it
also be minded, that they then coming newly out of the darkness of Popery,
and being exercised also with other points of that religion, neither did nor
could so consider of this matter, as since their time in this clearer light it
has in our days ben discussed.

Lastly, if you will have this answer of yours go for current, then will I by
like reason prove, that you may also submit to the Popes authority, and receive
all the corruptions of the Romish Church. And albeit that which I have already
said of the ancient Martyrs before, be sufficient for proof hereof, yet will I
show it you further, thus: The Protestants (you know) do usually alledg against
the Popes Antichristian authority and other corruptions of that Church, the
sayings of Bernard, Beda, etc. Suppose now the Papists should answer as you do
here, This makes stronger against you, seeing for all that, yet they themselves
refused not to yield to the Popes supremacy, and to partake with this Church,
as being Christ's, etc. What would you reply again? Either you must say (as the
truth is) that this answer is wandering and frivolous: or else you must needs
confess, that by this reason of yours you may also receive the Pope and all
that popery which is already cast out of England, and communicate therewith.
Which I pray God be not the issue of this your pleading for and partaking with
the remnants of Antichrist yet held in your Church.

To that where I demanded, If it were so that the reformed Churches, we our
selves, and the Martyrs of former time, had given allowance of your present
estate and Church-constitution, what would this help you, when as the word of
God condemns you etc. You answer, that those witnesses are sufficient for
this, that we hold a Paradox. So the testimony of Man (if you had it) is of
more force with you, then the warrant of Gods word. And whatsoever the
Scripture says, yet to you it is a Paradox, if it be gainsaid by the reformed
Churches etc. Blush for shame Mr Jacob, and fear any more to publish such
godles assertions and shameless Paradoxes.

All your clipping and perverting of my words will not help you. Neither your
new supply of the whole Churches judgment and practice, with all the ancient
learned Fathers, these 1300 or 1400 years, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Nazianzen,
Hierom, Austen, Ambrose etc. As if they had known and practiced the
Antichristian abominations now had in your Church. But when you bring proof of
this your lavish speech, it will then be time enough to answer it. In the
mean time hear what Mr Tindall that faithful Martyr said (speaking of the
Prelates and Priests in his age, for their so alleging the Fathers as you do).
As for the holy Doctors (says he) as Augustine, Hierome, Cyprian, Chrysostomus
and Bid, will they not hear. If they wrote any thing negligently (as they
were men) that draw they clean contrary to their meaning, and thereof triumph
they. Those Doctors knew of none authority that one Bishop should have above
another, neither thought or once dreamed that ever any such should be.

This is Mr Tindall his speech and observation. Which you may mind. I note it
now for this, that you may see how your Forefathers alleged the Doctors, and
how it stands you upon, well to mind what proof is brought from them, whether
it be for this point (which here he names) or for any other corruptions of
Antichrist retained among you. Some of which I have rehearsed * before in
particular, Page 63. etc.
for which I will expect your proof from such antiquity as you speak of, ad
Kalendas Graecas, in deed never. And yet I know that both 1400 years since,
and before also, they began to declyne very much. But Antichrist
notwithstanding came not of a long time after, to that height and impiety,
wherein now he is to be seen and felt both in your Church, and in your mother
of Rome.

Note also, that when all is said that can be in this matter, it is but a
Popish shift to fly from the Scriptures to the Fathers; and an impious Paradox
to exalt their sayings (who are known to have erred in many things) above the
word of God, which alone is the rule of truth, and can not lie at all.

Finally you say, that to try you I propound a many of questions. Yet they are
but seven in all. In deed I think it does and will try both you and your fellow
Priests to answer them. Such superfluous stuff they are. And have you not
read too, Job. 32.3.
how Jobs friends condemned him, and yet could find no answer? Apply it to your
selves and your dealing with us. But you say you would first have us clear
this present question and our reasons thereabout. Well: besides that is already
done, the deciding of these few questions will fully and plainly do it. Let
others judge if it would not. And mind you then what you have answered. To shut
up all, you tell us aforehand you have no leisure to meddle further. Very like
so. You have leisure enough, to write book after book, to no purpose: yet you
have not so much as to answer a few short questions, which may end all the
controversy between us. He that can not see how you would shift of the matter,
and yet labor to withold the truth in unrighteousness, what does he see? The
Lord open your eyes (Mr Jacob) that your self may see and mind it. As for
others that be seduced by you and the rest of your Prophets teaching lies, let
them in time (before it be to late) apply unto you and themselves in such
estate, that which is written, The leaders of the people cause them to err,
and they that are led by them are devoured. Esa. 9.16. Therefore also let them
all, even whosoever fear God and will be assured of his mercy, give no rest to
their souls, until with the Prophet they can say in truth of heart, and show
it forth in their practice, My portion O Lord, I have said, to keep thy words.
I have considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy testimonies. I made
have, and delayed not, to keep thy commandments. I have refrayned my feet
from every evil way, that I might keep thy word. Psalm. 119.57.59.60.101.

Let him that reads, consider.
AN ANSWER TO MASTER H. JACOB HIS TREATISE Concerning the PRIESTS of the
Church of England, Made by the PRAELATES, Accepted and joined unto by the
people. Which he terms A PASTORAL CALLING,

By Francis Johnson an exile for the testimony of JESUS.



Put your selves in array against Babel round about; all ye that bend the bow,
shoe as her; spare no arrows: for she has sinned against the Lord.

Ier. 50.14. They shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for
foundation: but thou shals be a perpetual desolation, says the Lord.

Ier. 51.26. 1600.

Mr JACOB his Argument, by which he would prove the Priests made by Prelates,
to be the Pastors ordained by Christ: Taken from a comparison of Marriage, Which
he falsely faith is gathered out of our own confessions. Together with the
Answer to it, and to his Reply thereabout.
CHAP. 1. The Argument of his Comparison (as it is now propounded) is this:
AS a couple of ignorant people not contracting, but meaning to marry, and yet
thinking that unless a Priest marry them, their marriage is nothing, whereas in
deed their public accepting each of other makes the marriage: Now being
married, (though As themselves bold.
vnlavvfully) by a Priest, yet their marriage is true and lawful
notwithstanding.

EVen so, a Christian people, meaning to have a sufficient man to their Pastor,
yet thinking, that unless a Prelate do make him, he is no Pastor at all,
neither can be theirs. Notwithstanding, he being made a Pastor, (though As they
also do acknowledge.
unlawfully) by the Prelate; yet, by rheir mutual accepting and joining
together, he is now verily a Pastor, yea their Pastor, true and lawful.

H. JACOB.

Fran. Johnson his Answer. THe Reader is to know that Mr Jacob did at first
propound this comparison far otherwise. Which since being answered, so as he
could not defend it again, he has now changed and propounded it with some
other terms then before: trying belike if he can any way help himself, or his
cause. Now although both his first and last be alike in this, that neither of
them are of any moment, yet because the former answer here following was made
unto the co^pariso^ as it was first propounded (which Mr Jacob concealeth) and
to the end the Reader may see what change he has made therein: I will here
also set it down, as himself did propound it at the first. Which was thus:

As a couple of ignorant persons that are contracted together, do think that
unless the Priest marry them, Mr H. Jacob his Comparison, as it was first
propo^ded and answered.
their marriage is nothing (whereas in truth the contract makes the marriage):
yet being married (though unlawfully) by a Priest, their marringe is
notwithstanding lawful:

So the ignorant people that have made choice of a Minister, do think unless the
Bishop make him a Minister, he is no Minister (whereas in deed their choice
made him a Minister): yet being made Minister (though unlawfully) by a Bishop,
his Ministry is notwithstanding lawful.

Thus did Mr Jacob at first make his comparison. In which and the change
thereof, let the Reader observe and Mr Jacob answer these things following.

1. That before in the Proposition or first part of the comparison, he spoke of
persons contracted together; now of persons not contracted.

2. That in the Reddition or latter part, he spoke of ignorant people; now of
Christians: Before of ignorant people that had made choice of a Minister; now
of Christian people inte^ding to choose or meaning to have a Pastor.

3. That he spoke before of any man generally for a Minister; now
particularly of a sufficient man for a Pastor. Then of a supposed lawful
Ministry received before the Prelates do unlawfully make them; now of this
unlawful one received before the other. Then of the peoples choice first had,
now of their mutual accepting and ioining together afterward.

4. That thus changing the terms of the Comparison, his answer therefore to
the Reasons first brought against it, The Reasons were 7. hereafter set down.
is even in this respect indirect and insufficient: besides that it is
otherwise most weak and frivolous. Of which more hereafter.

5. Where now he speaks of sufficient men for Pastors, set him tell us
plainly what he thinks of their Dumb Ministers, and of the rest among them
othewise unmeet and insufficient: viz, Whether the Dumb Ministers and
Formalists, have not the same calling of the Prelates, that the other have.

6. Whether they have not like, and many of them greater acceptance of the
people, then those he speaks of have.

7. Whether they therefore being thus ordained of the Prelates and accepted of
the people, are by the word of God true and lawful Pastors, to whose guyding
men may commit their souls, and join to their publik Ministry.

8. Whether their Churches (as they stand) have power to choose to themselves
their Ministers, so as being chosen by them they are by the Laws of their
Church their lawful Ministers.

9. How it is possible, that any should hold marriage by a Priest unlawful, and
yet think that unless they be so married, their marriage is nothing? And again,
to hold the Prelates making of Ministers to be unlawful, and yet to think that
unless the Prelates do so make them, they are no Pastors at all, neither can be
theirs? What strange contradictions be here? Is it possible, that these things
can stand together? Or can they ever be reconciled, unless Mr Jacob think
their people be so mad, as to hold that no lawful Marriage or Ministry can be
had, but by unlawful means? And consequently, that whosoever will marry or
become Ministers, must needs sin against God: Yea so, as they know and hold
it before they do it: and therefore also sin against their own conscience.
Page 186.
For thus much do " his Marginall notes, said together with the words of his
Comparison, necessarily import. And what a divelish doctrine also is this? 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3.

10. Whether the Offices and functions of the Prelates he speaks of, be not
among them (as the Apostle fortold) exalted above and opposed against the holy
things and offices of the Lord Jesus. Yea, Whether those very words of the
Apostle, 2 These. 2.4.
thus describing the Man of sin [(...), that is, set against and life up
above all that is called God or Or, appertaining to divine worship. As the
same word is used, Act. 17.23.
holy] do not most directly as it were with the finger point out that
Antichristian Prelacy. And here (to speak of it by the way) let the Reader
mind how wonderfully God has disposed, that they should by themselves (in
their Statutes, speeches, writings) be called by this name and title of
[Prelates] which is the very English of the Greek word used by the Apostle when
he describes Antichrist: The word is, (...), that is, exalted above; lifted
up; set before; or (as we usually speak) Prelate. 2. These. 2.4.

11. How it can be then that Pastors should be made by the Prelates, as here he
takes for granted. Men surely do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of
thistles. Neither has the throne of iniquity (which forgeth wrong for a Law)
fellowship with the Lord. And whatsoever be pretended to the contrary, certain
it is that Christ and Antichrist cannot accord together. Mat. 7.16. Psalm.
94.20. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.

To the end therefore that the Reader may better perceive Mr Jacobs corrupt
dealing, it will not be amiss, briefly to note here (out of their own
Pontifical and practice) how the Ministers he speaks of are made by the
Prelates.

1. First, they are made Deacons or half Priests, whose duty is to read the
book of Common prayer and Homilyes, to minister Baptism, to assist the Priest
at divine service, and (if he have the Prelates license) to preach withal.

2. Then after a years service in that Deaconship (or such time as pleases
the Ordinary) coming to be made full Priests, they are presented to the
Lordbishop or his Suffragane, by an Archdeaco^ or his deputy, saying, Note this
Point of blasphemy. For now Christ alone has the Ministry of Priesthood, and
that (...), that is, such as can not pass from him unto another. Heb. 7.23.24.
Reverend father in God, I present these persons present to be admitted to the
Order of Priesthood.

3 The Prelate then says to such as be there (be they his Serving me^ or any
other that happen to come that way), Good people these be they whom we purpose
God willing, to receive this day unto the holy Office of Priesthood etc.

4. None of them showing any impediment to the contrary, the Clerks and people
present say or sing the Letany etc. And the Prelate reads over a number of
Collects and stinted prayers taken out of the Popes po^tificall: with an
exhortation, an Epistle and Gospel, wherein they abuse and pervert the
Scripture.

5. The Prelate demands of them thus, Do you think in your heart that you be
truly called according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of
this Church of England, to the * Ministry of Priesthood? And the parties to be
ordained then answer, every one for himself, I think it.

6. After other questions and aunswers about the sufficiency of the Scriptures
etc. (wherein they condemn themselves) the Prelate asks, if they will
reverently obey their Ordinary and other chief Ministers of the Church (that
is, the Lordbishop of the Dioces where they live, the Archbishop, Archdeacon,
Chauncelor, Commissary and the rest of that Antichristian Hierarchy). They make
answer again, every one of them saying, I will so do the Lord being my helper.

7. Then the Bishop reads a prayer for them, that they may have strength and
power to perform the same: and desires the congregation, secretly in their
prayers to make humble supplications to God for the foresaid things. For the
which prayers, there is a certain space kept in silence. (Note this mystery).

8. After a while, the Prelate prays again in such wise as is set down unto
him in the book: being not able belike otherwise to co^ceive any prayer himself.

9. When this is done, the Prelate with the Priests present lay their hands
severallie upon the head of every one that receives orders: the receivers
humbly kneeling upon their knees, and the Prelate saying unto them, Note here
again blasphemy.
Receyve the holy Ghost: whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven;
and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained etc.

10. Then is sung the Creed, and they go to the communion: they that received
orders, being appointed to tarry and receive the communion with the Bishop the
same day, and remaining in the Well fare all good tokens.
same place, where the hands were laid upon them, etc. So testifying that they
are of the same faith and body with the Prelates, who are known to be notable
persecuters of the truth, and very Antichrists themselves.

11. Now being thus made Priests (and yet I omit many like things that might be
noted out of their Book and practice, for it were endless to recount all) they
pay for their letters of orders. Which they must also have in a readiness at all
times, to show (whenever there shall be occasion) for better assurance that
they have received the Beasts mark. And if now they be to enter upon a
benefice, or whenever that day comes (for which they are now prepared to day
before to morrow) then there is yet further required, that they have the
presentation of the Patron (who perhaps is a Papist, or an Atheist, or a
child, or the like) and the institution of the Lord-bishop, who without
question is an Antichrist. Ephesians. 4.5. 1 Cor. 12.^5. with 1 Pet. 2.25. and 5.3.4
The true Church has but * one Lordbishop, the Lord Jesus Christ. All other
Lordbishops are Antichrists.

12. Lastly being thus ordered, presented, instituted, and having sworn
Canonical obedience to the Prelates: now whether the people will or not, they
are and must be their Priests and have charge of their souls. And both
themselves, their Ministry, and people remain subject to the Prelates and to
their Antichristian courts, power, jurisdiction etc.

This is the case of all the Priests, even of them that have the most and best
acceptance of the people whereof he speaks. And would any now have thought,
that the Prelates making, and the peoples accepting of Priests, being such, Mr
Jacob would be so senseless as to persuade that these are true and lawful
Pastors? Might he not as well tell us, that a clean thing may be brought out of
filthiness, yea that Christ may be made to agree with Antichrist? Which both
Scripture and experience teaches can never be. Job. 14.4. 2 Cor. 6.15. Either
therefore let him make the tree good, Mat. 12.33.
and his fruit good; or else make the tree evil, and his fruit evil. If the
Prelates and their functions be Antichristian and were never but naught, then
such must needs be the Ministry derived and received from them. But so it is
with the Prelates, even himself being witness, who both yielded it Page 92.
before: And here again in plain terms confesses, that the calling received
from them is unlawful.

By this it is too evident that the light of the truth shines in his
conscience, howsoever he strive against it. Therefore will I not now further
urge it, hoping that himself in time will better mind it. In the mean time,
let the Reader note it: And withal, that this calling by the Prelates (which
he yields to be unlawful) is the only calling which by Law is ratifyed and
allowed in that Church. And does not Mr Jacob then (whiles he says,
notwithstanding, they are true and lawful Pastors) speak riddles, and
contradict himself?

These things being observed, and Mr Jacob desired to resolve them in his next:
I will now proceed to show the weakness and insufficiency of his present
pretended Defense. Where for more evidence of the truth. I will first set down
the Reasons heretofore alleged against his Co^pariso^, and then answer his
cavils now brought against them.

Chap 2. The first Reason against Mr Jacobs Comparison, as it was first
propounded.
Fran. Johnson. INfidels, Idolaters, profane and godles persons, may marry
together, with consent and choice of each other, notwithstanding their
prophanenes: And their marriage is therein lawful.

But it stands not so with choice of Ministers in the Church. For profane
godles persons (such as these Assemblies consist of, being never rightly
gathered together according to Gods ordinance, remaining in subjection and
bondage to their false Antichristian Offices and Courts, consisting of all
sorts of people etc.) are not capable of choosing and joining to a true Minister
in this estate, as Infidels and such like may marry in their estate.

Therefore the comparison holds not, neither is such choice of a Minister by
such people lawful.

H. Jacob his Reply. THe strength of this Reason stands in these last words:
But these Assemblies consist of such people, 1. profane and godles persons. 2.
never rightly gathered together according to Gods ordinance. 3. remaining in
subjection and bondage to their false and Antichristian officers and courts:
Ergo, etc. These three accusations avail nothing at all.

The first Accusation is from our question, Accusation. 1.
for we speak of a Christian people, but you of assemblies consisting of
profane and godles persons. If you say, our assemblies all and wholly are such:
That is false. If you say, some are: Of them we speak not. If you say in all
and every one of our assemblies there are some, yea many open profane and
godles persons. 1. It is too bold a saying, and without knowledge to speak so
of all. 2. If it were true, yet it were false to say, our assemblies consist of
such, or to think that whole companies of Christians by such commixtures are
made unholy; profane, and godles: which is contrary to these scriptures. Mat.
23.2.3. Luke 2.21.22. and 1.6. Act. 21.23.26. 1 Samuel 2.17. and cap. 1. verse.
3.9. Rev. 2.20.21. and 3.1.4. 1 Cor. 3.3. Gal. 3.1.2. and 4.11.16. and 5.4.9.

The second Accusation [that our assemblies were never rightly gathered
together at the first according to Gods ordinance.] I deny it: Accusation. 2
especially towching many famous Congregations in the Land, where the Gospel
was not unknown before the Queens commandment came to urge them to receive
this doctrine. And if the manner of receiving it then, in those hard and
doubtful times and hazardous beginnings, were not so perfect nor so exact, as
should have been, yet we may see by the example of 2 Chro. 30.17.18 19.20.
Hezechias, and 2 Chr. 33.15.16.17.
Manasses, and Zepha. 1.4.5. and 3.1. Ier. 3.6. etc. and 4.1. etc. and 5.1. etc.
Josias reformations, That God imputes it not to such godly and zealous
restorers, the pillars and ground of the truth in those days.

If you say, the untaught people then suddenly receiving the Gospel by
commandment, not by hearing, could not believe at the first, though they
professed, and therefore at the first were no true Christians nor Churches? I
answer. 1. Though many received the Gospel for the commandments sake, yet
who can say, That now they all generally wanted all knowledge, and all faith?
The word then having ben in many places taught, very many books scattered,
much conference, daily consultations and disputations used, and the blood of
the Martyrs having preached so loud, and so lately before. 2. It was not so
sudden. There was From November the 17. till Midsomer following.
more then half a year, for the people to hear, learn and consider, before
the commandment came. So that it can not be counted mere force and compulsion,
that at the beginning of our Queens reign, brought us to the truth. 3. I
would know, You condemn not (I hope) all reformation commanded and compelled
by the Magistrate. 2 Chronicles. 34.32.33. and 33.16. and 15.13.. Seeing therefore,
the assemblies thus openly, and advisedly, submitted to the proclaimed truth,
who sees not, but they confessed therein their former errors, and professed
their present faith, and undertook a new life from that which before they led,
though happily not so formallie, nor so perfectly as were to have been wished.

But they received all together, Papists, Atheistes, ignorant men, and all
dissolute livers, into one communion and fellowship.

Indeed all, who after this aduizement and notice taken, submitted to and
receyved this doctrine, This particular Mr Jacob has not printed: but it was
in his written copy which I answered.
bankrupts, known bad men, and very ignorant: yea and still retain men full
of contention, and bitter strife. 1 Cor. 3..3. In a word this I answer:

That which disanulleth not a Church gathered and settled, That disanulleth it
not in the gathering and beginning.

But such mixtures do not disanull a Church gathered and settled, as appears
above in the scriptures quoted against the First Accusation, Mat. 23. Luke 2
etc.

Therefore such mixtures did not disanull our Churches then in their beginning.

The Third Accusation is, [Our Assemblies remain in obedience to the false
Antichristian Officers, Accusation. 3.
etc.] Let this be our general sin: yet there is diversity of sins. All
are not of like detestation before God, not of like consequence against us. I
say not that any sins are venial: but I say, all sins by their nature are
mortal, yet do they not all alike abolish us from Christ, nor deprive us of
the glory of God. Now this sin of outward Church orders is not of the most
heinous, nor extremest disobedience. There are sins against the 1 Cor. 15
2.3.4. Romans 1.25. 1 Cor. 3.10 11.12.13.14.
foundation, and there are sins that stand with the foundation: ibid.
wherein men living and dying ignorantly without particular repentance, may be
saved. Such were the sins of the Jewish Church and estate in Christ's time,
and after, as Beza in Acts 15.20.
some think, even till their Temple and City were destroyed, though they did
personally hate and persecute Christ. Such also was the sin of the ancient
declyning Bishops, Cyprian, Epiphanius, Augustine, Chrysostom, Leo of Rome,
etc. No less was in ours of late Cranmer, Ridly, Hooper etc. in King Edwards
days: and no greater is now in ours presently, especially towching our
Churches, and Ministers too, generally. If you say, we are all convicted now,
and sin against our own consciences, as they did not in those times: It is
utterly false, and a palpable untruth. Whosoever knows any thing in our
Church estate generally, must needs see it, that this poinct towching the
Hyerarchy, is not acknowledged even of ignorance in a thousand to one: many
holding (and not of the simplest) this present government to be the only true
and right kind: but all men almost, to be indifferent, and lawful: very few
indeed, and scarce to be found, that see it to be merely naught, or as you
term it, wicked and intolerable. And in king Edwards time, whosoever
considers, shall find, H. I^.
that the godly learned Protestans then, were not utterly ignorant of this
point of reformation, and yet sinned not against their conscience in bearing
with the times, neither were abolished from Christ. And surely towching the
Jews, they were all generally more convicted then, that Jesus was the Christ,
then we are now that the Prelacy is of Antichrist: and yet they remained a
Church still, because generally indeed, they were not plainly convicted. Thus
then this our sin is see the 2. sorts of fundamental sins, in the 2.
Reply to your y^^ ^eason before. Page 142,

Fr. Io. See the answer thereto in the same treatise, Page 144.147.


no way fundamental, it destroys not faith and Christianity in our whole
assemblies: Therefore they remain Christian people still, as I affirmed: not
all godles and profane, as you uncharitably speak.

O beware of rash and hasty judging, even of one brother, Romans 14.3.4.13. how
much more of such anb so many whole assemblies professing Christ in England?
Woe be unto him which curses where God curses not. Number. 23.8. As also indeed
that blesses, where God blesses not. We desire you not to bless us in our
evil, but we vvarne you, not to curse us in our good: which indeed turns us
not to any furtherance, but to a great hinderance and stumbling block, stopping
us from that syncerity which else we should dravve nearer unto. Blessed is he
that judges vvisely (that is without affection and partiality) even of him
that is despised. Better it is and more Christianlike, even to offend in too
much compassion and patience (especially toward so many hundredth thousands,
by whom we know naught save good in this poinct) then to offend in too much
rigor, and severity, and unjust anger. Mat. 5.22. Howbeit this were not
indeed to offend, as has been above shevved. And briefly in two words, thus I
conclude it farther, that,

That faith and religion taught in the book of Articles published 1562. makes
the people that believe and obey the same, true Christians: such as so living
and dying may be saved.

But our Church does so hold that faith.

Therefore they are true Christians.

The Proposition only is doubted. I had thought none so desperate as to deny
it: but lately I understand, you have denied it. Howbeit for answer, I
refer you partly to that which here has been said before, and especially
to that which is replied to your Answer in the former Treatise: which being
well weighed, I doubt not but all indifferent, and Christian minds will
acknowledge, our public Church assemblies in England to be true Christians.

Fran. Johnson his Answer. YOu have now ten times reproched me, and are not
ashamed. Whatsoever your self or others do think of your Churches estate, God
forbid that I should either justify it, or take away mine own innocence in
witnessing the truth against it. Hear therefore, and I will answer you once
again: I will open my mouth for the truth, against him that pleads for Baal.

The strength of the Reason stands not (as you ignorantly suppose) in the
truth or falsehood of the particulars you mention: but in this, that it is not
so with choice of Ministers in the Church, as it is with choice of parties in
marriage. For Infidels, Idolaters, godles persons etc. may in that estate marry
together: but they are not in that estate capable of choosing and joining to a
true Minister. And therefore your Comparison does not hold.

Christian people, yet your comparison (which was given me to answer) spoke at
first of ignorant persons, and those also such as might marry together. Now
you cannot deny but ignorant persons (be they never so profane and godles) may
marry one with another. Yet have they not power in such case to choose a
Minister. It is your self then that keep not the point, but chop and change
the terms of your Argument, as you think may best fit your turn.

And yet all this changing of your hew will avayle you nothing at all, unless
you could prove, 1. That your people in that Church-constitution are true
Christians: 2. That your Ministers so made and received are true Pastors. But
neither of these can you do. For the first, let the Reader see the former
treatise, where this point is purposelie handled. (And mind here that your self
confess, some of your Assemblies are all and wholly profane godles persons: Of
which (you say) you speak not: Yet tell us whether you think such Assemblies be
true Churches, such people true Christians, and their Ministers (having like
ordering of the Prelates and acceptance of the people) true Pastors, or not.)
For the latter, this is the treatise and place where you should prove it, if
you could. But behold, you do nothing less. In the Comparison, Page 186.
Nay even: here you yield, that your calling received from the Prelates is
unlawful. Yet this is the only manner of calling that your Church
constitution appoints.

That which you speak, of your Assemlies not being all and wholly profane and
godles persons, is nothing to the purpose. You might easily have seen (if you
had minded the words of my Reason) that I said expresselie, your Assemblies
consist of all sorts of people, that is, some better, some worse: Yet seeing the
best among you remain in confusion with the worst, and all of you in bondage
to Antichrist: that even for this cause also you can not in that estate be
deemed true Churches, having power to choose such Officers as Christ has
appointed for his Church.

And where you say, whole companyes of Christians are not by such commixtures
made unholy, profane, and godles, it is wholly from the question. The point is
not, A treatise of the Ministry of Engl. in answer to M. A. H.
whether the better sort among you do by such commixture become godles persons,
like the rest; but whether your Assemblies in such commixture can be deemed
true constituted Churches of Christ. The Scriptures you allege, are therefore
misalledged, and fit not your purpose at all. Yea they are direct against you,
as I have ^ else where proved at large. Now note but these things briefly.

In Mat. 23.2.3. Christ speaks of such as sat in Moses chair, that is, in
the offices and functions which God by Moses had ordained. Deuteronomy. 33.8.10. and
Neh. 9.4. with Ioh. 1.19.24. Now what is this to your false Ministry, which
God never appointed? The same is to be minded in those other Scriptures of 1 Samuel 1.3.9. and 2.17.

In Luke 1.6. and 2.21.22. mention is made of Gods ordinances and offices then
observed, after the Law of Moses, without reproof. Is not this then directly
against your Antichristian ordinances and offices, which are not according to
the Law of God, but after the Apostasy of Antichrist: and therefore all the
observers of them to be reproved?

In Act. 21.23.26. we read that the Legal ordinances were for a time permitted
to the Jews being zealous of the Law, and so observed of the Apostle, himself
being also a Jew. Which was the honor of their burial. But what proportion is
there between those ordinances of God, and the enormities of Antichrist? Nay,
if we may not now keep those ceremonies of Moses, once Gods commandments: how
far ought we to be from keeping the abominations of Antichrist, by God most
straightly forbidden? Gal. 5.2. with Rev. 14.9.10. and 18.4.

In Rev. 2.20.21. and 3.1.4. 1 Cor. 3.3. Gal. 3.1.2. and 4.11.16. and 5.4.9.
the Scripture speaks of true Churches and people set in the way and order of
Christ. What is this to your Assemblies and people standing in the apostasy of
Antichrist?

But you will say, these Scriptures show in these Churches some corrupt men,
opinions, and actions. What then? 1. This was not the estate of those Churches,
but the personal aberratio^s of some therein. 2. Though true Churches planted
in the order of Christ, be subject to corruption: yet this does not justify
any false Churches in Antichristian constitution. Though Judah being the true
Church of God had her enormities, yet Israel in apostasy was no wife but an
harlot. Hos. 2.2. and 4.15. with 2 Chro^. 15.17. If you mind not this
difference, you may plead for Rome at this day and all the false Churches in
the world, as you do for your own. 3. Although bad men under a show of holiness
creep into the Church, till afterward in time they be descryed; yea although
many hypocrites both enter and continue in the true Church: yet this nothing
approves the confusion of such Assemblies as are cages of every unclean and
hateful bird even of known wicked persons, Atheists, Persecuters, Rev. 18.2.
Whoremo^gers, Drunkards, Usurers, Idolaters etc. 4. When any such are espied
in the true Church, there is Christ's power to cast them out, if they repent
not. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.11.12.13. But such being common and notorious in
your and the like Churches, yea and still remaining unrepentant, yet you have
not the power of Christ to remove them: but all the ecclesiastical power and
jurisdiction among you is in the Prelates and their Officers, which is meerlie
Antichristian. 5. Even in true Churches, when such persons and corruptions are
not redressed or removed, they do in time leaven the whole lump, and Christ in
justice removes his Candelstick, and takes his kingdom away from among them.
See it in such Churches as are spoken of in these Scriptures here noted by your
self. Mat. 21.42, 43. Rev. 2.5.16.22.23. 1 Cor. 5.6. Gal. 5.9. And if judgment
begin at the house of Christ, what shall be the end of the Synagogues of
Antichrist?

These things I thought briefly to note, partly to show that these Scriptures
approve not your estate, partly that the Reader may always mind to put
difference between true Churches, and yours with all other false ones
whatsoever. And let it be noted withal, how you seek out the very Scribes and
Pharisees with the corruptest times and people, by them to color your ungodly
estate, if possibly you could. Whereas the true fear of God would teach you
to make choice of the Prophets and Apostles with the purest times and people,
for examples, to walk in their steps.) But for the further handling of these
things I refer you to other treatises, where they are more fully spoken of.
The answer to Mr A.H. etc.
Now I will annexe (for more clearing of this question) a brief description of
a true visible Church, which has power from Christ to choose to it self such
Officers as he has ordained in his word. Thus therefore I describe it.

A true visible Church of Christ, is * a company of faithful people, by the
word of God called out and separated from the world and the false ways
thereof, gathered and joined together in fellowship of the Gospel, " by a
voluntary profession of the faith and obedience of Christ. * Mat. 18.17.20.
Ephesians 1.1. Act. 1.15. Ezech. 36.38. Ioh. 15.19. and 17.14.16. Lev. 20.26. Act.
2.39.40. and 19.9. Romans 1.7. 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 18.4. " Mat. 18.20. Phil. 1.5.
Act. 1.15. and 2.41.47. and 17.4. Esa. 60.4. " Esa. 44.5. 2 Cor. 9.13. Act.
2.41. Psalm. 110.3. Romans 1.8. and 16.19.

This I take to be a true description. If it be not, show the error by the
Scriptures. If it be, compare herewith your Cathedral and Parish Assemblies,
and, if you can, prove them or any of them (even the best among you) to be
such. And hitherto of the first of the particulars before mentioned.

many famous co^gregations you speak of, and that you show how they were
rightly gathered and joined together according to Gods ordinance. Otherwise
who can know whereof you speak, or what to think in particular concerning them?

If [by Congregations where the Gospel was not unknown before the Queens
co^ma^dement came to urge them] you mean the persecuted Churches that were in
Q. Maryes time: this helps not your cause, but makes against it directly.
For they were then separated from the rest of the Land; and voluntarily
submitted to the Gospel of Christ: and enjoyed the true and lawful offices of
Pastors, Elders, Deacons: neither stood in subjection to the Antichristian
Prelacy and other Clergy of the Land, but renounced and forsook it. None of all
your Assemblies were ever such, either at the beginning of her Maiestyes
reign, or at any time since.

If you object, that even they of that persecuted Church (when this Queen came)
submitted to the Prelacy and Clergy aforsaid: I deny it not. But note withal,
that such as did so, made thereby defection from the way of Christ, wherein
they were before. And the rest that would not so do, were either cast into
prison, and so detained unto death, or otherwise evil entreated: as both your
prisons and so me yet alive are able to testify. Since which time, your
persecution has increased far more, even unto exile and death, upon such as
refuse to join to your Hierarchy, worship, and other abominations of
Antichrist, by your Law then established.

How absurd then is it to pretend for your estate, the reformations of
Hezekiah, Manasseh, Josiah etc. Of which the Scripture testifyes, that God gave
the people one heart to do the commandment of the King, and of the Rulers,
according to the word of the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 30.12. And who knows not, that
these Kings did both abolish the false worship and Ministry which before time
had been in their Kingdoms, and did in stead thereof establish that true
worship and Ministry which God by Moses had ordained. 2 King. 18.6. and 23.25.
2 Chronicles. 29. and 30. and 31. and 33. and 34. and 35. chap. Besides that those
Churches consisted of people separated from the world, and willingly
submitting themselves to the Lord: as these Scriptures also do testify, 2 Chronicles. 15.8.9.12. and 30.11.12. 2 King. 23.2.3. with Exodus 19.5-8. Lev.
20.24.26. Howsoever then, being set in the way of God and walking therein, they
had their blemishes and imperfections, yea and evil men arising among them (as
the best Churches on earth are always subject to have): yet this is nothing
either for such commandment of Rulers, as is not according to the word of
God, or for your Churches estate, which from the beginning to this day neither
are separated from the world, nor have the true Ministry and worship appointed
by Christ, but stand both in confusion with the most profane, and in
subjection to the Hierarchy and worship of the man of sin. Otherwise the ten
Tribes of Israel might justify their defection, and the Romish Babylon her
filthyest apostasy by such pretenses.

For your people at the beginning of her Majestyes reign, you allege, 1. that
they did not all generally want all knowledge and all faith. I do willingly
grant it. But does it therefore follow that your Assemblyes are true Churches,
rightly gathered according to the ordinance of Christ? Then by the same reason
conclude the publik Assemblyes heretofore in Q. Maryes time, and now in Rome
and the rest of Italy, Spain, France etc. to be true Churches right lie
gathered: because their people neither did nor do all generally want all
knowledge and all faith.

But your people had then had in many places the word taught, books scattered,
much conference, daily consultations and disputations, and the blood of Martyrs
preaching unto them aloud and lately before. All these being granted, yet they
are so far from excusing your sins, as even therefore it is far the greater:
inasmuch as by this it should seem you knew better, and yet neither did it
then, neither do it yet unto this day. And so you are in the sin and under
the judgment spoken of in these Scriptures, Iam. 4.17. Tit. 1.16. Ier. 6.16.
Luke 12.47.48. Let him that reads mind it well. And this too, that you speak
not of the whole Land and all your Churches, but only of some places and
persons, such as had the books, conference, and disputations you speak of: Page
3.6.
Whereas your * former defense speaks of your Churches, as they are
established by Law, and therefore of them all.

2. Next you allege, that there was more then half a year (viz. " from
November to Midsomer) for the people to hear, learn, and consider before the
commandment came: so that it was not suddayne, neither can be counted
compulsion etc. But know you not Mr Jacob, 1. That it neither was, neither
could possibly be as you pretend, that the people in that time throughout the
Land should be taught: Yet at Midsomer were all constrained to receiv it,
whether they did so beleev or not. 2. That this time was appointed, not for the
peoples instruction, that so upon konwledge they might do what was enjoined,
but that in this time the Statute being known throughout the Land, they should
then do as was appointed howsoever they were persuaded thereof in themselves.
This I prove, 1. Because the Priests and people that would, were suffered by Law
all that half years space to say and hear Mass as before. Which I trow you
will not say was to hear, learn, and consider, as here you allege. 2.
Because when Midsomer came, they were bound to receyv (and so did) what was
published, for their faith, worship, Ministry etc. howsoever either themselves
were persuaded, or the things imposed did agree or disagree with the word of
God.

But now I would know what you will say to this, that all your former pleading
was from your Articles agreed upon in the year 1562. and here you make your
plea from your peoples estate in the year 1558. (for then began her Majestyes
reygne: which I pray God long to continue and prosper.) If your profession of
those Articles made you now true Churches, which before you were not: how were
your Assemblyes then rightly gathered so many years before, as here you
pretend? Or if you were not true constituted Churches at that Midsomer you
speak of here, how could those Articles effect it, being afterward agreed upon,
not by your Churches, See the title of those Art.
but by your Priests, neither by all of them, but only by your Archbishops
and Bishops and such other of your Clergy as were with them in the Convocation
holden at London in the year 1562. If to this last point you say, this
agreement of your Prelates and Clergy was then published through the Land, and
so you count it as the agreement and ordinance of your whole Church: then must
you grant withal, that the Antichristian Canons, Injunctions, Articles,
Advertissements etc. agreed upon at the same and like Convocations, and
likewise published, are also the agreement and ordinance of your whole Church.
And so your Churches estate and profession is to be considered, not by those
Articles only of 1562. but by the rest likewise agreed upon among you from
time to time. Thus all your defense is found to be full of deceit and
contradictio^ every where. But it may be in your next we shall know your mind
better.

In the mean time we answer what you desire to know of us: viz, That we
condemn not reformation commanded and compelled by the Magistrate, but do
vnfeynedlie desire that God would put into the heart of her Majesty and all
other Princes, within their Dominions, to command and compel a reformation
according to the word of the Lord: As it is expressly noted, that Hezekiah and
other the good Kings of Judah did. 2 Chronicles. 30.12. 2 King. 18.6. and 23.25. 2 Chronicles. 17.3.4.5.6.

We acknowledge with thanks to God and her Majesty, that out of her Highness
Dominions there be already abolished many of the abominations of the Romish
Babylon. And we pray God, that forasmuch as many of them be yet remaining in
your worship, Hierarchy, confusion, Canons, Licenses, Dispensations, Rev.
14.9.10.11. Exodus 20.4.5.
Excommunications etc. with which no man may have spiritual communion under
pain of eternal wrath: that if it be the will of God, her Highness may be his
instrument to suppress and abolish these also, and to establish the whole
truth of God, according to his word. And further, that she may take to her own
Civil uses the Lordships and possessions of the Prelates and other Clergy, as
God has foretold and appointed should be done with them (Rev. 17.16. and
19.17.18.) And as King Henry the eight (her Maiestyes Father of famous memory)
did with the Abbats, Monks, Friars, Nuns, and with their possessions and
revennewes.

Which happy work, by what Princes soever it be done (as certainly will come
to pass, for the Lord of hosts has spoken it) it will greatly redound to
the glory of God, the honor of themselves, the free passage of the Gospel,
the peace of the Church, and benefit of the whole Common wealth. The Lord
therefore hasten and accomplish it. Yea true and strong is the Lord, who has
spoken, and will perform it. Rev. 17. and 18. and 19. chap.

This is our mind (which you desire to know) concerning reformation commanded
and compelled by the Magistrate. Where note withal, that it is the work of God
only, to add to his Church such as he will save. And therefore that it is
not in the power of Princes or any Man whatsoever, to persuade the conscience
and make members of the Church: but that this must be left to God alone, who
only can do it. Act. 2.47. and 11.21. Genesis 9.27. 1 Cor. 12.13. and 14.24.25.
Zach. 8.23. Ier. 32.38.39.40. Princes may and ought within their Dominions to
abolish all false worship and all false Ministeryes whatsoever; and to
establish the true worship and Ministry appointed by God in his word,
commanding and compelling their subjects to come unto and practice no other
but this. Yet must they leave it unto God to persuade the conscience, and to
add to his Church from time to time such as shall be saved. But with you in
these things, you know it is quite contrary.

Thus then neither the examples of the aforesaid Kings of Judah are in your
case fitly alleged: neither is it of any weight, if all your people and
Assemblies in the Land willingly, openly, and advisedly, submitted to
whatsoever was proclaimed at the beginning of her Highness reygne: Unless you
could prove that Religion, worship, Ministry etc. then proclaimed and still
used, to be by God prescribed in his word. Which still you take for granted,
when it is the very thing which we deny and you should prove, if possibly you
could.

And what if here I should put you in mind, how you might more fitly allege
for your case, the keeping of the Statutes of Omry, and the like, Micah, 6.16.
But I will leave this for your next Reply. And then also tell us, what truth it
is you speak of, that was proclaimed at the beginning of her Maiestyes raygne,
whereof the people had such aduizement and notice as you pretend, from November
17. to Midsomer following. For the book of Articles * heretofore so much
pressed by your self, Page 3. etc
was so far from being proclaimed then, as it was not agreed upon till the
year, 1562. Which was at least four or five years after the time you speak
of here.

Now to proceed, you tell us that no open professed Papists, Atheists, nor
other Heretics were then receyved into your communion etc. But how can we
beleev you, when D. Whitgift your Archprelate of Canterbury (a man of as great
reckning and of more experience in your Church then Mr Jacob) tells us the
clean contrary, yea and prints it too (even then when he writes in defense of
your present estate) viz, Whitg. book, Page 176. and 178 639. 643.
that now the Church is full of Papists, Atheists, Drunkerds, whoremongers etc.
Even the Prelates themselves (I perceive) do in some things deal more
syncerelie then you Mr Jacob, and are nothing so shameless. Yet I know that some
others of your coat which seek reformation, deal herein as plainly as the
Prelates, and far more faithfully then you. For example, they confess and
publish that you have Sermon on Romans 12.
swarms of Atheists, Idolaters, Papists, erroneous and heretical Sectaryes,
the Family of love, and such like. Another spares not to avouch more
particularly, State of the Church of England between Diot. and Tert. etc.
that some Doctors of the Arches be the same men they were in Queen Maryes
time. Others (also speaking of your Ecclesiastical courts) write thus, Ad^. to
the Parliament.
God deliver all Christians out of this Antichristian tyranny where the Judges,
Advocates, and Proctors for the most part are Papists etc. Thus your own men
of all sorts bear witness against you.

But to let their testimony alone, who knows not that the whole Land being
polluted with most Popish and wicked Idolatry in Q. Maryes days, they were all
straightway after (without repentance or the word preached going before)
received into the body of your Church, and constreyned to become members
thereof? Who with their seed unto this day do so remain, and are commonly
called, the Church of England.

Neither will that clause of [open professed] be any starting whole for you,
as it may be you dream. All know well enough, it is no matter how open and
professed they be, so as they will be conformable to come to Church once a
month, and hear your Divine service book. Did Mr W. Smith (your great
acquaintance) never tell you, Mr Wroth, Justice.
how one of the Commisioners themselves (when he was called before them) said
unto him, Come to Church, and be a Devil, if thou will?

That which you say of ignorant men received in a general reformation, if you
mean of some having far less knowledge then others, being also unable either
well to express their own mind, or to defend the truth against an adversary:
I deny it not. Otherwise know, that all who are received members of the Church,
being of years, are to be such as in their measure (less or more) have
learned Christ, and do willingly submit to his Gospel, having heard and
known the grace of God therein. Ephesians. 4.7.20.21. 2 Cor. 9.13. Col. 1.5.6.
Act. 2.41. and 17.3.4. Esa. 44.5. Zac. 8.20.21.22.23.

And so questionles it was in the time of Hezechiah etc. For which, see these
Scriptures, 2 Chronicles. 29.31. and 30.2.3.4.11.12.13. 2 King. 23.2.3. 2 Chronicles.
15.15. Besides that the Jews did long before Hezekiahs time upon knowledge
enter covenant with the Lord, to have him to be their God and they to be his
people. Exodus 19.7.8. Deuteronomy. 29.10.11.12.13.

For the notorious, dissolute, and wicked, you plead that some were reclaymed,
all undertook another profession and a new appeara^ce of Christianity etc.
Which how false it is, appears not only in the receyving and retayning in
your Church the most profane of the Land and their seed, yea and constreyning
all whosoever in every Parish to be members thereof: but is confessed also by
your selves on all hands, as I showed * before, Page 16. 2^*
by testimony both of the Prelates and of the Reformists: who do both of them
testefy that your Church swarmeth with Whoremongers, Drunkards, Liars,
Extortioners, Blasphemers, Sorcerers, and other wicked persons. Now say your
self, if these be not notorious, dissolute, and wicked? Or if your Church
abound not with such, eve^ to this day? How were they then reclaymed etc. as
you pretend? And how was your Church rightly gathered according to Gods
ordinance? Are these fit stones for the Lords Temple, fit servants for the
Lords house, fit members for the body of Christ? Whatsoever you think, such
estate is before God intolerable, and by his word unwarrantable.. Learn it by
these and the like Scriptures, 1. Pet. 2.5.9. 1. Timoth. 3.15. Zach. 14.21.
Esa. 35.8.9. 1. Cor. 12.27.

But you say, we have likewise received bankrupts, known bad men, ignorant,
etc. 1. If it were so, would our sin justify yours? 2. Neither in deed is it
so, as you charge us. Known bad men we receive none at all. By bankrupts, if
you mean such as are not able to pay their debts, and do therefore think that
they are not to be received or retained members of a true Church, you do
therein too much bewray your ignorance. The Scripture teaches that the true
fear of God, and want of ability to pay a man's debts, may meet together in the
same party. 2. King. 4.1. Levit. 25.35. etc. And who knows not, that it is a
trial wherewith God sometimes exercises his dearest children? Iam. 2.5. with
2 King. 4.1. etc. Not to speak how there gathered to David (who was a type of
Christ in many things that befell him) all that were in distress and debt and
troubled in mind etc. 1. Sam. 22.2. Yet notwithstanding if any shall wilfully
run into debt, not caring what they borrow so they may get it, Romans 13.8.
with 2 King 4.7.
neither making conscience to pay again though they be able: such do both
break the commandment of God, which says unto all: Owe nothing to any man,
but to love one another: and are therefore by the Prophet accounted for wicked
persons, The wicked (says he) borrows and pays not again. Psalm. 37.21.
Now any that are known to be such, we neither receive nor retain. Yet you
know, yourselves, it is common among you. And what power has your Church to
redress it, if you would?

Towching ignorant men, you have our mind before. And as we are minded, Page
201.
so do we practice: Remembering always, that which is written of Christ our Lord,
A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench: etc.
Esa. 42.3. Math. 12.20.21.

Where you add further, that we do still retain men full of contention and
bitter strife, it is also untrue. For although with such men we have been
exercised (as the Church on earth is always subject to be, that they which are
approved may be known): Yet neither is it any other thing then the Primitive
Churches even in the time of the Apostles them selves did sustain (as the i
Cor. 3.3.
Scripture here alleged by your self, and Act. 20.30. 1. Cor. 11.16.19. Gal.
5.12.15
other the like do testify): and when such persons and dealing once be
manifest, we cast them out from among us and avoid them, according to the
rules prescribed in the word of God. Gal. 5.12. 1. Cor. 5.11.12. and 11.16.
Romans 16.17, Mat. 17.18. And yet, even then when they are hardened and please
them selves in strife and contention, they may both be received and retained
members of your Church, any of them that will come to your false worship, and
so return to their former vomit again.

That which follows in the last place, for the shutting up of this matter
(when you say, That which disanulleth not a Church gathered etc.) is directly
against your self. For seeing confusion and commixture with the world and wicked
thereof in one body of a Church, will disanul and make void a Church already
gathered and settled: how much more shall it there, where a Church is but a
gathering and beginning? (If we could imagine that to be a gathering of a
Church, which leaves it still in confusion with the world and bondage to
Antichrist.) Now that such mixtures with the profane will disanull Churches
before gathered aright, you may see by that which is written, Genesis 6.2. etc.
Ezech. 16. chap. and 22.26. and 44.6.7.8. And in the Churches that were at
Rome, Ephesus, Corinth, etc. Rev. 13.16. and 17.1. and 18.1. and 18.2. being
compared with Romans 1.7.2. Cor. 6.14. etc. Thus all your answer is in a word
taken away.

But further, mind here a contradiction with your self. For now you grant
(which before you denied) that your Church is commingled of all sorts of
people, having mixtures of profane and dissolute, with the rest that are better
among you.

The Scriptures you quote, I have showed before how you do pervert them. Page
195. And thus much of the second particular.

that you remain in bondage to Antichristian Offices. Courts, etc. This you
grant to be your general sin. Which is directly to give the cause. For
they which stand in bondage to Antichrist cannot possibly in such estate have
also the power and liberty of Christ, either for choice of Officers, or for
any other action to be performed by the power and in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

Thus having given the cause, yet fearing belike to yield too much to the
truth, you labor still to lessen and excuse your sin, as much as you can.
Now you allege, that it is not of the most heinous nor extremest disobedience.
And thus may all sin be pleaded for, except the sin against the holy Ghost.
Thus might Nadab and Abihu justify their strange fire: Corach, Dathan, and
Abiram, their usurping of the Priests office: the Ten Tribes their desertion:
the Papists all their abominations: Hymena^s and Philetus all their impieties,
and finally all Heretics and lewd persons their heresies and bad dealing.

Next you tell us, of sins that are against the foundation or not against it:
of the Jewish Church, of the ancient declining Bishops, Cyprian etc. of King
Edwards days, M. Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, etc. of your Churches and Ministers
generally, that you are not all convicted etc. These pretenses are all
answered before in the former Treatise. Mind now withal, that the sin of
the later Bishops since the exaltation of Antichrist, is far more grievous then
was the sin of the other that were before that time: has because the Mystery
of that iniquity is now more more fully disclosed which then was more hid and
secret: and because these later have seen before their eyes the mischief that
followed upon that declining, which the other of former time neither did nor
could.

Add hereunto the great unlikeness (when they are compared together) in their
Offices, Entrance, Titles, prerogatives, Courts, Canons, Jurisdiction, and
other procedings. And tell me why you left out Cyprian in your printed Book,
who^ you named in your written copy? (for which cause I have now also noted his
Name with the rest.) Is it so, that you see already how he is against you?
Assure your self Mr Jacob, that so will the rest also be found, less or more
(I always except the Prelates of Rome) whenever due trial and comparison is
made. Which I neither need nor purpose here to stand upon, seeing these things
are purposely handled and already published by others well known and approved
also of your selves, as by Mr Beza against Saravia. T. C. his 1. and 2. Reply.
The Demonstration. etc. I omit also that yours are become persecuters, whereas
the other were persecuted. Therefore your sin is far the greater.

And many other things I might allege: but it suffices us (and hereon we
rest) that your Prelacy, and other Ministry, Worship etc. are none of Christ's
ordinances appointed in his word. If you be other wise minded, prove it by the
book of God. Ioh. 17.17. Psa. 119.105 Esa. 8.20.
You know that it alone is the word of truth, and ought to be unto all the
la^terne of our feet. Hence forth therefore speak according to that word: and
seek not by the less sins of others, to hide and nourish your own far
greater. Otherwise remember and apply to your selves the judgment that is
written, Exodus 20.5. Ps. 129.21. Gal. 1.8.9. Rev. 14.9.10.11. and 22:18.19.

And note these things withal, 1. First, That here you speak of such as live
and die in your errors ignorantly. Now what defense is this for your self (Mr
Jacob) and for all the rest of your Church throughout the Land who do not
only know these errors, but have also taught, professed, and witnessed
against them heretofore? 2. Secondly, that here you are glad to use the same
pretenses (as rusty weapons) against the truth, which were sometimes used by D.
Whitgift and the Papists for defense of the Prelacy, and found to be of no
force at all. 3. Thirdly, that whatsoever you speak here in excuse of your
conviction, may be likewise alleged by the Papists and other Heretics for
defense of them selves, viz, that they are not all co^victed and sin against
their conscience: also, that such and such points are not acknowledged even of
ignorance in a thousand to one among them; that many of them (and not of the
simplest) hold their way to be the only true and right course: and almost all
of them to be indifferent and lawful: very few and scarce any that see it to
be merely wicked and intolerable. Yet these are the reasons and armor of proof
you bring for defense of your Hierarchy and Church Estate.

And what should I speak of your manifold contradictions, fearful clauses,
notable untruths etc. Your co^tradictions, as when you grant here, Page 28. 61
This is your general sin, and yet said before, you held these to be Christ's
ordinances. Your pretended excuse, that you speak some things in your own
person, some things in your Churches, I have showed before to be vain and
against your self. Page 55. 56. 72. Another contradiction, in that you profess
the ancient Bishops and yours have declyned (viz, from the truth and way of
Christ, or else tell us in your next, from what?) and yet plead, as if your
Church generally were either ignorant hereof, or held your present government
to be the only true and right kind, or at least to be indifferent and lawful
etc. For how (I pray you) can these stand together? If you say, your self know
thus much, but as for any others that know it, they are very few and searse to
be found (these, I take it, are your own words) this is but a vain conceit of
your self, and such as is still accompanied with folly. There are no doubt a
thousand to you, who are but one, that know these things as well or better a
great deal. Yea I know many of your Church my self, who have taught and
written far more soundly and godly of them, then ever Mr Jacob did. And if
these had all held their peace, yet your Book of common prayer (as gross as it
is) knows thus much, In the Commination.
that in the Primitive Church there was a godly disclpline, which (it says) is
much to be wished that it might be restored again. The particular there
mentioned, I stand not upon. I note it only for this, that you may see even
by that book, received among you generally, how your Church neither is so
ignorant of the estate of things in former times, as you pretend, neither
thinks your present government to be the only true kind etc. Not to speak
of your so many and so publik suites to the Parliament, to have it removed as
being unlawful and Antichristian: Neither of the many books printed with
Privilege, avowching as much. A third contradiction (till you clear it
better) note in this also, that you acknowledge they in K. Edw. time were godly
learned, and yet insinuate withal, as if they were little better then
tyme-servers.

Your fearful clauses, importing partly a yielding of the cause, partly a
seeking of starting holes and excuses for your sin: As when you say, 1. Let
this be our general sin, yet there is diversity of sins. 2. All sins by
their nature are mortal, yet do they not all alike abolish us from Christ. 3.
This sin of outward Church-orders is not of the most heinous, nor extremest
disobedience. 4. There are sins, wherein men living and dying ignorantly
without particular repentance, may be saved. 5. No greater is now in our
Bishops presently, especially towching our Churches, and Ministers too,
generally. 6. If you say, we are all convicted now, it is false. 7. The godly
learned Protestants in King Edwards time, were not utterly ignorant of this
point of reformation. 8. The Jews were not generally plainly convicted. 9.
Our Assemblyes are not all godles and profane: Our sin destroys not faith
and Christianity in our whole Assemblyes, etc. As if your self thought it did
in some.

Your notable untruths also are many, as when you allege Mr Beza upon Act.
15.20. as if he spoke of such Jews as did personally hate and persecute
Christ: where as he speaks expressly of such as beleved in Christ, but were
withal zealous of the Law, being not yet persuaded of the abolishment thereof.
Again, when from him you would teach, that they which did personally hate and
persecute Christ, yet were the true Church until the Temple and City were
destroyed, yea and saved though they repented it not. Which is contrary to
these and many the like Scriptures, Act. 2.40.47. and 13.45.46.50.51. and
19.8.9. 1. These. 2.14.15.16. Rev. 2.9. Another untruth is, that you say the
sin of your Bishops now is no greater then of the ancient declining Bishops
and them in K. Edwards time: Whereas many ways it is incomparably greater, as
I have showed before. Page 40. 41. 129. 133. 148. 162. 175. 177. 183. 203.
Another is, in that you say your sin is no way fundamental. The contrary
whereof see proved before, Page 22. 73. 114. 147. And another, when you charge
me, as if I held all among you to be godles and profane: when I have always
thought and professed otherwise. Yea even here I said, your Church consists
of all sorts, that is, both good and bad, better and worse, some making
conscience of their ways according to the knowledge they have, some not, etc.
For which also see further before, Page 7. 20. 21. 41. 78. 103. 168. 178.
Finally, it is neither untrue also when you say, this point towching the
Hierarchy is not acknowledged in your Church even of ignorance in a thousand to
one: Or if it be true, it is a shame for you and all the Ministers of your
Church, who have not in this clear light of the Gospel, by the space of
forty years together, made known unto the people so great a point of
Antichristianity, as the Hierarchy is: Which is the very sinews and strength
of the Popes Religion: As (I fear) woeful experience will teach you further,
if yet you do not see and feel it enough. But of this also I have spoken
before, in the Preface: Section 6.

Lo here, the ornaments of your Reply and Defense of your estate. The very
naming whereof, is sufficient to show your folly, and your Churches miscrie.
Yet least you should please your self in this course, as also for the
satisfying of such as desire further handling of these things, I have spoken of
them before more particularly. As namely, of sins fundamental, Page 22. 32.
44. 46. 51. 73. 114. 147. Of the Scriptures which here you allege in the
margent, Page 51. and in the Preface, Section 3. Of the Jews Church, Page 84.
161. 195. 197. and in the Preface, Section 5. Of the ancient Bishops, Page
129. 162. 183. 203. Of them in K. Edwards days Mr Cranmer etc. Page 8. 40. 41.
48. 49. 67. 77. 162. 182. Of your Churches estate and conviction, Page 3. 7.
16. 27. 33. 42. 43. 53. 60. 61. 63, 73. 78. 82. 94. 101. 103. 108. 120. 130.
131. 132. 135. 147. 155. 157. 171. 180. 188, 194. 196. 200. etc.

Your caution against rash and hasty judging of any, is very good and needful.
We do together with you exhort all to beware of such dealing: and to take heed
they judge righteous judgment, as Christ has commanded. And therefore that
they be careful to search out and help forward the judgment, Ioh. 7.24.
given by the Apostles and Prophets, on the Whore of Babylon and all her
Daughters. Rev. 18.20.21. and 17.1.5.6.7. with Ier. 51.61-64.

Neither let any think that this is to curse where God blesses, or to lay an
hindrance and stumbling block before any: but that it is in deed to reward
Babylon as she has rewarded us, and to bear witness to the truth and syncerity
of the Gospel, Rev. 18.6. and 14.6.7.8 2 These. 2.8.
that it may the more be brought to light, and received of the elect, to
eternal life. To such, we know, Christ with all his ordinances is precious:
but in deed to them which be disobedient, he is a stone to stumble at and a
rock of offense, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient, to
the which thing they were also ordained. 1 Pet. 2.7.8. Take heed therefore you
bless not your selves in your disobedience of any truth of Christ, promising
your selves peace, though you walk according to the stubbernes of your own
hearts: so adding drunkenes unto thirst. For such blessing God has threatened
to curse, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20. Zach. 11.5.6. Malach. 2.2.

For our selves, we judge not any man. It is the word of God that judges,
which shall also judge in the last day. Ioh. 12.48. By it therefore let every
man try and examine his ways (of what place or calling soever he be) first
for the worship he performs unto God, and then for all the other actions of
his life: that he may so please God in this life, as he may in the next be
partaker of the glory that shall be revealed. Neither let any be daunted with
the reproaches and afflictions which accompany the truth and witnesses thereof.
Even Christ himself the Prince of our salvation was consecrate through
afflictions: and he has promised, if we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him. Heb. 2.10. Rev. 2.10. Romans 8.17.18. 2 Timothy 2.12. Therefore also we
say with the Prophet (as you do here) and wish it might sound in the ears of
all men as a trumpet, Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor, even of
him that is despised etc. Psalm. 41.1.

To conclude, your one word (whereof you told us a little before) is now become
two words: and all little enough. For if your reason be good, all me your self,
if a man might not (after your example) in two words conclude the Papists also
to be true Christians, thus:

That faith and religion taught in the Creeds commonly attributed to the
Apostles, the Nicene Council, Athanasius, etc. makes the people that beleev
and obey the same, true Christians: such as so living and dying may be saved.

But the Popish Church does so hold that faith:

Therefore they are true Christians, etc.

If your reason be good, what will you say to this? If you say, they profess
in word, but do in deed both in their Church-constitutio^ and practice deny
it: such also is your case. Besides that the question is not, whether any
among you may be saved by the truth you hold: (For we doubt not but eve^ in the
Popish Church God saves his, by the truth there held.) But the question is,
whether you (or they) can in your estate and Church-constitution be deemed by
the word of God true Christians or true Churches: such as none may separate
from your worship and Ministry established among you.

And here I can tell you, that even some of your selves have acknowledged and
openly avowched your Churches case to be such, Demonstration, in the Preface.
as " a man may be any thing among you but a sound Christian. Yet I suppose you
will not say they were desperate for saying so. And if I be not deceived, your
self also have been like minded with them heretofore. Sure I am, you had need
clear these things very well: and in any case take heed you become not
desperate therein. Neither two nor three of your words will help the matter. It
is the word of God that must decide it between us.

Whatsoever you have replied in the former Treatise, I have there answered. And
now I leave it to all indifferent and Christian mynds to acknowledge your
publik Church asseblyes for such Christians, as in that estate they are found
to be by the word of God. If by it either you or any other can prove them to
be true ones, I have done. If not, then I wish you and all others to yield to
the truth, and no longer to strive against it. Hitherto of the first Exception,
against your Comparison.

Chap. 3. The Second Reason or Exception against Mr Jacobs Comparison.
Fran. Johnson. THe Priest does not celebrate or pronounce any marriage without
the married first give their consent.

But the Prelate make ministers without and before the peoples consent.

Therefore the Comparison holds not.

H. Jacob his Reply. FIrst it is very vain to make this any matter, viz, the
peoples consenting either before or after the Prelates ordeyning. For whether
before or after, it is in nature and value all one: They in their ignorance
having respect only to the Prelates act. And if it were so, that the Priest
should sometimes marie a couple, the Maid being merely enforced, and denying
consent, yet not striving nor resisting: and a while after shall willingly
agree and like: Out of question there is now true wedlock between them. Even
so the case is betwixt the Church and the Minister. 2. But what will you except
here against those Pastors amongst us, that were first chosen by the people,
they first professing their consent, and are after instituted, and inducted by
the Prelat. Many are thus called amongst us: and the most have the peoples
consent even together at their first inducting: at least wise they have soon
after, by the peoples submitting and mainteyning them even presently. 3. Lastly
in a word, where you say the Prelates make Ministers without and before the
peoples consent: Beza in Act. 14.23. Fenner against Bridges Page 148.
We" affirm, that they make not the Pastor at all indeed and in truth; but
only supposedly. It is the Churches consent that makes him truly, whether
before or after the Bishop, that skilleth not. If any think Imposition of
hands to be simply necessary to the being of a Minister: that is also an
error, and can not be proved.

Fr. Io. his Answer. BEcause I see you need it (Mr Jacob) I will deal very
liberally with you. I grant, that your peoples consenting (whether before or
after the Prelates ordeining) is in nature and value all one etc. that is, of
no value or force at all: Whether you respect the Law of God, which knows no
such juggling of people and Prelates: or the Law of your own Church, which
appoynteth no such election by the people at all. And thus too it is a very
vain thing for you to make this any matter, viz, our peoples consenting either
before or after the Prelates ordeyning.

Yet remember that your Comparison (which I answered) spoke of people that had
made choice of a Minister before he came for ordination to the Prelate.
Therefore it was and is enough against the Comparison, to show that the Priests
can not celebrate marriage before the parties consent each to other: Whereas the
Prelates make Ministers both before and without the peoples consent, yea and
without their knowledge commonly. It is vain then in you to count such
exception vain.

I mind also how deceitfully you pass by that clause [without the peoples
consent.] Therefore to discover your fraud, and to see what better answer you
can give in your next, I will propound the Reason also thus:

But the Prelates make Ministers without the peoples consent. Therefore the
Comparison holds not.

Your case [of a Maid being merely enforced and denying consent, yet not
striving nor resisting] is merely absurd and ridiculous. Can it possibly be,
that one should both be meerlie enforced, denying consent, and yet not strive
nor resist? As soon may you make Fire and Water agree together, as these two.
For, to be enforced, yea meerlie enforced, must needs imply a striving or
resisting against it. Else what needed there, or how should there be said, to be
any forcing?

But you say, if afterward she agree, there is true wedlock. True in deed if
they both agree. But then it is not by reason of any thing done before (which
was sinful altogether) but by virtue of the present mutual willing consent:
they having liberty and power to marry together according to Gods ordinance.
But with your people and Assemblyes it is far otherwise: seeing you have not
liberty or power in your estate to call a Minister according to the ordinance
of Christ. Which I have proved both in the first Reason before, and in the rest
hereafter following.

2. To your demand about Ministers first chosen by the people before they are
instituted by the Prelates: I answer, that if your people had power in your
estate to choose a Minister (which they have not) yet the receiving of
institution and induction by the Prelates afterward (being never ordained by
God) were at least to set your thresholds by Gods thresholds that is, your
inventions by Gods ordinances. Which were in very deed to commit abomination
against the Lord, and to defile his holy Name, and you in so doing become so
far from having him present with you, as even by this means you set a wall
between him and your selves. Ezech. 43.8. And not so only, but do also rebel
against the Lord, and turn away from him, in receiving an other Ministry for
the administration of his holy things, the^ he by his word has ordained in his
Church. Ios. 22.29.

Let the Reader note here besides, how you speak only of the institution and
induction by the Prelates, and closely pass over the Prelates first ordeining
of them Priests and Deaco^s. Without which they are in your Church no Ministers
at all, neither capable of any benefice, though the people should never so
much make choice of any.

Where you say, most of your Ministers have the peoples consent at their first
inducting, or at least soon after by the peoples submitting and mainteyning
them even presently: First I answer (as before) that your peoples consent in
your estate is of no moment. Secondly, if this reason of yours be good, then
your dumb Priests, Non-residents, and most Popish Ministers in the worst times
and places, are to be accounted true Pastors, as well as the best among you:
because upon their inductio^ the people submit to their Ministry and mainteyne
them even presently. For who knows not, that when once a Priest is presented
by the Patron and inducted by the Prelate to a benefice, your people do and
must join to his Ministry, and for his maintenance give him their tithes,
etc. will they, nill they.

Add hereunto, that even the maintenance belonging to your Ministry is such,
as was never ordained by Christ: and therefore neither to be received by the
Ministers, nor given by the people. Which I prove thus: 1. Your Ministrrs are
mainteyned by Tithes, which is Jewish, and ceased with " the Levitical
Priesthood: Or if you will, Popish, derived from the Jews: Heb. 7.12.
which comes all to one end. 2. Your maintenance is such, as by it all manner
Ministeryes once received in the Land might be mainteyned, were they never so
Popish, or otherwise never so impious in any respect. 3, You are bound so to
mainteyne the Ministers you have whatsoever they be: and that also, whether you
will or not. 4. On the contrary, the manner of maintenance now ordained by
Christ for his Ministers, is such, 2 Cor. 9.14.
as belongs" but to them which preach the Gospel, and must come from the
people of love and duty in that behalf. 1. These. 5.13. Gal. 6.6. Romans 15.27. 1.
Timoth. 5.17. 1 Cor. 9.7. etc.

3. Lastly you say in a word (but a shrewd word) that the Prelates make not the
Pastors at all in deed and in truth, but only supposedly. And now in your
printed book (for more certainty) you affirm it with consent of others, whom
you note in the margent. But for this point it needs not. For we yield it
most willingly. Yet note withal, that thus you do both give the cause, and
condemn at once all your Ministry as unlawful, such as may neither be
received nor joined unto. See it for plainenes sake in a Syllogism, thus:
Witness your Articles, Canons, Injunctions, Statutes, etc.
Your Law and Church admits no other Ministry as lawful among you, but
that which is receyved from the Prelates. But this (say you) is none at all in
deed and in truth. Therefore all the Ministry admitted among you by your Law
and Church is none at all in deed and in truth.


A very sound defense of your Ministry: such as all the Prelates and Priests
in the Land may well thank you for, with cap in hand: At least wise, if you
could draw them to be thus minded. And here let me put you in mind, how once
you wished us to set down nothing in answer unto you, but that which is the
doctrine of our whole Church. If your self have kept this rule, it is well. If
not, how will you answer it?

That which you have added concerning Imposition of hands, I admit, with these
cautions, 1. That it is not to be neglected where it may well be had. Hebr.
6.2. Act. 6.6. and 13.3. 2. That in Churches already established it be done by
the Eldership: and where people first come into the order of Christ, by the
fittest among them, being thereunto appointed by the rest of the Church. 1 Timothy
4.14. Numb. 8.10. And thus much of the second Exception.

Chap. 4. The third Exception against Mr Jacobs Comparison.
Fran. Johnson. THe people can not choose their Minister, unless the Prelate do
either before, or after, make him a Minister.

But a couple may choose and take each other in marriage, whether the Priest
will or no. Therefore the Comparison holds not.

H. Jacob his Reply. 1 WE deny your saying, the people can not choose. They can
choose. They have power in Christ, as being Christians, though they know not
their right therein. The ignorance of this simply, does not cut us of from
Christ, nor from this holy privilege: no more the^ the blind Papists have lost
their right and power of marrying together without a Priest, because they are
ignorant of it.

2. Again where you say, But a couple may choose each other whether the Priest
will marry them or no: Mark, That we speak of blind Papists, that think that
the Priest is the whole absolute and necessary marriage maker. If you say,
even such have right and power to marry, though they be far from knowing it,
and farther from practizing; Then grant the like in choosing a Minister, to our
Christians: for so the Comparison imports, Else if you mean those words of
others that be men of knowledge, Then you fight with your shadow: you touch not
our question.

Fran. Johnson his Answer. YOu do still take for granted that which is denied:
viz, that your people have power in Christ to choose their Ministers etc. I
proved before that seeing your people stand in Antichristian servitude to the
Prelates, their Canons, Courts, confusion, etc. they have not in that estate
(neither can have, whiles they so remain) the liberty and power of Christ,
either to choose them Ministers, or to perform any other action belonging to
the Church of Christ. And further that they can not in that estate by the word
of God be approved true Christians. For which see the former Treatise.

In that you grant the peoples choice to be an holy privilege, you condemn
both your Church which rejects it, and such of your people as seem to use it,
whereas in your estate they do nothing else but profane it. Why also do not such
of you as know these things, deliver every man his soul from that slaverie
wherein ye stand under the Prelates, that so you might enjoy and practice the
privileges and holy things of God, as Christ has given them to his Church?

2. To that you pretend of such as be blind and ignorant, thinking thereby to
help your self: I answer, that we speak of your people, as now they stand in
your Church-constitution. For so (you know) the question is. Now whether they
be ignorant, or whether they have knowledge, it skilleth not for the matter in
hand. This we allege, that none at all of your people or assemblyes have, in
your estate, the liberty and power which Christ has given to his Church: as
the other have for marriage. So we have towched the question directly. But in
deed the fault is Mr Jacob, Iren. adversus Valem. lib. 1. cap. 1.
that your Comparison and Arguments hold together, like ropes of sand: as "
Irenaeus said of the Valentinians.

Let the Reader note withal. 1. How you match together, and put as in an eaven
balance, the blind Papists and your Christians. A worthy defense of your
estate. 2. How here you pretend to speak of such as be ignorant, other where of
Christians having knowledge of Christ, fear of God, faith etc. Thus turning
your self into so many shapes and colors, as a man can not tell where to have
you, or what to make of you. Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo?

Chap 5. The fourth Reason or Exception against Mr Jacobs Comparison.
Fran. Johnson. IF any that by the word of God are not capable of marrying
together (as Brother and Sister etc.) do notwithstanding consent to take each
other for man and wife: yet are they not therefore lawful man and wife.

So if a people and some man, that by the word of God can not choose and take
each other as Pastor and Church in their estate (such as now is in this ^a^d)
do notwithstanding consent so to accept each other: yet are they not therefore
lawful Pastor and Church.

H. Jacob his Reply. THis is wholly presumed and from the Question also: Like to
the first Reason, and has the same answer as is made to the first accusation
there. You reason against people not capable of a Pastor; And we speak of true
Christians which are always capable. You do ill therefore in comparing this
action to marriage between brother and sister: who indeed can not marry.

Happily you may likelyer compare it to a couple that have lived both of them
wantonly: Afterward they marry together, and this marriage it self they use
not soberly, nor temperatly. Howbeit for all this, I profess these two are
truly man and wife notwithstanding: Now even so our Churches and Ministers, etc.

Fr. Ioh. his Answer. KNowing the question Mr Jacob, you might well see (if you
were not blind) that this is directly unto it. And so in deed it is like the
first Reason: that is, it shows the folly of your Comparison, and is such as
you can not answer. True it is that we speak of people not capable of a
Pastor: that is, of yours in your Church-constitution. And if you speak (as you
say you do) of true Christians which are always capable, then speak you not of
your people or Assemblyes in your estate. And so it is your self that f^^ht
with your shadow, and towch not the question, but still presume that which you
should prove: viz, that standing in Antichristian bondage to the Prelates and
their procedings, yet notwithstanding you are by the word of God to be judged
true Christians, having the liberty and power given by Christ to his Church,
whereof he is the head. Till you prove this, we must needs think that the
comparing of your choosing a Minister in your estate, to a brother and sister or
such like that can not lawfully marry together etc. is good and pertinent.

Your own comparing of it to a couple that have lived wantonly, and afterward
marry together, yet use not their marriage soberly etc. descryeth that your self
see the wicked and unlawful estate of your Ministers and people, as now they
stand, howsoever you labor to hide and excuse it, as much as you can. And
besides, if you would describe your estate, as it is in deed, you should
compare it to such, as both had and do still live wantonlie and wickedly in
adultery and uncleanness: whom God will judge. Let all such therefore among you
as fear God, delay no longer, but with speed forsake your adulterous ways and
turn unto the Lord: that by his grace you may be " married to him in
righteousness and judgment, in mercy and compassion, Hos. 2.19.2^.
and not still run a whoring after your own inventions, and abominations of
the man of sin, whom the Lord will destroy. Rev. 17.1-6. 2 These. 2.3.4.8.
Numb. 15.39.40. Ier. 4.18.

Chap. 6. The fifth Exception against Mr Jacobs Comparison.
Fran. Johnson. THe Priests joining of the parties does not make them Man and
wife at all, but only the parties mutual consent.

But contrarily, in the present ecclesiastical constitution of England, the
Prelates ordinatio^ makes the Minister, and not the peoples choice at all.

H. Jacob his Reply. THe second Proposition we here flatly deny. It is answered
in our last words against the 2. Reason.

Fr. Ioh. his Answer. YOu have an hard forehead Mr Jacob, that can flatly deny
so clear a truth. But for proof thereof, besides your Churches-constitution, I
cite your books of Articles, Canons, Iniunctio^s, Statutes: together with the
consent of your whole Church: and your book of ordering Priests and Deacons
etc. All which are so many proofs of the second Proposition, and witnesses of
the truth, which you shame not to deny.

Is it not your Churches express Law, that no other be receyved for Ministers,
but such as are made Priests or Deacons by the Prelates? Yea, that every one
must to this end have his Letters of Orders under the Prelates hand and seal
that ordained him? Can any among you (though he have the consent of all your
people) be Parson, or Vicar, or (as you speak) one of your Pastors, not having
the Prelates ordination and institution? On the contrary, having these of the
Prelate, is it not sufficient for him, though all your people stand against
him? Yea, must not all the people (whether they will or not) receive and join
unto his Ministry being by the Prelate so ordained and instituted as
aforesaid? The truth hereof is so well known and ill practiced through the
whole land, as it is strange any man should have the face to deny it. But what
will not Mr Jacob deny, when he knows not what to answer, and yet has not an
heart to yield to the truth? It must needs be a weak and bad cause that can not
otherwise be maintained then by such impudent denyals.

Your Answer to the second Reason before, is there taken away, and proved to
be both against your self and against the Law and constitution of your Church.
Mind it better next time.

Chap. 7. The Sixth Reason or Exception against Mr Jacobs Comparison aforesaid.
Fran. Johnson. IF a woman consent to a man that is another woman's husband,
they are not therefore Man and wife.

So if a people consent to a false Minister, they are not therefore true Church
and Minister.

H. Jacob his Reply. THis is answered as before in the Fourth Reason. It
carries some likelihood indeed, and some reason against Pluralities, but
nothing any further.

Fr. Ioh. his Answer. Neither the fourth Reason, nor this, nor any other of
them are yet answered, Let others judge. And now your self are driven to
confess that, this has both likelihood and reason against your Pluralityes.
Which is in deed to yield unto it. For tell me, if your Pluralitie-men have not
(as well as the rest among you) both the some calling by the Prelates, which
your Church appoints; and like acceptance of your people, who join unto them
and maintain them, as you alleged before: Page 208. The Reason then has
weight not only against your pluralists, but against all your other Ministers
too: seeing they have all of them one and the same false Ministry, received
from the Prelates, and executed under them,

Unto which you may add, that the Ministry of all among you is such as Christ
never set in his Church: whether you look at your Offices, from the highest
Prelate to the lowest Priest: or at your Entrance, according to your Churches
Canons and Book of ordinatio^; or at your Ministration, by your Book of common
prayer and other your Canons and Injunctions: or finally at your maintenance,
by Tithes, Chrismes, Offerings etc. When you have well minded these things, you
shall find this Argument reach a great deal further then to Pluralityes, even
to all the Ministers of your Church in your estate. Make a trial: search the
Testament of Christ throughout, and if you can, show it to be otherwise. If
not, give glory to God, and yield to the truth.

Chap. 8. The Seventh Reason or Exception against Mr Jacobs Comparison
aforesaid.
Fran. Johnson. AS when a man and woman have consented each to other, if the
man do afterward give his body to another, and so commit adultery: Then is the
marriage-knot broken.

So, if after a people have chosen a man to be their Minister, he give himself
to another and a false Ministry, and so commit spiritual whoredom: Then is
the former knot also broken.

H. Jacob his Reply. THe taking of orders from a Prelate, after consent given
to a Minister by a people, is not like adultery in marriage: especially where
both Pastor and people are simply ignorant of that error. Therefore that
disanulleth not, as adultery does the wedlok. So this Reason is much like to
the last before, and the answer not unlike to that of the Fourth Reason
likewise. For That which at the First makes not incapable: That same
afterward does not dissolve. But this error makes not Christians incapable
at the first: as thero is showed, and in the Third chiefly: Therefore neither
can it dissolve afterward the Covenant between the Pastor and the people.


Fr. Ioh. his Answer. YEs Mr Jacob, albeit your peoples consent were the choice
of a true Church, yet such taking of the Prelates Orders were like adultery.
How much more in your case, who have drunk so deep of the cup of Babels
fornications? Yet you say, these two are not alike: but your saying you prove
not at all. I do still affirm there is likeliehood between them, and thus I
prove it.

To receive the Ministry of Antichrist, is to commit spiritual whoredom.
(For Antichrists Ministry is part of the Whores abominations, spoken of, Rev.
17.4.5.)

But the taking of Orders from a Prelate, is to receive the Ministry of
Antichrist. (Witness your Book of ordination, Adm^^. to the parliam.
compared with the Popes Pontifical: Wherein (your selves confess) he shows
himself to be Antichrist most livelie. Witness also the nature of your Orders
and Prelacy, compared with the ordinance and Ministry of Christ.)

Therefore the taking of Orders from a Prelate, is to commit spiritual
Whoredom.

Now that there is likelihood and fit Comparison between corporal and
spiritual Whoredom, the Scripture does every where teach, and your self Mr.
Jacob (I think) will not be so senseless as to deny it. Even here you confess
that your taking of Orders from a Prelate, is an error.

Neither will the ignorance you pretend, help the matter. For although it
cannot well be thought, that after so open and manifold declaration of the
truth, as you have had, you should still be ignorant thereof: yet if it were
so, your ignorance (you know) will not warrant your action, nor justify your
sin. Ignorance in deed causes a sin to be less, but not to be none at
all. Suppose that two ignorant persons, not knowing (or at least pretending not
to know) adultery to be unlawful, should commit that folly together: Were
their action therefore not to be deemed adultery? Yet thus you reason. And
your answer besides imports some yielding to the similitude, as towching them
among you which know the truth. Let all such therefore, especially, weigh with
them selves in what woeful estate they remain wittinglie, even such as is
spiritual whoredom against the Lord.

So this Reason in deed is like to the last before, that is, direct and of
weight against you: and your answer unto it not unlike to that of the Fourth
Reason and the rest, that is, meerlie frivolous and to no purpose at all. For
this error as you call it (that is, your subjection to the Prelacy and
abominations of Antichrist yet remaining in your Church) makes you in that
estate eve^ at the first incapable of choosing a Pastor: or of entering such
Covenant as you speak of, or of performing any other action, by the power and
liberty which Christ has given to his Church For what concord has Christ with
Antichrist? Or how can the liberty of Christ and bondage of Antichrist stand
together, 2 Cor. 6.15. 1 King. 18.21.
and the one not expel the other? Or will you always halt between two opinions,
and never make straight steps unto your feet, to turn them into the
testimonies of the Lord? Be not deceived: God is not mocked. Whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he reap. He that sows to Antichrist, shall with him reap
corruption: but he that sows to Christ, shall by him reap life everlasting.
2. These. 2.10.11.12. Rev. 14.9.10.11.12. Gal. 6.7.8. Ioh. 3.36. Heb. 5.9.

Chap. 9. Of the clause annexed at the end of Mr Jacobs printed book, which is
thus:
H. Jacob. THis last Treatise, has remained in their hands, these three years
and more, unanswered.

Fr. Johnson. THis is most false, Mr Jacob. For I did answer it my self, "
above three years since. In the year 1596.
And (being then close prisoner) I sent it away from me sheet by sheet (as I
did at the same time my answer also to the former Treatise) to be copied out
and conveied unto you. Since which time, you have not given any Reply unto it
again. No, not unto this day. So it is your self that have not answered me
these three years and more. Mind therefore how greatly you have abused both me
and your Reader.

But perhaps you will say, my answer came not to your hands: For so by this
clause of yours, it may seem to be. If it were so (as for mine own part, I
know not whether it did or no) yet of this I am sure, that when you sent me
word these things were to be published, Month. 5.10. and 30.159 8.
I wrote to you " twice, desiring (among other things) this in particular, that
then you would with the rest publish also my answer to this Reply of yours. So
as by this you had knowledge (if not before) that it was answered. Yea you know
moreover, how I wrote unto you at the same time, that you had not replied unto
me again, since I answered you: and that if you wanted any of my answers, or
by any occasion had them not perfect, I would help you to them, if you sent me
word etc. And these Letters of mine you received, In your Letters to me. Mon.
5.27 and 6.20. 1598.
as your self " certifyed me: Which I have yet to show under your own hand.
Yet you have not only left my Answer to your Treatise unprinted, but you
shame not besides to affirm (contrary to your knowledge) that it has remained
in our hands, these three years and more, unanswered.

Think now with your self (Mr Jacob) what conscience or honesty there is in
such dealing. But it may be you had not so much care to deal well, as to have
the parts of your book agree together alike. For as with untruth and bad
dealing you began, and proceeded in it hitherto, so you do now also end it:
Principio medium, medio ne discrepet imum.

Thus in deed all the parts of your book from beginning to ending are suitable
one with another. Yet such correspondence in your Book, is small commendation
to your self. Better dealing would better become you: save that seeing you fight
for Antichrist his Churches and Ministry, it is no unmeet thing that you use
the weapons of Antichrist: Which are chiefly two, falsehood and violence. Of
the former whereof your book is full, from end to end, speaking lies through
hypocrisy. And with the latter your Church (which you would defend) abounds,
as your violent courses against the truth will always testify to your face,
howsoever you shame not to plead eve^ for this also. For which see before, Page
112.133.134.

If you write again, be better advised. Rev. 14. and 18. chap. Psalm. 84. Ier.
50. and 51. Chap.
Or rather learn to lay your hand on your mouth, and plead the cyuse of
Antichrist no more. But follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: And give your
self no rest, until you appear before God in Sion. Forsake Babel: Let
Jerusalem come up on your heart, and help you to build the walls thereof,
though it be in a strait and troublous time. And this which I speak unto you,
by the word of God, I wish to be minded of all, that fear God, and love the
Lord Jesus.

He that has ears to hear, let him hear. Math. 13.9.
A Table of some particular things contained in this Book.
ANtichristian corruptions yet had in the Church of England. Page 63. etc.
Antichrists, of two sorts. page 95. Of the Apocrypha books. page 22. 60. The
Chaldean and Spiritual Babylon compared together. page 99. etc. Of the Beasts
mark. Preface, Section: 3. Page 163. 189 Blasphemy in the profession and
Ministratio^ of the Church of Eng. p. 22. 60. 188. 189. Of the ancient and
late Bishops. page 129. 162. 183. 203. Of the Name Brownists. page 2. A true
visible Church described, page 14. 196. The true Church has but one
Lord-bishop, the Lord Jesus Christ. p. 163. 189. It is Christ's ordinance, that
there be true offices of Ministry, and a lawful administration, and to a
faithful people. page 16. 19. 39. The Worship and Ministry of the Church of
England, is against the Prophecy, Priesthood, and Kingdom of Christ. page 33.
etc. Of the Church of England. Page 1. 3. 11. 27. 122, 126. 161. etc. Her
confusion, page 16. 103. 122. 200. Conviction. page 42. 53. 78. 108. 130. etc.
Book of Common prayer. page 27. 33. 63. 86. 96. 120. etc. Dispensatio^s and
Licenses. Page 65. 73. False doctrines. page 122. 157. etc. Fundamental
errors. page 22. 114. 147. Excommunication and Absolution. Page 33. 65.
Hierarchy and Ministry. Page 2. 23. 27. 63. 120. 122. 188. etc. Holy days.
page 33. 64. Idol-temples. P. 65. 121. 126. Indifferent opinion of the
Hierarchy. page 94. 120. 121. Persecution page 66, 108. 112. 133. 177. 178.
197. Profession. page 21. 60. 120. 171. Speaking lies in hypocrisy. page 150.
151. Will Worship and superstition. page 27. 33. 82. 86. 87. The faith of the
Church of England, abolisheth the Second commandment, and perfection of the
Scriptures. page 38. The Church of Engl. holds all outward government of the
Church to be vnwritren and uncertain. page 28. 38. The Church of Engl. holds
the inventions of Antichrist, to be Christ's ordinances, if the Magistrate so
please. page 61. 69. 72. The Preaching, Sacraments, Prayer, etc. in the Church
of Engl. appointed by men's precepts. page 82. 86, 87. None can join with any
Chutch or Ministry of Engl. but they must needs partake with their
Antichristian abominations. page 88. 170. The estate of the Ministers and
Church of Engl. compared with Corahs, etc. page 32. 53. 130. 138. Difference to
be put between true Churches having corruptions, and false Churches making show
of Religion. page 92. 133. 161. 195. Things verifyed of the members of a true
Church, may be applied to a false Church, and yet not justify their estate.
page 83. Of the Ethiopian Churches. page 94. Of the error of Christ's descension
into Hell. page 115. 116. Of the Foundation in Christian Religion. page 46. 51.
Some dying in fundamental errors, yet saved. page 44. 45. 545 Some holding no
fundamental errors, yet condemned. page 48. 146. The falsest Churches and
greatest Heretics, hold much truth. page 47. 104. 106. 113. 136. 137. The
Heathens acknowledging and worshipping of the true God. p. 123. 124. The
Papists bring more show of Scripture for their grossest heresies, then Mr Jacob
or any other do for the Hierarchy etc. page 129. A notable false doctrine of Mr
Jacobs, wherein it seems he is alone. p. 172. Three special things to be
noted in Mr Jacobs Replies. page 9. How Mr Jacobs Argument should be
propounded. page 12. Popish shifts used by Mr Jacob. page 26. 30. 32. 128. 136.
etc. Idolatry and false worship, of two sorts. page 67. 80. Visible Idols in
the Church and worship of England. page 120. Of the Jews Church. Preface,
Section: 4. 5. page 83. 84. 89. 195. 197. Of Imposition of hands. page 208.
210. Of the forbidding of Marriage and Meats. page 73. 129. 135. 137. 140. 143.
147. Of the Martyrs. page 8. 29. 40. 44. 54. 67. 79. 182. How the Ministers of
England are made and ordered. page 188. 189. The word and Sacraments
administered and received in the Church of Engl. in and from a false Ministry.
page 16, 64. The Oath ex officio. page 63. Of such as live and die Papists, etc.
page 146 Of the word, Prelate. page 188. Seven Questions yet unanswered. page
164. Separation from the Church of England granted in express words by them
selves. page 156. 157. 169. The Sacraments administered in the Church of
England, with many corruptions. page 15. 17. 25. 33. 64. Of Sacramental
speeches. page 117. 118. Of the Samaritans. page 104. etc. The Parable of the
Tares. page 158. 173. Testimonies of the Prelates themselves, against the
Church of Engl. p. 16. 200. Testimonies of the Reformists, against it. p. 16.
27. 39. 79. 86. 103. 129. 176. 200. Testimoyes of the Reformed Churches,
against it. page 17. 176. Testimonies of the Martyrs, and of former times,
against it. page 162. 163. 177. 180. 182. 183. The Testimonies alleged out of
Scripture for defense of the Church of England, are also against it. Preface,
Section 3. 4. 5. 6. page 51. 52. 195. Of Tithes, and maintenance of the
Ministry. page 209. 210. The Word of God only is to be our rule and light of
our feet. page 22. 30. 34. 203. The word and ordinances of Christ, as plain
for us now, as was for the Jews under the Law. Yea, more plain. page 128. The
objections of Disco^tinuance, of Antiquity, of Ambiguity in expounding the word
etc. answered. page 128. 129. How the Lord abhors in his worship, the
mixture of man's inventions with his word and ordinances. page 61. 101. 209. The
doctrine and worship of Devils. page 121. 122. The Lotd accounts them to be
made and worshipped as Gods, whose ordinances are observed, though it be for
his worship. page 80. 117. 122. Princes and Magistrates ought to abolish all
false worship and Ministeryes, and to mainteyne the true, which God has
prescribed in his word. p. 199. Though they do not, yet ought all the people of
God to forsake the false, and cleave unto the true. Preface, Section: 4. 6. 7.
page 43. 46. 51. 101. 148. 158. 163. 170. 180. 184. 196. etc.
ERRATA.
Page 6. lin. 9. read thus: the Assumption. And note down in the Margent.

Page 86. and 87. (...), that is, after a sort, or, in part.

Page 183. Mr Tindals testimony there alleged, is in his works printed
together (page 176.) in the Book called, The obedience of a Christian man.

Page 197. lin. 41. sin, as Page 200. lin. 38. starting hole. Page 204. lin.
9. that they.

FINIS.

