A SERMON OF SAINT Chrysostom, wherein beside that it is furnysshed with
heavenly wisdom and teachinge, he wonderfully proves, that No man is hurted
but of him self: translated into English by the flower of learned men in his
time, Thomas Lupsette Londoner. 1534

A SERMON OF SAINT CHRYSOSTOM, That no man is hurt, but only of him self.
I KNOW WELL that all men of a gross judgment, and given to the pleasures
of this present life, drowned in worldiynesse, bound servants to their own
lusts, that regard not the spiritual sense, shall think my tale meruaylous
and new, and peradventure will mock me, as though in the first enter and
title of our sermon, we propose a thing both folyshe, and that to no man's ears
can seem true. But this not withstandyng we woll prosecute our intent, and by
this frowardness we shall be more sturred to approve the said sentence: so
that they the which seem agreued with our speaking, will in the beginning
have a little patience, nor will not at the first herynge interrupt my tale,
but be content to abide the end and conclusion of this matter. For plainly if
they so do, I am persuaded, that they shall utterly change their minds
herein, and cleave to our party, denyeng their own opinion, and rebukynge
them self for their error, that they have hitherto defended: and ferthermore
thanking me, as sike men thank physicians, when they have recovered their
health. So now I would not have the bring forth thine old roted opinion, but
a little tarry and consider the reasons of my tale, whereby thou may justly
judge of this matter, and specially when thou have lopped and cut away thine
own crokid fantasy that thou now art in, and may see the right and straight
way of judgment. For the judges of these worldly causes, though they have
diligently herd the first party, to declare and pleite his action, with
strong and plain reasons: yet this not withstanding they look what the
contrary party will answer, whom pa^^ently they also here, and be not moved
to give sentence, although the former person brought forth never so true and
just reasons. For always there is in their court a place reserved to the
second party: Seeing it is an ordinate rule among these judges, first well
to perceive the controversy and cause of both parties, and than afterward to
give sentence according. In like manner therefore I require the second place
and audience of my tale, for the first party has long heretofore prosecuted
his cause. This adversary of mine is the roted opinion of long time with many
men, that wandereth through the world, and confirms, that all things be
confused and trou bled, so that amongst men nothing can be justly and well
kept, nothing in right order. Daily we see many men hurted troubled and
oppresied with all sorts of wrongs and injuries: Feeble and weak persons be
overthrown by the strong and mighty: the simple and poor folk be undone by
the rycher: and as possible it is to tell the waves of the sea, as to rehearse
all them that suffer wrong and be offended, whom no laws no fear of judges
does help. This noyfull pesrylence no power can resyst, but rather daily the
tears, the syghes, the lamentyng of men, bewaylyng their wrongs and hurtes,
grow more and more. For the judges, to whom is given authority to redress
and amend these wrongs, be they that cause ino greues they that stir up
greatter myscheues. And now this fault is so far passed and grown, that
many unfortunate persons and vain foles break out into such madness, that
they blame for this disorder the Providence and wisdom of god, specially when
they behold a man that lives ^n honest and quiet life, to be drawn to the
law, to be cast in prison, to be vexed and troubled, and to suffer the extreme
rigor and cru eltie: on the contrary part they se a froward person, an
ungracious liver, a man set upon mischief to be at ease, to wax rich, to
come to high promotion, high dignities, great honor, in so much that he is
made fearful and terrible to all other, and innumerable ways he vexes,
troubles, renteth, tcareth, and as you would say, stampeth under foot the
honest good and innocent persons. This unjust iniquity, these shameful
wrongs be used and continually exercised in cities, towns, boroughes,
vyllages, in every place by sea and by land. Seeing than in many men's minds
this old opinion reygneth, necessarily our course now comes in, to declare
the contrary part, that shall overthrow the old buyldyng of this foresaid false
persuasion. Therefore as I said before, though it seem new and meruaylous: yet I
promise you, if you will diligently with patience here me, my saying shall be
found true. But I say, ye may not at the first hearing be therewith offended:
I promise you, to declare and show, how that notwithstanding men think the
contrary, yet it is surely true, that? no person can be hurted, but only by
him self: but that this sentence may be more manifest and playner, let us
first boulte out, what betokens this word, To Be hurted, and in what
mattier, thing, or substance it chances any person to be hurted, the which
self thing shall be opener, if we first of all seek out, what is the
excellency and virtue of man, and where it re steth. For though it shall
appear, whereof and in what wise it happens to a man, to be hurted: and more
over it shall than be seen, in what thing a man seems to be hurted, and yet
has no hurt, and this also by examples we shall show the playner.

Every thing in this world has somewhat, whereby it may be corrupted and
hurted, as in example: Rustynesse hurts iron, mothes hurt wolle, sheep be
hurted by wolves, the chaungynge into vynegre corrupts wine, the swetenes of
hunney is corrupted by bytternesse, worms noyen corn, hayle hurts the
vynes, and lest in rehersynge I be to long, to every thing diverse kinds
brings corruption, so that the hurt always rests in that part, wherein
stands the saufenes and health of the same, and that is hurt, whereby the
welthy estate of any thing is dimynished and corrupted. Let us now search out,
what thing that is, whereby the virtue of man's mind may be noyed or hurted.
Diverse men herein have diverse minds. We must bring forth also falls opinions,
and destroy the same, that by such means the very troth may appear: whereof we
intend to prove, that of none other person nor thing we can be hurted in very
deed, but only of our own self. Some there be, the which think, that
poverty hurts a man, some say the loss of goods or sclaunder, some bring
forth death. In these and such like things, men weep and bewail their
wretchedness and mysfortune: and great pity is taken of them that be in such
case, and with much lamentation they complain, saying amongst them self: O
what an hurt or loss has he suffered? all his substance and goods were
suddenly taken away. Of some other is said: He is extremely sick, physicians
have given him over, there is no hope in him of life. For some other that lie
in prison is great m^ne made: for other that be outlawed and banysshed their
country. for other that be plucked into bondage from their fredome: for other
that be spoiled of their ennemies, that be in thrauldome, that be throught sea
wrackes distroyed, through fire bourned, through ruins squashed. All this
sort is lamented bewailed mourned for of all men. They that do naught, and
live ungraciously, be of no man pitied or weped for, but rather oftentimes they
be of all men preysed, and be callid fortunate, and had in great honor, and
this truly is the cause of all euylle and myschiefe. But now, so that (as I
said in the beginning) no man interrupt my tale, let us show how that none of
the foresaid yuels and mysfortunes can hurt a wise man, nor yet corrupt the
virtue of this mind. For tell me, he that by thieves is spoiled of all his
goods, what hurt has he in the virtue of his mind? But (if you will) let us
first, as we proposed, describe what is the virtue of the mind, and that this
invisible virtue may the better be known, let us make a conjecture and take a
lykelyhode of sensible and bodyly things: and for exaumple let us see, what is
the excellency and virtue of an horse. I pray you, will ye say it is in the
gaye trapper, in the silver brydell, in the harneys besette with preciouse
stone and perle, begarded with golden frynges, with rich tassels, shall the
virtue and noblenes of an horse be in these things? or else Goodn^^^ of an h^^
rather in the swystnes of runnyng, in the sted fastnes of foot, in the
assurednes of pace, and lusty courage of stomak, and such other points apt
and mete either to make a journey, or to use in war, as to be an horse, that
nothing amassed nor afraid, rusheth against our ennemies: or when need
shall be, can deliver his master by swift flight from slaughter. Is it not clear?
that the virtue of an horse rests rather in these things, than in the other
foresaid? In like manner what shall we say of other beasts? Is not the goodness
of them in their strength and their propretie mete for our use? For he that
would praise an ox, Goodness an ox.
will he consider the stall, where the ox stands, or any thing cast upon
the beast, or else only behold the bygnesse of his body, the strength of his
lymmes, the surenesse of his hooffe? And he that would preyse a vine, will
Goodness a vine.
he not consider the largenes of the leaves, the length of the wrynkled
spurges, or else rather look how thycke the clusters be, how bygge the
grapes grow? and other fruits and trees in the same manner. Wherefore let us
also of this fashion speak of men, boultynge out in them, what is the very
virtue of a man: and than let us reckon the man to be hurted, when he is hurted
in that virtue. What now is the excellency and virtue of a man, it is not ^he
excel^cy of man
rychenesse, fear not poverty: nor it is not bodily health, fear no syckenes,
nor it is not renown and fame, let no yuel tongue fear the, nor it is not this
common life, thou nedest not fear death: nor it is not liberty nor noblenes,
lest thou be afraid of bondage, or of that we call churles bloudde. but yet
what is this virtue of man's mind? It is to thynk right of god, and to do right
amongst men. For all the foresaid vanities may be taken from man against his
will: but this said virtue, he that has it, can not lose it by no man's
violence, nor yet by the dyuels, except he him self destroy it. Our adversary
the dyuell knew well this order and degree of things, and therefore when he
assauted the blessed man Job, he destroyed al his substance, not to make him
pore, but that he agreued with so great loss, should speak some words of
blasphemy against god, and for the same self cause the dyuell finally vexed
and turmoyled the hole body of this pacient saint, not that he should be sick,
where of rose none hurt to Job, but the dyuelles intent was, to move him through
the panges of syckenes, if perchance he might forget his constant will toward
god, and so be priuated of that virtue, that his mind always kept. For this
only purpose the find slew all his children: for this intent he turmented
Jobs body with more cruel and grievous peynes than though he had been rent
with the violent hands of hangemen, or of turmenters. For no nails nor
fleshchokes could so have torn the sides of that holy man, as the find
dygged in them with worms, to hurt him was the dyuels purpose: and therefore
al these peynfull sorrows he cast upon Job, to make him think somewhat amysse
of god, without the which point Job could not be hurted. To this purpose
Jobs friends that came to comfort him, were by the find pricked to provoke
grievously Job, and they said to him, O Job, thou art not yet punyshed according
to the greatness of thy trespasses and weighte of thy sins. And many such
wordis they spoke and accused him. But the blessed Job, priuated and spoiled of
city, of house, of goods, of servants, of children, had for his palaice a
dunge hill, for his bed the ground, for his clothes cotton and stinking
straw. Yet all this not with and ynge the blessed man Job is not only by these
means nothing hurted, but also by this persecution he is made better, more
noble, and of higher dignity. For where the find had spoiled him of all his
goods, and also of all bodily ease and health, there blessed Job, through his
patience, gatherid infinite riches of virtue. Nor he was not with god in so
great hope and trust before he swette and labored in this cruel battle.
Than of this let us consider, if this holy man Job, that suffered so much and
so intolerable things, and suffered of him that far passes al manner of me^ in all kides of cruelty, and of ungraciousness: yet if he could not be hurted in the
virtue strength and power of his mind, who now than is there, whose excuse
shall appear right and just, when he says: That person lettid me, that man
offended me, that man hurted me, that person did me great wrong. For if the
dyuel, that is full of al mischief, with his hole power and al his might
setting upon the house substance and body of so just and holy a man, with all
his dates, al his ingins, and al his artillery, yet could not hurt him, but as
I said made him hereby more glorious, and more worthy to be looked upon: how
than (I pray the) can any person blame an other, as though he might be by an
other man hurted or noyed? Here thou obiectest and say, what, was not Adam
hurted of the dyuell, was not he deceived and driven out of Paradyse? To this I
tell the, The devil hurted not Adam, but his own fraylnes and sluggishnes
hurted him, whilst he regarded not the kepinge of goddis commandment. For
this synd that came so armed with so many weapons and deceytes against the said
blessed man Job, yet was not able to co^quere and overcome him. How could he
by any means have deceiuid Adam, except Adam by his own yper negligence
willingly had hurtid and distroid him self? But again thou say. what tha^? A
man betrayed and accused of backbiters loses all his substance and goods, is
not he hurtid? when he is spoiled of all his patrimonye, of all his heritage,
and brought to extreme wretchedness. is soore vexed and troubled? I say no. Ye
not only he is not hurted, but he shall have here of great advantage and
gaynes, if he be diligent and take good head. For I pray the tell me, in what
point did the poverty of Christ hurt the apostles? Lived not they in hunger,
in thyrste, poor and naked? and yet hereby they grew more noble, and were
more glorious, and opteyned a great hope and trust in god by their misery. Did
not syckenes, scabbes, extreme wretchedness, need, and poverty bring Lazar to
the blessed life: and for his vexation and troubles in this world, was not he
crowned in the everlasting joy? What shall we say of Joseph? was not he
contynually sclandered and rebuked, both at home in his own country and
forth: in so much that he was punished for an aduoutrer, and driven from his
kynne, house, and all acquayntance: is not he for these things in great
honor with all men, and with god in great glory? But why do we rehearse, that
by banyshmentes, by rebukes, by bondages, by prisonmentes, holy men came to
great glory? I pray the show me, death it self, what hurt did it to the
most just and blessed Abell? I say, that bitter and cruel death, committed
of no stranger but of his own natural brother? Is not Abell for this thing
celebrated and worshipped through all this world? Thou see how my process
declares more than I promised, for it does not only open, that no man is
hurted of an other beside him self, but also that holy men take infinite
gaynes and pro fytes in these things, by the which they seem to be yuell
handled. Here thou say, what needs so many peynes, so many punyshmentes?
What needs hell, and so many thretnynges, if it be true, that no man hurts,
nor no man is hurted? Here me to this, pervert not, nor myngle not my tale. For
I said not, that no man hurts: but I said, that no man is hurted of an
other. Again thou sayste, how can this be, that some shall hurt, and yet no
man be hurted? It may be as I have showed. for his own brethren hurted
Joseph, and did wyckedly against him: but Joseph him self was not hurted.
And Layn did wyckedly against Abell, when he laid in wait to slaye him: yet
Abell him self was not hurted nor suffered no part of yuell. To this purpose
serves peynes and punyshementes. For the virtue of patience in them that
suffer, does not take away the trespass of them that with an ungracious
intent set upon other, and do wrongfully. For albeit that they by their
patience be made more glorious: yet the other be not redeemed of their mischief
in their malicious purpose. And therefore the virtue and nobulnes of mind
auaunceth the sufferer to honor, and the malicious stomak drowneth the doers
in deep peynes. Thus the rightous judge almighty god, to them that constantlye
continue in a virtuous life, and come to receive the reward of victory,
prepares a kingdom in heaven, and for them that without repentance, persecute
ever their sinful purpose, hell is ordained. Therefore if thy goods be taken
from the, say with holy Job: I came Job...
naked out of my mothers womb, and naked I shall depart hence. Put hereto the
apostles saying: We brought nothing into this world, Tim. 6.
nor we can not take hens with us any thing. Thou have hard thy self to be
yuell spoken by, to be infamed and sclaundered with men: remember thou, and put
before thine eyes the words of our master, where he says: Woe Luc. 6.
be ye when ye be of al men preysed. And in an other place: Be ye merry and
rejoice, wha^ men reuyle your name as naught for my sake.

Thou art cast out of thy country, and driven from thy house and possessions:
remember that we have not here our dwelling country, but that we seek the
world to comme. Why than do thou think, that thou haste lost thy country
when in this whole world thou art a stranger, an alien, and a pilgrim? Thou
art fallen into a grievous and ieoperdous 2. Cor
syckenes: use and exercise the apostles saying, that is this: Although our
body the outward man be infected and sick, yet our soul the inward man is
thereby renewed and refreshed day by day. Thou art closed and shette in prison,
and some cruel death hangs over thine head: Look upon S. John^ beheaded in
prison, and there fastly behold so great a prophets head granted and given to
a tum blyng wenche in the reward of bodyly pleasure. These things when they
chance to the wrongfully: look thou regard not the injury and malice of them
that do hurt, but ponder and way thou, the reward and glory that shall be given
the for these wrongs. For he that willyngly and patiently suffers all such
troubles, is not only forgiven of his trespases and sins, but also he
opteyneth thereby the merits and the rewardis due to virtue and goodness: so high
and great a thing it is to keep steadfastly an assured and full says in god.
Than seeing that another the loss of goods and substance, nor sclaunder, nor
defyaunce, nor banysshement, nor syckenesse, nor torments, nor death it self,
that seems the most grievous thing of all the foresaid, ran hurt men, but
more rather help and do good to men, in making us better and worthy of so
great a reward, how and whereof shall we prove any man to be hurted, when of
none of these said greues a man can be hurted? But I will now assay to lay
plainly before thine eyes, that they only be hurted, the which do hurt, and
that the hurt, the which they do, noyeth not, nor touches not none other
person, but only them self that inforceth to hurt. for tell me, what can now be
more unhappy than Cain? The death, by the which he with his own handis slew his
proper brother, has made Abel for evermore a saint and a glorious martyr, and
has caused the slear for evermore to be taken for a wicked mankiller, and
that against his own blud. Also what is more wretched tha^ that Herodis wife?
the which desired to have S. Iohn^s head in a dishe, that her own head
should be drowned in the everlasting flames of bournynge hell. What is in worse
case than the devil him self the which by his malice made the holy Job so
glorious, that as much as that blessed man waxed nobler, so much grew and
increased the dyuels pain. I think thou now see, that my tale has showed
much more than I promised. For it is open and plain, not only how no man is
hurted of them that do wrong, but also that the hurters and none else be
hurted and suffer yuell. For another riches, nor liberty, nor noblenes, nor
health, nor life, nor such other things be the proper goods and substance
of man, that has nothing proprely his own, but only the virtue of mind.
And therefore when in these out ward things, other hurt or loss, or trouble
happens, man is not hurted, saying all his treasure is in the said virtue of
mind. Here thou ask, what if a man be hurted in the said virtue? It can
not be but thus. If any be hurted therein, he is hurted of none other person,
but only of him self. Thou desyrest to here how a man is hurted of him
self. When he is beaten of sum other, or robbed and spoiled of his goods,
or by any means troubled, if than he speak any opprobrious word, any
impatient sentence, he is hurted, yea and soore hurted: and yet (I say) not of
an other, but of him self, through his own lack of patience. For as it is
said before, Behold what the blessed Job suffered, not of any manne, but of
him that passes all men in myschyefe and cruelty.

That if he, that blouddye tourmentour the dyuell that haynouse kaytyfe, with
so many inginnes, so many crafts, so many peynes, could nothing prevail
in constraynyng Job to trespass with his toungue before the face of God,
specially when Job had never herd the law of God, nor had not part of
the redemption of the glorious resurrection of our savior Christ: If the
blessed Job I say, lackyng this aid of Christis passion, was able to resyst
all the fyndes malice: how much more thou christen man art able to
withstand all storms* If thou will use and exercise thy power, and take aid
and succor of thy feyth, it is not possible for the to be ouercom. For behold
S. Paul how much he suffered, his peynes can scante be told, the prisons, the
bonds, the scurges, the whippes, the strokes, the blows, the torments,
bestoned he was of the Jews, with roddis al beaten, cast down headlynge, in
the hands of thieves, he suffered of his enemies, of his false brethren
contynuall treason, in his mind he suffered fear, outward he suffered strives,
batayles, hunger, thyrst, nakedness, defamynge, tribulation, beastis, and what
need I speak more, he daily dyed, and yet all this not withstanding, not one
small impatient word escaped his lyppes, but he in these things glories and
rejoices, and with myrthe says: I take pleasure in my passions and
tribulations. If than S. Paul sufferyng so great vexations, was glad and
joyful, and gloried in the same, what excuse shall they have, that for every
tryfle and small wrong, or beatyng or other trouble, far unlike to these
foresaid, ask a vengeance, cry out and make a sorrowful a do? Here thou come
again and say, If I without resisting suffer, my goods shall be taken from
me, and thereby I shall be made unmeet to do any work of mercy. This is an
evasion nothing laudable. For if thou desire to work mercy, and to do almose
deeds, here what I say: Poverty lets not a man to exercise merciful acts,
I say it lets not a man that is merciful. For though thou be pore, thou
shall have. ii. mites, or one farding, the which when thou haste offered, it
shall be reckened to the above all the treasure of rich men. Though thou be
pore, thou have an hand full of meal, that suffiseth to feed a prophet: that
if thou be so poor, that thou lackest these said little and small things,
yet believe me, thou shall never lack a cup of cold water, whereby thou
may pass all manier of richesse, largely bestowed in merciful works. For
god requires a merciful mind, not the quantity of money, nor the heap of
goods. Do thou now see, that thou suffer none hurt when thou losest al
thy goods, ye thou haste a great gaynes and vauntage. For thou haste with two
mites, or for the price of a cup of cold water, bought the crown of
everlasting life, the which other scant with their infinite expenses opteyne.
I doubt not, but this tale is plain to them that be studious of the troth,
and have care for their spyrituall health and salvation: but to them that lie
in the bonds of their pleasures, in the prison of their lusts, that waaste
their holle life in the course of sin, to them this tale is vayn and
foolyshe, because their mind and srudye enbraceth nothing but shadows and
wyndes. For these things that seem to them the goodis of this world, shall
slyppe out of their hands, and fly from them like as shadows and the wind
Wherefore it is well, that we open to this sort the privy causes of these
fantasies: and let us take away the image that deceyueth them, and show to
them the very plain face of this filthy and sluttyshe harlot, the which they
love and enbrace. For surely I call this present life an harlot, an hoorish
woman, the which life is spent in the pleasures, and the vanity of riches, in
the delitis and the power of this world. And I do not only call this life an
hatlot* but a foul stynkyng sluttyshe and beastly harlot, whose face is so
far out of shape and fashion, so bitter, so crooked, and cruel a look, that
there is none excuse for the^ that be deceived by her love. And yet this not
withstanding we se many, ye the most part of this world, to be drowned in the
pleasure of her, and though they se that in this life, al thin ges be cruel and
bloody, full of ieoperdies, full of dethes, of misfortunes. And where men see
her beset with most unhappy naughty packis, with scla^ders, rebukes, hatred,
envy, deceites, treasons, complaints, thoughts, extreme cares, continual
fear, and with a thousand such other ungracious gosseps and handmaides be
compassed round about, as with a guard of ser pentes, amongst whom is no
comfort nor fruit, but only cruel slaughter, death, pestilence, and perpetual
peyn: yet how many be there, that love her, and that busily follow her? The
folyshnes of them is so great, so stockysshe, that no reason can pluck them
from this destruction, no evident example of innumerable other, that
continually and hourly perish. Shall not I reken these foles more blockishe,
more rude, more childyshe than litell babes? the which be holly given to
sportis and plays, and so busily drive about a round houpe, so busily scurge a
top through the long cloisters, or about the streets, that they can not be
pluckid from their game, being utterly ignorant and without knowledge, that
in such plays is no profit, nothing of valor* yet the folly of these young
babes is excused by their few years and tender age, but these other, in their
perfect age, old in the number of years, what excuse shall they bring forth, for
defending and keeping a mind much folysher and weaker than any childs. Now
tha^ tell me and pray the, why seems riches worthy to be desired. For me
think I must of riches begin with the. Thou aunswerest, because it appears to
many men, that richesse for our health, life, name, and fame, and the state
of our country, be more commodious than other friends, kynsmen, ye than all
other things that be. This goodly and semely sentence is not only observed
both by the sea and land, but is now mounted up above the clouds to the
sterres. I know well that this reason is not so much a sound of words, as
it is a bournyng flame and fire, that distroyeth the holle world, and no man
there is, that gothe about to quench it, but many there be that blow to it,
and more and more kendle it. For all sorts of men favor this mischief and
preyse of riches, not only they that be parttakers thereof, but they also that
yet be not come thereto. Thou may see every kind of men, whether it be man or
woman, servant or master, rich or poor, to the vttermoste that he can,
helps to increase this fire, and cast some matter thereupon, labourynge in it
both by day and night: all I say, bring to this fire plenty of mattier, plenty
of faggottes, not of wodde, nor straw, nor hey: for this kind of fire
consumes no such mattier, but they cast upon it heaps of yuell works and
ungracious deeds, both of their body and soul, wherewith this fore fire is
kyndled and fed. For these covetous rich men, though it were possible for
each of them to have in possession the hole earth, yet nevertheless they would
burn in their desire and appetite to have more. And poor men likewise,
whilst they couete to be equal with rich men, they be turmoyled with an
incurable fury, they be mad, they be wod they rage, they rave: and thus one
sycknesse, and one disease, gendreth in each of them a diverse kind of fransy.
The love of money so rules and cleaves in every man's mind and heart, that it
passes the love of frendeshyp, of kynrede, ye sometime of wife and children,
the which seems the greatest affection amongst men: yet the love of money
overthrows to the ground all these loves, and trampeth them under foot as a
wild beast, like a fierce and cruel maistresse she possesses and holds all
men's hearts, and as a tyran subdueth them to al uncomely bondages. This love of
riches rages, furieth like a hornewode and mad tyranne, and plays ever a
shameless part like an harlot, she never takes pity, never abashith, in
every place she comith forth proud disdaynfull, stubborn, terrible, cruelle,
churly she, wicked: and though she more furiousely rages than either bear,
wolf, or lion: yet she seems to men pleasant and amiable: what said I more
pleasant, ye sweter th^^ sugar or hunny. And where as she sharpeth swords to
her lovers, and daily prepares for them snares, pynfalles to the death, and
with many thousand seawrackes hurleth and tosseth them, to this rock, to that
rock: yet she is still loved, still embraced, stylle desired and sought for of
them: and by their own innumerable slaughters and deaths they be glad, that
at the last sometime they may approach nere, though it be but to the utter gate
of this strumpet and harlot. For as swyne they rejoice to tumble and walow in
her dounghyll, and as blind betyls they delight to stir and to wrappe
togydders her fylthy and stinking mucke. All they in manner, that defoyle their
hands with this shameful covetousness, be more unhappy, more filthy tha^ be the
said most vile beastis. And in this part their misbehauor is more for this
point to be noted, that the more they be rolled in these filthes, the gretter
pleasure they take of the same: The which vice and fault chances not to them
through the nature of the thing self, but of their own corrupted will. How
now may we heal their minds oppressed with such diseases, except they will
a little give us the herynge, and take good head, and also give place to
reason in grauntyng our sayings. For the said unreasonable vile and brute
beasts, that tumble and walowe in like fylthes, can not be plucked from their
fylthy appetite?, because they want perceyuance wit and reason: but we now
have adoo with men, to whom the goodness of god has given understanding and
the use of reason: so that they will here, they may easily without great peyn
or labor, be delivered from the stynche and fylthe of this worldly myer. Now
than harken, and as men should answer me, tell me, why seems riches worthy
to be loved and followed? There is no doubt, your answer is, that riches be
coueted, first for the pleasure of life and welthe of body: secondaryly for the
honor that is in this life. and for offices, dignities, promotions that be
given to men for their richesse. Ferthermore, thyrdly because the rich man may
sone be avenged, may sone bewreke his anger upon them that do him any wrong or
displeasure, and that he may be^ feared of other, as a man of power. I think
thou have no cause to allege beside these forsayde, that is to say, beside
pleasure, honor, offices fear and auengeaunce. For richesse can not make a man another better nor sobrer, nor more mercyfulle, nor wyser, nor yet make a man soft, quyete, and gentylle, nor finally richesse never teaches an
hastye man patience, an outrageous, man contynency, a drunkarde sobrenes, a
shameless person shamefastnes, nor none other kind of virtue is opteyned by
richesse, no vice nor sin is turned into the better by riches. So than if
riches prouayle nothing to the getting, or to the increasynge of the goodness
in the soul and mind, nor they make not a man in virtue better, tell me I pray
the, for what cause should riches be desired? Ye contrary wise this is truth,
that riches does not only nothing prouayle for virtue, but also when they
ones come into the mind, if they find any thing toward goodness, and mete
for virtue, they utterly distroye and corrupt the same, and in the stead and
place of virtue, they bring in vice and sin. For the handmaidens and
folowers of riches be bodily lusts, sensual appetites, lechery, anger,
gluttony, intempera^cy, fury, wrong, pride, bostynges, and al beastly and
unreasonable motion. But let us defer the speaking of these enormities to an
other place. For these men that have their minds sick in the desire of
richesse, will not gladly here communication of virtue or of^ sin.

For they defend lusts and pleasure, and they will not suffer any thing to be
said herin against them. Therefore we will now move this questyon, whether
there be any thing in richesse, that may delight and please men: or whether
there be any honor in the same. And here, if it please you, let us begin
from feasts, from the great abundance of meats. For in this thing chiefly
is praised the magnificence and glory of riches. Let us in this place
compare togythers the table of a rich man, and of a mean person, and let us
boulte out the gestes of either party, whether of them take of their chere
more pleasure. They that sit eating in feastis till their arms be weary, and
ioyn their supper to their dinner, and in manner stretche their bealyes till they
burste, ouerladed with the bourdeyne of meat and drink, in whose body the
soul swymmeth, drowned in the fluddes as in a sea wrack, of ale biere and
wine: whose another eyes nor tongue, nor foot can do his duty, but al their
members lie more greuouser fettered with the bonds of drink, than men that
lie in cheynes, to whom sleep brings no rest nor health, but with mad
furious dreams they be feared and made worse, and in manner willyngly they
bring into their souls and fantasies yuell spirits, being mocked and skorned
of all that see them, ye of their own servants: They remember nothing that
they see, they perceive nothing, they feel nothing, they know nothing, they
can not her here nor speak, but finally with shame they be borne from the
table to bed. Is there than more pleasure in such feastis than in other,
where is as much of meat and drynk, as is sufficient to drive away hunger and
thyrst? the whi che moderate diete Nature taught: the other superfluous manner
was brought in by corrupt lusts and beastly pleasures, and therefore also
health abides in the said temperate diete, and Honesty with sobrenes
continues in the same: and rysynge fro the table, the body is not ouerchargid
or oppressid, but rather amen ded and cased, and increased in strength and
lustynesse: That if thou will not believe my tale, consider thou the minds and
bodies of both parties, and thou shall find them stronger, lustier, and of
better courage, that use this moderate and mean dyete. Nor thou nedest not to
lay to me, that of these also some be now and than sick: as for that chances
of an another cause, the which we will at an other season speak of. But these
that live in their lusts, delites, in superfluousnes of meats and drynkes,
have their bodies loused slaked and made softer than wexe, and in manier filled
with an host and multitude of diseases and syckenesses, whom follows to
increase the heaps of their peynes, the gout, the paulsey, and feeble old age
long before his time: their life ever has adoo with physicians, with
medicines: their five wits and senses be dull, slow, heavy, dead, half
buried in them. And if there be any joy, any pleasure or myrthe in their life:
who is there that can set by it, specially if he be one that knows, what is
the very joy and pleasure? For of wise men pleasure Pleasu^^
is thus defined and called, That there is only pleasure, where a man has the
frank use of his desires. For where a man can not use his desires, whilst
that either syckenesse lets him, orelles is so full, that he has no desire:
without doubt there all pleasure and sweetness is lost and gone. For look
upon these sick men, how they looth all things: and although there be
never so delicate and sweet meats put before them, yet they take them rather
with tediousnes, tha^ any lust or pleasure to eat. In likewise, when by to
much abundance the lust and desire is quenched, there also the pleasure and
swetenes is lost For the delicatenes of meats gendreth not swetenes and
pleasure, so much as the fulfyllyng of our appetite and desire does. Whereof a
certain philosopher, well expert in this matter, says: When the mind is full
and satiated, he mocketh and dispiseth the sweet honey comes. Declaringe that
pleasure restith not in the nature of metis, but only in the strength of our
desire and lust. Wherefore the prophet, rehersynge the meruayles that were done
in Aegypte and in the wilderness, amongst the rest he reherseth also this
thing: how hunny rounnynge out of the stones satisfied and filled them. For
we never find that hunny sprange out of stones: What than means this
prophets saying? that after their labors and werynesse in the long journey,
having great thyrst, they drank the sweet cold water, that ran out of the
stones: and of that water with a great lust and desire they tasted. And
therefore because their desire and appetite of drinking was most swetely
satiated and filled, the pro phete called those waters hunney: not that the
nature of water was turned or changed, but that the sweetness of drink was
in so thyrsty a desire like hunney. Seeing than it is so, nor of these foresaid
things there can be no doubt, except the herer be either folyshe, or given
to strife, is it not now plain, that the simple and mean diete has much
pleasure, and keeps us in health: where contrary wise these abominable
feasts be fulle of diseases, full of corruption, and as a wise doctor says:
The dishes that seem to bring in delight and pleasure, be fulle of syckenesses,
full of grieves and peynes. But Riches they Riches.
say, gets honor, and gives ability to be revenged of our ennemies.
Shall we herefore think, that richesse be necessary, because they help vice
and sin, and makes that anger shall have his effect and purpose: and
stereth up vayn blastes to get honor and pro motion, and increases the
diuellyshe sin of pride: yet to say the truth, for such causes chiefly
richesse were to be eschewed and fled* For in this wise men should willyngly
nourish in their hearts wild and furyous beastis. More over, richesse entice
men to forsake the very true and gostly honor, and makes them seek the false
feyned honor and glory, that in very deed is no honor, but only has the
color and utter face like unto honor. As often times these harlottes being
soul of nature, they deceive men with peinted faces, and under fair white and
ruddy colors, they hyde their shameful and fylthy visages. In like ma ner
does riches, with whom flattery and feined curtesy is rekened to be honor For
these preyses and homages of the people be not in deed true: but they be
reckned under the false name of honor and worship. For if thou migh test se the
consciences, the hearts and inward thoughts of the preysers, thou should
find in every one ma^s heart a thousand curses and defiaunces of thy manners.
Finally when thy authority cesseth, when thou art Jack out of office, than
shall thou here innumerable defamers, complayners, dispreysers of thy life: And
all these shall be the same self persons, that before magnified and
worshipped the. Call thou this honor? and thynkeste thou this worthy to be
gotten by riches, thai brings ever, more of hatred then of love? So that if
they came to us without seeking, yet they were to be refused, and to be cast
away, for the ungraciousness that ever follows the^. But now if thou wylt
here me, I shall show the, what is the very true glory and honor. The true
worship and honor is the virtue of the mind, the which honor no king can
give the, nor no flattering nor money can get the. This honor has in him
nothing feined nothing peyuted, nothing hyd. Of this honor there is no
successor, none accuser, nor defoyler. This honor is not varied or changed
by no time, it fears no ^yran, nor it estemeth another favor nor displeasure
of princis. But again thou say, without riches thou canste not be revenged
of thyn ennemies* ye for this cause riches be chiefly worthy to be rehated and
cursed, and poverty is to be louid and che rished. For riches by this way
sharpeth for the thyn own swerd, seeing they make the a transgressour of the
commandment, where our lord said: Leave to me thy bewrekyng and reuengeaunce,
and I will requyte thy quarrel. for wylt thou see, how much hurt is
contained in the sinful appetite of reuengeance? It takes from man the mercy
of god, and distroyeth and quenches the grace that god had given. For it is
written in the gospel of him that was in many thousand pounds detter, and
asked remission and pardon of his debt: his master and lord granted thereto.
Afeerward the same person turned him to one of his own servants, that ought a
very small thing, and punyshed without mercy his said servant and detter, not
being able to repaye him: by the which act he condemned him self, not to be
worthy to have for his greatter det the grace and favor that his lord had
before granted him, so that he had no remission of his infinite bondage, and
was delivered to the ha^dis of torme^ tors, to be constrained by fore peines,
to repay every small io^e of his d^t. Thus the abominable fool, through his
immoderat desire to be reue^ged, lost the ^don of god. would thou tha^ have
riches, that by them thou might have an easier way to thy distructio^?
should thou not rather flee and eschew them in this behalf, as thy deadly
ennemies, and causer of all mischief? Now against this thou speak of
Poverty, as of a thing that is peynefull, and that oftentimes causes men for
need to banne, to curse, to do many points, uncomely, dishonest, and full of
shame. It is not poverty that does this, it is the weakness and feebleness of
mind. For Lazar was poor and very poor: whose poverty also was increased
with syckenes, and a very peynfull syckenesse, that caused his poverty to be
fair greuouser seeing the peynes of his disease required many things of
comfort and refreshing, where his poverty could give none help. Either of
these two, syckenes or poverty alone by him self, is peynefull and grievous:
but when these two, poverty and sycknesse, be joined in one, and have no
succor nor easement, there rises an intolerable grief, a fire not able to
be quenched, a sorrow without remedy, a tem pest full of wrackes, a bournyng
flame both of body and soul. Yet beside this, the said blessed Lazar had a
more grief, that was a neighbor very rich, that lived in all ease and
pleasure, and fared delicately: and yet much more his peynes were heaped, in
that he lay at the gate of this rich neighbor, saying before his eyes the
superfluous expenses and wast of meats. For much greatter grief it was to be
constrained to want the help and succor of things, that he presently sees,
than it was to lack that he saw not. But all this not withstandyng, this cruel
rich man is nothing moved, but he continues in his accustomated pleasures, in
rialtie of feasts, in noumber of servants, of cokes, of mynstrels, of
gesters, not diminy shyng his lusts and pleasure in any small point: in the
mean season, hunger, thirst and syckenes soore vexes the said blessed Lazar,
no servant, no comfort comes to him, no gobbet, no morselle from that rich
man's table, that fedeth a sort of crauynge knaves and lurdeyns till they vomit
and burst ageyn, not so much as the crummes that were cast away, were given
to succor this poor Lazar being in peril to die for hunger: and yet he
suffered this most peynefull poverty in such manier, that he never spoke
injurious or angry word: but as gold by fire is made purer and cleaner, so he
thus examined by passions and peynes was made through patience more noble and
glorious. For if it be truth, that many poor men only saying other rich
men, be vexed and grieved with envy, and have thereby a more peynfull life,
though that they want not as much as is for their life necessary, and have
meanly enough of help and ease: what did than Lazar suffer, that was poorer
than any other, and not only poor, but alsoo sick, that no man could be
more sick, and was in the mids of the city as clean with out all succor
and help, as though he had lived in a wilderness, sufferynge extreme hunger
and lack of all things, and most of all suffryng hunger in the superfluous
feastynge of his neighbor* he saw the rich man swim myng in ouermoch
substance, as in fountayns of goodis, and fluddis of riches: but he saw him
self have no erthly aid nor help, only pitied of dogs, being so weak, that
he was not able to drive them from him. This blessed Lazar, if he had not
learned the very true and most perfect philosophy and learning of god* how
could he have suffered so patiently, so assuredly all these greues? See thou
not, that he that hurts not him self, could of no man be hurted? I will renew
and repete my promise aforsaid. Look upon this Lazar, what could bodily
sycknes? what could the lack of al things, what could the dogs rubbing
upon his soores? what could the neighborhed of that covetous rych and proud
man hurt this noble and glorious champio^ of god? In what litel point was he
for all this hurted or discouraged in the virtue of his mind? Surely not one
jot, but by these tribulatio^s he was more confirmed in the love and faith of
god: and hereof the glorious crown and reward of everlasting joy was prepared
for him whereof he was reputid most unhappy, of the self same he was glorified:
and whereof his sorrows his peynes and passions were heaped, of the self same
he was rewarded with perpetualle life: His hunger prepared abundance and pleaty
of the goodis that were to come* his syckenes prepared the life of heaven: his
scabbes that the dogs lycked, brought him the glorious service of angels,
the despite of that proud and cruel rich manne, that vile canelle at his
gate, opteyned the most holy company and blessed embrasynge of Abraham.
What did the apostle Paul (for we may ones again speak of him) was not he
assayde with innumerable storines of tribulation? And yet in what point was he
for all that hurted? Was he not thereby made more glorious? Wherein did
hunger or cold hurt him? what did whyppes, strokes, or stones to him? what
hurt suffered he in the sea wrackes, in the bottom of the seas? Did he not
always remayn the same self Paul and the same self chosen apostelle of God? Of
the other part, Judas also was one of the twelve, and chosen apostell of Christ,
but it pre uayled him nothing, another that he was one of the twelve, nor yet
that he was callid an apostell, seeing his mind was not set to vertus and
goodness But Paul with poverty and stro kes, has run the course that ledeth
to heaven. Judas that was called to be an apostle before Paul that was endued
with like grace that the other had, that had learned the heavenly doctrine, that
was parttaker of the holy sacrament and bourde of Christ, that had the gift
also of the holy ghost, so that he revived the dead, he healed the lepers,
he drove out the yuell spirits, that was thought to despise the goods of
this world, that might cleave to the side of Christ, that had the cure and
rule of all Christis expenses, whereby his privy sin of covetousness might
have been amended, for he was a thief: yet not withstandyng all these
foresaid gifts, all these provisions of our savior, he could not wax
better. Christ knew well that Judas was covetous, and that for the love of
money, he should be damned. And therefore Christ not only rebuked him for this
sin, but also by secret and privy means, would have holped this fault,
gyuynge to him the rule and order of money, that he having in his hands the
thing he desired to have, might be satiated and leave that sinful appetite,
nor should not fall into the pyt of death, but with less yucll should
repress the greatter. So in all things he that hurts not himself, can not
be hurted of an other. And again, he that will not amend and correct
himself, as much as is in his power and will to do, can not be helped of
any other.

Finally besides this, the holy scripture, as it were done in a large image and
picture, has peinted to the many lives of the old fathers, from Adam to the
time of our master Christ, that thereby thou might see the sins and
fautes of some, and also the rewards of some other: and by both examples thou
might be instructed and taught, that except a man hurts himself, he can
not be hurted of any other, although the hole universal world would conspire and
agree against him, although there should be a change of all times and of al
things, although the fury of kings and pryncis should rage against him, and
as well friends as foes should wait to betray him, other by deceyte or by
force, yet all this can not move or stir in any small jot, the constant
stomach and waking mind in virtue. Likewise of the other part, the sluggard,
the negligent body, he that betrayeth and destroys himself, can not be made
better, nor be amended, although thou lay to him a thousand medicines and get
for him a thousand bulwarks and defenses: except he first put forth his own
strength, and exercise all the power and will that is in him. The same lesson
we may learn of the similitude and parabole, that Christ makes of diverse
builders, one that buyldeth his house upon a sure stone: another that byldeth
upon the sand, not that we should of these words understand, other sand or
stone, nor any buyldyng of timber: nor yet that we should imagyn fluddis,
showers, or wyndes, that assay our houses, but that by this similitude we should
remember other the virtue of mind, or the negligence of the same: and that we
should hereby perceive, how except he hurts him* self, no man can be hurted
of another, so that another stormy raynes, nor violent ru^nyng flud dis, nor the
great blasting winds could shake an house that is builded upon a sure stoone.
Whereby Christ teaches the, that a man, the which betrayeth not himself, nor
is not of himself sturred or troubled, no temptation can move or overthrow him.
But the other buyldyng is soon cast down, not for the violence of temptation,
but for the wekeues of the fou^ dation, that is the feebleness of man's mind and
purpose. For sand is a lose thing and fleting: the which without doubt
signifies the unstableness and inconstancy of mind. Wherefore the cause of the
houses ruin, is not temptation, but the negligence and the wavering of the
mind, the which sometime without any blast of temptation is overthrown, as
a building that is set upon the soft sand, though there rise no wind, nor
russhe forth no fluddes: yet the fl^tynge sand causes the hole house to
overthrow. For by itself sand will break and flytte: but the hard adamant
stone can not be broken with hammers. Do tha^ he that is not of himself
hurtid, can not be hurtid of other, although he be by many ways violently
assayd, but he that by his own minds slouthfulnes and negligence is betrayed,
though no man touch him: yet by himself he falls and is overthrown: As
that sinful Judas fell not only without al constraynt but also being help with
many stays and remedies, he could not stand. This thing I shall show you to
be true, not only in prsuate men, but also in hole nations. For consider thou
what a care and providence God had toward the nation of the Jews. Were not
all other creatures in manier ordained and made to serve them? was there not
given to them above all other men certain new and exquisite laws to live
by? Was not a dry way made for them through the middis of the sea? and in the
same place where they were in safety, their ennemies and persecutours were
distroyed. They lived forty years in wyldernes without plowyng or sowyng. They
knew not nor felt not the labor of harvest* they had no pain in bakyng or
brewyng, their wives did another card nor spynne, there was no necessity of
marchandyse, no man there to bye his meat looked for a market place: but all
these commodities the word of god gave them, and fed them in the wilderness,
without their labor or pain. For this was the nature of Manna, it seemed daily
a new meat: and as every man's appetite was, so it had his taste. Also by the
prouysion of god they lacked not clothes, hose, or shoes. For during all the
said years their clothes continued in one case, nothing worn out: no person
among them was diseased, or syck, nor had need of phisyk, no man sought for
medicines. The prophet David says: God brought them forth in silver ^sal. 104.
and gold, and in all their Tribus none was sick. But as though they had
left this present world, and had gone into an another better and more happy
place: so all things necessary without their care was given them by the word
of god. And beside all this the greattest miracle of all, lest the heat of
the bournynge son should noye and hurt them, they were in the day time
covered with clouds, and where so ever they removed, this heavenly ruff and
coueryng followed them. In the night also they were not without solate and
comfort* for a lamp set a fire by the word of god shyned before them: the
which did not only give them comfortable light, but also showed them the
right way in that deserte wilderness. what should I speak of the stone,
that followed them with abundant issue of water? What should I speak of the
multitude of birds, the which with their clusterynge covered the hole earth?
And other meruels that were showed to them in Egypt what should I reherce? Or
what should I repete the great virtues and nobleness performed in the
wilderness? the battaylles done by prayers, the greatte vyctoryes gotten
only by the calling of God? For they not like men fyghtyng, but as though
they had been in a dance contynually tryumphed. And how can it be told, that
as they passed Aegypte, where the seas fight for them, so with the sownde of
their songs and trumpettes they ouerthrewe the walls of Hiericho, in such
fasshyon that they seemed rather to be a company and a quyere of singing
men, than an hooste of adversaries or enemies: and they seemed men rather
to execute mysteryes thanne war. All these wonderful signs and tokens, al
these miracles were done, not so much for the pleasure and safegarde of that
nation, as that the doctrine and knowledge of God, the which they learned of
Moses, might the faster stycke in their minds. For these meruaylouse acts
were certain voices, that declared and preached to them the knowledge of God,
lord of heaven, of earth, of all the world. The seas that they with dry fete
passed over, cried upon them to know God, and the drowning of their enmies
cried the same. The same also showed to them the waters turned into blood,
the same the rayny storm of toodis taught them: and finally all the wonders
that were done other in Aegipt, or in the wilderness, signified the same. These
infinite miracles were to them as a book and writing, that could never be
blotted nor put out, nor turn from their conscience: This book they might
always read, and have ever in their hearts. yet all this not withstandyng, so
evident tokens of the power and ver tue of almighty god: And not withstandyng
the honor and glory that god gave to them above all other: yet they were
unkind, and remained infidels, having no steadfast feith in god. For they
worshipped the head of a calf, and would have other gods made for the^, although
they had in their sight and memory so many manifest signs of the infinite
power of god. But look upon the people of Ninevites, that was barbarous and
aliens, not accustomed with no benefits of the providence of god, not
instructed with no laws, not sturrid up with no mi racles, no co^mandementes,
rude and ignorant* they saw a poor man Jonas, as he came from the sea wrack, a
stranger never before seen or known of them, that said at his first entry
into their city: Within these three days this city Niniue shall be distroyd. Of
the whi che only saying they were converted and brought to the fear of god,
and straight they forsook their sinful life, and by penance they gave them
self to virtue and goodness, with so steadfast a feythe, that they revoked the
terrible sentence of god, that was given of their destruction, and reserved
their city being at the point to be destroyed. For the text says thus: God
saw that every man had left his most ungracious life. Tell me, how left
they their life so sinful: for their abomination was great, and extended up
to heaven, their iniquity was infinite, their wounds were incurable. For that
means the prophet when he says, Their malice and sin mounted up to
heaven: by the which infinite space he signifies the greatness of their
trespaces. yet all this not withstandyng, their terrible sins that stretched
unto the heaven, they being warned with few words, and a little co^muniation
of a stranger unknown, never before in that country seen, a man to be hold
wretched coming from the sea wrack: in a short space of three days, were so
quenchid and put out, that they deserved to here this gracious sentence of
god, saying: And when god saw that every one of them had left their ungracious
living, he changed his angrye mind, and revoked the bluddy sentence that he
had purposed against them. Do thou not here evidently see, how that he
that has his mind ready and bent to resyste sin, and well remembers him
self, can not only take none hurt of men, but also tourneth from him the anger
and vengeance of god, being at the point to punyshe him? Contrary wise he that
betrayeth and hurts him self, although he have an hundred thousand gracis
and helps of almighty god to his outward furtherance and staying up: yet all
suffiseth him not for his salvation. For as ye see in the foresaid examples, all
the wonderful miracles and providence of god, helped nothing the obstinate
Jews: nor the Ninevites being strangers were not hyndered for the lack of
such aides and succor as the Jews had: but in as much they gave them self to
god with hole heart and mind, they greatly prevailed by a little occasion, to
opteyne the mercy and grace of god. And thus they did being rude, untaught
strangers, and men set aparte from the learning of god, lackyng both laws
and teachers to be instructed by.

What may we now speak of the three chylderne? against whom although so
great and so many tourmentes were devised: yet there could no cruel pain
either hurt or decay the noble virtue of their minds.

Were they not three chylderne of tender age? that in the first entrye of
their life were brought into thraldom, and subdewed under the rule of a
fierce master, being from their country outlawes, driven from their house,
church, and all acquaintance, dysvsed from the laws of their country,
plucked from the accustomated sacrifices and ceremonies of God, drawn from the
sound of the holy psalms, and, brought to a strange order, where was
nothing like, under an heynouse and terrible lord, that they seemed rather to
be among wild beasts, thanne among men, herynge no voice like their fathers
and mothers tongue, herynge no communycation nor teaching of prophets: they
had no comfort other of priests or shepeherdes, that they were wont to
have. For these words they say them self, complaining that in that time
and place they lacked a ruler, prophets, capytayns, a convenient place to make
their sacrifice before god, to ask and opteyne his mercy. Furthermore besides
all this they were in a strayter ieoperdye, in that they were contynuallye
kept in the kings court: where seemed to be a sea always ragyng and
troublous with storms, with tempests, with waves, with rorynge flouddes, with
blusterynge wyndes: and here they were constrained to ieoparde their life
without shypmayster, without maryners, without sail, without oores.
Nevertheless because their hearts and minds were fast set in the knowledge of
god, and had their inward eyes lift up to heaven, and could well
remember, that this pryncis power, his regal pomp, his fasynge pride, all his
holle glory of richesse were fraylle, vile, unworthy to be regarded: They
thus helped and stayed up with the feathers and wings of faith, fleing to
heaven, regarded and compted the kings court for a stynkynge dongion and
prison, full of proud gloryouse stately persons: yet the king commanded them
to be set down at his own bourde, that pompouse table besette with all the
show and muster of gluttonye and bealyfare. They took this princis company
for none honor, but for an abhomynable sclaunder and shame to them, and were
like lambs set in the mids of wolves, and were by necessity driven other
to dye for hunger, or to eat of those meats, that were becursed and forbedde
of god. What did than these young children* this tender age bound in this
thrauldome? They sought none excuse in that god knew their necessity, and
might se how they were constrained, being in the hands of a tyran, kept in
bondage, having no power to resyste their cruelle lord and proud
conqueror: they imagyned none of these excuses, but determined utterly with
them selves to forbear to the death, only that they would not offend nor
dysplease God, or do that thing that was not lefull for them to do. Thus they
were on all sides besette with things clean resysting and contrary against
their desire. They were bare and naked of almoney, where by they might have
sommewhat swaged the fiersenesse of their rulars and kepers: nor yet they
could have no sure trust in any man's frendeshyp, seeing they were alyens and
strangers, and authority they had none, being bond prisoners, nor in
number they could not prevail, being but three alone. what do they than?
Surely that thing that only seemed to be in their power. With fair words they
^ntreate their keeper, whom they found full of fear, lest he should be
put to death, if he favored and applied to their desires. and so this
keeper said to them, I soore fear my lord the king, lest he look upon
you, and see your faces paler and leanet than bet the other young men, and upon
that blame me, and put me for your sake to death.

But they of the other part, with wise aunsweres took from him all his fear,
and caused him to bear them favor. Thus when they had done as much as lay
in them, and as much as was possible for them to do, straight the aid and
succor of god was at hand and did for them his part. Than I say this
work is not the work of god alone, but the beginning thereof comes of
their purpose and ready mind. For they were fully determined with them self,
not to taste of the unlawful meats. And when they had constantely and
strongely kept this mind, straight the beck of almyghtye god confyrmed them
in the same, and brought their purpose to a gloryouse end. See thou now
in this place, that who so ever hurts not him self, he can not be hurted
of an another? For I pray the, look with me upon the case of these three
chylderne, young they were, in bondage, in thrauldome, all alone, there hanged
over them a strong and mighty power, cruelle commandments, fear of
death, compulsyon of the tyranne, and fierce threttenynges. On the other side
help and succor was there none, another of kynseman, nor of neighbor, nor of
cytesyn, acquayntaunce, none that could counsaylle them to follow the best,
no earthely comfort: yet in all this heap was there nothing that could
hurt them, seeing their own mind and purpose hurted them not. But
contrary on the other side, the chosen people of god the Jews, having on all
sides so many aids (as I before rehearsed) so great succor and help of god:
yet they prevailed nothing in the health of their mind, only by cause their
own proper sluggysshenesse, their own frowardenes betrayed and distroyed
them selves. But let us return to our three chylderne. They first
opteyned this glorious vyctorye, that they were not defoyled with foul and
vnlefulle meats. And when the tyranne was in this point overthrown and
cast under their feet, they were brought to greatte enterprises and battayles
of more honor. for a much more cruel constreynment, a far greater mi schiefe
and heynouse condition was put before them. A furneys was set on fire, the
fierce and cruelle people of the Persis clustereth about them, the tyranne
rages, all that countreye is set to dysceyue and peruerte these simple and
innocente chylderne, there is ordered diverse and sundry sorts of instruments
to sound after the sweet consent of musyke. O a new kind of cruelty, fire
and musyke is coupled together, the threttenynges of tourmentes and fear of
death is myngled with pleasure. And yet all not withstanding, he that does
his endeavor and vttermooste power, can not be hurted of an another, yea by the
inforcementes of his enemies, he shall increase in glory and honor: as by
these foresaid means these chylderne came to an higher vyctorye than they
had before. For the tyranne Nabugodonosor bound them and cast them in the
said fourneysse of fire: but he could nothing hurt them, but did them
passing good, in that his fierceness and cruelty got them a greatter
crown, and an higher reward. For they in the mids of the bournynge furnace,
in the mids of the ragynge Persis that bourned more than the very fire in
suryouse madness, had a noble and gloryouse vyctorye over their ennemies: and
being but three selly chylderne and prisoners, overcame that holle nation with
their tyranny: whose noble acts and honor is song and shall be song for
evermore. Thus than he that hurts not him self, an other person can not
hurt him. I will not cease often to repete the title of my Sermon and sum
of my purpose. For if (as we have before touched) another imprysonemente, nor
bondage, nor thrauldome, nor the loss of countreye, of all friends and
acquayntaunce, nor an hole host of enemies, nor the fire, nor the cruel
tyranne was not of sufficient power to hurt three young children, being left
of all aid, being strangers, and brought into the hands of their enemies,
what thing is there able to break the virtue and courage of the mind? But
thou say to me: God helped and was with them, and delivered them out of the
fire. In likewise thou ought, if thou fulfylle thine vttermooste endeavor,
to hoope and trust to have the aid and grace of god. For doubtelesse God
will be with the, if thou leave not before thy self. How be it I do not
compte the said chylderne happy and blessed, because they trampilled and
walked upon the fire without hurt, but by cause they would be bound, and
would be cast in to the fourneysse for the laws of their country and of god,
the which thing conteyneth their virtue, preyse, and glory. For by and by
when they were thrown in the fire, began their vyctorie, and in that
instaunt momente they had deserved their reward, by their assured faith and
answer, saying unto the king: We need not answer the to this questyon:
for our god is in heaven, whom we honor and serve, that may deliver us out
of this bournynge oven, and shall deliver us O thou tyranne out of thy hands.
that if god will not deliver us, thou shalt well know, that to thy goddis we
will never bow: nor this image of gold, that thou set up, we never will
worship. Of these words they were crowned, and in this testimonye and feythe
they had their reward and thank of god, in this rested their course, the
which they ended in the martyrdom of their confession: But as touching that
the fire was ashamed to touch their bodies, and loused their bonds, and
forsakynge his own nature refresshed them with the dew of heaven in the
mids of the hot fourneysse: This was a point of the grace of god, whose
pleasure was to make his power be known by the wounder and meruaylle of so
strange a thing: but the chylderne in this had no vauntage, their vyctorie
was in their own steadfast confession, in their own constaunte and assured
feythe, whereby they opteyned the glory of so noble a martyrdom. What now
canste thou creke against this? although thou art banysshed thy country,
driven from thine acquaintance and friends, brought to thrauldome, to be
bound in the service of cruel masters? All this happened to the said
chyldern^: thou lyuest without teaching, without instruction, without
comfort, the said chylderne were in the same case. Thou art bound, thou
art spoiled, thou art constrained to dye: all this passed the said
chylderne, that ever by their passions wexed more glorious. And the Jews
having their temple, their sacrifyces, the book written with the hand of god,
having also Cherubin, their holy and secret place of prayers, and all other
things mete for their daily sacrifices, and having the prophets, some
departed, some yet alive, the which instructed them in their present maniers,
and showed what god did contynually for them, and what he had in times
paste done: what he dyddde for them in Aegypte, what in the wilderness: and
what alsoo god d^^^e for them when they came into the place promised to them.
Yet all this not withstandyng, they not only nothing proceeded in grace and
virtue, but also in a perpetual witness of their own myschiefe and
vngratiousenesse, they set up in their church ydols and images of false
goddis, sacryfyenge to the same both their own suns and daughters. Thus
they did in their temple, and also in other places in woddis and mountains,
but these said three children, in a strange country, in the hands of their
ennemies, under the power of a cruelle tyranne, thrown into the fire, be
nothing hurted, and not only that, but also take thereof greatte honor and
glory. Now thanne to make an end, we knowing and gatheryng these manier of
exaumples out of the holy scripture, where be many mo, that make to this
purpose, if a man will seek there: so that diuersely we may seesome without all
constraynte, without all necessity, without any cause, to be against them
self, and take soore hurt: sum other having all the world against them,
to be steadfast in their right way, and not able to be never so little removed
from their virtue. Thus when we evidently know and see* we should without all
doubtyng conclude with our self, that if any man be hurtid, he is hurted of him
self, although the number of them that do hurt, be infinite, although all
in a plumpe that dwell other in the earth or in the sea, would agree to
hurt: yet they can not in no small point hurt him, that is not hurted of
him self. With this we* began, and with this we make here an end.

FINIS.
LONDINI in officina Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad im
primendu^ solum. M. D. XLII.

LVCRECIA ROMANA
THOMAS BERTHELETVS



