AN INQVIRIE AND ANSWER Of Thomas White his Discovery of Brovvnisme.

By Francis Johnson Pastor of the exiled English Church at Amsterdam in Holland.

Psalm. 55.12.13.14. Suerly mine enemy did not defame me: for I could have (...)
it: neither did mine adversary exalt himself against me: for I would have hid
me from him.

But it was thou* O man, even my companion, my guide, and my (...) Which
delighted in consulting together, and went into the house (...) companions.

1606.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, grace and peace from Christ our Lord and Savior.
TWo sorts of adversaries, the Church still has among men. The one, of such as
be without: the other, of such as arise from within the Church it self. Both
heavy enemies: but the latter, far the more grievous, many ways. By both of
them have we (as others before us) ben exercised, a long time, and in strange
manner. Yet in and against them all, has the Lord by his power and of his mercy
hitherto preserved us, and I trust will so do unto the end.

Of late has risen up one Thomas White, despitefully reviling us, and wickedly
blaspheming the Name and tabernacle of the Lord. A man, that was himself
heretofore separated from the Church of England, holding the Prelacy Ministry
worship and confusion thereof to be antichristian: Who also was a joined
member of a Church in the West parts of England professing the same faith with
us: And afterward coming over to Amsterdam, and desiring to be partaker of the
Lords supper with us, did in our public meeting before us all, with his own
mouth, testify his consent with us in the same faith we profess: From which he
is now revolted: and of which he is become a notable adversary: setting
himself tooth and nail (what he can) against us and our cause: and that both
privately and publicly, as now himself has manifested to the world.

So as in himself (though it may seem strange) are found both the extremities,
whereof he speaks in his Preface, which bring no small annoyance to the
Church of God, hypocrisy, and prophanenes. His hypocrisy, now laid open, in
the particulars aforesaid, and many other known unto us concerning him. His
prophanenes, plainly appearing, both in forsaking the truth of Christ (as Esau
sold his birthright for a mess of pottage) and in oppugning it in this manner:
Genesis 25.33.34. Heb. 12.16.
which shows in him a despising, if not a despiting also of the truth: as
Esau contemned the birthright, when he had sold it.

And thus the instance, which he would falsely give in others, may fitly be
observed in himself, for both the extremities aforesaid: As also that howsoever
they seem to differ the one from the other, yet indeed they strengthen and
harden each other, with a mutual reciprocation, and proceed also the one from
the other, howsoever for a while envy do cloak it self under the name of zeal
etc. Which that it may yet the better appear both in and from himself, I will
here set down a letter of his, written while he held our cause, to a Minister
of the Church of England: And (to use his own words) as Christ alleged
against the Pharisees, Whites Discov. page 4.
the example of their own children, that they might be their judges: so will I
against himself his own writing and dealing, that they (as his children) may be
his judges. The letter is this which follows, taken from his own original
copy.

A letter written by Thomas White, to Mr I. A. Minister at M. in Wilsthire.
Ps. 7.9.59.2.140.5. Oh let the malice of the wicked come to an end, but guide
thou the just. Deliver me from the wicked doers, and save me from the bloody
men. The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a net with cords in my
pathway, and set grennes for me. Selah.


Sir, the pillars of the kingdom of darkness have been especially three,
ignorance, falsehood, and violence. How far your self have waded with others in
these, in your late dealing against us, by sermons conference and letters, let
the sequel show.

1. For the first, you in conference at W.VV. would undertake to prove the
reading Ministry to be a true Ministry, Ignorance.
though you refused to justify your own, and that by this argument. Whosoever
preaches the Gospel is a true Minister, but the reading Minister preach the
Gospel, Therefore a true Minister.

For answer to your argument, I denied the first proposition, especially in
that sense as you took preaching for any publishing of the Gospel, which you
presently left without defense. But if the reading Ministry be a true
Ministry, then is it the ordinance of God, and if it be the ordinance of God,
then may not the Magistrate remove such a Ministry under any pretense without
sin. An ignorant Proctor, for an ignorant Ministry, an unfit time for such a
doctrine of desolation, to keep darkness still in the Land, when the Lord has
shaken his sword against it.

2. Your ignorance further appears in the expounding of the parable you
entreated on Math. 13.24.1. In expounding ( field) for the Church, when as,
though there by ( kingdom of heaven) be meant the Church, yet by ( field) must
be meant the world, for the kingdom of heaven is in the ( field) except the
Church should be in the Church, or our Saviors exposition were untrue, verse
38. where field is expounded to be the world. 2. In that you would undertake to
expound a dark parable not by plain places of Scripture, but contrary to the
tenor of the Scriptures, and ordinance of God both in Church and common
wealth, for if by ( tares) be meant open offenders, which may not be plucked
up, then may not open offenders be cast out in the Church, nor put to death by
the Magistrate.

3. You said in conference that all that preached the Gospel, Act. 8.4. had
extraordinary gifts, which you went about thus to prove. Philip. Act. 8.5. had
extraordinary gifts, therefore all the rest had. Which argument you could not
then nor ever will be able to prove, the very recital of it is sufficient
answer unto it.

4. And your insufficiency was even confessed by Mr Sedg. to Mr Pow.
one of your own fellows (as I heard) who when he heard that you were to
preach on that parable, said that he marvelled that you would undertake it
being so unfit: he would some more sufficient man would undertake it: with many
such words tending to the like effect.

Thus have you showed your self not alone ignorant, and so acknowledged after a
sort by some of your selves, but also are become an vpholder and pleader for
darkness in others. But if your dealing had been alone of ignorance your fault
had not ben so great, but you have added falsehood and deceit thereunto, as may
appear:

1. In that you were not ashamed openly in the pulpit (which you made the
chair of falsehood) to teach that exco^municatio^ had no ground from the 18.
of Math. contrary to the coherence, drift, circumstances, consequence of that
scripture, Falsehood.
and by conference also with other Scriptures: as shall be showed if you will
undertake the defense of your own doctrine. In that scripture is showed a power
which Christ has given to his Church, ver. 17.20. for the removing out of
their communion, ver. 17. such as remain unrepentant and obstinate in their
sins, ver. 16.17. and therefore excommunication. To what end should this
doctrine tend, if not to bereave the Church of that power which Christ has
left for the sweeping of uncleanness out of the house of God. But this shall be
further showed, from whose breasts you sucked this poisoned milk, which now you
give others to drinck: if you will not leave the doctrine to the wide world
without defense.

2. In that you trussed up another false doctrine on the same Scripture, that
the party offe^der Mat. 18.17. should be an heathen and publican only to the
party first offended, not to the whole Church: When as the whole Church has as
much cause to be offended as the party that was first offended, yea and more
cause the^ that party had at first to be offended, by reason of the continuance
in his sin, which the offender has added to his former sin. If you had
understood what had been meant by ( trespass, verse 15) you would not have
thus abused this Scripture: as may also be further showed. In this point, one
of your Ministers, Mr ^^.
but of greater wisdom and discretion then your self has signified his
contrary judgment to you thereon (as I have heard) as knowing I doubt not the
falsehood and vanity of your assertion thereon. Yea I dare undertake that many
of your our own Ministers of best reformed judgments, will be ashamed of these
black drops which falls from your lips.

3. In that you published in like sort that though open offenders did
communicate with true Christians, yet were they not defiled thereby, traducing
Mr John's: (...) affirming the contrary. And yet when you came to the trial of
it in conference between you and my self, you said your meaning was of a true
Christian in the sight of God, not of a true Christian in the sight of men, as
he is a member of the visible Church, and that such a Christian could not sin
or be defiled with sin in that he was regenerate or borne of God, which was
never the question between us, and so a true Christian did not sin though he
should commit Idolatry, Adultery, or the like, in that sense that you took
sinning: Yea a true Christian might as much be defiled with sin in
communicating with open offenders, as by committing adultery, for any thing you
have said in that conference, which is under your hand. This was your miserable
shifting, I fear against the light of your conscience. Yet Mr Ies. a few days
after, in a conference between Mr Pow. and himself at Mr Bayl. on the same
question took it in an other sense, yea in that sense, as which you said you
meant not, neither could I bring you unto it, as may appear in that
conference. Such confusion of languages does well become the builders of Babell.

4. For that in your letter to Mr St. S.W.W.N. dated the 20. of Ian: 1603. you
would undertake, though no other would assist you, yet your self, by word, or
writing, or howsoever, against whomsoever, to justify your Ministry,
doctrine, etc. and yet by word in conferring you refused to justify your
Ministry, when you were provoked thereunto: yea when I offered to prove it
false in those particulars you mentioned, and to be separated from. I offered
also to prove your doctrine false on the 18. of Mat. and 13. of Mat. but you
refused. I desired that I might propose one argument concerning the question
between us, but you would deal no further, except you might put down some
proof further of that which we never doubted of: viz: that a true Christian in
the sight of God did not sin in the regenerate part as he was borne of God.
Was this timorous and fearful dealing answerable to your bombasted boastings,
let others judge. These be the doctrines of desolation which you do scatter:
Let others now judge what cause we have to account you a false prophet, and
they in miserable case that are led by such blind guides. Did you not tremble
to wish in the pulpit that the Lord would stop your mouth if you spoke not the
truth. Your dealing has confirmed us, and been a means (through Gods goodness)
to gain others to the truth we profess, and for your self remember seeing you
care not what you teach, nor how you take the name of God in vain, that which
is written, Ion. 2.8. that they that wayt upon lying vanities forsake their
own mercy.

3. And yet least the measure of your iniquity were not full already, Violence.
you add violence and persecution to your former evil dealing. When you are
not able to stand by the word you try whether you can suppress us by the
sword. 1 Your self would not suffer Mr Pow. to make answer to you at
Slaughtens. fearing least your falsehood should be discovered thereby. 2
Afterward Mr Ies. by letters entreated him not to make you answer publikly,
that you might speak what you would without controlement. 3 And seeing these
means would not prevayle, your self to show whose servant you are, with others
went up again and again as if much pains had been too little to procure a
warrant to attach him, and Will. We. told Mr Pow. that Mr Aw. was the procurer
of the warrant. Thus do you by falsehood and violence seek to uphold your
ruinated kingdom, when truth and verity has forsaken her. And you show
yourself in deed to be an Edomite, red with blood, Ob. 1.10. like the scarlet
colored beast, who has a mouth like a Dragon. 4 Your associate Mr At. could
tell me, that an other place was fitter for me, meaning the prison* To who^ I
answered, that if I had the gift of dissembling which he had, to subscribe
against my conscience as he did (I told him then when and where) I might live
long enough, and enjoy Achans wedge, as himself does without abridgement of
liberty. You of all others may be ashamed to dissemble thus with the Prelates,
knowing how basely you have thought and spoke of them: 5 You Mr Aw. could call
us brethren, and afterward being urged for your dissembling, you could expound
your meaning that it was in respect of creation: and so Cayn, Ismaell; and
Antichrist, be your brethren too, yea and nearer of kin then so, by persecution
too. 6 Your self could say not long since, that of all sects on some conditions
you could soonest join to us, as being nearest the truth: and yet a little
after call us rebels: but rebellion being a high degree of treason, your self
if you conceal it 24. hours will incurr the danger thereof, look you to it.
7 You promised by writing to put down reasons to justify your Ministry, and
doctrine between us conferred of, but we thought before how slack we should
find you in performance. At your next coming to Slaughtens. I pray you not to
spend an hour and half in confuting us in proving that we never denied, as you
did before, and not to contradict your self as Mr Ies. did, disproving his own
doctrine the same time that he repeated it. The doctrine was that whosoever was
reputed to be a Minister and taught the doctrine in the foundation sound he was
a true Minister, and yet in the same place at the same time he said that a non
Resident was a thief and a robber. Now I hope he will confess that a non
resident is reputed by them to be a Minister and may teach the doctrine in the
foundation sound, therefore a thief and a robber may be a true Pastor, (or else
he disproved his own doctrine) which cannot be. With grief of heart I assure
you I write these things, having been sometimes persuaded that you had more
conscience, and true knowledge of God then can be perceived in this dealing.
Thus have I given you a taste of your evil dealing, the Lord give you true
remorse at the sight of your sin, or else remember that which Mr Fox has
written of the terrible end of persecuters. If you have any thing to say in
answer, do not snatch here and there as your manner is, but directly and orderly
justify these doctrines which are laid to your charge as false. Thus as before,
so still committing our cause to the just judge, I take my leave: this present
the 25. of Mon. 2. 1603.

He that desires your good from his heart. Tho. White.




This letter he wrote, as is aforesaid. Since which time, being here discovered
and disappointed of his expectation, he has with Demas embraced this present
world, and left the truth of Christ: and is become a sworn enemy thereof
himself, and a pleader for like fruits of darkness in others. Will he now
therefore behold himself in his own glass, and not forget what manner a one he
is, but apply to himself his own speeches, of the pillars of darkene^, of
making the pulpit the chair of falsehood, of abusing the Scripture, of black
drops falling from his lips, of miserable shifting against the light of his
cons^ience, of confusion of language and building up Babel, of bombasted
boastings, of doctrines of desolation, of false Prophets and blind guides, of
waiting on lying vanities and forsaking his own mercy, of seeking to uphold the
Beasts ruinated kingdom, of being an Edomite, of having a mouth like a Dragon,
of the gift of dissembling, of enjoying Achans wedge, of base thinking and
speaking of the Prelates heretofore, of being now near a kin to Cain,
Ismael, and Antichrist, of the terrible end of persecutors, of committing our
cause to the just Judge, etc.

And how would he reply again, if Mr A. to who^ he wrote this letter, should
now answer him by the words of his own mouth out of his Libell against us, and
ask him, Are these things evil in others and good in him? Or as the Poet
speaks, Whites Discov. page 20.
Iustum non iustum non iustu^ iustu^ quod vobis libet: Or will he say as Medea
in Ovid, Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor? But rather will he hear the
Apostle, Romans 2.1.3. What art thou that co^de^nest another, and do the same?
Or the Prophet, Psalm. 50.16. Why take thou my word in thy mouth, and hate
to be reformed? Or Christ himself, Hypocrite first cast the beam out of thine
own ey, etc. Mat. 7.5.

Or if he will hear none of these, yet let him remember and take to himself
his own allegation of Tullies words, Testimonium tuum quod in aliena re leve
est, Whites Discov. page 6.
hoc contra te grave, etc. Thine own testimony, which in another case is of
small weight, this against thy self is of great moment.

Now of his hatred and malice against us and the truth (since he left it) what
should I need to speak? Himself has proclaimed it to the world. And howsoever
he would cloak and cover it with pretense of discharging his duty to God and
his Churches, of care for others, of omitting many the vilest things, of
offending chaste ears, of sparing us, etc. yet does he therein but the more
verify that saying of Solomon, Hatred may be covered by deceit: Pro. 26.26.
but the malice thereof shall be discovered in the congregation. Shemei
himself, yea and Rabshakeh, could besides other things pretend even the name of
God, when they rayled and cursed most bitterly. Wherein also what other thing
has he done in his invective against us, but as the Jesuits and other Papists
have often done against Luther, Calvine, Beza, etc. of whom they shame not to
forge and publish notorious lies and sclanders: and all to obscure the truth
professed by them? Whose steps how this enemy of ours has followed, let
others judge. And let himself remember his own saying heretofore, if he will
regard no others, that a man who has run away from his Master, will seldom
give him a good report.

But thus is he the fitter servant for his Masters the Prelates, by whose
authority he pleaded here before the Magistrates that his book was printed: and
under them belike hops to be sheltered in England, whither he has now
betaken himself: for what cause he knows best. But wheresoever and howsoever
he bestow himself, let him know, God will find him out: from whom he cannot
fly, nor escape his judgment. For as Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied,
so is it in all ages to be remembered, Behold, the Lord comes with his
thousands of Saints, to do judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the
ungodly of them, of all the works of vngod^ynes which they have ungodly
committed, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against
him. Jude, ver. 14.15.

For which cuase, we could for our own parts so have left him, and born in our
bosom all his reproach, without giving any answer: had we not considered that
by him not only our selves but even the faith of Christ which we profess is
traduced and oppugned; and many that are weak might thus be kept or turned away
from the truth; and Solomon says, He that is first in his own cause, Prove.
18.17.
is just, till his neighbor come and make inquiry of him. Therefore thought we
it best at this time to make the answer ensuing. Wherein as now we have
followed the counsel and rule of wisdom, which says, Answer a fool
according to his foolishnes, Pro. 26.5.
least he be wise in his own eyes: so for hereafter (unless there be great and
special occasion to the contrary) we may the better follow the other counsel
and rule which Wisdom in the same place teaches, saying, Answer not a fool
according to his foolishnes, least thou also be like him: Prove. 26.4.
And specially for this man, who has not delight in understanding, Prove. 18.2.
but that his heart may be discovered: whom God has already made a spectacle
to others of heady, contentious, and hostile opposition against the faith and
witnesses of Jesus.

Neither let him or any other of our enemies think their case the better,
because of our sins or troubles or weak walking in the faith, whereo^ they do
so much insist. Concerning which, my answer shall be with the words of the
Prophet, Rejoice not against me, Micah. 7.8.9.10.
o mine enemy: though I fall, I shall arise: when I sit in darkness, the Lord
shall be a light unto me. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him, until he plead my plea, and execute judgment for me: he
will bring me forth to the light, I shall see his righteousness. And he will
look upon mine enemy, and cover her with shame, which said unto me, Where is
the Lord thy God? Mine eyes shall look upon her, now shall she be trodden down
as the mire in the streets. And in this will we rest, and wayt upon the Lord
the God of our salvation: trusting in him, that notwithstanding our unworthiness
and his chastising which we have deserved, yet he will look upon us in mercy,
and make all things work for good unto us in Christ: And that thus the
uttermost opposition of all our enemies (howsoever they set them selves against
us, whether against our cause or against our persons, against our faith or our
walking in it) shall turn to our good, and to the furtherance of the truth
witnessed by us: which we have much found that adversaries of all sorts have a
long time and many ways oppugned, as they yet daily do and cease not: though
all in vain. For great is the truth, and will prevail: and greater is he that
is with us then they all that are against us. To him be praise and glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

Esaias 54, 15.16.17. Behold, he shall gather together, but without me: whosoever
shall gather himself in thee, against thee, shall fall.

Behold, I have created the smith that blows the coals in the fire, and him
that brings forth an instrument for his work, and I have created the stroyer
to destroy.

But all the weapons that are made against thee, shall not prosper: and every
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn. This is
the heritage of the Lords s^rvants, and their righteousness is of m^* says the
Lord.


AN INQVIRIE AND ANSWER Of Thomas White his Discovery of Brownisme, or (as he
calls it also) his declaration of some of the errors and abominations daily
practiced and increased among the English company of the separation remaining
for the present at Amsterdam in Holland.
TO any that are exercised in the word of God, or know the nature and power of
sin in themselves, or the doctrine and pledges of remission of sins by
Christ in his Church, or the power and use of excommunication for impenitent
sinners, or the Churches duty upon their repentance to receive them again,
etc. To any such (I say) it cannot seem strange, that in true Churches and
Christians, sins and enormities, sundry and great, should fall out and be
found. The condition of the Church of the Jews before Christ, of the Primitive
Churches after Christ, yea of the whole Church and people of God from the
beginning of the world to this day, show it plainly and certainly so to have been.

Which work of God so disposing, and case of his Churches and the members
thereof so being, howsoever many have stumbled thereat and abused it to their
own destruction and deceiving of others, yet thus would God preach unto the
world and have his own people learn and lay to heart other and better things
thereby. As namely, how sinful and miserable we are in our selves; how
subtly and continually Satan seeks to devour us; how fast we had need
always to hold faith in Christ, and to fight the good fight thereof against all
enemies of our salvation and obedience; how needful it is to live in the
Church of Christ under his conduct and government; how careful we had need be
to make an end of our own salvation with fear and trembling; also how
exceeding great the mercy of God is unto us in Christ his Son, by whom not
only when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by his death, but being
also reconciled are saved by his life; and finally how infinite his power and
wisdom is both in preserving his elect to salvation through the midst of so
great corruption, and in bringing the ways of the wicked upon their own heads
to their just destruction: and all to the praise and glory of his Name.

These and the like good uses may and should we make of the foresaid condition
of the Church here on earth. Neither did we ever think or profess otherwise of
our selves, but that we are sinful and prone to evil in our selves as well as
others, obteyning salvation only by Jesus Christ. Yet may not our or any
weakness of man praejudice the truth of God. So that admitting it were with us
as this Adversary Thomas White has written against us, yet ought none
therefore to be turned away from the truth professed by us, but to make other
use thereof, for their own good, as we our selves also ought. But now if the
things he obiecteth, be many of them notorious lies, diverse of them purposely
perverted, few of them truly related, and all of them (as all may see)
maliciously abused against us: how justly shall that return upon his own head,
which he would in ^his manner bring upon us? according as it is said, He that
diggeth a pit shall fall therein, and he that roleth a stone, it shall return
upon him. His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his injury shall
descend upon his own pate. Prove. 26.27. Psalm. 7.15.16.

TO come to the Libell it self: he begins it with blasphemy, in the very
title thereof, calling it A discovery of Brownisme. What our cause and
testimony is, we have long since published in the Confession of our faith:
which this man knows well, and has Wh. Discovery. page 5^
in his book alleged the 17. Article thereof. If then he take our cause (for
which we are reviled under the name of Brownists) to be error, why did he not
confute it? If it be the truth, why does he thus blaspheme it? But so to be
reproached, has been Act. 24.5. and 28.22.
the case of the Apostles and Christians of old. And at this day are the
Protestants thus dealt with by the Papists, who blaspheme the truth under the
name of Zuinglianisme, Lutheranisme, Calvinisme, etc. And well it fitteth the
Priests of England, that as they partake with the Papists in so many other
things, they should also follow their steps in blaspheming the truth and
witnesses thereof.

That which he annexeth, calling his book also A declaration of some of the
erros and abominations among us, as it enlarges the title of his Book, so it
increases the wicke^nes of his sin. For may not the Reader hereby gather,
that he would persuade, either that we hold and have many other errors and
abominations besides them that here he imputes unto us, or that all our cause
and testimony is nothing else but error and abomination? As also when he says,
the errors and abominations be daily practiced and increased: And that not
only in some particular persons, but even among the company of the separation,
(and as he speaks in his Preface) in that congregation wherein he would give
his instance of prophanenes and hypocrisy. This congregation he names to be
the English company of the separation remaining for the present at Amsterdam.
Where the Reader is to know, that we who by some are termed Brownists (of a
man's name who heretofore witnessed this cause) are by others called the company
of the separation, because we do separate from the Prelacy, Pri^sthood, worship
and Confusion of the Church of England as being Antichristian, and do also
practice the ordinance of Christ which he has given for the government
ministry worship and order of his Church.

THis for the Title. Like thereunto is his Treatise also. Where for his
general accusations of debate, malice, adulteryes, cousonages, and other
enormities, etc. this may serve in general to be answered: 1. If he mean of
some particular persons among us, falling into such sins, it has been and is
the case of all the Churches of Christ upon earth, as may be seen in those of
Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, etc. And what need or use else should there be of the
rules and power given by Christ to his Church for casting out obstinate
sinners, Mat. 18.15 17.18.22. Luke 17.4. 1 Cor. 5.1.4.5.11.12.13.
and receiving the rep^ntant in again? But if he mean of the body of the
Church, as if we approved or retained such being co^vinced and unrepentant,
himself knows it is a malicious sclander, and his own objections (afterward
in his book) of sundry persons whom for their sins and obstinacy therein we
have cast out from among us, may show it also to others so to be. We are
careful (he has seen it himself) that such be not retained or allowed among
us. And we find that even our carefulnes herein is abused against us: because
when any of us are known to have fallen into sin and are dealt with
according as the case requires, whether they repent and so remain in the
Church, or whether they persist in their evil and so are cut of, it is still
objected against us, and we are published to abound with such sins and
en^rmities. Thus might the best Churches that ever were in the world be
traduced: as hereafter there is further occasion to show in some particulars.

2. For our selves (as I said before) we confess, and profess it also, that
we are subject to sin and infirmity, as other men: looking for salvation, not
by our own righteousness which is of the Law, but only by the righteousness
which is of God, through the faith of Christ. Yet, notwithstanding all the
sins and unworthiness of us, let this still be held firm (at least till we
be soundly confuted) that our cause is the truth of the Gospel of Christ,
witnessed against the errors of the defection of Antichrist.

3. The accusations made against us, are to be considered with their proofs:
which will afterward come to be seen. In the mean time, let it be observed,
whether if some would set themselves to collect particular insta^ces of debate,
malice, adulteries, cousonages, and such other like enormities, daily committed
by many in the Church whereunto this man is now revolted, though they wrote no
untruths (as he does many) but noted only the truth of things as they are
indeed, neither took the space of thirteen or fourteen years (as he has done)
but of any one year among them, how might they fill, I will not say a few
sheeds of paper, but even many volumes of books therewith?

And if T. White were asked according to his own words here, whether he had not
himself partaken with their abominatio^s and unfruitful works of darkness: and
whether he would give warning to others of their leaders evil dealing, whereby
their people are devoured: would he not think you verify his own other sayings
here, showing himself to be far from repentance, seeking to cover, hide,
cloak, reproach and revile, using falsehood, shiftings, contrarieties, etc.
All which are known to be so true and common both in himself and the Church
whereto he is returned as I need not write thereof at all: their estate and
dealing proclayme it to all that have ears to hear and hearts to regard it.

Our banishment and poverty (whereof he speaks) increases his and their
sin against us yet much the more. For are not they the persons that bring
these afflictions upon us? and is it not only because we witness the truth of
our Lord Jesus Christ, against the falsehood of Antichrist yet remaining among
them, in the ministry worship order and government of their Church? But let
them know that he which judges justly the sons of men, Esa. 16.4. Psalm. 103.6
will remember his banished, and execute justice and judgment to all that are
oppressed. For the poor shall not always be forgotten, nor the hope of the
afflicted perish for ever. And in the mean time, Psalm. 9.18.
even in the midst of all our afflictions, are we comforted in the Lord, for
whose sake we endure them: and great benefit do we further reap by them, not
only for our own good many other ways, but in this in particular, that these
our troubles are a special means to keep discover and remove from among us a
number of hypocrites, such as this T. White, who (if it were not for our
poverty and banishment) would flock faster unto us and lurk longer among us,
under a painted color of holiness, making show as if they would depart from
iniquity and call upon the Name of the Lord (and who more then they?) when in
deed their hearts be freight full of the leaven of hypocrisy contention
maliciousnes and all manner of iniquity: which in such case and estate of things
does oftentimes both sooner and more appear, then otherwise it may be ever
would.

The calumniation of condemning all other Churches and men, we have often
answered and cleared heretofore, and this also known to himself. Yet thus he
writes, that in this as in the rest of his dealing all might see, how it is
himself that runs into fearful extremities, and reproacheth with a virul^nt
and venomous tongue. For our selves, besides our reverend estimation of other
Churches and good persuasion of other men, so often published to the world, we
have also showed it in our walking toward them, and namely in our dealing with
the Dutch and French Churches of this city as with true Churches. Which had we
not so esteemed of them, we neither could nor would so have done and dealt with
them, as we have.

THe letter he speaks of, I have still with me. His falsehood and other bad
dealing therein, I will here omit, save only about the doctrines by him laid
upon us.

1. The first is that we held it lawful for a man to live with her that is not
his wife, rather then to reveal himself. This he says: but how does he prove
it so to be held by us? If malice had not possessed him, this error had never been imputed to us either as held by the Church or partaken in by the Elders.
Sometimes in deed we have had speech among us of the unlawfulness (as we were
persuaded) for man and wife to live together after adultery committed; and
about the band of wedlock being broken thereby; and whether that in the case of
adultery unknown to others, the offenders were to reveal themselves, or not.
About which latter points when we showed our judgment and reasons, this Tho.
White (who then was present) did much urge, that a man who knew such a crime by
himself must reveal it, or else live in sin, and with one that was not his
lawful wife. Whereupon some of us reasoned with him about it, holding that a
man should not so reveal himself. The end was, that we differed in judgem^nt
about these things, and having had speech of them but by occasion, so rested
for the present. Will he now therefore make collections and frame positions of
his own or others spe^ch^s, and say (as in his letter) that they are false
doctrines that ly upon the Church, or (as here in his Libell) that they are
blasphemous doctrines of the Church? What good dealing this is, let the Reader
judge. And concerning the question aforesaid, whereas some of us were thus
minded about it, that a man having committed adultery (which is unknown to
others) is not bound by the word of God to reveal himself, but unfeignedly to
repent thereof: and that in such case he may notwithstanding lawfully continue
with his wife: Although I be not here in particular to handle this point: yet I
will now propound these few things to be considered about it. As namely, what
Scriptures teach a man so to accuse himself; whether it be not unnatural for a
man so to do; whether in Israel the woman spoken of Numb. 5.12.13. were bound
to reveal her adultery (being unknown) until or unless her husband were
moved with the spirit of ielousy, as the Law there is given? And, whether ^^w
^en should of themselves reveal such their case to the Magistrates, who have
power to put them to death for it? By what Law of God they are bound thereunto?
And whether else they cannot have true rpentance but deny the prophecy of Christ
and err fundamentally, as here he would persuade?

2. The second is, That there are qualities in God not essential, and that
love in God is not of his being, but that the self same love that is in God,
that is also in us. Himself knows and has been here convinced of the notable
falsehood hereof, yet shameth not thus to publish it against us. And that now
the Reader may know how the matter arose, I will briefly show it. We have in
our Church Besides the Ministry of the word.
the use of the exercise of Prophecy spoken of in 1 Cor. 14. chap. Romans 12.6. 1
These. 5.20. In which, some of the brethren such as for gifts are best able
(though not in office of Ministry) deliver from some portion of Scripture,
doctrine, exhortation, comfort; sometimes two at a time, sometimes mo: Then
also if there be occasion, upon the Scripture treated of, are questions
propounded and answers made accordingly: And the whole action moderated by some
of the officers and Overseers of the Church. In this exercise, the first
Epistle of John being treated of, upon these words, He that loves not, knows
not God: for God is love: the point aforesaid was by way of qu^stio^ spoken of.
And about it there was reasoning by two or three of the brethren and this White
himself, with objections and answers diversely. Whereupon this Doeg, by some of
those br^threns reasoning and the Since altered, as himself knows.
opinion of one of them about this matter, took the occasion thus to reproach
us: which first he did more privately, and now has done it publicly to the
world. Wherein his evil dealing is the more notorious, because himself being
then present, knows how both at the same time And this also with consent of
the Church then signified.
the moderation thereof by one of the Elders was according to the truth,
disproving the error aforsaid which he would impute unto us; and afterward (he
carrying himself very ill about it and other things) that the matter was again
heard and examined in the public congregation, where to his face he was
convinced to be a false accuser therein. Besides he knows the Confession of
our faith long since published, which alone does so fully clear us in it, as
very shame of men, if no fear of God, might have restrained his lying lips,
and kept him from blaspheming us with so black a mouth.

3. A third thing there was, and that objected by him publicly in the Church,
and noted also in his letter, as a false doctrine lying upon the Church:
Namely, that when a matter is in the third place to be brought to the Church
by the rule of Christ, Mat. 18.15.16.17. our order being that the ^lders first
have knowledge thereof given them by the parties themselves, then that the case
being such as is to come to the Church, it be publicly propounded and handled
by them, as in respect of their office apperteyneth unto them, being the
governors and overseers of the Church: This he blamed then as an error and
false doctrine, contrary to Christ's rule, Mat. 18. But here now he concealeth
it. And good cause why. For when he was called upon for his proof hereof in the
public Congregation where he had made the accusation: he was glad to answer,
that he was not provided: And this also after a weeks respite to consider of
it. Whereupon he was rebuked as hasty to accuse and slow to prove, whereas
wisdom would have taught him, first to have been provided of proof before he
had set himself to accuse as he did. But if now he think it to be no error in
us, and therefore speaks not of it, he might even by this have learned to set
a watch before his mouth, at least not to have barked rgainst us in so vile a
manner as he has done. Or if he still think that we err therein, contrary to
Christ's rule, Mat. 18. (as he objected heretofore) why has he not here noted
it down with the other aforesaid? Is it because that ordinance of Christ
overthrows the Prelacy and government of the Church of England (whither he is
now revolted) it being such as they neither do neither can in their
constitution observe that rule at all? But how then can he approve them for a
true Church in such estate, and how will he answer the reason alleged by us
against the^ Ansvv. to Mr A. H. page 62.
heretofore in this respect? which is this,

Every true visible Church of Christ has Christ's power spoken of Mat. 18*
17.18. to cast out ^^^unate sinners from among them:

But the Ecclesiastical assemblyes of England have not the power of Christ
there spoken of, to cast out obstinate sinners from among them:

Therefore the Ecclesiastical assemblies of England cannot (in their
constitution) be accounted true visible Churches of Christ.

And hitherto of his false and blasph^mous doctrines objected against us in his
letter. Which in his Libell he says I promised to answer and performed it
not. Yet in the letter it self he writes that To I.L. in his own hearing.
I said, I had spoken unto him both privately and publicly, and now would not
further have to do with him. And concerning his letter, my answer was to this
effect (as I remember) sent him by I.L. one of his own company, besides my
speech unto himself: That the contents of his letter were partly private,
partly public: that for the private, I required proof; and for the public, I
would not deal privaely. Wishing also the said I.L. to deal with him for
some reports (ascribed to him in the letter) concerning me which he denied, and
to end it between themselves who were of one company together: And as I should
hear thereof, so I should consider what to do for the rest. This let him ask
of I.L. his own companion: and let himself now look unto it who it is that
falsifyeth.

For not answering his letter by vvriting, I had good reason: as may appear
by that which before is alleged. And Wisdom teaches, there be persons who
are not to be answered according to their foolishnes, and times also when to
speak and when to be silent: Pro. 26.4. Eccles. 3.7. with 2 King. 18.36. The
dumb Ministers spoken of Ansvv. to Mr H. Ia. p. 17 4.
in the place here cited by him, he has now consorted himself withal, being
returned to his old vomit, and become as dumb as any of them for defending the
truth against the adversaries thereof: yet opening his mouth above all his
fellows in blaspheming the truth and witnesses of it. Wherein the case of the
worst dumb dog in England is ten thousand fold better then his: And happy it
had been for him, if his tongue had cleaved to the roof of his mouth, and his
hand never used pen, more then theirs: whereas now his sin is unspeakably
greater and his estate infinitely more miserable. But leaving him to the
judgment of God, I will proceed to the other particulars of his book: desiring
the Reader, for all his pretense of due proof of his charges, to remember that
saying of Solomon, He that is first in his own cause is just: then comes his
neighbor, and makes inquir^ of him. Prove. 18.17.

Of the first head of Th: White his Treatise.
THat which follows in his Treatise, himself reduces to four heads. In
which order I will also handle them. The first is, that he says we have
betrayed our own cause in vvriting. And to prove it, he alleges that I err
in the description of a true visible Church, and thereby overthrow the mayn
drift of my vvritings. I answer: 1. His reason follows not. For may not I or
any other of us err in some thing* and yet our general cause not be betrayed?
Again, did not Nathan the Prophet err about the building of the Temple, and
Peter the Apostle about the Gentiles calling and comunion? Could now an Edomite
or Pharisee have justly gathered, that they had therefore betrayed the cause of
Israel or of the Christians witnessed by them against the adversaries? To come
nearer to our own times, it is well known that Mr. Calvine, Luther, Beza,
Fulk, Powell, Sutcliff, etc. writing against the Papists Anabaptists and the
like, have in sundry things erred, even concerning the very points of the
difference between them: Shall we say therefore that they have betrayed the
cause handled betvveen them and their adversaries? and overthrovven the main
drift of their own vvritings? Not to speak of the Martyrs put to death by the
Papists, how both many of them, and in many things, have erred, even concerning
the causes controverted in their times. Should we therefore conclude that they
betrayed their own cause? Or that they did not witness the truth
notwithstanding faithfully even unto death?

2. Our cause towching the Church of England, is, that the estate thereof is
such in their Prelacy, Priesthood, worship, confusion, etc. as it is not
lawful by the word of God for any to join or continue with them in such
estate: And moreover, that it is the duty of all Christians, to receive and
keep the faith and ordinances of Christ, wherein the Primitive Churches were
planted by the Apostles. To discuss and make these things more plain, I
reduced our whole cause to seven questions, and so propounded them: viz,

1. Whether the Lord Jesus Christ have by his last testament given unto and set
in his Church sufficient ordinary Offices, with their Callings, Works, and
Maintenance, for the administration of his holy things, and for the sufficient
ordinary instruction, guidance, and service of his Church to the end of the
world, or no?

2. Whether the Offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders,, Deacons, and Helpers, be
those Offices appointed by Christ in his Testament, as aforesaid. Or whether
the present ecclesiastical Offices of Archbishops, Lordbishops, Suffragans,
Deanes, Prebendaries, Canons, Petticanons, Priests, Deacons, Archdeacons,
Doctors of divinity, Bachelors of divinity, Chapleins or housepriests,
Commissaries, Officialls, Proctors, Apparitors, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Vagrant or Mercenary preachers, Churchwardens, Sidemen, Clerks, Sextins, and
the rest now had in the Cathedral and Parishionall assemblies, be those
Offices appointed by Christ in his Testament as is aforesaid, or no?

3. Whether the Calling and entrance into these Ecclesiastical offices
aforesaid, their Administration, and Maintenance now had and retained in
England, be the manner of calling administration and maintenance which Christ
has appointed for the offices of his Church above named, or no?

4. Whether every true visible Church of Christ be not a company of people
called and separated out from the world and the false worship and ways thereof
by the word of God, and joined together in fellowship of the Gospel, by
voluntary profession of the faith and obedience of Christ? And whether the
Ecclesiastical Assemblies of the Land be such, or no?

5 Whether the Sacraments (being seals of righteousness which is by faith) may
be administered to any other but to the faithful and their seed, or in any
other ministry and manner then is appointed by Jesus Christ the Apostle and
high Priest of our profession? And whether they be not otherwise administered in
the Cathedral and parishionall Assemblies of England at this day?

6. Whether the Book of Common prayer with the Feasts, Fasts, Holy days,
stinted prayers, and Leiturgy prescribed therein, and used in these Assemblies,
be the true worship of God commanded in his word, or the devise and invention
of man, for Gods worship and service.

7. Whether all people and Churches (without exception) be not bound in
Religion, only to receive and submit unto that Ministry, worship, and order,
which Christ as Lord and King has given and appointed to his Church? Or
whether any may receive or join unto another devised by man, for the service
of God? And consequently, whether they which join to the present
ecclesiastical Ministry, worship, and order of the Cathedral and
parishionall Assemblies, can be assured by the word of God that they join to
the former ordained by Christ, and not to the latter devised by man, even the
man of sin, for the worship and service of God?

Now reducing our cause to these heads, if it were so that I erred in one of
them, is therefore our cause betrayed? Or should my particular error, be
imputed to the whole Church, or reputed the betraying of our general cause? Is
there not difference to be put between erring through ignorance (if this were
an error) and betraying with knowledge? Or if this manner of reasoning which he
uses might be admitted, who can deny but the Protestants of England, and of
all sorts, have an hundred and an hundred times betrayed their own cause, and
overthrovven the very drift of their own writings? And if they think it not of
weight against them for their multitude of known errors, with what face can
it be urged against us for one supposed error?

3. For the description it self which was given of a visible Church, I still
hold it to be good. It was thus, A true visible Church of Christ is a company
of faithful people, by the word of God called out from the world and the
false vvayes thereof, gathered together in fellowship of the Gospel, by a
voluntary profession of the faith and obedience of Christ. This is the
description: which he would prove to be false, partly by gathering my meaning
thereof in other places of that and other books, partly and particularly by my
judgment concerning the Israelites in Egypt, spoken of in the Ans. to M^ Ia.
page 47. Where before I answer him, let me advertise the Reader that if there
be any weight in this exception, it was found out, not by Th. White (as by his
book might be supposed) but by some of the Ministers in Wilsthire, specially
by one Mr Io. Ie. and other his fellows there, who have bestowed much labor
in reading our writings, whether for love to the truth, or that they might
find somewhat thereby the more to cavil against it, let their walking and
dealing show. Whose disciple now this White is become, having heretofore
stood as opposite against them, as white is to black. Now therefore to answer
them all under one, I will write somewhat touching this matter: referring the
further handling of it (if there be need) till some other adversaries, with
whom we ha^^ to deal concerning it and the other heads of our cause, give
further occasion.

Two things (as I said) about this description are specially noted and urged:
the first about the meaning; the other about my vvriting of the Israelites in
Egypt. For the first, the meaning is plain by the words themselves, and by the
drift of that and all other of our boo^s, as may appear not only by the
places here cited by him, but by many other compared together, and particularly
by an express declaration annexed unto it in our Apology against the Oxf:
Doct. page 36.44.45. Yet now again to explane and prove the truth of that
description, I will here treat a little more thereof.

To esteem and describe aright a true visible Church, we must look especially
to two things, 1. the calling of Christ; 2. the covenant and communion of the
Church: To Christ his calling, like as the Apostles every where describe the
Churches according to it: As namely, the Churches of Ephesus, Corinth, Rome
etc. For which see these Scriptures, Romans 1.5.6.7. 1 Cor. 1.2.9.24. Gal. 1.6.
and 5.8.13. Ephe. 1.1. with 4.1.4. Col. 3.15. 1 These. 2.12. and 5.24. 2 These.
1.11. and 2.14. Heb. 3.1. 1 Pet. 1.15. and 2.9.21. 2 Pet. 1.1.3. Jude, ver. 1.
Now it cannot be denied but Christ's calling of his Churches and people, is unto
the whole faith of the Gospel and willing obedience thereof, and f^o^ all
evil and iniquity that is any way repugnant thereunto, and therefore from the
false worship and ways of the world whatsoever they be or wheresoever. And
hereupon did the Apostles reprove the Churches still when they fell into any
sin either against the first or second Table, as not walking worthy the holy
calling whereunto they were called in Christ; and required of them also
obedience to all the commandments and ordinances of Christ f^o^ time to time.
Therefore should White and his teachers have better observed that clause of the
description aforesaid, by the word of God called out etc. So might they have
perceived (if they had love to the truth) both that the description is good;
and that the abberrations of true Chu^ches are so far from proving it any way
false, as they do in deed approve the truth of it: in as much as the very being
of a Church by the calling of Christ requires of them to walk otherwise.

Another thing that we are to look unto, yet also depending upon the former, is
the Churches covenant and communion. This covenant is to be considered, as made
by them unto the Lord, and one with another, to walk together in the truth of
the Gospel, in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord: And
therefore to forsake and avoid whatsoever is there against. As may appear by
these Scriptures, Exodus 19.3 -- 8. 2 King. 23.2.3. Esa. 2.2.3. and 14.1. and
44.5. Ier. 50.4.5. Act. 2.41.42.47. and 11.21.24. Romans 12.5. 2 Cor. 9.13.
Ephesians. 4.4.5.6. Phil. 1.1.5. Therefore also, the description aforesaid is good.
And so might the adversaries have perceived, if they had well observed that
other clause therein, of being gathered and joined together in fellowship of
the Gospel etc.

And what else is it that gives the being to a true visible Church, but the
calling of Christ, and the Churches covenant according thereunto? Whereupon in a
true Church may and ought these things following always to be observed:

1. That it has Christ alone for the Mediator, that is, for the Prophet,
Priest, and King thereof.

2. That it is to be accounted the spouse and body of Christ, the househould
city and kingdom of God, the ground and pillar o truth, a Church of Saints,
etc.

3. That the promises and pledges of Gods covenant presence and blessing do
appertain unto them in that estate.

4. That it apperteyneth to Christ, to remove his Candlestick and take away his
kingdom from a Church when and as he pleases.

5. That every true visible Church has authority and power from Christ to
receive in members willingly professing the same faith with them, and to cast
out obstinate offenders from among them.

6. That the want or transgression of Christ's ordinances does not simply or
presently disanull them from being a true Church. For example, When a people
are so called and covenanted as aforesaid, though yet they have none in office
among the^ (either Pastors, Teachers, Elders etc.) they are notwithstanding a
true visible Church. And by their calling and covenant they have power in
Christ, as he gives them fit men and means, to choose and enjoy these, as any
other of his ordinances. Likewise also, when any of the Church yea or the whole
do transgress, either in some thing which yet they have not seen, or whereinto
now they are fallen, they are notwithstanding a true visible Church. And by
their calling and covenant they have power in Christ to redress them. Which
when upon knowledge they shall refuse, and ^o continue, then are they to be
esteemed according as their case shall require.

So then, to judge rightly of a true Church, we must look (as the Apostles did)
at their calling and communion in the Gospel. Which being observed, it will be
easy to put difference between the errors, and the constitution of true
Churches: as Christ and his Apostles did, in the Churches of Asia, Achaia,
Galatia, etc. to reprove them for the one, and yet to approve them as true
Churches for the other. And this also until Christ himself remove his
candlestick and take away his kingdom from among them: which is to be left
unto him, to do when and as it pleases him.

And this also might serve for answer to the exception drawn from my writing,
concerning the Israelites in Egypt: who sinned with Idols, and yet were Gods
people. But it being so urged by diverse as it is, I will note a few things more
concerning it in particular. The objection is made thus, If they committed
Idolatry with the Idols of Egypt, how were they then a company of faithful
people separated from all false vvayes? I answer, By the Lords former calling
of them to the obedience of himself, who was by covenant the Lord their God,
and they his people. Genesis 12. and 17. and 46. with Exodus 2.23.24.25. and 3.7
8.15.16. Numb. 20.16. Deuteronomy. 26.7. Which also is laid as the ground of the
admonition, for calling of them from that Idolatry spoken of, Ezech. 20.7. And
may not a people so separated as aforesaid, fall into this sin of Idolatry,
as well as into other sins? See the case of Israel afterward again, Exodus 32.
Where Moses in his prayer to God, calls Israel the Lords people, even then
when they had committed such Idolatry, as the Lord would presently have
consumed the^ for it. Exodus 32.1.10.11. And of Israel again, see what is
recorded, Judge. 2. etc. And likewise of the Church of Rome, which at first was
a true Church separated from all false ways, yet fell into this sin, and
continues therein. Romans 1.6.7.8. and 16.19. with Rev. ^. and 13. and 14. and
17. chap.

But this was the general estate of the Israelites at that time. What then? So
may it fall out with a true Church: as now has been showed: and so we are
taught, Lev. 4.13.14. Yet here also might be demanded, whether he mean it to
be so general, as including all of Israel therein, specially considering what
is written of some in those times, Ex. 1. and 2. and 6.20-27. Numb. 1. with
Heb. 11.23. etc. And, whether this Idolatry were public, or private, like as
that spoken of, Ezech. 8, 12. Zeph. 1.1.4.5.

But howsoever, their sin was also of obstinacy: for they were admonished
from the Lord, and yet they rebelled against him, as the Scripture shows,
Ezech. 20.7.8. And even the same Scripture shows also, that for this cause
they deserved themselves and God thought to have powered out his indignation
upon them: but stayed it, in respect of his own Name (which is called vpo^*his
Churches and people), and not because of their estate, as now it was, Ezec.
20.7.8.9. And how does this then overthrow, and not rather confirm, the
des^ription aforesaid? Or must we not always desribe and esteem a Church by the
condition thereof according to the revealed word of God: and yet leave unto the
Lord to esteem and deal therewith notwithstanding as in any respect seems
good unto himself? Or when God says, he is the Lord their God, and calls
them his son and first borne, whom he might in respect of their own estate
cast of, can we not so esteem of them, but we must thereupon conclude, that in
the description of a true visible Church, Idolatry and all false ways are not
to be excluded? or (to speak of the questions controverted at this day) that
Rome, in all her Idolatries, is notwithstanding still to be reputed the spouse
of Christ, and not to be rejected as an harlot? and so likewise all the
Churches that be her daughters in that estate? Again, what if it were (as
Tremell. and Iun. on Exodus 2.23
some think) that Israel first rebelling, and so provoking God to wrath, as is
aforesaid, did afterward through the affliction which by Pharaoh was increased
upon them, turn into their own heart, and cry unto the Lord God of their
fathers (as we read, Exodus 2. and 3. Numb. 20.16. Deuteronomy. 26.7.)? should we not
then put difference between obstinacy still persisted in, and that which is
afterward repented of and amended? Not to speak of the Israelites estate in
Egypt, how in their kindred and families the Church consisted and was governed,
and how then they had not the word written; ^eyther of their estate afterward
in the wilderness, how God did never so punish the^ for any of their
transgressions (though of the same nature) before his Law given unto them, as
he did after: as may be observed in the history: So teaching all ages
succeeding, to take special heed to his written word, and according to it to
esteem and walk in all things.

Wherefore to end this point, thus I think, that for Israel and all other
people and Churches, we are bound always so to esteem and walk, as by the word
of God we have direction and vvarrant from him, and neither to judge nor, walk
otherwise: And as Christ gives to all true Churches their being, so to leave
unto him to take it away when and as he pleases. And for this case of Israel
in particular, let me further ask, whether such of the Israelites as should
now have left that Idolatry spoken of, ought not also to have left communion
therein with the rest so transgressing: and yet to have left them to the Lord
to esteem and deal with them as in any respect should seem good unto himself?

For that which he objecteth next out of the Preface to the last answ. to Mr
Ia. sect. 6. it is concerning Churches wilfully persisting in error and
disobedience of the truth and voice of Christ; and showed by the example of
the Churches of the Jews (...) ^^^son objected about them by D.B. For which I
refer the Reader to that Preface and sectio^, together with that which is said
in the answer to the 4. section of the same Preface: and more particularly, to
that which I have written about this point in the book it self, page
161.195.196. and in the answer to Mr A.H. page 61.62. Where the Reader shall
find what I have written, and what my judgment is, concerning this matter:
namely, that all good and lawful means being first used toward true Churches
fallen into sin, if they amend not* but wilfully persist therein the Lord
has threatened to remove the candlestick out of his place, and to take his
kingdom from among the: requiring also of such as are willing to obey the
truth and voice of Christ, now to save themselves from such a froward
generation, and to walk in obedience of his faith and commandments. Rev. 2.5.
Mat. 21.42.43. Esa. 8.12 -- 16. Act. 2.40.41.42. and 13.46.51. and 18.5.6. and
19.8.9. And according to this would I be understood, wheresoever I speak
concerning this argument.

For the Jews in Egypt rebelling after admonition, besides the difference to
be put between obstinacy persisted in, and that which is repented of (which is
thought to have been their estate) I have here before showed how we are to
discern, between their estate in respect of their own desert, and the Lords
mercy unto them for his Name^ sake notwithstanding. Which diversity of respect
being now revealed unto us in the word of God concerning them, we are therein to
rest, and so to speak and esteem of their estate as the Scriptures teach us.
Ezech. 20.7.8.9. with Exodus 4.22. and 3.10.18. and 8, 22. and 12. chap and
15.16. Hos. 11.1.

For the Jews in Christ's time and after his death, what I think and my reasons
thereof, the Reader may find also in the Treatise aforesaid: both in the
Preface, sect. 4. and 5. and in the book it self, page 161.195. For that he
objecteth here, about their estate after admonition, two things are to be
observed: the one concerning that people; the other concerning their
admonition. For the first, touching the people, God had chosen that nation out
of all the nations of the earth to be his; he had done great and wondrous
things for them; he had given them his word and statutes; he had promised that
of them and to them he would send the Messiah; him they expected; for refusal
of him they were to be cut of, and the Gentiles to be graffed in* many were the
cities and Synagogues of them; to to Jerusalem the males came but thrice a
year, etc. And for the second, towching admonition, God would have them fully
taught admonished and convinced that the Messiah was now come, and that Jesus
was he: therefore was John Baptist appointed to show him unto them, and to
baptize in his name; therefore did Christ send his disciples into their cities
to preach and testify it unto them* therefore also did Christ himself every
where among them teach and confirm it by his doctrine and miracles: and being
the true Passover shadowed out by all their types, was put to death at their
feast of Passover, and rose again the third day acco^^ing ^o the sc^iptu^es;
to accomplish the promises made unto the Fathers, and to leave ^he Jews
without all color o^ (...) ^^lief and obstinacy they should be cut off. These
things and the like noted of them in the Scripture, are to be observed of us,
that we may aright esteem of their estate, and of the Lords account of them and
dealing with them. Yea the Scriptures here cited by himself show this very
thing, how the Lord did not at first cut of that people, but after he had used
sundry means unto them, and that also many times. Luke 7.30.31, etc. Mat.
23.37.38. And the same is plainly declared, Mar. 21.33 -- 43. and throughout
the history of the Evangelists and Acts of the Apostles.

Besides for admonition also observe, how God requires that a particular man
for a private ^^nne be admonished in the (...) second and third place, before
he be cast out, Mat. 18.15.16.17. And in rejecting an heretic, that it be done
after the first and second admonition, Tit. 3.10. Also in the Lord his own
dealing with the particular Churches of the Gentiles, that he gave them space
to repent, after the admonitions given unto them, before he would remove the
candlestick out of his place, Rev. 2.4.5.16.21. and 3.3.16.18.20.22. And what
then should let, that we should not likewise obeserve Gods dealing with the
Jews at that time, and accordingly esteem of their estate? Concerning whom,
note also, when now they had despised all the former means and crucified
Jesus, then the Apostles testifying unto them that he was the Christ, did first
at Jerusalem and after wheresoever they came and found the disobedient, teach
all to separate and save themselves from such a froward generation. Act. 2.14
-- 40. and 13.14 -- 51. and 18.5.6. and 19.8.9. and 28.25.26.27.

Thus have I touching this point showed my mind: wherein if I err, let it be
showed by the word of God. And though in some things I differ in judgment from
Mr H Barrow (that faithful Martyr of Christ) yet does it not prejudice the
truth testified by both of us, against the Antichristian estate of the Church
of England. This themselves may ob^erue in their own writers against the
Papists: in whom it were endless to recount the differences found among the^,
and frivolous to pretend thereby approbatio^ of the Romish Church in their
estate. We all here know but in part: 1 Cor. 1^.
and who is he that erreth in nothing? If then in this I were mistaken, have I
therefore betrayed our cause, or overthrowen the main drift of my writings? Nay
if this be all the error in my writings that with all his searching he ca^
find, I shall rather think our cause to be so approved and my drift atteyned
therein, for the truth of Christ against the present estate of their Church, as
they are not able either to defend themselves or convince us by the word of
God, and therefore now set themselves to search snatch and cavil at something
for objection against us. Which also if they find, and it be graunte^ them,
albeit our defense therein were the weaker, yet were their cause therefore
never a whit the better.

To conclude this point, besides personal abuse of diverse (of which (...)
where he has it again) he objecteth against me, that I condemn the Dutch and
French Churches, for despising our admonition etc. But in what writing of ^^nne
has he found this, or in what words have I spoken it to any, or in what
dealing toward them have I showed it? Where is the due proof of his charges,
which ere while he told us of? How reverendly we think of these Churches, we
have often showed and published heretofore; which I need not here repeat. And
what dealing has passed between us and the Elders of the Dutch and French
Churches of this City, I shall have occasion hereafter to show more
particularly: To which place I (...) it* Now only let the Reader here consider
how truly and fitly his shutting up of this point may be applied to himself:
who heretofore has held and witnessed the same testimony with us against the
Church of England, and corruptions of these Churches here: but now wavereth or
rather in deed is revolted in both, as the world sees, and his walking
shows: He that wavereth in his own testimony, ^ow shall his witness ^e
received? But thus is that verifyed in him which the wise man speaks, Pro.
12.13.
The ^vill man is snared by the wickedness of his own lips.

Of the second head of The White his Treatise.
HItherto of the first ^ead of his (...), that he says we cut of from being
true Curches in our account, all the Churches of Christ that ever have been
since the Apostles days, or now are, y^^ and our selue^ also, His proof of all
this, he would fetch, partly from the description aforesaid, partly from a
(...) Treatise entitled, A true description out of the word of God, of the
visible Church. His instances are three, 1. of the Chruches that have been since
the Apostles days; 2. of the Churches that now are; 3. and of our selves.
Touching which (omitting that I have answered before to his former exception,
which may here again be remembered, though I repeat it not) let the Reader now
first observe and mark it well, how he says, the Churches that have been since
the Apostles days, and not, the Churches that were in their days. Beli^^
(...) that the (...) said cutteth not them of: And if not them, then not any
other at all. For that which made them to be true visible Churches, does and
must make all other so to be, to the end of the world, namely, the calling of
Christ and their mutual covenant and communion in his Gospel: as we have
showed before out of the Scriptures. Whereupon I reason thus:

If the description aforesaid cut not of the Primitive Churches planted by the
Apostles, from being true visible Churches of Christ; then does it not cut of
any other which since that time have been, are, or shall be to the end of the
world:

But the former is true: Therefore the latter.

The Proposition is undeniable, from the Scriptures and demonstration
aforesaid. It is one and the same thing that gives being to all true visible
Churches of Chr^^t. That which gave being to the Churches of Jerusalem,
Antioch, Rome etc. gave also being to the Churches of Galatia, Corinth,
Ephesus, etc. notwithstanding the corruptions they fell into. And that which
then gave being to them, gives being to all that have been since, or ever
shall be. The Church is the body of Christ, and every one members for their part;
He is the (...) ^f the body, and from him does all the life and power thereof
p^oceed: He is not divided.

The Assumption is as certa^ne, (...) will appear^, in that the Primitive
Churches planted by the Apostles, were companies of faithful people, by the
word of God called out and separated from the world and the false vvayes
thereof, gathered and joined together in fellowship of the Gospel, by a
voluntary profession of the faith and obedience of Christ. This is proved by
the Acts of the Apostles and their Epistles throughout. And if this man, or his
Masters of whom he learned to object against this description, do deny it (as
by their exceptions and reasons is employed) may not we justly return unto
them, that which unjustly they would impute unto us, and say, Are not they then
the blasphemers of the Christians and their Churches? Or is not this to rob
Christ of his honor? Or may not that saying be verifyed of themselves, He that
despises his neighbor is a fool. Pro. 11.12.

But let us come to his proof concerning the Churches spoken of by himself.
Thus he concludes it:

If no Church that has been since the Apostles days or now is that we read
of* be separate from all false vvayes in their account* then by this
description and in tho^ (...) Churches: But the former is true: Therefore the
latter.

Answ. The whole Sillogisme fails, as he has propounded it. In the
Proposition or first (...) tha^ which in the description is particularly
specified and needful always to be observed (namely, to be companies by the
word of God called out from the world and false ways thereof, gathered and
joined together in fellowship of the Gospel etc. Wherefore his Proposition is
not so undeniable as h^ suppos^th from tha^ description. And when these
particulars which now he has omitt^d be (...) to be employed, yet then also by
further following of ^he Assumptio^ may there be occasion to observe more
concerning it. And for the Assuption it self or second part of the Reason, it
must needs fail in like manner, because of that omitted in the Proposition
aforesaid. His reason therefore (if he would have reasoned soundly and to the
purpose) should have been framed thus:

If no Church that has been since the Apostles days or now is that we read
of, be in their account, by the word of God called out and separated from the
world and the false ways thereof, gathered and joined together in fellowship
of the Gospel, by voluntary profession of the faith and obedience of Christ,
then by his description and in their account must they be no true Churches: But
the former is true: Therefore the latter.

Answ. 1. The very propounding of the Reason thus, shows the weakness of it.
2. And what if we would not be drawn to speak of the Churches since, but only
of them that were in the Apostles days: keeping only to the word of God and
that which is recorded therein? If they cannot by it or the example of those
Churches disprove our testimony, what would it help them or hurt us, if we
answered them no further? 3. Yet to answer this Reason notwithstanding, and to
omit the Proposition, as is aforesaid: I requier proof of the Assumption,
because all that he has brought for confirmation of it, does not yet prove it:
as will appear by discussing his allegations, concerning the Churches he
speaks of, 1. that were then; 2. that now are; 3. and our selves.

For the first, viz, the Churches heretofore since the Apostles days, all that
he says is that we account the very saying of the Lords Prayer as a prayer to
be a false way, which was used from the Apostles age etc.

Ans. 1. Is this all he can allege against us concerning those Churches and
times? Others (...) would persuade they have it by (...) also of those w^ite^s,
that Archbishops, Primates, Metropolitans, Archdeacons, stinted forms of
prayer, the use of the sign of the cross, and a number of such like things
have been from the Apostles age. Should we therefore believe them herein? And
how comes it that this Antiquarie has never a word of all these for those
times? Is it that he thinks we hold them not now for false ways of governing
the Church and worshipping the Lord? Or is it not in deed because the Hypocrite
would not yet be seen to speak for these, and would notwithstanding so
diss^mble the matter, as yet may please all sorts that are against us?

2. To speak of that he alleges, admitting all he says here to be true, yet
is not the Assumption thereby proved. For in all true Churches, the calling of
Christ and the Churches covenant to obey the Gospel binds them from all
error and false ways: notwithstanding that both the members and the whole
body be subject to fall into them from time to time, while we live here on
earth. If then this saying of the Lords prayer as a prayer be a false way of
worshipping God, it was excluded by their calling and fellowship in the
Gospel: howsoever they fell into the use of it. If it be not a false way, then
were it but our error so to think, which we were also to corrrect, and the
description notwithstanding still should stand good. Now what our judgment is
concerning the right use of that form of prayer, together with our reasons out
of the Scripture thereabout, we have often showed and published heretofore, in
diverse treatises, which till they be answered and refuted, I shall not need
here to repeat them, or to insist any further upon that matter. Only thus much
now, If the using of the Lords prayer as a prayer, be a part of the worship of
God appointed by Christ, then did the Apostles in the planting of the Primitive
Churches teach them so to use it: For they were enjoined by Christ to teach
whatsoever he commanded them, and so they did: Mat. 28.20. with Act. 2.42. and
4.24 -- 31. and 20.27. 1 Cor. 11.23. But that they taught to use it thus, none
can show either in their Acts, or in their Epistles. And Tertullian says, (if
they regard his testimony) Lib. de Monogam.
Scriptura negat quod non notat: The Scripture denies that which it notes
not. This man therefore and such as do so hold, that the Lords prayer is to be
used as a prayer, are bound to show by the Scriptures that the Apostles did
teach the first Churches thus to use it: unless they would (with the Papists)
argue the Scripture of imperfection, or the Apostles of unfaithfulness.

3. The distinction of faulty and false is here also to be observed. True
Churches may be faulty in sundry things (as those of Asia, Corinth etc. and yet
not straightway therefore be false Churches. True Prophets may be faulty in
diverse things (as Jeremiah, Jonah, etc.) and yet they be no false Prophets.
True worshippers of God may be faulty in their worship many ways (as may be
seen in Corinth, Colosse, etc.) and yet not therefore be false worshippers. By
which examples also may appear, both what difference is between false and
faulty, and how needful it is always in these cases to be duly regarded.

4. His proof, that the Lords prayer was used as a Prayer from the Apostles
age, is out of Tertullian whose words be these: Tertul. lib. de Orat.
Quoniam Dominus prospector humanarum necessitatu^ seorsum post traditam orandi
disciplinam, Petite inquit and accipietis, and sunt quae petantur pro
circumstantia cuiusque, praemissa legitima and ordinaria oratione quasi
fundamento, accidentium ius est desideriorum, ius est superstruendi extriusecus
petitiones: Cum memoria tamen praeceptorum, ne quantum a praeceptis, tantum ab
auribus Dei long simus. Because the Lord that sees man's necessities did apart
after the doctrine of prayer delivered say, Ask and ye shall receive, and there
be things to be asked according to the circumstance of every one, the lawful
and ordinary prayer being premised as a foundation, we may for the desires that
fall out, we may from without it build thereupon our petitions, yet with
remembrance of the things commanded, least we be as far from the ears of the
Lord as from his commandments. Towching this testimony (if it were a thing to
be stood upon in this case) many things might be excepted. 1. Tertullian lived
about 200 years after the Apostles days. 2. Many things were held lawful and
ordinarily used in his time, which were not at all in the Apostles days: As,
prayer with cloakes put off, and hands washed; signing with the cross, and
annoynting with oil after Baptism; Godfathers and Godmothers; mixing of water
with wine in the Lords supper; oblations for the dead; Lenten fast; holy water
etc. 3. He also followed and was infected with diverse errors, which (...)
judgment, even in his own time reproved and rejected: As, the Jewish error
of the Chiliastes, that the godly shall have a pleasant life on earth, a
thousand years before the end of the world: Also, that the Angels fell for
lust of women; That Noah, Abraham, and others of those times were righteous by
the righteousness of the Law of nature: Whither also may be referred his errors
about Freewill, Satisfaction for sins, superstitious Fasts and heresies of
Montanus, etc. Not to speak how from his exposition of the Lords Prayer (even
in this book here alleged) the Papists would gather proof for their heresy of
Transubstantiation, and the Lutherans of Consubstantiation. Again, he
disallowed sundry things, which were approved the^ by others according to the
truth: As, the Baptism of children, second marriages; fleing in time of
persecution etc. 4. But if they think there be such weight in Tertullia^s
testimony, why do they the^ at their preaching use the Lords prayer after their
own prayers, when as Tertullian says it was first premised as a foundation
whereupon petitions from out of it might be built? Which (admitting the use of
it, yet) shows a quite different using of it then, from that which now is
had. And let it here be noted by the way, that Tertullian does often in that
book call it a form and doctrine of prayer, and shows that Christ has not
tied us to the use of those words, but thereon to build our petitions as upon a
foundation, according to the need and occasion of every one, following his
precepts. Why also do they not hear^en to Tertullian, when in the same book he
says, Tertull. Lib. de orat.
Such things are justly to be charged with vanity, as are done without
authority of any precept either of the Lord or of the Apostles: And when other
where he says Lib. de praescript. aduersus haeret.
The Apostles did faithfully deliver to the nations the discipline they
received of Christ: And, Lib. de virgin. veland.
that no continuance of times, or supportation of persons can prejudice the
truth? If they will believe Tertullia^, their book of common prayer, their
Prelacy, Priesthood, cross, surplice, and the like retained among them, may
justly be charged with vanity, as being never appointed by the Lord or his
Apostles. Neither can al their gloses persuade that ever they came from Christ,
seeing the Apostles did not deliver them to the nations, as appears by their
writings. Nor is it material, whatsoever continuance of times they pretend, or
supportation of persons they may have. None can prejudice the truth, as
Tertullian says. And for the point in hand except they can show that the
Apostles did teach to use the Lords prayer as a prayer, it is neither the
continuance of times, nor the supportation of any persons, be they Old writers
or Churches, that can be admitted for a sufficient warrant, even by Tertullians
own testimony.

For the Churches that now are, we also refer it to our dealing with in our
dealing with the Dutch and French Churches of this City. When some of their
members have left them, because of their corruptions, and come to join
themselves unto us, we have required such first to deal with them, as with
true Churches always should be done, namely, to advertise the Elders first, and
then the whole body of the Church whereof they were (if they might be suffered)
of the corruptions, for which they thought to leave them. Which we require not
of such as come unto us from any false Church. Also, when some of our Church
have gone unto them, and declined from the truth which they professed with us,
unto their corruptions, we have had dealing thereabout with the Elders both of
the Dutch and French Churches of this town, that were by the rest of their
Elderships deputed thereunto, before we would proceed with the parties for this
their revolt and transgression. And when the Dutch Church here received such to
be members of them, as our Church excommunicated for their sins, we also
admonished their Elders hereof, desiring that by themselves or by us knowledge
of these things might be given to the whole body of their Church. Which course
of dealing we use not with any false Church or the Ministers thereof. But to
insert here in particular the dealing that has passed between us and them of
this town, Confess. with Mr Iun. letters page 54.
would be to long: and their corruptions whereabout we have dealt with them,
are already published. By which and this that has here been said, let the
Reader judge, wheth^r we have not cause to put difference between them and the
other Churches of these countries not so dealt withal.

For not hearing of them in other of their Congregations in these countries,
this I answer: That seeing by the mercy of God we have seen and forsaken the
corruptions yet remaining in the public ministration and condition of these
Churches (if they be al like to them of this city) we therefore cannot partake
with them in such case, without declining and apostasy from the truth which we
have our selves already received and professed. This also I speak of the
members of our Church so walking and witnessing as is aforesaid, and not of the
members of their own Churches, whose duty I think it is, before they may leave
them for their corruptions, first to signify them unto them, and by all good
means to seek the redress thereof among them, as being members of the same
body with them. Which I take also to be the duty of all such, as have knowledge
of their corruptions, and being not of them, yet would communicate with them in
their public administration. And this for true Churches. But as for any false,
these are not the duties or rules prescribed for them, but other of a far
differing nature, namely, when once we see their abominations, to separate
from them without delay, and to witness against them even unto death. The
further declaration whereof with confirmation from the Scriptures, the Reader
may have in diverse of our Treatises already published about our cause. As in
the Refut of Mr. Giff. In the Answ. to Mr. A.H. page 61. etc.

But he provokes me yet further, and says, If he can, let him name any one
Church on the face of the earth now, that holds not false ways, yea even in
their constitution in their account. Although I might answer as before, that
the calling of Christ and the Churches covenant to walk in the faith of his
Gospel excludes al false ways in all true Churches (whether as yet seen or
unseen) and therefore in the Reformed Churches so acknowledged by us: yet
because he presses me so earnestly to name but any one Church, on the face of
the earth, I will give the instance, of that Church in the west parts of England
whereof himself was a joined member, when he separated from the Church of
England, and held the same faith with them and us, from which he is now
apostate. And let him now name any false way holden by them in their
constitution in our account.

Of the distinction to be observed between faulty and false worship, I have
spoken page 23.
here before. As also, of his blaspheming the Christians and their Churches,
despising neighbors, and robbing Christ himself of his honor. And now by that
which has been said, let the Reader observe how true it is in himself, that
after al his earnest endeavor not alone to wound but even to kill others (if he
could) he has turned the point of his weapon into his own bowels. Which will
also yet further appear in that which follows, in his particular objection
against the Church whereof we are our selves, which he says is not agreeable to
our description aforesaid.

Against our selves, the proof he brings is this that he says, we are not
separate from al open offenders, and all false vvayes: and persons and matters.
I answer: admitting al he says against us both the general and particulars
were true, yet notwithstanding the description aforesaid should stand good, and
our Church also agreeable thereunto. For this yet should be the error of our
practice, not of our covenant or calling in Christ: According to which we are
always to esteem or Churches, as we have ^hewed before. Otherwise to reason as
this man does against us, were to condemn those Churches of Asia, Galatia,
Corinth, and all that ever have been from the beginning to this day.

But to come to the particulars, his first allegation is, that he says we
reteyne among us open offenders: and for instance the first he names is one
Cast. noted publikly in our meeting for cousonage etc. A man that is of the
Church of England, and so was a good while before this book of Whites was
published. Sometime in deed he lived among us here, but after a while began to
be so noted and dealt with, as fynding the Church to be no harbor for him (but
that he must walk better, or be cast out from among us) he returned to England,
where he knew he might be retained in that Church, and where Th. White his
fellow will (no doubt) brook him well enough. But further he says, the Elders
here defended that he ought not to be publicly dealt withal for it, because
it was not orderly made publik. Indeed we hold, that private sins should
privately be dealt with, and if any bring in public without private dealing
going before (according to the rule given by Christ, Math, 18.15.16.) we suffer
it not, but rebuke them that so walk. Whereupon this White himself being by one
of the brethren reproved for so dealing with the party aforesaid, Mr R. Ia.
it seems still to stick on his stomach: and the more, because afterward upon
speech thereof my self with the rest of the Elders signified our dislike of
such disorderly and evil walking. Touching his repentance, such as were then
present do testify that he showed it for such things as could be proved against
him, and in other things stood upon his clearing. But whatsoever this White
has w^itten here against him, now that he is returned to the Church of
England, whither himself also is revolted, the point of his weapon (if there be
any sharpnes in it) is turned into his own* and that Churches bowels.

The same falls out in his next instance about adultery. For that man also is
declined to the Church of England, and there now lives. Thus still is he
snared in his own words. But yet further see how he deals here in that
which follows. He says, R.B. was publicly accused in our meeting, for
creeping in at a window to come to bed to another man's wife. That this is
false, is testified by such as were present at the meeting spoken of, and that
he did not creep in at a window so to do, we hear is testified even by
themselves from whom the speech of these things did first proceed.

Which being so, why or how should we deal with him publicly thereabout?
And touching the man spoken of, it is well known that as he has sinned, so he
has also repented: having therein before him the example of David in Israel.
Where if White had lived, as he has done among us, would it not have been
counted horrible (to use his own word) so to have dealt with them, as he has
dealt with us?

His next instance is of one of our Elders, Mr St. against whom he objecteth in
particular three things; The first, filthynes; and of this (to utter his malice
the more) he speaks four times in a few leaves together, sometimes under the
terms of filthynes with his wives daughter, sometimes of uncleanness, sometimes
of incest. For which Mr. St. has called him before the Magistrates here, for a
sclaunderer, desiring that proof may be brought, or satisfaction made according
to justice. The second is, supporting uncleanness in a woman a member of our
Church. The woman he has named Whites disco. p. 7. in the margent.
before to be Iud. Hol. For which also she has called him before the
Magistrates of this ci^^ where we live. The third is, refusing to pray with
his own vvif^ a member likewise of the same Church. Towchi^g which he says,
h^ is persuaded such cases may and do sometimes fall out between man and wife,
as while ^he things so continue between them, they may lawfully absteyne from
prayer the one with the other, using all good means within their own walls to
be reconciled together, and to live so each with other as their prayers may not
be interrupted: And that he has not refused to pray with his wife, but in such
case and manner. These are the particulars objected, after which a general is
annexed of worse carriage then this, often complained of by his wife and
committed by him, which the man says he is ashamed to me^tio^. But as he
names not the thing so neither does he mention the persons to whom she has
complained thereof. And if there were not some other cause in it, who can think
that he is ashamed to mention any thing, that has a forehead to write and
deal so shamefully as he has done?

Towching mine own knowledge and dealing about these things (to speak of no
other now) this Th. VVhites wife can testify what I did therein a good while
since, whereof she has particular knowledge, and which by this dealing of his I
am now constrained to publish. As I remenber, about some five years since,
there came unto me a brother of the Church yet living, and told me with great
heavines how he heard that Mr St. had lain with his wives daughter, A.P.
and that the matter should be heard publikly in the Church. I told him, this
was the first time I heard it, and inquired who it was that reported it to him:
which he told me: Then I went my self and inquired from one to another of whom
they had it, til by degrees it was brought to Rose Ph. (now the wife of this
Th. White) to whom when I came, she did for some things which she had spoken
name her authors of whom she heard them, but for this, could name none at all,
but confess^d it was her own addition: and then showed great sorrow and
repentance for her so doing. Now how she was rebuked for this her evil dealing
at that time, I need not here to write: But leaving the Reader to lay this
dealing of hers then, and this of her husbands now together, and accordingly to
esteem thereof: I will proceed to the next instances here alleged.

They are of Iud. Hol. Tho. Can. Ia. Ioh. etc. whom he mentions here by name
to be open offenders, but shows not how or wherein. Of Iud. Hol. I wrote
before, how she has called him before the Magistrates hereabout. And so has
Jacob Ioh: a man that has laid down his life for the Name of Christ, being
for his witness thereof condemned to death, At Northampton.
and brought to the place of execution, and then reprived, and since ^ent away
out of the La^d as banished. And touching Tho: Ca. himself that here finds
fault for reteyning him as being an open offender, does afterward in a
postscript at Whites discov. page 26.
the end of his book, find fault with the casting of him out, as being a man
penitent, and therefore not so to be dealt withal, but still to be retained,
according to Christ's rule, Mat. 18.22. Luc. 17.4. By his own confession
therefore, such as repent of their sins, are to be retained in the Church,
and not now to be counted for open offenders. What means he then thus to
write of any persons repenting of their sins, as if while such were retained,
the Church were not separate from open offenders; or they unfit members for the
fellowship thereof.

But if all these things were as he says, yet are they not in our
constitution, and therefore not of weight against the description aforesaid.
Which himself perceiving, attempteth therefore otherwise to prove that even in
the constitution of our Church we hold false ways. Where note by the way, how
himself yields that the fo^mer evils which he has objected, are not in our
constitution. And as not they, so neither any other. For (as we have said, and
are constreyned often to repeat it) the calling of Christ and our covenant,
which is to obey the faith of the Gospel, excludes all evil and false ways
whatsoever. Yet let us consider the particulars which here he has alleged

The first is, that he says we hold the Lords prayer is not to be used as a
prayer, contrary to Christ's express commandment, which is neither against
reason nor proportion of faith. I answer, if it be Christ's commandment so to
use it, then did the Apostles to whom it was given, both so use it themselves,
and teach others likewise to do. Neither of which can be showed. Then ought we
always whenever we pray, to use this for our prayer, seeing Christ's express
commandment is, When ye pray, say, Our Father etc. And so the Apostles and
Christians in all ages have sinned, when they prayed and said it not. Yea and
these men themselves do above all other transgress herein, who pray many times
without using of it, and yet think it to be Christ's express commandment,
which is neither against reason nor proportion of faith. Yet also when they
shall have considered, that it conteyneth all things, whatsoever from the
beginning of the world to the end thereof have been or can be asked aright by
any, it would be known with what reason or proportion of faith any particular
person or Church can so use it as they speak, without special explication and
application of the several heads to them selves and their present occasions.

Secondly, he says our opinion is contrary to the tenor of the words, having
the form of a prayer in all things, as Our Father, give us, and Amen annexed
in the end, which shows that they are petitions not positions or rules
which are set down in an other form, Mat. 7.7. and 21.22. 1 Ioh. 5.14.
Ansvv. If it be intended by the tenor of the words having the form of a
prayer, that it should be so used: then besides the answers already made, I
ask, Whether we should use it, as it is set down by Matthew, or by Luke. For
Luke does not only vary from Matthew in diverse words, but also omitteth the
whole Conclusion, yea and the word Amen, which is here alleged for a proof
that it is so to be used as is aforesaid. But in deed other use may be made
(then these men do) of the propounding it thus by way of petitions rather then
of positions or rules, as in other places is done: Namely, that Christ hereby
would show the right manner of praying unto God, that we may with confidence
come and speak unto him in our prayers, propou^ding our requests holily,
carefully, reverendly, without babbling, according to our several occasions
etc. And so meets with the manifold errors that in the use of prayer have
crept into the world: as may be seen among the Papists, Neutral-Protestants,
Anabaptists, Adamians, Euchetians, and other heretics Idolaters superstitious
and ignorant people: some thinking that we should not our selves come directly
to God in prayer, but use the mediation of some Saints or Angels etc. others,
that reading on a book is prayer to God, though it be of other men's words
prescribed unto us; others, that we should repeat the same things over again
and again; others, that we should use sighs without words; others, that we
should not pray unto God at all, seeing he knows what we need; and others,
that we should ever be praying, giving no place either to other exercises of
religion, or to any labor of the hands, etc. All which and the like heresies,
and abuses of the heavenly and most comfortable use of prayer, Christ has
prevented and condemned by this his direction for prayer, propounded after the
form and manner aforesaid.

3. Thirdly, he says our opinion is contrary to the use of al Christians, that
we read of, as before out of Tertullian and others may be alleged. Answ. Then
is it contrary to the use of the Apostles and Primitive Churches of whom we
read in the Scriptures. Which if any could show, that alone would end the
question: whereas the use and testimony of any other persons Churches or ages
cannot do it: As Tertullian himself shows when he says, Contra Marcion. lib.
4. c. 5.
That is truest which is first, that is first which is from the beginning, that
is from the beginning which is from the Apostles. But now admitting his proofs
were good, that the Lords prayer (as it is called) were to be used as a prayer,
yet were it then further needful to be known, whether it be Christ's
commandment that we should use it for our prayer alone by it self, or that we
should join it with other prayers conceived by our selves withal. If he say,
we should use it alone, his own testimony out of Tertullian (besides their own
practice) is against him, who says, that it being premised as a foundation,
Lib. de Orat.
other petitions may be built there upon. And if he say, we should join it
with the other prayers conceived by our selves, the practice and testimony of
the Apostles is against him. For which see, Mat. 8.25. Act. 1.24.25. and 4.24
-- 30. Phil. 1.3.4.9.10.11. and 4.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.18.19.23.

2. The second thing is, that he says we hold it not lawful for the innocent
parties, to reteyne the offender, as the wife her husband, or the husband his
wife, if either party have committed adultery, no though the innocent party
upon the others repentance, forgiving the others sin, be desirous still to
live with the other party in the marriage covenant as before, but have
excommunicated the parties innocent for so doing. This in deed we have held
(the most of us) heretofore: and some of us are Yet resting with peace in their
difference of judgment therabout.
so persuaded still. And while we were generally so minded, we also held it our
duty accordingly to walk, taking the innocent party that retained such
offenders, though upon their repentance, yet to be defiled and to live in sin
with them, as 1 Cor. 6.16.
coupling themselves with an harlot, But since upon further consideration of
this question, discussing it among our selves, when we could not find divorce
in the Scriptures any where commanded, but Mat. 19.
permitted only; and that such offenders repenting thereof, are not to be
reputed in that case of harlots, but to be 1 Cor. 6.9.11.
washed from their sin and justified in Jesus Christ: we have upon these and
other like reasons altered our former judgment, and now have thus observed and
agreed thus concerning this matter, That where the Magistrates inflict not
death upon such offenders (as by the law of God they should) it is in the
liberty and power of the innocent party, either for that crime to put away the
offender, or upon their repentance to reteyne them: But this with these
cautions, 1. So as themselves were no means or cause of the others so
transgressing. 2. That they be no nourishers of them in the like for time to
come. 3. That this remission and acceptance of the offender by the innocent
party be done before sufficient winesses. 4. That this also (as the marriage at
the first) be always in the Lord. And for the Churches and the Ministers duty
therein, that it is only to teach and require of them repentance, after the
example of Christ, Ioh. 8.10.11. or else to see them cast out of the Church,
according to the Apostles doctrine, 1 Cor. 5.11.12.13. This is that which now
the most of us do think concerning this question: being notwithstanding ready
to hear, if any can show us better from the word of God, which is the ground
and rule of the constitution of our Church.

Touching the case and excommunication of H. C. and E. H. his wife (of which he
speaks both here and afterward again) how will he prove the persons spoken
of to be repentant, when as the one of them denied the fact, which she had
before confessed to two of the brethren; and the other in the judgment of the
Church showed himself unrepentant many ways, which I will not here mention.
And if he do not show them to have repented, how has he proved that for which
he alleged them? Besides that there were also other causes for which they were
excommunicated.

As for that which he says, diverse of us have accused themselves of adultery
that so they might be rid of their wives: this also he should have proved,
and not only have said it. For we know that the persons whom he names ( W.
H. and T. C.) have said and avouched earnestly, that they did it not to that
end, but being persuaded that they ought not to continue with their wives,
having by their adultery broken the bond of marriage between them. Besides, if
by him or any it could be proved so to be as he says, he knows we would not
bear with such wickedness, but deal with them according to their demerit:
howsoever without all shame he do thus abuse us.

And here by the way let me a little note this man's crossing of himself, and
bad dealing against us still. Before in the beginning of his book, he imputed
unto us abounding with adulteries, and that above others, as if it were a sin
common and borne withal among us, and this also more then among others. Yet
here now his objectio^ against us, about the case of adultery, is such, as any
may see he thinks we have been too severe therein, and that above others. What
this our opinion was, is showed before. Wherein although we have changed our
judgment, as is aforesaid: yet even this particular shows how greatly we have
always detested that sin, and how contrary this White is to himself, that he
might by any means deal wretchedly against us.

3. The third thing is, that he says we have altered many things which we held
in our constitution, as among other, that it was not lawful for Apostates to
bear office. He says, many things, yet names but one. Towching which I might
answer, that although many of us did in deed so take it, yet it was not here so
generally received by all as he seems to suppose, because that as there was
diverse times occasion of question about it, there were of the brethren that
showed themselves to be diversely minded: but at length the matter being often
and much urged, we did thus agree about it, That we think it not meet to choose
such into office as have before time declyned from the truth, without good
caution first had thereabout: As namely, 1. That there be consideration had
both of the nature of the thing done, and of the quality of the person, and of
the estate of the Church. 2. That the Church have good and due trial of such
being returned, before they choose them into office. 3. That with these cautions,
the fittest be taken into office whom God gives in the present estate of the
Church. And all these things so minded and observed of us, as if at any time a
better way be showed out of the word of God, we be ready to receive it in the
Lord. This is that whereof hitherto we have agreed about this matter: the
particulars whereof there will be occasion to set down more at large
hereafter. But now admitting that the whole Church held it not lawful for such
to bear office, and afterward altered it (as here he says): yet was this
alteration but of our judgment and practice, not of the Churches constitution,
as I have showed before: and therefore his collection hereupon (that we held
false ways in our constitution, and by consequent, then were no true Churches)
is both false and frivolous.

4. The fourth he propounds as a question, saying of us, What would it profit
them to b^ free from false ways in their constitution, ^ their practice be not
according to their profession? But the question and point here treated on is,
whether the description aforesaid be true, or not; and whether we our selves be
a true Church according unto it? If we err in practice, is it therefore a
false description, or we a false Church? The Churches of Asia and Achaia erred
greatly in their practice, were they not therefore true Churches according to
the said description?

But yet where the practice is not according to the profession, it makes the
sin the more grievous. True, and therefore Tho: White his sin is
unspeakably grievous, as all they do know who have seen what great and earnest
profession of the truth he has made heretofore, from which now he is
grievously fallen.

But for our selves he asks further, since their knowledge is but in part
as well as their love, are not they as well as others subject to err in
constitution as well as practice? If he mean in judgment as well as practice, we
grant it: and we have always professed it: howsoever he write against us, as
if we were such as professed perfection of knowledge and practice in this life:
from which error himself knows us to be as far, as we know him to be from
truth and godlynes. But if he mean by our constitution, the way of God
wherein we are set, the calling of Christ with the Churches covenant, which
gives being unto the Church, then I answer, that difference must be put
between the way of God it self, and our weak walking therein; between the
calling of Christ together with the covenant of the Church, and our sinning and
transgressing in our own ways notwitstanding; between the Church considered
in Christ the head thereof, in whom we are washed from all our sins, guyded
in in the way of truth, and preserved to eternal life, and between the Church
considered in the members thereof, as we are in our selves every one sinful
and subject daily to err both in judgment and practice: And this not only in
the members severally, but in all of us jointly together. If this distinction
be not observed, who can show that ever there was or can be true Church upon
the earth, or how we can have true comfort in this life to our selves, or
esteem and discern aright between things that differ, as we ought? And if it
be observed, any may see that all his exceptions against us are of no moment.
It is not our knowledge or practice, but our calling and covenant in Christ that
secludeth in our constitution all false and evil ways, whether as yet seen or
not.

For which cause also I need not here stand upon his needles and erroneous
discourse about that which he calls a shift, though in deed it be a point
much to be respected, namely, Of this, I think my self have had speech with
this Th. White heretofore howsoever now he write as if he had never heard it of
any of us.
that a true Church must be separate from all false ways, which they see. For
as I have showed already, we ought if we will consider aright of a Church, to
look at their calling and covenant in Christ, which is from all false ways
whatsoever, seen or unseen, to the obedience of faith. Howsoever therefore we
have erred or may err in judgment or practice (as we and all men in this life
are always subject to do) yet does it not therefore follow, either that the
description aforesaid is not good, or that we are not a true Church
notwithstanding.

Further towching our selves, we acknowledge and profess before all men, that
diverse things heretofore observed among us at the first, we have since altered
and do from time to time alter and amend, as God gives us by his word to
discern better therein: Yea and hereunto are we bound and have power in Christ
even by the constitution of our Church. So free from all false ways is the
constitution it self, and yet we that are in it subject to err notwithstanding
many ways. So far are we also from the strange opinion and impiety of them,
that having in this latter age of the world disclaymed the Pop^s person and
rec^iv^d some truths of the Gospel, yet reteyning many abominations of
Antichrist withal, would now stand still, and admit of no further proceeding
or alteration among them. As if they had at first seen and received the whole
truth and all the ordinances of Christ. Or as if Antichrist should not now by
degrees be discovered and consumed, as heretofore he rose up and was exalted. 2
These. 2. Rev. 14. and 17. and 18. and 19. chap. with Ier. 51.25.26.45.46.

And now by that which has been said let the Reader observe, whether this
fellow have not entrapped himself and his mother Church, while he thought to
have ensnared us. Neither let any be so simple, as to give credit in the cause
of religion to any, further or otherwise but as warrant and confirmation is
brought out of the word of God, which is the ground and rule of all truth; nor
to refuse that which is approved by it, for the aberration, opposition, or
calumniation of any whosoever they be.

His abuse both here and other where in his book, of that which we have
published in print, I leave also to the Reader to observe, and for himself to
answer to him that knows his heart. As for I. N. whom he names in particular
more then others whom he would insinuate, for borrowing and making no
conscience to pay again: he has called him before the Magistrates here, as
others before mentioned: affirming and offering to show how in the very
particular alleged by White (when he was here demanded his proof) for thus
divulging him, he has offered his creditour goods sufficient for his debt with
overplus: and having had to deal with him for much, has satisfied all to a
little, yet remaining: having also had hindrance by the sickness and otherwise.
And for the general, we acknowledge that men ought to be careful both how they
borrow and how they pay again, and should measure these, as all other
affairs, with judgment and conscience, according to godlynes. Psalm. 37.21. and
112.5. Romans 13.8. And we know also, that yet notwithstanding it is the case
sometime of men fearing God, not only to be but even to die in debt: As we read
of one of the sons of the Prophets; 2 King. 4.1.

But all this which hitherto he has said, being not enough, either for the
vent of his own rancour and malice against us, or to please our adversaries
whose favor he would purchase by traducing of us: he now further pretends to
frame an opposition between our practice, and the Treatise entitled, A true
description out of the word of God, of the visible Church: thus setting
himself to seek and abuse against us whatsoever he can out of any of our
writings. To show his wicked dealing herein as it is, would require to insist
upon the particulars of that description, and to compare therewith the estate
and walking of our Church: and that would ask a long treatise, which here I
purpose not. It shall suffice, that the Reader, especially such as have
knowledge of our Church which he blames, and of the Church of England to which
he is returned, do compare them both with that description: and accordingly
esteem of both as he shall find the estate of them to be in deed and in truth.
Thereby also will plainly appear, how this adversary neither writes nor
walks in the fear of God: to whom notwithstanding he must give account of al
these things. And for the particulars he mentions, that the equity of our
cause and iniquity of his dealing may better appear, I will in the treating
of them first set down the words of that description from whence he would draw
his opposition, and then speak of the particulars themselves.

And first, for the body of the Church considered in her parts (as here he
would seem to except against us from one to another, through the several parts
of this body) thus it is set down in that description of a true Church, A true
descript. of a visible Church.
Page 2. Suerly if this Church be considered in her parts, it shall appear
most beautiful, yea most wonderful, and even ravishing the senses to
conceive, much more to behold, what then to enjoy so blessed a communion. For
behold her King and Lord is the King of peace, and Lord himself of all glory.
She enjoys most holy and heavenly laws, most faithful and vigilant
Pastors, most sincere and pure Teachers, most careful and upright Governors,
most diligent and trusty Deacons, most loving and sober Relievers, and a most
humble, meek, obedient, faithful, and loving people, every stone living elect
and precious, every stone has his beauty, his burden, and his order. All
bound to edify one another, exhort, reprove, and comfort one another lovingly
as to their own members, faithfully as in the eyes of God. Thus it stands in
that description. Towching which now I would ask, 1. Whether he hold this
description herein to be true and agreeable to the word of God. 2. Whether he
dare deny Jesus Christ to be the King and Lord of our Church. 3. Whether he
acknowledge him only to be the King and Lord of every true visible Church upon
the earth. 4. Whether these be the Offices and functions which he as Lord and
King has appointed to his Church, namely, Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons,
Relievers. 5. Whether these be had in the Church of England to which he is now
gone, and in whom they are there to be found. 6. Whether the Church Officers
there be so qualified, as here is set down. 7. Finally, whether if any would
compare the estate of that Church, in the body, officers, members, laws, and
walking thereof, with the description of a true visible Church out of the word
of God, he might not make another manner treatise and other manner of objections
against them, then this Priest of theirs does against us.

But to proceed, for the Pastor (with which office he begins first) thus are
his qualities and duties set down in that description of a true Church, Page 3.
Their Pastor must be apt to teach, no young Sch^ler, able to divide the word
aright, holding fast that faithful word according to doctrine, that he may
also be able to exhort, rebuke, improve, with who^some doctrine, and to
convince them that say against it: He must be a man that loves goodness: he
must be wise, righteous, holy, temperate: he must be of life vn^eproveable, as
Gods Steward: he must be generally well reported of, and one that rules his
own household under obedience with all honesty: he must be modest, humble,
meek, gentle, and loving: he must be a man of great patience, compassion,
labor and diligence: he must always be careful and watchful over the flock
whereof the Lord has made him overseer, with all willingness and chearfulnes,
not holding his office in respect of persons, but doing his duty to every
soul, as he will answer before the chief Shepherd, etc. And afterward, page
4. The Pastors office is, to feed the sheep of Christ in green and wholesome
pastures of his word, and lead them to the still waters, even to the pure
fountain and river of life. He must guide and keep those sheep by that
heavenly sheephook and pastoral staff of the word, thereby drawing them to
him, thereby looking into their souls, even into their most secret thoughts:
Thereby discerning their diseases, and thereby curing them: applying to every
disease a fit and convenient medicine, and according to the quality and danger
of the disease, give warning to the Church, that they may orderly proceed to
excommunication. Further, he must by this his sheephook watch over and defend
his flock from raven^us beasts and the Wolf, and take the little foxes, etc.
Thus far that description. Now among these qualities and duties he excepteth
only about two: the one concerning patience, the other love and compassion:
Which also are such, as it is fitter for the Church and people with whom I have
lived, to speak therein then my self. Neither will I set to excuse my self,
knowing how subject I am to fall into infi^mity, and to fail in duty otherwise
then I ought or would.

1. Therefore towching the former, which is of impaciency, I will not stand to
speak what I could, about the persons whom he names in particular, the dealing
then used, the Discourse now written, the other witnesses unmentioned, and the
like: Neither to alledg, how deserved reproof and severity is oftentimes
accounted too much sharpnes and impaciencie; and that anger sometimes is both
needful and lawful etc. But omitting these things, I will for my self answer
this, that I am a man subject to like passions as others be. And if Moses that
man of God and Number. 12.3.
meekest of all men on the earth, yet had this spirit so vexed, as he spoke
unadvisedly with his lips: Ps. 106.33.
what am I that I should not much more so think and acknowledge of my self, who
am so privy to my own weakness, as I am?

2. And for the second thing, which is concer^ing love and compassion, why
should I think otherwise but that I may sometimes fayl therein? Yet this man
for it of all other might have laid his hand on his mouth, to whom (when at
first he came a stranger and poor into these countries) I gave meat and
drink and lodging about nine or ten weeks together, till he returned again
into England.

Towching my Father (of whom he speaks in particular) I do and will always
acknowledge that I was so bound to him both by nature and for his care and
charge of my bringing up, as I never did or could do enough to show my self
sufficiently thankful. And what then should I do speaking of any thing I have
done by any means that way? And in particular for the time when he was here,
what I did and offered him to do, at his coming hither, remaining here, and
going from hence, with other particulars that might be noted, I will not here
speak neither, what my self could if it were another case, or what diverse
others know and could testify if it were needful. Neither will I stand to show
what I could towching the pretense which he makes about his being here in
necessity.

Of M. Sl. his abuse of me and manner of dealing at the time here intended, I
will forbear also to speak what he knows I might. If he at that time spoke
hereof (as here is affirmed) why might I not pass by it with silence, as I did
at the same time a multitude of his raylings and contumelies, as White himself
and the many witnesses then present did see and can testify, if they will?
When Shemei rayled on David, and Rabshakeh on Israel, David held his peace, and
Hezekiahs people answered not a word. 2 Samuel, 16.5 -- 13. 2 King. 18.36. Yet now
I thought good to speak and write thus much considering there is a time to
speak, as there is a time to keep silence. Eccles. 3.7. Pro. 26.4 5.

But to leave these men, that which I will here speak further is this only,
that it is needful for all in all things carefully to observe and follow the
rules prescribed by Christ, Deuteronomy. 5.32 1 Timothy 5.21. Mat. 10.37.
not declining to the right hand or to the left; not preferring one to another;
not yielding to our own affections and desires, but submitting them always to
the will and love of God. As we read, that Levi was commended of Moses and
blessed of God, for not respecting father, mother, brethren, or children, but
preferring before them the keeping of the word and covenant of the Lord: Deu.
33.8.9. And it is noted in the description aforesaid, among the Pastors duties
there mentioned, that he hold not his office in respect of persons, but do his
duty to every soul, as he will answer before the chief Shepherd. In the
performance whereof also the Pastor and other Elders and governou^s of the
Church are to be accounted and regarded as Fathers. But I will no further
insist hereupon: neither speak I these things to excuse my self in any thing I
have done or omitted otherwise then I should. I acknowledge my sins are many
and my infirmities great: and my strength and salvation is only in the Lord
Jesus: For whose sake I have (through his mercy) suffered much rebuke, and I
trust shall patiently bear it to the end.

Next he comes to speak of the Teacher, whose qualities and duties are thus
set down in the description aforesaid, Page 3. Their Doctor or Teacher must be
a man apt to teach, able to divide the word of God aright, and to deliver sound
and wholesome doctrine from the same, still building upon that sound groundwork,
he must be mighty in the Scriptures, able to convince the gainsayers, and
careful to deliver his doctrine pure, sound and plain, not with curiosity or
affectation, but so that he may edify the most simple, approving it to every
man's conscience: he must be of life vnreproveable, one that can govern his
own household, he must be of manners sober, temperate, modest, gentle and
loving, etc. And afterward, Page 5. His special care must be to build upon
that only true groundwork, gold, silver, and precious stones, that his work
may endure the trial of the fire, and by the light of the same fire, reveal
the Timber, Hay, and Stubble of false Teachers: He must take diligent heed to
keep the Church from errors. And further he must deliver his doctrine so
plainly, simply, and purely, that the Church may increase with the increasing
of God, and grow up unto him which is the head, Christ Jesus. Hitherto is that
description: wherein the qualities and duties set down, be many and great.

1. Yet cannot this Adversary satisfy himself with them all as he would: and
therefore coming to make exceptions against the Teacher, he fetches his first,
out of the general description of the Church spoken of before, objecting that
the Teacher is sleyned with hypocrisy: and to prove it he alleges his
dealing concerning G. I. M. Sl. Yet shows it not so much as in any one
particular: thinking belike that some are so simple in themselves or so set
against us, as they will take his word for proof sufficient, who ^eyther
knows that dealing himself, and in the things which he knows can ly so
notoriously, as if he had the art of lying and would be a teacher thereof unto
others.

2. The second thing he objecteth, is apostasy: because that many years since
having received this cause he did sometimes yield to hear the Ministry of the
Church of England. But since that time has so approved himself among us, both
in the witness of the truth and in the service of the Church, as has been for
the great help and comfort of us all, and my self in particular bound to
testify concerning him, as Paul did of Marcus Barnabas sisters son, that that
he has been my workfellow unto the kingdom of God, which has been to my
consolation. Col. 4.10.11. For the question it self and our account of
Apostasy, I shall write more particularly hereafter.

3. The third thing is, that he says he has been a means to bring in and
defend false doctrines. But what be they? First, The latter of those two before
mentioned. Now that latter was about apostasy in the matter aforesaid. So as
then himself accounts them to be apostates, that having held our cause do
afterward yield to hear the Ministry of the Church of England; and that it is
a false doctrine, that any such may afterward bear office in the Church. And
what then is this Whites own case, who being a Minister of the Church of
England, left both that Church and Ministry, and received our cause, and
witnessed the truth against them, and yet now has yielded not only to hear
but even to execute himself the Ministry of that Church again?

But he will say, that among the Errata (at the end of his book) he noted this
for one, that for the word (latter) we should here read, former. I have
observed it: and well in deed might he note it among his Errata, who even while
he would blame others of error, does so straungely err himself as to put
latter for former, one contrary for another. But this might be an oversight
(as often falls out in printing) which therefore I would not have noted, but
that I think there is a worse thing in it: namely, that at first he both wrote
and meant it of the latter, which is about apostasy, until he had himself
apostate from the t^ueth and executed again his Ministry received from the
Prelates in England: and thereupon now would alter it, measuring the doctrines
of religion, not by the word of God, but as may best serve his own turn. And I
am persuaded the rather thus to think for these reasons: 1 because when he
began to set himself to be an enemy of this Church and could not prevail as
he desired, he then began to make question about apostasy, whether any such
might bear office in the Church: 2. If we understand it here of the former, as
his Errata now would have it read, it is nothing to the purpose at all: seeing
there is in it no speech of any points of doctrine, but of hypocrisy; and
seeing an hypocrite may notwithstanding teach true doctrine. For else it would
follow, that neither Judas nor White himself did heretofore teach true doctrine
when they preached, because Judas was and he is an hypocrite, both of them
through hypocrisy betraying Christ into the hands of his enemies.

His other proof of false doctrines which he pretends is set down after his
woonted manner, others that may be alleged: yet not naming any, which no doubt
he would have done if he could, or if he durst adventure the trial of them
with the Teacher of our Church whom he thus envieth and abuses, who
notwithstanding for his learning, wisdom, and godlynes, as also for his
faithful teaching of the Church and upright walking toward all, is so well
known and approved, as neither he nor we need regard any adversaries malice
and opposition against him.

After this he comes from the teaching to the ruling Elders, whose properties
and duties are thus noted in the description abovesaid, Page 4. Their Elders
must be of wisdom and judgment, endued with the Spirit of God, able to
discern between cause and cause, between plea and plea, and accordingly to
prevent and redress evils, always vigilant and intending to see the statutes,
ordinances, and laws of God kept in the Church, and that not only by the
people in obedience, but to see the Officers do their duties. These men must be
of life likewise vnreproveable, governing their own families orderly, they must
be also of manners sober, gentle, modest, loving, temperate, etc. And afterward
again, page 5. Their especial care must be, to see the ordinances of God
truly taught and practiced, as well by the Officers in doing their duty
uprightly, as to see that the people obey willingly and readily. It is their
duty to see the Congregation holily and quietly ordered, and no way disturbed,
by the contentio^s and disobedient, froward and obstinate: not taking away the
liberty of the least, but upholding the right of all, wisely judging of times
and circumstances. They must be ready assistaunts to the Pastor and Teachers,
helping to bear their burden, but not intruding into their office. Thus is the
description. Now towching our Elders, he takes here his exception against two
of them. The first is, Mr Da. St. against whom it may be he is the more eagerly
carried, because he discerned so quickly into him, being a notable white
hypocrite, and dealt so plainly and roundly with him as he did: And therefore
also exc^pteth not a word against him, for his ability to discern into persons
and causes and to deal with them accordingly, nor for sundry other of the
properties and duties here required, though they be many and weighty. Yet some
things he speaks of, which he had twice before, besides that which he has
also hereafter: so as I need not repeat and speak of them, as he does again
and again. Yet somewhat more I will note here touching the particulars
excepted out of the description.

1. The first is, of being endued with the Spirit of God: Of which we have seen
many and great testimonies in Mr St. from time to time. He has been an
ancient disciple of Christ in the faith of the Gospel this many years; He
has given up his life for the name of the Lord, being adjudged to death, and
so remaining many years under the sentence and daily expectation thereof, till
he was banished; He now lives still an exile for the same truth of Christ; And
in the government of the Church has had to deal with so many causes,
persons, and dispositions (yea oppositions also of sundry people) as if he had
not been endued with the spirit of God, and that in great measure, he had never
been able so to have endured and waded through them all, as he has done. Which
also may both stre^gthe^ himself still in the Lord, and stop the mouth of all
his adversaries. And for this Th. White himself, let it here be considered: 1.
Whether he be fit to bear any office at all, yea or to be so much as a member
in the Church of God, if he be tried but by this one particular, of being
endued with the Spirit of God. 2 With what spirit he has written this book of
his. 3. Whether he have not therein many times and sundry ways blasphemed the
holy spirit of God. For which he shall answer to the Lord.

2. The second thing is, that he says he would defend the transgressing of the
laws of God in himself and others. Note, that he says not he has done it,
but that he would do it. And how shows he this? Not so much as by pretense of
any one particular for proof thereof, Yet this is the man that would persuade
his Reader he could make due proof of any thing he lays to our charge.

3. The third thing is, about the governing of his house: for which he
refers to that he has else where cited, and so do I to that which is there
said. Yet let himself take this withal, that if the things be true which are
reported and observed concerning his own family, he might have found work
enough at home, and cause enough to cast a beam out of his own eye. But I
will not follow his course in this manner (howsoever it might be just) to deal
with him as he does with others.

4. The fourth is, of cruelty and tyranny: for proof whereof he allegeth that
some of our own members have complained, that if they had a matter as clear
as the sun against him, yet durst they not deal with him for it. But who be
these some he speaks of? why does he not name them at all? Or would he have
us to think that they be some such as hate the light, knowing that their works
are evil, and whom he therefore concealeth: that he might show himself with
his fellows Mr P^. and the rest to be fit receivers for such reporters? Or why
did he not observe, that the Elders must be men of wisdom and judgment, able
to discern between cause and cause, plea and plea, and that it is their duty
to repress the contentious and disobedient, froward and obstinate? Which by
whomsoever it be done, who can otherwise think but such will be as ready to
open their mouths against them, as they are to please themselves in their own
eyes? But howsoever they may for a while lurk and walk in the dark, yet God in
his time will bring them to light and discover them, as he has done this White
himself and sundry other the like heretofore.

5. The other of the Elders he speaks of, is Mr St. Mer. against whom he
excepteth for Apostasy. The matter was thus. About thirteen years since, a
little while after he was come to this cause which we profess, being in the
country with his friends, he was there persuaded that he would hear some of
the Ministers of the Church of England preach: Which he did once: And
straightway after being affected therewith, did it no more. Which also he made
known himself, whereas otherwise it was unknown to us. Now after that time
living with the Church, and being well approved among us, he was about five
years since chosen to be one of the Elders. Thus is the case: wherein now mark
this hypocrites dealing. The qualities and duties required in the Elders being
so many and great, as in the description are noted: was there nothing whereat
he could except, but this only? And was his malice such, as rather then he
would say nothing, he would except eve^ for that which himself accounts to be
good and lawful? Let such dealing then return into his own bosom, and be a
comfort to such as be thus abused by him.

From the Elders, he comes to the Deacons, whose qualities and office is set
down in the aforesaid description of a true Church, page 4. Their Deacons must
be men of honest report, having the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience,
endued with the holy Ghost: they must be grave, temperate, not given to
excess, nor to filthy lucre. And afterward again, Page 5. The Deacons office
is faithfully to gather and collect by the ordinance of the Church, the goods
and benevolence of the faithful, and by the same direction, diligently and
trust^lie to distribute them according to the necessity of the Saints:
Further they must enquire and consider of the proportion of the wants both of
the Officers and other poor, and accordingly relate unto the Church, that
provision may be made. Here he excepteth only against one of our Deacons, Mr
C. Bow. To whom about eleven years since, the Magistrates of Narden did once
(and not weekly, as this man intimates) send a little money to be given to the
poor of the Church: which he together with one of the Elders (Mr. G. Kniston)
did accordingly bestow upon such as they judged to stand most in need. Whereof
because goodwife Colg. (the woman of whom he speaks) had not a part,
therevpo^ by her means it seems was this report raised of Mr. Bow. which now
this fellow has published: and for which with his many such like instances, he
is by Mr B. called before the Magistrates as a sclanderer. And touching the
woman no marvel if she so abused him, who has since in other things carried
her self so ungodly, as she is cast out of the Church, and so remains. And
for Mr. Bow: how well he has approved himself in his office, I shall not need to
relate: neither need he regard any sclanderous tongue or pen, knowing his own
integrity, and having the Churches testimony, to which he has with good
approbation ministered in that office now about fourteen years.

After this dealing with sundry of our officers in particular, the adversary
comes to speak of the Elders jointly. Against whom he obiecteth, that we
called R.W. (that is Rose White his wife) before us in the first place, for a
private thing. But it was, for that her child was kept unbaptized; and for that
we heard she had entertained Ma. Sl. at her table, who is a man excommunicated
by our Church, whereof she was then a member. For these things only was she
called before the Elders: and for the first, together with her apostasy from
the truth which before time she had professed with us, she was a while after
excommunicated by ^he whole Church. For the latter whenas she answered that it
was her husbands doing, without her liking, and against her will (though not so
signified unto him) and that her self gave the excommunicate no countenance as
approving his estate, we rested therein: instructing her only how to carry her
self in such cases for time to come, and exhorting her to be careful
accordingly to walk as by the word of God we have rule and direction. Now for
the hypocrite her husband himself, whereas he says here, the Church of Christ
do privately admonish a private sin of a holy and loving affection: how will
he show this in the Church of England, whither he is gone? or does he hold it
not to be the Church of Christ? or that it is by some privilege not bound to
the ordinances of Christ? Not to speak how himself by his own mouth is
condemned, whiles he acknowledges that Christians ought thus to walk, and yet
publishes he cares not what, things private or public, true or false, and
that with a wicked and malicious affection.

Lastly, from the officers he comes to the people: objecting against them
uncleanness, cousoning, disgracing, backbiting, and undermining one of another
amongst themselves. But this only in general terms: And so might any unclean
mouth, and backbiting sclanderer, traduce any people in the world. Will he now
then apply to himself and to his practice and The Prelate of Land. etc.
consorts in this work, that which the Prophet speaks, With our tongue will we
prevail; our lips are our own; who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4. Why
boastest thou thy self in malice, o man of power? the loving kindness of God
indureth every day. Thy tongue imagines mischief, it is like a sharp rasor, o
thou worker of deceit. Thou love evil more then good, lies more then to
speak the truth. Selah. Thou love all words that may destroy, o deceitful
tongue.

But above all, mark now the wickedness and blasphemy of his conclusion of this
point. Which that it may the better appear, and with less praejudice of
others be regarded, I will put the case in an instance of Jacobs family, before
Christ's coming in the flesh, and of the Church of Corinth, since Christ's time:
and therein will alledg (not things forged, perverted, and abused, as this
enemy does against us) but true things only and such as are recorded in the
Scriptures themselves. That the family of Jacob was the Church of God, cannot
be denied. Now in it we find, Genesis 29. and 30. and 31. and 34.
that Jacob having two wives and two concubines, his wives envied one another;
Rachel stale away her Fathers idols; Dinah his daughter was deflowred; his
sons deceitfully beguiled the Sichemites; Simeon and Levi slew them in a
rage; Genesis 34. and 35. and 37. and 38. chap.
Reuben committed incest with Bilhah his fathers concubine; the other brothers
hated envied and sold Joseph into Egypt; and colored it with lving to Jacob
their father; Judah lay with Thamar his daughter in law, taking her to be an
whore, etc, Will now any man of knowledge and fearing God infer therefore
hereupon, and say, Were these then the Church* the Saints, the Israel of God?
Were these the fathers of the tribes of Israel, so greatly renowned through
all posterity? Were these the stones, the precious stones, embossed in the High
priests Brestplate? Were these the twelve Patriarks for the time of the Law,
answerable to the twelve Apostles for the time of the Gospel? Yet such you see
are the conclusions, but in deed the delusions, of this blasphemous wretch.

But see it further in the Church of Corinth under the Gospel. In which, Epist.
to he Corinhians.
were schisms and dissensions, strife and envying, wrath and backbiting;
uncleanness and wantonness, fornication and incest, hurting and jnjurying one of
another, abusing of Christian liberty, sitting in the Idols temple at the Idols
feast, declining from the Lords ordinance in the use of the Sacraments, prayer
and prophecy; denying of the resurrection, etc. If now this white painted
hypocrite had lived in that age and Church, as he did with us of late, would he
nothing have respected their faith, their order, their constitution, wherein
they were set by the Apostle: but reprochfully have concluded and inferred
against them, as here he does, saying, Are these then this beautiful? yea most
vvonderfull Church, ravishing the senses to conceive of it? are these the
Saints then marching in such a heavenly and gracious array, where every stone
has his beauty, his burden, and his order, where no law is wrongfully
wrested, or vvilfully neglected, no truth hid or perverted? Thus indeed he
shall show himself to be one of those Ministers of Satan (spoken of in that
Epistle) who can transform himself as though he were a Minister of
righteousness; 2 Cor. 11.13.14.15.
whose e^d ^hal be according to his works: howsoever f^r a time he may d^lude
many poor souls and frustrate their expectation, as already he has done.

As for W. Ha. and E. Ha. whose words (as if they were of weight) he records,
he should have remembered, that these his companions are such whose mouth is no
sclander, two such like as himself, poor souls in deed as touching faith and
godlynes, but abundantly rich (so to speak) in dissembling, lying, railing,
backbiting etc. and therefore fit witnesses for such an accuser, their own
sayings fit testimonies against themselves, that they never needed to have
separated themselves from the Church of England, as they did, being such also
as this society would quickly have thrust them out from among us, so living and
practicing as they do. No marvel then if when they had seen our estate, they
were frustrate of their expectation, and therefore returned again to the
Church of England, knowing it to be a fit cage for such birds.

And hitherto of the second head of his Treatise, concerning the ^^scription of
a visible Church. According to which, if we would compare the estate of the
Church of England, in the members, officers, worship, ministration, etc. as he
has done ours: let the Reader consider, whether it would not in truth be found
so clear a testimony against them and their practice, as neither he nor all
his consorts (the Prelates and their chapleynes) could ever be able to turn
away. Neither that only, but even their own description of a visible Church,
as it is set down in their Articles of religion agreed upon in the year 1562.
Artic. 19. which is thus, The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of
faithful men, in the which the pure word of God is preached, and the
Sacraments be duly ministered according to Christ's ordinance, in all those
things that of necessity are requisite to the same. Which (to use his own
words) is a clear testimony, Answ. to Mr, H. I. p. 14. etc.
and a pregnant sentence of condemnation against themselves and their practice.
Of which also I have otherwhere spoken heretofore, which yet re^ayneth
unanswered.

Of the third head of Th: White his Treatise.
THe third is, that he says we condemn others, in those things that we would
and do practice our selves. Which he pretends to show in diverse instances.

1. The first is, For communicating with open offenders. For which he refererth
to that which is before showed: and so do we: Adding this further, that our
Church is so far from communicating with such, as it excommunicateth them, when
once they are convinced and found obstinate: which himself knows to be true.

2. The second is, for making men swear to accuse themselves. A thing which
neither my self practiced to I. L. (as here he falsely objecteth) neither is at
all practiced among us either publikly or privately that I know of. And for the
matter of incest so reproachfully divulged against Mr St. this man knows
himself that Rose White his own wife was the rayser of that opprobrious report,
that he had lain with hi^ wives daughter: and that she both confessed it unto
me her self, and could not deny it here before the Magistrates, when she was by
Mr St. now of late brought before them about it: as this man himself also is
for a sclanderer, as I showed before. For his not denying it for the clearing
of himself, though he were requested for the satisfying of weak brethren so to
do, he says that he remembers it not. But being thus dealt withal, he has
written this answer himself, which here I will annex out of his own writing
given unto me hereabout. The malice and envy of this T. W. ( against me Da.
Stud.) has appeared to be exceeding great, both in his often speaking of me in
his book as he has done, and especially in this place, where making an end of
mentioning my name, he thought he would power forth his rancour to the full,
Therefore thus he says, Yet would not their Elder Da. Stud. never so much as
deny the matter of incest with his wives daughter, for the clearing of himself,
though he were requested for the satisfying of weak brethren so to do. In
these words of his, he would make the world believe as if some came unto me in
friendly wise to know whether I had committed incest or no, and as if they
required my direct answer unto it for the satisfijng of weak brethren. To
which his words I answer: First thus: That there never came any so unto me
as he falsely forgeth, and therefore herein he lies egregiously. Secondly I
ask why he did not set down what my answer was to such as he insinuates
came unto me. For if my answer were evil, no doubt he would not have spared
to set it down: if it were good, they would and ought to have rested in it.
Further it is to be minded, that he has not named them that came unto me,
which if he had done, himself saw that then his wickedness would the more
appear. Thirdly this I do affirm, That such as have spoken unto me (about this
slander and reproach raised of me) in any christian and orderly manner, I have
answered them to their full satisfaction: and to such as disorderly and
reprochfully have spoken to me thereof, I have, (mynding the persons as I
esteemed them) either passed by them with silence, or else urged them to do the
vvorst they could unto me, being ready to answer them according to their
dealing with me, as I have now endeavored to do with this T. W. and Rose his
wife (the first author of this accusation) whom I have called before the
Magistrates, for slandring of me. Fourthly being thus provoked by him, my
answer now is, That if T.W. with his father if he were living (being reputed
to have skill in the black art) had the help of him, and of all the devils in
hell joined together, yet should he never be able to prove this his wicked
slander upon me. Moreover I would demand these things of T.W. as follows:
First whether he will deny that his father spoke thus of him, I miss my
aim if ever this my son T.W. do prove a good man. Secondly, whether he will
deny that he knows not some that can tell of his evil dealing about Clokes.
Thirdly whether he will deny that he has not dealt ill with some about a
Bible. Fourthly: whether he will deny that he has committed the like sin
as T.C. has, whom he mentions in his book. Lastly I ask him, whether if he
do not presently deny these things, or any the like, that by any shall be
demanded of him, he be content to have it taken for granted that then he is
gilty of them. If this be his judgment, let him take it to himself, as wise as
he will be otherwise minded. And thus I leave him and this his dealing and
account thereof, to him that judges righteously, and so end with this saying,
An hypocrite with his mouth hurts his neighbor, but the righteous shall be
delivered by knowledge, Pro. 11, 9,
Da. St.

3. In the third, he has again cowched diverse untruths together. As when he
says we condemn the Dutch Churches, for baptising the seed of those that are
not members of their Church. Which is not so: but we dislike in the Dutch
Church of this town, that they baptize the seed of them who are not members of
any visible Church, and besides admit not the parents themselves to the Lords
supper. Great difference there is between these two, Confess. with Mr Iun.
letters. page 54.
not to be members of their Church, and, not to be members of any visible
Church. And this it seems himself perceived, and therefore kept not our
words, as he had them set down in the book alleged by himself. But yet more,
in that he says my self with the rest could offer to receive Mr Deuxburies
child to baptism, who neither was neither would join himself a member unto
us. For Mr Deuxb. (who dwelt about fifteen miles from us) being desirous that
we would baptize his child, we wrote unto him that we could not admit of it,
And that we might and would, if he did thus.
unless he would make profession of the same faith with us, and be careful so to
walk, either with us or with some other Church, in the same truth of the
Gospel, as God for his dwelling and estate should give him opportunity. Which
he not performing we baptized not his child. And of this refusal of ours,
himself spoke but a day or two before his death, to one of the members of our
Church, W. Simson.
a soldier who was then with him in the army where he was slain. Which things
being so, how then should it be as he says further, that we were offended at
G: I. for withstanding it, when we our selves so wrote and dealt in it, as is
aforesaid. Or how had he any hand in this business, when Mr Deuxb. writing to
one of the Elders, had answer from them all jointly, of whom he was none?

4. In the fourth, his bad dealing does yet further appear: it being a matter,
wherewith himself is acquainted, and yet propounds not the case truly, as he
knows it to be. We have indeed misliked in the Dutch Church (not Churches,
as he speaks) of Amsterda^ that consisting of so great a multitude, it is but
one, and yet meets in three several places: by means whereof, the whole
Church cannot come together in one; the ministers can not together with the
flock sanctify the Lords day; the presence or absence of the members of the
Church cannot certainly be known; nor any public action be rightly performed.
Which reasons we signified to themselves in our dealing with them heretofore.
On the other side, we misliked also that a few people, being strangers
together in one town, of one language, of one profession in religion, and
having not before time their peculiar officers, should in such case yet divide
themselves into several Churches: For which I required example or warrant out
of the Scriptures, and alleged my self diverse reasons about this question. And
what contrariety now is there in these things, being laid together as they
ought, with their true and due circumstances? Such perhaps as the false
teachers would pretend against Paul, when he circumcised Timothee, Act. 16.1.3.
and yet would not circumcise Titus, but withstood the false brethren that urged
it, Gal. 2.3.4.5.

The others he speaks of, were himself and some other with him, who had left
the Church of England, and came to dwell here. Touching whom, seeing he
pretends that they joined not to us for diverse disorders amongst us, I will
here advertise the Reader a few things concerning them, and those also
specially out of their own letters, which being as their own children shall
also be their Judges. When they had left the Church of England, as having a^
Antichristian Ministry, worship, confusion, etc. they first joined in and to a
Church in the West parts of England professing the same faith with us. A while
after, they came over hither, and at first communicated with us: but afterward
(being about twelve or thirteen) they joined themselves here as a body
together, to walk in the same faith and way as we do; reputing and calling
themselves a Church, distinct from us, and in their letters to the Church of
the West country thus inscribed them, The Church in Amst. to our brethren the
Church in the West, partakers of the same heavenly vocation, etc. And in the
letter wrote thus, For our consultatio^ and resolution thus it is, To meet
apart by our selves, as well for the redress of disorders that may arise, as
also for the administration of the word, expecting the blessing of God which
has not chosen us for our multitude, seeing we were the fewest of all others.
And again in the same letter, for our own estate, though our hope to be a body
distinct in our country were, yet is not our hope to be a distinct body in a
straung country frustrated, but rather accomplished. And afterward again
speaking of us, and themselves, they say, For the other Churches estate, though
that acknowledgment of them were granted, yet all things considered, whether
God does not offer us occasion to increase the number of the Churches, and our
selves to walk together in holiness to the Lord, who have had better
experience one of another then of that Churches estate, that by this means the
adversaries reproaches, of one Church, and flocking thereunto, setting up one
head, may be stopped, is the thing we pray you to ponder. Thus they wrote in a
general letter together.

And in another of theirs written in particular by this T. White and Tho. Pow.
We (say they) through Gods mercy have our meetings now apart from our brethren
the Church in Amsterdam, building up our selves with that small ability that
God has inabed us vvithall etc. as also receiving such members as we find
meet and desirous of our fellowship. And afterward in the same letter, W^ have
had one meeting already together, wherein M. W. is joined. Consider that
which is written, Exo. 7.^. and pray with us that the Lord would s^nd the
Northvvynd and the Southvvynd, the one cold the other hot, Luk: 12.55. that
is, the lively graces of his spirit in the preaching of his Law and Gospel, to
blow up that our garden may be fruitful, Cant. 4.16. but not an Eastvvynd
which withered Jonas gourd, Ion 4. Thus wrote they then of themselves. By
which may appear, both what they intended, and for what. They intended to be a
several Church from us, though they were but a few, and of the same faith,
living strangers together, in the same town, etc. And the cause why they did
it, That they might redress disorders among themselves; that they might be a
distinct body in a straung country, as they purposed in our native country,
before they came over hither; that they might increase the number of Churches;
that they might stop the adversaries reproaches, of one Church, and flocking
thereunto, setting up one head; that they might receive such members as were
desirous of their fellowship; and that they might also themselves be a garden,
fruitful, etc.

If these things were so as then they wrote, how says he now in his book, that
the cause why they would not join to us, was for disorders amongst us? How do
his letters and his Libell agree together? Specially seeing in the same letters,
at the same time, they write us to be their brethren the Church in Amsterdam;
of whose estate they had not that experience etc. Belike he had forgotten the
old saying, Mendacem oportet esse memorem, A liar had need have a good memory.
And further, if it were as he says now, why did they not then so alledg, that
we might have insisted thereupon? why shrank they from the handling of the
question between us, which we would have discussed by the Scriptures, had not
they refused as they did? But (if some be not mistaken) there was an other
cause then any of the aforesaid, which they will not make known, namely, that
Mr Po. and this White might have been Officers of that Church, whereof they had
little hope among us to satisfy their desire: Which whether it were so or not,
themselves know best. And howsoever, yet with what face can this hypocrite
write as he does, that they would not join to us for diverse disorders among us,
when but even a while after, they returned to the Church of England, which they
knew certainly to have not only diverse disorders, but even a multitude of the
corruptions of Antichrist the son of perdition.

Well might he write of these things, as he did in another letter of his to Mr
S. W. Respice finem, Look to the end. For as they sowed, so have they reaped*
not having the wind of Gods grace to blow upon them that they might be a
fruitful garden, but the worm of Gods judgment to smite them that they might
become a withered gourd. And this according to his own prophecy (though as
Caiaphas speaking more truth then himself intended) when to the same Mr S. W.
he wrote thus also, Certainly if God does not work mightily for us we shall
come to desolation. Balaam even then when he would have cursed Israel,
prophesied the truth, though against his will.

5. The fifth is a mere calumniation, like the rest. In the place quoted, we
blame in the Dutch (as we do also in the French) Church of this town, that the
rule and commandment of Christ, Mat. 18.15.16.17. they neither observe, nor
suffer rightly to be observed among them. (If this man-pleaser could approve
them herein, why does he not?) For our selves we do carefully observe it, and
think all the Churches of Christ are bound so to do. For deciding of matters
which are of public nature, they are made known and decided among us in and
by the whole body of the Church, and not by the Elders alone. Yet therein we
have this order, that all such matters be first signified to the Elders, to
whom the oversight of the Church and affairs thereof apperteyneth: by whom
likewise they are proprounded advised and treated of also publicly, as the
cases do require. Of which points we have spoken sufficient (at least till we
be answered) in our Apology against the Oxf. Doct. page 63.64. Notwithstanding
if any come to the Elders, either for our advise or to have some matters
brought to the Church, we show them what we think to be best as we are
persuaded our selves: and yet debar not any from proceeding further, so as they
will answer their doing to the Church, as there the case shall be found to be.
And this to be our practice and manner of walking, I think this man himself
knows well.

For T. C. his matter, the Elders did not decide it (as he falsely says) but
showed him what we our selves thought to be best according to godlynes, and
required of him to do no otherwise in it, then he could answer to God and to
the Church. Of the matter it self, as also of W. H. is spoken here before, page
33. And for that he says here, seeing W.H. his wife put him away, who can
constreine her or any other in like case to retein such if themselves be not
willing.

For the bringing of matters in a third place to the Elders, as they have
objected: Mr P. himself and the rest of them have been answered, that we do not
so: but that when in the third place a matter is to come unto the Church by
that rule of Mat. 18. this is the order we keep therein, that first knowledge
thereof be given to the Elders, the overseers of the Church, then that they
seeing the matter to be such and so dealt in as is to come to the Church, it be
by them publicly propounded and prosequuted as is meet: whereas otherwise both
the Church might be troubled and men's names and private matters be brought in
public without just cause. And this we do, not adding to that rule of Christ
(as this man and his followers have still objected) but having that care and
keeping that order in the observation thereof, as the Scriptures else where lead
us unto. For which, see 1 Timothy 5.17.18.19.21.22. and 4.14. Heb. 13.17. Romans
12.7.8.1. These. 5.12.13.14.27. Rev. 2.1.7.8.11.12.18.29 and 3.1.6.7.13.14.22.
with Exodus 3.16. and 4.29.30.31. and 12.21. and with 1 Cor. 14.40.

By which also may appear how frivolous it is, that he says we allege the
same reasons for our practice, which we approve no^ in ^he Dutch. As if we
should put no difference between the Eldership alone hearing and deciding the
public matters of the Church, and between the Elders according to their office
having knowledge advising and propounding of such matters to be heard and
discussed by the body of the Church jo^ntly together; Or as if the reasons
which warrant a lawful thing, should also bear out that which is unlawful;
or that we should not therefore disallow them, when by any they are so applied?

And for the abuse of that rule of Mat. 18. whether through evil affection in
partiality and envy, or to an evil end to cover filthynes withal, if any do
so as he says (measuring others it may be by the length of his own foot) they
are to answer it to God, who knows the heart and tries the reins to give to
every one according to their works. Our duty is, for that which man may see and
judge, to have that rule as all other the ordinances of Christ carefully
observed among us: Whereat let him consider if his heart grieve not more then
it does that the Church of England, of which he is, neither does nor can in
their estate observe that nor many other the ordinances of Christ: by reason
whereof they cannot be esteemed a true Church of Christ in such constitution:
As I showed before, page 8.

6. For the sixth, which is about the worshipping of God in the Idol Temples of
Antichrist, can he not put difference between the ordinary public worship of
the Church in such places, and the occasional receiving of a^mes therein by
the poor? Neither between the benevolence of a Church to the Ministers or
Saints of Christ (which is ^he sacrifice spoken of Phil. 4.18) and the relief
of a City given to the poor that dwell among them, be they of any religion
whatsoever, one or other? Which I speak not, as discommending the care they
have for the poor among them (which is very great, and much commendable) but
to show the nature of this action, and how it is performed. Nor will he
discern between the solemn appointed worship of God by the Church so
assembled together, and the private duties of thankfulness, of salutation, or
the like? Or does he think we hold it not lawful to walk up and down in the
Idol Temples, as they use in Powles at London; or if we be walking there, to
lift up our hearts to God as occasion may be; or if we meet some there of whom
we have received a benefit, to give the^ thanks, Or if their Temples were made
prisons (as in Powles aforesaid there are diverse) and some of us committed
thither (as heretofore sundry have been by the Prelates) that we would not pray
there, yea and preach also as there might be occasion? Or when we did so, would
he thereupon infer (as now he does) that we condemn others in those things
which we would and do our selves? A senseles conclusion: but well beseming a
Baals Priest, that has a good will (if he had ability withal) to plead for
Baals altars and houses.

As for the point it self, and the place of Deuteronomy. 12. we have written already
in other Treatises not yet answered. Apology. Discovery. Refutatio^.
Questions. Answer to Mr H. etc.
Therefore need I not now write more about it here. But let the Reader observe
here how this Idol Priest himself yields these places to be Idol Temples,
and the Temples of Antichrist: Yet brings no warrant for the reserving and
appoynting of them to spiritual use in the worship of God: but says plainly,
if the commandment Deuteronomy. 12. be moral (which he cannot deny, if he hold it
moral for the Images and altars) that then no civil use of them may be had at
all, much less spiritual. And yet I suppose he will not deny, but Iehu the
King of Israel put the house of Baal to a lawful use, 2 King. 10.27.

7. The seventh is, that whereas we showed the Dutch here, that they use a new
censure of Suspension, which Christ has not appointed: yet we ourselves
suspended M. S. many months together before his excommunication: But this he
should have proved so to have been. The Dutch suspend their members from the
Lords supper, and yet admit them to participation of the word and prayer. so
did not we. But the case was thus: The said Mat. Sl. having declined from the
truth which before he professed with us to sundry errors of the Dutch here, it
required many days to deal with him and convince him in them all, which we
were careful to do. Now when some of them being handled, he was admonished by
the Church to repent and return to the truth, and he notwithstanding
obstinately persisted against the voice of Christ so speaking unto him, there
were some of us who thought it not lawful to have any more spiritual
communion with him when he came to our publik metings. Whereabout there b^ing
some question, and all the particulars being not yet finished, it was agreed
for the present, when he did so come, to deal with him about the residue of
the points yet remaining. Which being done, and diverse days (week after week)
being so employed for the convincing of him in all: the Church did then
excommunicate him, as here is said, and so he remains at this day: a man
overcome with the love of this world (here called his preferment) and never a
whit too good, when he was at the best, to be of our fellowship, which is in
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For which, he that thinks any too good, is
himself stark naught.

8. For the eight, about non residency, howsoever he speak of Mr Br. his
absence from the Church, and this without any leave thereof, yet himself
knows that he with some others of us was upon special occasion sent by the
Church into England, and there employed a long time about that business: Wherein
also what good pains he took and with what great carefulnes, even this White
himself was often a present beholder and witness. When he stayed there, upon
other occasion, he says it was not so long as here is deceitfully pretended,
(though longer then he or we would have had it) and that he could not then
possibly do otherwise, as things fell out. But I will not here insist to
speak, what may be done in cases of necessity or special occasion; or to put
difference between factours, servants, and men agreing together on mutual
conditions; nor upon the difference that is between Ministers of the word and
the Deacons; and specially the difference between one man having two three or
four benefices (as they call them) by reason whereof, though he be still with
some of those Churches, yet must he needs be a non resident all his life, and
between one Church having two three or mo Deacons, by means whereof though
some be absent upon occasion, yet there are other usually present to perform
the duties apperteyning to the office notwithstanding. But of these things I
will not stand. For that which we desire and approve is, that he which has an
office should wait on his office, Romans 12.7.8.

9. Now follows the last of his instances, but not the least for the lies and
sclanders contained therein. The first particular here spoken of is about this,
that we blamed in the Dutch Church of this town, that they receive unrepentant
excommunicants, to be members of their Church: which by this means becomes
one body with such as be delivered unto Satan. But this man had no list to set
it down in our own words, because he has no love to speak of things as the
truth is. And if there were no other corruption but this only in the Church
aforesaid, let such as are of judgment consider whether we have not just cause
to put difference between it, and the other Churches of these countries that
stand not in like transgression: (of which we spoke before, page 25.) and
whether we which know these things and have had dealing with them thereabout,
may suffer the members of our Church to join with them in this estate, in any
part of their worship and Ministration, be it the preaching of the word, or any
other whatsoever. Yet notwithstanding it is false that he says we
excommunicated our own members only for hearing the word preached amongst the
Dutch or French: for those whom yet we have cast out hereabout, it has been
partly for their revolting from the truth which they have professed with us,
to the corruptions of these Churches (which declining as they may show in
hearing the word preached among them in such estate, 1 Cor. 10.18.
so are we accordingly to esteem thereof) and partly for other sins withal,
whereinto they have fallen. And a most shamelesly it is, that he says we are
our selves one body with an excommunicate from the French Church. The party
whom he intends (now one of the Elders of our Church) was not excommunicated
by them, but did himself leave them for their corruptions, after he had long
and much dealt with them in all good manner to the uttermost of his power
thereabout, and they persisted therein notwithstanding.

The next particular here spoken of, is about our dislike of them for that they
observe days and times, consecrating certain days in the year to the
Nativitie, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ etc. Which this adversary himself
knows we do not: though his conscience be so seared as he cares not how he
belly us and abuse the Reader, so he may seem to say something against us. And
strange it is (if he were not impudent out of measure) that he is not ashamed
to say that we observe their holy days as much as they do. A thing which is
false, in both the instances which himself gives hereabout: the one being
about the shutting of shops, the other about our public meetings for worship,
on those days. For towching the first, such of us as shut their shops, do it
not in respect of religion or with observance of public worship as they do,
but partly thinking it to be a thing civil which may be done at the Magistrates
appointment, seeing no spiritual observation is urged upon us withal, partly
choosing rather so to do then to pay the penalty whereto otherwise they are
liable, it being far more then in compass of the day they could by their
labor obteyn. Others of us do on those days follow their ordinary labor, and
some have been called and have answered it before the Magistrates, alleging
diverse reasons of their doing, in regard of Gods requiring but one day in
seven for public worship, and permitting six for labor, and because of the
popish and superstitious observance of these times still retained, and other
the like. And what though in these things, being matters of such nature and
question, we have differed in judgment? Act. 15. Romans 14. Phil. 3.16.
Is it any other thing then the Christians in the Primitive Churches, and at
this day, and in all ages have been and may be in diverse cases subject unto? For
the second, it is a notable deceitful untruth, that we have our meetings for
worship on their holy days: For although their Easter and Whitsunday falling
always on the Lords day, and the feast of Ascension of the fifth day on the
week called Ascension Thursday, we have our public meetings on those days,
yet it is not at all in respect of their holy days, but because that weekly we
have our meetings on those days all the year through. Besides, if we observed
their holy days as much as they do, we should have a religious regard of them
and have our public metings for worship as they have, on Christmasse day and
the morrow after, also on the morrow after Easter and Whitsunday. Which days
together with the former he knows they observe, and we not. Yet shameth he
not thus to write as he does: as if his Lords the Prelates had given him a
dispensation to lie and calumniate, no matter how, and that now he is grown so
wicked and shameless that he counts it nothing so to do, if thereby he may
please his Lords or pleasure himself: God thus justly punishing his former
hyprocrisie and present apostasy: and so matching his writing with his walking,
as it should be an evident testimony in the sight of all how undeniably his
own collections are true in himself, as in his Lords too, which so injuriously
he would apply unto us; and how far he is behind the very heathen, even Medea
her self which said, Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor, I see better
things and approve them, but I follow the worse: whereas himself, after the
example of his Patrones, though he see better things, yet does not so much as
approve them, but set himself to oppugn them what he can possibly; and for the
worse things, does not only follow them, but approve and applaud them most
shamefully: yea and thereunto brings pretended allegation of Scripture, as if
it were no sin to take the Name of God in vain, and make the Scriptures
serve his own fancy, yea his lies and calumnies. For which certainly the Lord
will not hold him guiltles.

And where he pretends against us as if he could declare false and
impertinent allegation of Scripture, and yet passes by it vndeclared: the
Reader observing his purpose and dealing may easily gather, that if he thought
himself able to do it, he wants no will thereunto. That which he refers
unto in a book already published, will not prove it so much as in part; A
Discourse of certain troubles and excom. etc.
no though himself with all his ayders do join withal. The point is about the
Scriptures alleged by us against the yearly change of the Elders in this
Dutch Church, and not continewing in their office according to the doctrine of
the Apostles and practice of the Primitive Churches: Which Scriptures be these,
Romans 12.4.5.6.7.8. 1 Cor. 12.11.12. etc. Act. 20.17.28. 1 Pet. 5.1.2.3.4. and
Numb. 8.24. etc. Where there be many reasons expressed and included, plainly
disproving the yearly change and dismission aforesaid: As namely, the
authority and work of the Lord making them Overseers of his Church, and placing
them as members in his body; the duties of waiting on their office, of feeding
the flock committed unto them, of attendance, care, and watchfulnes therein;
the account to be given thereof unto the Lord; and the reward to be hoped for
from him according to his promise at that day; and other the like. Neither can
any example, or reason of sound consequence, be showed from the Scriptures for
warrant of their practice. But I need not speak further of this point, unless
some would undertake their defense against us in the particulars wherein we
have had to deal with them. Which neither themselves could perform, nor any
other would yet so much as attempt for them, though some great learned men have
had just occasion thereunto, if they could have done it.

As for that he says of the book aforesaid lying unanswered, we have diverse
reasons for so leaving it. 1. It is but part of a book, printed before the rest
was finished: And to see the whole, might be of special use if an answer
should be given unto it. 2. Since the writing thereof, it pleased God to visit
him with sickness that he died: And seeing he is dead, we do so leave him:
forbearing now to write what we could: a^ is well known to many. 3. He did
not, like as this man, leave or contrary our general cause and testimony
against the Church of England: but held it so himself, as of late going into
England he was there taken and put in prison for this cause, where he died
under their hands. These reasons among other we have of not answering it: Being
notwithstanding always ready (as there is just and needful occasion) to answer
for our selves, and to defend the truth and equity of our cause and dealing,
or wherein we have erred to acknowledge and amend it, as we have often signified
heretofore.

Now for that wherewith he concludes, even false accusations of whole
Churches, and would show it by comparing the 7. accusation in our letters to Mr
Iunius, Confess. with Mr Iun. letters. Page 54.
with the practice of the Dutch Churches: it is to be observed, that the
particular corruptions there noted whereof we have advertised the Eldership of
this Dutch Church, be ele^e^ in all: so as this enemy grants himself ten of
them to be true: And for the other, that one whereof he speaks, namely their
yearly change of Elders, it also is so true, as the Ministers themselves
deputed among them to deal with us, and knowing best their own estate and
practice, did never so much as once offer to deny it; and their continual
practice (if they have not left it of late) avowcheth it against all
gaynsayers. Yet this flatt^rer (to speak somewhat for them) shameth not to say
that is false which is very true: like as here before against us he affirmed
those things to be true which are very false. A fit servant for his Lords the
Prelates, with whom it is common in all their dealing against us, to account
and give out of the truth that it is falsehood, and again of falsehood that it
is truth: That in himself and his Masters may be seen verifyed that saying of
Plautus here alleged, Iustum non iustum, non iustum iustum, quod vobis placet.
Let them therefore consider their ways in their heart, and lay their hands on
their mouth: Else let them know that out of their own mouth they shall be judged,
according to those denuntiations and reproofs here spoken of, both by the
Apostle, Romans 2.1 -- 9. and by the Prophet, Psalm. 50.16 -- 22. and by Christ
himself, Mat. 7.1 -- 5. Luke 19.22. Which I leave this hypocrite with his
fellows to ponder and apply to themselves: and will now conclude this third
head of his Treatise, and our answer to his false accusations, with that saying
of Apuleius, Insimulari quivis innocens a quovis nebulone potest: Or rather
with that answer of Nehemiah, Nehem. 6.8.

Prove. 24.28.


It is not done according to these words that thou say: but thou feynest
them of thine own heart. And with that of Solomon in his Proverbes, Be not a
witness against thy neighbor without cause: for will thou deceive with thy
lips? And hitherto concerning the third head of his Treatise.

Of the fourth head of Th: White his Treatise.
THe fourth and last is, that he says we have drawn the curse of God on our
selves by rash unjust and wicked excommunication. Where first in general
observe these things. 1. That we have the power and use of excommunication:
without which no Church can walk aright in obedience of the faith of Christ*
nor long continue without manifold errors and corruptions prevayling among
them. 2. That even by this appears we hold that evil men may creep into and
arise in the Church. 3. And that when they are once known and will not be
reclaymed from their evil, we approve them not, but cast them out from among
us. And so this fourth point being well observed, overthrows the whole tenor
and intendement of all his writing against us. Now to come to the particulars.

1. About thirteen years since, this Church through persecution in England,
was driven to come into these countries. A while after they were come hither,
diverse of them fell into the heresies of the Anabaptists (which are too common
in these countries) and so persisting were excommunicated by the rest. Then a
while after that again, many others (of whom specially I think he speaks
he^^) some elder some younger, even too many, though not the ha^ (as I
understand) fell into a schism from the rest, and so many of them as
continewed therein were cast out: diverse other of them repenting and returning
before excomunication, and diverse of them after. As for him in particular of
whom he speaks that he was distracted in mind, 1. He was not then so known
to be, neither so reputed of his fellows, but only that he had some trouble
of conscience which disquieted him. 2. Yet since it has been pleaded by some
that he was dist^acted, whereupon to himself it has been offered by the Church,
that if he would come and affirm as much publikly in the Church as he and
others had said more privately to some of us thereabout, and that the contrary
could not by any be showed against him, then the Church would acknowledge that
they offended in casting him out, and he should be received again. But this he
would never yet do: although it have been signified to him again and again by
my self and others, that thus the Church had agreed concerning him. And thus
stands his case.

For the excommunication in general, it was in deed recalled: wheervpon C.S.
one of the schismed here mentioned by him, wrote unto me thereabout. (And here
the Reader is to know that my self with some others of us, both of the officers
and other brethren, were then prisoners at London, while these things fell out
in the Church being in the Low countries.) Now in his letter he wrote, that
the brethren had revoked it as rash and unjust, denying also that he and the
rest with him had made the separation etc. With this letter I acquainted the
other also then in prison: and we thought it best (considering the case as we
had before ben informed and took it to be) to send his letter to the brethren
aforesaid, that they might see how he had written thereof, and we might know
the truth of things how they stood. Whereupon the matter being again and
further examined both by them and by us (as in such estate and distance of
place we could do) it was in the end agreed upon by the Church, that the
excommunication was just and not to be recalled, notwithstanding the errors in
the manner of proceeding thereabout: which the Church then did and always is
ready to acknowledge, and whereupon they had before revoked it (...) unjust,
only in respect of that cir^umstance, but not at all clearing the schismed of
their transgression they stood in* which at that time the schismed themselves
agre^d unto, confessing the cause they stood for, to be evil.

And now both for their good whom this matter more specially concerns, as
also for the satisfying of others, and that Th. White his abusing of us may
better appear, I will here briefly note down the grounds whereupon the
excommunication was esteemed just and not to be recalled: as I find in some
writings reserved about this matter: Which was thus. 1. The excommunicated were
found to be abettours of an evil cause, and thereupon to have made the schism
at the first: and so were guilty of the sin for which they were proceeded
against. And this was then agreed on all hands, as we were let to understand.
2. They also were afterward diverse times and ways reproved and admonished
thereof; They had sight of the witnesses testimonies about the matter then in
question; they heard the reasons gathered by one of the brethren for their
conviction; the Church sent unto them of the best able of the brethren to deal
with them, besides that we wrote from London concerning this matter, exhorting
them to peace etc. And all this before the last message of the Church unto
them, which was that they should ^^me to the Church, and there they should be
convicted, or if they came not they should be cast out. 3. They yet remained
impenitent and despised the Churches voice and authority. Which appeared by
their answer to the Churches message aforesaid, being to this effect, That as
by commandment or as unto the Church they would not come at any time: And,
that whereas some of them were to go out of the town on the morrow, and all of
them were at that time unprovided to maynteyne their cause, if they might have
a hand with them in appointing another day, they would come to confer with
them and mainteyne that they did. In which answer be diverse things showing
their impenitency and despising the Churches authority. 1. Their answering
resolutely, that by commandment or as unto the Church they would not come at
any time. 2. That they would have an hand in appointing the day when they would
come. Which might have greatly infringed the liberty and power of the Church,
to yield unto schismatics an equal authority in such cases. 3. That their
coming should be to confer and mainteyne their cause, not to show
repentance. Besides that some of them also dispitefully asked the brethren,
when they would draw out their wooden dagger, etc. Now whereas it has been
objected, that they refused not simply to come, that charity would have taken
things in the best part, that the Church might have appointed them another day
etc. it was also granted that these and all such things should have been duly
weighed before the censure had been executed, and that whatsoever error was
committed therein is always to be acknowledged: yet for the reasons before
alleged, the censure was deemed to be just and not to be recalled.

And for those he speaks of that withstood their receiving in again, even
this shows that there were then among themselves which thought the
excommunication was not to be revoked. Yet were not they therefore
excommunicated, as he says: but were earnestly exhorted to rest in their
difference of judgment, and notwithstanding it peaceably to continue with the
Church, if it were but till they could use the advice and help of others for
the better clearing of this conttroversy which had so long and much troubled
the^. Yet they would not, but left of all communion with the Church: and so
persisting, were for this cause excommunicated: Who also afterward upon
acknowledgement of their e^rour therein were received again.

Finally for the reversing again of the censure aforesaid, who k^oweth not that
even the best and wisest men have their second and (...) thoughts: and that in
some cases this befell the Prophets and Apostles themselves: howsoever here he
term it a dallying: esteeming others belike by himself who has so changed
and rechaunged his faith and profession as if he thought he might dally with
religion at his pleasure. But the Lord is not mocked: As he has sowed to the
flesh, so let him look of the flesh to reap corruption. For as every man
sows, so shall he reap. Gal. 6.7.8.

2. Of the second instance, which is about such as have heard the word preached
in the Dutch Church, I have spoken before. If he had named the diverse he
speaks of, it might have been showed that they were cast out for diverse
causes. As M. Sl. whom only he names in particular was, for receiving and
maynteyning these errors, 1. The baptising of the seed of such as are no
members of any visible Church of Christ, neither can be themselves received to
the Lords supper in any such Church. 2. Read prayer, or a set form of prayers
prescribed by men for the worship of God: As also, mainteyning that that only
is not to be used in the worship of God, which God himself has commanded.
These are other things then only hearing the word preached, as this Proctor
for excommunicates objecteth again and again in his Libell. And both the
Teacher and my self told him aforehand what would follow, if he joined with the
Dutch in these corruptions aforesaid. Which M. Sl. himself knows to be true.
As he does also that the other matter here intimated, was about their Temples
(whither he was to bring the scholars to the public worship): concerning
which there being then some diversity of judgment, and himself affirming that
he had always held it lawful to hear in those places, and so had In these
countries, being from the Church upon occasion.
before practiced, after he was come to this cause, I said (as I remember) that
it should not trouble my self, and for others I would therein persuade them the
best I could: But afterward I did speak more to him here about, as he may
remember.
But whereas we heard that the Dutch baptized all that were brought unto them,
and used also read prayer in their worship, I told him also that if these
things being so he should partake with the^ therein, that the^ his case would
prove such as we could not keep communion together. Yet he went on, and
persisted, and so for his receiving and mainteyning of these corruptions among
them, about baptism and read prayer, he was cast out of the Church. By which
also, this man's dealing and depraving after his manner, may here be observed.

And for the general, of excommunicating such as being of us have declined to
the corruptions of these Churches, the Law of God requires that all sin and
sinners be censured without respect of persons. And who ever would have blamed
Smyrn^ Philadelphia etc.
such of the Primitive Churches as were free from the errors found in Corinth.
Galat. Pergamu^ etc.
others of them at the same time, about the resurrection from the dead,
fornication spiritual and bodily, justification by works of the Law etc. if
any of their members declining thereunto they should have excommunicated them
for this cause. If the particulars noted in this Dutch Church be not errors and
corruptions, why is not that point undertaken to be cleared? If they be such,
why should we not for them accordingly censure our members declining thereunto?

3. Of the third, which is about the question of Apostasy, (often spoken of by
him who is so notable an Apostate himself) I have spoken somewhat before, Page
34. Now further the Reader is to know, that while my self with some other of us
were prisoners in England, there fell out question about this matter among the
brethren here in these countries. Whereof knowledge being given unto us from
hence, we wrote a letter unto them, setting down what our judgment then was
about this point, and the reasons persuading us thereunto. And this is that
whereof he speaks here: which we wrote to the Church being absent from it.
Whereabout some of the brethren from hence wrote unto us a while after, how
they were contrary minded, and their reasons thereof. Afterward it pleased God
so to dispose as we were discharged out of prison, and came over hither. Being
here, there was speech and question again about this matter: And some of us
did now consider further about it, more being observed out of the Scriptures
about this point, then at the first had been. And so began the alteration of our
judgment to be such as it is. Which was a good while before ever we heard any
thing concerning Mr A. So very false it is which here he writes thereabout.

And for those that were cast out, these things are to be observed: 1. Both the
point in general, and the case in particular was considered. For the general,
these questions were spoken of, And these were in deed the causes that made us
think more and otherwise of this matter, the^ we had done.

Which we also showed in the Church.


whether the Priests being special types of Christ, the exception out of
Ezech. 44. where they are spoken of, do yet include all persons, times,
offices, and conditions, etc. Also, whether even in the time of the Law, the
Levites (which were not of the Priests) falling to Idolatry, and afterward
repenting, might not again have and execute the same office and function as
they had before: And in the New Testament, whether John Mark at first refused
by Paul for his apostasy, Act. 15.37.38. was not afterward received by the
same Apostle and employed in the Ministry of the Gospel notwithstanding,
Col. 4.10.11. etc. For the particular, it was also considered, what the
exception was about (which is spoken of before, Page 42.) that themselves could
not deny but he was a man very fit for the office in all other respects; that
he was already in office, and the thing before this time not known to the
Church concerning him; (although if it had been known, consideration were to
be had of the nature of the thing done, of the condition of the person, of the
estate of the Church, and other the like circumstances to be observed
thereabout) that both before and after his being in office he had well approved
himself to and with the Church, to the great help and comfort of us all, etc.
2. Yet notwithstanding they persisted and left of to participate with the
Church in all his ministration therein. 3. We entreated them that they would not
so walk, but to continue with us as before, at least till we might either among
our selves or by others have further help and dealing about this matter: but
they would not. Whereupon they were for this leaving of communion with the
Church, together with other causes which he notes not, cast out: and some of
them a good while since upon their repentance received in again.

For that which he says of not answering the reasons in writing, note these
things: 1. We were absent from the Church, when we wrote the reasons aforesaid
in a letter sent hither: but now were here present with the Church to speak
mouth to mouth with any that did or should make question thereabout. 2. We also
signified, that if it were so that we were absent, having like occasion as
before, we would then write as before we had done: but being now present to
speak and reason together, we thought it best so to do. Not to speak any thing
now of the persons and their dealing that would have it otherwise. 3. Yet when
the matter was still urged, we further advised and agreed about it, of some
particular circumstances or cautions to be observed therein: Which were set down
in writing, and given to the ruling Elders, for any that would come to read or
reason thereabout: And upon occasion we gave the same also in writing to the
Eldership of the Dutch Church here. These things T. White himself knows, and
heretofore thought it sufficient to satisfy any that were reasonable: howsoever
now he write thereof.

And where he says we would not suffer the reasons to be read in our. meeting,
being requested there unto: sometimes in deed we did not suffer it, wishing the
parties that were contrary minded unto us to show their reasons out of the word
of God (whether they were those contained in that writing or any other) and so
to reason from that ground, which is the only rule of our faith: sometimes
also for the more satisfying of all, they were both read and reasoned of in our
publik meeting.

As for playing Satan's part, let him apply it to himself, who has heretofore
both by word and writing out of the Scriptures approved our cause against the
Antichristian estate of the Church of England, and having now left and
oppugning it, yet has not, (nor ever can) use as good means to disprove it,
and to approve the estate of that Church whither he is returned: With whom also
it is so common throughout his book, to object against us things very false,
and to conceal or deprave the things he knows to be good: and all this to
calumniate the truth and us that wi^nesse it before the world.

For that which he annexeth of Mr Ad. such as were here present, do neither
remember it, nor think it to be true: howsoever he affirm it: And if it had so
been, yet who knows not that alteration of practice does usually follow
alteration of judgment? And if in other cases, why not in this also?

Finally we do here know but in part: and are subject to err both in our
judgment and in our walking: as I deny not but in these things thus much urged
upon us we may have done. Yet our desire has been and I trust shall be always to
try all things by the word of God, and to keep that which is good.

4. The fourth instance is of W.A. cast out for recalling a former Schism,
spoken of a little before in his first instance. Whatsoever W.A. now say, the
Church heard and see what then he spoke and did. If he do still repent of that
Schism, standing to the acknowledgeme^t he made, that matter is soon ended.
To the writing of Th. White and others about this matter, this answer was given
by the Elders (which the messengers can testify) that it being about
excomunicatio^, it was a matter which co^cerned the whole body of the Church,
and therefore if they had any thing to say thereabout, they should come to the
Church at our public meeting, and there they should have an answer. But
thither came they not. So themselves kept back an answer from themselves. And
still Th. White keeps on his course to write falselie. What the schism here
spoken of was and whereabout, see before, page 65.

As for appealing, seeing it is from an inferior Judge to a superior, we hold
it Antichristian to enterteyne or admit of such appeals from one Church to
another, because Christ the Lord has given like and equal power and authority
to all his Churches on the earth. Yet notwithstanding may and ought one Church
to help another, by any good means they can, as there is occasion. But what is
this to the appealing and trial whereof he speaks, when such as be
excommunicated by this Church, would have their matters and the like submitted
to the Dutch and French Churches here, or any other else where? For which
themselves could not by the word of God show any warrant: And against which we
had and have these reasons following. 1. That the Judge which God has ordained
in these cases, is to be submitted unto, and not to any other, Deuteronomy.
17.8.9.10.11.12. 2. That the highest Judge ordained now of the Lord for all
sinners by Ecclesiastical censure, is the Church, even that particular Church
whereof the sinner is a member, Mat. 18.17. with 1 Cor. 5.4.5.12.13. 3. That
all Churches of Christ have equal power, and are not one over another, but
have Christ himself over all, and in midst of all, Rev. 1.13. and 2.1. And
therefore in urging our Church to submit to another Church, they sought to draw
it into Antichristian bondage, which we might by no means yield unto, Gal.
5.1. Rev. 14.9.12. 4. The sin and sinner being bound in heaven* how may the
cause be submitted to men on earth? Mat. 18.18. 5. If the censures of the
Church, then also other doctrines of the Gospel and our faith in Christ, might
as well by the same ground be brought to like submission. 6. It is contrary also
to the Confession of our faith published, Artic. 24.25. 7. And this way there
would be no end of strife: for if the two Churches disagreed, a third and
higher must be sought unto by like reason; and if yet they agreed not, an
higher then that: and thus might the usurped Supremacy of the Romish Church and
Pope grow and be established. 8. Finally if we might and would assent, yet
these Dutch and French Churches do not hear any such matters; but they are
heard and handled only by the Eldership (by them erroneously put in place of
the whol^ Church) as we have had experience upon other occasions.

Now though we might not (for these and like reasons) submit as they required,
yet we also signified that if these Churches or Ministers, or any else
whosoever, could show us by the word of God to have faulted in any thing, we
were willing and ready to hear them. These are our reasons and this is our
refusal and walking in such cases. Which this White knows full well, and
therefore his sin is the greater, to write and deal notwithstanding as he
does.

5. The fifth instance, which is about receiving the penitent offenders in cases
of adultery, is spoken of before, page 32.33. To which I refer the Reader: and
will now only ask of him, whether he would have any to reteyne unrepentant
adulterers and adulteresses, and so to partake in their sin? It may be some
of his Lords the Prelates can quickly take him out as bad lessons as this:
specially he being so apt a scholar for such Masters. Yet may not we reteyne
such members in our Church. And if we should, what exclamations would he make
against us, as in deed justly he might? Here therefore mark the wickedness of
this Impe of Satan, common to him with such enemies of the truth and Church.
If any stand from and against the Church, be they never so lewd and wicked, he
is ready to favor and partake with them. But if any continue with the Church,
though they repent of their sins as David, he will not cease to malign and
abuse them, yea and to defame the whole Church thereby, as if it were a company
of adulterers etc. as before in his book has appeared.

6. The sixth instance is of his own wife, Rose White, excommunicated for two
things, though he mention but one: 1. First for not bringing her child to
baptism; 2. For falling from the truth which she had professed with us, to the
corruptions of the Dutch Church here where she joined her self a member. And
the man he speaks of, her husband, is himself, matches one for another.

For the abuses which he speaks of, to give an instance, was not one of them
our observing of that rule Mat. 18.15.16.17. in such manner as we do? For which
when he had reproved the Church, and was after a weeks respi^e called upon for
his proof, he was glad openly in the Church to say he was unprovided: and came
no more to our meetings to prove it at any time afterward. Yet such is his face
as he will boast of his reproving abuses amongst us.

Towching his wives alleging of the example of Timothees mother that did not
circumcise him, and no other cause mentioned but that his ^ather was a
Grecian, he says she could get no answer; whereas the whole congregation then
present knows how many things were answered about it, and sundry reasons used
about this case of not bringing her child to Baptism, upon her husbands
forbidding: As,

That the covenant of grace made with the Church in Christ, was without respect
of persons or sex, there being in him neither male nor female, Gal. 3.28. and
therefore though the father should refuse or neglect, the mother has right and
ought to present.

That she might not deprive her seed of the sacrament of Baptism upon her
husbands will, any more then her self of the Lords supper if he should forbid
her, because that by the believing woman the children are clean, as well as by
the believing man. 1 Cor. 7.^4. and she now being of our church and her husband
not, we were to call upon her for performance of her duty.

That baptism was a sign of incorporating into Christ, and salvation by his
death and resurrection, so as her neglect of baptising her child could not but
be injurious both to Christ and it.

When these and the like persuasions were used unto her, and she had nothing to
answer but asked why then Timothees mother did not circumcise her child, our
Teacher (as he remembers) answered that the cause was not certainly known,
for it was not expressed in the scripture: If she were living and present we
would demand of her self, but she is now dead and gone, wherefore it were hard
for us to determine of the cause, but this To. White was living and present and
must give account of her own ways: That we must not walk by example but by law
of God: for even the most righteous may offend, and Moses himself faulted in
neglecting the circumcising of his son. Exodus 4. And if Timothees mother being
a Iewesse did mary with a Gentile an infidel, who therefore would not suffer
her to circumcise her son, and she obeyed him; that such marriages were
forbidden of God and unlawful: And then she sinning in marying with him, why
might she not also sin in keeping her child uncircumcised for him, if that were
the cause as now this woman pretended? Wherefore she was put in mind rather of
the examples of other good women, as Abigail, 1 Samuel 25. the elect Lady. 2 Ioh.
Epist. also of some spoken of in the Machabees (though that book be Apocrypha)
which lost their lives for causing their children to be circum^ised. 1 Match.
1.63. 2 Match. 6.10. It was also demanded by some of us, how it could be showed
otherwise but that Timothe^s mother might be 2 Timothy 1.5. and 3.14.15. and 1 Timothy 4.6.12. with Act. 16. and 17. and 18. and 19. and 20. chap.
in the faith of the Gospel before he was born and he in that respect might be
uncircumcised* Also, whether the women in Noah's time should have refused to
enter into the Arc, or the women of Israel in Moses time to go themselves
with their childen through the red sea, if their husbands had been against it?
Both which were types and resemblances of our baptism, as the Scripture
shows, 1 Cor. 10.1.2. 1 Pet. 3.20.21.

These and the like reasons being then showed and spoken of, and now upon this
occasion thus noted down, let the Reader here consider of this man's dealing
and his wives, and accordingly esteem thereof as now he finds it to be. His
scoffing at the Teacher of our Church, not only for his words then used, but
even at the office it self which he executes (and therein at the Ephe. 4.11.
Romans 12.7.
ordinance of Christ) hurts not him nor us, but increases this skorners sin
and judgment upon his own head.

For that which he says of myself, I did in deed with hold my consent towching
the first cause of her excommunication about the childs baptizing: making some
doubt about the case aforesaid, partly in respect of the husbands authority
over his family, partly because of the objections arising about the case and
Scriptures alleged out of Act. 16.3. etc. Yet notwithstanding I gave my
consent as touching the second cause thereof, for her falling from the truth to
their corruptions here: And that so, as I said also I was willing for it to
pronounce the sentence my self, if the Church should so appoint. By which
compared with his writing may appear, how still he keeps on his woonted
course against us, and has himself drawn fourth this unfolding of his evil
dealing and his wives too.

For the others of whom he speaks (viz, Mrs Sl. Goodw. Chapter and R. M.) they
were excommunicated for other causes then he has noted down. And it is not
our manner to cast out any for difference of judgment in such cases, if they be
content notwithstanding to walk peaceably with the Church, and to carry
themselves toward the excommunicates as they should by the word ^f God. But if
they join with them in their evil, as some of these more specially did with
his wife, then are they also for so doing justly subject to the ^ame censure
with them, as in this case likewise came to pass.

That which he speaks of the Magistrate is false: he did not forbid, but
persuaded us not to do it. Though if he had or should forbid us any thing which
God requires at our hands, we have learned to obey God rather then man: A^t.
5.29.
As we did then answer him, that what we did, we would always be ready to
approve by the word of God. And now by that which has been said, let the
Reader judge whether this fellows hard forehead verify not the Orators
saying, He that (...) passes the bounds of modesty, becomes imp^dent out of
measure.

Excommunication we use as the holy ordinance of God, to recover the parties
that have sinned (if so it be his will) and to keep the Church from the leaven
of their wickedness. If we did it not, we should dishonor God, and be accessory
to their evil. But observing it, we use the remedy which Christ has given
us, for their good: and if it work not so in them, then is their destruction
the more just upon their heads, and we are clear. Neither does the long
suffering spirit of meeknes hinder but that due execution of the Lords judgment
upon obstinate sinners be inflicted. And being so done, neither will this man's
cursing us for good hurt us, not his blessing of himself and others in evil
help them. Therefore to his many curses denounced against us, I will give no
other answer, but say with Solomon, Prove. 26.2
The curse causeles shall not come, but fly away as a bird: and return upon
him that allegation out of the Prophet, As he loved cursing, Psalm. 109.17.18.
so shall it come unto him, and as he loved not blessing, so shall it ^e far
from him: and as he clothed himself with cursing like a garment, so shall it
come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. And for his
blessing of himself and others in evil, I will refer him to that
denuntiation of Moses against every such one, as when he hears the words of
the curse, yet blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
although I walk according to the stubburnes of mine own heart, (...) adding
drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not be merciful unto him, but then the
wrath of the Lord and his ielousy shall smoke against that man, and every curse
that is written in the book of the Law shall light upon him, and the Lord shall
put out his name from under heaven, and the Lord shall separate him unto evil
out of all the tribes of Israel, according unto all the curse^ of the
covenant, that (...) written in the book of the Law. Deuteronomy. 29.^9.20.21.

For that which he speak^th of our Tents, it is to be noted that this man
himself desiring heretofore to partake with us in the Lords supper, did in our
public meeting compare our and all true Churches to the Tents of Shem, and the
assemblies of the Church of England (whither now he is returned) to the Tents
of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. What remains therefore but that according to
the words of his own mouth and course of his own walking he be left to the
Lord the jealous God that judged Corah and his company? Numb. 16.
Who also is the God of Shem, and will perform to the sons of Iapheth who^
he persuades to dwell in Shems tents, according to his promise made of old to
Abraham son of Shem, Genesis 9.29.27.
and Father of the faithful of all nations, saying, I will bless them that
bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. Genesis 12.3.

For that which he annexeth about fatherles children, himself knows we
approve no such dealing. And some of the persons to whom they were committed are
departed this life. The living belike could not serve his turn: but he will
dig into the graves of the dead. who cannot answer for themselves. Or if he
mean of any that are alive, why gave he not (after his manner) some knowledge
who they be? Would he not that the matter should have been considered and answer
made accordingly? Or would he that we should speak what we hear concerning a
fatherles child. who was long since with that woman who is now this Whites
wife, and ran away from her: who knows best her self how she used her?

For our selves we mislike all hard and evil usage of any, much more savage
and cruel dealing to fatherles children, who ought most of all to be pityed
and helped. If any such have more specially felt their part of our common
troubles and poverty, why will he not consider his Lords the Prelates their
savage and cruel dealing with us, who have made many poor orphans and
widows among us, besides many other great calamities brought upon us by their
means? Of which to begin to speak were to enter into an Ocean sea: so many and
great they are* and not unknown to this White himself: howsoever he can like
now to sail in that sea, where putting away a good conscience, he has
concerning the faith made shipwreck.

For that which he says of W.C. the man himself affirms that be spoke not
these words at all which he has printed of him: and that he told this Whites
wife before the book was published, and spoke it since to his own face, that
it is a lie. Some words he confesses he spoke which were evil: but those also
spoken by him about a year before he joined to the Church, as himself
testifyeth. Yet White obiecteth his speech as the confession of our own
members, affirming also what he has printed to be spoken before many
witnesses. Which if it were, yet till we should know it, and after knowledge and
dealing with him find him obstinate in such evil, how could we but have him
still a member among us? But if such speeches, yea or public writings, of the
members of the Church of England would content men, as White will with this
content himself, how easy were it for his one to to produce a thousand, and
none of them perverted neither?

The conclusion of his Libell, is like the rest. The censures of Christ in his
Church, he blasphemously calls our fond excommunications. which Whites
Discov. p. 24.
before in like manner he termed our Bulls of exco^munications. Suerly God that
will not hold him guiltles that takes his Name in vain, will never suffer
such profanation of his Name and ordinance to go in vain. Such de^iding and
despising of the Lord and his ordinances is fearful. And a fearful thing it
is to fall into the hands of the living God. All his Lords the Prelates
authority and authorizing of his book to be published (as himself alleged here
before the Magistrates) will not help him before the Lord, Prove. 11.21.
who is a consuming fire. From whom what can he or any so persisting look for
else, but to be cast out from his presence, and to have their portion among the
cursed to hear that fearful sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25.41.

And thus has this Esau showed himself to be one of those profane, of whom he
speaks here, hardened in his sin and prophanenes, and of which also he
spoke in the Preface at the beginning of his book: That in him might be seen
the truth of that which Salomo^ says, Eccles. 10.12.13.
The lips of a fool devour himself: The beginning of the words of his mouth
is foolishnes, and the latter end of his mouth is wicked madness: and that thus
also it might appear, how far he is from being of the Israel of God, that
follow peace and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.14.

TOwching his postscript about T. C. the man himself says he is falsely
traduced by him, as he was likewise accused by some other here to Magistrates
for the same thing, who could not prove it against him, when the matter came to
be examined. And see here still the bad dealing of this man, who publishes his
name in this manner to the world, only upon an hearsay, not knowing whether
the thing were true or false, and then also when he heard withal that he had
greatly bewailed his sin, and had not afterward given him any just or
needful cause so to do. For the casting of him out, it was thought meet and
good, considering his former dealing and the present case, so to proceed: yet
not without difference of judgment in some of us thereabout. But he was shortly
after received in again, being repentant for his sin. Now here let the
Reader observe, how this man which blames others for not forgiving of penitent
sinners, has not ceased throughout his book to publish and object the sins
of such against the whole Church and the parties themselves: besides the
manifold falsehoods and blasphemies into which also he is ^un. But his madness
is become manifest to men, and his judgment sleeps not with God: who will
remember and reward him according to his works. Nehem. 6.14. 2 Timothy 4.14.

A note of the particulars (spoken of before, page 62.) wherein we differ from
the Dutch and French Churches of this city, and wherabout we have had dealing
with such of their Ministers as by the rest of their Eldership were deputed
thereunto.
1. THat the estate of the Dutch Church of Amst. is such, as being one, yet it
meets in three several places: whereby it comes to pass that the whole
Church cannot come together in one: the Ministers cannot together with the
flock sanctify the Lords day: the presence of the members of the Church cannot
certainly be known: and finally, no public action, whether excommunication or
any other, can rightly be performed. Which is contrary to these Scriptures, 1
Cor. 12.27. and 11.20, 23. Math. 18, 17. with 1 Cor. 5, 4. Act. 6.2, 5. Numb.
8.9. Act. 20.28.

2. They baptize the seed of them who are no members of any visible Church: of
whom moreover they have not care as of members, neither admit their parents to
the Lords Supper. Genesis 17.7, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 7.14. Exodus 12.48. with 2 Chronicles.
30.6. etc. Numb. 9.13. Hos. 2.2.4. with Rev. 17.1. Ezech. 16.59. etc.

3. In the public worship of God, they have devised and use an other form of
prayer, besides that which Christ our Lord has prescribed Mat. 6. reading out
of a book certain prayers invented and imposed by man. Exodus 20.4.5. and 30.9.
with Psalm. 141.2. and Rev. 8.3. Lev. 10.1. Esa. 29.13. with Math. 15.9. Romans
8.26. Ephesians. 4.8. 1 Pet. 2.5.

4. That rule and commandment of Christ, Mat. 18.15.16.17. they neither
observe nor suffer rightly to be observed among them.

5. They worship God in the Idol-temples of Antichrist. Exodus 20.4. with Deuteronomy.
12.2.3. 2 King. 10.26.27.28. and 18.4. Act. 17.23. Rev. 18.11.12. etc.

6 The Ministers have their set maintenance after an other manner then Christ
has ordained, 1 Cor. 9.14. And that also such, as by which any Ministry at
all, whether popish or other whatsoever, might be mainteyned.

7. Their Elders change yearly, and do not continue in their office according
to the doctrine of the Apostles and practice of the primitive Churches. Romans
12.4.5.6.7.8. 1 Cor. 12.11.12. etc. Act 20.17.28. 1 Pet. 5.1.2. 3.4. See also
Numb. 8.24. etc.

8. They celebrate Marriage in the Church, as if it were a part of the
Ecclesiastical administration, whereas it is in the nature of it merely
civil. Ruth. 4. chap. Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 7.2.

9. They use a new censure of Suspensio^, which Christ has not appointed.
Math. 28.20. Gal. 3.15. 2 Timothy 3.16.17.

10. They observe days and times, consecrating certyan days in the year, to
the Nativity, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ, etc. Exodus 20. Commandment,
2. and 4. Rev. 1.10. 1 Cor. 10.1.^. Act. 20.7. Col. 2.16.17. Esa. 66.23. Gal.
4.10.11.

11. They receive unrepentant excommunicates, to be members of their Church:
which by this means becomes one body with such as be delivered unto Satan.
1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20.

About this matter we had dealing with them diverse times heretofore. And we
desired that knowledge thereof might by themselves be give^ to the whole body of
their Church, or that they would take order that it might be done by us. But
they refused both. Whereabout we had afterward some further dealing with them.
In which time, diverse messages and answers passed between us. Which we had
thought here to have inserted: but now think good for the present to forbear
them: Wishing rather that they might be buried among themselves by amendment
hereafter, then that we should be constreyned either by themselves or others
(as we are already too much provoked) to publish them to the world, for the
further manifestation and clearing of our cause and manner of dealing with them.

The cautions (spoken of before, page 34. and 68.) concerning the question
following.
Question. Whether such as sometimes have fallen from the truth, may afterward
by the Church be taken into office.

Answer. We take it not to be meet, without these and the like cautious: viz.



For the nature of the thing, 1. Whether it be from the truth to the Idolatry
of the heathen, or to some false Christian worship: And here further, whether
to the Papists, Anabaptists, Lutherans, or other Protestants professing
reformation in sundry things, and those of great moment etc. 2. Whether at the
first appearing and receiving of the truth, or when the adversaries have been
soundly and thoroughly convinced. 3. Whether in dispersion and absence from the
Church, or living and remaining with it. 4. Whether drawn, circumvented, and
overcome by others (as Aharon, and some of the Galatians, Exodus 32.1.23.35.
Gal. 1.6.) or drawing, intising and seducing of others (as they of whom we read
Ezech. 44.12. Deuteronomy. 13.5.6.12.13.) Such as now also be they which publish
writings against the truth, the Church, etc. 5. Whether they did voluntarily
yield of themselves, or fainted being broken with troubles and persecutions. 6.
Whether they joined themselves as members, or were present only at their
worship. 7, Whether (being joined as members) they did partake only, or did
administer also and execute their worship themselves. 8. Whether slipping aside
for a time through infirmity, or falling away long and resisting the means
offered for their recovery, or laboring (what they could) to change or abolish
the true religion and worship of God. 9. Lastly, whether before or after the
Church has discussed and agreed what to do in this matter.

For the quality of the persons, 1. Whether they were in office before or not.
2. Whether they be fit for office, or not. Else what blot should they bear in
this behalf who for their sundry defects are altogether unfit, and therefore
never to be taken into office, though they never had fallen from the truth? As
they of Aharons seed, who had a blemish in their body, might never be Priests,
though they did never fall to Idolatry. Lev. 21.17. etc.

For the estate of the Church, 1. Whether it were but newly and weakly entered
into the faith and way of Christ, or had been long and well established therein.
2. Whether as yet it were unsettled and tossed hither and thither, to and fro,
or were settled and well together. 3. Whether it have great and present need of
some to be taken into office. 4. Whether it have others in all respects, as
fit to be chosen. As Paul when he refused John Mark, had Silas, whom he chose
to take with him, Act. 15.25.26.27.32.38.40.

Paul may be noted to have done with Mark, whom yet Barnabas did sooner
receive, as being his sisters son, well known unto him before. Col. 4.10.
and 2 Timothy 4.11. with Act. 15.38.39.

Finally, that none be contentious, but that all As Well those that have fallen
as the rest.
all the members thereof in the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor.
11.16. Ephe. 4.2.3. Phil. 3.15.16. Gal. 6.16.

This for the present, so to be minded and observed, as if others shall at any
time show us better from the word of God, we be always ready to receive it in
the Lord.

An Answer to the Reasons alleged to prove the use of the Lords prayer as a
Prayer.
Objection. 1.
AN express commandment neither contrary to nature, nor analogy of Faith,
and agreeable also to the drift and tenor of the place, ought literally to be
understood and obeyed.

But this Math. 6.9. (...) etc. And Luke 11.2. (...), say, Our Father, etc. is
such an express commandment etc. Ergo It is also so to be understood and
used.

Answer.
1. This reason was alleged before: Where see what is answered unto it. page
30.

2. The Assumption or second part of the reason is but barely affirmed, not
proved at all.

3. How is it agreeable to the nature of prayer and analogy of faith, that one
man or Church at any time should so pray, as asking all things that ever any in
the world have needed or shall need upon any occasion whatsoever? Or that we
now should offer such prayer and worship unto God, as we cannot have assurance
by the Scriptures, that ever the Apostles or other Christians approved of God
did so use at any time? Or to keep always a set form of words for our prayer
to God?

4. How is it agreeable to the drift and tenor of the place, that Christ did so
command it to be used as he pretends? 1. For then it should be sin to pray
at any time, and not to say it, seeing Christ has thus given his commandment
concerning it, Luke 11.2. (...). etc. When ye pray, say, Our father etc. 2. And
thus also we should be bound to say it twice over together at every time we
use it: because Matthew and Luke in some words and clauses recorded it diversely:
And who can say we ought to use the words of the one more then of the other? 3.
But both Mat. 6.9.
the commandment it self, and the circumstances about it noted in the
Evangelists, show it to be given for a rule of prayer; and therefore so to use
it, is that which is agreeable to the tenor and drift of the place: As we have
heretofore showed in Apology. Discovery. Questions. Answ: to Mr H. etc.
diverse Treatises yet unanswered.

5. By literal understanding of Christ's words in the same sermon, do the
Anabaptists gather, that it is unlawful for Christians to take an oath, to go
to war, to bear Magistracy etc. pleading the express words and
commandment of Christ. Math. 5.34.39. etc. with many other pretenses which
they have thereabout. Shall we therefore admit of their errors, or understand
those Scriptures, as they would have us? Not to speak of other as express
speeches, or any collections thereabout: As Mat. 6.17. Ioh. 13.5.12.14.15.

Objection. 2.
2. If Christ had taught only to pray to this effect, then had he taught
nothing but that which John's Disciples and all the faithful practiced before:
for the Prayers of the Saints, as of Solomon, Nehemiah, Daniel, were to that
effect before.

Answer.
1. What if all this be granted? What would follow thereupon? Does not christ
in the same sermon of his, teach the very same things that Moses in effect had
taught before? But now by reason of the false gloses of the Pharisees, he
explaned them, according to their true meaning. Math. 5.17. etc.

2. In like manner there being great abuse about prayer, as is particularly
noted by Matthew, Christ shows them how to use it aright. Math. 6.5.6.7. etc.

3. If he mean, that the prayers of the holy men in former times were of such
things as here be comprised, it is true, that they the^ prayed to this effect:
But if he mean that they prayed with like intendement and in like manner as
Christ now taught the Apostles and Christians hereafter to do, he is deceived.
For in their prayers they intended and looked at Christ to come, they prayed
that God would send him according to his promise, that he might perform the
things spoken concerning him, etc. But now Christ directed all hereafter to
pray in his Name, as being come and exhibited according to the promises that
went before concerning him. Ioh. 14.13.14. and 16.23.24.

4. The purpose of Christ in giving this form of Prayer, was not only to
teach to pray to this effect, but to give direction also concerning all other
things that are needful to be known and observed in the right use of prayer.
As in other books already published we have showed in diverse particulars.

Objection. 3.
Whatsoever Scripture has in every respect the form of prayer, that is ^ot
alone matter of Doctrine, but has been used also as Prayer.

But this Scripture Math. 6.9. has in every respect the form of prayer: as,
Our Father, give us, lead us, and amen, annexed in the end: ergo. And in deed
how can they tell, which were prayers and which not, if not by their form of
Petition? whereby they are distinguished from Doctrines, and rules proposed in
an other form, as Mat. 7.7. and 21.22. 1 Ioh. 5.14.

Answer.
1. The Proposition or first part of the reason needs proof: if he speak of
the use of the very words, as they are set down. But if he speak only of
praying for such things to such end and in such manner as is recorded, then we
grant it: and he speaks nothing against us, but fights with his own
shadow.

2. For some instances herein, let these Scriptures be considered, Ier. 31.7.
Hos. 14.3.4. Joel. 2.17. which have in every respect the form of prayer, See
also Job 22.17. Esa. 44.17. Ier. 2.27. Hab. 2.19.
and yet were given to be directions of the matter and manner of the prayers
which then they should make, and not to prescribe the^ the very words which
they should use. As likewise in this particular of Mat. 6.9 -- 13. compared
with Luke 11.2.3, 4.

3. For the Assumption or second part of the reason, that it is propounded in
form of prayer, see the answer before: page 31. And let them now at length
tell us, if it were so to be used as they say, whether we should follow Matthew
or Luke therein, and whether we should at the end thereof use the conclusion,
and say Amen, or not: seeing Matthew has it so, and Luke not.

4. The very propounding of it in form of Petition conteyneth in it great and
needful Doctrine for the right use of Prayer. Of which also see before, page,
31.

5 The Scriptures and rules of Prayer here mentioned by himself (Mat. 7.7. and
21.22. 1 Ioh. 5.14.) show that neither Christ intended, nor the Apostles
understood it so, that those very words (as they are set down) should be our
prayer unto God. For which observe these clauses, Ask, seek, knock: As a son
asks of h^^ father bread, or fish etc. Mat. 7.7 -- 11. Whatsoever ye ask,
etc. Mat. 21.22. If we ask any thing according to his will etc. 1 Ioh. 5.14.
Thincketh he, when Christ commended unto us the needful, careful, and fervent
use of prayer saying, Ask, seek, knock etc. that his meaning was, Get by rote
and say over, Our father which art in heaven, etc. Or is the saying of these
words, prayer to God, as when a child being hungry comes to his father and
asks bread, or having bread asks fish or other food according to his need?
Or why did Christ use such a general clause, Whatsoever ye ask: and John, If
we ask any thing according to his will etc. if they had meant we should for
our prayer use that form spoken of, wherein they knew are contained all things
that can possibly be asked according to the will of God? Or should we therefore
use these words only for our prayers, and no other at all? But of this
question we have written other where already: Which may suffice, till we be
answered.

Objection. 4.
4. In a duty to be used of all, the holy Ghost is plain: but if those very
words are not to be used as Prayer, no Christian for 1500. year^s and more, did
ever understand our Lords meaning.

Answer.
1 Solomon answers, relating the words of Christ, that they are all plain to
him that will understand, and straight to them that will find knowleledge.
Prove. 8.9.

2. In the duties ^o be used of all, about the Sacraments, etc. the holy Ghost
is plain: yet have Christians swarved from our Lords meaning therabout, as
long since as he speaks of: yea even in the Apostles times they began in
diverse things to go astray therefrom, 1 Cor. 11.20. etc.
as any that is acquainted with the Scriptures may perceive.

3. If erroneous pleading from former times, without scripture, were proof
sufficient, how many and great errors might be pleaded for? As the
Antichristians do, for a multitude of their heresies and abominations, which I
will not stand here to particulate.

4. See also what is answered before, when to like purpose he alleged
Tertullians testimony, page 23. etc.

Exception. 1.
But they say that the Apostles never used those very words in prayer. I answer:

1. An express commandment is warrant sufficient without example.

Answer.
He takes for granted that which he should prove, namely, that there is an
express commandment so to use it as he pretends. Of which point we have
spoken before. And let the Reader observe, how he cannot show by any Scripture
at all, that the Apostles used those words for their prayer at any time.
Neither can he deny, but they understood it aright, and prayed according to the
true meaning thereof.

Exception. 2.
2. There is no example in the whole book of Genesis of the observation of the
Sabbath for 2369. years space after the institution of it. Genesis 2. Neither to
come nearer, is there any example of baptising, in the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, yet is the commandment of Christ sufficient warrant so
to do. Compare Math. 28.19. with Act. 10.48. and 19.5.

Answer.
What a reason is this? As if we thought nothing were observed of old, whereof
there is not mention in the history; or as if no difference were to be put in
the understanding of the Scriptures, but that if one be understood literally,
then must all other likewise. He might as well have told us, we read not in the
Scriptures that Methuselah did ever eat any meat, and yet lived 969 years,
Genesis 5.
the longest of any that are mentioned in the story. And for the Apostles and
others at that time administering Baptism, how plain is it in the Scriptures
cited by himself, that they baptized in the Name of the Lord, as they were
appointed? If he could show but in general terms, that the Apostles at any
time when they prayed, said over the Lords prayer: though it be not written in
particular that they said, Our father which art in heaven etc. there were some
proportion in his manner of reason, which now is not.

Besides, the Apostles and Evangelists themselves recording the institution and
use of the Lords supper, observe not the same words alike, yet all of them
agree in the same matter and substance? Mat. 26.26.27.28. Mark. 14.22.23.24.
Luke 22.19.20. 1 Cor. 11.24.25. And why should we not think likewise of their
administration of Baptism^, that it was according to the commandment of
Christ, though the same particular words be not rehearsed? Or how can any make
question of it, when it is recorded that they baptized (not in their own name,
but) in the Name of the Lord: Act. 2, 38.41. and 10.48. Romans 6, 3. 1 Cor.
1.13.15. Gal. 3.27. with Mat. 28.19. And so by their example have taught us how
to understand and vs^ these things aright?

Exception. 3.
3. It is the Anabaptists reasoning against childrens baptism, asking for an
example, when otherwise there is sufficient warrant so to do: yet are their
Pretenses as good or better then Mr Iohnsons in refusing obedience to our Lords
commandment for want of an example.

Answer.
A childish collection from the Anabaptists error about children^ baptism.
How often shall we speak it, that other sufficient warrant from the Scriptures,
is as good as a thousand examples? And why will he needs show himself to be
like the Anabaptists: who would bring in a worship of God, for which there
cannot be showed sufficient warrant either by precept, or by example, or sound
collection from the Scriptures; and so by consequence in time deprive the
Church of that true worship of God which we are taught both by commandment
and by example and by unanswerable reasons drawn out of the word of God?
Wherein the very experience of former times so extreemly corrupted in this
exercise of prayer, might and ought to teach us to be more careful.

For administering the seal of Gods covenant, and sacrament of i^itiation, and
consequently of Baptism, unto children being the seed of the faithful, we
have both precept, example, and undeniable reasons out of the word of God:
which I will not here stand to relate. If our reasons towching the use of the
form of Prayer spoken of, be so weak as he pretends, why did he not
undertake to answer them: but choose rather to insist upon the Pretenses which
now he has purposelie published concerning that Argument? And why will he
never leave begging of that which he should prove, that i^ (...) our Lords
commandment to say over the very words prescribed, Mat. 6. ^ Luk 11. for our
prayer unto God?

Exception. 4.
4. The Prayers mentioned in the new Testament, are such as (...) powered forth
upon special occasion, as Act. 4.24. Ioh. 17.

Answer.
An absurd pretense: and such as wherein he is against himself, yielding that
the Lords prayer is not to be used upon special occasion: or else he speaks
nothing to the purpose. And if it teach us not how to pray upon special
occasion, how is it a perfect direction? Or if it do, and yet be not in such
case to be used, how plain is it that Christ's meaning and the Apostles
understanding of it was such as not to prescribe it for our prayer, but for our
instruction and direction therein? Again Christ says, When ye pray, say, Our
father etc. therefore also upon special occasion, if that were his meaning, as
he would persuade. Not to speak how themselves commonly hold and give out that
it is such as is fit to be used at all times and for all occasions. So well
they agree together.

But why does he cite here, Ioh. 17. wherein Christ's prayer a little before his
death is mentioned? Is it to show that though Christ did not then use it,
praying upon special occasion, yet at other times he did? If this b^ his
intendement, who will believe him that Christ who had no sin, could ask
forgivenes of sin, as in that form of prayer is prescribed? If this be not
his meaning, to what purpose is that Scripture alleged, unless it be to reason
against himself, and to show still his own foolishnes?

Exception. 5.
5 Let them show me an example where ever the Apostles prayed before their
Sermons; if they can.

Answer.
1. Have they not read what is written of the Apostles, Act. 6.4. how they said
to the brethren at Jerusalem, Look ye out men whom we may appoint to this
business (of the Deacons office): And we will give our selves continually to
prayer and to the ministration of the word? Nor how the Apostle Paul gave
direction concerning public prayer, when he wrote to the Churches and to
Timothee about publik doctrine, whether it were in prophetical or ministerial
use of the word of God. 1 Cor. 11.4. and 14. chap. 1 Timothy 1. and 2. chap. Or
when Paul taught Timothee that the food of the body is to be sanctified unto us
by prayer, 2 Timothy 4.4.5.
should he not think likewise of the food of the soul?

2. And what though the particular circumstance of time (before, or after) be
not set down? Or that the Apostles having to deal with several sorts of
persons and occasions, did diversely carry themselves according thereunto?

3. Or does it not ly upon the Ministers in publik, to be as well the mouth of
the Church unto God in prayer, as to be the mouth of God to the Church in
doctrine? Or should we think that the Apostles did not carefully perform the
whole work of the Ministry committed unto them?

4. Finally, let these men show us an example in the Apostles or Primitive
Churches, where ever they said their prayers over by tote; or used a book of
Common prayer among them; or read any prayers at all for their prayer to God;
or had Archbishops, Lordbishops, Archdeacons, Priests, Parsons, Vicars, etc.
either for use of prayer, or for any other service Ministry or government of
the Churches of Christ.

Finis.

