The treasury of health conteynyng many profitable medycines gathered out of
Hypocrates, Galen and Auycen, by one Petrus Hyspanus and translated into
Englysh by Humfre Lloyd^ who has added thereunto the causes and signs of
every disease, with the Aphorisms of Hypocrates, and Iacobus de Partybus
redacted to a certain order according to the members of man's body, and a
compendiouse tabl^ conteynyng the purginge and confortatyue medycynes, with the
exposicyo^ of certain names and weyghtes in this book contained with an
epistle of Diocles unto king Antigonus.

Ecclesiast.xxxvii. The Lord has created Physycke of the earth, and he that
is wise will not abhor it.

To the Gentil hearted Reader Humfrey Lloyde.
Although diverse learned me^ of no less judgment then practyse, have
berebefore translated and set forth sundry books, containing the most wholesome
and profitable precepts of Physic, wherein they seem to have openid and at
large declared al such things as seemed necessary and expedient to be had and
known in this our vlgare English tongue: yet never thelesse, I calling to
memory the notable s^ntence of Cicero, that every man is not alonly borne for
him self bu^ chifely to profit his native Country then his parents,
afterward his children and friends, seeking a means whereby I might profytte
this my natyue Country, thought it best to translate this little treatise which
was gathered out of the works of the most noble and Ancient phisicions
Hipocrates, Galene, Dioscorides, and Auicen by one Petrus Hispanus which
(although he chanced in a barbarous and rude time) was a man of great
knowledge and long practyse unto which work conteyninge alonly ye simple and
bare practyse, I did add before every chapter as brefely as I could, the
causes and signs of the sicknesses and dyseases, trustyng thereby both to
gratifye and somewhat ease the pains of the reader so that he n^de not ^lles
where to seek the causes and signs of such diseases whose remedies were
contained in this book, and upon that consideration I did also translate and
add herunto the Aphorysmes of Hipocrates redacted unto such an order yt as the
members of man's body be disposed to receive some one disease and some
another, so the Aphorisms, which entreat of eueri disease that may happen to
that membre be gathered together into one chapter beginning at the head and
so in order to the far: and also because men often times desire to know the
names and properties of compounde medicines, I did translate a little book of
such compoundes drawn out of mesue by one Iacobus de partibus, which work
I have redacted to the self same order that the aphorisms be in and
furthermore because I would gratify the reader, and would not he should be
ignorant in the names and weyghtes herin contained. I have hereunto added two
tables, of the which the first does brefly express such symples and
compoundes as do either comfort or purge any disease or hurtful humor
infectynge any member of man's body, and the second expounds certain general
names of medecines and weyghtes commonly mentioned in this book and thereupon
have made an end of this rude and simple work, employng my ^ole labor and
dylygence to set the same furthe as truly and as nigh the authors mind as I
could, not thinking but that there do some faults remain therein both because
the barbarous and arabicke terms which the author does chyefly use, and of the
diverse and sundry opynions of most notable and well learned Phisicions as well in
the names as in ye natures of herbs and simples, and especially that we be
either ignorant or destytute of Englysh names for a great sort of them, yet I
did as nigh as I could follow Dioscorides and in such things as I could not
find in him I did confer Fuchsius, Ruellius and Dorstemius together, and
followed the judgment wherein they did al or the most part of them agree, and in
the Englyshing thereof I and al other which intend any such work are much
beholden to Master Wyllyam Turner, who with no small d^ligence has in both
his herballes most truly and syncerly s^t forth the names and natures of
diverse h^rbes, unto whose judgment and correccio^ and all other learned in the
most necessary science of Physycke, do I submyt this little work and treatise,
desiring them most hartly to take in good worth this my first labor and to
accept my good will, not thynkyng it to be done to hurt any man, knowing what
a perylous thing it is for them that be not learned both in the complectyons of
men, Age, Regions, and time of the year, with the knowledge of the Orygyne and
causes of the diseases, to take upon them the cure of any pacient and that
rather they shall do hurt then good with the sole and only practyse thereof
except they do thereunto add great knowledge and perfyte judgment had with
paynfull study and long practyse, therefore I would that all such rash and
temerariouse persons should perfectly know, that it was never my mind or will
that this work should be set forth to maintain there fylthy lucre and blind
boldness, but ^hefely to be a toke^ and sign of the entye^ de^yre I have to set
forth the thing which should ^e acceptable and pleasant to the Reader, and ^lso
I would that it should be for ye use and pro^yte of such honest persons as will
modest^y and discretelye (either in time of necessyty ^hen no learned Physician
is at hand, or else ^onferryng with some learned man and using (...) council)
mynister the things herin contained and go about the practice thereof, and upon
these most honest and godly co^syderacyo^s, I take upon me this heavy burden
and hard prouynce, therefore I shall most hartly desire the gentle reader to
pardon my audacity and bear with my sclende^ judgment, and not to despise this
simple work because it is not garnished with colors ofrethorik and fine
polyshed terms, but rather to consider that Physike is an art content^ only
to be plainly and distinctlye taught and nothing desirous to be adourned and
decte with eloquence and gay painted sentences, wher^fore I trustyng to the
syncer and indifferent^ judgment of the reader, do entyerly desire him to pray
with me to him that created physick^ of the earth, and commanded that we
should honor the physycion, to preserve this Realm^ of England in most
prosperouse and contynuall health, and to endow the inhabitan^tes thereof, with
perfyte understanding and the most desired knowledge of his holy word. Amen.

Places of scripture which seem to make for the praise of Physyke.
MOses brought forth Israel from the reddesee and they went to the
wilderness of sur, Exodi. 1^.
and they went three days in the wylldernesse and could find no water, and at
the last they came to mara but they could not drink of the waters for ye
byttern^s thereof, and Moses cried unto ye lord and he showed him a tree, and he
cast it into ye waters and they waxed sweet.

Also if you r^de over the.xiii.xiiii,xv, chapters of Leuiticu^ (where the
prestes be taught to dyscerne the Leprosy from all other dyseases) you shall
find many things that make for the praise of Physycke.

H^zekish was sick to the death, and after he had prayed to the lord he sent
Isayahe unto him, Regist. 4. cap. 10.
who put a lump of fygges upon the sore and he recoueryd.

Helyf^us the Prophet healed the naught and bitter waters of Ierycho and the
barennesse of the ground, Reg. 4 chap. 4.^
with castyng salt into the spryng thereof, he healed also Naaman of his
leprosy and the potage that was made of collyqu^ntyda.

The heart is glad of a sweet ointment and savor, Pro. 27. Tobi. 6.
but a stomach that can give good counsel rejoices a man's neighbor.

The angel said unto Tobias, take out the bowels of this fysh and as for the
heart, ye gall and the liver keep them by the for these things ^re necessary for
medecyne.

For the falling of the Hear.
The Causes.
THe falling of the Hear is of two kinds, of the which the one is called
alopecya which is caused thrughe the malignite of vytiouse and noughty Humores
which rote and corrupt the rotes of the Hears whereby they fall away. The
other is called Deflunium capillorum and comes of ye rarytie of the skyne and
lack of the Humore by the which ye hear be come forth and nourished for the
relaxatyon and losnesse of the Skin is the cause why they be not steadfast and
want of their humor does extenuat the same whereby they do fall away.

The Signs.
The signs or tokens be plain enough for in the first, the hear is more
lose in one place then in an other, and in the second they fall in all places
like.

Remedies.
Diosc. Isac.
IF thy hears fall, make lie of ye Ashes of Culuer, dounge and wash thy head,
it is prouyd.

So do walnut leaves beaten with Bears sewet, restore ye hears that be
plucked away.

Seth the leaves of an Oak and the mydle rynd thereof in wa^er and wash thy
head, it is proved.

The ashes of little Frogs burnt Do cure the falling of the hear.

The ashes of Gootes dounge, myngled with oil, Galen,
does engender hear.

The Decoctyone of a Mallowe Rote in water makes the scurffe of the head fall
of, if thy head be washed in that water, it is proved.

The water of the decoction of ye myddle rynde of an elm thy head being often
washed therein, Galen
does the same.

Wormewoode stamped and laid to the temples does quickly remedy the pain in
the head. Macer.


Stamp Parsley with the blood of an Hog, let them sethe in white wine and
afterward let it be streyned through a cloth over cold water, and let the
Fat that flyteth or swimmith above be gath^red together and mengl^d with the
yolke of of a sodden egg and Mastike and Cummin and let the bare place be
anointed there with and there will hear grow quyckely, it has been prouyd.

Annoynte the place with raw Honey and sprynkle it over with the (...) over
with the Ashes of a grene Lacerte burnt, it enge^dreth much hear it is prouyd.

Diosc.
The blood of a Tortois, if ye bare place be anointed there with enge^dreth
much hear and curethe the Leprye.

The same does the Shell of the Snayle being brent.

Gerard.
The Milk of an Ass does make black the hear after a wounderfull manner.

Burn Barley bread with Salt, and mengle it with Bears sewet, and anoint on
what place so ever thou will and the hears will grow there.

The Joyce of Sloes and Ynke the utter rind or shale of a Nutte brayde and
tempered with vinegar so that they be moist, let them be applied for an
ointment and they do make the pacientes hear black.

The Ashes of a Goats clawe, menglid and beaten with Pytche, remedieth the
falling of the hear.

Let thy head be washed with Dogs piss, and thou shall not be bald

Make lie of the ashes of the wod of Iuye, ye rind first pulled of wash an old
ma^s head therwyth and his hears shall be yelow two months space after.

These things following make hear to grow after Auicenius opinion first Oil
wherein a kind of flies called Cantharides be sod and boyld does greatly dry
the fleme and afterward let these be applied which follow. Oil of Eggs,
Auicen.
bears sewet, Ashes of the herb called Condise or Lanary and of the pintle
and spleen of an Ass, the ashes of the ears and bellye of an Hare burnt, ye
ashes of Laudatiu^ or Cist sage of sothernwod, of Teintworte and the ashes of
burned filberts and also of wal^uttes, oil of Radyshe and Bayberys.

A Lacert and horse leches, minglyd together with the Oil called Laudanum and
let the place be anointed therwyth, and for a suerty the hear will grow, it is
prouyd.

Galen.
Burn the head, of a Fox together with the skyne unto ashes, and boil a
Lacert (the head being cut o^) in oil mightilye a hole day, and anoynte and
sprinkle that place with ye ashes where you will have hear grow. The same
thing workithe the ashes of Gotes doung, or of the clawe of a Got.

Burn a quycke Snayle upon a Tile and crushe it to ashes with.. of alume and
as much Mary of a Dear, sethe these in Wine and a anoint the baldnes. The same
thing does the ashes of Bees myxte with oil.

Euphorbiu^ myngled with oil is wonderful good.

To take away Hear.
The Causes.
IT is a comin saying that if the one contrary be known the other is plain
and evident. Auicen.
So like wise he that knows why the hear fallethe or is little in quantytie,
is not ignorant why the Hear is much in quantytye and steadfast, which
comes of the multitude of incorrupt humors and thycknesse of the Skine of the
head with streytnesse of the holes through the which the hear grows.

The Signs.
There is no declaracyon of the tokens necessary if a man do either se or
feel the head.

Remydes.
IF thou will yt the hear should never grow up again, pluck them up by the
rotes, and anoint the place with the blood of a back or with the blood of a
little Frogge, it is proved.

Put also to the place horse leches taken out of the standing water and
dressed with strong Uineger.

The ashes of a Colewortes stalk made in a plaster lets the growing up
of hears, it is prouyd.

The milk of a Bitche if the place be anointed therwt will not suffer ye hear
to grow. Galen.
The same affirmith Galene also, of ye blood of a bitche.

Let the joyce of a Gourde, well and delygently mengled with water be put on
the bare place.

Lapdanu^ the gum of an Iuy tree Emetes Eggs Arsenicke and Uineger bound to
the place whereto ye will apply the^ and there will never hear grow.

Put the ashes of a grene frogge brent in a bathe and all the hears y^ be
washed of ye bathe will fall away it is prouyd.

The Branne of Lupines or penny bean laid on the hearye place, Isac.
will make the hear to fall, and will not suffer other to grow.

The Joyce of Fumitorie myxte with gum of Arabyke and laid on the place the
hears first plucked out by the rotes will not parmytte the hears to grow.
Dioscor.


Been flower laid to the preuye me^bres of a child, will not suffer the hear
to grow.

The things that let the growing up of hear after Auice^ be these opi^m,
Henbane, Auicen.
the roughnes or cot^on yt is found in Fleworte the blood ^f water Frogs, of
a water snaile ^ of a Rere mouse, and the oil of ^he Decoccyon of a little
grene la^ert and the earth called Cymolea

Let the rote of Rape Uyolet or Sowbread be sodde^ in water where in let the
nape of the neck be washed and afterward anointed with the oil of the
Decoction of Rape Uielet or Sowbread for it heals myghtly.

Let the breaking out of the ring worm of the head be washed with strong
Uineger, and sprinkle thereon afterward the ashes of the rind of wodbinde and
without dout it will heal al ye scabbines and filthy Ringe worms.

Circan.
Take Uineger wherein wine lies has boylid a little and anointed it al over the
scurfe first cleansed, and it myghtily heals and dries it, or take the
branches of a grene Fig tree and the leaves also and stamp them in water
mightily, if the scurf be new, let them be vside daly with Uineger, till it be
like mary and then apply it to anoint the place.

Cleanse bitter Almondes and thereof, Constable.
with the cold water of Fystyke Nuttes make an oyntme^t, it is very good if
thy head being shaven be anointed therwyth.

Stamp the rote of Helena Compana, the Braunchys and Leaves of the Fygge tree,
and bitter Almo^des, mengle them well with oil and strong Uyneger, afterward
put therein the ashes, of the rote of Cole worte and Litarge and Quick
Silver, white Lead and Common salt and blynne them well together and afterward
wash clean the place with Uyniger or Urinne and then anoint ^t, it is proved.

Wine Lies called Tartarum made in powder and put upon the Scurffe being
clensyd, Circan.
menglid ^n oil and Ueniger is very good ^herto.

The Ashes of an wild Coucu^^er root mengled with cold water Constable.
does cleanse the place wounderfull well.

Sethe beaten Oak Aples and the Gall of a Bull and bitter Almondes together
till they be thycke and annoynte the place.

Make a confeceon of the flower of Fenell Seed in a Glass with wy^e and
annoint the head therwyth and it will lyghly heal it, it is proved.

Macer.
Wormwood stamped and laid to the head heals lyghtlye.

Let the Seed of Staphisagre boil in water, Circan.
and temper with the same water a good quantity of chosen wine Lyese, and let
the head be washed with this water twyse or thryse.

Of great Ualoure and efficacy thereunto is this, let Ship Pytche Be
dyssolued one whole night in strong Uyneger in the morning let the Oil of
Nuttes be add mixte there unto and Arsenike and ^he rotes of an oak and let it
be well ^eaten and put there unto a little quick silver and let the head be
anointed therewith, but first let it be ^hauen, it is proved.

Let the Rote of Helena Cam^ana, boil with bread in strong Ui^eger and
afterward strain it, and ^et the head be washed with the stray^inge thereof, and
beat the Roots that are not sodden with Bores Grease, and let a little Quick
Sil^er and Wine Lies be put ther^o and anoint the place. It is ^roued.

Stamp the leaves of radyshe ^ Hogs grease, or mingle quick ^^me quenchyd in
water with old ^reise.

This is good for all Scabbes and Ringewormes, Circan.
take and make confeccyon of wine lies and litarge, with Ueneger and let it
stand all a night together, in the morning set it over the Fire with oil of
Nuttes put thereunto, and when it is do^ne take it of and annoint the place.

Take the dry doung of an Ass, of an Hog, and of an Ox, and wine Lyese
well punnyd, and stir them together, but yet wasshe the place and dry it,
first rub it with Ueniger or Urynne that it blede again, it is proved.

Powder of Amptes, myxte with Oil, and therewyth annoynte the Scabbe against
the same it is very good.

Sethe the Leaves of anoke, and the myddill Rynde thereof in water and wash thy
head, it is proved.

Beat old Grease, Brymstone, Salendinne, and salt together and annoynte the
bare place therwyth. Ten times, it is excellent.

Take of Alu^me.. 8. of salt..ii. dyssolue it in strong Uineger and anoint the
place and it will heal it

Water of the decoction of nut leaves cures the disease in the head or berd
where the hear fall way. Plini.
And other deseases of the hear.

For the worms in the head, Galen.
lay over all the head Ellebore stamped with hogs grese.

Lay over the head in manner of a plaster the raw liver of an hog, the space
of.ix. days, wash it afterward with old water, and it will heal.

The powder that is fylyd of from a hearts horn given in wine to be drunk,
Gilbert.
does not suffer nether nitts nor lyce in the body, much more being made in an
ointment.

Al bitter things that cleanse and consume, and kill Nyttes.

Stauysagre salt peter, Arsemion, menglid and tempered with vyneger and oil
kill lyce.

The same works salt water with brymstone in it.

Burn gume, and a horsleche together, and mingle it with hogs blood and
anoynte the head therwt and there will nether Nittes neither any kind of worms,
Lyce nor fles live in the head.

Dios.
The sede of Staphisagre, myxte with oil, kylleth Nittes.

Cir^ain.
If Quick Silver and Staphisager, be myngled with oil and Uyneger, and be
anointed on, they kill the lyce.

Burn the head of a great Ratte and myngle it with the droppynge of a Bear
or of a hog and anointe the head, it heleth the desease called Allop^cia.

Against forgetfulness or drousynes.

The Causes.
THis disease is called in Greek of the effect Lethargus and in latin veternus
and is caused of cold and putrified phlegm which has made cold, and filled
the brain.

The Signs.
The Lythargye comes with great sluggishnes and such desire of sleep as cannot
be eschued, with great oblyuion, and forgetfulness so that they can skant tell what
they have done, nor make answer when they be spoken unto.

Remedies. Capi. iiii.
Against this disease of forgetfulness apply Rewe and red myntes with oil and
very strong Uineger unto thy nosthrilles. Galen. Co^stan.


Burn thine own heat and mingle it with Uineger and a little pytche and apply
it to thy nosethrilles, Constable.
for it wou^derfully stirs and quickneth yt persons diseased with
forgetfulness. The ligthes of an hog laid unto the head being shaven is very
good

The blood of a Tortoys anointed on ye forehed is of much valor

The gal of a Crayne being made warm in a leaden vess^l does thoroughly and
lyghtlye stir up the deseased body if y^ nape of his neck be anointed
therwyth.

Fume made of Roes lether, does myghtyly sterre him up.

Fume of Kyds skins does quicken forgetful persons and those yt be infected
with the falling syknes and weme^ also that have their flowers stopte.

The sent or smell of Dog fennel, takes away sleep.

Grynd Mustard sede with Uineger, and rub it myghtyly on the pla^tes of the
feet, and it does quicken forgetful persons.

Sauery beaten and sodden in Uineger and laid in form of a plaster to the
hinder part of the head does merrily awaken those yt are heavy with sleep.

Nothing does better quicken forgetful persons then the smoke of a man's hear.

A drink made of Anacardiu^ is a peculiare remedy is this desease. Galen,


The smoke of Galbanum or of an h^rtes horn is best of al things

The skin of an Hare burnt and the ashes thereof droncke with calament heal
the lytargie.

For the Frensye.
The Causes.
THe Phrenisye comes of great abundance of blood or choler fyllyng up the
brains or paunicules thereof. Which choler if it be adust engenders a most
peryllouse and peruiciouse phrenesy.

The Signs.
They which have the frenesye be troubled with a contynual fever and madness
with great watchinges and little sleep, and when they wake they roar and cry
and cannot tell what they say or do, and if it come of blood they laughe, of
choler they fight and braule and ska^t be ruled without Cords or Chains.

Remedies. Ca. v.
First let ye matter be put back with the joyce of Playntayne or morel and
Uyneger anointyng the temples therewith, then make a coife or cappe of wax
terebintine and womans milk and put it upon the head, for it will ease the
pains and provoke the pacyent to sleep.

Constable.
Let the fume of the matter be drawn downward with a suppository or clister,
and with moderate rubbyng of the hands and feet, then put a sponge dipped in
the decoction of Henbane or a whelpe or a cock rypt over ye belly upon the
head, or ye lyghtes of a swyne, also bynd the arms and legs of the pacyent,
and let him smell Opium, camphory, Henbane, Basyl, Saffru or wax mingled with
Rose water, afterward anoynte the ears, eyes and nodle with mirth, storax,
Castoreum, or wash, the head, with Henbane or Smalage that have be^ sod in
sweet wine

Make an oyntme^t of Dogfenel detain and oil of Roses, and anoint his head
therwyth and it shall cause him to sleep.

Also take of Opium. ii. of leven.ii. well beatyn with honye and vinegar and
anoynte the Pulses there with.

Make a plaster of Opium, henbane sede, and Sugar, myngled in the joyce of
lettys and lay it to his forehead.

Make a suppositori of Opium and oil of Uyolettes.

White Popie, and Henbane seed distempred with the white of an Egg and laid to
the forhead provoke sleep.

It is very good to let blood of ye vain which is in the myddel of the
forhead.

Take..i. of opium..ii. of black popy and distempre them with populeon and the
milk of a woman that gives suck to a wenche and lay it to the foreheade.

The wax of the pacyentes ear, given him in drink causes him to sleep.

Seth Henbane in sweet wine and wash therewith thy ears temples and nose
thrilles, and it provoke sleep. The hot lights of a goat clapped to the
head takes away the frenesy so does a Spo^ge dipped in warm wine and put to the
left Pappe,

It is very good to anoint ye forhead with oil of Roses, and to put a horsleche
to the forhead.

Constable.
Safron in all meats provoke sleep.

Lay to the pacyents head Saffro^ Mandrage and Opium and he shall sleep.

Galen
If the head be anointed with oil of Roses, Dogfenell, and Castoru^, it swageth
the pains and causes the pacyent to sleep. Galene.

Sprinckle the powder of Mandrage and Arsenike upon a shaven head, and the man
shall sleep.

If the face be washed with hot water of the Decoctyon of Popy ye pacyent
shall out of hand either sleep or dye,

Lay ye rote of Neproyal boiled to the head and it will draw forth the matter
of the madness, Dioscor.
it has been prouyd.

If the pacyent be very sad, Galea.
let the joyce of Iuye be put in his nose, and Myntes sod in Uineger be laid to
his head.

If the Fra^tyke man have is head anointed with Castoreum, without dout he shall
sleep.

If thou would, cause a man to sleep take Opium, Henbane, Plantayn Popy, and the
leaves of mandrage and yue leaves and beryes, mulberie leaves, and the joyce of
hemloke and lettyse, of every one of them. i. stamp them al in a mortar, then
let a sponge drink them up and put it in the Son to dry, afterward lay
the sponge to his nose and he shall sleep, and when thou will awake him, deep
another sponge in Uineger and hold it to his nose.

For the head ache.
The Causes.
THis disease called in Greek cephalalgia and in arabike Soda comes somtymes
of great multitude of humors contained, in the head and sometimes of an
outward cause as of heat of the son of cold, of drunkenness, and of a
stripe, which be also diverse and sunday, but because the aucthore is so short
in his remedies (and I entende to write nothing here but that shall be
necessary for the understanding of him) I will pass the^ ou^r at this time.

The Signs.
Great pains in the head.

Remedies. Cap. vi.
THe joyce of ground yuie cast into the nosethrilles purges the head and
takes away the pain.

This does purge the head wonderful well in every kind of head ache. take wax,
Masticke Pellitory, mustard seed, town cresses, Nigella romana, Stauisager,
Cynamon, and of black and white, hellebore, of either.ii. ounces let these be
well pu^ned and put in a bag of lynen clothe, then let ye pacye^t fasting hold
this bage i^ his mouth and chaw it betwixt his teeth, Gerard.
and after wash his mouth with warm wine and Honey.

When al remedies fayl a cantery in the hinder part the head helps

Against the Rewme.
The Causes.
A Great multitude of cold humors in the brain wych fall down to the nose and
throat.

The Signs.
This disease is sone known and especyally in cold weder.

Remedes. Capi. vii.
IF the Rewme come of a could cause lay hot Calame^t or runnynge Time bruysed
to the head.

Diosc.
An emplayster made of Garlike, cloves and leaves stops ye humore causynge
the rewme.

Ysope bruiled in ye embres and so laid to ye head, stops ye Rewme. A
little bag full Darnel salt and anyse laid to the head is very good

A pomander made of the powder of Cub^bes, ma^ys, Laudanum, and Gr^ke pitche
does remove from the brain al superfluouse humors.

Maces and Cubebes chewed in the mouth do the same.

The joyce of colwortes cast in the ^ose thrilles does purge the head. Mace^


Sorel punned with oil of Roses is good for the head ache.

Against the turn or daselyng^ in the head.
The Causes.
A Gross and thycke humore in ye brain, from the which rise vaporouse
spirits and move disordinatly about the brain and sumtimes these spirits or
exhalatyons come from the stomach.

The Signs.
The pacyent thinks that all things which he sees move and turn round,
and oftentimes falls down.

Annoint thy forhead with opium, Mandrage he^bane and Popy sede myngled with
the joyce of nightshade and oil of Uyolettes.

Rasis.
If it come of old pains in ye head dissolve Opium and Camphory in oil of
Wylow, and pour it into ye ears and nosethryls, or put oil of v^olettes and
milk into the nosethriles

There is no medycine to be compared to tamaryndes for this disease

Dioscor.
Mustard seed, or leaves bruised and laid hot to the head takes away the
pains and there is no better medicyne,

The vapoure of celydone sodde in wine and received at the mouth asswagith the
grefe.

There is nothing better then to blow to ye nosthrilles nesynge po^der with
powder of Peper and Castoreum.

Dioscor.
The joyce of Sowbread myngled with Honye, and spouted unto the nosethrilles
does purge ye head.

Oil of tystikes heals the hemicrane and watchynges. Auicen.


Make a plaster of the rote of a wyld Cucumer and wormwod boiled in oil, and
lay it to the head.

The seed of mandrage heals al pains in the head. Rasis.


This emplastre is wonderful good, take Gume, wild Rue, the utter rynde of the
rote of Cappares French Garlycke and euphorbium or clary, of al like quantity,
stamp them with odoriferouse wine, and lay it to the head.

Siler Montayne is good for ye head ache. Macer.


It is good to distempre powder of aloes with oil of roses.

He that uses to receive three pills made of Aloes and the joyce of colwortes
of the bigness of a bean, shall never be troubled with pains in the head.

Let thy head be often washed with lie made of the ashes of Colworte roots, and
nettle rotes, with the rote of bryonie, for it is of great efficacy against all
pains in the head.

Galen.
If you have the hemicrane, anointe thy brows and nosethrilles with the joyce of
Iuye leaves myngled with oil and Uineger.

Plini.
Anoynte thy head with the ashes of a hertes horn, myxt with oil of Ros^s.

The suffumigacion of ye oil of kerua is good for all diseases in ye head

The joyce of Popy mingled with oil of roses provoke ye pacye^t to sleep if
his head be therwt anointed

Gal^n
Theodoricon empericon takes away all pains of ye head, so do the leaves of
ground Iuye stamped with the white of an egg and laid to ye head

Galen,
Anoint thy belly with this ointment following, and it ^aseth the head ache,
purges the stemake, comfor^eth the appetite and clarifieth ye eyes, ^ake of
the joyce of smallage. ii. of mercury. iiii. of gosgrese and h^n^es grese of
either a pound, of rosyn ^ ii. of masticke and franke^sence of ^yther. v. of
casiafistula.ii. make ^f all these an oyntmente and use it ^ut if you add
thereto the joyce of ^alwort and the rynde of an elder ^t shall be much stronger.

Galbanum emplastred to the head ^s of great efficacye.

For the falling Evil.
The Causes.
Gross and slymye humores, which stop the ventricles ^f the brains, and
ways of the ly^ely spiri^es.

The Signs.
The pacyent to fall as dead ^o some at the mouth, and lose his ^ences.

Remedies. Capi. x.
Sixtus.
THe Powder of hertes horn drunk with wine heal^the the falling Evil.

The brain of a Fox given to infantes cures this disease.

Also the stones o^ a bore drunk with wine be good therefore, so is ^ gall of a
B^re drunk with warm wat^r.

The milk of a mare dronke does preserve from falling, so do the ston^s of a
Cock drunk with wat^r but the pacient must absteyne from wine.x. days after.

This is a sou^raigne remedy for this disease, Galen.
make powder of castoreum, Oppoponax, Antimonium and Dragons blood and use
this.

Gerard.
A like virtue has Antimonium, with castoreu^ alone, or antimoniu^ receyuyd
with wa^er.

The eggs of a Raue^ drunk b^ very good, ^o is the joyce of wild Rue.

The ashes of the skull of a dead man drunk is wound^rful good. Auicen.


Five leaued grass^ drunk.xxxiii. day^s does perfectly heal. Diosc.


The red stone found in a swallow heals the falling evil. Dioscor.


Aristologye carried upon a man ^ureth him, so does the dunge of a ^^rlewe if it
be drunk.

The flesh of an wolf eaten and especially the heart thereof is of great
efficacye.

It has been prou^d that Misceltow drunk cures the disease.

The ashes of a want, welel, frog or swallowe, brennyd in an erthen pot, and
drunk it is very good.

It is good to drink three sponful of the joyce of Horhounde myngled with three
sponful of honey.

There is nothing better then wine wherein hemlocke has been sodden Powder of the
liver of a Kyte or ye Rasis.
joyce of Cowslope drunk.ix dai^s together heals without doubt.

The blood of a wesell drunk, or the joyce of sparow tongue do cure ye falling
evil.

Macer.
A pie made of the blood of an hare, gromel seed, and other spyces does heal
perfectlye, so does ye liu^r of an ass sod and eaten.

Gilbert.
The galle of a bear, or of a dog, ^aten is very good.

Make powder of the heart, liver lo^ges and all the entraylles of a dog, and
give it him that is seek, for it heals wonderfully, likewise does the powder
of the blood of a dog.

Galen.
The remnet of an hare given thirty daye^ together early, in the fashion or
bygnes of a fetch healith the faulyng Evil.

Pyony tied about the Pacients neck kepith him safe from the falling evil.

The sand of a wall made in powder with dogs toorde, and ye joyce of slo^s
drunk with warm water as the disease begins to come on the sick pars on
will heal him for ever.

Give the sick party the heart of an ^^art to drink with warm water, ^^d he
shall be healed.

Give ye pacyent to drink the heart of a Gripe, with warm water and he shall be
whole.

Let the heart the liver and lights of a Grype, or vulture be dried well against
the fire, and let the pacient drink the powder thereof with oximel, and the
falling sickness will go from him.

The ston^s of a Bear, be very good eaten, and so ar the stones of a Ra^me, of
a Boore, and a boore big. In Tuscia there was acertayne man delivered and
healed of this diseass, of a certain husband man, by only orderyng or dressi^g
of wild rue and afterward were many healed, after the same manner.

The joyce of Coryander given to the pacient to drink, will not suffer the
humore to asce^d into ye head and it works also great h^alpe to the pacientes.

Take a Frogge and cut her through the mids of the back with a knyefe and
take the liver and fold^ it in a cool worte leaf and burn it in a new
earthen pot well closid and give the ashes thereof unto the si^k person in his
si^knes to drink with good wine and if he be not healyd at ons do so by another
frogge and so do still, and without dout it will heal him.

Powder made of ye stone of a swalowe heals without doubt those which have
the faulling Evil, for it is a sure experymente.

Against madness called mani^.
The Causes.
GReat quantity of incorrupte blood flowynge to the brain.

The Signs.
It is like to the Phrenesy saving that the frenesy comes with a fever and
this without

Remedies. Capi. ^i.
Certain men say that a rost^d Mous eaten does heal Fra^ticke persons* Diosco
Gilb. and Lapi^ariu^-


A red stone found in a swallowe carried about the pacient and tied in a
clothe of lyno^ and put under the lift arm does heal Frantyke and lunatike
persons,

A Radysshe sta^pt, and bound to ye brain will heal one of ye faullinge
sickness by and by.

Against al deseases in the eyes
The Causes.
Seeing that therbe many dis^ases in the eyes and therefore have s^ndry causes,
and that ye remedies be not digestyd to order for every cause, it were but
vain to recyte ye causes in this place wherefore I will pass them over.

The Signs.
The signs do ever follow the causes.

Remedies. Capi. xii.
Give unto a daselled person Sothernwod to drink, and lay on his head being
shaven, Galen.
theodoricon emperion, and ana cardium, for it draws and sucketh out the
venomous vapors.

Baume beaten with oil laid unto the brain and forehead, is good therefore.

Lions flesh does heal fantastic^^l persons. Escula-


One dram of Armoniacke is good therefore mynystred with honye.

Gilbert,
When as the pacient faulleth first in to his sickness, give him the joyce of
Columbyne to drink, or make him potage of Ualeria^ or of Sage or of Rue and
he shall be hole for ever.

The brain of a Camelle being dried and taken drives away the ^aulyng
sickness. Plini.


Of the same operacion is his ^^oud being drunk.

The blood of a Lamb drunk with wine, takes away the falling sickness.

The herb that is called sparows tongue heals, if it be drunk.

The stone that is found in a hearts head stamped and given to the sick person
heals him.

Sees the heart of a storke in water and give the broth the^of to drink and
the heart to be eaten of the pacient, Robertu^
but let the blood be drawn out of the heart first, and he shall never have the
falling evil again.

The ashes of Rue snuft up, into the nosetrelles does purge it inco^tinente.

Xistus.
The spleen of an ass eaten often does remedy.

The brain of a camel myxt with oil of roses anointed on the pacient behynd
and before through out al his body does throughlye heal^ which is not so
wonderful an exp^ryent as it is true.

The blood or gaul of a la^be does heal the sick of the faulling Evil

The donge of a Pecoke taken in drink heals them also.

Swallows if they be eaten are good therefore,

The l^tle stones that are found in swallows bellyes bound to their right
arms does perfectli heal the^

Cauteries applied to the head ar good for this disease, if it have reigned
long upon him.

The bird that makes her neste in the banks under the ground yt has anecke
that is of a changeable color black and blewe, and is much like to ye clear
eleme^t, with her wings burnte and beaten and so after drunk heals those that
are taken.

Put the leese of wine and the branne of wheat in wine a day and a ^yght,
Galen.
and afterward make pills which pylles minystre to mela^cholyke persons
fasting.

The white of an Egg beaten together and scummed and put into ye eye, Xistus.
takes away the heat and pricking thereof.

Let the white of an egg and the joyce of Perritory of ye waul be beaten well
together and scummed and let one drop of the licore remeyninge be put into
the eye and it shall heal the web in the eye. This is true and proved.

The joyce of Scala, Celi or Salomons seal, strayned and put into the
nosethrilles is very good for many diseases of the eyes.

The joyce of wormewod, womans milk and Rose water myngled together, if they
be ordered in form of a plaster they will asswadge ye greeffe and take away
the blood and other spots in the eyes.

The sede of the herb called dragons being taken in drink helpith the syghte.

Wormewod new stampte with ye white of an egg and laid over the eyes, takes
a wai the blood and redness thereof, of what humor so ever it come.

If the eyes before with blood or whote tears put in them the joyce of the
tops of a black beary tree with the white of an egg and fine Flax, and they
wylbe whole, this is proved.

The joyce of chickenweed with the joyce of the top of the black b^ry busshe
put into the eye takes away ^he blood and the white spote in ye eye.

New made cheese washed often in water and mengled with the white ^f an egg and
rose water, and so laid ^o the blood shoten eye, or that is ^ull of hot
humors does quikley ^elpe and remedy. Petrus.


It is also of the same operacion being only put in skalding hot licour The
yolke of an egg sodde^ in rose water or myxt with oil of Roses and ^pplied to
the eyes does asswadge ye grefe of them, this has been proved Roses put in a
bag and being ^ell boiled and laid to the eyes, take ^way the pain and
swelling from ^he eyes.

Against a great pain take the ^sshes of the leaves of Colwortes, ^ the
yolke of an egg roasted in the ^ier and woman's milk and myn^le with all a little
honey and bynd it unto the eyes till they be hole.

If thy eyes be burning hot minggle Richardus
the milk of a Bitche with the joyce of an herb called, Scala cel^ and anoint
them therwyth.

Sixtus and dioscor.
The lights of a Ram or weder being^ hot bound over the ey^s does lightly
take away the blood, (...) is proved.

Another experyment is this the gaul^ of a Part^itche put or dropp^d into the
eye takes away ye dymnes of the eyes.

The same operacion has ye gaul^ of a Turtle Dove, that has ben^ proved.

The joyce of Rue mixed with honey that has been scu^med and put into the eye a
little atons, riddeth the paci^nte of an ancient dimnes of the syghte.

If thou put into thine eye.ix. graynes of the seed of Oculus Christi, thou
shall not f^le the^, yet they will purge the eyes.

I have oftentimes seen that little stones like unto the nauil of a man which be
found growing togeder like bedes by the sea side, put into ye eyes purge the^
and yet are not felt. The water of the decoction of wild time does dry up the
tears or watrynes of the eyes if they be often washed therwythall, this is true.

Take and sees the leaves of betonye, and the root of Fennel and wash thine
eyes with ye water thereof and the tears will be dried up.

The joyce of the leaves of woodbynde stampte and strayned with woman's milk
and put or squyrted into the eye does put away the blemysshes of the same.

The joyce of chyckweed does clear the eyes of blemysshe or spotte if it be
puryfyed.

The joyce of knotgrasse puts a way the spot of the eye.

The joyce of plantayn or ribwort applied to the eye with a little silk Dioscor.
it heals the sore and hollow ulcers of the corner of the eye within ten
days.

Of the same operacion is the powder of horsehoofe that growethe by the ground,
put into the eye.

Lapida
A saphix and a smaradge heal ye eyes of them whom they touch.

Dios.
The joyce of ye rote of great gallga being put i^to ye eyes does clear the^.

The water wherein flewort has be^ stepped all a night put either in^o the eye,
or washed over the eye liddes does incontinent dry and heal ye t^ares with the
heat and ytchyng.

The same does a fumygation wherein the flouers of pomegranates or ye leaves of
an oak or plaintaine have been sodden in, this is proved.

Let Tutia be washed in rose water till the water change the color and put
the same water into the eye, it takes away ye blood, ye heat the abundance
and humydity of the tears.

Burn sower grapes upon a tyleshard and the dust thereof being syfted through a
fine cloeth and put into thine eyes, Gerard.
it takes away the rednes and also the humydity thereof.

The yolke of an egg, mengled with Rose water, bra^ne, and womans milk, is by
asswadging the pain a very good repercussyne medycyne.

Tuty does dry and clear the eyes, more then all medycynes and restrayneth and
kepth back sharp matter from flowynge up the eyes. Sixtus.


Stamp rue with common and myngle thereunto the yolke of an egg, Constable.
it healith wonderfully well and clearith the eyes of congealed blood.

Anoint the eyes that are blearid with the joyce of gandergose or lady traces yt
grows on montaines or inmedowes and they shall be hole inco^tynent and the
grefe taken away. For ye dimnes and bloudshotting of ye eyes sta^pe aloes with
ye white of an egg (...) it is wonderful good.

Galen.
Gallens collyry is exceeding good to heal the dymnes of the sight in one day
take of Antimonium, and the joyce of slowys of eiche, v, of Endyue, i. and of
burnt brass washed. ii. of white lead. i. of myrh^ half. i. of castoreu^, of
opium, of g^me Arabicke, of the joyce of whete of each. i. temper them together
with rose water and the white of an egg and cast it into thy eye,

Against fistules, make powder of Frankensens, Aloes, Sarcocolle, Dragons
blood, flowers of Pomegranates, Anise, the flower of brass and when need is
press the holowe vlcere, so that the rottennes may be queashed or crusshed
out, then let ye pacient lie on that side yt is whole and distell a little of
this powder with the claryfyed joyce of plantayne, and let it be droppyd into
the sore corner of the eye, and so let him lie.iii. or.iiii. hours.

Put the ashes of a burnt snayle upon the spotte in the eye, Bartholomeus.
and with in three days it will take it away.

All kind of milk does assuage the pain in the eyes, but chyefelye when it
is made in form of a plai^^^r with the yolke of an Egg and (...) of Roses.

Betony stamped and made in a playstre, Macer
heals a stripe in the eye.

If thy eyes be washed with the water wherein Betoney, or the root thereof,
has been sodden, they shall be whole without Dymnes, or other blemysshe.

If you drink a drame of Betony with water, Plinius.
it will bring down and heal the cloudynes and bloudines of the eyes.

The same being eaten dries up the tears of the eyes.

Item the often eating of great Colwortes clears the dimmnes of the eyes.

Stampte Comin dried against ye fire (and not burnt) with the white of an egg
and mingle it with cromes of bread and put it on your eyes and yt shall clear
the blood from them, this is proved

Ueruen stamped with ye white of an egg and bound unto the eyes at ye evening,
takes away the watrynes of the eyes.

Resolve aloes in a good quantity of the joyce of Fennel put into a latin
basen.xv. days, and after put it into the eyes that are full of itchyng and it
is very good for them.

Rogerius
Item Beans, the rynde or over skin being pulled of, bruised and menglid with
the white of an egg and applied in form of a plaster to the temples, or
menglid with mastycke keep back and restrain humors flowing up to the eyes.

The same being plasterid with wine healith the eyes that have had some strype.

Acacia made in a plaster is wonderful helping against swellings or other
humors of the eyes.

Lyk^wyse this precious powder is of great effycacy to extinquishe the spot of
the eye by removing the blood and restraynyng the tears.

Take of Tutia. ii. of Dragons blood. i. of ^uger. i. stamp them and sifte
them fynely and put into thine eye a verey little, it is safe and without
danger in wa^rantise and often approved.

Item let the spot be ryped before you use dissoluing medycines with oil made
of filberies sodden in water stampte and crusshed.

Make powder of Roses sugar and salgem of eiche like quantetye and put it upon
the spot in the eye and it will destroy it incontinent. Galen,


Take cerusse and tutia.iiii. times que^chid in Uineger and Sugar and sta^p a
little marchasit, and let the poude^ be put upon the spot, this has been prouyd.

Let the root of Fennel boil with water in a pot, of the same water take one
drop and put it into thine eyes

One drop of the pacientes own vryne does might^ly heal the watrynes of the
eyes.

Stamp burnt Almondes, Cerusse Sarcocol, Tutia, of eych like qua^titye with
clear wine and let them be dried again and Stamp them and put a little thereof
into thine eye and so shall it be whole.

Put Camphorye bruysed and strayned with the joyce of Fennel upon a little
blemysshe in the eye. The ashes of Hearts horn burnt on a tyleshard heals
the blemysh or stripe in the eye.

Fine wheat flower mingled with water and strayned, Dios. Isac.
put into the eyes restrayneth and purges the tears and humores that else
would flow unto the eyes.

The green leaves of the Plane tree sodde^ in wine and used as a plaster cure
the Rewme and wattines of the eyes.

The milk of the rind of a Sal^owe tree when it bears floue^s being cast
into the eyes, heal^th and claryfyeth them and being tender comfort them.

The joyce of the seed of Playntayne cast into the eye, takes away the soornes
thereof.

A pumyse made hot, and thrysse quenched in wine and beaten to powder if it be
put into the eyes it heals those that have pain thereof.

The white of an egg clapped whot to ye sore eyes restores and heals Diosco


Clear Common oil dropte into ye eyes puts away incontinent the spots
and whitenes thereof. Auicen.


The joyce of Thistell of malowes and wild Endive put away the blemyshe out of
the eye.

Item take of the ashes of a swallows head burnt. ii of chosen honey. ii^. of
the joyce of fennel. i. mengle them together and put the^ in a vyol of glass,
and stop ye mouth thereof clos^, afterward it boil i^ a skell^t full of water
sething still ^il the one half be mynysshed and let the other half remain,
and anoint the eye earlye in the morning* and a little before the pacie^t go to
supper: and also when he goes to bed put one little drop thereof into the eyes
and it shall appeas the grefe. This has been proved of diverse autors.

The powder of Succory put into the eyes sharpneth the sight. Auicen.


Morel also put into ^e eye heals the hollow ulcers of the eye.

The leaves of wild malowes chewed in the mouth and a little salt applied as a
plaster to ye eyes, make clear the hollow ulcers of ye eye and make the
flesh to grow.

Myngle the ashes of Coluers dounge burnt with vinegar and afterward let it be
dried and brayed fine ^ye and temperid with the joyce of fennel, Pet. Lucrotus.
and drop the joyce into the eyes upon the blemysshe, it is a principal
medysyne.

Wine of the decoction of tormentile drunk daily without any other drink and
the herb thereof sodden and every evening emplaysteryd over the eyes ye space
of.iii. or.iiii. months or more restores the sight, Yea to those that have
there eyes as though they did se, and yet se not at all The leaves of veruene stamped with wine and salt and bound over the eyes as a
plaster day and night has a wonderful efficacye against the blearynesse of
the eyes.

Stamp Rue and strain it with Uyneger and Honey, and put of yt which is
stryned out a little in ye eye, it dries up the tears wonderfully.

Tempre ynke with the white of an egg and sterre them well together till a
froeth rise over it and the, let it stand, and put that into the eye which
fletyth above every night till it be whole.

Pet. Lucratus.
Sta^pe the rind of black thorn being grene with a little wine and put into
thine eyes one drop of y^ licour and thine eye will be hole within three days.

Again, temper honey and ynke and strain it through a cloth and cast a drope
thereof into thine eye, within iii. days it will heal it and clear away the
blemysshe.

Take a bruised cocle and press out the joyce, put it hastly into thine eye
for it puts away the blemisshe in the eye wonderfully.

Item if. ii. of Alowes and. i. of mastike be mynistred unto the pacient
temperid with Fennel water, it ^s amedycyne of great efficacy and often proved
to clear the sight.

Take of the wood of Aloes, of ey^^ight, of runnyng time, of sauery, (...)
Isop, of spyke, of eiche. i. of ma^^s. vi. of Uiolettes half. i. let the^ al be
made in powder by them selfs then myngle them together, and of this powder
sprinkle the quantiti of i. scruple every euenyng two hours after supper on
the foreparte of the head by the ioynte Sagit, from the ioynte yt comes up to
the crown of the head, full unto the point of the crown, called zenithe, the
breadthe of four fingers, yet so that the first powder be taken away, for the
second powder must be laid upon ye place, and this were good to be used.iii.
or.iiii days and is a great help in apt co^plexions.

Item take of the uttermost part of the Iuy tree, of the seed or leaves of
Oculus Christi of amysticados of each. i. of Cala mynte of wild Margeram ana.
i. of the roots of condisi or lanary. i. of the rotes of holyhocke.. and a
half seth the^ all in two pottels of water until ye wasting of the third part,
then after let the ashes of ye same be shed over it finly sifted, and with the
water of the ashes let thy head be washed ons or twyse in a weke gently
rubbing it with white soap, for it dries up the spots and vapors in the
eye, by sokyng them to the hinderpart and stre^gthing the substance of the
brai^ and eyes.

The joyce of smalege and ye white of an egg mengle them together and put into
the pacientes eyes goinge to sleep.

Of the same opera^ion is the ashes made of a sallow tree dried and burnt and
put into the eye.

It^m the fat of fre^she river fys^hes molten and mingl^d with oil and honey
at of great excelle^cye for ^he clearnes of the eyes. And they are good against
the watrines when it ^^rst begins in the eye.

The joyce of wild put flane drop^ed in the eye, puts away the web of the
eyes without doubt.

The joyce of ground Iuy put in^o the corner of the eye where the white is
turning the head aside takes the freatting of the eye and remoueth the little
whitenes that is be ^inde.

Against the cloudynes of the sight ^ake morning dew and ^he joyce of ^ue, and
the flowers of Bytone, and ^ut them into thine eyes.

Put a good quantity of Salt P^ter burnt into thine eye it is very soueraygne.

The gaul of a Grype or Ramm^ mixed with man's ordure and wine, and well strayned
is very good to clear the sight.

Against the ytchyng and hawe in y^ eye, mengle soute and the joyce of sm^lag^
with good white wine, then le^ it stand al a day afterward, anoyn^ and wash
the eyes* it is very good.

To take away the pain and blood in the eyes, mengle Alowes and opium with ye
milk of a woman tha^ gives a man child suck it is very good therefore.

Cut a whot lofe of barley in two in the mids and lay the dust or powder of
wild Parsnep upon the raw flesh about the eye, and hold the ho^ lofe hand to
thine eyes, it clearethe thy sight very much.

The self same thing does ye powder of ye mulberey leaves, this have I proved.

Take Time and eat it, it puts away the dymnes of the eyes.

Cerusse dropped into thine eyes takes away the pain and clears the eyes.
Of the same operacion is camphorye.

Ungu^ntum preciosum dropped into the eye with a fether dries ye watrynes and
put away the spotte in ye eyes, and sharpneth the sight.

Quench the stone called Calaminaris being first burning hot in ro^e water
three times, after the same manner do by Tutye, and with that water wash the eyes.

Furthermore take of this Calaminaris stone dried and well dressed. ii. of Tutia
preparyd after the same manner. vi. of the wood Aloes, half a.. of Roses. ii.
let them be beaten and made in powder and wraped in a sylke cloeth double
folded, and thereof make an ointment, with.ii. pound of swines blood that was
pigged ye year, and a pound of Rose water and let them seth together til the
rose water be consumed, then cole it, and with the same blood mengle the
pouders above specified, and they shall be kept in their lively strength. This
has been proved.

The wine of the decoction of rue unto ye third part dropped into ye eyes
clearith them from all filthey blood.

Of the same operacion is the dust of the coals of a dry sallow tree put into
the eye.

Petrus.
This water folowi^g is marvelous good against al spots in the eye, and to
comfort the sight.

Take of fennel of Rue, of eybright of Ueruen, of Endive, Tormentill, Betone,
of Siler mountayn, of the rote of Galingal, of ^iche like quantity the first
day after they be sta^pt let them be put in wine, the second in ye urine of a
mayde^ child, then after let them be distelled in a Le^bike ye first water yt
comes out is as precious as silver, the second as gold the third as bawme.

Take the seeds of fennel, of perseley, of smalage, of anise of oculus
cristi, and clary, ye rotes of sale^dyne, of fe^nel, of betone, of gali^gal, ye
leaves of agrimoney, of eybright, of torme^til, of rue, of verue^ of ^tche like
qua^tytie, let them be stamped al together, and let the^ be put ye first day in
the vryne of a maiden child, ye second in wine, ye third in ye milk of a she
ass on the fourth day let them be distellid and keep it, as bawme it sharpneth
the sight, it clarifieth the eyes it puts away the pynne and web.

Camphorye and water betony have been greatly proved to clear ye sight, stamp
of eyche together like quantity and that myghtly well, and strayn the joyce out
thereof through a cloth and dis^ill or drope it into the eyes through a quyl.

The joyce of the Lyly rote put into thy eye takes away the hawe.

The ashes of man's ordure cast into thine eye does mightlye put away al
spots of the ^ye.

Plini.
For the web and cloudines in ye eyes, take and stamp indisshe Peper, and put
to it y^ joyce of a Fenel rote and let it be put for.xv. days in a basen of
brass, and so put it into the eye, it is very good.

Galen
A bathe of warm water does g^etly supresse the burning or fyery ytchynge and
the grief of the eyes.

The lights of an Hare cut in small pieces takes away the swellyng of the
eyes.

Take the gaull of a Cock mixte the joyce of Salendyne and honye and anoint
thine eyes therewith, it restores thy sight perfectly.

The ashes of a great swallowe might with honey and put into thine eyes,
takes away the dimmnes of the eyes.

Of the pain of the Ears.
The Causes.
Going or riding in cold wynd^s, or bathing in cold wat^r and sum times it
comes of a hot inflammation.

The Signs.
Great pains in the ears either with hete or cold.

Remedies. Capi. xiii.
THe joyce of wild Cucu^mere leaves, Diosc.
takes away ye grefe of the ears.

Take and put the grene wood of an Asshe in the fyere, and save the licour that
comes out at the end of the same and put it into thine ears it causes the
pain of ye ears to cease and amendeth the hearing.

Stamp earth worms, the eggs of Emetes and ye leaves of Rue together and
being sodden in oil strain them and let faull one drop of that oil being
warm into thine ear it restores again the hearing, being ons lost.

Put oil and scalion seed together, and me^gle thereto the joyce of lekes, and
wormewod, and womans milk sees them over the coals and strain it, and put
one drop into thine ear and stop it fast with silk in the morning, after six
hours, take it out, and turn the sore ear downward and wash it gently, it
is a goodly experymente.

Item in a hot cause, lettis made in a plaster is much worth. Hemp tow dipped
in the white of an egg is very good it is proved.

Item worms of the earth sta^pte with Rose water and applied to the ear are
very good also.

Item hot water with woman's milk only, applied for a plaster is of much
efficacy.

Rogerus.
Item if a little stone or a grain or any such like thing faull into a man's
ear, let one person or other put his mouth to the ear and let him blow into
it strongely and a good while, and after set to his mouth again and suck.

If a worm have crepte into a man's ear, drop thereunto of ye joyce of the
ryndes of nuttes or of the leaves of a peache tree.

Arype aple yt has a good savor is to be applied unto the ear being warm
somewhat opened on the lower part that fasteyneth to the tree and in the
morning you shall find there a worm al to pieces through the savor of the apple.

The oil of bitter almondes, and the curnel of a peache does open the ears
very much.

Against the worms of the ears let the joyce of wormewod be dropped into the
ears.

Put the joyce of Sengrene, oil olive, the joyce of a leeke, the milk of of a
woman yt gives a man child suck into a vyole of glass three days and three
nights setting the mouth open, it is said to restore the hearing wounderful
well.

The gall of a Got put into the ear with joyce of a Leeke, takes away the
pain in the ear and restoryng the hearing.

The gal of a Goat and womans milk temperid with honye, and a little mirhe is
a principal medicyne.

Boil the joyce of sengrene put in a holowe scallyon in the fire, and put the
joyce that is strayned therout in to thine ear, and lay the Onyon over the
same, in manner of a plaster it is very much worth in both causes.

^o^stan*
The joyce of wild Margeram mixed with woman's milk and put into thine ear
takethe away pain thereof.

The joyce of Iuy myxt witg common oil and put into the ear takes away the
grefe.

Item Betelles that are found in ye dounge of beasts grynded and myxt with oil
Roses and the rynde of a Pomegranate, if the oil be put in to the ears, and
the rest being the dreggs be plasterd on, they will take away the pain of the
ear^s.

Item of a stone, Platear.
or a corn fall in to the ear, put into it things that will soften or make
easy, and let the pacient always lie on that ear, that if it decline or be
coming forthward be ever readi to receive it, if not, let him stop his
nostrelles and mouth and provoke himself to snees, if it will not be so nether,
apply ventose unto the ear with fire, then again put into ye ear Turbentine
or byrd live upon the end of a stycke, and let it stycke to the ear, yet put
it in, and pull it out again.

The joyce of an onyon, with woman's milk does wonderfully asswadge Isaac.
the grefe,

Dioscor.
The joyce of Betone cast into the ear luke warm, is very profitabl^ against
the pain, deafnes and other impedymentes of the ears.

Item the fat of a Fox does greatly cure the pain of the ears.

The joyce of bay leaves distellid in to the ears does not permyt deafnes, nor
other strange soundes to abide in the ears.

Galen.
Oil myngled with cinnamon is ye most soueraignest thing of all that delayeth
grefe of the ears.

Oil wherein bitter almondes have be^ stamped, or oil of Juniper, or oil of ye
decoction of onyons, or of a radyshe, al and every of these ar good for ears
that have their gr^fe of a cold water.

These ioyc^s kill the worms of ye ears, the joyce of wormwood, and the
eoyce of peache ^eaues, or ye joyce of wyld cucuminer,

Distell into the ear the fat of an Eele with the joyce of an onyon and ^f
singrene yt grows on tyles, put ^t in luke warm and it takes away ^he
deafnes,

Likewise the joyce of Isop mixed with oil, Macer.
and blood warm put in^o the ears takes away the pain^ul ache of the ears.

Item a perfume of whote Uyneger does greatli open the ears and ^oth much good
to the hearing for ^he sharpnes of it. Gilbert.


Item stamp Amptes eggs and ^train them thorough a clothe and ^ut there unto
the joyce of Swines ^rasse or Knotgrasse and dystell it unto the ears it
helps long conti^ued deafnes. Galen. Diosco


The vryne of a boy poured in ^o the ear dries up the humor of ^he dyseas
and heals it quicklye. Stamp onyons and common with oil and rub the ears and
lay it to hot, ^ it will take away ye grefe of ye ears

Plini.
The fat of frogs instilled (...) dropte into the ears takes away tynkling
or sound in them.

Escula.
The fat of a Lion or of a For i^ of much valor against the payn^ of the ears
and all pains besides.

Plini.
The joyce of creuises myghtly^ healpeth the grefe of the ears.

The ioice of a willow tree leaves pu^ into the ears helps the hurt.

The fat of a Dormous put into the ears helps the grefe thereof.

Constable Macer.
Take of Alume. i. Castoreum. i of salt Peter. i. and a half, let the^ seth in
the best wine that may be gotten, then strain it and let the same wine be put
into the ears luke warm.

It would much healpe to anoynte the out side of the ears and to lay it there
in form of a plaster.

The gaul of an hare made hot with the sewet of a Fox and spick^arde heals
deafnes.

Drink a whole mouse stamped and ^yxte with wine and Spiknarde, ^ wonderfully
heals an old con^inued pain of the ears.

For the morphew.
The Causes.
Gross and slymy blood changed (...) white phlegm, or to melancholye.

The Signs.
The skin to be spotted like (...) a Snake.

Remedies. Capi. xiiii.
TO expel or take away the Morphewe or Ringworme ^ixe milk with ye water of
ye inuere ^ernelles of pine apples and with ^^e cream yt fliteth above ye
warm ^ylke anoint the ryngworme and (...) will heal, it without dout. ^ bathe
made of the chafe of barley ^rotes of the leaves of Mallows Rogerus.
and wormewod, and after annoyn^ it with this oyntme^t. Take bath^ meal and
flower of Fenigreke and Borace, make dust or powder of the eyche in like
quantity, and myngl^ it with the joyce of an onion and hon^ scummed and
clarified and anoint the place therewith.

Against the Ringwormes or morphewe that has long reigned upon one, take of
Camphoyre. i. of Borace. ii. of the meal of Ciche pease being tedde. iiii.
mengle them with joyce and honey.

The fat of Lions, smerde over the face with Rose oil keeps the whytnes.
Plini.


Against the morphew in the face sees a Lacert being grene together with white
wine in oil unto the thryd part, Galen.
strain it, and put thereunto white wax and an anoint the place therwyth, this
is proved.

The rote of a little burre sodden in Uineger and dried over the ringeworme
heals the same.

The same does the rote of a plantayne stamped with Uyneger and salt and
strayned and after the place with warm Uyneger must be anointed

To put away the wrinkles out of the face and all other grief, stamp the dry
rote of a wildecucummer, sifte it and myngle it with water, and wash thy face,
and wash it again with other cold water, do this for iii. days space, and
it shall have wonderful effect.

To make all the face fair, smere thy face all over with bulls blood it takes
away the bl^myshe in the face, and makes the face fair.

Coluer dounge ground in vyneger and smeared over thy face puts away al
morphewe and tawnines this has been proved.

A sheep liver fresh killed and warm laid to thy face, it makethe a fair
colored, and amorous face,

For the toth ache.
The Causes.
The ^ynowes being very hot or cold or great quantity of humors, falling from
the head to the gummes.

The Signs.
The pain is known well enough

Remedies. Cap. xv.
IF you wash your mouth ons a month with the wine of the decoction of the
root of Wertworte, Dioscor.
thou shall be healed of the toothe ache

Salt myxte with dowe and baked against the fire, and so laid on the toothe
heals the ache perfectly.

In a vehement ache put a little of the joyce of ground Iuy, in thine ear on
ye side as thy ache is, it will a little grieve the, but incontinent thy toth
ache shall ceas.

The joyce of yellowe flagge put in to thine ear is of the same operacio^

Put henbane sede upon the coals and receue the smoke thereof into thy teathe by
gapyng and and holding thy mouth over it, it kylleth ye worm and asswagiche
the pain, this has been proved.

Anoint thy toth with mary of an horse it has been tried yt it does hele.

The flower or meal of wild popyseed put into the hollow toothe does quickly
heal.

Item let the mouth be washed with the decoction of our ladys Thistel, it takes
away the pain.

Fill the tooth with a piece of Radyshe rote, dioscor.
or let thy gummes or thy teethe be rubbed therewith it takethe away thy ache.

That thy teeth never ache, take the powder that comes of fylyng of an hearts
horn, and let it seth in water in a new earthen pot and so put it into thy
mouth wheare thy grefe is

Dios.
Wine or water after (as the cause is) of the decoction of wild Cucummer holden
in thy mouth dryuethe away the pain.

The joyce of Succorye put into the ear or nostrel that is on the contrary
side to the grefe takes away utterly the tooth ache, the stone of a Date
takes away the pains,

Kyr.
Sethe the rind of a mulbery tree rote, in the joyce of a clufter of grapes
unto half, and wash thy mouth therewith, and thy teeth shall never ache.

Rub thy teeth often with a Persenepe root, Macer.
and it shall take away the worms in them and aching for ever.

Against a strong pain sethe violets in wine and hold the^ in thy mouth

Uyneger wherein the root of Henbane is sodden takes the ache in ye teeth
away, diosco^
if thy mouth be washed therwt and holde^ a good while therein. Hearts horn
burned till it wax white, Auycen
and beaten fine makes the teeth clean and the gumes and ceassethe the
burning pain in them.

Stamp two cloves of garlyk^ and tie it about thy arm on that side that ye
tooth aketh, Galen.
nere to the hand it draueth away all the pain.

Put into the ear of the same side that the teeth ache, Diosc.
the joyce of Bleit and of the leaves of wyld cucu^mer, it takes away the
tooth ache.

Let thy teeth be washed with the decoction of wild Margeram, Galen. Rogeri^
Constable.
or put into thy toothe a burning stick, for above all herbs, or more then
all herbs the same helpethe the teeth.

Serapine stampte and put into the hollow tooth takes away yt pains Dios.
thereof.

Galen.
Uineger of the decoction of Colloquintida, held a good while in the mouth, is a
principal remedy, or if it be sodden in the rind thereof.

Dios.
The milk of wertwort baked with the branne of Corn and put into ye hoole of the
tooth breaks the toth.

Fyl the hollow tooth with the gum of Iuy it will take away the toothe ache.

Diosc.
Touch the tooth that aketh with the rote of water crowfote, incontinent it
takes the pain away and breketh the tooth.

Dios.
Wash thy teeth with the water of the decoction of pomegranates flowers and put
the powder of the said flowers into thy toeth, it does make the teeth fast and
takes away the ache thereof by restraining the rewme.

Make a gargarysme of the decoction of sage, Rue, Pelletory, Isop, black
Ellobor of the rot^ of wild cucummer, the root of Calamyne and of the stalk
of Organ, and part of it beside, put into the ear on ye side as the ache is
of, with oil.

If the grefe be exceeding paynful put thereto Opium temperyd with the yolke of
an egg half sod. There be also which make of ye dregs of oil, the lyknes of
silk thriedes the take the dregs of oil that has no grounds of Dirt or
sand and sethe it in a caudro^ of brass till it be thick and then they put
it upon ye teeth yt ache, for it que^cheth the pain and he that does the same
with the joyce of sower grapes till it be like honey and put thereof upon the
teeth yt be eaten hollow, it pulls them out by the rote, or else makes a
way to the easier pulling out of them.

If the hollow toth be filled with crows doung it breaks the tothe and
takes away the pain.

Boil five corns of the seed of Iuy in the rind of a pomegranate with oil of
roses and put it to the ear one the right side, and it will take away the pain
of thy teeth on the lift side and so of the contrary part.

The rote of black Henbane mightly heat, and it be applied to thy tooth that
aketh and the roots thereof, it will faull out by it self incontinent, but
beware lest it touch other teeth also, for then they will faul out as many as
ar touched therewith.

Of the same operacyon is the herb being rubbed upon the toth

Co^stan.
Mengle the powder of pelletory callid in Latin Pirethru^ with the milk of
wertwort and with Galbanum, and lay it on the tooth and it will break, and the
pain shall be taken away thereby.

Rub thy toothe with a root of walwort, it take^h away ye pain thereof.

Dioscor.
Put the joyce of affodyll into the ears, it takes away the pain of thy
teeth on the contrary side, of the same operacion is the joyce of succorye,

Sethe the root of henbane in vyneger, which vyneger hold a good while in thy
mouth it takes away the ache of ye teeth.

The joyce of town cresses put in to the ear on yt side yt aketh, takes away
the ache thereof.

Let Isop boil in vinegar and let the toothe be washed therwyth, it take away
the pain thereof quikly.

The root of cynkfoyle or the water of the decoction thereof, put into the
mouth and as it were gargarysed, Dyos.
takes away the ache of ye teeth. A decoction of the leaves of the tree yt is
called of the apothecaries, Tamariscus, helps the toth ache.

Powder made of dogs teth put in to thy toth does put away ye tothach The
brain of a partriche put into Sixtus.
the hollow tooth breaks the same takes away the akyng.

Water or wine wherein ye leaves of the damasyne tree or the rynde of ye rote
thereof have be sodde^, the mouth being often washed therwtal, it fastyneth
the teeth and gumes and keeps all the whole mouth from al kind of pain.

The joyce of ye rote of dog fe^nel or of the herb thereof put into the hole
of the tooth will not permyte any worm to live therein.

Rue sod in wine, and laid in form of a plaster upon the pain in the gumes
by drieng up the humor it takes away the pain.

Dioscor.
The rote of Sperage stamped and laid unto the toothe yt aketh with wol draws
out the same, without pain.

The leaves of Sage laid unto the toothe yt aketh ^aketh away the ache and
comfort the teeth yt are hurt through cold, that they be no more put in
grefe thereby.

If thou, fill thy teeth that are hollow with pytch of a Cedre tree, it will make
them to break: and if you hold it long in your mouth it will take the pain
away quyte.

Mastike somewhat mollyfyed with the white of an egg raw and applied to the gumes
closes ye choppes of ye gume and lips, this has be^ proved

The liver of a slelly on laid unto the tooth yt does ache will appease the ache
incontinent.

Take of Sumache, of okaples, of the berys of the Myrhe tree, of acorns husks,
the seed of myrhe tree the seed of plaintayn of etche. i. of white vitriol of
alume broken in pieces of each. i. and a half. of flowers of Gilofer and of the
seed of Roses of eiche. ii. and a half, let them all be stamped together after
a gross manner, and let them sethe in a pot with water, wherein let.xl. young
buddes of a bramble that bears beryes be put contynually to boil, til half
ye water be consumed, which beyng^ strayned and cooled, let the pacyent wash
his mouth with the same very often, which done let him apply it to the Jaws and
teethe.

Ite^ take of Camphorie and let it sethe in vinegar, a little afterward let the
sick person hold his mouth over it and it shall make the ache to cease.

Myngle man's hear being bre^t with oil roses, Auycen
and put it into thy ear, the grief of thy toothe shall cease.

Put the powder of read Coral in the hole of thy tothe and it will faul out by
the rote.

Smalladge rote hanged about thy neck does alay the tooth ache. Put the joyce
of ground Iuy into ye ear of that side that the tooth does ache, Auicen
it is of wonderful effect.

If thy teeth be often washed with the decoction of the rind of our lades
thistel root, thy teeth shall be fastynned thereby, and thy gumes graven about
will be made whole.

The Decoction of Pomegranate flowers or the powder of them, being laid thereon
does the same.

The powder of coral being laid thereon also is most pryncypall in comfortyng
the gumes. Auicen.


Masticke chewed with wine in a man's mouth, Peter. Lu.
takes away the tooth ache.

The root of Horehound drunk or chewed of a man fasting does quickly heal
the ache of the teeth.

Strawbery leaves chewed, in continent takethe away the tooth ache, is is a
sure and tried experynt.

Light a sharp stick of ash and while it burns put into the hollow toothe
first filled with triacle it is much proved.

The body and fatness of a Frog applied, does make an easy means to pull out
the teeth, and therefore do y^ teeth of living beasts that take ^ eat them,
quickly faul.

(...).
Let the gumes be rubbed with the ashes of a Delphin tooth, the teeth are there by
greatly helped, or if they be touched only with the tooth it self.

The rote of mouse ear, put in ye hollownes of the tooth takes away the tooth
ache, this has be^ proved.

Sta^p the inner rotes of nut trees and mix it with oil, and put the ioice into
ye ear on ye co^trari part yt ye teth ak^ and he shall be delivered out of
pains. Let the skin of a serpent be sod in Uineger and hold the same
Uyneger a good while in your mouth. Constable. Galen,


Peter. Lu.
Sup up (so that there be nothing thereof swallowed but gargarased) a cup full
(at times one upon another) of the joyce of yarow fasting thou shall be ryd of
thy toothe ache there by.

Sees the scrapinges of ye rote of a mulbery tree in wine, which wine ^old in
thy mouth it cease ye grefe ^ncontynent.

Of the same operacion is wine of ^he decoction of yuy rotes. Galen.


If you take one corn of Salt and wrap it in fair whyt cobweb and put ^t
into thy hollow tooth it will heal ^t. Richardus


For bledynge at the nose.
The Causes.
A vain or arteri opened or bro^en within the nose with great abu^^ance of
blod, or to much labouri^g.

The Signs.
To blede at the nose.

Remedies. Cap. xvi.
THe joyce of hogs dounge cast into the nostrelles does ^estrayne the blood.
Constable


Beware that nothing bind the body hard, as thy girdle or such like, and
hold thy ha^dful of shepa^ders purse and st^dfastli look up to the son, it
stauncheth bledyng, this is proved.

Like is said of veruen.

Lay the joyce of night shade against the liver if it run out of the right
nostrell, if not upon the spleen, it stauncheth the blood.

Diosco.
The flower of a bean the over ski^ne pulled of, put into ye nostriles
stauncheth blood, if it be a wound.

The half of a bean laid upon a wound closes up the wound and restrayneth
ye blood, especially where horesleches hau ben, this has been prou^d.

Cold stones laid upon the veins of the temples and hard holden thereon,
restrain the blood.

The joyce of R^e put into the nostrelles restrayneth the blood. Dios.


The joyce of a nettle put into the nostrelles makes ye blood to flow,
Dioscor.
but being anointed on the forehed makes the same to stop.

Yarowe smelled unto, or being ^ro^k restrains blood, yet put into ^he
nostrelles, makes it to bleed.

Item the stone Iaspis burnyd and applied, stauncheth blood. Lapida


The ashes of the rote of rue, blown into the nostrelles does won^erfully
staunche the blood.

The very blood it self burnt and made to powder, and blowe^ up into ye ^ose,
does wonderfully staunche ye ^loud, and close up wounds: if the ^loud run
from the left nostrell ^ut a ventose upon the spleen, if from ^he right upon
the liver.

If it be a woman after the same ^aner lay it on her teate.

If a woman blede put flax in ye white ^f an egg and apply it to her teate, on
that part as the nose bledyth, or with the joyce of night shaede.

Item make a plaster of potters clay, vinegar and the white of an egg^ and
apply it to thy codds it is good and has been proved,

Galen
Let the person which bledyth ly^ up right and let his own water being cold be
dropped on his face with vyneger.

If the hears of an Hare be put into the Uyneger and water, and be put into
it, is wonderful good.

The blood of a Cow laid upon the wound does staunche the blod incontenent,
but I say it is of more valor being burned.

The ashes of a Cowes horn, cast into the wound does quyckelye restreyne it.

Powder made of ynke, and layd^ upon the wound with ashes of a Fern rote,
sta^ch^th the blood and heals the wound.

The ashes of a Frogge burned in a well closyd pot, Richardus
stancheth all bleding though it be of wounds, it closes up the veins and
arteries and healyth burninges,

The blood of a Thrushe, a partrige, a dove, and a turtle dove, Auicen.
put into the wound stops the blood wounderfully.

The urine of a man made in form of a plaster, and aplied with the ashes of a
vine, stanchyth bledinge.

Chawe the rote of a nettle until you may swallowe it, Pet. Luc^a
and without doubt the blood will stanche.

Chawe the same till you may swallowe it, but in no wise swallow it, and than
will it stanche, for if a man kep^ it in his mouth he can lose no blood.

The powder of the scrapynge of a caudron or a fryeng pan Stamped and mengl^d
with the joyce of a netle, and put into the nostrelles does stanche the blood
incontinent, this has been prouyd.

Cons^
Plaster burnte and stamped with hares hears and made in a plaster with the
white of an egg sta^cheth blood if it be in an artery or vain

A certain herb that his comonlye called Torche or moleyne sta^pt and laid
upon the branches of the teates, does stop the bledynge of any place.

Plini.
The ashes of a burnte Frogge aplyed to ye place that bledith, does staunche it
in continent.

The Fresh dounge of a bore is a chief Remedy against bledynge at the nose as
I find in the book of natures of things.

The joyce of an assys dounge dropped into the nostrels or into wou^des,
stancheth the blood though it be of a vein or artery that is woundyde of the
same.

Five leaued Grass drunk, and anointed in the nostrels, Diosco.
stancheth blood*

The ashes of Hens Feathers snouft up into the nostrelles, stanceth blood.

The joyce of vyolet roots, gargarised in your mouth, and throat, Mace^
and swallowed stancheth often times bledynge at the nose incontinent.

The powder of a nettle snuft into the nostrils, Galen.
will stanche blood incontinent.

Item stamp earth worms with white frankencense and the white of an egg it is
good.

Prymrose leaves stamped and laid in the place that bledeth, stanchithe the
blood.

Put into thy nostrils ye rind of wodbinde, and the scrapynges of a Radyshe, it
is good. An onyon only put into the nose is good also.

If a vein be broken within let the pacient drink Peper and the sede of Town
Cresses. Take one pa^te of Terrasygyllata, and an other of the gu^me called
Sa^asenicum, an other part of Draganc^, stamp it with wine that is old, and
make pills and give the pacient to drink.

Here unto sethe Goats mylk. with dragance and use it one day for an electuarye.

Mengle potters claye with Rose water and vinegar and make a plaster and aplye
it, the blood thereby shall be stanched.

Take Confery and Terra Sigillata of each like much, make a powder and
minister it with rain water three days, this has been prouid.

Rycha^.
The hears of an Hare chopte small and myxt with the white of an Egg, and laid
upon the place that bledyth tak^th away al flowyng of blood.

For the Palsy.
The Causes.
Gross humors flowyng to the synowes.

The Signs.
That the me^b^r has lost both since and mocyon.

Remedies. Capi. xvii.
PArali^is is a sickness called the Palsy: wherein either all the body or one
member or many me^bres be mortyfyed and be depryued of feling and moving, it
happenith either of an impostume stopping the rotes of the sinowes, yt they
being deprived of y^ lively spirits which serve for them be come dead, or else
of the Fleumatyke humor gross^ and undigested which stoppith the said places
some time of a stroke or faul, whereby the joints of the back bone ar loused
and the synowes which come from the neck or nape of the head, ar stopped other
while the synowes and the rotes of them hu^te with a bruyse engenders the
palsy, and specially in a old man.

Lapida.
If the tongue be suddenly wrythed through cold, make a whote gargarysme of the
wine of Decoction of Sage, Rue and pellytory, it is very good.

Put these pylles in thy mouth, and under thy tongue.

Take of Castoreum, of Pellytory, of Pyonye roots, of each like much make
pylles with Triakell it is very good.

Anoynte the pacient without with oil benedicte or the oyntme^t called
Martiaton, with castoreu^ these be very good in all palsis of a cold cause.

Rue, Pellitory, Sage* Cinnamon, Mustard, salt, let them all boil to gether in
oil to ha^f, and anoint ye pacient therwyth it is very good.

Take a dead earth worm, make a ster and lay it upon the hinder part of the
head where it ryseth with pyche wax old oil, Bears suet, coluer dounge,
quick lyme man's, ordure Castoreum, Pellitory.

If thou stamp a sylke worm, and make a plaster and lay it in the nape of
the neck, because lyghtlye the disease rises there, and if it rise in another
place put it there, and not upon the hurt member.

If the tongue or throat be in flam^d draw thereon a Saphyre, upon the grefe for
it takes away ye swellynge.

Against al grefes in the flap being in the mouth which covers the wind
pipe.
The Causes.
The recourse of humors from the head to that place,

The S^gnes.
Great difficulty in swalowyng his meat redness and swellynge.

Remedies. Capi. xviii.
FOr dyseases in the mouth and especialy in the little flap whicouerith the
wyndpipe called Uvula, some call it Co^umella that is a little flap, it is
ryghtlye a little piece of flesh hangyng in the roufe of ons mouth which sometime
swells and greuyth one very mouche.

If the piece of flesh be to long hangyng, make a ointment if it be so
requesite, and afterward make a gargarisme with the water of ye decoction of
Pomgranate flowers, and Uineger, the husks of acornes and such like, make a
powder of peper, and the joyce of flows and put it to the piece of flesh with
thy thumb.

Fill a shell an ynche thick with piche, Galbanu^, Opoponaxe, Calaminte, and
aplye it to the nape of ye neck beneth the no^, it greatly helps the grefe,
of Unula by drawe^ng it, and better it were if a another part like wise were put
in the crown of the head being shaven, the^e i^* have I proved. Lay a hoole
egg well sodden and the shel pylled of and sumwhat bruised unto ye crown of the
head.

Mengle Gume, Rue, Musterdsede, Frankencens, Pyche Oppoponaxe, Galbanum and
Calamente, let them be aplyed in a grievous sickness.

A cautery with Gold is the best remedy.

The ashes of Coleworte Rotes burnt, Diosco
put with ons finger to the flape, does ease it by drieng up y^ humors.

Pulioll royal warmed in Uyneger given to drink and aplyed to the nostrels
does quicklye Restore speech suddenly lost. Macer.


Of the Squinancy.
light wheat somewhat moist with Uineg^r wherein fy^st Rue has bi^ sodden,
the^ open thy mouth to su^ the^ it restores wonderfully ye speech being lost.

Dioscor.
The ashes of anyse rote dries up and helps the dyseas of the mouth and the
flap if it be swollen.

Let the rote of Saledyne stampte sethe in wine, whereof a Gargarysme made
healith the swellyng in ye mouth and purges the head.

Gilbert.
A plast^r made of dogs turde and man's ordure and the gall of a bull is very
good.

Make a gargarisene with the decoction of dried Fygges, and dogg^s turde it
does quickly open ye apostume.

I have hard many expert men sa^ yt Uerue^ stamped and laid to whote as a
plaster, has healed oftentimes the squinanci.

Dioscorydes says that Ueruen ^onde to the swellings does open them, heal
them, and sparse them.

The flower of Ox eye contynuallye eaten, Dysco.
never will suffer the ^quinanci to rise or grow.

The earth of a Swallows nest ^ade in a plaster takes away the ^wellyng of
the Jaws and t^ares. Auicen.


The flowers of Pomegranate and Camphore made to powder is a ^lessed medecyne
to heal the swel^ing in the throat.

Gauls with salt Ammoniake are good therefore.

This has been proved, take of the ^eed of Roses a pound and a half, of ye
^oyce of goats beard. iii. sethe the^ ^n wine and make a Gargarisme.

Against a daungerouse squina^cy ^urne old swallows in a new ear^hen pot,
Galen.
and mengle the powder thereof with honey, and with a quyl put ^t down into thy
^hrote.

In the danger he^of t^ke away ye blood with ventosis aplyed betwyne y^ sho^ders
of ye pacie^t, it does much dymynishe the matter and drawyth it to the contrary
part.

Gerard.
Wrap all the throat on the utter part, with wolle depte in the decoction of Isop
and oil olyue.

Con^t.
Dyp a sylken threde in a mouse blou^, and so let that threde dipped in ye mouse
blood be swallowed of the pacient, it is ^ery good.

The ordur of an infant, and of a man in l^ke ^ase being dried and mengled
with honey, healyth the squinanci.

Let the^e be made a plaster of the fresh ordure of a man, and aplyed outward,
with leven, gume of trees, and the ashes of burnt Time* the fat of a hedgehogge,
this does rypen and draw out yt matter, and warely breketh the aposteme: beware
yt you use out wardly no ^epercussy^es, but dyssoluyng, drawing and ^yping
medice^s.

Scabiouse gargarised and drunk, or made in form of a plaster, healith the
squinanci yt is past hope of healing, this is of certeyn^e

Item in the mouth of the paciente being open, put a stick, as a gagge and
mark well the place of the aposteme and prycke it with a sharp stycke, there
is nothing of like efficacy, for many Authors have oftentimes proved the
same.

To heal the disease of the mouth in the Unula, put fine Salt in a cloth and
bind it to the kerneles of the neck it is very good.

Against horsnesse and coughe

The Causes
The coughe comes of superfluouse humors coming from the head or of cold,
dust, smoke, and such like horsnesse is when the humor falls into the wynd
pype.

The Signs.
To coughe or to be horse.

Remedies. Capi. xx.
THe gume that is of the che^^ trees dyssoluyd with old wine, and given to sup
up, does very well ease the sharp Arteries of ye breast.

Diosco,
Rostyd Fylberdes or hasel nuttes stamped and ministered with honi heals the
grefe of a long continued coughe.

Against a continued and dangerous dropping of the rewme, and against the
vlceracion of the liver, apply unto the head being shaue^: mustarde seed, and
the skin shall be exasperate and the rewme dried.

Sees Baye beryes in water and the smoke thereof receyuid at ye nost^ylles and
ears, will thoroughly dri up the rewme.

Take ye fume of Laudanum and Frankensence, cast upon who^e coals, nothing
dries better ye rewme and conforteth the brain.

Assafetida taken with a reere egg in the euenyng opens the stoppynges of
the lever that comethe of gross and fleymy humors, Cons^;
and helpyth them that be short brethed.

Item lie made of the ashes of a great oak opens mightily the stoppynge of
the lever, Dioscor.
chefely that which comes or engenders of any venemouse matter, by
dyssoluing and co^suming the superfluous humors The lyghtes of a fox is very
good for short and paynful drawyng of breathe and to all strayghtnes of ^
liver. Sixtus.


The tongue of a Ra^me eaten ofttymes is good and wholesome therefore. Galen.


The powder of a dogs tord spre^kled on a felt of hear or cloth dipped in
honye, Galen.
and old grease made and applied to the breaste or neck of the diseased
heals the squina^ci.

Put mustersed in dry Figs, and give the pacient them to eat in the euenyng^
it does di^^olue the gross humor and op^nyth the stoppynge of the lights, and
also the condites of breathyng.

The Smoke of Arsenicke receiuid by the mouth helps them that have great
pains to take there breath.

Against spyttynge of blood.
The Causes
A Strype, great cryenge, hot rewme, repletyon, or great dryn^sse.

The Signs be plain enough.

Remedi^s. Capi. xxi.
WHen a man spitteth or vomyttith blood, Gale^.
give him to drink ye joyce of Knotgrasse and it shall cease in continent, it
was prouyd.

The grease of a Hen, a Gose a Pygge, and a Ducke, the Mary of an Ox, fresh
butter, Oil of Uyolettes, of each a like much, mengle them all to gether and
melte them, and put there unto wh^te Wax, Gum Arabycke Dragons so that it
be like an ointment but first lay Towe upon the breaste of the pacyent, dypte
in the Decocty^ion of great Mallows, and keep it there vn^yll he sweat, than
let the breast he anoyntid with this ointment, and lay above the same a Fox
skin, or else another like thing warm nothing helps more outwardly than
th^s.

Sethe dry Fygges in white wine or in claret, Dios.
but first fill the figs with musterd seed, and let him drink the wine every
night when he has eaten the figs, it opens all stoppynges of the lever so
that he may breath at his will.

Gume of a Peache tree given to him that rechit or spitteth blood, helps
greatly and opens the inward clawesures of the breast and purgethe the
inwards of the longes.

The powder of dry mulberyes is ye chefest remedi, for them ye spit blood A
Sirupe for them that can scantli take there breath, take the joyce of the rote of
sweet br^^r, young Time, bo^e Armyniacke, ye joyce of flows white coral, and
the powder of Rue, folefote, or mynts, the ryndes of pomegranates, okeaples,
gume of Arabicke* Dragance, Camfery, Knotgrasse of the seed of Rybwort, of
Manna, Sumach, drago^s blood, of blood wort, of each of these.. ix. and of
Sugar take four pound, then make a syrup of ribwort and give it with the
decoctyon of quinces, lentyles, and medlers this is very good against the body
flux, vomytinge and such like.

English time, and venician time stamped them to gether and boil them in
seething water, Dyos.
let it be set aside a day and a night in a pot well closyd that the smoke may
not breathe out, let it be strayned and put melroset thereunto and being scommed
of, let it be given to the pacient in ye going to bed it healyth the stoppinges
of the coundytes of them which be short breathed.

Almondes given to them that spyt blood is a singular help.

The rote of dragance or serpentine with claryfyed honey cleanses humors out of
the breast, Macer.
so that yt shall never return or engendure again.

Of the sodeyne losing of stre^gh and debilitie of the vytall spi^ites.
The Causes.
It comes of all great euacuatyons, as losing of blood, great laxes,
vehement mocyon, swe^inge overmuch, sorrow, fear and of the intemperance of
the heart, but the author touches that alonly which comes of euacuacyons.

The Signs.
To lose all the strength suddenly with cold of the extreme parts, and
swetinge in the face, with despair and great pains.

Remedies. Capi. xxii.
SEthe a He^ne in a pot well closed on every side till you perceive ye towe
parts ar consumed the^ take it forth and apply ye hen cut in pieces to the
pacientes nostrelles and give him the broth to drink thereof, and add to the
same He^ne, mastike, cubebes, Basyll. An^hos and such which comfort the
heart, The milk of a bitch is very g^od. Petrus*


Give the pacyent this p^ast^r following, take the scraping of gold i. magarites
of both ^ortes. i. of mastike. ii. of cubebes of spodiu^ of the scrapinge of
Iuory, the bone of an hearts heart, of burnt Sylke, of ros^s of each. ii, of
white and read coral of each. i. of cloves i of sugar two pound of musk of
a^b^r of each.i. make a plaster or a powder thereof it does wonderfully comfort
in all kind syncop^, if it be of to much swette or heat^, give unto the
pacient Sugar of rosys with cold water and sprynkle on him some rose water,
^oral does greatly comfort the heart Macer.


the wod of aloes, musk, amber, mastike, and such like do comfort ye heart
renewyng ye liuelines of ye spirits, and natural heat.

Margarites, coral, the scrapinge of Iuory, the bone in the hearts her^ Gold,
Silver, Helebore and other such like do strengthen the vytall spirytes by
puryfyeng the blood in the body and by altering the unnatural heat.

Treakel in all causes, and the root of affodile having in it the virtue to
quicken and to strengthen, does cheryshe the heart by defending it from poison
and keeping it in strength.

Of yeskyng and lothynge,
The Causes.
Yelking comes either by lack of meat and great euacuatyon, or of corruptyon
of the meat and great quantity of sharp humors, lothing comes of much
corrupt meat or sum gross and sharp humor.

The signs be euydent.

Remedies. Capi. xxiii.
ANyse seed dried and smelled unto takes away yeskyng and lothyng. Dyosco.


Betony myxte with honey and after a sort mynystred, Macer.
makes good digestion and afterward it is good to purge, Dioscor.
the same also taken takes a way vomyttyng.

Endyue made in a plastar and aplyed to the stomach, Isaac.
does comfort the same wonderfully, the same takes away the pain of the
stomach and the coughe, and also short breath. Macer.


Wild Margeram drunk with warm water takes away the gnawyng of the stomach
incontene^tly.

Gume of a chery tree dyssolued with wine and given to drink takethe away the
lothesomnes of a weak bealkyng stomach,

Water of the decotion of Opium, with water and honey takes away the belkyng of
the stomach.

Watercrowefote stamped with Isac.
cremmes of bread and a plaster made thereof takes away the heat of the
s^omake.

Dyos.
Coral stamped and drunk with water, ape^ith for ever the grefe of ye stomach
and bel^.

Auycen.
Stamp pomgranates ^ole with the rynd, and tak^ a pound of honi let them boil
together till the be thecke, give thereof a quantite unto the pacyent fasting
with cold water, it restorith the appetite very well.

Isaac.
The joyce of pomgranates taken and made in a plaster with barlye bran, and
applied on the mouth takes away the gnawinge about^ ye heart and stomach.

Ue^uen b^ynge eaten does wonderfully styre up the app^tyte it has been prouyd.

(...). His.
The joyce of w^lworte ministered ix. days with honey, tak^th way the swellinge
of the stomach and losith the belly.

The rotes of mugworte, and Fenel, and the leaves of Wormod sta^pe to gether
give to ye pacyent to dri^ke with warm water and honye, provoke vomyting
incontinent.

Masticke baterid with white of an egg, and vinegar applied unto the spone of
the stomach, Dioscor.
it comfortethe the stomach immediately, and restreineth vomyttynge* zedwary,
chawed of the pacient fasting and swallowed down takes a way the grefe of
the belly.

Aloes helps the stomach above all other medicines. Dioscor.


Against ye pain of ye stomach of a cold cause, stamped english Galengal, and
let it boil in oil and so be plastred on the mouth of the stomach, it is a
pryncypall remedy.

Make a plaster of.iiii. or Olybanum and.iii. of wa^, and. and a half of
cloves. Calaminte taken and Neppe with wine takes away the pain of the
stomach.

Water Roses, stamped and drunk with wine, do greatly restreine vomyttyng.

Against over much vomyttynge and flux of the belly, Galen,
boil cominin Uyneger and let the pacyent drynk the vyneger or eat the common.

Boil Frankensence and joyce of myntes and a little Uyneger to gether and make
a plaster thereof and bynd it to the spone of the stomach.

Stamp of masticke of Comin, of Bay beries of each. i. mynglid with joyce of
rue, aplye the same with towe upon the the stomach it has a wonderfully
operation.

Of the pains in the lyghtes.
The Causes.
Great heat or dryness, much drynkyng of wine, eating of salt meats, or
rewme.

The Signs.
Pains in the lift side with coug^inge and difficulty of brethinge.

Remedies. Capi. xxiiii.
THe grefe thereof that comes by crying, by smoke, by dust and by heat, is
easily curyed, if you give the pacyent when he goes to bed cold water to drink
wherein licoris has been sodden, and therein put sugar candye, in the morning
when he ryseth give him a litel morsel of bread dypt in the same water it shall
slake his thyrste of the same operation is clear water.

These pylles are very good for ye same take of Gume Arabicke, dragance of
every one. ii. of Franke^se^ce. i and a half make them up with honye.

Against the Pleurysy.
The Causes.
Great qantitie of hot blood having recourse to ye thine skin which is about
the rybbes.

The Sygne^.
Difficultye of breathynge, the coughe, great pains and prycking in the side
with a sore fever.

R^medies. Capi. xxv.
Against the Pleurisy the best counsel is to cut a vain of the contrary side
to the dyssease, after full rypyng it ought to be on the same side, for in the
beginning the influence of the matter is to be turned on the co^traripart after
the first phelebothomy thou must use hot r^percussiue medicenes that the out
ward pa^tyes of the body may be comfortyd and the matter goo away, if in
deed there be any suspicion of cold matter, use partly rer^percussyue medicenes
partly euaporatine co^fortatiue maturatiue among all which the best is a
bleder full of the decoction of Camomyll, Honye, and Fenegreke and such lyk^.

In a hot Pleurysye never make euaporations, for then aft^r must you make the
sorer attractions because that layeng to of things euaporatynge, wo^keth only
the increase of pain, for all medecynes euaporatynge and draw from the
inward part by subtyllynge the humore and increasyth Rewme by openinge the
ways, use therefore Maturatiues Ingrossatyues, and Diuisiues, as these
followyng, Root of Holyhoke, dry Lyquyrys, rise, the Milk or joyce of Wheat
steyped in water a certain day^s, and Lynesede, Fenigreke, Fleworte, Pease,
Barlye, and such like the seed of Maiden hear, Endyue with Popis^d myxt with
warm things I have receuyd this knowledge of a certain man and worthy
credyte, yt this is a most sure remedy and with out danger because it makes
the cause and humor of the pleurify to come forth.

Stamp the rote of Scabiouse and half a pound of red coral.ii. ounces of
sugar, and make a syroup, and when the decoction shall be gynne to be almost
enoughe put into ye same a pound and a half, of the joyce of scabiouse of ye
powder of coral asmoch let it be straygned, and give thereof a good draught to
the pacye^t it breketh and openethe the aposteme incontenent and cle^sith it by
spitting.

Stamp a cluster of dry fygges, with suet or oil of gume, and make a plaster
thereof, is of a wounderful efficacy.

Make a plaster of the root of holyhoke and fenigreke, with bran of Hempsede
and butter.

Make a good plaster of the bran of Fenigreke and linesede, and whete, and of
leuin, make bread with butter and aplye the same hot.

Boil the bran of fenigreke and lyneseed in oil of violetes and butter and
myngle them with mallows dyssolued, Plini.
and with fresh hogs grese hete al to gether, and make a plasture of it being
hot, and renew it often.

Dyp wol in the decoction of holyhoke and butter, and let thy side be wrapped
often therwyth.

Mengle well leuenyd bread with butter, and with the decoction of holyhoke, and
oil of baies given to the pacient part thereof to eat, and after make a
plaster and lay it unto the apostume behind and before, and thou shall find
a wonderful cure.

Rue drunk healyth the pleurysie quickly. Diosco.


The dounge of a bore with water is a synguler help to those that spytte
blood.

To be laxatyue, or against costyuenesse.
The Causes.
Immoderate excercyse, or lack thereof, with using of restryctyue meats.

The Signs.
To be costiue and have no seg^,

Remedies. Capi xxvi.
G^len
TO louse the belie, mengle ye gaul of a Bull* Aloe, Saltg^me, and oil together,
and anoynte fou^o^me^t, within a moment it prouok^th a man to the stool,
sowebrede rote stampte and laid to the nauil and the belly of the pacient
moves Flux.

Diosco.
The joyce hereof laid to with sylke very well purges the belly.

Sweet Cheries eaten in a morning fasting with the kernelles do provoke the belly
so myghtely, Dioosc.
that the fete b^ynge sore by some infirmity, shall be healed thereby.

Collyquintida myxt with honye and bulls gaul, and applied to the belly does
lose the same.

One pyll here of taken and eaten does in contenent move the belly, it has been
prouid.

Take wolle or sylke dypte in the joyce of sowbread rote, and in wine use it
for a subpositorye.

Mallowe root stampte first and sod and mengled with old hogs greas and a
little bra^ put there unto and applied to the stomach mouyth the belly.

Walworte rote or the joyce of the midell rynde of an elder tree myxte with fat
of a mouse and laid under ye nauil, moves ye belly to be laxatiue. a
suppositori mad of hard soap an^i^ted with butter and a little salgeme sprinkled
thero^ or else gume, loses ye beli. Malows and mercuri sode^ with hoggs suete and
eaten, cause a wholesome stole. Take of nesyng powder, of black hellebor,
hermodactile, brioni, spourge, of Henbane, of the great Galingal, of singrene,
ye joyce of coliquintida, of Aloe of each like portion, and when you will have a
laxe, anoynte the plants of your fete: and if thou will vomit, anoynte the
palm of thy hands, and when thou will bind thy self again wash thy hands,
or anoynte them with Martiaton.

One corn of Comonbaysalt, being put into the fond^ment, does incontenent
move the to the stool.

Stamp Sauyne well sodden first, with hogs suet, and stamp them both in
the water thereof, and make an ointment and anoint the nauyll.

Mengle bulls gaul, Aloe, salgeme and oil together, and anoint therwyth
within the mouth of the fundament it provoke flux of ye belly in contenent:

After the same manner the gaul of a bull bound to the nauil with towe provoke
to the stole. Of the same operacion is oil of bays.

The whaye of milk does work after like sort. Isa^*


The joyce of walwort rote, and of the myddel ^inde thereof, of an elder tree
root, of wyld cucummer, of the root of both ellebores, of the joyce of
Wertwort, of spurge rote, of malow rote, of Mercury, of the rote of such Fern
as growethe upon the wall let them boil together, with butter and oil, after
put therinto Wax, therewyth anoynte thy nauyll and it shall lose quickly thy
bellye, specially if thou add thereto scamony, the herb called spurge and
anoxe gaul, this has been prouyd, nether is there any other medicyne like unto
this.

If also thou make hereof a suppositorye it will lose the quickly,

Take butter, Alume, plume and salgeme, make a ointment, and anoynte the
^undament, depely it lousith incontinent.

Galen.
Mengle the joyce of helebore with course bran or meal from the mylstone, and
put a little butter thereto, and if you would purge upward, put it upon the
stomach, if downward, upon the navel.

The water of the decotion of an old Cock loses the belly.

Against the flux.
The Causes.
Eating of fruit, great cold or heat, and chiefly of ulcers in the bowels
with receiving of laxatiue medecynes.

The Signs.
To go to the stole very often or to have to many seges.

Remedies. Cap. xxvii.
A Dogs tord, that only eatith bones does bynd y^ belly myghtyly. Auyce^


Cryakle is very good for all fluxes.. Auice^.


Roste Popy, and Myll^t and let them afterward besta^pt and make a broth
thereof with cow^s milk, or gotes milk well soden, and with the fat of the
reins of a Goat, for the flesh thereof is a great bynder.

Almondes blaunchid and sodden with honye, till they be black, and let them be
eaten fasting it restraynith the flux of ye belly wond^rfully but yet much
more if they be not blaunchyd.

Make bread of the first grounded meal, after the peckynge of the mill and
eat it it is named for a principal remedy.

Abath of ye decoction of ye midel ri^d of an oak, does greatly bind ^ belly.
Dios.


Take and eat. S. Ihons herb it is a very strong help against the flux of
the belly.

Auycen
Opium vsyd in suppositories does restrain the flux.

There is a wounderfull propertye in rewebarbe in restraining the softenes of
the belly.

Galen.
Milk wherein a goats mydryfe has be^ sodde^, does greatli restrain the belly.

The decoction of the rote of the herb called in English Ueruen, mallow, if
it be drunk, does suddenly help the softenes of the belly.

Auicen. Galen
Old chese much tosted and dried if the pacyent take thereof. i. it is stronger
then any thing else.

Auicen.
Water of the decoctyon thereof is very good.

The matter ought to be removed and cleansed with myrabolanes, somewhat dried and
myxt with rose water after as the matter requires after the workynge of the
medicyne, give the pacyent fasting such an electuary, with rose water or with
ye decoctyon of sumach.

Take of Cassiafistula and of masticke of each. i. ypoquistidos, Acatia,
spodium, Cubebes, Ana. i. of Smalage.. and a half, ye scrapyng of old chese
sod in Uineger. ii. let them be made up in a lectuary with water of Sumache,
and of Sugar a pound, let the pacient eat Barlye bread, or millet, or else
Turki wheat minglid with water.

Beans sodde in Ueniger and eaten, Dios.
or used as a plaster, do greatly withold Laxatyon.

Likewise Peers and Cheris sodden in vinegar, and given to drink with mastike
does greatly bind.

Still water of the leaves of an oak as you do of Rose leaves, the same water
drunk does bynd also.

A pine apple without kernels if it be dipped and suppled in Scamonye and
afterward part thereof laid on hot burning coals, and be received v^ through
a close stoule, it does wounderfully bind and takes away the disease called
Tenasmus, which is a desire to go to the stole and yet may do nothing, with
burning and some time a bloody sege, it conforteth also those members, and
restrayneth the humors.

The powder of the pitche called Colophonia or greca, Gilbert,
and the flouers of Pomgranates, and Acacia, let the^ be vsid in susfumigacions
they bind myghtily.

Fleworte sede roasted with an egg and stamped and so given to drink with wine,
does bind hard.

Diosco
The sede of Cora^der drunk does greatly bind the belly.

Resolve coluerdounge in water of the decoctione of Fleworte or salowe tree,
and let thy fete be washed therwyth it is wonderful in operacyon, and true.

The decoction of Acorne rindes myghtyly binds the belly of a man,

Wine or water of the decoctyon of Saynct John's herb, is a most mighty help
against the laxe and all Flux of the Bellye, and of blood, or if the herb it
self be drunk.

Take of Opium, Frankence^ce Myrhe of each like much, mengle them together,
and butter them with the white of an Egg and make a supposytorye, and tie it
with a threade that it may the more easylye come forth, it mightylye
restraynethe the Flux of the belly and bryngethe sleep on the party
immediately.

Make a suppository of Acacia, Ipoquistides joyce of black Popy myxt with
pytche of greece, it binds mightly.

A great ventose said upon the belie and remaining there.iiii. hours takes
away al losenes of the belly. Auicen


Water wherein pears has be sodden, is very good against ye flux of the belly.

Dioscor.
The ashes of a fig tree braunchis temperid with water, causes ye laxe to
stop.

Fyl a pot with water of roses, and put eight cloves and therein mastike, and
let the pot boil with scaldyng lycour and let the water be taken for drink it
is excedyng good to scour the filthy of the inner parts engendered of sharp
matter cheiflye of Scammonye.

Gume of the Peache tree is good to bynd.

A catia given to drink or put into the foundame^t and especially vsyd in a
suppositorye with opium byndeth vehemently.

The joyce of sanicle the less binds all losenes of the belly.

The stalk of a Coleworte roasted in embers, Diosc.
and eaten restranyth much flux of the belly.

The flouers of Colewortes given twice a day with old wine, heals the
laxatyne lowsnes.

Sethe Horehounde in wine and oil, and being stamped make a plaster thereof,
and apply it upon the share.

The Rennet of a Kyd or a Leuerete is after one manner auayleable tempered and
given with the joyce of Pla^tyne it bind^th incontinent. Galen.
Ite^ for a flux of matter cleanynge to the inner parts or stomach of a man,
make thin fine cakes, bake them and let the pacyent eat them, myxte thereto
Terebe^tine it draws with it slymy matter.

The lever of any best sodden in vinegar and eaten does myghtyly restrain
blood and bind the belly. Peter. Lu.


The powder of a marbul myngled with the white of an Egg and sodden in wine
and so eaten, is a mighty binder.

Item powder made of the mawe of an Ox given in drink or meat does
wonderfully bynd the losenes of the belly.

A certain Physician healid al his pacyentes with the same one medicine.

Myngle branne made of dried seruyse or quike^ berys with honey and the white of
an egg, let it be sodden on the coals, and give it the pacie^te fasting, or
else raw put it in by a clister, it mightylye byndeth.

Fill a hen with sumache and ypoquistidos and such like, and let her sethe
well, and drink the potage and eat the flesh and ^f it be a long continued
disease, it does comfort and bind much.

Dioscor.
Item sodden milk drunk or vsyd for a clyster, does bynd the belly, and heleth
meru^lously well the corrosyons of ^he inner parts, and specially gotes milk
or asses milk

Above al things the best is cows milk sodden with an iron or a stone, and
above al suetes bears suete is best worth in this cause.

Item take Bramble berys, and sethe them in the water of the decoctyon of
gladin, which being administried is a good remedy and help, for him yt has
the Flux, if it be with out an agewe but if it be wi^h an agewe let him be
bathyd in the water of the deco^tion of gladin, or wypt over with a clothe wet
therein.

Item powder of roses does bind the lousenes of the belly. dioscor.


Tryfera the great, mynystred with an onyon* heals utterly al Laxes and
r^straynythe vomyttynge.

For the flux when the mete comes Galen.
forth as it was eaten and ouermuche solublenes, make this throughli approved
plaster, take sower and wild apples roste them, make a plaster and lay upon the
reins and nauel, and when it is cold renew it and put a hoote one in the
place, do this often till you be healed, it quickly helps those that are past
help.

Mengle the joyce of a Pigges head with Rosyn, and lay it upon a hot Tile,
and let the pacient take the smoke thereof fro beneth, three or fouer times,
this has been approuyd, and it is true.

Seth Quynces made clean with in and without and Okeaples, and Cinnamon
together, and put to the decoctyon sugar, and give of ye three in three nights
and the pacient shall be healyd.

Sauery tempered with the joyce of Plantayne leaves is very wholesome herefore.

Take the flowers and ryndes of pomegranates, okaples, Acacia sumache, Saffron
cubibes, opium, make pills thereof with the joyce of Rue, as you will and give,
v. or seven of them to the pacyent going to bed.

Take of myrhe, of opium, Acacia of Prunes storax of each. i. of fra^kencense,
of masticke of each. ii. of lauender gentle.. and a half, mengle it with the
joyce of the Tops of brambles or of Rybwort, make pills and give the
pacyent.v or.vii. it has wonderful effects wythal.

One knot of Mollen rote given to drink, does bynd the lousnes of the belly.

The root of Five leaued grass is very profitable against the flux of the
belly. Dioscor.


Let the pacient receive from under a close stoule or such like, the smoke of
a rusti iron burning, hot quenchid in veniger.

Item fine cakes fried with larde and wax, and so eaten do greatly bind the
bellye.

Give to the pacient wine with a soft egg and salt to drink fasting and let
him tarry fasting a good while after, and on the morrow give him the second
time likewise, and he shall be healed.

Item milk sodden, with myxt Staphisagre and drunk is a sure tried medycyne.

Beans sodden in vinegr and eaten be a singular remedy for those which have
the laxe.

Almondes bind ye lousnes of ye belly

Make little pies of the substance of Colewortes sta^pt and w^ll wrong and of
chese broken in pieces sta^ped and dissolved in water and well wrong, and of and
hogge^ l^uer and whytes of eggs first sodden and molte^ sh^pes talowe, and
white wax, let them be laid (...) a ^urnace or fried in a pan, and let him eat
them to his breakefaste, it byndeth myghtyly.

Coluer dounge stamped and used for a plaster with strong veniger and applied
to the navel, Mace^.
bindethe incontinent al flux of the belly.

The dounge of a camel dried and drunk is of the same operacion. Kye.


Of the colyke and the pain called yliaca.
The Causes
The Colyeke comes of gross* and slimy humors or of wynd contained in the gut
colone, and yliaca is engendered of raw and corupt meats specially fat, and by
drinking cold drink after great heat.

The Signs
Grypynges and pain in the utter part of the belly with restriction thereof, and
belchynge and lothynge of meat do signifye the Colycke, and yliaca is when the
pains and swellyng is in the small guts with belchynge and murmuring in the
belly.

Remedies. Capi. xxviii.
DOunge of beasts yt are kept up in stables very rank even from the place
where they piss dried and laid to the grefe with fryenge oil, does apease the
grefe wo^derfullye.

Wolves dounge bound to the thighs, or to ye bone above ye preuie members
takes the grefe away incontinent.

Make a powder of wolves turde dogs berde, coluer dou^ge and quik lyme and
mengle with molte^, pitche, and suete meltid, lay it to whote, it is very good.

Make a bath wherein put all the sundry tordes as may be found, the same
resoluith wyndines and sl^my humors this have I prouyd.

Give Treakle in warm wine wherein dissolve cloves. Galen.


Sethe the flesh of an old cock or an Hen with a good deal of sale, and
give the brothe thereof unto the pacyent at even and at morn.

The herb called Seaholme being stamped together with the rote, and drunk with
honye and water, asswageth the Colyke.

The ashes of the branches of colwortes burnt, Macer.
mixed with stale greece and vsyd for a plaster, takith a way the ache of the
belly, the sides, and of the reins, for it dries and wastith myghtily.

Sethe old oil and butter and strong Ueniger, Galen.
and sethe of them equal porcyons till they be thick, afterward dippe th^rin
mo^st woll and apply it to thy belly, and ^haung it as often as it coleth, it
is good in a hard and intolerable colyke.

Parytorye drunk with wine, or used in a plaster or after y^ manner of
fomentacion, takes away the pain of the colyke.

Coluer dounge, brayd fynely and drunk with wine and used for a plaster, is
above al for the colicke,

Item take a hot shepes turde with got^s ^alowe stamped well, and put there on
pitche all to b^aten in fine powder and well menglid to gether apply it warm
as a cerote, it has with out doubt wonderful efficacy.

The dounge of a Wolf, if it be newly made, and so applyd there, is nothing
better then it for to heal ye Colycke, if it be stale dissolve it in old oil.

Horehound stampte and sodde^ in oil olive and applied to ye grefe does
assuage the pain wonderfully A yong^ whelpe not nine days old killed and clean
o^dered, Sixtus.
healyth ye grefe or pain in the guts for ever.

The rynde of the pyne apple tre^ sodden with wine and the same wine drunk,
Dyo^.
does myghtyly take away the wrynging of the belly.

The root of Affodyl drunk with wine, takes away the pains of the sides.

Take of Agaricke. i. and drink the same, it allayeth the g^ypynges of the
belly, by ^^myshing raw humors.

The ashes of scorpions g^uen in drink is very good. Auicen.


Hearts horn burnt and given in drink, takethe away the Colycke incontinent.

The powder of the bowelles of a Wolf, is of great efficacy to help those
that be payn^d with the Colycke.

The dounge of a wolf g^uen in drink, help^th him that has the colicke
streygth way.

The rote of a Lily given to drink in the decoctyon of Horehound, appe^ethe
the colike it has be^ proved.

Give the pacient Garlic with a little bread, for it breketh wyndynes more
then all other medicines, and ingrenderith no thryst, and therefore it is very
good in this cause.

Give Trynkle unto the pacyente with things that induce sleep, Galen.
they assuage quycklye the grefe.

Make a suppository of Castoreum and Opium, it is very good to assuage the
pain of the ears y^ ey^s and of the Agewe.

March Mallows sodden in water heal the pain in the bowell^s within three
days, we have prouyd it, and also Dioscorides.

Diosco.
The powder of Coral drunk with warm water does a pease the grefe of the
stomach and of the belie.

Water of the decoctyon of Holyhoke taking the smoke thereof from bin^th, thris
in a day, heleth ye pain of the belly.

Heat the joyce Plantayne and put it into a close stoule, Auicen.
sit thereon and receyu^ the air thereof upward, it takes away the pain of
the belly incontinent.

Mengle the joyce of Myntes, or of the leaves of Christ's thorn called Rhammis
with eight corns of Pepper and a little Honey, and give the pacyent to drink,
the effect thereof is wonderful.

Take the flour of Linseed and of Barlye, Galen.
sethe them with oil of Ca^mamell, and lay it to the nauyll hoote.

Make a plaster of y^ bigger Docke leaves, and of Mallow leaves sodden in water
and stamped, it is wonderful good,

Hydroleon and Allegant dronke is wonderful good also.

Hydroleon is made of.ii. parts of water and the third of oil sodden together
to the consumption of the water.

Isaa^.
Take an old cock filled with oak fern or walferne, and saffro^ sede of ye
east part, and wild co^wortes, let them all seth together till the flesh
fall from the bones, Auycen
the decoctyon is v^rye wholesome for those that be payned with the colycke.

Use Rue sod in oil and butter, inform of a clister, it takes away the
pain incontinente.

The rote of Tormentyll stamped and drunk, takes a way the pinchynges and
pains of the belly.

Galen.
Take of Bay leaves, of Rue, Ana. ii. of Comin one part, heat it upon the
fire in a fryenge pan, and apply it to the place where the grefe is, it
healith mightily and dissoluyth windines and takes away the pain.

Syler, montayne and Comin sod in wine, and laid to the stomach, is of (...)
same operacion.

The scrapynge of a hearts horn given unto him that is sick of the collicke
with water and honey being so together and vsyd.ix. days helyth the Colicke
parfytlye.

For the worms in the belly.
The Causes.
Phlegm putrified in the stomach or bowels.

The Signs.
Great pains in the belie with much desire of meat.

Remedies. Capi. xxix.
TO kyl worms give unto ye pacient fasting clean milk to drink.iii. or.iiii.
days together the.v. day give him garlycke sta^pt with warm venig^r to
drink.

Make a plaster of the peache leaves or leke blades with veniger, bi^d it to ye
stomach of the pacie^t and let him sit in his warm bed, the worms will not a
bide the bitterness thereof.

Dioscor.
The sede of Colewortes drunk, kills all the worms of the belly.

Smallage sede drunk, kylleth y^ worms, and is mighty in operacion.

Ribwort stamped and bound to ye navel as a plaster or drunk especially with
Uineger, A^yce^
of his own prop^rty kylleth worms.

Sethe the rindes of Pomgranates, and the root of an Ash in wine, and drink
the same wine fasting, it sleeth the worms wonderfully.

The joyce of Basyll or Myntes, myngled with Goats milk, ^alen.
kylthe worms.

If the navel be anointed with bitter Almondes and the oil of Peache kyrnels,
it mightily distroyeth the worms.

Dios.
The scrapynge of hearts horn drunk kills worms.

Auicen.
If the fundament be de^ely anointed within and without, with milk and honey
minglid together, or else if sylke being dypt therein be vsid as a suppositorye,
the worms will descend to the swet place incontinent.

If the worms hurt the mouth of the stomach put honi combs in the mouth
fasting, they will draw unto the honey, and so voyed by ye mouth, it has been
proved.

Agarike given fasting to the pacyent kills all the worms.

Sumache dissoluid in water and drunk, is wonderful against worms. Auicen.


Pursland sede in good quantitye, drunk, kylleth the worms.

Acacia drunk in water of the decoctyon of Pomgranates, or sod ^n venyger
kylleth them.

The decoctyon of grene myrhe drunk does sleye the worms meruelouslye. Ga^^^.


Pyls made of Galbanum and sugereandy stamped together, and given to the
pacient, do greatly help

Take of the joyce of mynte, rybwort, of orpyn, of singrene, of p^ach leaves,
strong v^niger, and an oxs gaul, oil of peachis, flours of Lupines, smalage
sede, of each like quantity, make an ointment and anoint the nauel and there
about and they shall al dye.

Leke seades kill the worms, also radishe myxt with water and honey.

For the Hemorrhoydes.
The Causes.
Much melancholyke blood conteynyd in the liver.

The Signs.
The veins in the fundamente brekyng forth and bledynge.

Remedies. Capi. xxx.
Galen.
YArowe drunk restranyth the flux of the hemorrhoydes, and aswageth the pain
of them ye flow not, being drunk, or inform of a plaster.

Make a bath of molle^ sod in wine vsyb in a plaster helith.

Item the leaves of henbane, and Pursland, the yolke of a rostyd egg, the pyth
of bread, oil of Roses, mingled together, and made in a plaster, apply them to
the grefe, the same in contynent heals.

If the hemorroydes flow over much, make a supposytory of Ceruse alone, or of
Ipoquistidos, or else myxt burnt led, Ceruse, Ipoquistidos, and Acasia with
pitch called Collofonia, and order them as a suppository.

Against the pain of hemorroydes make a plaster of ceruse, of burnte led, the
yolks of roasted eggs* oil of roses, minglid together, put th^r unto Sumache
it helith all the hemor^hoydes and al ulcers about ye fundament.

Anyse sede brunt and laid unto ye grefe with honey, helith hemorrhoydes

The dust of rosty iron, or the seals of iron mingled with the joyce of
Mollen, is very good.

Galen.
Dyp old sylke in the water of the decoction of Dill, and afterward dry it, and
there with wype the hemorrhoyde, and make a supposytory of the same.

Dyos.
A plaster of Rosemary leaves, helithe the hemo^rhoydes.

Common clay restranyth the flux of the hemorrhoydes.

Ashes of eggs shells that chykyns were hatchid in, given with white wine
fasting, hele the hemorrhoydes incontin^nt,

Against the hemorrhoides being sw^llen and not runnyng, sethe horehounde in
water wine and salt put it in a close stoule, sit over the same to take the
air thereof upward being hot, and lay ye herb thereto for a plaster.

If the hemorrhoydes be much ha^ging and paynful, Peter. L^.
make a plaster of lynnen coth and hard pitche, and upon the plaster cast
powder of smalage rote and mastycke, apply it to the gref^ it helps
incontinent.

Myngle Antimonium with the joyce of Mollen, wete sylke therein and aplye it to
the hemeroydes, it heals the pains thereof.

The powder of Agaricke menglid with the joyce of Sowbred and warm oil, is bery
good.

The hears of an hare made in powder and cast upon the Hemerhoydes does
incontinent restrain there bledyng.

The yolke of a roasted egg myxte with oil of Rosys and laid to the grefe in
form of a plaster, U^at^.
healethe the pain of the hemeroydes.

Against desire to the stole without any sege.
The Causes.
Aprykyng humor, or dry dou^ge in the small guts.

The Signs.
Great desire to the stole without auoydyng of any thing at all.

Remedies. Capi. xxxi.
Diosco
Stamp rue first sodden, and use it for a plaster, it h^lethe v^ry well.

Sethe mollen and stamp it, and m^ke a fume thereof, or use the herb for a
plaster, it heals also.

A^um got^o^ made of Teribenthine cast on the coals heals.

Sethe the rynde of a pomegranat, and the rote of an ash in swet wine and give
the same wine unto ye pacient to drink, it is very good.

Take of white Franke^sence. i. of Ameos. i. of Opii.. and a half, of
Safron..x. myngle them with honey and make a suppository. for this is very good.

Put Common, Anyse, dyl, and greek pytche upon hot ^oles, and when it burns
let the pacient receive ye smoke thereof clo^^ly from beneth.

Dyp old Sylke in the decoctyon of Dill, and afterward dry the silk let the
pacient wype his fundame^te there with.

Afumigacion made of sarcocoll upon hot Coals, h^aleth the pacie^t of this
desease.

Annoynte the Raynes and al pertes down ward to the end of the back bone
with honey, Platea^.
and spre^kle thereon powder of Greek Pitch, and of town cresses, and the sede
of Penyryall, Isope* and Organ, and let it be bownde with a towlar.

Peritory made in a plaster hely^he the hard sege and the swellyng of ye
fundament.

Against chynes and ruptious in the fundament.
The Causes.
Sharp humors, or going much in cold wynd.

The signs be euydent enough.

Remedies. Cap. xxxii.
Galen
A Prouyd medicine ggaynste Hemorroydes and attrycious in the fundame^t, take of
plantayne.iii. handfulls of yarowe, and Fenel, white myntes of each fouer
handfulles, stamp them and press out the joyce thereof, and put thereto viii.
graynes of Peper, and.vii. graynes of masticke, and drink it fasting renew
the drink as need shall be, till nine days be past.

Sethe Cinksoyle in gotes milk, and drink it, iii. days, it is good if the
fygge blede.

Myngle.ii. yolks of Eggs with oil of Roses and white wine* and distill it
upon the grefe through a quyll, it helps myghtyly and that incontinent, for
it has been prouyd.

Common eaten makes the hemorrhoydes to flow.

Cast brymstone beaten into powder upon Coals, and incontynente upon the smoke
let there be cast in an herb called Blind nettle, and let the smoke thereof be
receyuyd upward closely, and do so thryse it takes away the grefe incontinet
and so after it dries up the hemorrhoydes it has been prouid, for I mi self
have tried it.

Take and stamp the stalks of Rue, and the fresh ordure of a man. together,
and blende them with the yolke of an egg and make aplaster it is very good.

Here unto take Sage, rue, Frankensence, Wax, oil, Galen.
and gotes milk mingle them together, and anointe the place.

Marigoldes put to the fundame^t do lightly heal the figs and hemorrhoydes.

For the Hemorrhoydes that appear hanging in the fundament, myngle the donge
of a colte, french soap, the stalks of mollen together, and put it into the
fundament the third day thou shall find thy self hole th^rby.

The powder of mollen myxt with the joyce of horehound, br^keth the swelling
hemorrho^d^s of the same operation is the root of hole worte plasterd with
Organ.

Of the coming forth of the fundament.
The Causes.
Resolutyon or imbecillitie of ye muscles which be about the fundement not
being able to draw in ye gutte.

The signs be manifest.

Remedies. Capi. xxxiii.
HEeate aposcolicon against ye fire, and touch the fu^dame^t there with, it shall
go in again inco^tinent^, do this.iii, or.iiii. times as it shall com out, and
afte^ward let ye pacie^t bath him self in the water of Perytorye, and Fygge
leaves, and Pear tree leaves, or only Peritory.

The leaves of Rosmary applied inform of a plaster, take away the swellyng of
the fundament.

Item make a fume of Gr^ke pitche cast upon the hot coals, it has been prouyd.

Also cast upon the fund^ment powder of hearts horn burn^, ^t is good.

This is a suer experym^nt above all make fumes closlye beneth with the warm
joyce of Garlike being clear, Rogerius
and afterward let it be sharpened with the powder of a Hart^s horn burnte,
and pi^che burnte, with Fra^k^nsence and masticke, it is ve^ye good, not only
for the going forth of the foundament, but also against the going forth of the
matrixe.

Galen.
Make a warm suppositorye of woll that is moist and dipped in y^ joyce of L^kes
without the blades, and when it is cold heat it again, and when it is dry
renew it again.iii or.iiii. times, it is a sure remedy for those whose
fu^dame^t comes forth, or else put the water of the decoetien of white
frankensence alone into ye fundament.

Of the oppilatyon of the liver.
The Causes.
In Apostem, or gross humors therein contained.

The Signs.
To be evil colored in the face and great pains in the right side.

Remedies. Capi. xxxiiii.
IF thou will open the stopping of the liver anoint the place against the liver
with this oyntme^t, take common oil, butter, Gose grese, Hensgrease, and
Hedghoges grese, and myngle the^ together and let them be meltid, but first let
them boil in a pot mingled with the sede of gromell and Saxfragge, of each
like much, of Fenell, of Carowes, of sauery, of Calament Ana.. and a half of
fenell roots, Percely. i. strain these same and use them, and after thou have
anointed the place, apply thereunto a plaster of Wax, Pitche and butter like
much, then cast upon the grefe this powder. Take of Sage dried of Sauerye of
Anyse, of Fenell, Gotes dounge, of al like much let the^ be myngled and make a
powder thereof, afterward give a little quantyty of seen, and a garicke, with
Uermilyon it is very good against the stoppyng of ye liver and heals them
that have ye dropsye of a cold cause.

Such alike drink as this does very well op^n the stoppynges in the liver of
a hot cause.

Take of Hearts tongue, of rybwort, of Betonye, of Litarge and as much water as
shall su^fice, let the same boil therein suffycyentlye and strain them, and
let the straynyng thereof be drunk earlye in the morning with Endyue stampte,
and myxt with oil of Uyolett^s, and Ueniger.

(...).
Ribwort sod healith those yt have the dropsye.

Of the Hydropsye.
The Causes.
Water conteyn^d betwyxt the bowels and thy thine skin that goes about the^
and comes of it coldness in the lyueer.

The Sy^nes.
Swellynge in the belly evil color and lothynge of meat.

Remedies. Cap. xxxv.
THe hidropsye y^ is inge^dred of a h^^e cause, when it is not much confyrmyd
is easly healid with o^te eating of endyue and drinking of the decoctyon of
the same this have I prouyd.

A plaster made of both the plantaynes applied against ye liver with vinegar and
barley meal is much worth among al hot things, and immoderate exercise, also
make anoyntme^t of ye oil of al sorts of sanders and Rosis and of ye sede of
plantayne and let it vsid in such like electuaries. Take of al sorts of
sa^ders, Ana. i. and a half of vasyl, of cub^bes i. of the four cold se^es
which be melons, citrous, cucumer and goourdes of each. i. and a half of endive
of pursla^, Ana, a pound let it be made with the Decoctyon of endyue* use it
every morning if the substance of the liver be not alredye, di^solued wtou^
doubt it shall shortly be clean and helthful.

Constable.
Fill a pot almost full to the brinke with the joyce of plantayn, and bind a
bout the pot a lynen cloth and upon the cloth put ashes, and let it sethe so
upon the fire unto the half, and give thereof every morning to those that be
sick in the spleen, and thar are infectyd with the dropsy it is a pryncypall
remedy.

Kye.
Gotes blood heat on the fire, and given to drink, does perfectly heal those
which have the dropsy.

dioscor.
Wine of the decoctyon of wild cucu^mer rote, quyckly heals those who have
the dropsye ingendryd in them of a cold cause.

Kye
Mingle of the powder of ox dou^ge vi. of bra^ke vrsyn, iiii. three raw eggs,
apou^d of brimstone and make a plaster thereof and with the same plaster, thou
shall hele those that be sick of the gout, of the dropsye and of such like.

Give unto him that is diseased with the dropsy the joyce of briony with
honye, Diosco
it shall heal him without danger.

Water of the decoction of ye said bryony helith the dropsye.

The rote of an Elder sod and drunk giuith perfect remedy unto ye dropsi. Kye.


Wine of the decoctyon of cucumers rote being drunk, Dios.
purges ye swellynge from those that have the dropsye.

Mustard sede drunk, or the wine of the decoctyon thereof, does lightly heal
the dropsye by dryuyng up the humor and taking away the heat of the liver.

The kernels of Pears ^^ampt and drunk with honey, takes away the grefe of
the liver,

Water or wine of the decoctyon of walwort if it be drunk is a present remedy
for those yt have the dropsy.

Wine that Isope has sodden in being drunk, burns ye hydropical humors so
that it can not engender again.

Water of the decoctyon of stauesagre being drunk, does greatly hele the
dropsy it has been prouyd.

A^icen.
Goats p^ss^ heals the dropsy.

If those that have the dropsye be anointed with common dur^ that is found in
the carte ways or upon ye carts they shall be hole.

Gilbert,
A certain man healed the cold dropsye by gyuyng every morning a sponefull of
a black goats piss or of a black sheep in the water of the decoctyon of
spicknard.

Amans own urine being drunk is very good.

Plini.
The fat of a Delphyn meltid and drunk with wine, heals the syck man of the
dropsy.

Dioscor
The powder of the stone magnes drunk with milk, resolves ye dropsy

Hares piss drunk healyth ye dropsye* for if the pacient drynk.ii. spone
fulles thereof, Diosco, Kye.
it will perfitlye heal him.

For them that be splenetike
The Causes.
Great abundance of blood or choler in the spleen.

The Signs.
Swellyng and great pains in the lift side.

Remedies. Capi. xxxvi
Wine wherein the rynde of Ash has been sodden dronke fasting is a most
certain remedy for those which be sick in the spleen as says Co^sta^tine and
after the use hereof, Galen.
three days space use to anoint ye spleen with dialtea and oil of Bays the space
of.vii. days, and after make a plaster of Goats dounge baked with strong
veniger, and let it be often renewyd till the pacyent be hole.

Hearts tongue drunk with wyn^ xxx. day^s does dry up the spleen and dymysh^th
i^. Diosco.


Wine of the decoctyon of the rind of a willowe tree, mollifyeth the swellynge
and hardenes of the spleen.

Dioscor.
Egrymoyne taken with meat, wastyth the spleen.

Kye.
The leaves of a willow tree stamped with a little salt* and applied unto the
spleen, appease the ache and grefe thereof.

Dyosco.
St^mpe ^uye leaves sod in vinegar and make a plaster, for it wast^th ^he spleen.

Kye.
The rind of a Sallow tree sod with water and ho^y, and given to the pacient to
drink, loses and molyfieth the spene.

Diosco.
Se^he the rote of an elder in water unto the third part thereof, it
wonderfully helpith the spleen.

Macer.
The root of docke sod in strong vinegar, and stamped, and applied unto the
Spleen inform of a plaster, does utterly take away the swelli^g of the spleen.

The leaves of docke, Dios.
sod in Ueniger and plasteryd upon the spleen, lose the swellynge thereof.

A plaster of Goat^s dounge mingled with the powder of horehound leaves, and
Rue, and Elder, Gilbert.
and ye ashes of the stalk of a Uyne, with wine, and a little veniger, is of
great efficacy to dissolve the hardness of the spleen.

The powder of a Fox dried upon the hot coals, Sixtus.
if it be given in drink does utterly wast the spleen.

Sethe the twigges of a Wylowe in water. and give the same water unto the
pacient to drink, it vtterli consumyth the spleen.

Goats dounge losith the stoppynges and al hardenes of ye spleen or of the
stone. Dyos.


Peniryall sod with salt, and applied to the grefe, losyth ill humors of the
spleen and takith away the sw^llynge.

Coral stamped and drunk with water, dries up the spleen.

Raw Colewortes eaten with venyger, is a help for the spleen.

Against the stopping of the spleen the rote of hearts tongue is very good made
to powder, Galen.
and put in wine, and at the wane of the moon the said wine is to be given to
the pacyente to drink.

Diosco.
Grass sod and bound to the grefe brings great help to the spleen.

The leaves of Tamariscus sod in veniger, and stamped, applied unto the spleen,
are very good.

Take a dry coutord, the joyce of a nettle, oil of eggs and of brimstone
make a plaster thereof, it is very good for those that be diseasid with the pain
in the spleen, the falling Evil, and dropsy, for it is a precious medycyne.

Bind the spleen of a dog to the spleen of the pacient, and it shall heal
him.

For the yelow iaundes.
The Causes.
An opilacion in the gaull or spleue, with great heat in the liver or
debylitie of attraction in ye milte.

The Sygnes^
W^nne and yelow color of the skin and white of the eyes with sum grefe in
the spleen or liver.

Remedies. Capi. xxxvii
This is a good experiment, Gilbert.
to heal the Iaundys, take of ye scrapynge, of Iuory of the joyce of
Lyuerworte, of Saffron, as much as shall seem to be sufficient, of French Soap
to the quantitye of a Chesse Nutte, and bynd them all in the Corner of a
Clothe, and swing them up and down in the water till the virtue of al ye said
things be in the wa^er, and give ye same to the pacyent to drink, this is
wonderful good.

The vryne of the pacient drunk with the joyce of Horehounde healith the
Iaundis.

The scrapyng of Iuory with the water wherein it was washed, does myghtyly
heal.

A certain old woman healyd me^ which were almost full of the dropsye, with
the joyce of planten sodde^ to half, it might also be made in a syrope.

Make a bathe of the water of the decoctyon of Gladyn, Diosco.
and of ye rote of Ci^lanim, or stamp them and drunk it with water, it h^leth
the Iaundis, if the Pores be open that the pacient may sweet, for in the sweet
you shall perceive choler to proceed.

Saffron dissoluid in water and dronk, healith incontinent.

The ioice of Camomil given to dri^k unto the pacient dysea^yd with the Iaundis
or fever, with warm water is a present remedy.

The joyce of morell drunk is a help therefore.

Water of the decoction of mouseare or wine healith incontinent.

The donge of wild goats bet to poudere, and drunk.iii. days, Dio^
healith those that have the Iaundys.

Of the stone in the raynes or bladder.
The Causes.
Great heat, ^ryeng up gross and putrified humors contained in eyth^r of
them.

The Signs.
Grauel in the vryne with great pains in the dyseasyd place.

Remedies. Capi. xxxviii.
TAke of Cloves, of Iua non mu^kata, of b^ttels, of Galingale, of dried
grass^hoppers, of Gromel, of long Peper, of saxfrag of the ashes of a
scorpyon, of gotes blood dried, of ye stones of a man, of each, ii. make powder
thereof, and give it the secke (being in a bathe made of the decoctyon of
Bochers brom Sperage, Smallage, Fenell) with white wine, wherein great
Galingal, and English Galangale, and the rote of Radyshe have be^ sodden, this
is wonderful good.

Item take Goats blood, the ashes of a Scorpyon, the powder of Grasshoppers, of
Spodium, of spiknard, of the blood and hears of an hare, of Galingale, Drago^s
blood, of Gromell, make powder thereof, and myngle it with Syrope of gromel, and
Saxfrage, and give it to the pacient in the morning that he may sleep upon it,
it helpith very much

Seth all those symples yt breake^ the stone, put them to gether in a go^rde
that is old, and stopped it incontinent with the pacientes yard, so the hole
air thereof may enter through the hole of ye yard, and let him use the same
often times a good while, after the same manner, for it brekith the stone,
enlarges the ways loses the humors of the blad^r, and consumith, dries and
also expellith the stone inespecially if many flees called cimyces be sodden,
afterward make a plastere o^ the dregs, and apply it to the yard and to ye
bone above the yard.

Item put the Powder of the Worms called Cimices, dioscor.
in the condute of the yard, they perform a synguler remedy.

Item if the yard be anoyntid over with Fox blood, Const^.
the stone will break incontinent, for put a stone into the blood of a Fox,
and it will break in three days.

Item.ix. Iuy bertes given with warm wine to drink, purg^th the stone and
prouokith vryne myghtily.

Burn hares blood and the hole skin of an hare, in a new pot well closyd,
and of the same ashes give ye pacient a sponefull in warm wine in a bath, and
fasting, it brekith and drives out the stone.

Item the stone of a man, given in drink unto the pacient fasting, breketh the
stone and brings it out myghtily with his urine.

Before al things the pacient must be purged, and nourished with such things
as open the pip^s and veins, and cleanse slimy humors, or else all the medicines
that shall be given will little avail him.

In the head of a great Tode there is a stone, which stone being sta^pt, and
given to the pacyent to drink in warm wine, makes him to pise the stone out
incontinent, but if the stone be to hard and to great, take the powder of
Snayles for it is a good experiment.

Womans flows dried and beaten to powder and given to drink, breketh the
stone more then ought else.

Take a good deal of mugworte, stamp it and wrynge out the joyce thereof,
drink a good draught thereof every day to the quantite of half a cupful, it
breaks the stone wou^derfully, and causes the gravel to yss^e forth, it
has been prouyd.

Item if the stone will be droken by no means, Gerard.
put in a spoute of brass softely through the hole of ye yard till it touch
the stone, then punch it till thou torn the stone out of his place, and it be
setlyd in some other place of the bladder, there it may remain forty years
without danger.

The gume of Cheryes does mightyly Dyosco.
break ye stone and lose the grauil.

Kye.
Item the herb and rote of sea^olme sodden and drunk with wine and Honye,
earlye in the bed, helyth the stone if it be vsyd syxtene days.

Gal^n.
Stamp goats blood thy liver, ye lyghtes, raynes, yard bowels and stones
altogether. make a puddi^g thereof in the great gut of the same goat sethe it
and give it to the pacient to eat, and thou shall se wonderful operacyon
thereby, in taking away the stone.

Dioscor.
Betony given to the pacient to dri^k with wine* honey and peper* myngled to
gether, takes away ye pain of the raynes, and expels ye stone out of the
raynes and blader.

Galen,
If thou doubt whether the stone be in the blader, make a plaster of ye herb
that is called checkwede sod in water and boo^d to ye yard and to the bone
above the yard and if the grefe increase it is in the bladder, if (...) it do
not increase it is not there but in the the raynes.

The gume of a damasyn tree breketh the stone, Diosco.
and causes it to issue

The rynde and beryes of a baye tree drunk, brekyth the stone.

Goats pysse drunk expellith and breakyth the stone.

Ameos or in the sted thereof the sed of charuyll, Auycen.
losith the difficultye of making water and dryueth forth ye stone broken.

Item the ashes of grasshoppers given with the syrup of spiknard. Roses.
is of wonderful operacyon.

Sethe seven heads of garlyke in water a good while, Petrus.
and give the same water unto ye pacyent.iii. days, it a prouyd medicene
against y^ stone.

Take.ii. or.iii. young leuerettes, drown the^ in vinegar, that they dye
there, and afterward boil them in a pot well closyd without any thing else,
and give the ashes thereof to him that has the stone, it breketh the stone.

Goat^s blood, and Gose blood, myngled with veniger, and sod together with a
slow fire, does mollyfye the stone.

Macer.
The leaves of Enula, Campana, sod in wine and vsid for a plaster, is a great
help to them that be franty^e through the pain of the stone

C^^can.
Item English galingale stamped and sod with oil, and plasteryd warm upon the
bone above the yard, provoke urine without doubt.

Fox blood fresh drunk brekith the stone, for it is known that if a stone be
put into it, it will break.

The powder of a hare burnt quick in a new pot, and ye powder of a hearts
horn if it be taken, is greatly to be co^mendyd, for it breketh ye stone.

A Fox eaten, and the suet thereof anoyntyd on the pacyent is a great help.

A special remedy after Auicen, Auic^^.
is a wagrayle.

Make powder of grass Hoppers taking away the f^te head and wings myngle it
with Gillofloures, Gilbert.
and Sixfrag made also in powder.

The stone of a man the stone in a sponge, the stone that is found in ye
bladder of a hog be very good.

Oil wherein Betels and Paperwormes be sodden, anoyntid or put into the
holownes of the yard with a spout is very good.

Stamp the rotes of Olyue, Galen.
comin, and Chibols, the^ se^h them in oil* and apply them hot upon y^
share, it moves him to pysse incontinent.

Stamp Peritorye* and apply it warm unto the same place, Gerad.
it is of wonderful effect.

The blood of an old Got made to powder, and myxt with ye decoctyon of
spiknard and cinnamon, and dry grosshoppers beton to powder, and given to drink
causes the stone to gushe out wonderfully.

The feet of a Cock given to the pacie^t to eat, at very good but not the
rest of the flesh,

To cause the stone to break and issewe forth, make ten or more toules of
Radyshes rotes, put them in white wine al a hole night in ye morning drink
the wine fasting, use it every day till the stone go from the.

(...)
The raynes doung, blood, ashes and hears of an hare break the stone.

Of the Strangury.
The Causes.
Ulcers in the blader or an Apostem in the liver or reins, which causes the
vryne to be sharp and prickyng.

The Signs.
The urine ever dropping at the yard with great desire to pysse.

Remedies. Cap. xxxix.
Ox dounge myxt with honey, Auicen^
and wa^me applied to ye bone above the yard, is very good.

Item.iii. flies called cantharydes (there heads and wings taken away) myxt
with goats milk, and drunk, do lose the stranguryon.

Paper worms stamped with oil, and with the fot of a hedghogge anoint the yard
and the place there about therewythall, it provoke vryne myghtily.

Water of the decoctyon of galingale provoke the vryne.

Make a plaster of hensgrese gose grese, and the grease of a hedghoge of the
sead of gromell, and Saxfrage and goats blud.

Apply Galbanum upon the belly under the nauyl, it causes the pacient to make
vryne incontinent.

Pyls made of Rye mele, and applied upon the yard (it being anointed with
vnguentum, Populeon) helyth lightly.

Dioscor.
There is nothing that prouokithe urine more mightly then a radyshe rote.

Item the rote of a Docke sod with wine and oil and plasterid above the yard,
provoke vryne in great quantytye.

The powder of the beryes of briony does greatly heal ye stra^gurion.

The rind of a Has^l nut tree or the leaves help greatly the stra^gurion Isa^.


Dioscor.
The leaves of Plantayn which grow nere the rote, being drunk healith al
difficultys of the blader.

Radyshe rote s^d in whyt wine and a little powder made of hares here is mynglid
thereto, causith ye pacie^t to make water inco^tine^t it has been prouyd.

Warm eggs applied above the yard, heal the great of blader and raynes
wonderful.

Item Filbertes sta^pt and dronke with water or wine heal the pains of the
blader and raynes.

Of ulcers or pustules in the yard.
The Causes
Sharp and bitter humors.

The signs be manifest.

Remedies. Capi. xl.
Wash thy yard often with win of the decoctyon of sage. Macer


The ashes of a dry gourd helith quickly the rotten ulcers of the yard. Dyos.


Item a fomentacion made with wine of the decoctyon of olyue leaves, is very
good.

If it be swellen about the yearde, take dry figs and flouer of wh^te Constable
myngle it with oil, and apply it to the yard.

The joyce of planten sodden and put into the holownes of the yard, heals
the ulcers thereof.

Circan.
Litarge dissoluid with oil of rosys, is very good.

Diosco.
Sethe the milk of an Ass, or of a got, with the joyce of plantyn it heals
if it be drunk, the ulcers of the raynes bladar and yard. Isac spekyth only of
the very milk.

Of them that cannot hold there water.
The Causes.
The weakness of the retractio^ and great strength of attractyon in the
reins.

The Signs.
Great thurst, and inuoluntarye making of water.

Remedies. Capi. xli.
Against this disease give y^ pacient the blader of a got or of a black sheep,
Constable.
or else of a Bull made to powder, give it him to dri^k with vyneger and water
when he goes to bed.

Give him for.iii. days at the wane of the moon, Dioscor.
ye blader of a fresh water fyshe.

The brain of an hare given in wine to drink, causes the pacyent to with
hold his vryne.

Filberdes rostyd are wholesome against the distillacion of urine.

Stamp to powder a dry blader of a sow Pygge, Galen.
give it in drink for it is very god and wholesome.

Item gallingale withholdeth the flowing of the vryne, Constable.
ingenderyd of the coldness of the reins and blader

Ite^ the blader of a bore rostyd, Plini.
restraynyth ye inco^tinency of ye urine. The ligthes of a Kid eaten and bound
under the nauyll with holdyth the distillacion of the vryne.

Of inflatyon and swellinge of the codd^s.
The Causes.
Abundance of hot or cold humors falling to the coddes.

The Signs.
Great inflatyon and swellyng^ in the coddes.

Remedies. Capi xlii.
Diosc^. Isa^^.
IF the coddes be swollen, take been flouer and temper it with the joyce of
walworte, and common oil bind it unto the coddes i^ loses the swellyng thereof
incontinent.

Of the same operacion ar the ioyces of Elder and walwort.

Goats dounge dissoluid with wine tak^th away all the swellyng of the Coddes. ^ye.


The seed and leaves of Henbane stamped Dios.
and bound to the coddes take away the pain and swellynge thee of. This cure
is wrought many ways, first let the plac^ and fundament be mollifi^d with
d^coctyon of Margeram, and aft^rwarde the things mentioned before myxte
together and made in a plaster, suppli the same till he be hole of ye swelling
Another form of plaster is this, take of Marciaton, wax, pitche, ship rosen,
and Terebentine, of Franke^sence, Mastycke, Dragons blood, bole Amonike new, of
each like qua^titi^: aft^r that let him use such a like syrup as this
following.xx. or.xl. days.

Take o^ veruen, Styche wor^e, Calament, wyld Marg^ram, Pla^tayne, Starewort,
Sc^b^o^se, and of the rote of restharowe, let the^ boil well together,
afterward ^ake Fra^kensence, Dragons blood bole Acmyny^ke, Fenegreke, of
mastycke, of ^che like much stamp them and blend them with whytes of eggs,
and put therinto a good quantity of the foresaid decoction, and give it unto
the pacient early and late, so shall he be healid.

Coluer dounge, dogs turdes, Gotes dou^ge with the joyce of walworte and
common oil, is much worth.

Of the inflatyon of the yard.
The Causes.
Uaporouse wind therein contained or ye arterys being very open.

The Signs.
Swellynge and pains in the yard.

Remedies. Capi. xliii.
Constable.
IF the yard do swell, and be grievously payned, mingle Wax and oyl^ and ye
joyce of purslande togethere, and apply it unto the yard it is a prouyd
remedy.

Put Betony sod in wine unto the yard.

Barley branne sod in wine and honey, and bound unto the yard as a plaster
takes away the ache and swellyng thereof.

Olyue leaves stamped with honey helyth the Cancer in the yard or else where, also
let the place be washed with warm vinegar and dried with a lynen cloth, sprynkle
thereon pouof gauls, do this thryse a day and it shall heal it perfitlye in
short space.

Item the joyce of water lentyls anoyntyd upon the yard, Alber^.
healythe the yard, Cods, stones, and taynes and raynes, and suppressith ye
fleshely lust.

The joyce of lenttyls laid upon ye ranker of the yard kills the same.

Against great desire to fleshly lust.
The Causes.
Use of hot meats and such as do increase much seed.

The signs need not to be declared.

Remedies. Capi. xliiii.
Macer.
HEmlockes bound to a man's stones, take utterly away all desire of copulacion.

If Opium, Henbane sede, and ma^drage be mynglid with wax and oil, in the
which they have soden, and the members therewith be anointed and a plaster
thereof being made, and bound unto the coddes, it takes away the desyer of
copulacion.

Anoynte oftentimes the members, with the joyce of Night shade Singrene, and
vyneger.

Al men and inespecially Dioscorides says that P^per, Rue, Tutsayne,
Calamint, Castoreum, waste the s^de of generacyon, (by driving it up) of there
p^opretie and strong heat.

Item let the yard be anoyntyd with oil, Co^sta^.
wherein Camfore has been resolved, and he shall have no fervent desire to it.

I a man eat the flowers of a sallow or wyllowe tree, or of a Poplet tree,
they will make cold all the heat of carnal lust in him.

Been flouer made in form of a plaster and bound unto the pryuye members of a
boy, Dioscor. Isac.
quenchith al concupiscence and sufferth not hears to grow there.

Lettys sede dryethe up the seed, and quenchith the desyer of copulacon.
Auicen.
Anonte the privy members with ^he joyce of He^bane, and the carnal
concupiscence shall be quenchid thereby.

Against an aposlem or hard swellynge in ye matrix.
The Causes.
Wythholdyng of the flowers, or pains in child birth, or of an old ulcer or
in flamacyon.

The Signs.
Sudden losyng of strength, pains in the head and neck, hardness and grefe
aboutes the share, with with holdyng of vryne.

Remedies. Cap. xlv.
THe rote of lilly sodden with common oil molletieth hardnis of the matryx and
openithe the same. Dioscor.


A fom^tatio^ of ye water wherein mallows or holy hoke have been sodden in,
takes away the hardenes of the matryx and openith the mouth thereof. Mingle
gose grese with ye joyce of lekes and anoint the neck of the matrix, it
vnbi^deth the same drawn together after ye issuing of ye flouers

Item cokle, myrhe, white franke^cence* and safron* let them all sethe
togethere in wine or water, and if a woman be anointed there with it openyth the
narrones of ye matrix, and makes her apt to conceptyon.

The rote of walwote soden, Diosco
and a fomentatyon made thereof, helpith all the hardenes and clausures of y^
matrix.

To provoke the flowers.
The Causes.
Oppilatyons in the matrix, abundance of gross blood, or after great
euacuation, or fatness in the womb.

The Signs.
Pains in the lower parts of the belie, desire to sleep in the same, the
intemperance of all the body, wytholdyng of water lack of dysgestyon and no
desire to meat.

Remedies. Capi. xlvi.
THe wine wherein wild margeram has been sod in, does provoke the flouers,
likewise the herb laid to the matrix in a plaster, or y^ suffumygacion of the
same.

A supposytory or pessarie of coton dypt in Citbyntyne, does cleanse the matrice.

The dregs of oil put into the matri^ does cleanse the same, and bring forth
a dead child.

The ro^e of madder made in a pessary has no l^sse stre^gthe. Wine of the
decoction of Calaminte or pulyoll drunk* does quickly provoke the flouers, but
mugwort is much better for the same purpose.

The rote of a Li^lye rostid under the Embres and stamped with oil, being laid
to the matrix does won^derfullye open the same, so does the sede thereof and
also b^ing forth a dead chyld^ with out p^ryl.

Purflane does vtt^rly dissolve all swellings in the matrix whether it ^e
drunk emplaster^d or the place be washyd with ye decoction there of

Sethe sage and d^inke it, either stamp it and lay to the matrix, for both
ways it provoke the flouers and after burdens.

Holworte drunk and laid to the matrix clensyth the matrix and takes away the
after burdens after child birth, nevertheless it is corysiue and therefore
perilouse.

The flouer of nigella, Romana, put to the ma^r^x with honey, draws out al
cont^nt^s with great vyolence, wherefore it is perelouse.

Let the root of g^adyt, be made like a pessarie and anoint the same with oil
debay or common ole, the^ cast thereon powder of walwort and put it into the
matrix all a night till it provoke it to blede.

It is very good to make a bath of such herbs as do provoke the flowers and to
wash the members there with, and to receive the fume thereof standing over a
close stole, such herbs be those.

Wild margeram, clamint, sauery, Mynte, Mugwort, Cynamon, Cardamomum. i.
Galingale, Cappares, the rinds of Cassia fistula, et Cassia liguea, fenell
sede, sage, pulyoll, afterward make a pessary or suppository of black helebor,
nigella, Romana Scamonie, wrappid in a lynin cloth, put that into the matrix
and without doubt it will provoke the flowers wonderfully.

A pessary of cotton dypt in oil wherein coloquintida hat ben sodde^ is very
effectuouse.

The flowers long stoppid are brought furthe with a bathe of the decoction of
ye herb called bawme.

A pessary of lynen cloth full of sod garlike heads stampyd with oil, is very
good.

Also one Cloue of pillid garlyke put into ye matrix does open ye same Bitter
Almo^des blau^chid and sta^pid put to the matrix like a pessari or other wise,
do draw forth al fylthe and corrupt humors contained in ye matrix or else where.

Cinnamon (having great virtue to provoke vr^ne) does cleanse the after burthe^s
of a woman, and yt much better if it be mynglyd with myrte. Chickwed roasted
under the embres and stampid and laid to the matryx, provoke the flowers.

There is no medicine like unto oil of lyllyes, if the members be anointyd
therwyth, it helythe all dyseases of the matrix.

Powder of scamony cast upon a pessary of the rote of malowe does bring
forth the flouers, this have I prouyd.

A bathe made of the decoctyon of Mayde^ hear and reynworte does
wounderfullye purge the matryx.

Mugworte stampid and put to y^ nauyll or the joyce thereof mynglid with myrre
and made in a p^ssarye does provoke the flowers.

Sauery drunk or emplaysterid to the matrix does cast out a dead child.

A pessarye made of Galbanum does myghtily provoke flowers.

To stop the flours
The Causes
The veins broken or opened, erosyons in the matrix or losinge of a child.

The Signs.
Change of color, swellyng in the feet and lack of appetyte.

Remedies. Capi. xlvii.
IF the Flowers will not cease in there natural time, make a pessarie of goats
dou^ge, and the joyce of shepherds purse or ribwort or Pla^tayne, and put it
into the matrix.

Yarowe stampid with the water of the decoctyon of ypoquistidos, and the
flouers of pomgranate, stops wonderfulli.

Make abath of these herbs Pla^tayne, Shepherds purse, wild Tasill, and the
middel rind of an Oak, and afterward use this pessary. Take the powder of a
hearts horn, Ipoquistidos, Acacia, bole armeniake, new plaster, wax, Talowe
of a Got, and of ye which remaynethe make a plaster to the raynes and share
and it stops Flowers on warrinsise. Likewise make a bathe of the rind of an
Oak, quicken beres or service, and plaster, this is of great efficacy.

As many graynes as a woman does drink of Coryander sede, so many days shall
the Flowers be stoppid.

Apessary or powder of ceruse or white lead minglid with powder of smallage,
does meruelousli stop the Flowers.

The joyce of Lekes stops both the flowers and after burden,

Coral drunk stops the flowers, so does the ashes of brent acornes cast
into the matrix dry and heal al fylthy and nociue hummours.

Acatia made in a pessarye is very good for the same, likewise agreat ventose
laid to the papes and kept a hole hour.

Rybwort drunk or made in a pessary stoppithe al flux of matrix and there is
no medicine comparable unto this.

The sede or rote of water lylly has a peculiar virtue.

The water found in an holowe Oak is g^od with Rain water for the same rso is
water of Pulyol drunk.

A decoctyon of Akorne shales does me^uelously enclose the matrix, and so does
a pessary of morell.

Sanct John's herb drunk, does stop utterly both whyt and Red flux
Cynabarys of some men callid dragons blood has a maruelouse strength to stop
the matrix.

For the mother.
The Causes.
Much a bundance of humors with stopping of the flowers, or the co^tencyon and
putrefaction of sede in the matrix, or great cold in the time of the flowers.

The Signs.
Sadness, pal^ color sluggishnesse, weakn^sse in the legs, and in the
fytte, desyer to sleep, dotage, losing of all the senses and voice, with
crampes in the legg^s.

Remedies. Capi. xlviii.
IF a woman be greuid with the mother* sta^pe netle leaves and put the^ to ye
matrix, and let her also drink parsnepsede with wine for it is very good and
losith the suffocations and cleanses the sede contenid in the matrix.

A pessary of oil of bitter almondes, does assuage the grefe utterly.

This is a principal medicine, let the woman smell to enphorbiu^ that she may
nese or blow it to her nosthrilles then shall she drink Castoreum cloves and
assofetida.

Also louage, Isope, wormewode and Fern leaves, sod and made in a plaster and
laid from the nauyl to the share do wounderfullye help the mother.

Sethe wormewod and Fern or either by it self and stamp them for a plaster
thereof does break the pains of the mother.

A lynen cloth sod in the lie of the ashes of colewortes does take away the
ventositie of the matrix.

Triakle cloves and garlic dyssoluyd in strong hot wine, is present
medicine for the Mother, this have I prouyd.

Likewise does a great ventose with much fire upon the share: also let her
receive stynkyng and filthy sauoures at her mouth and a suffumigacion or
diverse sweet and odoriserous things beneth.

Rue sod and stamped in oil with hens grese and gose grese hot laid betwyxte
the nauyl and the share, is an excellent medycyne.

Nettle sede drunk in wine does a swage all pains in the matrix, and take
away the ventositi thereof.

A suffumigacion of myrhe does open the Matrix being inclosyd: so does the
fume of Terebentine receiuid by the mouth.

Make a pessary of minte, calamint Sauery, hilwort and musk with castoreum put
this into the matrix, and let her smell assafetida, and rue this have I prouyd
to be wounderfull god.

Also Rue sod in water and put into the matrix asswagith the pains even so
does the suffumygacyon of galbanum.

Rain water minglyd with strong vinegar and spout^d into the nosethrilles
does soddenly drive down the mother, and like virtue have.xv graynes of Peonye
drunk with wine.

To help conceptyon.
The Causes.
Immoderate heat or coldness in matrix or much fatness^, with diverse other.

The signs be plain.

Remedies. Capi. xlix.
THe suffumigacion of cocle and frankense^ce is very good therefore. An
implayster of laudanu^ laid to the matrix or the same sufumygated does dispose
the matri^ to conceive if the let come of cold.

A pessary or suff^migacion of nep does dry and heal the moist and cold
matrix, but chefly a pessari made of Theodorico^ and scammony and put into ye
matrix: after the natural stoppyng of the flowers if she use ye company of a
man it will make a barra^ woman conceive.

Herb Bawme suffumygatyd does wounderfully comfort the matrix.

Let a woman eat the mat^ix or Rennet of an Hare and she shall conceive.

This is a present medicine take y^ dounge of an Hare and the Rennet thereof and
mingle them with honey, and afterward make powder t^erof and let the woman
drink ye same three days and three nigthes with ye shauynges of Iuory, and
wytho^t doubt she shall conceue.

The powder of the stones of a bore made in powder and dronk^ does maruelously
help conception, likewise does a bathe made of the decoctyon of rosemary, and
of more efficaci is garlyke sod in oil of Roses and woll made in a pessary,
this is a present medicine.

If a woman do use to anoint her members with this oil she shall conceive
without fail, take of dates a pound, of Fistikes a pound, of Nutmigges, and
Cinamoum Ana i. of long Peper, of nuttes of Egypt ana i. of gauls. ii, of
Gynger. i. of Sugar a pound and mingle the^ with honey and make anointment
thereof.

Also let an egg shell be filled with. i of greek pitche. ii. of Castoreum and
bind it upon the nauill for it is very good, so is the suffumigacion of Aloes.

Here follows a pessary of great virtue and efficacy for y^ after burdens
and al pains in the matrix, and beside this does meruelously help co^ceptyon,
take ye brains of a heart or calfe of grene Ysope, and butter of gotes milk or
cowes milk almondes, storax claryfyed honey of every of them. i. of oil of
spike..ii. then stamp those which be to be stampid and melt the rest
afterward mingle them together and with wol make a pessarye thereof and if the
woman use it three days and there upon use the company of man although she has been barraine of long time yet she shall conceive.

Also this has been often prouid very good for the purpose take comfery, the
rynde Pomgranattes, the skin of a medler, the rynd of an ^ke the leaves of
sweet breare ana. i of nut curneles cloves and nutmigges ana. i. make powder of
al these and of the same with rose water make little balls and dry them in the
shadow, and when you be dysposyd to use them dissoluyd one in rose water and
with the same bath the matrix, and you shall conceive without doubt.

Of the swellyng in the pappes.
The Causes.
Much abundance of hot blood, or the milk therein contained waxed hard like to
chese.

The Signs.
Great pains and swellyng in the Pappes.

Remedies. Cap. l.
IF the tetes be swolle^ up through superfluity of milk, first of all put it
back with potters clay and vinegar or else with a bean broken and stamped and
minglyd with the white of an egg or which lentils sod in veniger apply it unto
the tetes in all increase of the same, and with oil of rosys it takes away al
swellyng and hardenes of the tetes.

Bind unto the breast cromes of bread myxt with ye joyce of smallag^. Constable.


The rote of Colewortes, myn^es, been flouer all and every of these love and
dry up the milk.

If there be any holowe ulcer or ca^kar in the breast, got^s dounge tempered
with honey kills the same, and takes away al fylthe.

If the head of the tete be anoyntyd with bawme, it takes away the pain
thereof.

Item the orure of a man burnt and applied unto the tetes, helyth the ca^kernes
and mueterate vlce^s.

The leaves of an olyue tree stamped kill the Canker and worm in the breast.

Against the swellyng of the tetes apply malloes sta^pt and made hot with
common oil and bind them to the same. Diosco


Henbane sede stamped and put in Macer.
wine and applied to the Tetes takethe away the pain thereof and of the kyrnels
also.

Dioscor.
Gotes dounge minglid with veniger and branne and applied for a plaster, losith
wounderfully al swellyng of the breasts.

Co^^ta^.
Ashes made of a dogs head sparsyd upon y^ holownes of the breast, that is
ingenderyd of a kankar kills and brekith away al filthe thereof: Coluer dounge
with honye and wax is much worth and of great efficacy hereto.

Knot grass being carried about the person takes away the swelling of the
Tetes incontinent.

The grese or fat of a Hedghogge anointed upon the Pappes, sletthe the milk
therein by opening of y^ pores and losyng thereof.

Mouse turdes anoyntyd upon the breasts with water losyth the hardness pain and
swellyng thereof.

Brimstone stampte with wine and plasterid over the Tetes, Isac.
brekith the hardness of the same.

The shells of partrigis eggs sta^pt and minglid with wax and Terra Sigillata*
do heal the tetes being ready to fall of with ache.

Against the pains in child birth.
The Causes.
The faintness or gross fatnes or weakness of the woman, or the innaturall
coming furthe of the child.

The signs be known by ye woman's telling.

Remedies. Capi. li.
Against dangerous child birth many say that the scrapinges of Dates stones
given with ^yne does wonderfully ease women ^f there trauaylinges in child
birth. Dippe a lynnen clothe in the joyce Isac.
of slone Perstie or of Common persty and put the same into the mouth of the
matrix, and it shall cause ye dead chyldes delyu^rance and the after burdens
also, and the same being drunk in any kind of drink clensyth the matrix and
the child of all gross humors.

Oak fern stamped and plasteryd upon the feet of the traualinge woman, causes
the child birth either a live or dead.

If a woman drink maiden hear in wine, Aui^en.
it causes spedy deliverance.

Item drink made of Castoreum is very good in such causes.

Peter. Lu.
Also if the priuityes of a woman be anoynt^d with y^ ashes of an asses houfe,
it is a very good and easy remedy.

Also give unto a woman in th^s case an other womans milk to dri^k it causes
spedy delyuerance.

Gilbert,
Stamp^ Ueruen and give it to a traualinge woman to drink with water it causes
delyuerance also.

Item myrhe given to drink in warm wine the quantyty of a big nut, causes
deliverance of ye child either quick or dead.

Dragance bound to the priuities of a woman in labor, causes her to be
delivered incontinent but there must head be taken that it be quickly removed,
least it draw forth the matrix with all.

Sethe Mugwort in water and plaster it hot upon the nauyl and thighs of a
woman laboring with child, Rogeriu^
it causes both child birth and y^ after burden also, if it tarry long there it
will cause the mat^r to follow upon

The joyce of Lekes has a mighty operacion in this case, if it be dronke with
warm water.

The joyce of Figs or powder of Dyttanye given to a woman that laboring in
child has the Ague, with water, if she have not the Ague, with wine, it
causes ye dead child in her womb to issue forth. A horse curde drunk and
suffumygated causes delyuerance, as well of the secondines as of the child.

Kye.
Item take pyony sede, when it is black, stamp it and blend it with oil and
anoint the loins and priuyties of a woman traualinge with child, it makes
delyuerance of the child in her womb without pain

A suffumigacion made of the horns and houfes of Goats moves myghtily the
matrix to deliverance.

Dios.
Take of Betony sodden with water and honey i. it hasteneth the delyuerance, and
delyueryth y^ laboring woman out of her danger, but in any case beware that
there be no peers in the house wherein the woman traualeth for they are very
hurtful and do not suffer the matrix easylye to open.

If the woman cannot easylye be ryd of the after burden, take borage and leke
blades, and the ioice of parsl^ ro^^s give the same with oil and it shall be
delivered incontinent.

The leaves of Iunip^r drunk with water and honey causes the delyuerance of
the child and of the secondynes, Co^stan.
and after burden.

Dissolve a swalowes n^st with water, strain it and drink it, it causes the
birth of the child to be very easy.

The pains after child birth.
The Causes.
Cold takyn in the berynge of the child, with diverse other.

The signs be manifest.

Remedies. Capi. lii.
FOr ye pain after child birth, take y^ yolks of eggs mightyly sodde^ in
water, break the^ to pieces and mingle them with suet and the joyce of mugwort and
Cumyn and make a plaster thereof.

Sethe onyons in water and after stamp them with oil and Cumin and yolks of
eggs, it is very good applied in like form as the other.

Sethe in wine or water the rotes of maryshe mallowe and walworte and stamp
them well and mingle them with Common oil warm, and a make a plaster.

Diosco
Let Baye berys being beten to powder, be put upon hot Coals, and let the
woman receive up the fume thereof, closely, it helpith much the pain of the
matrix, and concepcio^, and wastethe the superfluytyes of the Matrix, also it
causethe delyuerance.

For the Gout.
The Causes.
Much surfettinge and dronkenesse, to much accompaingin with women, imoderat
excercice, long sta^dynge, and such like,

The Signs.
Great pains and swellinge in the joints chyeflye in spryngtyme and heruest.

Remedies. Capi. liii.
THe iointe sickness is thus deuidid, into sciatica, which is in ye huckle bone.
Podagra, ye gou^ of the legs and feet, and Chiragra, the gout of the
fingers and Arthritica which is in every other part of the body.

Town cresses stamped and made in a plaster with suete, takes away the ioynte
sycknes long hanging upon a man before, if it be vsyd.

Asphaltuum made in a plaster with Dioscor.
salt Peter heleth the ioynte sickness and the gout.

Isac.
Water of the decoctyon of rape, through the working thereof, helith the pain
of the Iointe sycknes and gout of his own property.

Dioscor.
Cost or detin plasterid upon the gout, and disese called sciatica, healyth the
same, by drawing out the humors from the bottom: and after the same sort it
is good for them yt have the palsy, and ioynte syckn^s.

The root of holy hoke or marishe mallowe, stamped and myxte with y^ grease of
an old hog, healith the gout within three days.

Playntayne leaves plasteryd with fresh grease, is a good r^medye to take away
the pain and swellyng of the gout. The sede thereof also used in plaster is a
great help against the gout.

Mace^
The leaves of Cresses myxth with branne and vinegar and emplasteryd upon y^ grefe
ar of much effect.

Ite^ take musterd sede a little bread dry Fygges, honey and as much vinegar as
you will, put them all to gether, and bind it to the grefe.

Take the flesh of a fat Cat, the grease of a Gose, Gilbert.
of a graye and of a Fox, and the mary of a hearts horn Iuy* Sage, Rue*
Uyrgius Wax, Frankensence, the yolks of rostyd eggs, Snayles, put them all
in an earthen pot that has a hole made in the botome for the nones, and let
it be close above with paste that no air may issewe forth at al and put under
the same pot, another whole pot and close the^ together and put the nethermost
in ground. and as it were burye it in earth, and compass it about with fyere
above, and there will distill a wonderful good oyntme^t out of the upper most
pot which wylbe good for the cold gout.

Against the cold swellynge Gout, take stale grese, and the whites of eggs,
beat them togethere a good while and mingle together brimstone, the rote of
red Dockes, quick silver without any fire, use the same plastered upon some
lether, early and late let it be renewed, it shall cause it to ytche greatly,
but yet doubt nothing of it, for it will heal the.

Also this plaster folowinge has been proved of this Gylbert and is an
wounderfull inuencion. Take of ye bare earth of Emetes. iiii. of barley branne
* i. of Rose. and a half, of been flower. and a half malowes ma^drage ana vi.
sethe the mallows and mandrage in three pound of water unto half, and make
therwyth the other medycines beaten to powder in a mortare, and myngle therwyth
Wax* and yolks of eggs, of Safron. iii. kneade them all well together and it
shall need none other plaster or medicine.

An other plaster which is to be used when the grefe is most vehement. Take
of honi comb. i. and of the milk of Barlye styepen in Rose water and Rain
water minglid together. i. and a half, mingle them together in a mortare, and
blyende them well with the white of an egg, make a cerupe, and apply it, is
very good.

Item sethe six Backs or Reremyse in Rain water, and afterward streyne it,
and put thereto of oil of Roses, and bows of Wyllowes, and sethe them unto the
consumpcyon of the Oil, it is much worth both in a hot and cold cause, for it
has an unknown virtue.

Sshippe Pitche and salt Ammoniake mixte together is a syngular help for them
which have the Crampe. Diosco.


Item Betony stampte and plastered upon the grefe of the gout, eases the
same, and the decoctyon thereof being drunk does the same son^r.

Woman's flowers anoyntyd upon the grefe of the gout takes away the pain.

Item a bathe made of decoction of flewort takes away al gout.

Time stampte with the white of an egg and applied for a plaster is a good and
helthful medicine for ye ioynte sycknes, and especially the sciatica.

Take Bay berys and the leaves of Rue, Time, Organe, Pennyrial, old soap,
myngle them together and frye them and apply them upon the hot gout, with
towe, the place being first annoyntyd with honye it takes away the gout and al
other grefes.

This is a precyouse ointment against al gout and ioynte syknes, take the three
sorts of Snayles gathered in may, and put them in a frying pan, use it for
an oyntme^t

This following is approu^d remedy, in all cases, without purgacion, anoint
the place with y^ joyce of Galyngale and of artychokes, or lay a spou^ge upon
the grefe dipped in warm wine of the d^coction of comin, it will draw out the
hurtful humores* it has been prouyd.

Hares dounge discomperd with warm wine and plastered heleth utterly those yt
have the sciatica, Kye.
though they be past hope.

Anoynme^t made of hearts horn is good for the same disease also.

This is a most assurid ointment against al old goutes and io^nt sickness and
against the pal^ye. Gilbert
Take Fox flesh and sethe it in good wine till it faule from the bones,
afterward stamp the flesh myghtylye, being hot and wringe out ye joyce
thereof and sethe the same joyce till it be as thick as an oyntmen, afterward
put a little red wax thereunto and little of powder of Masticke of Castoreum,
bdelii, myrre Bayberis a quantity of euforbium and a little of musk, and let
them be incorporatyd all together as anoyntment.

Another most certain approuyd ointment. Take a byge root of Bryonye, and
make it hollow and put into the holownes thereof ye joyce of Hellebor,
Calamint, Time, or Rue, unto two hollow parts and let the third part remain
emptye, and put the pouders therein mencyoned in the formare oynteme^t, Pyretory
the root of Ge^tian, and hermodactilys, and put thereto Petroleum or sum old
oil and Wax, and let it be stopped with Potters claye or paste, and let it be
put in the embr^s there let it boil a good while and afterward stamp it and
wrynge out the joyce, use for anoyntment.

Another ointment of efficacye, thereunto, take the joyce of a wild Cucummer
rote, grene Grapes, parritorye, the leaves and beryes of Iuye, Juniper berys,
euforbium, Castor^u^, the fat of a Gripe, of a gose, of a Heron, of a Fox, and
of a bear then take a fat Cat and pull of the skin and fill her with all
these foresaid things, and let it roast well upon a spyt against the fire and
let the drippyng that comes of her be kept and resolve a little Wax therein,
and annoynte the grefe therewyth.

Item kyl a whelpe of.xxx. days old and anoint the payneful grefe with the
blood of the said welpe, it is very good.

Item sethe the flesh of the said whelpe in wine, with Rue Betany Fenigreke,
Egrymony, and Sage, afterward stamp them al to gether and put to a little mary
of a Hearts bone, and a few ashes sethe it in manner of anoyntment, and anoint
the place, it is very good.

In a great and extreme pain of the joint sycknes, take a whelpe of the age
aforesaid and roast him, and cut him in the mids alongyst the back, and
apply it hot it is very good and much worth.

Constable.
Item seth Rue and Sage in oil together and being hot stamped, apply it to
the grefe, it will alay the pain incontinent.

Boil the joyce of Henbane in ye grese of hog, Constable.
and put thereunto a little wax and anoint the grefe therewith: ye herb it self
also sod in wine and bound unto the grefe appesith it immediately.

A plaster made of the rote of walwort and Hermodactiles stampte with Hogs
grese, and bound unto the cold gout, helps the same.

A plaster made of Ox, and hogs dounge sodden in veniger, and Ravens grese,
cattes grese, or Hearons grese, is very good against an immoderate pain. Make
to powder i. of Opiu^ minglid with Saffro^ and yolks of Eggs, and oil of
Rosys, this myghtylye asswagithe and restraneth the matter.

Item take Emetes and the eggs of them, and a little of ye earth wherein they
did a bide, and common salt, mengle them with the grese of an old Hog, and
being put betwyne a clothe of lynnen apply it unto the grefe.

Misselto boylid in water and the grefe being bathid with the said water has
great help thereby.

Item ashes of burnt Time myngled with the white of egg and plasterid upon the
place, brekith gout and draws out the hurtfulnes.

A bathe wherein emetes and there eggs being stampte have been sodden, does
quyckly heal an old and almost incurable joint syknes.

Gotes dounge takith away the hardenes and swellyng of ye joints. A^i^^n.


Grene Rue plasterid with salt and Honye takethe away the pain

This confectyon is most proper and certain medycine for those that have the
ioynte sycknes.

Constable.
Take of Sauayne. ii. of Peper, of Iuy, and Rue leaves, Ana. vi. of Germander.
ii. give the sam to the pacyent with wine.

Item boil Mules pysse with wax* oil, and litarge, make a plaster thereof and
it will remedy.

If the grefe be myxte with swelling, take of beans. iiii.v. yolks of Eggs,
blend them togethere, and plaster them upon the grefe.

Item Baye leaves sodde in water and myxte with water of Purseland, if the
grefe be washed there with it much helpythe.

Take of Lions grese, ii, pound of Wax, a pound, of Masticke, oil iiii. it
utterly takes away al grefe of the joints.

Item anoyntement of a Catte helythe the pacyent in one day, if it be made
after this fashyon, it is very good.

Take a fat slayde Catte her bones being pullyd from the flesh, stamp it
myghtylye and put it in the belly of a fat Gose, and put salt grese thereunto
with Peper, and musterdsede, of Dragons, of Pellytorye, of warmewoode, Garlic
and beres suet, Ana. i. of wax. ii. roast it and keep the drippynge.

Myngle the ashes of colewortes burnt with fresh hogs grese anoynte the
Gout there with, Galen
it will heal it in three days.

Gilbe^
The dounge of a storke mixed with hogs greece, helith alonge contynuyd Gout.

Temper persly and oil of Rosys with woman's milk, and anoynte the grefe
therwyth.

This potion folowinge is wounderful good for the gout and joint sickness take
of hermodactill. iiii. of Cummin and Ginger ana i* give thereof at once unto ye
pacie^t. ii.

Hermodactil made in a plaster with veniger is very good.

Peper plasterid upon the grefe warmeth the Joints and sinowes so that there is
no medicine like unto it.

Flebothomy or the cuttinge of a vain next the gretest joint, Galen.
is very good.

The rote of wyld Mallowe sta^ped with stale grese, and plasterid helith the
gout in three days.

Take of Armoniacke and pitche like quantytie, Dios^^*
mingle it and make it in a plaster it is a singular medicyne for the gout,

Oil sod in water and honye plasteryd with cokle (after that the pacie^t has
bathid the grefe with water) healith the disease.

Take a good deal of wormewode of the rotes of Walworte, of whete branne, of
dunge and salt, let them sethe together in vyneger till the Uineger be
co^sumyd, afterward stamp it and apply it hot.

Rattes turdes stamped and minglyd with old grese losyth all swellynges of a
cold cause.

Item coluer dounge sodden in wine, till the wine be consumyd and plasteryd,
helyth the gout.

Take half a pound of Wax, of oil olyue.v pound. of good wine a pound, let
them sethe together till the wine be consumyd, afterward mynge thereto. ii. of
Euphorbium made to powder, make an ointment thereof it has been prouyd in y^
gout and ioynte sycknes.

Take a drame of y^ joyce of popler rind, drink it, for it is very good.

Sethe a dead Wesyll till the flesh faul from the bones, strain it with
oil, and mingle wax thereunto and anoynte the ioynte grefe therwyth, and the
great ^wyn^ pokes, it mightyly heals all corrupcion of the sinowes and
Joints.

Sethe nettels that grow in hot and dry ground in lie made of the ashes of a
Uine, and with the same lie b^inge hot wash the grefe and plaster the nettels
upon it, it is very good in all aches of the gout.

Sethe salt and syfted Whete branne* honey, and red wine till they be thycke,
and so apply it unto the grefe.

Be sure of this one thing that in some cause medicines yt are made (except
they be purging, or breking or at the lest except some sufficient euacuacio^
of ye matter go before) do not greatly h^lpe, therefore let the hot humor be
purgyd with an electuary made of the joyce of rosys.

Let those pacientes be well ordered and warely and let the matter be by little,
and little purged, that the nouryshynge virtue be not dystroyd, for in Pills,
many things are received that draw with vyolence, as euphorbium,
harmodactill, Colloquiti^a, Turbith, scamony, which all are as it were poison,
and therefore indiscreetly mynystred causes faintness through the debilitie of
vital sperites, in that nature cannot with stand the mattre, and such things
are never mynystred except they have stand setteled a good while after
commixtion, and full ordrynge, so that the strength and violent operacion of
them is mynyshed, by long taryaunce and setlynge. And yet is not their whole
virtue distroyd, but their operacio^ is better and helth^uller.

Co^stan.
Item wild myntes yt grow in holes, made in an ointment delyuerithe him yt
has the Sciatica and gout of his grefe, by heating and drawinge furthe the
matter.

Gilber^
If the grefe be two out ragyous take of Opium. i. of Saffron. iii. mingle them
with.iiii. yolks of Eggs, or.v. and plaster the same upon the grefe, for it
myghtyly ass wagythe the pains and restrayneth the corruptyon.

Item Gotes dounge sodden with cattes grese, or the fat of a raven or vulture,
is much worth in this case

The dounge of a storke myxte with hogs suet, is very good also.

Above and more force then all things else is to keep the belly lowse at al
times.

The joyce of sallowe or willowe rote myxt with oil of rosys is wounderful good
for the hot gout. Galen.


Against the chopping or ruptures.
The Causes
Much going in cold wyndes and dryness.

The signs need no declaracyo^.

Remedies. Capi. liiii.
HEmlocke leaves stamped and oryed and so made in a plaster, heal all ruptures
or choppynges within.ix or.x. days.

English Galangale healethe the choppynges and deep wounds.

Lyuerworte stampte and drunk with wine, every day is helthfull and good.

Young Hares dressed and orderid with honey in manner of Pylles, and so ministrid,
do close up and make hole choppes and ruptu^es.

Item hares dounge myxt with Honey and given often unto the pacyent to drink,
in the bigness of a bean closes up the ruptures mightylye.

Let the head of a got be sodden hear and al, y^ in water of a gourd, and
eat the meat thereof, or drink the water, it makes all the inward parts of
a man hole and sound.

Of the Agew called ephimera which endures but one day.
The Causes.
The vital spirits in a wonderful unnatural heat without putretactyon,
which comes of much watching, sadness, anger, ho^ger, or dronkenesse.

The Signs.
Great heat in the body with a fever and ending in a sweat or vapor.

Remedies. Capi. lv.
First make a syrup of the decoction of saunders, and the flowers of water
Lylyes, then let the pacyent avoid and eschew all things that burn the
heart* and all that are gross and hot, and if ye vital spirits be in flamid
cheflye above all things bring the pacient in a soft sleep, and let him
smell to Camfore with rose water, and violettes and such like, and minister
things that cause coldn^s and comfort the heart, as Margarites, and sanders,
and the scrapynge of Iuorye, or let him be anoyntid with oil of Rosis and
Nenufar, upon the breast and plasture thereon cold things te^perid with Uenyger,
and it is very good against the heat: if ye natural spirits be inflamid, take
cold syrops and electuaryes that cause coldness, as are sugar, Rosys, and
Uiolettes and plaster the rosys and sau^ders upon the liver, but if it be of a
cold cause beware of letting of blood, to engender more cold the^by and
specially if it be with a rewme.

Give unto the pacyent rose water newlye made myxt with sugar or violettes, and
let him smell to basyl, yet let him not smell to other sweet sauoures, yt be
hot, and in a hot rewmatike cause, let him use a cold fomentatyon and
ointment, but chefelye if it come of over much labor, or copulacion or heat
of ye air and such like, let the holownes of the hands and the souls of the
fete be anoyntid with oil of Uyolettes rosys woman's milk, also anoynte the
back bone, the forehead and temples with oil of rosys, Populion, woman's milk
that gives a woman child suck, and let his meat and drink be of light
dygestyon, and cold, but if it be of over much labor or of over much emptines
he must be nouryshed with resumptiues and confortatyues, if he cannot sweet,
this will heat him incontine^t and mynister occasion unto the pacient to sweet.

Let the leaves of Sallowe tree and Holyhoke, Uiolettes and rosis, and such
like boil together in water, wherein put a great clothe, and let ye pacyent be
wrappyd in the same being warm and coueryd therwyth till he sweet, and
afterward let him wash his feet arms legs in the same decoctyon.

Item the joyce of Cucumers with oil of rosys anoyntid upon ye pulsys and upon
the heart, Dyosco.
asswagethe the heat of the Ague.

Platearius had a certain pacie^t destytute of strength, and put him in a
bathe of water, wherein sodden Eggs were resoluid and after the bathing he
departed strong.

Put a grene Gourde in paste, and bake it in an oven, and afterwrynge out the
joyce and put it into a pot and sethe therein Hens flesh or of some other bird
(first well washte with wine and salt) and a few graynes of whete and Barlye
Lycorice, gume, of Arabike, drago^s Rosys, flowers of water Lylys, fleworte,
Almondes, of the gume of ye Almound tree, Basil* Reasons, myrabolans, Sebesten
sede, the seeds of a gourd, Mellon and Cucumer being al clean dressed put the^ in
a pot well closyd with claye, and let them boil till the third part be washid
afterward strain it and put sugar to the strayner and make a syrup thereof
and give it unto the pacient, it restores very well, and temperatelye colythe
and helthfullye comfortithe fayntinge persons.

Of a contynual Agew.
The Causes.
Abundance of putrefyed humors contained within the veins.

The Signs.
Contynuall heat and pains unto the end of the Fever,

Remedies. Capi. lvi.
TO mytigate the over much heat in a continual Agew, Macer.
sethe Coleworte leaves with oil of Rosys, and plaster it upon the stomach.

The same thing may be done of Willow leaves, Morel and flewort

A certain curious practicionar showed me for a certaynte, ye Pympernell
drunk with warm water, takes away the contynual Fever.

Put the sede of Flewort hole in water all a night, Auycen
then let it be strayned and put thereto Sugar, and give it unto the pacient it
colethe, and intolerable heat of sharp agewes.

Syrup of nenufur does mightily heal sharp Agewes. (...)


Galen.
Item if the Agewe be not very sharp, let the pacyent drink cold wine myxt
with water it openythe the stoppynges within, and bringithe forth corruptyon
through ye urine and confortith weak members.

Diosco* says that if the pacient drink a great deal of cold water the
intolerable heat wylbe extynguyshed thereby.

In this cause apples that are called bitter swetes are very good.

Of the tertian Fever.
The Causes.
Much choleric humor putrefyeng in the sensible parts of the body.

The Signs.
To have a fyt every other day and not to endure above.xii. hours.

Remedies. Capi. lvii.
IF it be the right Tertian give unto the pacyent to drink, ye joyce of
Dendelyon before coming of the fit.iii. or.iiii. times and the Agewe shall go
from him this am I sure of.

The matter being digestyd cause thy self to be let blood in the fourth or fyft
hours before the coming of the fit, and if it so be there go before any tokens
of digestio^, he shall have the Agewe no more.

The matter being digestid make a plaster upon the pulses of ye arms of the
lesser nettel that grows in a very dry and warm place stamped with much
salt, for shortly after the Fever shall cease.

Myngle Radyshe rote being stamped, with Wheat branne, and make a plaster*
apply it between the nauyl and the share that the matter being first digestid
he should not perceue the pain and wringinges this remedy has been prouyd
against al kind of Tertian fevers.

The joyce of Ribwort given before the fyt do com, takith away ye same.

Of the same operacion are.iii. pla^tayn rotes stamped and drunk with water
before the fyt come. Diosco,


Three graynes of Coryander put in a rere egg and given to the pacyent to sup
of after the.iii. or.iiii. fyt will deliver him of the Agew.

The joyce of sower grapes vsid.ii days in the morning, takes away the
Tertian Fever.

To take away al tertia^ fevers* take mellilot. Cellydone, white and black
Pepper, netels, and salt Peter w^l bound unto the pulsis of the arms this was
tried by a practionar.

The joyce of pympernell drunk as the fit comith does vtterli take it away.

Of the same operacion is cychory, the same thing workithe the joyce of
Parselly drunk after ye sam^ fashyon.

Item stamped Ueruen leaves and iii. rotes thereof dissoluyd in water, take it
before the fyt come, and it will drive it away.

Take vine leaves and put them in wine, Dios^
and give the same wine.ii. or iii. times to drink, and it will rid him of the
tertian or quartan Fever.

Rewponticke is a singular remedy against Fevers.

Take, iii. slyppes of, iii. leuyd grase stamped it and put the joyce in water
and drink the same water, it is very good for the Fever.

Take Rye branne, the joyce of Ueruen, Syngrene, Peter. Lu
Nettelles and Plantayne, myngle them together with.iiii. Eggs and plaster it
over the bellye before the coming of the fyt,

The joyce of mollen put into the nosthrils of the pacient in the coming of
the ^yt, takes away the disease.

Gilber
The powder of Crystal given in wine and Dendelyon, before the coming of the
Agewe, takith away the fyt thereof.

The powder of Crystal given to drink to a nurse, takes away ye Agewe from
the children that she gives suck unto.

Item the lyquor that comes from the sodden lyghtes of a Ra^me, healyth the
tertian fever, and ye disease of the raynes.

Garlyke bound to the outward members of a man, takes away ye quodyane and
tertian Fever, but it must be applied as I understand before the fyt come, for
by that means the matter is drawn to the extremities, that is to say to the
hands and fete so that ye principal members are helped.

Of the Quotidian Fever.
The Causes.
Putrefyed phlegm driven by nature to all the sensible parts of the body.

The Signs.
To have a fyt every day about xviii, hours long.

Remedies. Capi. lviii.
IF thou wylt spedylye heal the quotidian Fever, Macer
take these approved medicines, give to pacyent. ii. of Betonye. i. of
Plantayne, with the straynynge of them, before the coming of the fyt, and the
pacyent shall be hole thereby.

Give unto the paci^nt this syrup, take the leaves of Betonye, the rotes of
Persly, of Fenell, of Filipendula, of Maiden hear, of Hearts tongue, of the
middel rind of an elder, Ana. M.i. of Agaryke. i. of oak fern. ii. of wild
Time. i. and much honey as discrecyon will give to be sufficient, it is of much
and great efficacy.

Item stamp crummes of bread and gall, of each like quantytye mingle it with a
soft roasted egg, and oil of Bays or oil of Cipresse and wete a clothe
therein and apply it over the stomach and bellye, it has been prouid to be
very good.

Provoke vomit unto the pacient with an electuary of cassia, and a little
Cinamound with the decoctyon of wild cucummer rote: and radyshe rote and
vinegar made in a sirupe with honye is very good.

Take the rote of Galingale and the seeds of Radishe, and the sede of Orenche,
the rote of black hellebor and as much Honye and Uineger as shall be thought
sufficient mengle them together and let them seth to half, and let the pacyent
dry^ke thereof.ii. hours before the fyt comethe, and afterward let him eat
nothing in five hours, or at lest in a good space after.

Item give unto the pacient before the fyt come upon two pennye w^ightes of bay
beris made to powder with a soft Egg, or pults and with out doubt the pncyent
shall be made hole.

Mustard eaten before the coming of the fyt expellith ye cold and Fevers yt
come by course as in quotidia^s and Quartaynes. Mac^^.


Item Isope given with water and h^ny purges slymy humors.

After purgacyon of the hole body apply unto the veins of both the Arms, this
plaster following. Take four leaves of Nettelles, Galen.
of Morel and of Sengrene Ana. m.i. of Cobwebes. ii. as much Common Sa^te as
shall be thought suffycient stamp them all together and make a plaster.

One says in his book of practyses that he has helid many of the Quotydyan
Fever, with ye middell rynd of an elder given with warm water, or with the
rind of a nut tree give after the same manner, and with.ix grains of leasse
spurge or of Pioni but these things ar to be ministrid unto strong men and
laboriouse.

Give unto the pacyent, woman's milk yt gives aman child suck, Petrus.
with water, either before the fyt or in the fyt it shall so heal him.

Take.ix. rotes of waulwort, of ye bignese of a man's finger, cut them in pieces
and stamp them and strain them with Ale or with white wine, and give thereof
unto the pacyent before ye hour of his fit, and let him not sleep in any case.

The liver of a Hare dried and given to drink with water, takethe away the
Fener.

Take of agarycke. i. give it unto the pacient to drink with wine and honey, it
takes away all fevers Quo^idians, tertians, and quartaynes, through purginge
slimy and corruptiue humors.

Take wine and myngle it with asses blood, Estula.
drink the same for it healith the quotidian Fever.

Of a Quartane Fever.
The Causes.
Melancholy putrefyed having recourse to diverse parts of man.

The Signs.
To have two good days and the thryd a sore fyt.

Remedies. Capi. lix.
TO take away the quartane Agewe give unto the pacie^t three or four pills as
follow, take of opium, of brimstone, myrhe Agaricke, Rue leaves, cassia
Fistula, Ana. i. mingle them with the joyce of Wormewoode, and make pylles in
the bigness of a bean, give unto the pacyent before the fyt do come on him.

Item Trochiskes are of certain prouyd where with many have been healyd of the
Agewe at once drynckynge, but they are best in quotydyan Fevers. Take of Rue, of
alu^, Myrhe, Opiu^, ana.. and a half of safron. ii. cassia fistula. ii. of
quick Brymstone. ii. of Henbane..vi. make Trochiskes and give the^ with water.

Also Beres flesh eaten heals the Quartayne Fever.

Item strong wine wherein Egrimonye has been sodden heals the quartayne Fever.

Make a hole in a bean and put therinto the small stynkynge worms that bread
in paper or wod called Cimices, they take away ye fever

Item cynksoyle stampte with a little Peper and drunk before ye fit come, is
good against ye quartayne.

The joyce of Mollen drunk before the fyt, sleeth the same.

Item yarow given to drink before ye fit comes with wine, takes a way the
quartayne.

Item the joyce of Camomill being drunk before the fyt, takyth a way the
Fever.

Take Assa fetida, Rue leaves* peper ana. ii. mingle them with honye give them
unto the pacient.ii. hours before the coming of the fyt as bygge as a Chest
nut, it has been prouyd.

A swallows donge drunk takes away the Fever Quartayne.

The joyce of horse houfe drunk and vsyd.x. days takyth a way both the
Tertian and quartayne fever, The joyce of mugworte myxt with oil and given
unto the pacie^t warm iii. days, takes away the fever.

Take of dragons blood and wild Time of each in like quantity, as much as
shall suffice sethe them in water til it be thycke, and afterward mingle, there
unto of the stone called Lazulus. ii. give unto the pacient thereof the space
of.iii. days one. ad^ye* the first day it takes away yt the rigorousnes the
second the fit the third day it heals all together perfitly, this same has been prouid

Item Briony stamped and plastesteryd unto the pulses of the temples and arms
before the fyt com, takes away the quartayne agewe.

Circan
Item Assafetida sodden in wine put it in a holowe rote of soubread and put
therinto sugar given unto ye pacient before the fyt (and a purgacion ministered
before it), it helith.

Give unto the pacyent to drink before his fit the seeds of Henbane. Mandrage,
ana. ii. Assafetida. i and a half, and it will heal him.

Let the pacient fast all a hole day before his fit come on him, and let him
watch all the night after, in ye morning roast him a Partriche and let him eat
thereof, and let him drink good wine and strong, and let him eat no other
thing al y^ day, and afterward let him sleep his fyl.

This same also is named to be a helthful medycine, Azarabacca if it be fresh
gathered stamped it and ^ethe it a little while in wine and let ye wine be given
unto the pacie^t.ii. houe^s before his fyt if the matter lie in ye stomach it
causith vometynge, if other where it wastyth it.

The matter being digestyd give unto the pacient before his fyt a little oil
of Ienoper, (a purgacion presupposid) it is of much strength in the quartayne
agewe.

Give unto the pacient.iii. graynes of Iuy gume.

Take the rote of sperage let them seth a good while in water and give thereof
unto the pacyent that has Fever quartayne.vii. days, and the is a wounderfull
help therein.

The joyce of rybworte, drunk with warm water and honey two hours before his
fit come upon him, takes away the quartayne agewe.

Of ye sam^ operacio^ ar four rotes of pla^tayne sta^pt and dronke with water.

Fill a hen yt is but a year old with percely and Basil as much as shall be
thought sufficient, and put into her all the hole substance of a raw egg
beside the shell, and salt sufficient and put her in past and bake it upon the
herthe under some vess^ll and give unto the pacient one part there of one day
and somuche another day, and let him eat no other thing it is good also for
the tertia^ and quotidia^ fever it provoke vryne and disiestith ye matter and
takith away ye fever.

The blood of an Ass anoyntyd over the back bone while it is fresh and warm,
Constable
takith away the quartayne Agewe.

Wine of the decoctyon of the rote of Gensian is good, for let the pacient
drink thereof, and it shall take ye Fever away.

Take holworte and hensdonge and stamp them together, distemper the^ with
white wine strain it and give it unto the paciente before the coming of his
fyt.

Certain practitionars say yt turmentil drunk before the fyt losythe the
quartayne.

But a skorpion in oil and let ye soles of the fete and palms of ye hand be
anoyntid therewith and the forhed and back bone before ye fit comith, Kye
it expellith both the quartaine, quoridia^ and tertian Fever

The fat of a vulture myxt with oil if the pacient be anoyntid therwyth Kye.
it dryueth away the quartaine.

Macer.
Take.iiii. leaves and.iiii. rotes of Ueruen seth them in wine and let ye
pacye^t drink ye same before his fit.

Dyosco.
Calamint given before the fyt, takith away quartayne. Wyld margeram does
extenuat and wast ye fits.

Dioscor.
Calamint, wild Margeram Peniryall, Buglosse, Borage, Hearts tongue, seen, the
rindes of the ^ote of tamarike, and of ash, betony, iarmander, Time and wild
Time Ana. ii of Betony.m.i. of Mugwort of egrimony, of Sperage.m.i, let them
seth all to gether in whyt wine and put a little honey thereto, let the pacie^t
drink thereof, morning and eueni^g it mightylye wastes choler adust and
melancholy.

Take of Uiolettes, of Borage Flours, of seen, time, and wild time ana* i. and
a half, Myrabolans Cytryn, rewebarbe ana. i. sethe them unto the.iiii. part,
then streyne it and (...) sethe it again till it be brought to the full point
of. ii. or.i. and in y^ end of ye decoctyon put to rewbarb^ and let it be
sharpnyd with. i. of spurge or of the joyce of scamonte, and give it an hour
before his fyt come on him, and without doubt it will heal al quartaines.

A cure prouyd of one often times, before the fyt give all the sorts of
myrabolans and seen with cynabarys made to powder, put there into a little of
spurge with cream of euenning milk, and if the pacie^t be a woman and full of
choler put thereto rewbarbe

Take nepe stamp it and wringe out the joyce and drink it with wine it losith
al ye hole matter into swette and so takith away his disease. Diosco.


The joyce of Mugwort that has one stalk, mixed with oil of Rosis and
anointed on the backbone and pulsys, takes away the fever and healyth the
pacient soundly.

Orenche seade stampte and sodden in drink takith away ye quartayn.

Take ye joyce of Pellytory and myngle it with the powder of Mirabola^s of India,
give it before the fit.iii. hours, and before the very fit give.i. penny
weight of wyld Margera^ and it shall heal without doubt.

Diosco.
Take. iiii. of Betony with wine honey and water before the fit, it takith away
the Fever.

Macer.
The decoctyon of black helebur passith all medycynes in operacion against a
long contynuyd quartayne Fever.

G^^bre
Take of white and black Helebur Ana. i. of the stones called Lazulus and
Calaminaris and Armeniacus of each. i. of oak fern. i. and a half of Borage
flouers. i. of Gotes blood dried. ii. make a powder thereof and give the pacient
in dri^ke iii. hours before his fyt, the matter being first digestyd and
extenut by purgacion.

Stamp persly and all the hole substance of an egg and half a pound of hogs
blood, incorporate them well together sesond with salt, and take a hen and
stufe her there with, the^ make a pie and back her therein, and let the pacient
eat thereof, it takes a way the quartaine fever by a little and little* it
conforteth the heart, stomach, and noryshinge virtue, and prouokith apetit.

Take.xl graynes of Peper with warm water and drink it, it is very good to
take a way the quartayn and intermyssiue fevers.

The cuttinge of a vain before coming of the fit distroythe greatly the
fever, let it be vsyd often and little at once,

The rynde and leaves of a nuttre drunk in vinegar, takes away the Fever and
rygorousnes thereof.

Cost or Detyn stamped and mixed with oil, Dioscor.
and anoyntyd upon the back bone and pulsys of the pacient, heals the
intermyssyue rygorousnes of the fittes.

Item fyl a capon with oak fern, and flowers of Borage, seen, and with ye
joyce of Garlyke, make potage there of, it purges the raw humors, and birnt
choler, if you put thereto a little Penyryal for it wastes more better the ill
humors and makes the potage of better operacion.

Musterd sede stamped and drunk before the fyt, dryuyth it a way.

Penyryal, both kinds of Time, Seen, Calamint, wild Marge^a^, mingle them al
together with honey sethe it and let it be scoumid clean, and let the pacyent
take thereof, it is very good for the quartayne Agew, and against the stoppyng
in the spleen and liver.

The ordur of a man dried and drunk with wine or honye testranyth the fittes.

A sea Crabbe eaten is good in the quartayne fever. Auicen.


Camamyll drunk is good for all fevers.

Mingle the joyce thereof with oil and anoynte the rigge of the back and the
pulsys of the pacient before the time of the fit, and he shall have no fit.

Stamp rosemarye and give the joyce thereof unto the pacie^t to dri^ke before
his fyt, and he shall be hole in contynent.

Sethe.ix. handfuls of Rue in suffycient wine. Peter. L^.
and give the same unto the pacient to drink in the hour suspectid of the
fevers approaching.

Stamp the rote of holworte and sethe it with water and honey and give the
paciente thereof to drink before his fit, Macer,
it will take away a long co^tynuinge fever if it be often vsyd.

Take the inward skin of nutte curnelles and sta^pe the same and sethe it
with good wine, and drink the same when it is claryfied a little before the
fit, and it will cause the same to cease.

A grene frogge sodden in oil of myrhe, if ye pacient be anoyntid therwyth
before his fit, it shall clear him of his Agewe,

The joyce of Hemp, before the fyt takes away the fever.

Wine of the decoction of sage, rosemary, and Laua^der drunk before the
coming of the fit, healith the quartayne Agewe.

Rewpontike is a singular help unto intermissiue and cold fevers.

Centory stamped with wine and drunk before the fit, causith it to be no fit,
this experiment is known to be of most certantie.

The rote of wild cucumer given to drink before ye fit, takes away the Fever.

Make lie of fine wine, oak ashes of y^ rote of read coleworts and of rustines
of iron burnt and sta^pt to powder, and give it to drink long before the
coming of the fyt, it mightylye lowsyth the bowels and takes away the
quartayne fever.

For a Carbuncle and venomous bytyng.
The Causes
Gross and hot blood having recourse to any one place.

The Signs.
A sore and paynfull ulcer or byle with a foul scabbe as it were brennyd with
fire with a great heat and fever.

Remedies. Capi. lx.
THe brain of a hen or potage made thereof, eaten or applied to the place of
the grief is of more better operacion the^ any thing else.

A pacientes own spittle is very good against venomous bitinges,

A scorpion stamped and applied to the grievous place, is contrari to her own
stinging, and other of her ki^d and therefore it is a wounderfull remedy.

Lyra.
A fig leaf or the rind of a fig tree stamped and applied, is very apt and
good against venomous stingi^ges

Gotes blood warmyd over the fyere and drunk, is of myghtlye operacion against
al drynkinge of poysones.

Gotes dounge temperid with honey and put unto the stinged place, heleth the
same.

Ox houfes sodden and eaten with mustard, withstand al poison, so yt nothing is
able to hurt.

Dioscor.
Agrymony drunk with wine, is wonderful good against the venemouse bytinge of
a serpent, a dog or a man, and a carbuncle.

Take hounds tongue grene or dried and lay it to the Carbuncle and stinged or
venomous place, and it will ripe it.

Mollen stampte and plasteryd, is of great efficacye against the stinginge of a
serpent, or when a member is wounded put the joyce thereof into the wound, and
it will cause the venom to issewe out.

Cressys stampte and mynglid with branne healyth the carbuncle plasteryd thereon.

The ordure of a man is very good often times before brekyng forth and after.
Auycen


Juniper berys are medicinable against poisons for there is none of like
operacion unto it. Dioscorids also affyrmith that they do help against poisons
and stinginges of serpents.

Cheruill and coluer foot are very good against the carbuncle: Gilbert
and in ye danger of death give unto the pacient milk mingled with wine and water

The rote of brom put into a vesel of wine, preserves the drinkars thereof
from all poison it has been prouyd.

Dyosco.
The rotes of Affodyls expelli^h al poison incontinent, and it preseruyth from
evil and venomous meat and plasterid helthfully helps venomous bithinges.

Isac.
Rue, nuttes and honey, stamped together and plasterid, break wou^derfullye a
melancolike or flegmatike aposteme.

Dioscor*
Nuttes stamped and applied to ye grefe, to gether with the ri^des, disstroy al
apostemes within the body.

The sede of a palm tree drunk with wine helith al venemouse bitinges

Fill an egg shell full of the joyce of egrymony, give it unto the pacient to
drink it purges mightylye al poison upward and with a wounderful faciliti
helith the biting of serpe^tes and other vene mouse bestes.

Bees, and flies, bound and knit with honey and wine in a clothe, draw out al
venom, also apply stamped garlic there into til it break.

Dytany stampte and plasterid and ye joyce thereof drunk, Cons^
is very good against all poison, and v^nemouse bytynges.

The same expellith and drawethe out of the body an arowe or shafte. Dioscor.
Take a kernel of a great nut, Isac.
sta^pt it with the leaves of Rue, and plaster it on the grefe early and late,
without doubt it will break the apostem or any kind of swelling else in ye body.
An ox gaull brekyth a felon, or the sore yt is called a carts hear and
brekinge out in the fingers.

Mulberies very ripe bronken and applied to the grefe, break wou^derfully the
apostems.

The sede and herb of cressys minglid together and plasterd, healethe the
Carbuncle.

If a man eat of garlic, and the^ drink the blood of a cock with warm wine,
he shall be hurt with no vemous beast.

The blud of a Ducke drunk with wine preserves the drynkar from all poison.

Saynct Ihons herb stampte and plasteryd immediately upon the bytynge, does
permyt no operacion of the poison in him.

Of the measels.
The Causes.
Nature purging all corrupcion from the inward parts of ye body.

The signs be evident to the sight.

Remedies. Capi. lxi.
HE that will heal the measels ought first to labor and bestow his endeavor
that they first come al furthe, thereto take dry fygges and flower of lentyls
munified and made clean ana. x. of the gume (...) Draga^ce ana. vi. let the^
be sodden in five pounds of water unto iiii. strain, it and put therinto. of
Saffron and give the pacyent thereof to drink before meat, and when he goes to
sleep, till all come forth.

Salt peter myxt with terebentine opens the Carbuncles* Galen,
and draws out the filthy corruption.

Take of the leaves of Basyl, and fill the place of ye ulcer that makithe the
carbuncle, there is nothing more stronger then this.

Against felons in the fingers, make a plaster of brimstone, Rosen,
terebentyne, put a little saffron thereunto and the Tallow of a calfe.

Leven of whete breketh the venemouse humors and apostumes. Isac.


Any clothe dyed purple has virtue of attraction.

Against a hollow ulcer or fistula.
The Causes.
A corrupt and sharp humor in any membre.

The Signs.
A deep holow ulcer narow and hard with al.

Remedies. Capi. lxii.
Against ye disease called fistula mingle the milk of wertwort, with the fresh
grese of a hog let them boil a little together and incorporate the^ afterward
put thereto powder of myrhe and anoynte ye tente with all and put into the hole.

Wine of the decoction of spurge put into the holownes of the ulcer, healethe,
and of the same operacion and working is ye joyce of coluerfote. Take of both
kinds of plantaine, of coluerfote, coryandre, marygold yarow, Primrose, daysy
that groeth in meadows, ye tender stalks of docke, and Betony make the^ al to
powder or to a joyce and give it to the pacient dyseasyd with the fistule, at
morning nountide and night, it is sovereign and heals al kinds of fistules
and holow ulcers if they be curable if not the pacient shall vomit it up again.

Powder made of a bogges head healith the fistule, the cancre, and al
fylthynes in holow ulcers.

If the Fistule have many holes and be not straight yet, Co^stan.
if a medycyne may perce into the^ there is nothing better the^ to put into the
holownes of them gotes dounge with warm honey myxt wythall, for it losyth all
sw^lling, draws out rottennes and purgyth foul and defylid senowes and
healith up the fistule and asswagith the Cancre and grefe thereof.

If the Fistule be outward put therinto ye joyce of coluerfote it healyth, if
it be inward drink it, and it healith also.

Time stamped with salt and plastrid upon the fistule helith the same.

Man's dounge burnt having myxt therwyth peper beaten to powder, kills the
fistule and ca^cre above al things.

Sethe the joyce of Mollen with honey, skume the same till the ioyc^ be
consumed, then put thereto of the rindes of Pomegranates and of ye stones of
myrabosanes, apply it to the cancre, it helps in continent.

Take the joyce of a cow turde (in a woman) and of an ox (in a man) wash the
fistula with the ioice and apply the residewe thereto plasteryd, it helps
quicklye.

Dioscor.
Put leaven in strong lie and so apply it to the fistule, and so it shall be
lyghtlye, healyd, for it draws the rottynes even from the bottom of ulcer,
and dioscorides affyrmyth ye same of the lie and Isaac of the leue^.

This potion is wonderful and very often prouid of me, for it kills the
Fistule in what place soever it be and draws out the corrupt and broken bones.

Take the rotes and leaves of pla^tan, strawbery leaves, the leaves or seade of
He^pe, the leaves or sede of mustard, ye tops of sharp docke, red colewort
leaves, tansey, let them al sethe in good quantity, in white wine, afterward
strain all the hole and put into the straining as much honye as shall be thought
mete, give it unto the pacient early and late, til such time as the clear
potyon come forth by the mouth of the Fistule, which must always be kept open
with a silver pype put into it, and keep upon it always a red colewort leaf,
it is of a wou^derful operacio^.

The blood of a sea Tortoys takith away often times the holownes of
scrophules. Gilbert,


Plantayne stamped and the joyce wrong out, Dyosco.
and put into the holow

A drink most certainly approuid of wounderful and incredible efficacye, which
being given to be drunk of woundid men so that the wound be not mortale wypyth
out within xiii. days al filthiness from the wou^d, and drawith there out al
broken bones and heals up the wound.

Take of red colewortes, fen^greke Percely, sothernewod, tansey, strawbery
leaves, and suet, brere leaves, plantayn leaves, hemp, redmadder smallage,
cransebill, Alam, nuttes, before al things let them be sodde^ together in pure
white wine, and put thereto a little honey, give it unto the pacient early and
late, and anoynte ye wound without when he has drunk of ye said potion, and lay
thereon a lefe of red colewortes and keape the same co^tynually over it, it
opens it and has been often prouyd.

A wounderful good and approuyd powder, take, of Eg^imoney, of pimpernell, and
plantayn. ii. a. C. gratnes of ryshe sede, verdegrece, and the place being
mu^dified, put this powder in.

Take as much powder of holworte as you can take up in three fingers. and use it
at none and at night, for it purges downward the hole fistike and helyth it
wounderfully.

Auance drunk with wine and in plasterid often unto the ulcer helith the
Fistula. Alber^.


The water of nightshade healith the holow ulcers though they be in the eyes.

Poly drunk with wine and benet thistell, has a wounderful effect in
drawinge the holowe ulcers called fistules but when it is dronk the powder of
egrimony most be pourid up on the Fistule.

Agrimony is of wounderful profit in midicines and inespecially against holow
wounds and ulcers

Of the Scab, Pockes, and Leprousy.
The Causes.
Gross and fylthy humors mingled with thynne and sharp matter,

The Signs
Scabbes in the outward parts with great pains and ytchyng, and if he have
the lepre mystempre and pains through all the body with fylthy scabbes and
fallinge of the hear.

Remedies. Capi. lxiii.
THese remedies folowinge ar against the French Pokes lepry and such like.

Make anoyntment against the Scabbe that is ingend^rid of salt fleagme, of
Aloes and vnquenchyd lime with common oil.

Diosco
French garlic fried with oil, kills the ilscabbe and the breking out
th^rof and applied upon the apostem, so yt it touch no other flesh by, and it
brekith the same Immedyatly.

To heal an old Leprye. Auycen
Take a serpent of a dry hyl, and cut of the head thereof quickly, and the
tail, and let her blede and sture about the blod till the bleding cease, and
afterward let the Serpent be mundified from his inwardes, and let it be sodden
and cause the pacient to eat thereof every day. i. and drink ye wine where in
the serpent has been sodden, till the leprouse person be swollen and puffed up
and be gynne through Anguyshe to be in a manner beside him self, then put the
pacient in a stewe or hot house, and let the hole body of the pacient be
anointyd with the liquor wherein the adder or serpent was sodden, for the hole
flesh and skin is thereby renuid, and so shall the pacient be perfytly healid.
Take a black serpent the head being cut of, bury her til she be full of worms
and then let her be dried, and give thereof unto the leporouse. i. with a syrope
of honey every day.

Put corn in water of the decoction of serpents, and feed hens with the same
corn, and let them drink ye same water, and there feathers shall fall of, and
when they be vnfetherid let them be sod, and let the leprowse person eat them,
and drink the water where in they were sodden and let him wash his hands, face,
and berd therewith.

This same experiment is said to heal the pockes for a certayntye in one day,
take of mollen, pytche. iii of qui^ke brimstone, of salt Peter, Fra^kence^se
ana. ii. as much oil as shall be thought sufficient, make it and work it up
well and reserve it as ye shall ocupy it.

Circan
The back of our ladys Thystell stamped with vinegar and applied, takyth utterly
away al scabbynes (...) curffe.

Take nesynge powder, louage, fennyll, and sees them all to gether in wine,
wash the pacient that has a deformytie of the skin enclyning to a leprye,
and it will clear him.

A precious ointment against ye scabbe, which is wounderful, in effect and
has been of^ prouyd.

Take of quycke silver. ii. of euphorbium. i. of stauisagre. ii. of litarge.
iii. of suet a pound and half make an ointment and let ye paci^nte be anoyntid
therwyth, all the arms, shulders, and back bone, and about the knees, either
against the son or against the fire, and if you perceue by anointing the
pacient with this vnctyon, that he be inclyned to vomiting, or else any
swellynge of the upper parts in the body, anoynte him no more if not, cease
not to anoint him till ye seventh day be past, and if the^ he break not out,
make a some^tacion against the stomach with water of the decoct^on of
Rosemary, and Sage, and after three days let make a bathe with water of the
decoctyon of enula ca^pana and docke and lay a white lynnen clothe upon the
anoyntyd place, that the ointment touch not the other parts of the body, by
this manner of ordering have many Leprouse persons been healid.

Gilber
Against the French Pokes, take of brimstone. ii. of nesyng powder quick
silver, and Cumin, Ana. i. of Staphisagre. and a half and incorporate the^ with.
vi. of stale hogs grease, by this means every evil disease or sickness is
for a surety healed* excep^ it be of glandules or kernels which must be cured
after an other mean.

^eape a cock fasting three days, and then tie him to a stake with some Cord,
and tie a tode by him with a cord also, so that the cock may eat him, within
two days after the eating of the Tode, kill the Cock, and sethe him in pure
good wine a good while, put raw honye therein, let the pacient use the same
every day, a hen were better. But thus has it ben prouyd.

The leaves of Lilly stampte and plasterid upon ye grefes, heals the^. Petru^.


Uitriolum citrine dri^d and mixed with vinegar, and burned upon a tyle shard and
do so by it thryse, lastely make it to powder being applied, it healith the
sycknes.

The rotes of Lekes, made in a plaster and applied upon the glandules or
kernels (whereof the syknes comes) heals it and anoint the ulcers with this
ointment.

Take the joyce of leke blades oil and wax and incorporate the^, and so
anoint the places yt be cancrous it heals them wounderfully.

Melt talowe and dryppe therein a linen clothe, and so bind it to the legs it
does excedynglye well heal ye pustules of the legs and else where.

Take the pythe of leauened bread stamp it and tempre it with wine and honey,
and make them boil together and myngle thereto talowe and spr^d it upon a lynen
clothe, and apply it hot to ye bruyses and grievous pultules of the legs.

The cuttynge of the vain that is nyghe the bigger ioynte does myghtylye
heal the scabbe and the evil pustules on that side.

Diosco.
Dry figs stampte with ye flowers of Iuy, and so applied do mighty lie help
the paynefull pustules of of the legs.

Stamp red myntes, Rue, black bery or bramble leaves, and morell together
with the rotes of lilly mixed them with the whytes of eggs, vyneger and oil,
strain them all together and anoynte the therewith, it is wounderful good.

Sethe the rotes of docke, Diosco.
and sta^pe them mightily with hogs grese and put thereto quycke silver
quenchid with Sage and ashes, incorroporate it and anoint the therwyth, it will
yield wounderful effect.

Sethe the flowers of wertworte mightyly in vinegar and put oil th^rto, anoint
the therewith, it will heal the lepry, the scab, and al itchinges.

Apply to the ulcers being first mundyfyed, tryacle and in ye spring following,
or the^ (if it be then spri^g) thou shall be hole.

Take staphisagre and litarge make a powder, and a bathe, and after wash thy
self it is good against ye mor few.

The smoke of henbane sede (ye grieved member being fumigatyd therwyth) heals.

Anoyntment therewith expert and Cunnyng men say that though ye paulmes of
the hands and sooles of the feet (being nothing grieved) be anointed therewith
yet al scabbynes is taken clean away from al ye body. Take of oil of bays.
iiii. of white Frankencense, and clear white Wax. ii. of quick silver
quenchyd with spettell. i. of hogs fat well fried, v. of baye salt well
stampte. viii. of the joyce of plantayne, and fumytory as much as you will,
myngle them all together, and if your conf^cion be just and good, it is a
wounderfull experiment.

Kye^.
Take a snake and roste her with salt, and afterward burn her in a pot well
closed unto powder, and give the same against al Leprye: and al other desperate
grefes.

Of Glaudules or curnelles,
The Causes.
Gross and thick phlegm gaderyo to one place.

The Signs.
A curnel in the flesh not very hard.

Remedies. Capi. lxiiii.
TO take away the glandules, Diosc^*
inco^porate brimstone and whete bra^ with Cerpentine, and make a plaster of.
Darnel, Circan Dyo^.
quick brimstone linseed and coluer dounge, take them and sethe them in wine
and apply it to the scruphules and weles, it kylleth and brekyth them.

Lentil sede given with wine that is fyued, does expel and drive forth the
glandules.

The rote of wild Cucumer sta^pt with barley mele, Diosco.
and made in a plaster takith away old swellings filthy and hard.

The rote of betony incoroporatyd with grefe and co^uer dounge, the strophules
mightyly.

Macer.
Wylo Poppy, quick brimstone, coluer dounge, and Lin sede, let the^ be all
sodden with pure wine first stamped together and so plasterid it healyth all the
scrophules.

Gilber
Take and sethe an egg well and break it in ye milk or joyce of spurge, and
give it ye pacient to drink three days early and late, and let him eat no
supper and so shall he be delivered thereof.

Take of coluer, Gotes and Ox doung dried, of litarge of the ashes of
coleworte rote, of serapine, of bitter almoundes Ana. i. incorporat them all
with pytche and a little stale oil or stale grese, and so apply it, y^ same
helpith and lowsethe quickly, specially if they first take a purgacion of
turbythe.

Macer.
Mustard sede stampte and punned with old grese and so plasterid, clensyth the
scrophules clean.

Make dowe of bean flouer with ^he joyce of coryander, bake it, and plaster it
hot, it helith perfytlye the ^crophules.

Snayles boylid stamped and so laid ^o, mollyfy and dissolve. ye scrophules. The
powder of black peper dried and mixed with hard pitche, Diosco
does disperse and put away, scrophules infantes.

A sodden fig plastered thereon helith them.

Lycoryse, stamped and plasterid takes away the swelling of ye scrophules.

In the wane of the moon, let ye paciente use to drink.ix. days together the
joyce of Agrimonie and whay fasting, and so shall he be hole of the glandul^s.

Melt pytche and hogs greece, and put thereto quick brimstone and whet branne,
and so make a plaster, it he^ithe the pustules of ye neck and throt applied
there.

Go^es dounge is good to resolve the glandules.

Mengle the ashes of the feathers of coluers wings, and burnt henbane, with
bread, and so apply them to the scrophules of ye neck for thereby they shall be
resolved and consumid

Take the joyce of wild Lylly and euforbium, temper them together and give the
paciente seven pills made thereof in the morning for.xxx. dais contynually, for
it expellith the scrophules, so yt one shall not remain.

Take the rote of a lylly and lynesede and stamp them and myngle them with
vinegar, and put thereto coluer dounge and plaster it on ye scrophules for it is
wou^derful in operacio^.

Ribwort fresh gatherid myxt with clear grease and plasteryd losithe all
swellynges.

The blood of a Wesyl dropped upon the scrophules, is very good and medicinable.

Gilbert Sixtus
A plaster made of walworte does assuage mytigate and extinguyshe ^he
scrophules.

Radyshe taken of the pacient in any form either of meat or drink, is
wounderful good against the scrophules.

Peache leaves stampte with salt and plasteryd, are much worth. Galen,


Apply the rote of bryony stampte and myxt with hogs grease, and if the
scrophules beharde, take go^es dounge and vinegar, mollyfy ye gotes dounge
therewith, and put in ^o a lynnen clothe, and so apply it.

Of Wartes.
The Causes.
Gross and cold melancholy or Phlegm.

The Signs.
Every man knows a wart.

Remedies. Capi. lxv.
TO take a way Wartes make this experiment put the feel of Hens in the hot
Embres till the scales or skin thereof be seperatid, and shronke from there
legs and the same skyne warm rub the wartes three or.iiii. times, or more,
and it will drive the^ a way.

The Rind of a sallow tree burnt and temperid with veniger and so plasterid,
takes away the wartes and scabbes that be in any place.

Dyos.
Egrimony myxte and stamped with veniger and so plasterid, puttith out the wartes.

Pursland rubbed upon the wartes, pulls them up by the rotes by his own
property.

Lyra.
Burn the grene vine that berithe grapes of the the inner side, and with the same
water that comyth therout anoint the wartes, bunchis, and Figs about, or give
it the paciente to drink it shall cause them al to faul out by the rotes.

An egles turde anoyntyd or bound on the wartes, takes them away.

Take a red snayle and cut her over thwart the back, Gilbert,
and reserve the liquor that comes thereof, blende it with salt and apply it,
for it shall kill all the wartes.

The milk of fygges anoyntyd, Dyosco.
pull^th them out by the rotes with out any bytinge.

Arsenicke myxt with vinegar and applied on the wartes, takes them away.

The gume of Iuye applied after the same manner is of the same effect

Pull up the marks on every side and lay about the sides vnque^chid lyme and
then anoint the^ with oil of lylyes.

Of brennynge with fire.

The Causes and Signs be euydent.

Remedies. Cap. lxvi.
TO heal the burning of fire skauld a Hare and take the hears cute very small
and fine, and sprinkle it upon the place.

Mingle the oil of Nuttes and wax to gether, and anoint the place it is very
good.

Gilbert
Wash quick lime in several waters.ix. times, and that which remainyth in the
last water myngle with common oil, mighteli sti^ing it about and anoynte the
place, this ^xperiment has been prouyd.

A certain practitionar says for a surety, Diosco
yt if straight upon the burning. Ink menglid with water and common oil be
bound unto the place, it will shortly heal it.

The rote of Lyllye rostid upon ye coals and resoluid with oil of rosis,
Macer. Diosco.
does mightily heal the burninges with fire.

Apply unto wounds yt be moist and old.v. partts of the joyce of Lylly leaves
and one of vinegar, and in especially unto the head.

Take a mou^e skin and apply it hot unto the burning and take i^ not away
till it be hole.

Take the ashes of a dry Cucumer, and sprynkle it upon the burning it has
great efficacy to heal the same.

Soap anointed upon the place is very good.

Ashes made of a dry snayles shel healyth the burninges. Auycen


Burn Doves dounge in a lynnen cloth and myngle it with oil of Rosys, and
anoint the place, for it is very good and m^dicinable.

Sethe lekes, then stamp them and apply them they are also very good.

The leaves of holihoke sod in oil and plasteryd, healith burninges.

Take the whit of an egg raw and oil Olife, sture them about so long to
gether till it be come into a thick oyntme^t, and anoynte it upon the place,
and there shall apere no scarre.

The leaves of a pere tree stamped and applied, heal the burning of fire.

For the wyld fire or creapinge ulcers.
The Causes.
A fluxyon myngled with hot blood and choler.

The Signs.
A certain redness in the skin and not very paynful.

Remedies. Capi. lxvii.
THe body being first purgid of burnt humors, apply unto the place raw eggs
and lay thereon a blete leaf, and thou shalt wounder at the healyng thereof.

Take the horn of a got and burn it in the flame of the fire and ye rind
that ryseth thereof at that time take and stamp it with vinegar and over noynt
the burned place therwt, for it heals wounderfullye.

(...).
Barley meal fri^d or coluers dou^ge dissoluyd with oil and put a lynnen clothe
and bound unto the burnte is wounderfull in efficacy for thou shall find no
stronger medicine against this disease called wyld fire and al other burninges.

The Grene leaves of a plain tree stamped and myxte with grese helith often
times the burninges. Dioscor.


The leaves of rybworte stamped and plasterid ar a singular help.

The yolke of an egg temperyd with oil and so applied assagithe al burnynges.

The ashes of the rynde of an elm sprinklid upon the burning, healith
myghtlye the burnynges with out scarres.

Salt stamped and myxt with oil and applied does quench this disease.

Uineger is of valor above all thing for burninges. Albert.
And dioscorides says yt it healith this disease called ignis sacer.

The powder of hares hears burnt Dioscor.
and sprinklid upon the burning heals the same quickly and causes y^ hear
to grow.

To draw out any thing fyxed in ^he body.
As for the causes of this chapter and of the rest unto the end of the book,
because that either they be manifest, or else before touched, I will wryt
nothing at al.

Remedies. Capi. lxviii.
Macer.
SOthernewood and fresh greece of there own propertye do draw out spriges,
thorns, and other things yt faste^ in ye bodi.

Holeworte stamped and applied is of the same operacion.

The same operacion has the sede of roket.

^lexan.
Gose turdes plasterid upon the grefe, drawith out y^ sticks and Iron that be
fastenid in the flesh. Of the same operacion is the joyce of ^elber
Dytanye myngled with Gose dounge.

The ashes of a burnt Swalowe myxt with vinegar and applied, is like in
operacion.

Okeferne stamped with hogs grese and bound unto the grefe, is very good also.

The root of gladen stamped and applied to the grefe, Diosco.
is good in operacion for it draws out the broken bones and if it be drunk
it heals bruysynges.

The braunchis of wild poppye and unripe figs, Isac.
draw broken bones out from ulcers.

Bytony drawith bones out of brekinges wounderful well. Kyra.


Dog Fenel rote expellith the broken bones. Dyos.


Ashes made of Fumitorie stamped and mixed with raw honey, and applied upon the
wou^des, draws out the pieces of broken bones.

Stamp a rote of Enula and of a read with hedghogges grease and honey, and
appli them for it draws out ye thorn or such like thing fastenyd in a man's
body.

^^bert
The ashes of earth worms with honey sodden and applied, draws out broken
bones.

A drink for them that be hurt and bruysed. Remedies. Ca. lxix.
^^len.
FOr them that be bruysid, take Betonye, Egrimony, Strawbery leaves, Azarabacca
or fool foot, malowes* buglosse, ta^sy, margeram, Five leaued grass, Saynct
John's grass, and Pimpernell gather of each.M.i. stamp them and sethe them
with.iii. pound of wine and the same wine yt remanith strain, and put thereto an
hundredth corns of peper, and the oftener that the pacient drinks thereof, the
sooner shall he be whole, but let him beware from all poisoned and hurtful
things.

Incorporate the powder of fragra^tcense and whet branne with percely joyce
that they may be good and thick, and so apply the same to ye sore.

Take a gober of larde, and take honey branne and Fenigreke and wine sethe them
all together, and apply it upon ye sore of the strippe, it wou^derfully
helpith and healith.

A drink that is wounderfull against bruysing.

Take Egrimony, betony, Sage, Plantayne, Iuy leaves, rospercely poune them
together and myxte wine thereto, give the pacient it often to drink till he be
whole.

To cure beasts that are sick or hurt.
THe blood of a graye myxt with salt and instilled into the horns of beasts
preserves the^ from the moren this is well known and prouyd

Pulyal royal applied to there nothrils Dios.
with vinegar, takes away the hurt of them.

Peter. Lu.
Cut the beast and put into the wou^d powder of black Hellebore which with his
property draws out poisoned humors, and so the beast shall be delivered from
the moren.

If the beast drink a good hearty draught of ynke it will heal it.

Against dronkennes. Cap. lxxi.
Give unto that man that is given to dronkennes the lights of a sheep, and he
shall feel no dronkennes.

Give unto a dronken man the ashes of burnt swalows, and he shall not be drunk
while he lives.

Of them that take werynes by Iourneinge. Capi. lxxii.
Give unto the weryed person to drink at night, ^^osco^.
the rote of mugwort, and so shall his werynes depart from him.

Water of the decoction of linseed it self being hot applied to the
stomach, provoke swet, and causethe werynes to issue out.

Calamus Aromaticus, Pelliter, Calament, Carobes the less, detin Maioram, any
of these that I have mentioned, either simple or compo^dred sodden with oil,
and the pacient therewith anointid, provoke sweet

The ashes of an old wild fig tree, drunk provoke sweat this same has been prouyd.

A good drink for wounded men. Capi. lxxiii.
This a good drink for wounded men. Take mouse ear, betony, Sanamu^d, sage,
of each.m i. as much red madder as of al ye rest before, make a powder thereof
and boil the premises in wine, and give thereof to the woundyd party as much
thereof thryse a day, as will into an eggs shell.

A good oyntmente for wounded men, take of good vermilion. i. of cynomond. i.
of cardamomum. i cloves, in number.xx long peper. i and a half, black
Peper.xx. graynes, of Saffron. i. make an ointment with the foresaid pouders and
good whit wine and honey, and the^ make a plaster and apply it unto the wound
as thus. Take of Lille Malowes young that grow hard by the rote.m.i. wyld
Gellefloures.M.iii. boil them to gether with strong wine and make a plaster,
apply the ointment and lay to the plaster.

A drink against the Fistule. Capi. lxxiiii.
MAke cloves Pympernell, valerian, mouse ear, herb Robert, tansey sethe the^
al in white wine, give unto the pacie^t twyse a day thereof.

Pills to heal al sores. Take the sede of red colewortes, the sede of ta^sye
and Cabage, of yche like much, of the greater madder, make of the hole as much
as shall suffyse for ye hole year, give thereof twyse a day, and keep always a
Colewort leaf upon the fistule.

Take of drago^s blood, seagyrdel of Cinnamon, of Cardamonium, Ana. i. of Alume.
i. of Gentiane. and a half, of Saffron..i. make anoyntment, then after you have
given the potion twyse a day, have this respect whether ye woundid so does
preserve and keep the said potion, if he cast out the potion thrice, then is it
to be doubted of his health.

To pourge the choleric humor down ward. Capi. lxxv.
TO purge Colericke humors downward by the bellye, and that in helthful men:
first let the matter be digestid, with Oxizaccharum, or else with sirupus
Acetosus, the matter being digestid, pourge it with this medicine. Take of ye
electuari desuccorosatu^ oximel, resoluid with the joyce of rosis ana. ii. of ye
joyce of scamoni. and a half mingle the^ together and if you will you may give
ye pacie^t thereof tempered with wine or you may make thereof pills.

If it so chance that the matter be contained from the navel downward or in
any other part of the body, then myngle with the fore rehersyd medicines. ii.
of the powder of mirabolanes citrines, of all this make pills, and let them be
given to ye pacient.

Of Melancholy natural. Capi. lxxvi.
TO purge natural mela^cholie in helthful men, fallen in the nether parts of
ye body, first digest ye matter with squillitike oximel, or else with some syroupe
made therefore, ye matter being digestid purge it with this medicine.

Take of Hierologodion. ii. of hiera rufi. i. of theodoricon emp. i. of honye
Anacardine.. mengle them together and make pills, and give it in the euenning
and let them be sharpenyd with. i. of spurge.

If the matter which ought to be purged, be in the middell parts of the bodi,
as in the stomach, or in the inward of man thereunto must be aplyed laxatiues,
as Cassia fistula. and.c. or as the medicine above mencionid.

But if it be inseueral parts of the body as in the gout in such a case must
strong medicines be ministrid as is rehearsal of before, and they ought to be
doubled.

Of purging burnt collar. Capi. lxxvii.
TO purge burnt collar or salt phlegm, let the matter be preparid with
oxisaccharum in three parts thereof and the fourth part of a syrup, of
diuretike things or of syrupes made of the joyce of Fumitori, and purge it
with this medicine. Take Catar: Imperial, oximel laxatiue, of each. ii. of
Hierologodian. i. of spurge. i. mengle them together and make pills give them
in the euenyng.

Of the Quotydyan fever. Capi. lxxviii.
Against the Quotidian fever after the fourth coming of the fyt, take of the
joyce of Germandre. i. of the joyce of Cynksoyle and violettes ana. iii. of
wine of pomegranates. ii. sugar a pound and a half and the same is good
against the quartaine after the.vii. fit, the joyce of Germandre being doubled
these medicines are ministrid to: helthful grutched and not greatly vexed wi^h
fittes of the Agewe.

To pourge phlegm in quotidian Fevers. Capi. lxxix.
TO purge natural phlegm in quotidia^s, take of electuariu^ ducis. i. temper it
with warm water and give it unto the pacient to drink in the morninge.

Of a quotidian fever through swette Phlegm. Capi. lxxx.
Against a quotidia^ of sweet phlegm, make this decoction and give it unto the
pacient, take of Uiolettes.. and a half of pruines. oak fern. i. mirabolans
kebules i. make a decoction and mynister it unto half a pound.

Of a quotidian of sharp phlegm.
Against the quotidian that is of shrape phlegm, take this order, digest first
the matter with oximell simplex, or oxizacharum or with syroupe composiue, and
being digested, purge it with this medicine, tak^ of violettes. ii. of Seen,
time, wild time, and oak or wall fern ana. of cass^a fistula, of tamarindes,
ana. and a half, mirabolans kebules, ii make a decoctyon, if it be a strong
pacient give him al, if weak, give him but half, and mark that this medicine
that is ministered against a quotidian of sharp phlegm may be mynystred
against the same of slimy phlegm and against a quartayne of melancholye
natural.

Of purgynge of choler in Tertian Fevers, Capi. lxxxii.
TO purge choler in Tercians mak^ this recepcion. Take of violettes. ii. of
Cassia fistula. i. of tamarindes., give them unto ye pacient in the morning,
but first make a preparatiue of the decoction of prunes a pound, first strain
it and resolve the foresaid things in the strayning. A syrup against a
tertia^ of red choler, take mayde^ hear.m ii of violetts. iiii. of these.iiii.
melo^s gourdes, cucumers, Pepons, of the sead^s of pursland, o^ Sandarache
white and red of each.. and a half of white poppy. i. o^ ashes of spodiu^. and
a half, of wine of pomegranates. i. of prunes.v. of clear cass^a fistula. i,
of manna.. and a half mirabolanes, citrin.. Rewbarbe. i. make a decoctyon.

Of tertian of yellow choler. Capi. lxxxiii.
Against the Tertian of yellowe choler, or glassie, or else like salt, take ye
rotes of fennel, parcely, teyntwort maiden hear, endyue, cychory, hearts
tongue, ana. m.i. violettes. iii of iniubes of these.iiii. melo^s gourdes
cucumers pepo^s, of lettys and pursland sede ana.. of dil.. of wine of
pomgranats of sugar.ii. pound make a syrup and clarify y^ straining thereunto
take of Uiolettes. iii. of iniubes, and of the.iiii. cold seeds before named,
maiden here, cassia fistula, clered tamarindes, anise, fenel ana,. and a half,
of citryn mirabolanes, Rewbarbe ana. iii. of prunes xx. make a decoction.

Of a simple or double tertian. Capi. lxxxiiii.
Against a double or simple fever Tertian, after the third fit prove this
experiment. Take of the joyce of Endive, of Cychory, of southistell. i, of the
joyce of plaintaine, of hearts tongue. i. and a half of wine of pomegranates,
pounds ii. sugar a pound, and a half make a syroupe, and let a young man
drink.v. sponefull thereof, and an old man iiii. with water, of both the
endiues ana. m.i. of these.iiii. melons gourdes cucumers, pepons, of pursela^de
ana. i. violettes. iii. of ye flowers of Borage. i. of sugar a pound of wine of
pomegranates make a syrup. A decoctyon for the same, take of violettes.. of
Borage flowers i. mirabola^s citrins, kebules, ana. i. prunes.v, oak or
walferne.. and a half, turbith. ii. of Anise, fenil sede Ana.. and a half. make
a decoctyon.

Of a Tertian fever of red choler, Capi, lxxxv.
Against a tertian of red choler, take of Maiden hear, Teyntworte,
sowthistell, lyuerwort, of winter Gelefloures Ana. m iii. of violettes. iii. of
ye flowers of water Lyllyes. i. of these.iiii. cold seeds, Lettyse, Purslayne,
white poppye and sanders, ana. i. Prunes xx. of sugar.ii. pound, make a syrup
and let it be clarifyed.

And if it end not either by swette or seege, or else by some good success in
ye declinatio^ of ye fever, give unto pacient this decoction. Take of violets.
iiii. of ye.iiii cold seeds. ana. ii. of Casia fistula. ii. of myrabola^s
citrin.. and a half, of rewbarbe i. and so make the decoctyon.

Against the fiuer tertian or quartayne take of Nettell.m ii. of a cobweb, and
salt. i. and make.iiii. plasters thereof, and let the^ be put in the.iiii.
extremities on the ^aines pulsatiues, after the third fit.ii. hours and before
the fit.i. hour, and give unto the pacient.. and a half, of camphory with Rose
water.

Of the quartayne fever that comyth of burnt choler. Cap. lxxxvi.
Against the quartayne of a burnt choler in somer, take of Endive, cychory,
Hearts tongue, citterache, mayde^ here, teint wort, ana. m i. of violettes.
iiii. of borage floue^s. ii. of the.iiii. cold seades melons Gourdes, cucumers
Pepons, ana. i. prunes.x. time, and wild Time ana. iiii. seen, dodder, ana..
and a half, sugar.ii. pound, make a syrup and claryfy it. A decoctyon
thereunto, take of violettes, sebesten, of Borage flowers, ana.. and a half, of
mirabola^s citrin, kebulis Indi. ana. iii. of rewbarbe. i make a decoction.

Of a Quartayne in harvest. Capi. lxxxvii.
Against a quartaine of burnt coler in harvest, take ye rote of fennel,
parcely, of bochers brom sperage, cinksoyle* of grass, of Endive, cychory,
cyterach, maiden here tentworte, Hearts tongue* Lang^ebefe, Lentils, Acasia.
ana. and a half prunes.xx. wine of pomegranates, a pound and a half, of
sugar.iii.l^. make a syrup. A decoction hereunto take of violets. iiii of
borage flours sebestene, cassia fistula, tamarindes ana. i. o^ time, and wild
Time, of both ^ortes of sticados mirabolans citrinia Indi, the four cold
seades, M^lons, Gourdes, cucumers Pepons, ana.. of Prunes.xx. make a decoctyon.

Of a quartayne bredde of natural melancholy Ca, lxxxviii.
Against the Fever Quartayne bre^ of melancholy natural. Take the rote of
Fennel, of Perselye, of buchers brom, of sperage, of cinkesoyle, of Hearts
tongue, of the rote of langedubefe, of hogs tongue the rote of an elder,
walwor^, germa^der, ground Iuye, of both sorts of stychados, Calament, Organe,
of the cold herbs, Melons, gourdes, Cucumers, Pepo^s ana. m.i. of violettes,
of Borage flowers, Ana. ii of Spikenarde. iii. of the joyce of borage. i. of
whit veniger, a pound of sugar.iiii. pound, make a syrup with the decoctyon
of.iii. pound of germander, let the pacient Receive the syrup with this
decoction early and late.

Against a quartayne Agewe. Take violettes, borage flowers* seen, time, and
epithime, ana. ii. Mirabolanes, citrin, Kebul^s Indi, Ana.. make a decoction
and give it to the pacient (if he be strong of nature) before the fyt.

A potion for a quartayne. Capi. lxxxix.
FOr a quartayne this potio^ is good to pourge by little and little and is given
from three days to.iii or from iiii. to.iiii. as is nedful* for it purgith and
disgestithe specially if it be with a coughe.

Take wild time, calamint, black helebour, Seen, violettes, hysope, and oak
or wall fern. Ana. i. and a half of fenell, Lequoryse, of the rotes of
Fennel, and smallage, ana. and a half, let them be sodden and stand to
settill that it may clarifye, and take of the decoctyon.v. pound: and let it
be made in a syrup^ give thereof in a receptyon unto the pacient. ii. in the
morning.

A confectyon of pylles to purge all corupt humores. Capi. lxxxx.
A Confectyon of pills wherwt humors are dissoluid, take the inner part of
coloquintida. i. of agaricke. and a half, of Baurach i. of Liquoryse. i. of
Nettels sede roket royal, ana.. and a half, sta^p them and make pills.

Of heaviness or drousynes of the head. Capi. lxxxxi.
A Certain experiment agayns^ the heuines of the head. Take of Agaricke. v.
of the joyce of wild Sage, Rewbarbe, Holworte, ana i. whit sugar. ii. and a
half, make pills like to cyche Pese, and drink one thereof thryse in a weke,
or else every day till you have made an end of al, it helpith in the mids but
specially in the end without any danger.

Take of cloves, macys, Nutmigges, Galingale, Dragons blood anyse, comin ana.
i. as much of spurge as of the^ al and make a powder.

The aphorisms of Hippocrates redacted unto a certain order, according unto
y^ members of a man's body, and the dyseases that may fall in any of them.
Of the disposityon of the head. Capi. prim.
VRyne troubled like unto the water of an Ox or horse signifies pains in the
head.

Milk is evil for them that have the head ache,

If y^ pains be in ye nodle of ye head it is good to cut ye vain in ye forhed

If any matter or water flow out at his nose or ears which has the head
ache, it takes away ye pains.

Whatsoever helthful man is suddenly payned in the head and therewith losyth his
voice and routeth withal, he dies within seven days, if an Agew take him not.

Of the lethargye or forgetfulness. Capi. ii.
To tremble in a lythargy is very evil.

Of the pain in the head called subeth. Ca. iii.
IN this disease paynfull sleep is mortal.

Of to much watchynge. Cap. iiii.
Immoderat sleep or watching is very evil.

Of the Palsy. Capi. v.
PAlseys do commenly chance from xl. years of age till.lx

It is hard to help a small palsy, but to heal a greuouse palsy it is
ympossible.

It is no matter what kind of spume or froth be about their mouths which be
strangled or have thhe palsy, and be not yet dead.

Of the madness called melancholia. Capi. vi.
A Swellynge or weakness endurynge a long time brings a ma^to a melancholy.

Peryllouse eruptons in all melancholyke dyseases, do signifye either the palsy
a conuulsyon, blyndenesse or madn^sse.

The Hemorrhoydes be very good to such as be melancholyke.

Of Ragyng madness. Capi. vii.
IF he that is mad be taken with a laxe or hidropsye, it is good

The Hemorrhoydes breaking out, take a way madness.

If a mad man use to laughe it is a laudable sign, but if he be very sad, it
is peryllouse.

If a mad man find ease in sleaping it is good, but if his rage increase, it
is to be fearyd.

Of the falling Evil. Capi. viii.
They which have the falling evil in their childhod be often healed, but if they
be past.xxv. year old, they die for the most part.

The changing of place time, and age curethe the falling evil in young men.

Of the diseases in the synowes. Ca. ix
ALl cold things be noyouse to the synowes, the bones, ye teth the brains and
the mary in the back, and unto those al hot things be profitable and good.

A sodeyne Fever heals y^ cra^pe.

A convulsyon after sleep in an ague, is to be feared.

To be short breathyd in an ague is the sign of a convulsion.

A convulsyon or gripinges in the belly in sharp agues, be very evil.

A convulsyon after the drynking of hellebore, is deadly.

To have a convulsyon with a sore wound is death.

A conuulsyon is perillouse to him that has blede much.

A convulsyon or yeskynge after a great inadityon be very evil.

If a dronken man lose his speech and have a co^uulsyo^ he shall shortly die.

A convulsion comes of immoderate fullness or emptiness and so does yeskynge.

Yeskinge, vomiting, a convulsio^ or m^dnesse coming upon him yt is payn^d in
the small guts are, to be fearyd.

The crampe or madness with much watching, is very perillouse.

He that is taken with a sore convulsyon if he live four days shall e^kape.

A convulsyon after a purgatyon is very perillouse.

If a young man being fleshy be taken with a distension of the synowes in the
Somer time. let him be washed with cold water for ye does increase the heat,
and ye heat does assuage his pains.

In sore wounds a convulsion or distencyon be very evil.

Of the drousynes in the head. Capi. ^.
TO dote or to be astonished after a blow or stripe is, very evil,

Of the members being set awrye. Capi. xi.
IN a contynuall agew if the lyppes, the eyes, the brows or the nose stand
awry, so that the pacyent can not hear or see and be therewith very weke, he
shall dye shortly after.

Of the disposicion of the eyes. Capi. xii.
OF the times of ye year if it chance the winter to be dry and ye northwind to
blow, the springtime moist with the southwynd, ye somer following there shall
many be troubled with blernesse, but of the contrary part if the winter be
moist with much southwind, and the springtime dry with northwindes, men
shall be likewise vexed with dry blernisse.

If in autune, or Heruest there be much drought, and northwyndes, it shall do
good to moist persons and women, but other it shall vex with dry blernes.

When the times of the year be dry many shall have bler eyes.

The southwynde blowinge daily for a season, will engender daselinge in the eyes.

Diseases of the eyes do cheflye rainge in somer.

In a continual agewe, if the eyes be wrythen a side, and the pacyent weak
and cannot see, it is a pr^sent token of death.

In all kinds of Fevers, and other diseases, voluntarye tears be laudable*
but if they flow contrary to the pacyentes mind, they be to be fearyd.

It is very good* if he that is diseasyd in ye eyes be taken with a sode^ lax.

All dyseasys in the eyes be healyd either by drinking of sweet wynes, or with
baths of whote water or lettyng of blood or with a purgacio^.

If a man be seek mark his eyes when he slepyth for if any white thing
appear betwixt the eye liddes, and the pacient have no great laxe nor
received any purgatio^ before, is a terrible and deadly sign.

Of the disposion of the ears. Capi. xiii.
Whosoever uses to void choler, and in ye mean while waxes defe, the laxe
stops, and of the contrary part, a sodeyne lax and deiectyon of choler
takes away defnesse.

To wax defe in a continual agew (the pacyent being weak of body) is a
token of death.

Uoluntary bleding at the nose or a sudden lax does take away the de^nes
which comyth of an ague.

Of the dysposition of the nose. Capi. xiiii.
THey whose nostrilles be full of superfluouse moystnesse, and have also their
nature or seade very watrish, be not helthful of body, and they that be
contrary enjoy continual health.

Horsnesse and continual fluxion of sneuil in old men, do in no mea^s wax
ripe.

A dry Somer with often northwynd and a moist Harvest with ye southwind, does
engendre in ye next winter the head ache, ye coughe horsenesse, and much
fluxyon of rewme by the nosthrils, but if the Heruest be dry and the northwynd
blow, the rewme shall endure much longer. Old men be often greuyd with
fluxyon of rewme and ye coughe.

Much rewme contained in the stomach is changed within twenty days to plain
matter.

All cold things as snow and yse, do engender distillatyons.

Of the bledinge at the nose. Capi. xv.
OLd men and children do often blede at the nose.

If it chance him that is seek of an agewe to blede, he shall have a laxe in
the decrease of his fever.

He that waxes deffe through an agewe and bledithe at the nose shall recover
his hearing.

Who so is like to have an apostem in any of his joints and in the mean while
bleadeth at the nose is sure to recover his health.

If a woman whose flowers be stopped do chance to blead at the nose it is a
good sign.

Bleding at the nose or ears takes away the headake.

To have the crampe or to dote while the nose bledeth is an evil sign.

Of nesing. Capi xvi
IF a woman having the mother, or being in pains of child birth, chance to
nese. it is very good.

Nesinge takes away belchinge.

All nesing that comes of the head is caused either of the brain being hot,
or the empti place of the head being very moist, for the air with in
contained brekith out through a narowe passage, and thereby causes the noise.

Of the disposions of the mouth and tongue. Capi. xvii.
Young children and infantes be often troubled with ulcers in the mouth, and
to much vomytinge.

Of al other men they which lispe, be most troubled with mani sieges, and laxes.

Of the diseases in the teth. Capi. xviii.
IT is the sign of contynuance in an ague, to have much slimy matter about the
tethe.

When the teeth begin to grow children are payned with fevers, crampes, and
ytchinge of the gummes* and espicially in the growyng of the gu^me teethe.

Of the grefes in the throat. Ca. xix
OFtentimes diseases propre for the somer season do chance in autumn, as the
squinancy, shortness of breath, and the pains in the flape that covers the
wind pype.

A suffocatyon chancinge to him that has an agew, and no swelling remain in
the throat, is a token of death.

If the squinancye fall down to the lyghtes, and the pacient live seven days,
the fluxion will turn to matter

If he that has the squinancy do swell in the neckei, it is a good token for the
fluxion is driven outward.

He that has an agew not being able to turn his neck, neither to swallowe
his meat, without a manifest swelling in the throat, shall short lie dye.

Of the breast and lyghtes. Cap. xx.
TO have the brethe somewhat stopped in an agew is an evil token, for a
convulsyon shall shortly follow, they which have swellyng in their backs before
they be xiiii. year old coming of shortness of brethe, or a sore cough, shall
shortly dye.

If it chance a dro^ken man suddenly to fall spechlesse, he shall shortly dye of
a conuulsyon, except either he fall to an agew, or else he receive his spech
again at the hour when the surfyt is digestyd.

They which suddenly ar taken with pains in the head, and therwyth lose their
speech and route, they dye shortly, if they be not taken with an agew. Whosoever
has his brains hurt any way, does suddenly lose his spech.

Of blood spyttynge. Capi. xxi.
Young men be chieflye troubled with spittyng of blood, consumptyons, hot
fevers, and the falling Evil.

The spyttel in a continual Fever being wane of color, bloody, stinkyng, or
choleric, is an euel toke^.

He that spitteth frothy blood is diseasyd in the lyghtes.

If he that spitteth blood, spit therewith al filthye matter, it is an evil
sign.

To vomit blood without an agew is helthful, but in an ague peruicious

Of the pleurisye. Capi. xxii,
IF in the beginning of a Pleurysye the pacyent use to spit, it shortneth the
disease, but if it chance afward it prolongeth the pains.

The Northwynd blowing a long season to geder, engenders colykes coughes, and
pleurisyes.

Pleurisyes, peripeunomyes, rewmes, and coughes do chiefli raygne in the winter.

If he which has the pleurisy, be not purged in.xiiii. days, the fluxyon
will change to matter.

The pleurisy once changed to matter, if the pacie^t be not purged with in
forty days after the brekinge forth of the matter, he shall fall to a
consumptyon.

A sodeyne laxe following a pleurysie or a peripeunomy, is very peryllouse.

They whose belchinge smellith ^umwhat sharp or tarte, be not given to the
pleurisye.

The frenesye in a peripeunomye is an evil token.

Whosoever having filthy matter in the void place of the stomach, or having
the hydropsy, is la^ced or bre^ned, if all the matter or water issue furthe, it
is present death.

Of the consumpsion or ptisike. Cap. xxiii
Autumn or heruest is very yuill to the^ which be in a consumption.

A dry somer with much northewynd, and a moist heruest with southwyndes, do
engendre in the winter following coughes and rewmes, and to diverse,
consumptyons.

In consumptions purge downward, and upward.

They which be betwixt.xviii. and.xxv. be chieflye troubled with the ptisike.

If his spittell which has a consumpsition being cast upon coals do stincke,
and the hear fall of his head, it is a sign of death.

A sodeyne laxe to him that is in a consumptyon and his hear fall o^ is deadly.

Milk is unwholesome to the^ which have the headake, or that be syke of any
fever, and to the^ which hau^ noise and wind in the hyer part of there belyes,
and that have cholerike decoctions in hot fevers, or yt have lost much of
their blood, and of the contrary part, it is good to such as have a
consumption without an agew, and also it may be ministered to them which have
agewes long time, if none of the abouesayd tokens do appear, and to such as
have been long seek of a consumption.

Aptisike or laxe with spittynge of fylthy matter if the spittinge cease is
deadly.

Of the dispositions of the heart Ca. 24.
GReat brennynge in the stomach and prickynge about the h^rt is an evil token
in an agew.

They which lose their strength of ^entymes without manifest occasion shall dye
suddenly.

Of the Pappes. Capi. xxv.
IF the Pappes of a woman which is with child of two do wax lyttel, ^he shall
lose one child, and if it be ye right Pappe it is a man child, and if it be
the lift a woman.

If a woman, that neither is with child, another has brought furthe a child,
have milk in her pappes, she is past her Flowers.

Blood drawing to the pappes of a woman, is a sign of the frenesy.

If thou will stop the flowers of a woman, put a great ventose upon her
pappes.

Much milk yssuyng out of the tetes of a woman yt is with child, betokens
the child to be very weak and feeble, but if the pappes be hard the child is
strong and helthful.

Like as the decreasing of the pappes is a sign of the destructyon of the
child, so the hardness of the same signifies great pains, in the pappes,
legs, knees, or eyes, and the life of the child.

Of the stomach. Cap. xxvi.
THe stomach is most hot in the winter and springtyme and then also the
slepes be longest.

Men can not well away with much meat in the somer and herueste, but meanly in the
spring, and best of all in the winter.

In all dyseases to be steadfast of mind, and to be content with such things as
be mynystred to him, is a laudable sign, but the contrary is very evil.

Drink of wine does take away hunger.

If he which goes very dry to bed step, it is good.

If they which have certain murmuryng and wynd in their belyes, have great
pains in the loins, they shall have moist deiections, if ye wind do nether com
forth nor great multitude of vryne, and al these do chance in fevers.

If in a laxe or vomit such things be purged as ought to be purged, it does
ease the pacie^t and it is nothing greuouse, but if no it chau^ceth contrary.

Let such as can not easly vomit, be purged downewarde, but not in the somer.

In all kind of diseases if black choler be purged upward or downewarde
without a medicyne, it is perillouse.

In the pains of the small guts called yl^aca, vomytynge, yeskynge,
convulsyon, or dotynge be evil.

A convulsion and yeskyng after a great purging, ar to be fearyd.

A sodeyne and voluntary vomiting, heals him that has had a long laxe.

Yeskynge is good to him which has a heat and swelling in the liver.

Of the diseasys in the liver. Capi. xxvii
AN agew takes away ye grefe and pains in the liver.

A wound in the brains, heart, midrife, small guts, stomach, or liver is
deadly.

If he whose liver mattreth be bre^nid and therout issue pure and whit matter,
he shall eskape, but if it be lik dregs he shall shortly dye.

Many diseases proper, to ye somer do chance in harvest, as quartaines and
Hydropsyes engendryd in the spleen.

If he which has the dropsye be woundyd, it is hard to hele him. Whosoever
has grypinges about the hauel, and pains in the loins and cannot be helped
by purgatio^s or otherwise shall fall to a dry hidropsye.

The coughe goinge before the hidropsye is evil, but in the hydropsy much worse.

If they which he splenetike, have a blody flux which will long continewe, they
fall to the hydropsye, or their meat shall cume through the^ vndygestyd and so
they dye.

A bloody flux, an hidropsy or madness after a frenesy, are laudable.

Whosoever have their liver full of water, and it break downwarde to the belly, it
is death.

If he that has an agew be taken wi^h the yelow iandes ye.vii. the.ix. the.xi.
or.xiiii. day, it is laudable, if the right side wax not hard, but if it do,
it is contrary.

An agew takes away the pains under the syddes, if it be without great heat
and swellyng.

Of the gaul and spleen. Capi. xxviii.
IF the yelow Iaundes, chance in an agew before the seventh day, it is evil.

They which have the yelow iandes be not full of wynd.

If there liver which have the yelowe ye iandes be hard, it is an evil sign.

A bloody flux is good to th^^ y^ be splenetyke.

Of al kind of fluxyons. Cap. x^^^
IN a laxe diverse kinds of (...) be good, except they change to (...) as be
evil.

Black sieges like to fylthy b^^ude being voluntary be wounder^^^l evil
wh^rther they be with an (...) or without an agew, and ye de^ker to our they have,
the worse they be, but if these sieges com through a p^rgacion they be more
laudable, (...) and although they be of diverse colors the be not evil.

To have a siege of plain m^^^^cholye, or to perbreake the same in y^
beginning of any disease is deadly

Whosoever is brought weak either by some greuouse disease or siknes of long
contynua^ce, or by wou^des received, or any other way, and thereupon have a
syege of melancholy like to black blood he shall doutlesse dey the day after.

A bloody flux beginning with a melancholic siege, is deadly.

Little peaces ^f flesh appearinge in a bloudye sie^e, be tokens of present
death.

Uayne desire to the stole in a woman with child, kills the child.

Tart or sharp belching suddenly chancing to him whose meat comes through
him indigestid, is very good.

In long continuance of a bloudye flux, to abstain from meat, is very evil
and if it be with an ague much wors

A bloody flux is good to such as be splenetike.

A sudden bloody flux after a sincer or clean siege, is to be fearyd.

If a great laxe chance in a white morfewe, it takes away ye disease.

Frothy sieges in a flux, do declare the phlegm to come from the head.

It is an evil token in a sharp agewe, to have a convulsion, or painful
gripinges in the belly.

Pains in the hyer parts of the belly, be more gentle and of leasser peril
then they which be in the lower part.

If he which has the strangurye, be taken with the pains in the small guts
called iliaca, he shall dye with in seven days, except a fever take him with
much flux of vryn.

Of the fundament. Ca. xxx.
IF the Hemorrhoydes chance to such as be melancolike mad, or frentike, it is
laudable.

If he that has long time had the hemorrhoydes be healyd, and not one left
open, it is to be feared least he fall to a consumptyon or hidropsye

The hemorrhoydes be very good to such as have a mela^cholike madness, or
great grefe in the raynes.

Of the disposicyon of raynes. Capi. xxxi.
THey which have the pains in the raynes after.xl. years of age, can not be
healyd.

They whose vryne is full of grauel be seek of the stone, either in the raynes,
or in the bladder.

Dyseases in the raynes and bladder, are skant curable in old men. Little
bladders or bubles in a ma^s vryne, do betoken pains in the raynes, and long
diseasys.

The hyer part of the vryne fattye and thick, is a sign of pains in the
raynes and sum greuouse disease.

If the above said tokens appear in such as be seek in the raynes, and also
have sore pains in the muscles of ye back, if the pains be inward it
signifies an apostem in the inner parts, but if they be outward the apostem
shall be there also.

Much phlegm contained betwixt the stomach and the midrife, having no way to
the belly, is sone dissoluid if it issue by the veins to the bladder, and
thence forth in vryne.

Of the diseases in the bladder. Cap. 32.
IN moist and wete season, long agewes fluxes, rottenesse, ye falling evil,
the squinancy, and the palsye do cheflye raygne, but contrary in dry seasons,
co^sumptions, blearnes goutes, stra^guryes and bloody fluxes

Children be often grieved with pains in the throat, and fallinge of the jaws,
worms in the belly, and stranguryes.

Old men have most comenlye these diseasys, shortness of brethe, rewme, the
coughe, the stra^guri, difficulty of vryne, goutes, daselinge in the head,
pains in ye raynes, palses in their bodies out of just temperanse, y^ ytche,
watchinges with moystnesse in the belly eyes and nosthriles dullness of sight, and
hering.

If his water that is seek of an Ague be litell in quantity thick and full of
cru^mes, and th^rvpo^ his vryne follow much in quantity and thine it is very
good,

Whosoever in an ague has his water troubled like to the vryne of an ox or
cow, has or shortly shall have the headake.

In such diseasys as shall be endyd the seventh day, there shall appear in the
pacyentes vryne a red cloud the fourth day with other reasonable tokens.

Uryne white and clear is not laudable, and especially in them which be
frentike or do^ing.

They which be like to have an apostem in their joints, be deliuerid thereof by
much vryne white and thick as that which comes from such as have been iiii.
days seek of an ague

Blood or matter in the urine does declare ulcers, and biles, either in ye
raynes or blad^er.

Little pieces (...) flesh and hears in the vryne co^^ from the raynes.

Contents lyk^ branne in ye urine signifye a Pocke or Scabbe in the bladder.

They which p^sse blood have a vain broken in the ^^ynes.

If they which (...) blood or cromes, or else hau^ ^he ^tranguri, if the pains
be bene^h the beli about the share, the disease is in the bladder.

Gravel in the vryne betokens ye stone in the bladder.

He that pisseth blood or matter, and he in whose urine skales do appear, or
the water have a strong smell, has ulcers in the bladder.

Whosoever has pustules or welkes in his yard, and if they break and the matter
run out, they shall be shortly hole.

To piss much in the night, does betoken a lytlel siege.

The strangury chances to that parson which has a hot swellinge in the
fundament, or matrix, and to him whose reins do matter, and yesking ever
follows the heat and swellyng in the liver.

Diseases in the raynes and blader, are hard to heal in old men.

Conte^tes in the botome of the urine like unto thick branne, signify the
disease long to continue.

If the water do appear unlike of substance, it betokens great
mystempera^ce, for diuersitye of humors within the body.

Drinking of wine, heals ye stra^gurye, and him yt cannot hold his water,
and it is also good to let blood of the inner veins about ye ancle.

Of the membr^s of generatyon in men. Capi. xxxiii.
Likewise in men, either for the raritie of the body, the spirits goo out, so
that the seed ca^ not come to his due place: or for the thiknesse thereof the
humor cannot get furthe, neither wax hot for the coldness, and so it heapeth
in yt place or else ye same thing comes of great heat.

A bone a gristel, a synow, and the the top of the yard being cut, will
nether grow nor join together.

Of the members of generation in women. Ca. xxxiiii
IF the winter be moist and warm and the southwind blow, the spri^g time dry
with northwyndes, those women that be then with child shall of every light
occasyon lose their children, and the children then borne shall be weak and
seckely, wherefore they shall either dye strenght with, or else al their life time
be, fayntye and full of diseasys.

If a woman with child must ned^ be purged, let that be from ye fourth month
to the seventh, yet those su^what leasse, but before four and after seuin let
the^ receive no purgacions

The suffumigation of sweet odurs does bring forth the flowers, and is good for
diverse other things if it did not cause ye head to be drousi.

Lettynge of blood does kill the child, but the nyer ye birth the more
perillouse it is.

If a woman with child be taken with any greuouse disease, it is death.

The fluxyon of the flowers takes a way vomiting of blood.

If the flowers stop it is good to blede at the nose.

It is perillouse for a woman with child to have a great laxe.

Nesynge is very good to her that has the mother, or that trauaylethe of
childbyrth.

She whose flours be evil colourid or that keep not their common cour^^ had need
to take a purgatyon.

If thou would know whether ^ woman has conceyuyd or no, geu^ her water and
honey myngled together to drink when she goes to sleep and if she feel
grypinges and pains in her belie she is with child, i^ she feel non she is
not.

A woman which has conceuyd a male is well colouryd, but if it be a female,
it is contrary.

Those women which be very small and lean before they conceive, shall lose one
child before they wax gross, Those women which being mean of body, do lose
their children the second or third month without manifest occasyon, have the
closures of their wombes full of fylthy matter, wherefore they cannot sustain
the weight of ye child, but suddenly break.

They which be very fat cannot conceive till they wax lean, for the ^outh of
their matrix is stopped ^p with fatness.

If thou wylt provoke the flowers ^ause the woman to nese, and in the ^eane
while stop her nose and mouth

They which be with child have ^heyr wombes closed up.

If a woman with child be taken with an agew, and wax very hot, without
manifest occasion, she has great pains in childebyrthe, or else ^he loses her
child with peril of her ^wne life.

If a convulsyon, and faintness ^ake a woman in ye time of her flou^^s, it is
perillouse.

If the flowers have to much issue there do ensue diverse diseases, and if they
be stopped there follows great grefe in the womb.

If a woman has not conceived, and thou will know whether she shall conceive or
no* let her be well coueryd with clothes, and beneth let a suffumigacion be
made of hot things and odoriferous, for if the smell com up through her body
to the nose and mouth, be sure yt she is not barayne of her self.

If a woman with child have her flours, it is impossible ye child should be
helthfull.

The flowers stopping with an ague or great cold, and the woman loathe her meat,
say she is with child.

The matrix cold and gross, or very moist, is not apt to conceive, for ye seed
is therein quenched and distroyed. Likewise if it be dry and very hot, for the^
is the seed lost for lack nourishment, but they whose matrix is of a mean
temperature be ple^tifull and do often conceive, if you wilt know more read
above in ye disposion of ye Pappes.

Of the disposyon of the outward members Capi. xxxv.
IF two great grefes do happen in diverse me^bres at one time, the gre^ter
takes away the leasse.

Pains in the knees and loins, or grypynges in the belly coming upon him that
has non agew, do sygnifye that he should be purged down ward.

In paynful fevers apostemes do often happen about the knees and chekes.

The sickness shall chiefly remain in that place which was greuyd before it
began.

The joints of such as have had a fever for a long season, shall ache and be full
of pustules.

Great pains and swellynges in the joints with any brekinge or issue, do
signify that the gout or cra^pe shall follow, and many be remedied with much
washyng with cold water, for yt does extenuat the humor and take a way the
pains, for a mean cold extinguisheth.

Letting of blood does utterly take a way such pains as begin at ye back,
and thence remove to the arms. Enuches be never bald nor gouty.

Women have never the gout as long as they have their flowers.

A child has never the gout until he has known a woman.

All kind of goutes (if the infla^mation be quenchid) within forty days, do
end.

All goutes do chieflye reygne in springtyme and harvest.

If the hippe bone fall out of his place after a long sciatica, there shall
much matter follow, or the leg will consume away, and the pacient shall
halt, except he be brennyd.

Of the Fevers and Agues. Capi. xxxvi.
THe sickness it self, and the time of ye year do plainly declare the time of
the fyttes, the chief time of the disease, and the order in y^ fittes.

Old men be never troubled with (...) sore agewes because their bodies be cold.

All sharp diseasys are judged in fourtene days.

Quartanes in somer be very short in Autumn much longer, in winter longest of
all.

It is much better that he which has a convulsyon be taken with an agew,
then he which has an agewe be taken with a convulsyon.

If his flesh that has a sore ague do either fall nothing away at al or
decay very much it is evil for the first betokenith long contynuance of the
disease, and the other great wekenesse in the person.

At the beginning and ending of an agew, al things be of more stre^gthe then
in the chief part thereof.

In all diseases they be in leasse ieopardy to whose nature age, accusto^, or
time of the year the sickness does agree, then they with whom it does in no
point agree.

When the somer is not unlike to the spring time you shall look for much
sweting in all agewes.

In dry seasons there shall reygne diverse sore agewes.

All dyseases in the harvest season be perillouse and deadlye, but in the
springtyme most gentyl and easy.

In the somer these do chiefly reygne, contynual and brenynge agews tertyan and
quartayne fevers, vomyting, laxes, blernesse with ulcers in the mouth and
pryuy members. A cold stiffness chanci^g the sixth day in any fever does take
away all iudgmente.

All fevers which do not intermite and give over the third day be perillouse,
but if the paciente have no fyte that day there is no ieope^dy.

If great coldness take him which is very weke through a contynuall agew it is
deadly.

If in a contynuall agew the outward members be very cold and the inward
parts hot and dry, it is a token of death

If in an agew pustules and pains chance in the joints, it is a sign that
the pacient fedeth well.

In a contynuall Fever, if the lyppes, the eyes, the Nose or the mouth be
wrythen and out of fashyon, so that the pacient can not se nor here and
therewith all his body be weak, it is a sign that death is at hand.

A sodeyne laxe or dotage in a continual fever is deadly.

An apostem which does not break at the first iudginge day in a Fever, does
signify the long contynuance of the disease.

Uoluntary tears in agewes be laudable, but they which flow against the
pacyentes will be to be fearyd.

Al Agewes with swellinge in the foundament be evil except such as endure but
one day.

If he which has an agew do sweat very much and the disease contynew it is
evil, for it betokens long syknesse and abundance of humors

He that has a convulsyon or discencion in ye synowes, and thervpo^ an agew,
is suddenly delivered.

A tertyan not endid in seven fittes shall continue long.

The yelowe iaundes coming upon him that has a Fever before the seventh day is
perillouse.

To be affrayde in his sleep, or to have the cramp is evil.

To be short brethyd in an agew is the sign of a convulsyon.

Soryful syghes in sharp agewes be to be fearyd.

They which have the quartaine have seldom convulsyons, and if he which has a
convulsion fall to a quartayne he shall be deliuerid from his conuulsyon.

If he which has an agew swette in these days following it is very good, the
third, the.v.vii, ix.xi.xiiii.xvii.xxi*xxvii, xxxi.xxxiiii. for ye swetes do
judge ye fever, but if they be otherwise, they declare long contynuance of ye
disease and great pains.

Of the diete to be observed in agues. Capi. xxxvii
IN all diseases of long continuance the pacyent most use little meat, and
exquisite, but in sharp diseasis yt is perillouse, yet to eat to little or to
much be both evil.

Secke m^n do more often err in using little meat, then in that diet which
is sumwhat larger, whereby they be often hurt, yea and to such as be in health
small fare, and exquisite diete, is very perillouse, because they easly err
therein.

Unto extreme diseases extreme cures be necessary.

When the disease is most extreme and sharp the pacyent shall by and by have
wonderful pains, wherefore he most use most small and thin diet and as the
disease is from extreme pains so most the diet amend.

When ye seknesse is most vyole^t then most the pacie^t use least meat of al.

The physician most mark well whyther the pacyent using such small diet may
endure to the state and strength of the disease, or whyther the pains will
first assuage or no

If the sickness in the beginnynge be most fervent, then most the pacicyent use
little meat, but if the siknes be afterward most vyolent the pacyentes meat
most be sumwhat before diminished, but in the beginning he most feed well that
he may be able to abide the disease.

The pacyent most forbear meat in the fyttes, and especially in such agewes
yt do intermyt and come bifits. Among al other old me^ may best a way with
fasti^g, the^ such as be of middell age, after young men, and worse of al
children and especially such as be quick and lusty.

Such as grow, have much natural heat within them and therefore do require
much meat, which if they have not their bodies do sone consume, but contrary
litel meat will ^erue old men, because they have but little natural hete which
with much meat is sone quenched, and therefore they have not so fervent Agues
because their bodies be cold.

The stomach and inward parts be most hot in winter and springetime, wherefore
men most then feed better, for ye inward heat the^ being much does require
much meat and for a proof thereof mark ye ages and ye cha^pio^s Moist meats be
best of al to such as be sike of agues, and chiefly to children, and to such as
have be^ acustomed like meats.

You must mark whether you shall give them meat onse or twyse, and to whom
you must give more, to whom less, and su^what you most bear with the time of
the year, the country, the age of the person, and with the accustomed use.

In somer and autumn men may skarce away with much meat, but in the winter
best of all, and mean in the spring.

To such as have their sickness by certain fyttes in order, you shall give
nothing, nether add nor dimynishe before the time of judging.

Here end the Aphorisms of Hyppocrates, set in order for every membre, and
translatyd out of latin into English by Humfre Lloyd.
A Book conteynyng the names of the co^pound medecines, which be good for all
ky^de of dyseases that may chance in any membre of man's body, in readyng of
which book I would the gentle reader should be admonished of one thing, which
is yt I do comenly through all this book use the latin names, and have not
translatyd ye same to ye English tongue, being mouyd thereunto, because that
many of them he such that they cannot be well Englished, and also that the
Apothecaryes which have such medicynes to sell do comenly use the Latyne or
rather Arabike, and Barbarouse terms, and not the English n^mes thereof, upon
which consideracions I thought it best to use the same through all this
present book.
For all diseasys in the head. Capi. i.
THese confections following do not suffer the hears to wax hoar and gray
electuarium de aromatibus, co^fectio alharif, oleu^ costinum and de alchana.

These be very good for all diseases in the brain, the electuarye of Perles,
Triacle dyatessoron and the confection of musk.

These comfort the brain, aromaticum rofarum: maius aromaticum. dyambra, galie
elepha^gine and pillule stomatice.

These purge the brain, the confectyon alphescera, and pillule elephangene,
Oximell squillitike opens ye opilatyon of the brain.

The infusion of hyera heals the melancolike pains of the head.

These be good for the falling evil, confectio de musco, thiriaca diatessaron,
confectio alfescera, syrupus sticados, acetum and oximel squilliticum,
vnguentum de bdellio, oleu^ de cucumere asmino, de lapide gagatis, de piperibus
and philosophoru^. Co^fectio alharif and kebuli co^diti, be very good for all
diseasis in ye senses

These purge ye instruments of ye senses, pillule elephangine stomatiche*
aggregate and pillule lucis maiores and minores.

Hyerapicra purges al cold diseasis of ye head, so does hiera hermetis,
hieralogodio^ rufi, and pillule aggregate

The cold diseases of the head are healyd with the confectyon of water and honey.

These confectyons ensuynge are good for all pains in the head, oximell
squillitike, infusyon of Hyeratrociskes of cr^o: oil Anet, oil of Laurel, of
spiknard, of elder and oil of wild cucumer,

The infusion of hyera clensith the head, so do pillule stomatice and pillule
aggregate maiores.

Hyera hermetis purges the hemicran, and pillule alha^dach an e^playster of
mustard and oil of euforbium heal the same.

The electuary of rosys purgithe the head ache of an hot cause, and so do
pillule alhandach.

These heal the turn or daselynge in the head and eyes the confection of
musk a sharp syroupe of citrones or of prunes, vinegre or oximel squllitike,
but these purge the same hamech, electuarye of Roses, confectio psilii, hyera
hermecis, and hieralogodion ruffi.

For the pains and diseases in the ears. Ca. ii.
Oil of bitter almondes, oil of peches and of bee^, ar good for all pains and
noise in the ears.

Oil of of Spiknard is good for wynd in the ears.

For all diseases in the eyes. Ca. iii.
THe elec^uarie of Roses purges the superfluites which descend to ye eyes,
also oleum Philosophorum is good for watery eyes.

Pillule de yera, and trifera persica purge al diseasis of the eyes and make
clear the sight.

For all diseases in the nose and face. Ca. 4
Oil of wild Cucumer takethe away the ste^che in the nose and oleum
Philosophorum opens the oppilatyons of the same.

A syrup of Popy and diacodion with pillule contra catartum, purge and heal all
weles which be upon the nose and face.

These cleanse all foul color, and difformitie of the face, diacucurma,
diamorosion, diacodion, trifera minor, co^fectio rauedseni and alkakengi,
trochiskes of Roses and of rewbarb^.

For all diseasis in the mouth and throat. Ca. v.
FOr an Apostem in the throat dyamozo^ and dyacarido^ be very good

These confections folowinge be good for them which cannot take their breath,
the confectio^ of musk loche of squilla, loche of pyne, loche ad Asma, Loche
Alfescera, dyasulphur, philoniu^, the confection of perles, and alchermes.

Diacodyon and a syrup of popie heal a rewme and coughe, so do pilbule contra
catarrhum.

Uyneger squillitike heals roten and lose gummes.

Oil of sweet Almondes and of sisami takes away the asperitie and roughenesse
of the throat.

Oil of grysomyle takes away all impedimentes of the tongue.

These confectio^s make the mouth to have a sweet smell or odor ye electuarie
of atomatikes and of perles, of citrones, the confectyo^ of xiloaloes,
aromaticum muscatum, aromaticu^ nardinum* trifera saracenica, a syrup of the
pilling of orenges, mellicrat of orenges, trochiskes of gallia muskata, and
sufuf xiloaloes, aromaticum, pillule dyarhodon.

An electuary or syrup of peches, Peches condite, trochiskes of xiloaloes,
take away all stenche in the mouth.

Dyatryonpipereon takes away all belching.

A iulep of iniubes heals al horsnesse.

Diacalamentum, philonium, diacyminu^ and a syrup of myntes do utterly stop
al paynfull and cold yeskyng.

These confectyo^s of musk, ti^iaca diatesseron sirupus of sticados, the
cerote of alexander, oil of pip^r and oleum philosophoru^, and hyerahermetis,
with hieralogodio^ do purge the same wounderful well.

Let him that has an old and paynfull coughe use these, Dianisum, athanasia
mag: and if his breast be full of matter, these be good, dyasulphure, loch de
pino, lochsanum with syrupes of myrte, of licori^e* of Calamente, of prunes, of
iniub^s, of Ysope, and these do extenu^te the gross humores loch ad asma and
susuf ad Asma, and if they cannot sleep take a syrup of Popie.

For a coughe of a hot cause tak^ loche of popie, loch ad caliditatem a iulep
of violetes, and a syrup of ye same, with the sirupe contra catarrhu^, but if it
be a dry coughe, take a syrup of tereniabine and of popie, loch bonum and loch
of almondes.

Pillule de agarico and pillule ad omnes morbos catachi, do purge ye matter of
an old coughe.

Lochsanum and expertum or a syrup of iniubes take away horsnes that comes of
cold phlegm.

Oil of Cartamus of nucis indice, of sisami, do clarifi the voice, and so does
vinegre squillitike.

Musa acnea, oleum philosophoru^, be good for the toth ache, and acetu^
squilliticum fasteneth the teeth.

For the morphew yelow iaundes and al other deformyties of the skyne. Capi. vi
THese confectyons make the skyne well colouryd, electuarium de aromatibus,
confectyon of quinces, confectio anacardina, algarif syrup of fumitory, oil of
saffro^ of cost trifera galeni, and the confectio^ of ma^na.

Unguentum alfesericu^ and oleu^ de cucumere asinino, takes away^ the
roughness of the skin, hamech purges al diseases which be in y^ skin and
ye elephancye.

If you will have your skin smothe and clean, use these trifera muskata,
dyacucurma, diamorusio^ oil of been, of Cherystones, of citrones of elder, of
serpe^tes, of eggs, of whete of juniper and oil of ash.

Unguentu^ sericinum is good for to cause the skin to grow.

Unguentu^ rosaru^, violaru^, vngue^tu^ ceruse, oleu^ de iunipero and
defraxino, trochiskes of arsenicke do heal wyldfyre and ringwormes.

These confectyo^s heal the yelow iandes, confectio rauedseni, trifera persica
co^fectio de psilio, trochiskes (...) of Rosis, of reubarbe, of camphory and of
enpatori electuariu^ rosaru^, sirupus de fumoterre and pillule inde.

Hyeralogodion ruffi, hamech, co^fectio epithini, pillule inde, Pillule fetide,
do purge all matter of morphew and leprousy.

Syrupus de fumoterre, and epithimi, oil of iunyper, vnguentum alfesericon. do
heal the leprousy.

Unguentum aragit, oleum de been, de nucleis cerasorum, de granis
citta^guloru^, do take away the spott^^ of the morphew.

Ungue^tum alhariel, takes away the spots of the skin.

Pillule Collequintide do purge an old morphewe.

Pillule aggregate minores purge and take away al ytching and skratchynge.

These be good for scabbes, oleu^ nucu^, vngue^tu^ cerusae and alphesericu^.

For all diseases in the stomach. Capi. vii.
AN hard apostem of the stomach is mollifyed with moist hisop, and a cerote of
ysop of galenes descriptyon, dyaquilon with the emplaster of oribasius, and
oil of masticke.

These do styre up appetite ones lost, aromaticum rosatum the confectyon of
quynces, of alchanzi and of orenges, trochiskes of Myrabolanes do increase
appetite wounderfull well.

These confectyons do make good digestyon, dyarodon, acondite of orenges,
aromaticum nardinu^, and rosatum, hyeralogodyon ruffi, pillule stomatice,
rosatum maius, diaciminum, diambra, diatrioupipereo^ kebuli co^diti, a condite
of quinces of buglosse, sufuf xiloalo^s, sufuf aromatu^, vinegar squillitike,
trochiskes of rose, pi^lule elephangine, pillule de turbithe.

The confection de galanga, diaciminu^ oximel squilliticu^ be good for
belchinge that comes of sharp matter.

Confectio de aromatibus comfort the stomach that cannot abide the smell of
meats, so does aromaticum rosatum, and gariofilatum, and syrup deminta.

Athanasia magna, lochbonu^ aqua mellis sirupus de liqueritia pillule de
agarico trochisci aneti, do cle^se ye stomach.

Loch de papanere, loche de squilla loche alphescera, syrupus de ysopo, sufuf
ad tussim antiquem, oleum de ketri and de lillio take away al pains in the
stomach.

Lochsan^m cleanses al filthy matter out of the stomach.

Loch de amigdalis heals the vehement dryness of the longes and stom^ke.

Sirupus de prassio de thimo de kesmes heal all cold disease of the stomach.

Oleum de cartamo and oximel squilliticum, sirup de ^upatorio, ^roch de
absinthio open ye opilations of the stomach.

These confections take away ye asperitie or roughness of the stomach

Loch ad calliditatem, iulep vio: iulep iniub: syrupus cucurbite, sirupe de
prunis, sirupus de granatis, oleum papaner: oleum violace.

Electuarum de aromatibus, de g^mmis, confectio xiloaloes, oxim^l squilliticum,
and oleum nardinum, heal al diseases of the stomach which com of gross and
slymy phlegm.

All ventosites and inflations of the stomach ar cured with these confectio^s,
electuariu^ de aromatibus, de citro alxicostu^, troch de spodio: vngue^tu^
rosaru^ cerotum sa^dalinu^ co^fectio de gala^ga de zi^zibere, philonium,
diacyminu^, trifera muscata, diacucurma, diamorusio^ secacul conditu^, pillule
aggregate maiores.

These confectyons comfort a weak stomach and cause good digestion,
electuaryes de aromatibus, de citro de granis mirthi, de persicis, de sorbis,
confectyons xiloaloes, alkinzi, de citonus, aromaticum rosatum, gariofilatum,
nardinum, trifera galeni, yeralogodio^ ruffi kebuli co^diti emb^ici co^diti,
citonia persica condita, zuecharum rosatum, syrupes de piris, de citoniis, de
corticibus citri, de granis mirthi de albela, de absinthio, de fumotere
mellicrata de citro debuglasso decitoniis, rob de piris, de citoniis, de
gra^atis, fructibus, de aggresta, trochiskes, de gallia de rosis, ramich de
absinthio, sufuf xiloaloes, sufuf diarodon, sufuf aromaticum, pillule
elephangine aggregate, stomatice, diarodon, Cerotum Alexandri, emplasters,
dyafinicon, stomaticum, de Gallia, de Fermento, Oils, de stincho de Citoniis,
maluinum, myrtilorum masticum, costinum, and of elder.

Let him yt is payned in the stomach with multitude of hot and sharp humors,
use these dyarodo^ galeni, acetum squilliticum infusio de Hyera, pillule
elephangine but if the pains come of cold humors these be very good
confectio anacardina, philonium Musa acnea, Athanasia magna oleu^ de Cartamo
and de kerua.

These mitigate the vehemente hete of ye stomach, electuarium de persicis,
confectio de acetosa, de Pruuis, trifera persica, iulep rosatu^. syrupus de
Persicis, de portulaca trochiskes de Ca^phora de Sandalis, Sufuf Dyarodon rob
de ribes de berberys, de sumache and demoris.

Against the humiditie of the stomach use aromaticum maius rosatum,
gario^ilatum, co^fectio de cynamomo, trifera saracenica, diacucurma,
dyamorusio^, emblici conditi, trochisci dyarodon.

These confections purge the stomach, hierapigra galeni, hiera hermetis*
pillule elepha^gine, and agregate fetide and sebellie, electuarium alharif.

For the inflammatyon of the stomach, take sirupus de succo acetose de agresta,
de pomis, and sirupus acetosus t^reniabin.

These comfort a cold stomach, syrupus de menta, de thimo, secaniabi^ de
calamento, mellicratu^ co^ditu^.

Let him that vomiteth ouermuche use these aromaticum rosatum, and
gariofilatu^, sirupus acetosus de citoniis* de prunis, and de m^nta de agresta,
diafinicon, troch: ramich, and if he vomit choler and phlegm, take ye
confectyon de citoniis and a syrup de calamento, but if it be choler alone,
use these rob de ribes, de agresta, de berberis, de sumach, de moris de sceni,
de granis.

These do expel and dissolve al ventosities out of the stomach, Aromaticum
gariofilatum, diaciminum oleum nardinum aromaticum nardinum, dianisum trifera
saracenia muscata alkanzi trifera hieralogodion ruffi electuarium m^u^, sufuf
aromaticum emplastrum de alliis, oleum amigdalarum amararu^, nucum de kerua and
de enula.

Let him that is in a consumption use these confectio testieulorum vulpis,
lochsanum trochisci de camphora oleum amigdalarum dulcium.

These oils make fat the body oleum amigdalarum dulciu^, sisami de nuce
indica, and oleum de granis papaneris.

These confections quench thyrst and keep the stomach moist, electuarium de
persicis, confectio de acetosis, alxicostum trifera persica, persica condita,
Succharum violarum iulep rosarum, syrupus de per^icis, de acetositate citri,
Acetosus de pomis, de citoniis, de prunis, de cannis, de portulaca, Rob de
ribes, de sumach de berberis, de Agresta, de moris, de steni, de granatis,
trochisci de camphora, de spodio de berberis, de sandalis and vnguentum rosarum

For all dyseases in or about the heart. Capi. viii.
ELectuarium de gemmis, and confection xiloaloes, be good for all diseasys about
the heart.

These heal the tre^bling and beatyng of the heart confectio de acetosa
xiloaloes and de musco syrupus de pomis de prunis conditum de citro de
buglosso. rob de agresta co^fectio xiloaloes.

These confections comfort the heart electuarium de citro, de pomis. Aromaticum
rosatum, muscatum, Gariofilat, Dyambra, Pira condita Poma persica, Citra,
zuccharum Rosatum syrupus de pomis, rob de ribes de Citoniis de piris,
trochisci Gallie muscate, Ramich, sebelline g^^ie elephangine, Dyarodo^, sufuf
xiloaloes.

Let him that has the heart brennynge, use these, Alxirocostum, syrupus
acetosus de succo fructuum Sirupus de Succo Acetose, Rob de Ribes, de Berberis,
de Sumach de Moris, de sceni de G^anatis.

The confection of xiloaloes does make a man, merye, so does Dyambra and
confectio de Musco.

Dyalulphur is good for poyso^ and trifera persica against the pestilence.

For all diseases in the liver. Ca. ix.
THese confectio^s heal al dyseasys of the liver yt com of gross fleygme or
ventositie, electuarium de Aromatibus and de gemmis, co^fectio xiloaloes,
diacucurma magna confectio de gala^ga troch: dianisis emplastrum de gallia, and
de sermento, sirupus de thimo, secaniabin de calam: and mellicratum conditum,
Also hyerapicra and alharif purge the same.

For the stiche and pains in the liver use confectio diarodon, Athanasia magna
sirupus de absinthio, de eupatorio pillule de reubarb. pill: alkakengi, ysopi
cerotum and oil of euphorbium if it come of a cold cause. For the weakness
and debilitie of the liver take Diarodon, Aromaticum muscatum d^alacca,
confectio alka^zi, sirupus de absinthio, citra co^dita trochisti xiloaloes and
if it come of great heat emplastrum de gallia and diafenicon be very goood.

These comfort and make strong the liver, Aromaticum nardinum, elect: de
granis mirti, confectio de cytonus, sirupus de fumoterrae, conditum de citro
and de cytoniis troc: gallie elephangine and ramich pillule aggregate minores
oleum costinu^.

For all inflammations and heat in the liver take conf^ctio de pomis, de
tereniabin, and d^ portulaca trochisci de ca^phora, de spodio cum semine
acetose de berberis de sandalis, vnguentum rosarum cerotum sa^da. eplastrum de
fermento de melliloto andromachi and diaquilon.

The hidro^sie of the liver is healed with tiriaca diatess^ron and the
oppilatyons thereof with the confectio^ of fumitory, dycodion Athanasia sirupus
de eupatorio de fumoterre secaniabin de kersinii and deradicibus trochisci de
Reubarbaro, de Rosis de lacca, de absinthio, and Pillule de Rauidseni.

Pillule stomatice and aggregate cle^se the liver, and co^fectio alrengi,
pillule de turbith, and sebellie purge the same.

Cerotum ysopi, troc: de reubarbe and de eupatorio heal an apostem in the
liver.

Syrupus de agresta, de pomis and de tereniabin, be wounderfull good to quench
thurst.

For all dyseasys in the longes. Cap. x.
THese cleanse the longes of al gross humors. loch de squilla, emplastrum filii
zachary, oleum philosophorum, confectio de musco and sirupus de thimo, also a
syrup de granis mirti, does confort the lo^ges, and it is clensyd with a syrup
de liqueritia, and oleum cartami.

Oil of Uyoletes and of sweet almondes, do take away the asperitie of the
longes.

A iulep of Roses is good for the ^nflatyon of the longes.

For all diseasys in the spleen. Capi. xi.
UNguentum arthanite, oleum de been and philosophorum, do dyssolue al apostemes
and hardness of the spleen.

For all pains and oppylatyons of the splenne, take Dyacucurma, Magna
Athanasia, Syrupus diacodion, secaniabin de Radicibus, and de Kesin, acetum
squilliticum, Sirupus acetosus de Radicibus, de calamento, trochisci de
eupatorio de lacca pillule rauedseui, Sebelie and inde, confectio alkekengi,
oleu^, Nardinum, and de euphorbio.

These do dyssolue and mollyfye the hardness of the Splenne, Dyasulphur,
secaniabin de Calamento trochisci de Capparis, Cerotum Isopi, Diaquilon,
emplastru^ Andromach and de melliloto oleum philosophorum.

For all dyseases and pains in the back^ and sides. Capi. xii.
OLeum de pipere, vulpinum and philosophorum, be good for all pains in the
back and if the pains come of hete take vnguen^um de papauere.

These pills purge the matter which causes pains in the back, pillule
aggregate maiores de serapino and de oppoponace.

For pains in the sides, take philonium loch de squilla loch de alfescera
syrupus de ysopo, oleu^ tute and electuarium alesiof purgith ye matter.

Emplastrum Andromachi and aristarchi swage the swelling in ye side.

For the pleurisy take loche de papauere, iulep viol. iniuba^um syrupus
cucurbite de prums, de granatis, de cannis, de iniubis, de violis and oleum
violaceum.

For all dyseasys in the bealy gutte^ and entraylles. Cap. xiii.
EMplastru^ de aliis dyssolueth an apostem of the entraylles.

For the colike take diaciminu^ diafenicon, Philoniu^, musa aenea, oleum de
cartamo, de lilio and de piperibus.

These purge the humor causi^g the colike, hiera hermetis, electuariu^ indu^,
and alesc^f, confectio de dactilis, Dyacitoniten, aqua mellis, pillule
aggregate and fetide maiores.

For the hidropsye, use Diacucurma magna, diamorosion diallacca diacoston,
diasulphur, Sirupae de cupatorio, trochisci xiloaloes de rosys and de reubarb.
emplasters, de alliis and Andronachi, oleum almereseron, and these purge the
matter, confectio de eupatorio and de alkakengi, pillule sebelaro, de reubarb,
and almeresion, and vnguentu^ arthanita magum.

Oleum de kerua and de ass be very good for the pains in the small guts.

Aromaticu^ rosatum dries up the humydite of the entrailles.

These conforte and make strong ye guts, aromaticum nardinu^ succoru^
rosatu^, dyacostum, syrypus de granis mirti, mellicratu^ de citoniis. For ye
lubricitie of ye bowelles when the meat comes forth vndigestyd use these,
electuariu^ de granis myrt^^, dyalacca, trocisci ramich.

Co^fectio de seminibus, dyacoston, oleu^ lauri heal ye pains in ye belie
which com of wind therein contained, and hiera hermetis with electuarium.
alescof purge and cle^se ye same, these also be good against al pains in ye
entrayles, oximel squilliticum, diafinico^, emplastrum arabicum, oleu^ de ouis,
and if it come of slymy phlegm take diatrion pipercon, dycyminum co^fectio
anacardina, and an emplaster de granis lauri.

Syrupus calame^ti, oleu^ rute, emplastrum aristarchi, do hete ye entrails yt
be cold, and dyaciminum, dianisum, decoctio alhast, dissolve ye ve^tosites in
the belly contained.

Emplastrum de fermento heals the inflammations of the guts, and secaniabin
de calamento, or emplastrum de melliloto mollitie the hardness thereof.

For the flux use the confection de citoniis, citonia, syrupus de albelach and
de me^ta, emplast^u^ de gallia, and if it come of choler take el^ctuarium de
fructibus, sirupus acetosus de succis fructuum, Trochisci de spodio, emplastrum
diafinicon and if the Flux be bloody athanasia magna* is good, but if the
cause be phlegm take confectio de storace, rob de fructubus, trochisci de
Berberis.

Succharum violaceu^ makes the belly loose.

For all pains in the raynes and bladder. Capi. xiiii.
THese confections heat the reins, electuarium de aromatibus, trifera galeni,
secacul co^ditu^, confectio de zingibere, oleu^ de lilio and de ruta,
aromaticum rosatum.

For the pains in the reins, and bladder take diacucurma, dyamorusion,
philoniu^ e^plm de granis lauri oleum, lauri, de keyri, de ruta de ass de
piperibus, oleum vulpinum, philosophorum and nardinum.

These break the stone in the reins and bladder, dialacca, oleum de nucleis
cerasorum, de granis citrangulorum, de scorpionibus, and de piperibus.

Hyerapicra, hyera hermetis, electuarium indy, purge the raynes.

Syrupus acetosus, de radicibus, opens the opilations of the reins and
trochisci alkake^gi heal the ulcers thereof.

For the hardness of the bladder use cerotu^ ysopi, and for ye bre^ninge heat
thereof Oleum amigdalarum dulcium.

These provoke urine, diacalame^tum, diacucurma, diamorusion, diasulphur,
secaniabin de radicibus, and de cheisyu, trochisci de lacca, pillule aggregate,
oleum philosophoru^, philonium, masa aen^i, oleum ask.

Oleum quartuor seminum frigidorum maiorum is very good for all brennyng and
heat in the yard

Syrupus de piris and de citoniis be good for him yt loses his nature

For all diseases in the matrix and pryuy members. Ca. ix.
GErotum ysopi mollifieth the hardness of matrixe.

For the pains in the matrix comenly called the mother, take diambra oleum
nardinum, philonium, musa aenea, emplastrum de granis, lacca, de ruta de croco,
and philosophoru^, and if the pains come of cold, use oleum de enula, and
hyerapicra, hiera hermetis, pillule de serapino, expert.

These heat a cold matrix electuarium de gemmis, oleu^ rute lilii an de
piperibus.

Aromaticum muscatum and oleu^ de lapide gagatis, be very good for the mother.

Diacalamentu^ and pillule de serapino expert provoke ye flowers, and trifera
minor stop the same.

For the hemorrhoydes and all dyseasys of the foundame^t. Cap. xvi.
Oil of lynseed is good for all pains in the fundament. Trifera saracenica,
trifera muscata trifera galeni confectio alkakengi heal ye hemorrhoydes, and
these assuage the pains thereof, oleum de grisomilis and de nucleis persicorum.

These stop the flux of ye hemorrhoides, pillule de bdellio maiores and
minores, and of the contrary part pillule aggregate, lose the same.

If they swel anoint them with oleum de grisomilis.

For the gout, ye sciatica, and all other ulcers and ache in the outward
me^bres. Ca. xvii
OLeum violarum, and cerotu^ sandalium, ar good for all hot apostemes and these
ripe and dissolve ye same, cerotu^ andromachi, emplastrum de ferme^to, and
dyaquilon.

Oleu^ auellanaru^, vulpinum, de lapide gagatis, and philosophoru^ heal a cold
gout, and if it be hot use oleu^ de ranis* and, for an old gout* cerotum
alexandri, oleu^ de nucleis cerasoru^ and de granis citrangulorum be very good.
hieralogodio^, and hamech purg a ca^cer or crabbe, and these ointmentes heal
ye same, diafinicon alpheserico^ emplastrum arabu^. oleu^ iun^peri and de
fraxino, and these ripe and break it, sirupus de epithimio, pillule inde.

These dissolve al hard knobbes and swellings, dialacca, oleum amigdalarum
dulcium, and sisaminum, cerotum ysopi emplastrum diaquilon and de alliis.

Oleum lilii, masticum and sinapis, ease al pains which come of cold, but if
they be hot take oleu^ rosaru^ and de papauere, and these assuage al aches,
oleum rosatu^, camomilli, and de melliloto with cerotu^ andromachi.

Unguentum egiptiacum cleanses an old fistula very well, but yeralogodion ruffi
purges the matter, and these oyntmentes heal the fistula, vnguentum
diafe^icon. de lino and alpheserico^, oleum de onis, syrupus de epithimo and
emplastrum arabu^

Pillule aggregate and de oppoponaco purge the matter that causethe pains in
the knees, and emplast^u^ andromachi takes away the ache. These purge al
goutes of cold causes, hyerapigra, hierahermetis, electu^ium iudu^, confeetio^
alkakengi, pillule alhandhal, de hermodactilis and de oppoponaco, but if it
come of a hot cause, take electuariu^ de succo rosarum, and these purge all
kind of goutes, electuarium alescof, pillule stomatiche, aggregate, fetide, of
serapino and coloquintide.

Anoint cold joints with cerotum alexandri, and oleum de stincho conforteth
lose joints.

For all pains in the joints, take aqua mellis, oleu^ masticum, de storace, de
euphorbio, de been, de lauro de keire de cucumere asimino, de granis
citrangulorum and de piperibus, also use cerotum isopi, acetum squilliticum,
emplastrum andromachi and filii zachary.

Emplastrum diaquilon ripeth all swellynges.

Trifera sarasenica is good for werinesse.

Unguentum alphesericon, oleum de iunipero and de fraximo heals the pains in
the legs.

Confectio de ass and diasulphur be good for bytynges of venemouse beasts.

Emplastrum de fermento draws al fixed things out of ye body. For ye sciatica
take emplastrum andromachi, e^plm sinapis, oleum de piperibus and philosophor.

Anoint thy body with oil of dyl and thou shall sweat, and oil of quinces
does stop the swette.

Pillule aggregate maiores and serapine purge the sciatica.

Hyeralogodion ruffi and pillule aggregate minores purge foul ulcers

Ungue^tum nobile, nichodemi ceraseos, and ceruse, oleum almezereo^ de iunipero
and de fraxino heal old ulcers

Oleum de bee^ takes a way ye skarre of an ulcer.

Ungue^tu^ sericinum and vnguentu^ ceruse heal al brinning with fire.

^For wounds and al dyseases in the syno^es Capi. xviii.
HYera hermetis purges well all ^ymy ma^ier contained in ye sinowes ^o do
pillule alha^dal and de opopona^o, for cold diseases in ye sinowe, use ^irupus
sticados, aquamellis, vngue^tum de bdellio, oleum, nardinu^, de croco, de
piperibus, de euphorbio de storace, de scorace, de bee^, and oleum de enula,
cerotu^ andromachi, oleum costinum and de sanbuco, oleu^ nucu^, and if they
have a co^tractio^ cerotu^ Alexa^dri, and for ach in ye sinowes, take ysopi
cerotu^, oleu^ amigdalarum amararum, auellanaru^, nucu^, lauri, ta^oniil,
sa^buci, keyri, melliloti, mast^cis, and de euphorbio.

If the sinowes be hard or swolle^, take oil of bitter almo^des, of lynsed of
safron, of nuttes, and of laurel, and oil of quynces is good for loose synowes.

Co^fectio alphescera and balanscioch good for the synowes.

Unguentu^ diaphenico^ and vngue^tum arabum be very good for broken bones.

Emplastrum synapis is good for pain in ye bones if it come of a cold cause,
and emplastrum de fermento draws out broken bones.

Syrupus de epithimo vnguentu^ de lino, diafinico^, emplastrum Arabicum,
vnguentum daceraseos, do wonderful cleanse and heal wou^des and if the wound
putrify, take vnguentu^ cericinium, and egiptiacum magnum, and if the synow be
hurt take vnguentum basilico^ magnu^.

Oleu^ philosophorum is good for an old sore, and oleu^ de grisomilis
asswagith the swelling in a wound and emplastrum de fermento dries up a hurt
ye mattreth wonderfully.

Emplastrum andromachi aliud, does bre^ne and consume the skin and flesh as
it were a cautery.

For the crampe, take sirupus stic^^os, pillule de serapino, vnguentu^
^ebdellio, oleum de been, de croco, ^e piperibus, and de lapide gagatis

For all agewes. Cap. xix.
For all hot Agewes, use confectio de acetosis, de prunis, sirupus cucurbite,
and Acetosus ^e pomis, iuleb violaceum, cerotum violaceum, trochisci de rosis,
and de spodio, reubarbarum, trochisci de eupatorio.

For the quartane, take confectio de assa, de dactilis, diasulphur, sirupus de
eupatorio, seca^iabin de radicibus and de calamento, infusio de hyera,
dyarhodon, trocisci de rosis, de eupatorio, de absinthio with pillule inde be
good for a quartayne.

These purge sharp agues, trifera persica, alxilcostes, co^fectio de dactilis,
syrupus acetosus de succis herbarum, and decoctio cupatorii.

For hot fevers, use iuleb violaru^ sirupus de prunis, de granatis, de
acetositate citri, de portulaca, trotisci de ca^phora de berberis and de
sa^dalis, and ye same be good for pestilent agues.

Sirupus de bisantiis, is good for old fevers of long continuance, and so is
confectio de psillio, and for cholerike agues take syrupus de succo acetose and
agresta.

Sirupus acetosus de tereniabin, is good for hot fevers yt be very perillouse,
and for agues in ye which diverse humores be putrified take sirupus diacodio^,
troc^sci de rosis and eupatori^

Decoctio de sticados and trocisci diarodon heal agues that com of corrupt
phlegm.

These purge al ki^d of agues, pillule aggregate, de rubarbaro de alkakengi,
and in the cold or shakinge it is good to anoynte the pacient with oil of dyl or
de enula.

For all corruptyon and dyseases in the four humors blood, choler, phlegm, and
melancholye. Capi. xx.
HYeralogodion ruffi, hamech, decoctio epithimi do purge mela^choly These purge
choler wonderful well co^fectio de psillio co^fectio de manna, electuariu^
rosa^u^, diacitonites, pillule de turbith, de coloquintida, sirupus acetosus
laxarinus, aqua fructuum, aqua casei, insu^io de succis herbarm, co^fectio
fumiterre, and de croco, with myrabolanes.

To purge choler adust, take syrupus minor fumoter, syrupus de epithimo, acetu^
squilliticum and decoctio capilli veneris pillule de lapide lazuli and de
armuico, pillule stomatiche purge both choler and melancholy

These aswage and delay ye hete of choler, succharum violac^u^, sirupus
acetosus laxatiuus, and syrupus acetosus de succo fructuu^. Gross and thike
choler is made thine and easy to degest with, sirupus acetosus de radicibus,
seca^iabi^ de radicibus, trocisci de ramich These be good to purge phlegm,
hieralogodion ruffi, decoctio alharif, and of myrabolanes, pillule de
euphorbio, de turbith, stomatch, de satcocolla de serapino and de coloquintida.

If thou will break gross and slymy phlegm take syrupus mayor de fumoterre.

Diacala: galeni, purges al slymy matter so does acetum squilliticum pillule
aggregate maiores, and fetide minores, infusio hyere, and if the humores
descend to ye sinowes, take pillule de euphorbio and lay to the place
euplastrum de alliis.

Confectio^ de dactilis purges raw humores wounderfull well.

The blood is mu^dyfyed and made clear from all corruptyon by these
confections, co^fectio anacardina, decoctio capilli venetis, aqua fructuu^
decoctio fumiterre, and pillule ad febres cholericas purge the blood.

Aqua fructuum, Alxicostum trochisci de camphora, delay the heat of the blood.

Athanasia magna and trochisci de terra sigillata be good for them that spittte
blood, but for bleding at the nose take trochisci de ramiche de terra sigillata
and de karabe, and they be also good for a bloody flux, oleu^ philosophorum
dissolueth blood gathered to one place.

Rob de prunis, de fructibus, trochisci sandalorum, vnguentum rosarum, violarum
and oleum mandragore be good for all inflamatio^s and brennynges.

Hamech purges al dyseasys which come of choler or salt phlegm.

These open oppilations thrughe all the body, diacyminum, co^fectio de
seminibus, syrupus acetosus, de succis herbarum* de fumoterre, secaniabin de
radicibus, trochisti de aniso, pillule aggregate minores, ol^u^ amigdalarum
amararum, de been, costinu^, persicorum and de piperibus.

Electuarium alescof purges the superfluities of all the body.

These purge melancholic, pillule inde, lucis maiores, de lapide lazuli and
zebelie.

A Table containing ye weightes which phisicyons do comenly use, and the
interpretacyon of the names of the compound medicynes herin contained with the
quantity and time yt they ought to be received in.

THe least and first of al weightes (como^ly used among phisicyons) is a barley
corn, and.xx. corns make a scruple, three scrupules make a drachme, eight
drachmes make an ounce, xii. ounces make apou^de. A quarter of pound is three
ounces,

And they be this notid.
A corn. gra. A scruple.) A drachme. An ounce.. A pound li. A quarter. q. A
half. s. A handful. m. Ana. of every one.

All compounde medycynes be either receyuid within the body, or laid to the
same without* and they which be received into ye body be these.

ELectuarium and confectio differ in this alone, that electuariu^ is moist and
made with sugger and honey, and confectio dry made alonly with sugar, and
because they be for diverse diseases theris nooe certain time or measure, for
the receiving of them.

Mixtura is when diverse electuaries or co^fections be mingled together, and is
received.ii. hours be fore meat. Tragea is when diverse pouders be me^gled
together with sugar and they be received a.. at onest with soppes of strong wine.

Conserua and conditu^ be when diverse spyces be mixed with sum sirup and be
come^ly receiuid early and late after the bygnesse of a walnut.

Loath is a medycyne which may be lyked with the tongue, and may be received at
al times in the quantity of a hasel nutte.

Iuleb is a clear potyon made of diverse waters and sugar.

Rob is a joyce made hard and thick with the heat of the son or of ye fire
and is commonly mingled with electuarys, and conserues.

Syrup is a moist medicyne which may be receyuyd earlye or late

Decoctum is a medicine made of rotes leaves, sead and flowers where unto is
added sugger or honey.

Infusio is when diverse medycins be beaten to powder or hole laid to stepe a
certain space in sum liquor

Trochiscus is a round confectio^ and plain, made after the manner of a whele,
the which before it be receiuyd most be beaten to powder, and drunk with wine
or other licoure the weight of one. commonly.

Pills be known to al men and ought to be received two or three hours at
after souper the quantity of. i.

Sief is a confectyon made after the fashion of a sugar lofe and most be
dyssoluyd in licour before it be receiuid

Collirium is a moist confection made of sief dissolved.

Sufuf is a fine powder made of diverse spices.

Secaniabin is a sharp syrup wherein is put sugar or honey.

Masticatoriu^ is a confection which is held in the mouth and chewed to purge
the head of phlegm.

Suffime^tum or suffumigatio is when diverse pouders be cast upon the cooles,
and the pacyent does receive the smoke thereof.

Gargarisme is a confectyon of diverse matters and sum decoctyon wherein sum
rob is dissolved, which is gargarised in the mouth and not swalowed down.

Here follow the compound medycynes which be applied to the outward parts of
the body.

UNgue^tu^ an ointme^t, is made of oils, spices and wax, and ought hot to be
applied to the place being sumwhat before rubbed with a lynen clothe.

Linimentu^ is in all points like to vngue^tu^ saving that there goes no wax
to the composityon thereof.

Emplastrum is made of herbs and spices, not being beatinge to powder but a
litel bruysed mixed with sum liquore or decoctyon, and being hot is put upon
a line^ cloth and so laid so laid to the sore.

Plus dyffereth not from an emplaster saving that mele or branne god to the
composityon thereof.

Cataplasma is made of grene herbs or dry sod in water till they be soft and
then applied to the sore.

Cerotu^ is made of wax or rosyn with oils and spyces, and is laid upon a cloth
cut after the form of the member it should be applied unto.

Dropax is an ointment only vsyd to take away hear.

Sinapismus is an emplaster made of mustard to vlcerate the skin and make the
same red.

Epithema is made of diverse pouders mixed with su^e ioice or distilled water, and
commonly laid upon skarlet is applied to the seek membre.

Embrocha is when the membre is washed gentilly with a spo^ge dypt in the
decoction of diverse herbs, rotes and flowers.

Fomentu^ is a bath made of the decoctyon of diverse herbs to wash the sore
place with al.

Euaporatio is when the diseased membre is holden in ye hot vapor of some
decoctyon.

Saceuly be bags made of linen cloth wherein be contained herbs rotes and
leaves which being hot must be first dypte in Wine or vinegar, and then
laid to the membre that is greuyd.

Encathisma or insessio is a decoctyon of certain things wherein ye pacyent
most sit for certain space.

A table of comfortatiues.
SAge, Rue, margera^. Betoni, Peony, Sauery. Symples. Camomyll Pulyoll,
Calamynt, Nutmykes, Hot medicines which comfort the head. Cubebes, Musk.
Fenell. Aurea alexandrina, Letificans rasis, Pliris acroticon Compoundes.
Dyacastoreon, electuarium de gemmis Diacodron iulii, Dianthos cum musc^. White
Popy. Henban^. Lettis, Uyoletes. Camphory. Dymples. Mandrage Wylow leaves.
Uyneger. Cold medicynes which comfort ye head Dyapapauer. Diacodion mesu^
Dyagregantum. Kebuli conditi, Compoundes. Diap^nidion sin^ sp^ciebus, Iulep
violatum. Succarum rosatum. Borage. Cloves. Rosmary Symples. Aloes. Musk
Cubebes. Hot medicines which comfort ye heart. Saffron, Myntes. Diamargariton
Diacinamomum Plirisarcoticon Compoundes. Diaborraginatum, Electuarium
letificans Dyanthos, Succarum buglossatu^ Electuarium regum Camphory.
Uyolettes, Margarites. Symples. Iuo^^. Coral Water lyllyes Coryander Roses
Cold medycynes which comfort the heart Dyarrodon abbatis Succarum rosatum
Manus christi Syrupus violaceus Compoundes. Rob derybes Triasandall Trocisci de
camphora. Succarum rosatum Syrupus nenufarinus Myntes Sage, Margeram Wormwode
Horehounde Symples Anyse Common Mastyke Gynger Maces Hot medicines which
comfort the stomach Diatrionpipereon Dyagalanga Rosata nouella Mel rosatum
colatum Compoundes. Dyanisum Dyacymynum Dyacalamentum Philonium mesue
Dyacucurma Dyalacca Rose Uiolet Plantayne Lettyse Symples. Pomgranates Quynces
Gourdes Melones Purslane Uynegre Cold medicines which comfort the stomach
Dyacytonyteu cum succaro. Dyarhodo^ abbatis Succarum rosatu^, Rob de berberies
Rob de rybes Compoundes. Succarum violaceum, Iulep rosatum Rob de moris
Triasandall, Spyke Squ^nante Cynamone Symples. Wormwode Fumytory Fennel Ameos
Hot medicines which comfort the liver Dyacymynum, Theriaca magna Dyacosta
Confeccio anacardina Rosata nouella Compoundes. Dyalacca Dyanysum Aromaticum
rosatum Dyacalamentum. Endyue. Lettis Purssane Symples. Uyolets. Liver wort.
Camphory, Berberyes Cold medi^ines which comfort the liver. Diarodo^ abbatis
Tryasandaly. rob granatoru^ Succarum vyolaceu^* Compoundes. Succarum rosaceum.
Cappares. Tamaryndes, Borrage Symples. Buglosse Cresses, Calament, Time.
Almondes, Anyse. Hot medicines which comfort the spleen. Fenell Dyacayparis,
Dyacalamentum, Compoundes. Dyacimynum. Lettyse, Endive, Symples. Gourdes,
Cucumers, Cytrones, Cold medicines which comfor^ the spleen. Uyneger*
Dyaboraginatum, Triasandali. Compoundes. Saxifrage Gro^ell, Alexander Simples
Nettle, Rocket Spiknard. Hot medicines which comfort the raynes. Paritorye,
Juniper, Dyagalanga, Trifera magna, Dyacalamentum. Dyalacca mesue, Compoundes.
Electuarium ducis. Aromaticum rosatum, Philanthropos, Theriaca. Water lyllyes.
Lettys Symples Purss^ane. Endyue. Whit Popy. Cold medicines which comfort the
raynes ^la^tayne, Sirupus menufarinus. Compoundes. Syrupus ace^osus. Mugworte,
Rue, Sag^, Sa^yne, Symples. Pulyo^^e Cala^int, Myrhe. Opopona^, Hot medicines
which comfort the matrix. Cynamom. Dya^alametum. Electuarium ^^cis. Dyambra
me^ue. Compoundes. Philanthropos, Dyamargariton, Theriaca magna Electuarium de
bacci^ lauri.

The cold medicines that comfort the raynes, do also comfort the matrix.
Hermodactyles, Saint John's herb, Symples. French garlyke, Folefote,
Castoreum, Cresses, Oxdungue Hot medycines which comfort the joints and
outward parts, Organ Prymrose co^fectio anacardina Electuarium dymarte
Oximell iuliani, Compoundes. Oximell squilliticium Morell Syngreue Symples.
Lettys Endyue. Uineger Cold medycines whicomforte the joints and outward
parts. Rosewater Syrupus nenufarinus, Sirupus acetosus Compoundes. Oleum
rosarum,

Purgatyue medycynes.
Coloquintida, Agaricke, Symples. Aloes, Lapis lazuli, Lapis armenius, These
medycynes purge the head. Kebuli indi. Hierapicra. Hieralogodion, Pillule
cochiae, Compoundes. Pillula^ aureae, Pillulae de hyera, Hysope, Wythwynd,
Symples. Agaricke, Casiafistula, Gladyne, These purge the breast and lyghtes.
Colloquintida, Diasene, Paulinum, Pillule de agarico mesue, Simples. Aloes,
Wormewod, Mirabolanes, Medicyns which purge the stomach. Dyaprunis, Stomaticum
laratiuum, Catarcticu^ imperiale, Compoundes. Hyerapycra, Pillule de hyera,
Pillule Stomatice mesue, Pillulae lucis. Simples. Wormewod Fumytory,
Tamarindes. Gladyn. Medycynes which purge the liver. Mirabolani citrini.
Dyaprmnis. Trifera sarasenica, Compoundes. Pillule de reubarba^^ mesue,
Agarick^ Simples. Seen. Black belebo^ These medicynes purge the spleen
Calamint, Dyasene, Compoundes. Pillule inde Hermoda^tiles, ^urbith. Oppoponax,
Symples Salgeme Euphorbist, Centory, Wyld cucumer, These purge the joints and
outward members. Such fern as grows upon walls. Electuariu^ de su^co
rosarum. Hamech. Benedicta. Compoundes. Hermodactili, Pillule de benedicta,
Pillule arthreticae, Catarcticon imperial^ Wormwode. Tamaryndes, Scamony,
Aloes. Mirabolanes citrines Reubarbe, Water of chese Joyce of roses, Casia
fistula, Symples. Uyoletes, Manna, Prunes, Spour^ Withwind, Fumytory. These
purge choler. All pills wherein is diagredion, Electuarium de succo rosarum,
Diaprunis Rhabarbaru^, Compoundes. Aqua tamarindorum, Hiera picra, Pillule
aloes, Electuarium de psilli^ Pillule alephangine, Pillule aureae, Kebuli,
Emblici. Belerici. Mirabolanes, Agaricke. Turbithe. Colloquintida Gladyn Been,
Symples. Wild cucumer. Hermodactiles, Folefote. Peper Sugar Gynger Centorye
Elder Hellebore Okeferne These purge phlegm Benedycta Stomaticum laxatynum.
Theodoricon Paulinum Hyerapicra Pillule arthritic^. Pillule fetide, Pillule
cochye, Compoundes. Pillule auree, Pillule sine quibus, Hiera archigenis
Pillule de hermodactilis maiores. Pillule asayret. Mirabolani indi Spurge
Wallferne Lapis armenu^ Lapis lazulu^ Seen Symples. Calamynte Fumytery black
hellebore Saltgemus Garden saffron Sticados Prunes These purge melancholye.
Wyld time Hyera ruffi, Dyasene Catarticum imperiale Diacatholicon Compoundes.
Ha^eche* Pill^le de fumaterre. Dyasene Pillule inde Pillule de lapide lazule.
Hoppes Tamaryndes Maydenhear^ These medycynes purge and cle^se the blood. Joyce
of roses Casia Manna Fumytory Aloes Lapis lazuli Reubarbe.

The epistle of Diocles unto king Antigonus, which teaches a man to preserve
him self in health.
IN so much that your grace being now sumwhat run in years (most noble
Prince Antigonus) is endowed with knowl^dge above other kings, and that in all
parts of Phil^sophy and the arts called Mathematical wherein your grace has
wounderfully profited: I thought that part of Philosophy which teaches a man
to preserve himself in health not worthy to be despised and left untouched of
your regal majesty, wherefore I thought it necessari to declare unto your
majesty in this Epistle, the causes of diverse diseases with the signs and
tokens which goo before the same, and last of all the remedies wherwyth ^^e
same may be healed and cured, for like as the (...) no raginge and hideouse
tempest without sum^ ^anifest and open signs which declare the same to follow,
whereby men which have knowledge and be learned in ye Arcane and preuy works of
nature do so provide for themselves that they be sure from all perils and
i^operdyes that may ensue, so is there no kind of disease or sickness that may
infecte any membre of man's body but that has before such euydent signs
and tokens that it may be easlye known to follow. Therefore your grace puttyng
your trust and confidence in those our precepts may easly attain to the
perfect and absolute knowledge of all things.

First of all I have divided the body of man unto four parts, that is to say
the head, the breast, the belly, and the bladder.

Th^se signs and tokens do de^lare when any kind of disease is about to
infecte the head, daselyng in the eyes, the headache, heaviness of y^ brows, a
noise in the ears, prichinge in the temples, the eyes to water in the morninge
and the sight to fail, with dullness or want of smelling and the liftyng up of
the gummes.

When thou do perceive any such tokens, it is the best remedy to purge and
cleanse the head (and that with no purgatyue medycyne) but with, v. ounces of
wine made of wytheryd grapes, or of new wine sodde till half ^e wasted a way,
therewith thou shall wash t^y mouth fasting, and gargarise it therein till the
head be purged of phlegm therein contained, and this is the easyest remedy for all dyseasys in the head. Also it were very good and helthful, if the pacyent
fasting would eat a quantity of mustard which have been macerate or steped in
^at^r and honey myngled together, and gagarysynge the same would draw down the
humore contained in the head, but first of all yo^ most take heed the head be
coueryd tyill it h^ar, whereby the slymy phlegm may b^ made more apt and mere to
flow down to the mouth.

Now of the contrary part, whose despises these signs and tokens shall be
troubled with these deseases, or one of them, the ophtalmy, ye perle in the
ey^s, brekyng out about the cares poukes or weles in the neck, the c^nsumptyo^
in the brain, heuinesse in the head, the squina^ eye, worms which eat the
hear, the pains in the flape that coueryth the wind pype, the falling of
the hear, s^abbes or ulcers in the head, and the totheache.

You may perceive by these tokens if any man is like to be diseasyd about the
breast or no, first a swette through all the body and breast the tunge to wax
roughe or thyck^, the spittel to be salt or bitter in taste or choleric,
sodein pains in the sides or shulders without manifest occasyon, of tyaning
much watchynge, suffocatyones, thurst after sleep, great sadness, coldness
in the breast, and a shaking in the arms and hands, and the dyseases thereof
ensuing you may avoid with perbraking after a mean supper, without
receyuinge any medycyne. Also it is very good to vomit fasting,

Therefore let him that would vomit, eat Radyshe, Towneressys, Roket, Mustarde*
or purslane, and afterward drink warm wat^r and he shall vomit furthwith,
but he that serrythe lyt^ll by these presagyes and signs ought to fear these
diseasys, the pleurisy, pains in the longes, melancholical madness, sharp
agues, the phrenesy, the lythargye, and a burning ague with yeskynge.

When ye belly shall be dyseasyd, sum of these signs do comenly appear
before, the throws and pains in the belly, meats and drinks to ^^me bitter,
heuinesse in the knees, cold stiffness in the loins, weariness of all the
body without any occasyon, lack of senses in the legs, and easy fevers,
Now when ^riye of these tokens do appear it is best to make ye belly^ soft and
lose with some kind of dyete and with no purgi^g medicyne, for it is leasse
ieopardye to use such things that a man may skant err in, as betes sodde with
water and honey, sodde garlike, malowes, dockes, or mercurye and sweet metes
made with honey, for all these things do mollifye the belly, but if any of the
foresaid signs be manifest or endure long add to the said decoctyons the
joyce of b^stard Saffron, for thereby it shall be swetter and more wholesome. Also
Col^wortes sod in a great quantity of water, or four ounces of ye joyce thereof
receyuid with honey and salt, is very good, and of no less effect is the
water of the decoctyon of Cichepcasen or bitterfitch dronke fasting, But they
which think these signs to be of none effect, are oftentimes dyseased with
these syknesses, the flux in the belly, pains in ye bowelles, the lyenceri,
iliaca pa^sio which is a disease in the small guts, the ^ciatica, the fever
tertyan, the gout in ye feet, ye apoplexye the hemorrhoydes, and the ioynte
syknesse.

Al dyseases of the bladder, ^e known by these tokens, to be very full after
little meat, great in flatyons, much b^lc^ynge, the pale color of all the
body, heuye or sad sleep, vryne wane of color, and great pains in the
making there of, with swellyng about the pryuye members, after which tokens it
is good to use odoriferouse things which move urine, as the rotes of Fenel or
persely which have been steped a while in good and doriferouse white wine, of
yt which let the pacyent take every morning fasting three ounces with the water af
yelowe carettes or lonage or enula campana, for they be of like operation, and
of no less effica^y is ye water wherein Ciches have been steped in, if it be
drunk with wine. But whosoever does lyghtli passover these tokens shall look for
sum of these dyseases the hydropsye, the bygnesse of the spleen, pains in the
lyu^r, the stone, pains in the raynes, the strangurye, and the d^stentio^ of
the be^y. And her it is to be noted that in all these signs before rehearsed we
ought to mynister gentle and easy medecines to children, and to such as be
elder, medycynes that be of more strong operatyon and greater efficacye.

Now I entende brefly to declare unto your majesty the two turnynges of the
sone callid in latin solstitia (at which times such things do comenli chance)
and what meats your ^^ur grace shall use or absteyne from in either of them,
taking my beginning at the winter turnynge.

The winter turn.
Solu^itiu^ ^^emale which I call yt wi^ter turn is about ye xi. day of December
when the so^e enters the Goat.
IN the winter turn do rewmes and humiditie increase in me^nes bodies till ye
spri^g equinoctial, therefore it is good to eat who^e meats and to drink
sweet wynes and especially with wild marg^ram, and also to use ye company of
women.

There be from the winter turnynge to the spryng equinoctial nynty days.

The springtyme equinoctial.
From the spryng equinoctial unto the rysynge of the seven sterres called
vergiliac, does phlegm and swette corruptyon of the blood engendre in man's
body, The spring equinoctial is ye.x. day of March when the son enters the
Rame.
and for that cause it is good to use moist and tarte meats, to exercise ye
body, and not to absteyne from women, from the spring equinoctial to the
rysynge of pleyad^s be.xivi. days.

The rysynge of the seven stars.
Choler and vytter matter berythe rule in man from this time unto the somer
turnynge, The seven sters called vergilia^ or p^e^ades rise with the seen about
ye.ix day of may
therefore use meats that be sweet, laxatiue, and beware of acts venereal,
from the resig^e of p^e^ades unto the somer turn be xlv days.

The somer turnynge.
At this time is melancholye augmentyd tell the heruest equinoctial, therefore
drink cold water and smell odoriferouse things, The somer turn is about.x.
of July, when the sone enters the Crabbe.
and as for ^enus you most either use it moderatly or exchew it utterly, we
have to the heruest equinoctial nynty and three days.

The heruest equinoctial.
Phlegm and thine flurrons abound from this time to the setting of ye seuyn
sterres, The heruest equinoctial is about ye. 14 of Septe^bre when the son
enters the bala^ce.
therefore it is good to purge ye humors or to stop ye fluxyons, and to eat
al tarte and moist meats, to perbrake nothing at all, to excercyse ye body,
and to flee women, from which time to the setting of the seuin sterres
be.xxxvi. days.

The setting of the seven Sterres.
From this time to the winter turnynge does phlegm bear domynyon in man, The
seuyn sterres set with the sone about ye.x. of noue^bre
therefore you most eat fat and bitter things, drink sweet wynes, and
excercyse the body, from the going down of the.vii sterres till the Winter
turn be five and forty days.

Finis.
The table of this book.
Against the falling of hear cap, i To take away hear cap. ii To heal ye
pustules or weles in ye head, ca. iii Against forgetfulness cap. iiii Against
the frenesye cap, v Against the headache cap, vi Against the rewme cap. vii
Against the gyddynesse of the head cap. viii Against the headache which comes
of to much watchynges cap. ix Against the falling evil capi. x Against madness
called mania cap. xi To heal all dyseases in the eyes cap. xii Against
dymnesse of the sight ca. xiii For all pains in the ears and defnesse ca.
xiiii To take away the Morphew and R^ngwormes Capi. xv Against the totheake ca.
xvi To stop blood at the nose ca. xvii To heal the Paulsey cap. xviii For
horsenesse and all fautes in the speech and for the Coughe capi. xix Ahaynst
spyttyng of blood capi. xx For the sudden debilitie of the vital spirits
coming of emptynesse capi. xxi Against yeskyng and belkynge cap. xxii For all
diseases in the lyghtes ca. xxiii Against the pleurisy ca. xxiiii To make a
man laxatyue cap. xxv To bind or make on costiffe capi. xxvi Against ye
colycke and fretti^g of the guts. ca. ^7 To kill worms in the braly cap.
xxviii To stop the flux of y^ hemeroydes cap. xxix To heal the disease
called remasinus which ^s a desire to goo to the stole without a voydd^ng of
any thing ca. xxx To heal the Emeordes being exstante and ^^ffurs in the
fundament capi, xxxi Against ye co^m^ng forth of ye arsegut cap, xxxii To hele
ye stoppi^g or opylacio^ in ye liver ca. 33 Against the dropsye capi, xxxiiii
To heal all diseases in the splenne cap, xxxv Against the yelow iaundis ca.
xxxvi Against the stoppyng in the raynes the stone and disease of the bladder
cap. xxxvii Against the stranguryon cap, xxxviii To heal ulcers and byles of
the yard cap, xxxix For the^ that ca^ not hold there water, capi, xxxx Against
the swellyng of the coddes capi, xli Against the swelling of the yard ca, xlii
To a^^wage fleshli lust ca, xliii Against the hardness and apostem of the
matryxe cap, xliiii To provoke the flowers capi, xlv To ^^ope the flours capi,
xlvi Against the suff^catyon of the matryxe called the mother ca, xlvii To make
a woman co^ceyue ca, xlviii Against the swelling of the tetes through much
abundaunce of milk cap, xlix Rem^dies against hard delyueraunce of children
capi, l For the pains after the delyuerance of the child cap. li Against the
gout joint sycknesse and sciatica capi. lii Against ruptures and brekynges
cap, liii Against an agew yt holds a ^. a^ one day ca. liiii Against the
brenn^ng agew cap, lv Against the tercyon feu^r capi, lvi To heal a ^uoridian
fever cap, lvii For the quartayn agew cap, lviii Against a carbuncle cap, lix
To heal the mesel^ capi. lx To hele a fistula or holow ulcer capi. lxi Against
the scabe and french pokes cap. lxii Against glaudules and kurnels. cap. lxiii
To took a way wartes cap. lxiiii To heal burninges of fire cap lxv Against the
disease called wyld fire. cap. lxvi. To draw out arowe heads or thorns that
frycke in the body. cap. lxvii Against brusynge cap, lxviii To cure beasts
that be hurt or seek. ca. lxix Against ^ronkennes cap, lxx Agayst werynesse
cap. lxxi A drink for wounded parsons, cap, lxxii A drink against the fystule
cap. lxxiii To purge cholryke humors dounwarde. cap. lxxiiii, To purge
melancholy humors. cap. lxxv To purge choler adust cap. lxxvi A purgacion
against the quotidian fever. cap. lxxvii To purge phlegm in a quotidian. ca.
lxxviii A purgacion against a quotidian ^f swet fl^gme. cap, l^xi^. A purgacion
against ^a quotidian of sharp phlegm, cap. lxxxx To purge choler in a tercyan
cap. lxxxi A purgacion against a tercyan of yelow choler, cap, lxxxii Agkynst a
simple or double tercia^ ca, lxxxiii Against a terc^an of red choler ca.
lxxxiiii Against a quartayn of bre^t choler. ca, lxxxv Against a quartayne in
autumn or harvest. cap. lxxxvi. Against a quartayne of natural melancholy cap.
lxxxvii A pocion against a quartayn. ca. lxxxviii A co^fectio^ of pills
against euel humo. ca. lxxxix Against ye heuin^s in ye head. cap. lxxxx
The table of the aphorisms.
OF the dysposicio^s of the head. cap. i Of the lethargy cap. ii Of the pains
in ye head called subeth. ca. iii Of to much watchynge cap. iiii Of the palsy
cap, v Of madness called melancholia cap. vi Of ragyng madness^ c^p. vii Of the
falling eu^ll cap. viii Of the deseases in the synowes cap. ix Of drousynes in
the head cap. x Of the me^bres being set a w^y ca. xi Of the disposicions of
the eyes cap. xii Of the dis^osityons of the ears ca, xiii Of the dysposytio^s
of the nose cap. xiiii Of the bledyng of the nose cap. xv Of nesynge cap. xvi
Of the disposytion of the mouth cap. xvii Of the diseases in the teth cap xviii
Of the grefes in the throat cap. xix Of the breast and lyghtes cap. xx Of ^loud
spyttyng cap. xxi Of the plenrisye cap xxii Of the co^sumption or ^^isyke cap.
xxiii Of the disposityon of the heart cap. xxiiii Of the pappes. cap. xxv Of the
stomach cap. xxvi Of the dyseases in the liver cap. xxvii Of the gaul and
spleen cap. xxviii Of al kind of fluxyons cap xxi^ Of the fundament cap. xxx Of
the disposicio^ of the reins cap, xxx^ Of the diseases of the bladder cap.
xxxii Of the me^bres of generation in me^ c^. xxxiii Of ye me^bres of
generation in weme^ ca, xxxiiii Of the dysposicion of the outward members Cap.
xxx, v Of fevers and agewes ca. xxxvi Of the diet to be observed in agues ca,
xxxvii
The table of the compound medycynes.
For all dyseases in the head Cap. i For pains in the ears ^op. ii ^or the
pains in the eyes cap, iii (...) the dyseases of the face cap. iiii (...) the
dyseases in the mouth and throat ca, v (...) the morphew and yelow iandes cap*
vi (...) ^ll dyseases in the stomach cap. vii (...) ^he dysposycyons in the
heart cap, viii (...) dyseases in the lyu^r cap, ix (...) pains in the longes
cap. x (...) ^^seases in the spleen cap, xi (...) ^ayne of y^ back and sides
cap, xii (...) in the guts and entraylles, Ca^ xiii For (...) in the raines
and bladder ca, xiiii For (...) in the matrix cap, ^v For (...) ca, xvi For
(...) scyatica cap. xvii For all (...) cap, xviii For all (...) ca. xix For the
(...) in the four. cap. xx.
Impry^^^^ (...) London in Fletestreate at (...) of the Rosegarland by (...)
Coplande.


