DAVID'S TEACHER, OR THE TRVE TEACHER OF THE RIGHT-VVAY TO HEAVEN.

DISCOVERING ERROneous Teachers and Seditious Sectuaries.

Preached at Paules-Crosse the 3. of September. 1609.

By To: Johnson, M. of Arts, Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God, the
L. Bishop of Lincoln.

LONDON Printed by T. Haueland, for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard, near S. Austinsgate, at the Sign of the Fox. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD: THE LORD BISHOP OF LINCOLN. ()
TO make triuiall Apologies for publishing books in these times, were idle,
since the reasons some allege for their defense therein, are common, and
ouer-worne. And therefore if I should with others urge the earnest entreatieo,
friends for a coppie of this Sermon, as a reason for publishing thereof, rather
then the express commandment of some which have authority therein, and unto
whom I am most obliged in all duty; I could not be free from such suspicion
also. In which respect, since as it was preached, so being now published (as
both my duty and love binds me) I present it unto your Lordship with all
due respect. Humbly desiring, that (as unto my unworthy self, so also unto
this) you would be pleased to vouchsafe your Patronage: If not; your pardon.
But howsoever, I hope your acceptance, since I offer it with a truly devoted
love I bear toward your Lordship in all duty. And so addressing still my
prayers unto God, for your Lordships long health and prosperity, Irest

Your Lordships in all observance and duty. ROBERT JOHNSON.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS THE third of SEPTEMBER. 1609.
Psalm. 119. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes, and I will keep it
unto the end.
AS the Psalms of David are rightly entitled, The holy Psalms of David; so
this Psalm Pelican styles Sacratissimus Psalmus, a most sacred or holy
Psalm: First, holy in respect of the subject, which is the holy law of God:
and then holy in respect of the Author thereof, which is the holy Spirit of God,
that directed the pen and heart of this Psalmograph, for the composing thereof.

And this Psalm is compiled after an alphabeticall order, to help the
memory. And although there be in this Psalm 176. verses, yet in every one of
these verses is found one of these ten words, according to the number of the
ten Commandments of Almighty God: viz. the Law, the Way, the Word, the
Righteousness, the Truth, Judgments, Precepts, Statutes, Commandments, and
Testimonies.

And this is David's ten-stringed Lute, wherewith he did solace himself: and in
every one of these verses he touched one of these strings. Neither is this to
be thought any absurd tautalogie, or idle repetition, that these words are so
often repeated in this Psalm, and one of them found in every verse. For it
shows us, Arg.
The wonderful affection, love, and zeal, that the children of God have unto
his laws and word.

Therefore David here, out of his love and zeal that way, says, Teach me, O
Lord, the way of thy Statutes, and I will keep it unto the end. Nay, such is
his affection to the Law of God, that he will not rest so, but proceeds
further, Verse 35.
Direct me in the path of thy Commandments. Nay such is his love, that he
will not stay here, Verse 36.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies. Nay more, so great is his zeal to the
Commandments of God, that he makes it demonstrable, with an Ecce,
demonstrable in it self, verse 40. Ecce, behold, I desire thy Commandments:
he stampeth the carecter Ecce upon it, in testimony of his great love unto
the Law of God.

And therefore as all the other verses deserve a careful and respective
meditation; so this verse, which I have proposed to be handled, is most worthy
our considerations, both propter dignitatem subiecti, the excellency of the
subject, which is the Law of God: and also propter necessitatem and vtilitatem,
so necessary, as nothing is more requisite then hoc vnum, this one thing; and so
profitable, if we respectively apprehend it, that it cannot but sway our best
and worthiest thoughts unto the love thereof.

Teach me, O Lord:] Connex.
because he was ignorant, he desires a Teacher: and because he would be sure
to have a good teacher, he prays the Lord to teach him: and because he would
be sure to learn a good lesson, he desires the knowledge and practice of
Gods Law: and because he would not discourage his Teacher, by teaching a non
proficient, he promises to keep it, and that unto the end.

The wisdom herein contained, First, Doce, Teach: There Is his ignorance.
Secondly, Teach me: There is the ignorance of the elect themselves, without
continual instruction. Thirdly, the way, the narrowness and difficulty
thereof. Fourthly, of thy statutes, the firmness and stabilitie thereof.

I will keep it: There Is his promise respective.

First, I will: There Is his free will by grace.

Secondly, keep it: There Is his treasure.

Thirdly, unto the end: There Is his time limited, his perseverance.

So then Two parts.

1 Here is a request. 2 And here is a promise.
A request to be taught; a promise to keep his lesson: Teach me, O Lord;
There Is his request: And I will keep it; There Is his promise.

In the request observe,
1 The subject of the request, in Doce, Teach. 2 The pattie making request, in
me. 3 The person unto whom he makes this request, O Lord. 4 The sum or
total desired, The way of thy Statutes.
In the promise observe,
1 The person promising, I will. 2 The matter promised, keep it. 3 The
continuance and time limited how long. Unto the end.
Let us now therefore not stay any longer at the doors of my text, but let us
enter in to behold the riches and furniture contained therein. And if it please
you to lend me the hand, and go along with me, I will be your conduct into
the still-yard and storehouse of Gods children, and there ye shall take a view
of all their treasures, which are wonderful, and cause admiration in the true
beholders thereof: for so he says, verse. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful,
therefore does my soul love them. 1. Wonderful in respect of the Author,
whose name is wonderful, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace, Isay 9. 6. Secondly, wonderful in respect of the wisdom contained in
them. Romans 11. 33. (...): O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out? Thirdly, wonderful in respect of the continuance of their time,
verse 144. The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting. These
treasures will continue, when all other decay and perish. For all other
treasures vanish away like smoke, and are like Zeuxes painted grapes, deceiving
poor birds with the only semblance of grapes: when a man thinks he has
fast hold of them, then they are presently gone from him, do what he can. Or
like unto the apples of Sodom: no sooner ye can touch them, but they are
presently turned into dust. So are all the riches and treasures of this life.
But here are treasures that shall continue for ever: therefore let us learn
with the Prophet here, to keep them, and hold them fast. Teach me, O Lord,
the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end.

But because we cannot keep it, unless we apprehend it, let us first desire
to be taught with David, which is the subject of his request.

Teach: This verb (...) or (...), Text.
doceo, is oftentimes construed with two accusative cases, as Doceo teliteras,
so in this place, Doce me viam, Teach me the way: First, Teach me; then, Teach
me the way. So in Isay, populum quem docebis scientiam; I send thee to a people
whom thou shall teach knowledge. So that both these things are requisite to a
Teacher: first, that he have populum quem docere, a people whom to teach; and
then that he have scientiam quid docere, learning and knowledge what to teach.
In our precedent times we had quem docere, people, and maintenance enough for
Teachers, and wanted quid docere, learning to teach: but now many have
scientiam, learning to teach; and want quem, a people, and maintenance for
teaching. Both these had David's Teacher. He has wisdom, what to teach; and
then a people whom to teach, his elect: Wherein, out of this word teach, Doct.
observe, (...), Doctoris sapientiam, the wisdom of the Teacher.

And this we need not stand upon: for he is solus sapiens, only wise. Now unto
the God immortal, invisible, to God only wise. Nay, he is infinite in his
wisdom: Psalm.
Great is the Lord, and great is his power, yea and his wisdom is infinite.
There Is the wisdom of this Teacher.

Secondly, out of this word Teach, we learn, Ignorantiam discipuli, Doct.
the ignorance of men in the knowledge and practice of Gods Law, before they be
taught and regenerate by the spirit of God.

So ignorant was I, Psalm.
even as it had been a beast before thee.

So ignorant was I: There Is his ignorance before regeneration. He speaks of
what he had been, not what now he is, being taught and regenerate.

The natural man cannot perceive the things that be of God, 1. Cor. 2.
because he judges carnally.

The great worthies of the world, renowned for learning and wisdom, were far
from the knowledge of Gods Law, because they were led naturally by reason only.

Zeno the Athenian of Greece, and chief of the Stoics sect, which held, that
virtue was the summum bonum, and chiefest felicity: This was good Theorick and
contemplative learning, yet it is far from that learning which David here
desires, the knowledge and practice of Gods Law.

Plato and Aristotle, of the Perepatetick sect, held, that actio virtutis, not
only the knowledge, but the practice of virtue to be their summum-bonum, and
chiefest good. This learning is excellent; for it is practick and a moral
action; yet they come short of the knowledge of Gods Law. And therefore this is
that Philosophy which Paul bids us beware of, Take heed and beware of
Philosophy: Ephesians.
for this wisdom God has cast away, Isay 29. 14. I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, and cast away the understanding of the prudent. And this also the
holy Ghost derideth, 1. Cor, 1. 12. (...)* etc. Where is the wise? Where is the
Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Has not God made the wisdom of
this world foolishness? For since the world by wisdom knew not God in the
wisdom of God, it pleased God by simpleness of preaching to save them that
believe. But what speak I of the ignorance of the natural man? It is David
here, that is something more then a natural man, that desires to be taught.
In the second place the person making request,

Teach me; Text.
not an ignorant man, not a simple man, neither a man of any low rank, or
ordinary calling: his regal title is, The kingly Prophet: a King, and no
less then a Prophet. And wisdom is requisite for both these: for in respect
he was a King, he had need of wisdom, whereby he might rightly sway the sword
of Justice: but not only in this respect did David desire to be taught, when
he said, Teach me, O Lord; he did not mean how he should govern his
Kingdom, which is very requisite; but teach me thy statutes; teach me this.

Neither does David, that is trained up in the school of regeneration, only
once or twice make this request, to be taught in the knowledge and practice of
Gods Law, but makes many requests to the same purpose. When he is come to some
perfection in the knowledge of Gods Law, he will not here rest. Wherein
observe,

The elect themselves, Doct.
when they are come to some perfection in the knowledge and practice of Gods
Law, must not here sit down and rest, but must still proceed to learn and
practice the way of Gods Statutes and Laws. Teach me, O Lord. Direct me in the
paths of thy Commandments, etc.

David* though learned in Gods Law, yet desires still to be taught, to be
instructed, to be directed. For he can never, with his best endeavors, come
to the center and perfection of this learning. And this serves to reprove the
carelessness of many both in learning and practicing the Law and word of God.

Men think, when they can but say the Lords prayer, or the Creed, they are
learned enough, they need know no more, nor do any more, but only repeat it;
no more belongs unto it. When but once or twice in a year they hear a
Sermon, and that with a cold zeal, that it freezeth; or receive the Lords
Supper once a year, to save themselves from the danger of the Law; it is well
enough. And thus do the poor blind worms of the world deceive themselves,
and are content with a very little learning in his law and word, and a less
practice in the same.

The wisdom here then is that which Paul teaches in 1. Cor. 1. 7. Use.
The manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal. They
that are called by the spirit should profit in the spirit, lest they be
excluded out of the school of Christianity, for non proficients, and thrust
out of Gods favor, for the neglect and contempt of his law. And thus much out
of the word doce, Teach me, and so let us come unto the third place, which is
Dauias teacher, O Lord, Teach me, O Lord, Here is David's teacher.

Here is the teacher of teachers, and pastor of pastors, and doctor of
doctors, that apposeth doctors themselves, and astonisheth them with his
wisdom. Luke 1. 46. This is David's teacher, he has no worse he desires no
better, for a better cannot be.

To whom then shall we go to learn?

Shall we go to the world? alas, totus mundus in maligno est positus, all the
world lies in wickedness.

Shall we go to the flesh? alas, caro concupiscit aduersus spiritum, the
flesh lusts against the spirit, the spirit against the flesh, that ye cannot
do whatsoever ye would.

Shall we go to the Devil? absit, he is a tempter and seducer of the
brethren, Leo rugens, a roaring Lion and a red Dragon.

(...)? to whom shall we go?

Shall we go to men? alas, the children of men are set on fire, their teeth
are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. Vain is the help of
man, trust not in Princes, nor in any child of man for there is no help in
them.

(...)? To whom shall we go?

To our selves, alas, least comfort of all, our consciences accuse us, as
Joseph's brethren accused one another.

(...) To whom then shall we go?

To the law, the law is a Schoolmasters to Christ

To prophets? they points us to Christ.

To Angels? they adore Christ. Reu. 22.

(...). To whom shall we go to God without Christ? Horribile est de Deo sieve
Christo cogitare. It is a fearful thing to think of God without Christ. In
the 6. of John. 68. when the Disciples that heard Christ, began to fall away,
and grow to an Apostasy, he being also jealous of these eleven, said unto them,
what, will ye also go away? Simon Peter answered, (...), to whom shall we
go Lord? thou have the words of eternal life, which answer of Simon Peter
shows us, to whom we must go to learn: to him which has the words of
eternal life. Austen de Trinitate. Ioh* 6
John. 6. to him which teaches David and all the elect. Psalm. 1. 33. To him
which is the true Messiah promised from the beginning: To him which is the true
Paschal Lamb, that was slain from the beginning. To him which is the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world: To him which is a king, which
has the soueraintie of heaven and earth. To him which is a priest, and that
for ever after the order of Melchisedech, to him which is a prophet, and which
spoke in and by all the prophets.

To him which is a king to rule us, a Priest to pray for us, and a prophet to
instruct us. To him which is a King, and rules his church, with his Septrum
regni, the Scepter of thy kingdom is a right Scepter. To him which is a
Priest, which ever lives and makes intercession for us. To him which is a
prophet, and far excels all the Prophets of Judah. To David's teacher and
David's Lord, which is the teacher and instructor of his elect. Teach me O Lord.

And this Doctrine brancheth it self into two parts.

1 By whom God teaches. 2 By what means he teaches.
God teaches? by himself immediately in his own essence and nature. Doct.


1 God himself taught our parents both law and Gospel. Genesis 2. thou shall not
eat of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, for in whatsoever hour
thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death.

God taught our Parents the Gospel also. Genesi. 3 the seed of the woman
shall break the Serpents head. Again, God teaches us by his written laws.
Exodus. 20. God spoke all these words and said, I am the Lord thy God, thou
shall have no other Gods but me. And this law he expounded by the mouth of his
Prophets, in the succedent ages of world, in the days of the Kings of Judah and
Israel.

2 Secondly God teaches us by his Son, or God the Son teaches us. Heb. 1.
God which in times past did diversely and many ways speak unto the fathers by
Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his own Son, and Math.
9. 35. Jesus went about teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gspell
of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the
people. And Matthew. 11. 1. And it came to pass, that when Jesus had made an
end of commanding his twelve Disciples, he departed thence to teach and to
preach in their Cities. Thus God the Son teaches us. Teach me O Lord.

3. Thirdly, God the holy Ghost teaches us, so John 14. 26. When the Comforter
is come, which is the holy Ghost, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance whatsoever I have told you. Thus the holy Ghost also
teaches us, which shows unto us.

The dignity and excellency of the office of preaching the Gospel. 1.
Instruction


It is called euangelium regni, Romans 1.
and ceptrum regni, the Gospel ot the kingdom, Psalm. 45.
and the Scepter of the kingdom; the Scepter of the kingdom is a right
Scepter, there is the power and dignity of the Gospel. What need I stand to
show how the worthies of the world have graced this calling of preaching the
Gospel? David King of Israel chose to be styled a prophet. Solomon the wise
commonly called a preacher. Nay, our Savior Christ himself, heavens only
Phoenix, and earthes great Satrapasse, he which has the sovereignty both of
heaven and earth, did undertake this magnum opus, Mat. 9.
this great office and work of preaching the Gospel.

Secondly, 2. Instruction.
the necessity of teaching and preaching is here commended unto us, Teach me O
Lord, for if this had not been very needful, why would Christ himself take
upon him this weighty and painful office. So necessary, as nothing is more
necessary, then hoc vnum, Luke 10. 41.
this one thing. Martha, Martha, says our Savior Christ, thou art careful
about many things, verily one thing is needful. Mary has chosen the best part
which shall not be taken from her.

If such then be the dignity and necessity of this office of teaching and
preaching the Gospel, why are yet the ministers thereof so contemned and
despised? why are they so traduced and slandered? why is the dignity of the
church so indignified and disgraced the orders and constitutions depraved and
violated, her livings and maintenance so cut and mangled.

That Prophecy of Esaias concerning the Church, is now come to pass. Esaias. 1. 8.
And the Daughter of Sion shall be left like a cottage in a Vineyard, like a
lodge in a garden of cucumbers like a besieged City. This poor daughter the
church is left indeed bare enough, now without dowry, without gifts, without
gold, she is robbed of all these. As Jacob said, Me have ye robbed of my
Children, Joseph is away, and Simeon is away, and will ye take Benjamin also? al
those things are against me, so may the Church say: Me have ye robbed, my
maintenance is away, my props and pillars decay, our green pastures and rich
meadows are drowned by sacrilege, all these things are against me, ye have
robbed me. As the Israelites sometimes robbed the Egyptians, they borrowed
Jewels of silver, and Jewels of gold, but they never meant to pay them again,
Exodus 12. 2.
and they robbed the Egyptians, so is the church robbed and cousened of her
maintenance, they have borrowed our Church-liuings, our Silver and gold, our
Jewels, but how? as the Israelites borrowed of the Egyptians never meaning to
pay them again, but to rob the Church. It is to be feared that the contempt of
Sion, and neglect of her prophets and preachers will be the ruin of the
church, downfall of religion, decaying of learning, etc. and an Apostacy in
faith and grace, and a flat relapse from Christ and his Gospel.

The second branch of this doctrine is, by what means God teaches us. Teach
me O Lord.

The means whereby God teaches us is threefold, A threefolde means.
verbo by his word, secondly benedictionibus, by his blessings. Thirdly,
afflictionibus, by punishment and afflictions.

1. First, he teaches us by his word, how to walk in the way of his statutes,
Psalm. 119. Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths.
And verse. 9. Where with all shall a young man cleanse his way, even by ruling
himself after thy word. Hence it is called a staff to walk with, a buckler
to defend us against the incursions of our spiritual enemies, a light to give
light unto our paths, that we stumble not in the darkness of our own
ignorance. So has God taught us in this land by his word, and yet does still
teach us, though he see little fruits of his labors, little fruits of his
teaching, little fruits of his word, he has not thus dealt with other
nations, neither have the heathen knowledge of his ways other nations have not
this teaching: other nations have not this word of life founded unto them:
other nations have not these clear and pure crystal waters of life, without
corruption of Heresy, as we have, and yet we are as backward as they in
bringing forth fruits, and as barbarous in our life and conversation, as a
number of the heathen which have not known his name.

2 Secondly, God teaches us by his blessings, to encourage us to walk in his
ways and statutes. So he did the Israelits. Deuteronomy. 8. 6. Therefore thou shall
keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways, and fear
him. For the Lord thy God brings thee into a good land, a land wherein are
rivers of waters, and fountains, and springs that flow out of valleys and
mountains, a land of wheat and barley, and of Vineyards, figtrees and
Pomegranets, a land of Oil, Olive and honey. A land wherein thou shall eat
bread without sacrifice, neither shall thou lack any thing therein. A land
whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountains thou shall dig brass. These
are blessings sufficient to encourage the Israelites to walk in his ways, for
here is plenitudo diuitiarum, the fullness of riches. God does not give us his
blessings sparingly unto his children, but (...) richly abundantly.

We cannot say of God, as Esaw said of his Father Isaac, father have thou but
one blessing bless me also O my father, I am thy son Esaw, for he has many
blessings in store for his children, of his fulness have we all received.
There Is his manus plena, his full hand, which he opens and fills all
things with plentiousnes. Then he protecteth and keeps his children, there is
his manus extensa, his stretched out arm to defend them from their enemies.
And with all these blessings, and more then all those has God blessed us, and
they are indeed truly said his blessings, if we be taught by them to walk in
his ways and keep his statutes. Therefore (says God) thou shall keep my
commandments: the cause is set down in, therefore, wherefore? because the
Lord thy God brings thee into a good land, a land of wheat and barley, etc.
Had Gods people the Israelites, ever any more cause by his blessings, Deuteronomy. 8 7
to walk in his ways, then we have? What had the Israelites that we have
not? What was there in the la^d of Jury, now called Palestina, that we have
not? they had a good land, so have we; they had a land of rivers and waters,
so have we; they had a land of wheat and barley, so have we; they had a land of
Vinyards, and figtrees, so have we. They did eat bread without scarcity, so
do we; they did dig iron and brass out of their mountains, so do we. We
are in nothing behind the Israelites, concerning blessings, our land is
machable with theirs in every respect, nay, before it, in respect of governors;
a religious puissant Prince, a most learned and literate Clergy, most
reverend Bishops, most paineful Pastors, most careful Magistrates, in respect
of the Gospel, a land indeed of rivers, not of drops of spiritual waters of
life: a land wherein we eat the bread of life without scarsitie, neither do
we lack any thing herein. In respect of temporal blessings, a land of wheat
and barley, etc. To be short a land without parallel, a land wherein nothing is
wanting, but an obedient thankful people unto God for this land. And with
these blessings does God in courage us, and by these does he teach us, to walk
in his paths, and commandments.

3 Thirdly God teaches us, afflictionibus by punishments and afflictions, that
we may walk in his paths, and keep his statutes. For when his world and
blessings will not serve to instruct us, and teach us, he will teach us by
punishments and by judgments. So Psa. Before I was troubled I went wrong, but
now have I kept thy statutes. And these are requisite to reduce us out of the
ways of ignorance and blindenes wherein we walk.

Has not God taught us of late by afflictions, Appli.
and yet we will not learn? has he not taught us by noisome sicknesses, by
diverse diseases, and sundry kinds of death? has he not taught us, and does
he not yet now teach us by the fearful sickness of plague and pestilence in
this City? when we hear a lamentation and weeping consent of Children for
their parents, Parents for their children: Husbands for their wives, wives for
their husbands: Servants for their masters, masters for their servants. In our
Rama, there is a voice heard of lamentation, weeping and mourning. Mourning for
this great affliction of plague, but not mourning for our sins, which are the
cause of these plagues.

Will you therefore know the cause of these plagues, David tells you. Foolish
men are plagued for their sins, and because of their wickedness. Here is
the cause of our plagues which we consider not. It is our sins then that
plague us, not God; It is our origniall sins, our actual sins, our heinous
sins, our bloody sins, our cruel sins, our crying sins, that cry out
to God, that in his justice and judgments he cannot but plague us. It is our
pride and envy one against another: our gluttony and drunkenness, our
whoredom and adultery, our covetousness and cruelty, our profanation of the
Sabbath day, with other the like sins: these are the cause of our plagues.
And so long as we continue in sin, God will continue his plagues, still to
continue in these sins of pride, covetousness, whoredom and drunkenness.
These are peccata clamantia and vastantia conscientiam. These are crying
sins, heinous sins, and a man knows not where to appear before him, when
God shall summon him by death to appear before him, so that to sin is of
weakness, but to continue and persevere in sin, this is not only a sinful
life, but a life of sin it self.

If therefore we will not learn by his word, nor by his blessings, he will
teach us by his afflictions and plagues. He will cause his Angel to strike,
yet more then seauenty thousand of the plague and pestilence, as he has done
already in this City. Nay, he will stretch over Jerusalem, 4. King. 21. 13.
the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, he will wipe
Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, and turns it vpside down, he will forsake
the remnant of his inheritance, because we have done evil in his sight, and
provoked him to anger, because we have forsaken the Lord our God, that has so
lovingly taught us by his word and blessing, and yet we will receive no
instruction, Esaias. 1.
but still continue a sinful people, a people lade^ with iniquity, a seed of
the wicked, corrupt children which have forsaken the Lord, and provoked the
holy one of Israel to anger, these are the means whereby God teaches us.

Neither has he taught us only by this late sickness of plague and
mortality, He teaches us by this immoderate rain.
for this is the easiest punishment. And David chose this, to fall in the hand
of God, but also by these late inundations of rain and water, whereby he
seems so angry with the world, that were it not for his promise, he would
utterly drown it again, such is the wickedness of men, and the thoughts of
their hearts inclining to evil, that it even repents God that he made man.
Genesis 6. And though he has made him, yet he will destroy him again with
waters. Neither does he send this plague of rain and waters at such time of
the year when it should refresh and comfort the dry earth, and do good unto
men, but even in the time of Harvest, when we should reap and receive the
fruits of the earth. Whereby as we have made frustrate his expectation of
receiving fruits at our hands of his word: so has he made frustrate our
expectation of receiving the fruits of the earth, whereby I say, he seems
so, more then much moved with our sins, that he threatens by these raines
and waters, that which is far worse then a plague, even a famine, the most
grievous punishment of all punishments. When as ten acars of vines shall give
but a quart, and thirty bushels of seed shall give but an Epha, that he should
break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and that we should eat bread by
weight, and drink water with astonishment. Esaias. 5.
That we should have cleanness of teeth in all our Cities, Amos. 4.
and scarsnesse of bread in all our Coasts. For so did the Lord when he would
destroy Jerusalem, Ezech. 4.
stretch out his own hand against it, by a famine to overthrow it, when the
father did catch meat from the Son, the son from the Father: the mother from
her child, the child from the mother: the husband from the wife, the wife
from the husband: and their Children died, holding bread between their teeth.
Our sins I say, have deserved these plagues, this horrible intolerable
plague of famine. The sickness of plague and pestilence is a great and grievous
punishment, when we are suddenly stricken, that our friends forsake us, and are
oftentimes suddenly called away before repentance. The sword of our enemies is
a greater punishment, when we should fly before our enemies, they pursuing us
with swords in their hands to sacrifice us, when in vain we should cry out to
our merciless murderers to save our lives, the lives of our wives and
children, when there is no jot of mercy, or compassion in them, but draw out
their swords and sheath them in our bodies, the bodies of our Sons and of our
Daughters, but the rod of famine does far exceed all these, and passes the
degree of admiration. Letvs therefore by our timely repentance prevent these
plagues, and leave when God teaches us by these plagues and punishments to
walk in his ways.

And thus we have heard by what means God teaches us, by his word, by his
blessings, and by his afflictions, and also who is our teacher, even the Lord
God himself, God the Father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost, which
spoke by the mouth of all his prophets, since the world began. Teach me O Lord.

I have told you of some teachers, and yet I have not showed you all, I have
showed you David's teacher, who it is, the Lord God is the elects teacher. This
is the best teacher, and it shall be very necessary for us to know the worst
teacher also, that we may avoid his school, and take heed of his Doctrine.

As therefore God teaches the Elect his scholars, so the devil that old
serpent, and satan teaches the wicked his scholars most subtly and
cunningly to beguile and deceive them.

And his teaching he did begin betimes, even with our parents in Paradise in
the beginning, anon after God had begun to teach our parents the law, the devil
he snatched away that doctrine out of their hearts and instead thereof taught
them another pernicious lesson and doctrine, to their own woe and misery, and
ruin of themselves and their whole issue. And like a most cunning teacher,
that he might understand the mind and disposition of his scholar, how she
stood affected to apprehend his Doctrine, he subtillie moved a question, yea,
has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree in the Garden, by moving of
which question he had a wonderful advantage, and had laid a snare to entrap
her howsoever: for if he found her affection but lame and halting in the
Commandment of God, not absolutely and resolutely affected thereunto, then he
was ready by his suggestion and instinct, to make her give as much credit to a
cou^terco^mand, Ye shall not die at all, and thereunto added pleasing objects,
the beauty of the Apple, and that they should be Gods, and know good and evil.

Thus the Devil teaches cunningly, subtly, and powerfully: he is an ancient
teacher of long standing therefore he teaches cu^ningly. He is a Serpent:
there is his subtlety: he is a Dragon: there is his cruelty. He is a Lion:
there is his power: he is a Prince. Ephesians. 2. There Is his potencie. 1. Pet. 3.
The Prince that rules in the Air, and that works in the Children of
disobedience. He is a cunning Rhetorician, he has artemad vnguem, oratory at
his fingers end to persuade.

He is a cunning Arithmetician, he can number our virtues thirteen for twelve,
and thereby puff us up in pride and ambition. So he did the Pharisie, I am not
as other men are, extortioners, unjust, or as this Publican. I fast twice in
the week, I give tithe of all that I possess. Nay, he can number our sins
also, and set them down all for ciphers, he will tell the covetousness,
whoredom, pride, envy, they are set down all for ciphers, tush, they are
nothing. And when our sins are increased, that they oppress our conscience,
then he will ad one figure unto those ciphers, and then the sins are on the
other side innumerable, intolerable, impardonable. So he dealt with Caine,
Genesis 4.
My sins are more then can be forgiven, and thereby drive us to desperation.
But since his cunning and subtlety is apparent, I stand not upon this, my
purpose is to show you his Disciples who they are, and they are many, four
hundred false Prophets for one true Michea. 3. King 22.
Now therefore the Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these
prophets. And among all the Devils Disciples, The Atheist.
the Atheist is ranked in the first place. Psa. 14.
The fool has said in his heart there is no God. He is ashamed to say so with
his lips, for then the Birds of the Air, and the least creature in heaven or
earth would condemn him for a fool. Secondly, the fool has said in his
heart, for he that confesses him in tongue, and denies him in heart and mind
is a foolish Atheist. Thirdly, the fool has said in his heart there is no
God, for when there is no sense and feeling in his heart and conscience of
sin, which comes by the transgression of the Law, he denies the law of
God, he that denies the law of God, denies also the Lawgiuer God himself.
And so the fool has said in his heart there is no GOD. we must not therefore
learn of these teachers. Ex quibus Doctoribus? of what teachers shall we
learn then? shall we learn of the Hypocrite? no, for he is the Devils
disciple, and will cry Lord, Lord, with his lips only, and deny him in his
heart. Pastillos Rufillus olet. The Devil and these smell alike, they
simbolize very nearly in quality and condition, they never part here on
earth, and it is a chance if they part in hell, give him his portion with
Hypocrites. Math. 24. We must not learn of these teachers.

Teach me O Lord. Ex quibus Doctoribus, of what teachers shall we then learn?
shall we learn of heretics, they are the Devils disciples also, and teach the
doctrins of devils. In the first epistle of S. Paul to Timothy the fourth
chapter and first verse, the holy Ghost discovers these. Now the spirit
speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith,
and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils, which
speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot
iron, we must not learn of these, Teach me O Lord, Ex quibus? of whom then
shall we learn? shall we learn of the Pharisees? Pharisees.
they prefer their own righteousness before the righteousness of God in Jesus
Christ? Saduces.
shall we learn of the Saduces? they deny the resurrection, and affirm that
there is neither spirit nor Angel? Turk.
shall we learn of the great Turk? nay, his skill is to high for a Teacher,
God of heaven and Barron of Turkey, and yet there is sound difference between
these two titles.

Ex quibus? of whom then shall we learn? shall we learn of the Heretics
since Christ?

Shall we learn of the Manaches, Maneches.
that put two-beginnings, one of good, another of evil? or shall we learn of
the Menandrians that affirm the world was made by Angels. Menandrians.
They teach not right, for in the beginning God made heaven and earth. Genesis 1.
1.
Or shall we learn of the Arians? Arians.
which deny the (...) in Christ, that he was not (...) eiusdem essentiae cum
patre, Ga^ 1.
God equal with the Father, Valentines.
and of one and the same essence with the Father, or of the Valentines which
affirm Christ took not flesh of the Virgin Mary, Genesis 3.
They teach false, for the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head,
Pelagians.
or of the Pelagians, which say there is no original sin, they teach
falsely, for behold, I was conceived in sin, and borne in wickedness. Of the
Apolinarists, Apolinarists.
which affirm Christ had a body without a soul, and that the Godhead did
supply the stead and room of the soul? they teach falsely: for then Christ
was not perfect man of a reasonable soul and humane flesh subsisting.

Or of the Donatists? that put an imparitie in the three persons of the
Trinity, Donatists.
one to be greater and less then another. They teach falsely, for in Trinity
none is before or after another, but the three persons are eternal, and
coequall. We must not therefore learn of any of these, for God never taught
these Heresies which are the Doctrines of Devils.

Teach me O Lord, Text.
Ex quibus? of whom then shall we learn? of that adulterate Church, that
Hydra of Rome, with many heads, and so many Heresies, as they pernitiouslie
teach and maintain.

1 That the Church cannot err: For let God be true and every man a liar, God
did not teach them this.

2 That the Church of Rome is the only true Apostolic Church: for then there
were no other true Church.

3 That the authority of the Church is above the authority of the Scripture:
for then the authority of the Church were above the authority of the holy
ghost, by whom the holy Scriptures were written.

4 That they have immediate power to forgive sins; for immediately none can
forgive sins, but God only.

5 That there are seven Sacraments; for Christ never instituted but two only.

6 That there is Purgatory; for then there is a third place.

7 That works do justify unto salvation; for this is, to ioin our works and
merits with Christ. We must not learn of them these heresies: God did never
teach them. Neither did he teach,

8 That Ministers should not marry; Heb. 13.
for then marriage is not honorable among all men.

9 That prayers and inuocations of Saints is lawful: for this is to rob God of
his honor: God did never teach these, neither must we learn them of any
teachers. Ex quibus? of whom then shall we learn? shall we learn of their
Monks, their Monks of the Oliuet, their charter house monks? or ex quibus
ordinibus? of what orders shall we be of? shall we

1 Of the order of the Gilberines. 2 Of the order of the Humiliates. 3 Of the
order of the Justinians. 4 Of the order of the Ierominians. 5 Of the order of
the Canons regular. 6 Of the order of the Frisonaries. 7 Of the order of the
Cruch-Friers. 8 Of the order of the Grey-Friers. 9 Of the order of the
Blackfriars. 10 Of the order of the White-Friers. 11 Of the order of the
Dominicke-Friers. 12 Of the order of the Franciscan-Friers. 13 Of the order of
the Capuchian Friars. 14 Of the order of the new Hermites.
Let us hear no more for shame: for God did never teach any of these orders,
neither is their warrant in the Scriptures, for the name of any such order.
Teach me O Lord.

Ex quibus Doctoribus? of what teachers then shall we learn? God did never
teach them any of these heresies, or orders, which in silence I might have past
over, but hoc vnum, this one thing I may not, I cannot, which both
commandment, duty and conscience binds me to publish. For I am sure God did
never teach them those late published, railing, slanderous pasquils,
blasphemous apologies, pernicious aphorisms, foolish assertions, of the late
Paper-treason (as I may so call it) which of late was contexed against Gods
truth and his ordinance. Plut. in vita. Alexa.
We read that Alexander was angry with Aristotle, for publishing books of
Acroamaticall sciences, which he secretly had read to Alexander; and so by
publishing of them, would make these arts common. I do not think, but that
Antichristian Alexander of Rome, is now as angry with those his Disciples, for
publishing these books, which here in this place were of late fired, and
burned before your eyes, (as was very fit, that such light stuff, lighter then
chafe it self, should be burned) books I say containing Acroamaticall,
enigmatical, diabolical, super-diabolical positions. For, what do you think
of them? do you think them to be written only as an answer to the book of
our learned, and truly religious Sovereign, which by him of late was
published, entitled, An Apology for the defense of the Oath of Allegiance?
no: For therein his Majesty may yet truly say as Caesar said of Pompie: Plut.
in vita Caesar.
The victory had been our enemies, if they had had a Captain that could have
told how to overcome.

Or what do ye think of these books? do you think them to be written
only, to deprave the state of our Church, to disquiet the peace of our Sion,
to traduce and slander her Ministers, to seduce her people? this were hard
dealing enough, or do you think them to be written, only as a quib to our
Gentlemen, a scoff to our Nobles and worthies of Israel, and that which is
most of all in derision of Cesars own self, his second self, his whole race
royal? not only so, for these devilish positions, and blasphemous Querries as
they term them, were flat blasphemy against the holy spirit of God. He
that offends the king, may sometimes be pardoned, nay he that sins against
the Father and the Son may be forgiven, but he that sins against the holy
Ghost, shall not be forgiven. And what now can be thought of these base
pasquils, and most idle assertions contrived without wit, without art, without
discretion, without judgment, without the fear of God, without respect to his
ordinance, without head, without tail? It is much like the Embassage, which
the Romans sent to Bythinia, Marc. Cato.
who having chosen three Ambassadors, the one of them having the gout in his
feet, the other his head full of great cuts and gasps, the third being but a
fool, Cato laughing said, That the Romans had sent an Embassage, that had
neither feet, head, nor heart. And their Embassage by their books is much like
unto that without feet, it stands not by reason without head, it wants
judgment, without heart it wants understanding.

And to help to grace this their Embassage, they sent this shallow weak
stuff in as weak a vessel, by a woman forsooth, she must have the portage of
these books.

It is reported by Plutarch, Plut, in vita Tur. Camil*
that there were certain holy Geese, that were kept in the Capitol at Rome,
which with their noise did discover the practice of the Gauls, that were
scaling the Capitol. It seems there was one of these holy Geese kept unto
this time in their capitol of Rome, which being sent hither has discovered
the practice of these pernicious Gauls, that of long time have laid siege to
scale our Capitol, overthrow our peace, ouerturne our government, extinguish
the light of the Gospel, extirpate our Christian profession, eradicate our
christian religian, and have labored to ouerturne and cast down all the
foundations and pillars thereof. For what is this else but with Rabsakeh to
say, 4. King. 18. 29.
Let not Hesekiah* deceive you, nor make you to trust in the Lord, saying the
Lord will surely deliver us: hearken not unto Hesekiah, for thus says the king
of Ashur, make appointment and conditions of peace with me, and come out unto
me, and let every man eat of his own vine, and of his own Fig Tree. So say
these Idolatrous Rabsakehs, Let not your Hesekiah deceive you, nor make you to
trust in the Lord, saying, the Lord will surely deliver us, hearken not unto
your Hesekiah for thus says the great Ashur of Rome: Make appointment and
conditions of peace with me, and come out unto me, and then let every man eat
of his own vine, and of his own Fig Tree. But if these be their conditions of
peace, to set heaven and earth together by powder and paper: let us not hearken
unto them. Teach me O Lord.

Neither may this ink and paper treason, so stop the powder treason, that it
shall yet be forgotten, for God did never teach them, that unheard of impiety,
that matchless cruelty, that infand villainy of the powder treason in the
Parliament; whereby they would have brought upon us a diabolical domesday
unawares and unprepared without the commission of God upon us all, upon Cedar
and shrub, king and subject, priest and people: upon all the worthies of
Israel, upon all the grave Senators and counselors: upon all the priests of
the Lord: upon all the Prophets of Judah: upon all the people of Israel. Fight
neither against great nor small, 3. King. 22. 31
save only against the king of Israel, was Arams charge. But h^ere, fight not
only against the king of Israel, but also against the whole race royal of the
king of Israel. Let not the root escape, nor the branch go scot free, but let
all feel that fatal blow, that cruel blow, that merciles blow of these
infernal Gunners.

Neither did this cruel feritie extend it self against the living only, but
against the dead also. That they which are asleep in the Lord, and are at rest
from their labors, should not rest from their labors. God did never teach
this. Teach me O Lord.

Thus we see all other teachers have their defects, but David's teacher has
none: he is perfect, as his way is perfect, and therefore as we have learned
the Teacher who it is, so let us learn his way.

Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes. Text. 4. Circ.


This is the sum or total in his request: this is the way that we must
walk in, and he that is the way, teaches us this way: he that is the truth,
teaches us this truth: he that is the life, brings us unto this life. This
is the elects way, this way leads to all happiness. Hac itur ad superos, this
is the way to heaven, and herein observe the narrowness of the way.

Narrow is the way that leads to life, Doctr. Mat 7.
and therefore in the 35. verse of this Psalm, it is called Semita, a path.
Direct me in the path of thy commandments, there is the narrowness of this way.

If the way then to heaven be narrow, Instruction.
and the gate straight, I wonder how many of the Daughters of Sion will do to
go that narrow way, and get in at that narrow gate, since their apparel they
wear has so much compass about it. Those Daughters have the seven properties
of Materia prima, that is, appetens cuiuslibet formoe, to be of every form
and fashion, until they be of the fourth property of that Materia informis,
deformed without shape, without decency, without modesty. I can be silent to
speak of these shapes and new fashions in apparel every day, for the
maintenance whereof, they rack their rents, grind the faces of the poor,
turn hospitality out of doors, and out of commonweal. But this one thing of
their filthy painting their faces, like dead pictures, David's teacher never
taught them: he cannot abide it, and I cannot tell whether I were best dispraise
it, or wonder at it in silence.

Saint Cyprian, Deum ipsum inducit loquentem, brings in God himself speaking
against them, Non metuis oro quae talis es? Do thou not fear that art such a
one so disguised. When the resurrection shall come, thy maker will not know
thee, he will say, opus hoc meum non est, nec haec imago nostra est. This is
none of my work: this is not after our Image and likeness: you are a great
deal better complexioned then I made you. If they did but consider this, or
that which Esaias has, Esaias. 40.
That all flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof is as the flower of
the field; it would somewhat surely daunt their painted bravery and pride: or
if they did with David here consider the narrowness of the way, they would be
more respective with him to learn the ways of the Lord. Teach me O Lord.

Secondly, if the way to heaven be narrow, I wonder how the drunkard will go
that way, 2. Instruction.
when he cannot stand upright in the way, and how he will travel this narrow
way, since he reeleth too and fro and stands as David describes him.

Drunkenness is, qualitas patibilis, he cannot dissemble it if he would, the
fool knows he is drunk because his speech bewraieth him, and as the maid
said to Peter, Thou art of Galile, for they speech bewraieth thee, so it may be
said to the Drunkard, Thou art drunk, for thy speech bewraieth thee.

Drunkenness is his verb imparsonall, and he declineth it roundly, Delectat,
delectabat, delectauit. etc this is his summum bonum, his felicity and chief
delight, hac non itur, this is not the way, but David's teacher shows us still
the same, Teach me the way, wherein secondly note,

The difficulty of the way to heaven. Doct.


Heaven is called olympus, a hill: it is hard to travel up thither: we must
take pains with Jonathan and his armor-bearer, to scrabble up thither upon our
hands and our feet, between, the rocks of this world; else we shall not come
there. And this briefly is David's way. Text.
Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes.

Doce me Domine. Teach me O Lord. This word (...) or (...) Doce^, serves lastly
to correct all unbridled masterlesse Schismatikes, such as run upon their own
heads, and think themselves better learned then their teachers, I mean
disorderly Brownists, masterlesse Schismatikes lawless Sectuaries, that
impugn orders and constitutions established by authority, by the ordinance of
God, and agreeable to his word. Let them learn here of David, Doce me domine,
David is in the accusative case, and follows the verb, so will not these
parisyllabicall sectuaries, that would bring a paritie into our church the
mother of confusion: they will be in the nominative case, and go before the
verb, before their teachers, before their Pastors, before the ordinance of
God. And the true badge, congniscence or marks, whereby ye shall know these
pernicious and seditious sectuaries, and distinguish them from the true
children of God, are these which follow. And as Christ said of false Prophets,
Mat. 7. 16. 20.
by their fruits ye shall know them: so I say of these sectuaries, by their
fruits ye shall know them, by these notes and marks ensuing, ye shall know
them. And first by their Discipline ye shall know them.

1 An unchristian Discipline, not yet christened: it wants a certain name:
so that if a man should catechize these men, and ask them, what is the name of
your Discipline, they could not answer you.

2 A Discipline that banisheth such Bishops, as Christ and his Apostles
appointed, allowed, and approved.

3 A discipline that knows not whether her Officers should be ecclesiastical
or lay men.

4 A discipline that disdaineth the ancient fathers and general Councels.

5 A discipline that to serve her own turn, will wrest and wring the
Scriptures as a nose of wax.

6 A discipline that would be very chargeable, by reason of her train, that
must be all maintained by a common purse.

7 A discipline that gives her Children very strange names in Baptism,
instead of Robert, Thomas and John, The Lord is near: More trial,
Reformation, Discipline, Joy again, Sufficient, From above, Free-gift, More
fruit, Dust, etc. Names in our English phrase not very usual.

8 A discipline that oppugneth the authority of Princes in causes
Ecclesiastical, and herein they join with the Papists.

9 A discipline that turns all things vpside down, Churches into chambers:
Bishops into Snidicks, and superintendents: Ministers into Senators, and bench
Presbyterians, and that if they might be suffered with their discipline, would
make a new metamorphosis of the world, and would with Phaeton, Son to
Phoebus, if they might have the guiding of the chariot of the Sun overthrow the
same, and burn the whole world, and set all on fire with their Discipline.
Therefore by their discipline ye shall know them.

2 Secondly, by this badge or mark ye shall know them: they are always in the
optatiue mood, and are known by the sign vtinam, I would to God things were
otherwise: I would to God the church were reformed, her orders and
constitutions altered: but it were great pity they should be in the potentiall
mood, and have power to do it.

3 Thirdly, they have inward marks, whereby ye shall know them.

1 They are not a little malicious: they lighten and thunder malice against all
that will not be of their rank and discipline, and with the Basaliske would
kill them with their looks if they could, therefore by their malice and envy
ye shall know them.

2 Secondly, ye shall know the^ by this mark, that they are not a little mouthie
and clamorous to traduce and slander other men. They are set on fire, their
teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

3 Thirdly, ye shall know them by this mark, that they are very busybodies in
such matters as do not sometimes appertain unto them. They will with the
Pharisees find fault with the disciples of Christ, if it be but for the rubbing
of the ears of Corn, or for not washing their hands, this cacoethes or evil
custom is most apparent in them.

4 Fourthly, by this mark ye shall know them: they will speak evil of their
Pastors and teachers that are regular, and are not of their stamp. Nay, they
will conspire against them, and this the author hereof may say, as David did,
Save me O Lord, from the conspiracy of the wicked, and save me from the
insurrection of the wicked doers, which have whet their tongue like a sword,
and shoot out their Arrows even bitter words. By their slanders and
conspiracies, and combinations ye shall know them.

5 Fifthly, ye shall know them by this mark: they smell of Hypocrisy, and
herein they sympatnize and symbolize with the devil himself. Apud Indos aes
adeo lucidum, etc. Amongst the Indians there is a kind of brass of that
claritie and perfect golden color, that it can by no means be discerned from
gold, but by the smell thereof only. These seditious sectuaries much resemble
that brass, for they set such a golden color upon themselves of singularity
and pureness, that by no other means they can be discerned from the true
children of GOD, but by the smell only of these aforenamed defects of malice,
slander, conspiracy and hypocrisy, therefore by their smell ye shall know them.

Therefore I would not have you mistake me here, that I do here condemn the
godly zealous man, which tenderly loves Gods word, and walks vprightlie in
his ways with David, for by these aforesaid marks ye shall know them, and by
these marks ye may easily distinguish and put difference between the upright,
religious, and zealous man, and the masterlesse, seditious, and pernicious
sectuarie: These marks and characters are stamped upon them, and make them
demonstrable to the world: these are principles and first heads of disorder,
and break the parke-pale of the government of our church: neither do I hereby
dissuade any from hearing any man's Sermons whom they affect, for hear all men
that preach the Gospel as much as thou may: He that refuses to hear his
prayer shall be abominable, but to this end, partly because a number of the
laity, the roes and hinds of the field, which will start aside at the cracking
of a stick, will refuse their own parish Churches, and to hear their own
Pastors preach, be they never so learned or well habited in speech, because
they wear a Surplisse, and make a cross upon a child, and will run after
and get them a heap of teachers that speak evil of them that are in
authority: these are truce breakers, false accusers, and intemperate fierce
despisers of them that are good: that will rail against Bishops, and curtaile
the title of kings, as in their prayers oftentimes, as is most manifest. And
partly because many of my brethren of the ministry, that have excellent
parts, and gifts, and are called into the Lords harvest, to labor in the
Vineyard in their callings, will notwithstanding, rather then they will wear a
Surplisse, or submit themselves to authority commanded by Gods ordinance,
leave that magnum opus, that great work of preaching the Gospel undone, yea,
utterly disclaim and renounce their callings, to the hindrance of the Gospel;
and undoing of themselves, and their families. Alas, Mat, 27.
Christ which preached here on earth, rather then he would disclaim his
calling, of preaching the Gospel, would notwithstanding his purple robe, his
Crown of Thorns, his Scepter of reed, that was imposed upon him in derision,
preach the Gospel still.

That same triple exaggeration of Christ unto Peter, should be me thinks a
great motive unto all us of the Clergy, not to renounce this work for any
respect. Peter love thou me? Peter love thou me? etc. and it is well noted
by one, that Peter was sorry that Christ should ask him the third time, Peter
love thou me: John 21, 17.
Simon Peter answered, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love
thee. And shall not we be as sorry that Christ shall so often tax us by his
love, and thereby inioyne us unto the exigence of this duty, that we have
notwithstanding left it undone? Let us not therefore, my brethren, I beseech you
in the fear of God, be so perverse unto god and his ordinance, but let us with
David learn to be in the accusative case, and to come after the verb, as he
did when he said, Teach me O Lord. And let us not leave this work of preaching
the Gospel for any respect, and renounce our callings, and offend our good
God, and cause an amazedness in the Roes and Hindes of the field, an apostasy
and relapse in the ignorant and simple, and hereby let them stand stock-stil
in piety, virtue and godliness, but be rather all of one mind, and love as
brethren, and submit themselves unto the ordinance of God, as David did, Teach
me o Lord, follow the verb, and be subject to authority. And so let us come
to the second part which is the promise I will keep it with my whole heart.
Doctr.


Promises are made either absolute or respectine: as we distinguish* either
absolutely or conditionally, David does not make his promise absolutely but
co^ditionally: he says not I will learn and keep thy law without teaching,
Text.
but first teach me, and then I will learn and keep it, wherein out of this
copulative and, and, Doct.
we may observe,

Grace always has the precedencie, and goes before good works and
righteousness.

We cannot walk in the laws of God before we be enabled by grace. David
could not so much as make a promise of keeping the Law of God before the Lord
had taught him. Paul could not preach before he was called by grace, (...)
and therefore knowing the necessity and utility hereof in all his Epistles,
Peter Martyr.
first wishes them grace, Grace be with you and peace, etc.

1 For there is gratia praecedens, or operans, a grace going before, that
works in us, and brings us from that blindness and ignorance, that is in
us by our original corruption, to the school of regeneration, and true
knowledge of Christ. And of this grace Paul says, Not I, but grace that was in
me.

2 Then there is gratia cooperans, a grace working together with our wills, and
our wills working together with grace. And this is that which Paul speaks of,
And his grace which was in me, was not in vain; not in vain, as it was given,
not in vain, as it was received; for even as the rain falling on the earth
mollifieth the same, and both work to bring forth fruits, so the grace of God
being distilled into the will and mind of man, work both together to the
bringing forth of the fruits of righteousness. So David here, Teach me O
Lord, instill this grace into my heart, and I will keep thy laws, yea with my
whole heart. Nay, God goes a step further with his Children by grace: for
there is

3 Gratia preueniens, a preventing grace. Psalm. 82. His grace shall prevent
me. So in Genesis 20. 6. I kept thee from doing this thing: and that thou
should not sin against me, therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. God
does prevent his children from sin: nay, there is more,

4 Gratia subsequens, a subsequenting grace Ps. 49 Gratia eius subsequ^tur me,
his grace shall follow me, he shall set a crown of pure gold upon my head.
And thus much out of the copulative, And, which shows, grace goes before
righteousness.

I will. Tex.
Wherein for breuities sake observe:

There is in the regenerate free will to will good, Doct.
or righteousness, but not to perform but by grace, velle mihi adiacet,
perficere autem non inuenio. To will is present with me, but I find not how to
perform the same. I see a law in my members, rebelling against the law of my
mind. But David says here, I will keep it. Text.
Wherein observe, Secondly,

There is in the regenerate conditionally by grace free will in righteousness,
2 Doct.
to keep the Law of God. I will keep it with my whole heart, I will offer thee
free-will-sacrifice, I will praise thy name.

For if there were no free will at all in the elect, to perform righteousness
by grace, then were grace given in vain, and received in vain, and of
necessity it must be granted, that men should stand still in the ways of God,
without any will or endeavor of action at all: and let grace work in vain, as
on senseless stocks and stones. Nay rather grace being given us, we must bend
our affections and actions to walk in the law of God, and to keep it with our
whole heart. And yet when ye have done all this, free will unto
righteousness, even in the elect, est manca, maimed and weak. Caro habet suam
voluntatem etiam in pijs, as Cyprian says, the flesh still rebelleth against
the spirit, so long as this union stands, and until it be separated by
death. So we come unto the third place, Text.
wherein we observe the thing promised.

I will keep it.

And here may a question be demanded, Quest.
whether the regenerate (for of them we speak in this place) may keep the
law of God or not.

The answer must be with this distinction.

1 It is one thing to keep the law of God, perfect absolutely, perfectly, as
the law requires.

2 And it is another thing to keep the law of God respective, respectively, to
the uttermost of a man's power, and with all his endeavor, to have respect unto
the law of God, to keep it so near as he can.

The first way none can keep it, no man has kept it, but only vnus Christus,
God and man, none but Christ can keep the law perfectly, as the law requires
perfect obedience unto justification, but only Christ, he has fulfilled it.
In the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy
will O God, I am content to do it, yea, thy law is within my breast. And in
Christ is God well pleased. Matt. 3. which he would not have been, if he had
not kept his law perfectly.

The second way, we may keep the law of God, that is, have respect unto the
law of God, unto the uttermost of our power, and with all our endeavor to keep
the same.

David says, Psalm. 119. 33. Luke. 1.
I will keep it unto the end.

Zachary and Elizabeth were both just before God and walked in his ordinance
and commandments for to do them. Paul says, I have fought the good fight; I
have kept the faith; I have fulfilled my course, from henceforth there is a
crown of glory laid up for me: yet none of all these did keep the law so
perfectly as the law required, to justify themselves by the law. But they kept
the law of God, with that respect as David had unto the law of God. Psalm. 119.
I will have a respect unto all thy commandments. Solutio.
And so we are said to keep the law of God.

If a master set his Scholar a coppie excellently written, and bid his
scholar do as he has done, if the same scholar has respect unto his
masters coppie, and frame the proportion of his letters so near as he can to
his masters coppie, the same scholar does as his Master bid him, and as well
as he can, and so is said to keep his Masters commandment.

Even so we beloved, God has set us a law to keep, and bids us keep it.
Deuteronomy. 1. 6. If we do keep it as well as we can with all our endeavors, and
have respect unto it, we are said to keep his commandments, though we
cannot keep them in such perfection, as our Master Christ has done: he is so
excellent, so perfect, that we must still learn of him, and yet come short of
him.

So then because we cannot keep the law of God so perfectly as the law
requires, Conclusio. Argumenti
shall we not keep it at al? absit, God forbid.

If our earthly parents command us to travel up an exceeding high mountain,
Sl.
whose top we cannot attain unto shall we not therefore indenour to climb up at
all? shall we not go up as far as we can? God forbid.

Because in Isaac shall thy seed be blessed, Sl.
which cannot be if Isaac be slain, shall not Abraham therefore keep the
commandment of God, and do his endeavor to perform the commandment by
offering up his son Isaac? God forbid: Look thou to the commandment of God
above all respects, and do thy endeavor to keep his law, and have a respect to
keep it, and this is that which God requires at thy hands. August.
Si quod possimus agamus, caetera peragat Christus. If we endeavor and do what
we can to keep the law of God, what shall be defective in us, Christ will
supply by his perfectness and righteousness. And this is David's meaning, when
he says, I will keep thy law, nay, he must also persevere in this, and
therefore he says,

I will keep it unto the end. Text.


Here is the continuance and time limited of David's promise in keeping the law
of God: first he will keep it, then unto the end,

Not for an hour, or a day, or a year, but ad finem vsque, there is the time
limited, so long as our time is limited. Wherein observe.

We must go on still, Doct.
proceed still, continne, persist, and persevere in the ways of God, and a
sanctified life, ad finem vsque, unto the end,

David says, I will keep it unto the end. And Paul, But continue thou unto
the end, 2 Timothy 3. 14.
was his charge unto Timothy. John. 8. 37.
And our savior Christ says, If ye continue in my word, ye are my Disciples.

What shall it profit a Merchant to travel a long voyage, and to make
ship-wracke in the Haven? Even so, what shall it profit a man to live a virtuous
life a while, Simil.
and when he should enter into the haven of rest, make ship-wracke of faith and
a good conscience?

Hence are all Apostates to be reproved that decay in grace, Instruction
and through the pleasures and treasures of the world, fall to relapse from a
Christian life, that Christ and his Gospel has no power or place in them at
all. I do not speak of the Jewish Apostasy, which is absolutely to deny
Christ the Son of God, and Savior of the world, but of an Apostasy of
Christians, that in the beginning put on Christ in baptism, and utterly
disclaim and renounce a Christian life afterward, or while they confess
Christ in word and profession, deny him in their actions. This is not to
continue unto the end: This is an Apostasy when they have heard the word,
presently to relapse and slide from the same, like the dog unto his vomet, or
like the Sow that was newly washed, to wallow in the mire, but we must keep it,
and that unto the end, there is our continuance.

To conclude therefore with the time, we have heard of David's request, and of
his promise.

In the request, Teach, there is his ignorance.

Secondly, Teach me: there is his progress in the way, and continuance in his
journey.

Thirdly, Jehovah: O Lord: there is his teacher; for God is the elects Teacher.
And we have heard by whom he teaches, by himself immediately, by his word
mediately, by himself in his Godhead, by his Son in his manhood, by his
holy spirit, which spoke by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world
began. We have heard also by what means he teaches us: by his blessings, by
his afflictions and judgments. So he has taught us, and yet still does teach
us. God grant we may learn his will, lest in his wrath he sweep us away by
plagues and pestilence, or by famine, which is his most grievous rod, to punish
our inflexible stony hearts, that will not bend, that will not yet learn his
ways. O Lord, we confess thou have just cause rather to disclaim and
renounce us, then to receive us again into thy favor. We have deserved, O
Lord, the full viols of thy wrath and indignation to be powered down upon us.
There is, o Lord, no tractablenes at al in us unto hy Laws, though thou by
these thy favorable punishments do still teach us. But (gracious God) still
proceed to teach us, and be gracious unto thine inheritance. Gracious God,
still proceed to teach us thy way, and direct us in the paths of thy
Commandments. Still incline our hearts unto thy testimonies, and turn away
our eyes, lest they behold vanity, and quicken us in the way. Still let thy
Gospel be published: and be gracious unto Sion, and build thou the walls of
Jerusalem. Still send forth laborers into thy harvest, and faithful Pastors
to feed their flocks. And remove, O Lord of hosts, all pernicious heretics
and schismatikes, that seduce thy people, and trouble thy flock. Still be a
prop to thy Gospel, and government, here planted in this land, against the
inundations and incursions of troublesome and perverse sectuaries, that too
impudently and saucilie disturb the peace of our Sion. Let not thy faithful
Pastors be men-pleasers, and sow pillowes to their elbowes, to indulge them in
their backwardnes and perverseness: but let them truly preach thy Laws, and
maintain thy Gospel, thy truth, and this thy government, according to thine
ordinance and appointment. Let them remember what the Lord says unto his
Prophet: Ezekiel. 2.
Thou son of man fear them not, nor be afraid of their looks, but tell the
house of Israel of their sins, and Judah his transgressions, wherewith they
have provoked the Lord God unto anger. And give us al grace (O Lord) that we
may keep thy laws, though not perfectly, yet carefully and respectively, to
our best endeavors, and that we may walk therein, and continue and persevere
unto the end, looking unto Jesus Christ the author and finisher of our faith,
which comes quickly, and his reward is with him, to give to us a kingdom,
not earthly, but heavenly; a crown of gladness, a crown of joy, a crown of
all eternal happiness, in his eternal and everlasting kingdom. Unto which
place he vouchsafe to bring us, for his dear son Christ Jesus sake. To whom
with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

