A Remembrance of the Honors due to the Life and Death of ROBERT Earl of
Salisbury, Lord Treasurer of England, etc.



Imprinted at London for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop near
Christ Church door. 1612.

To the honored belouers of the well deserving worth of the late deceased
Robert Earl of Salisbury, Vicount Cranborne, Baron of Essindon, principal
Secretary to his Majesty, Master of the Court of wards and Liueries,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, Knight of the noble order of the
Garter, and one of his Highness most honorable privy Council.
IN the height of admiration (which my thoughts conceived of the deserved worth
of this late deceased nobleman) I imagined many deservedly bound to offer to
his name, signs of love and duty in a high measure, which I now find contrary:
Scholars I see (in these evil days) give no luster to Nobillity, but
neclegently suffer their renownes to consume with their bodies, the pens of
long lasting poesy, writes not in times forehead, virtues records to
posterity, but carelessly gives way to envy (that canker-worme to greatness) to
eat out all remembrance of mortallitie: some (I know) will controulingly
censure, and give sentence of this my ouer-bold presumption, a task more
befitting a most excellent Artist, but the reason of this my bold adventure is,
because I see the Muses lips locked up, and all loath to enter into the
description of his honorable lives pilgrimage: be as it be will, I stand
patiently armed against the biting scoffs of selfe-conceited wits, with this
reasonable excuse, I confess ignorance, and with all give them thus to
understand, I never tasted one drop of Parnassus fountain, but yet care added
to industrious trauells is able to perform matters of importance, your high
worth may Judge of my meaning, my love to the deceased begot this boldness,
therefore for his sake (whom you honored in life time) daine to afford one
cheerful countenance to my humble affection, for I stand like poor blind
Irus before the worlds lottery, casting in my lots either of good or evil
fortune, where if I chance to light but upon any reasonable prize of good
liking, I have my desire, but if all happen blankes, I depart ouer-loaden with
burdens of discontent to my rustic cell, and their pining lie consumed away
in penance for this my presumption: so in duty I kiss my hand, and humbly take
my leave.

Richard Jhonson.

To the world.
IF in the depth of my intyre affection, long borne to the honored house of the
Cecils, I take upon me plainly to set down, according to my simple
understanding, the honorable augmented dignities of the late deceased Earl of
Salisbury, and therein offend some peremtory censurers, I lay the fault upon my
presuming love, and make it my privilege of excuse. The temporizing world (I
know) full of envy, ingratitude and unkindness, has nursed up fame-killing
falsehood (the greatest enemy to naked truth) (not valewing true worth)
clamerously to wrong this desertfull statist, by detracting from his honor,
times applauding graces, a cankering deisease (after death) subject to
greatness: but let black mouthed envy be of a more favorable carriage, for
inocent truth before the worlds broad eye stands combatant, and will asuredly
defend, his honorable deseruings from his greatest disparrages, Fame I see
stands ready pressed to give the world notice of his worlds late aduancements,
first, he had a time, a happy time, I may say, when desert in his prime of
youth, won him a multitude of honorable friends, to continue to his age: for
being (even but in the bloome) of a virtuous inclination, he so tied his
Princes affection to his succeeding preferments, that he obtained by
instruction of his father the Lord William Burleigh the perfect rules of a well
governed Statist. Now hear to make a short flourish how by degrees he climbed
to the top of all these his high dignified titles and places of honor, he thus
fortunatly proceeded: first unto the age of sixteen years, he was only
tutord under his father and in his fathers house, without any other education:
at which time of his age, by his virtuous mothers will and free gift, of
thirty pounds yearly given to a college in Cambridge, he was sent in person
to carry it, and be the presentor of the same himself, where at that young
age he commenced, according to the order of schools, and was made master of
Art, after this, in short time, by the favor of Queen Elizabeth he was in
the presence of the state royal, created Knight at Theobalds, and immediately
to his greater aduancements, in the year of our Lord. 1588. he was sent over
into France to accompany our then English Ambassador, Henry the great Earl of
Darby, a grace fitting so noble a spirit as he was like to be, Englands
buisinesse there ended, he returned and in short time after, merited by his
well deserving endeavors, many court honors, as under Secretary to Queen
Elizabeth then principal Secretary of Estate, then one of the Queens Majesty's
most honorable privy Council, these dignified places, in the eye of his
honored father, were put unto his charge, which he so wisely carried, that he
obtained even the common grace of the multitude, in which authorities he bore
himself in the worlds equal balance, till the death of his father, and then
it pleased his gracious Mistress Queen Elizabeth, to bestow upon him the
office of the Master of Wards and liueries, which he inioyed with the rest,
till the death of his said Sovereign: but our now royal King, coming to this
his Imperial kingdom, and looking into the worth of this man, weakened not any
of these his aduancements, but added more strength to the same, by creating
him, first, a Barron, next a Vicecount, then an Earl, then Knight of the
honorable order of the Garter, one of the Council of Estate, and lastly Lord
High treasurer of England, the greatness of which places, planted His renown
in the feelds of succeeding times. I must not ouerpasse his Chancellorship of
the University of Cambridge, that nurse of witdecking schollors, whose learned
pens might let the world know all his fame worthy actions, but time I see
proves ungrateful, and would have his memory buried in forgetfulness. Awake
sluggish muses, awake! In his life might thousands of noble objects befound
wherein your noble spirits might tower high: It is a task only fitting rare
pens, and not for me, the worst of many thousands, to give him that
immortallity, which the baseness of this worthless time will hardly afford,
honor him, kind scholars, with some sonnets that living honored you, and
cause him to live, in dispight of repining fate, This is the richest Epithet
my love can bestow upon him, he was borne honorable, experience made him wise,
educatio^ learned, and these were his honors, yet his cares were great to
maintain them. He always took nerest into his favors such as were best
aquainted with wisdoms secrets, I am loath to be long in my induction, least
you grow weary, therefore I hear make my period, Wishing you to be contented,
with my willingness to please.

Richard Ihonson.

The Commemoration and Rights, due to the life and death, of the Right
Honorable, Robert, Earl of Salisbury, late deceased, Lord high Treasurer of
England, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
THe original of Nobility, may well be compared to a small spring of water,
whose good desert makes a grateful King to enlarge to a great River, for the
which he is bound to pay duty to the said King his Ocean, not unfitly aplyed
to the late deceased noble personage, Robert Earl of Salisbury, for that all
his Springs and currants were so well ordered, that they paid their full due to
the royal Ocean of his two Sovereigns, Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, and
our now liege Lord and monarch King James of great Britain: For even both of
them by a singular Judgment, inspired from God above, cast not only an
eyesight but an in-sight into the behavior and carriage of this man, upon
whom God had bestowed in all his actions a deserving wisdom, in regard whereof
they both graciously bestowed upon him many rooms of honor, but especially our
now suruiuing and oueraigne, who being a most prudent prince, retained an
inward examination of the strength and habillitie of his Judgment, concerning
public causes, wherewith he was plentifully enriched, and endued with the
treasure of state-vnderstanding, as for example, he is a right Noble man, that
ascends to the titles of Nobility, by virtuous actions merited, which is the
calling that dignifieth greatness: It is not the rich revenues, fair
possessions* pleasant houses, many Lordships, and infinite riches, that can
make a noble man, (all are external actions, and subject to the sudden change
of fortune*) but to be wise, temperate, and discreet in all the actions of his
life and conversation: One virtuous exploit is not sufficient to make a m^n to
be accounted ever after noble, but a cont^nuance in the same nor is every one
that lives virtuously, forthwith a Noble man, or a Gentleman: but he only
whose virtue is profitable to his King and country, and th^se and such like
men, his Majesty, by a secret in-sight of knowledge, esteems worthy to bear
coats of arms, and in his mere affections vouchsafes to give them the
inioy^ng of diverse honorable privileges, for services done to his highness
and the kingdom: coats of arms* thus gamed, rema^ne unto their offspring,
to incite them, never to be weary of well deserving, and does not only teach to
follow ancestors but also to guide successors; for William Lord Burleigh, Lord
Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth, and Father to this Honorable Earl deceased, was
the first spring of this house graced, on whose life, spent in the benefit of
his country, may be a subject for all writers to exercise their pregnant wits
on, and employ their learned hands. The second assay of this houses honor, was
partly by imitation, for under the wise, and state-experienced tutelage of the
famous Councellor William Lord Burleigh before named, the late deceased Earl
(his son) had his education, and under his wing sucked the Milk of deep
understanding: by which help he so temp^red himself, that all his actions
seemed to tend to naught but honor, vertuou^ly snatching at it, even in his
infancy: and as the virtuous children of Nobility, are the hopeful plants of
a commonweal, so his youth (by his Fathers careful instructions) tempered
with wisdom, promised succesfull honor, for having attained scarce to the
years of man, and newly entered into the world but his quality drew him into
the knowledge of the world, his noble towardness begot him estimation and that
estimation extended into the assured hope of succeeding greatness: for by a
secret instinct of nature, helped by continual practice, taken from the
council of his Father, became so ready and apt in state imploiments, that he
seemed to be like fish in the sea, in propper place: by which means, his
wise-regarding Princess Queen Elizabeth, in her time, and in his Fathers
days gave him the first step to advancement, made him her principal
Secretary, and a Counceller of estate, a burden of high charge, but eased
with the sweet imbracements of dignity: Being settled in this his first
honorable place, his opinion began to have some scope and liberty, and by the
general consent of the wisest Statesmen, observed convenient for this calling
and office, in the managing of public businesses, which was not dispatched
without much care and contemplative study: but here mark the protection of
heaven over this man, whose forward spring had been mixed with times biting
malice, had not an equality in carriage guided him, for in his first grace he
was not only deprived of his fathers help by death, which was the conducter
of his nature and fortunes, but also lost his dear and gracious Mistress
Queen Elizabeth, in whose life consisted all his honors and earths happiness.
Those two great losses had been sufficient even to have curbd the forwardness
of all these his noble preferments, by the devouring teeth of envy, which upon
sundry supposit^ons, was (even then) whetted to make hauock of all his
fortunes, here was his wisdom tried upon the tutch, the world and time grew
unconstant, began to pick quarrels, misdeemd honest actions, and invented false
informations, yet was his cares so watchful, that he saved himself from the
subtilest snare of secret envy.

At this time the good Physician, and saluer of all sores, our most gracious
and prudent King possessing his royal rights, the whole state of England, and
the government thereof, came to this his own Kingdom with such magnificence,
as all Christendom admired if, here being settled with peace to the great joy
of us all, with his clear and pure shining judgment, he qualified all
occasions of discontent, seuering dross from pure gold, sollid pearls from
liquid hailestones, manacles from bracelets, businesses of trouble, from
employments of honor, and like a perfect Physician applied precious salues to
every sore of the common wealth, adding honor upon honor according to desert
and calling: Amongst many others in the rank of nobility, graced by time and
fortune, this late deceased Earl of Salisbury, by his wise carriage and
honorable accomplishments, (which here we omit) begot such an entier respect
and inducing opinion of worth in the Kings regardfull mind, that his honors of
estate, by degrees came to the height, first (not disparaging his former graces
given by Queen Elizabeth (but adding more luster to his bright spreading
fortunes) it pleased the Kings Majesty, whose wise and gentle disposition is to
advance the desertfull, first to give him the honorable title of a Uiscount,
then of an Earl, with many other promotions and offices of greatness and
charge, of the which he returned contentfull satisfaction to his King and his
contry, and likewise being a councellor of estate to his highness, attending
near his royal person, offered up his hearts trust in professed and true
loyalty, as the secrets of many court businesses can verify: process of time,
and his highness favor, lifted him higher in his contries graces, for at last
he was created Knight of the honorable order of the Garter, and to conclude
greatness was made Lord high Treasurer of England, an Office of Estate
answerable to his ingenious judgment.

It was the Lord which gouernd all those his actions, and still instructed his
mind in the right way of preferment, it was the Lord that plast him in
authority, in these honored offices, to do right unto all men without respect
of persons, which weighty burdens thus laid upon him, he carefully
discharged, and with great wisdom dispatched all state businesses put unto
him, to the great ease of his royal sovereign, and comfort of his contry: he
still remembered what he was, where he was, and what he should come to be, and
having a continual care of his high established honors, with the eyes of
wisdom he governed his family, and retainers about him, where if he saw
sheltred under his wing any deceitful Parasite, any male-contented mutener,
any murmuring whisperer, any infringer of honesty, ambitious oppressor, or
unmerciful briber: if he found any such about him, he swept them away like
Cob-webs, because they were consuming cankers to his honors, bloud-suckers of
his estate, and betrayers of his prosperity.

Thus purging his house of these pestiferous ^uilr, he entertained men of
truth, and placed about him such in office, as feared God and loved the King:
Oh thou mirror to succeeding times, thou have left thy well governed quallities
an example to posterity, and a never decaying ornament to all thy offspring:
But again to our purpose: virtue was his life's guide, and in his breast both
Arts and law reposed, all his chiefest and principal endeavors were exercised
in such actions, as advanced the glory of Gods truth, the peace, the quiet, and
the prosperity of the commonwealth, and surely, that Nobleman, thus affected
to his coun^ries good, is in a right way to the attaining of a good estimation,
grace and favor with all men, as well Prince and Peers, as the common sort of
people.

In like sort, this groundwork of our subject, I mean, this deceased
Councellor of estate, fixed his whole resolution in the like purchase, using no
indirect means, but confined himself within the bounds of reason and wisdom,
from the which he did not start nor stray, either for the love of his own
private profit or pleasure, nor for the fear of purchasing any other subjects
displeasure, he never used sinister means, to wring and wrest away other men's
estates, nor devised too greedy taxations to impouerish the country, he enuyed
no man's prosperity, nor maligned the honorable purchasers of his Princes
favors neither pr^ed into any men's fautes such as hurt not, or disturbd not
the quiet of the state, but was sorry when any traytorus plot was wrought
against his Princes safety, or the peace of the commonwealth, and had an
honorable regard to men of high place and calling: Not-with-standing all this
there be some ignoble spirits, I mean the common monster with many heads,
which seeks by scandalous speeches, to move all his former fame, and to mipe
the remembrance of his credit from the br^w of the kingdom, but surely in my
mind it can be no other but the poisonous plots and devises of rebellious
Papists to take away the deserved honors of his name: The devouring teeth of
such wicked Uipers, the Papists I mean, which seeks to eat out the bowelle of
this their native country, long has his ^illigence labored to beat forth, and
many of them has his wisdom and god-speeding policy discovered, abating the
swelling pride, envy, and sedition of these hatchers of unnatural treasons,
and brought them all to a swift destruction, giving them titles of the worlds
scandals, when their lives were smothered up in a helples repentance: These in
my opinion be the asured libellors, but let envy spit her gall, malice her
poison, and hell it self open her gates to let out furies for this accursed
sla^der, virtue and time will outweare it, and con^ecrate his noble life to
lasting memory, for the opinion of the world is settled in his deserved
commendation, England his native country, the seat of his aduancements, can
witness the contrary: w^o can but aplause his wisdom? Neighboring France
affords him high deserved praise, whereas in Ambasage in the reign of Queen
Elisabeth he performed the honorable actions of a wise and well governed
states man: for the good of Holland, Zeland Brabant, and those low country
provinces, Englands associats, has his persuasions with his prince prevailed,
and they obta^ned men and money. Ierland ouer-burdened with vntam^d rebels,
has been like-wise succored through his counsels, and cherisht in the lowest
ebb, which country now blessed with peace, lives in quiet subjection under our
heaven* blessed sovereign* whom God preserve. What shall I speak of Spain and
Italy, the one feared him, the other admired him and to lock up al descriptions
of worth, his name retained a general opinion of the worlds love. I need not
speak much of the excelent buildings and works of great magnificence he
adorned England with, as well in the country as h^are about this wonder-famed
city of London, now fresh in memory, and visible in this age, all subjects of
honored bounty, worth, and beauty, remaining to the inheritance of his noble
posterity.

Yet let me a little speak of his Godly devotion, charity, and compassion on
the poor: who tasting of his annual bounty are witnesses of his Christian
conversation, amongst all others, the gifts and yearly pensions, bestowed at
Theohalls, upon aged, and ouer-worne Captains, gentlemen by birth and
calling, stands gracious in the worlds eye, for their lost blood, spent in the
service of their Prince and country, has he most honorably recompensed with
sufficient mayntenance, with soft beds to rest their mained limbs upon.

Many other memorable gifts have proceeded from his liberality, to his
eternal fame, and lives grace* which I leave to the worlds consideration, to
be a pattern to suruiuing greatness.

But now I am to forsake the remembrance of these his advanced honors and wade
into an Ocean of deep sorrows, lamentable sorrows for this general loss,
this dear loss of his worlds-beloued life: yet are we not to contemplate
thereon, it was divine providence to have it: Time has a sweet course, and
begets sudden changes, he liu^d not to the period of nature, but was taken
away, even in his middle age, even in the fullness of promotions, which severity
of death, when I think upon, brings to my heart, ouer-ruling passions, and
constraines me sighingly to say.

Ah me things precious, and of purest prize:
For-sake the Earth, to mount above the skies.
And now I am to satisfy the world of his Magnanimity showed at his lives last
hour, as it was credibly reported in open audience, by a man of spiritual
calling, and near to him both in life and death: this man of worth living in all liberty of pleasures, environed with all earthly contentment at that
dreadful hour feared not death: the memory of death had no bitterness; no
disquietnesse troubled his mind, he grieved not to leave his beautiful
buildings, his rich and curious Architectures, his fair alurements and his
many pleasures, his courtlike trains, gallant attendants and bare-headed
petitioners. It was no sorrow to his heart to depart, and leave them all
behind, neither feared he the voice of the world, mixed with scandal, which
still makes misconstrued suppositions of great men's lives, the which commonly
they are taxed with, but his pure white innocence dreaded not this putrifiing
canker that creepes about the tombs of Nobility: reason and nature told him he
must needs go, and appear before that great King of all Kings, and receive
the reward of his lives passages upon Earth: Thus ran out his glass, and faded
his liues-sunne, being ouer-shaddowed with the Sable clouds of Death. When upon
this moldy stage of the Earth, he acted the last part of his life before the
eyes of the world; his departing-iesture moved sad compassion, his words
seasoned with deadly sighs, bathed the hearers cheeks with distilling tears,
making confession of his secret sins, calling for help of prayer, and like a
hungar-starued Pilgrim, cried to that honorable, heavenly houshoulder, saying,
Oh good God, open the gates of thy mercies, to the greatness of my miseries,
unfold the ports of thy unspeakable pity to my wearied spirit: receive my
soul into thy hands, and anoint her festred wounds with the blood of thy
imaculate Lamb Christ Jesus* so yielding up the ghoast, he left this world
for a better.

Uncertainty of state, may well seem strange,
When great men seated up in high renown,
By time and death, with unexpected change,
Are thus from all their glories tumbled down.
Then what are we but fools of self conceat,
When our best joys stands in a wavering state.
Dull earthly dross, wherein consistes thy pride,
Thy state, and greatest glory goes to ground,
Thy bed of worms wherein thou shall abide
Will be corrupted, and thou filthy found.
Our sunshine hopes, thus time sweepes fast away,
This night we live, but die before next day.
A Mourners passion, for the loss of the aforesaid Nobleman deceased.
THe world (I see) is waxt unkind,
And time forgets what time has done:
And spightfull spite wears out of mind,
The doubtful race great men do run.
Where are our late world wondering Kings,
Those sheapheards of our English heard:
Which won by conquest famous things,
(In dark oblivion all interred)
This Age gives grace to few or none,
By princely tombs, or blasts of prays,
To moldy grave no sooner gone,
But all their worlds renown decays.
Though fames arch enemies do strive,
To canker greatness with times rust:
Yet spiritfull Poets may revive,
Their true deseruings from the dust.
Fair heaven, some supreme wit inspire,
Aford him grace and gift of pen:
To light a lamp at honors fire,
And memorize worlds worthy men.
Come Sol^n-Cicill take thy place,
Thou art inrich't by virtues gains:
The world adornes thy name with grace,
Being honored in two Princes reigns.
Let Neighboring France and Bellgia speak,
With new-tamd Ireland, blessed with peace:
What cares his laboring mind did take,
Their Roman bondage to release.
A thunderboult to Englands foes,
A scurge to every newfound sect:
A statesman whom our King had chose.
His highness safety to protect.
On studious laws (oh happy man)
For countries good he plast his heart,
So worship, wealth, and honor wan,
By diligence and due desert.
His learned councels purchased grace,
Where men of greatest wisdom were:
And where he sat in Justice place,
The law infringers, quakt with fear.
His presence promised good success,
To all affairs he took in hand:
A cheerful comfort in distress,
A worthy States man of our land.
Most grave of words: most stout of mind,
In goodness constant, firm, and fast:
Not turned with every fickle wind,
Nor sturd by threatening storm or blast.
A Target to the public state,
Of Judgment reaching, deep and great:
That could of countries weal debate,
A learned Sage in Senate seat.
A Cicero for speech and looks,
Wherein the pregnant world might spy:
The eloquence of Wisdoms bockes,
Persuading both by tongue and eye.
His service for his Prince declared,
How wise a Councellor he was:
Whose worth was of as great regard,
As fined silver is from glass.
His wise behavior, kind and meek,
His hearts true humbleness did show:
No virtue was in him to seek,
That might to his high honors grow.
By friendship, faith, and dealings Just,
He purchased loves aplause in Court:
His upright word, and special trust,
Gained love likewise of meaner sort.
But what avails due deserts,
To live in worldly favors here:
When life is mixed with ouer-thwarts,
We, earthly honors buy too dear.
O England thou have many such
Rich Iems, thy state to glorify:
We cannot praise them over much,
If we should write eternally.
Faier gold and pearl brought home from far,
In time consumes and wastes away:
Proud fame ataind by peace or war,
Does quickly in this world decay.
The love of friends, and favors won,
Of noble, wise, and worthy wight:
Steals hence like shaddows of the sun,
Or gliding stars in moone-shine-nights.
Sat I not under honors hill,
Lately in calmy vailes below:
Safely from bitter tempests still,
How ere the churlish winds did blow.
What sudden storm then troubles me,
That had of late so sure a seat:
Has winters blast blown down my tree,
That feared no peircing summers heat.
Oh tell hard destynies, why you did,
Thus envy my most happy state:
In fury now, (oh heaven) forbid,
I should cry out on partial fate.
Or braule, and child with churlish death,
Considering, hence we all must go:
What bears life or draws breath,
Are surely borne to die we know.
Earl Cicills gone: The passing bell,
Has rung his lives last rufull end:
The grave (God wot) we see full well,
Has closed up my fortunes friend.
Not I alone, lament this loss,
For many mourners more there be,
That bears this all too heavy cross,
Of vnrecured grief with me.
Life is vn-certaine, life must die,
Both high, and low, of life takes leave:
What comes from earth, in earth must lie,
Or fondly we our selves deceive.
Then worldlings wail the dead no more,
His soul lives pure, and mounts the sky:
Lord Cicell did but go before,
To learn us all the way to dye.
Nor muse to see this man entombed,
All flesh (by course) to ground must go:
Death calls for life, and we are doomed,
To pay the det to earth we owe.
He left the world with worlds good will,
Though world did hold his honors dear:
For whom his friends sit mourning still,
With cheeks bedewd with many a tear.
But yet before his leave he took,
And death made conquest of life's end:
To heavens high throne his eyes did look,
And thither did did his soul commend.
When the sharp pains of death arose,
And sickness fury did increase:
He held up hands, and eyes did close,
And lamb-like went away in peace.
Me thinks I hear heart moving cries,
Where sadness to a fulness grows:
Me thinks I see how blobred eyes,
Pasions of pining sorrow shows.
Be still, and mute, each house of joy,
Open wide your doors, give grief some place:
Turn solace into sower anoy,
And let tears stain, each cheerful face.
Let gladsome mirth go where it please,
Make bitter moan your welcome guest:
Let all delights, and wished ease,
Deny to tutch one trubled breast.
Let sports, and pleasures silent be,
And name no word of earthly bliss:
For heavy hearts do best agree,
Where death, distress, and dollor is.
In saddest sort, prepare to hear,
Of woe, that did through death befall:
This tale perchance, may change your cheer
And make your hearts to mourn withal.
Honor lies dead who late alive,
Did purchase fame and Lordlike praise:
And still for honors gain did strive.
By sundry duties many ways.
What want of him have we the while,
To loose this high prized Jewel now:
Whose wisdom shonne amidst this I Will,
Like pearls upon a Princes brow.
Come Scholars all open sorrows door,
With clasped hands true signs of woe,
Your Muses patrons loss deplore,
For grief ore reasons banks do flow.
Come Soldiers and with Drum and fife,
Sound out his dear but last adieu:
The balm of your decayed life,
By death has changd to deaths pale hew.
Cold death has wrought us all this wrong,
By wronging nature thus to soon,
With us he might have lived long,
Had not Deaths Tyrany been shown.
Thus we behold how times do pass,
All Adams sons such ends must have:
We fade away like summers grass,
To day on foot, to morrow in grave,
Best hopes of him, when people had,
Came sickness and his life imbrast:
Death followed, and with mould him clad,
And so in Heaven his soul is plast.
And now full low, in earth he lies,
(Which late sat high, and bore great sway)
Till he, and we, (made pure) shall rise,
To hear our doomes at Judgment day.
So, ending here with joy at last,
His soul on earth we could not keep:
In Paradise is Cicill plast,
And there in Abraham's breast does sleep.
Death is the door to life, therefore let all men so live, that they may drive
death out at the same door, and so live eternally.

The funeral of the said Earl of Salisbury holden at Hatfield in June last, is
here described in a short formal proceeding order.
BEing at Hatfield in Hartfordshire in June last, my eye presented to my heart,
the worlds last farewell given to the right honorable the late Earl of
Salsbury, A due, that blood, consanguinity, and affinity customably bestows
upon the deceased, the sight whereof settled within me many private sorrows
for the loss of so great a subject, whose late living honors carried such a
sway in his contry, that in a sad passion it made me accuse deaths
partiallity, in taking of his life, but smothering grief for a time in
silence, I stood amazedly beholding a train of noble personages, in sable
habits trayling on the ground, witnesses, and presenters of Englands
heaviness, for so general a loss: black cloudy garments outwardly equalized
their inward sorrows, and this following (as near as I can remember) was the
order of the mourning passengers.

First, diverse Marshalls to make room,

Next certain poor men and women.

Then servants of Gentlemen, Esquires and Knights.

Then Standerd-bearers with banners of arms.

Then messengers of the Chamber.

Then some of the Kings Majesty's grooms.

Then Noblemens servants.

After them diuerss officers of the Court,

Then Heralds of Arms with other Ensigns of honor.

Then followed my Lords own servants,

Then Knights and Gentlemen his retainers,

Then the Kings Solicitor, Council, and Attorney general.

Then Barrons of the law with some Judges.

Then the sonns of Noble men and Earls.

Then Lord Barons allied to this deceased Earl,

Then Earls of his affinity and Kindred.

Then principal Herralds with Banners of his coat of arms.

Then his Hearse covered with black velvet, his Helm and Crest with diverse
Scutchions belonging to his honorable house.

Then after the Hearse as principal mourner the Right honorable William now
Earl of Salisbury the only son to the deceased nobleman.

Being thus with honor carried to his grave, declared the greatness of his
estate, how much favored of his prince, esteemed of his equals, and beloved of
his followers. Time, out of my remembrance, can never put away his high worth,
whom I will honor the longest day of my life, and in the closet of my heart
place his perfections to my private consideration, and now to make a conclusion
of all these my loves labors, (as duty binds me) I end.

(...) all subject to change and times envy.
The misery of Policy.
MAn has his time, whom fortune will advance,
Where sudden falls, in gilty hearts breeds doubt:
Some rise aloft by others hard mischance,
Thus fortunes restless wheel runs still about,
True wisdom sees how times of men do pass,
When fortunes change turns back promotions glass.
The misery of Greatness.
Envy, attends upon a great man's state,
Where in his breast ambitious bellows blow:
And then he climbes above his wits conceate,
Disdaining much to cast his eyes below.
Yet all he has is upon hazard set,
When mounting high, he falls in dangers net.
The misery of Scholars.
The Scholar, if but poor, he is thought a wretch,
His good desert is held in high disdain:
The grosest fool is wise, if he be rich,
And wisdom flows from his dull-sotted brain.
The rarest spirit, has here but credit small,
And he most grast that plots his neighbors fall.
The misery of Lawyers.
The Briberous mind makes still a God of Gould,
He scorns to plead without a good reward,
Thus poore-mens suits are bought and sold,
Whilst sillken avarice has best regard,
He has no fear of Gods consuming curse,
That pulls with pains, gould from the poor man's purse.
The misery of Time-pleasers.
Ingratitude thou ill, ill favored ill,
In vpstart thoughts thou buildest Castles strong:
Whilst shame deuoures thy temporizing will,
And shows the fillthy vileness of thy wrong,
That mind wherein ingratitude does dwell,
For illness coequalls the ills of hell.
FINIS.

