AN EXCELLENT TREATISE touching the restoring again of him that is fallen:
Written by the worthy man Saint John Chrysostom, Archbishop of
Constantinople, to Theodorus a friend of his, who having once embraced the
truth of Christ's Gospel, fell from it by lewd living: not unfit to be read and
perused by all those, that shall be desirous to stir up, either themselves, or
other being in the like case. Turned and put into English, out of an ancient
Latin translation, written in velume: by R. W.

1. John. 2, verse. 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father,
Jesus Christ the just, and he is the reconciliation for our sins.

Printed at London by Ar. Hatfield, for Io. Winnington at the golden Tun,
near to S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreete. 1588

Of the profit of this Treatise.
THe prince of Surgeons, Phoebus son,
In curing famous was:
Machaon and his brother too,
By art brought much to pas.
The best of these in festred sores.
Did all, and could no more:
To soul of man corrupt by sin,
Their skill denied a door.
But here behold' against dreadful crime.
A sovereign medcine lies:
A Moly, Panaceia sweet,
To him that upward flies.
If fallen down thou feel despair,
Read through this pamphlet small:
It Theon cheiras, powerful salve,
In such assaults may call.
R. W.

1. Pet. 4, 3. It is sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of the
life, after the lust of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, droonkennes,
in gluttony, drinkings, and in abominable idolatries.

To the Worshipful and his especial good friend, Master John Kemp^horne
Esquier, R. W. wishes in this life prosperous success in all affairs, and in
the life to come a crown of glory.
SEeing always it has been accounted a superfluous work, either to commend
in A^ollo wisdom, or to ex^ol in Hercules puissance, or to praise in Minerua
knowledge: it may be ^hought no less needless or me, to praise in fined
words and garnished style if so I were able to do) ^our ardent zeal in Gods
truth, and marvelous af^ection toward the true professors thereof. And
because among those that know you, it shines so oriently, as in words to set
it forth, were rather to imbeazle than illustrate it; and among those tha^
know you not, by commending it abundantly may fear the censure o^ smoothing, I
think i^ better, at this time (as Salust says of Carthage) to speak nothing
at all o^ it than a little. Yet surely (though the envious happily mislike it)
this I affirm, when I bethough^ to find a meet protecto^ for this pamphlet,
tha^ might love it, as Antonius the Emperor was won^ to love books, as
Alphonsus was accustomed to esteem the works of Cicero, that might read it
diligently as Erasmus did Terence, as bishop Jewel did Horace, as Lady Jane
Graie did Platoes Phaedon: none came to my mind before your Worship, under the
wings of whose tuition, these my slender labors might safely be shadowed, from
all the malice of spiteful reproouers and taunting carpers. Now concerning the
work, some I know will find fault with my presumption, that being a tender
suckling and nouice in good letters, I would dare to put forth ought in print,
especially in such a plentiful time of books. Let these take this answer;
that I did it not voluntarily but enforced, and that by the request, not of one
or two but of many, whose good will I have often experimented, whose friendship
in the Lord I will no^ (for a small cause) violate, whose authority I may not
despise. For lighting by chance on this treatise of Chrysostom, reuerencing it
at the first sight more for antiquity than ought else, as soon as I had read
it over, I did it faithfully for my private utility into English, never
thinking it should come to this pass. But having ^ent it unto some of my
Friends, desirous of such a piece of matter, they fell suddenly into that
liking and loving of it, that they never ceased exhorting, begging, compelling
(I may say) until (maugre my head) I granted, it should go forth for the
benefit of many. Which ^ow being newly borne and come into the world, I beseech
your courtesy to receive into your patronage: and as it proceeded from a
willing mind, so to take it with a gladsome countenance. And notwithstanding
this testimony of a grateful mind, do not any way counterpoise the weight of
your demerits, yet I beseech you to accept of the poor widows mites, and of
the cheerful giuers mind. Thus surceasing any longer to interrupt your
Worships serious affairs, I suppliantly crave of the Almighty, daily to
augment his graces in you and the virtuous Gentlewoman your wife, that after
your rac^ ran in this dale of misery, you may for ever enioi^ the sight of
Christ Jesus in heaven. From Chudleigh, Anno. 1587.

Your worships daily and humble Orator, ROB. WOLCOM^

Of the restoring again of him that is fallen.
OH, Ier. 9.1.
that my head were (full) of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears! Much
more ^tly is it spoken of me now, than ^t that time, of the Prophet of God. The
worthiness and integrity once of the person to whom he writes.
For howbeit not many ci^ies, neither a whole country is ^o be lamented of me,
yet I must mourn for a soul, of more worth ^han many nations, of more price
^han many cities. Ecclus. 16.3.
For if one that ^oe the will of God, be better ^han a great company of the
wicked, thou also wast better once, than many multitudes of the Jews.
Wherefore let no man wonder, if I peradventure use more large lamentations at
this time, The cause of his lamentation.
and power out more plenty of tears, than at that time the Prophet did. For
(as I said) I do not bewail the sacking of a city which is taken, nor the
thraldom of the common people little set by: but the downfall of an excellent
soul, and the ruin of a temple which Christ inhabited. If any ever knew the
ornaments of thy mind, which now the flame of the devil has consumed; if
any ever beheld the temple of thy body, when it glittered with the brightness of
chastity; soothly, he would deem that lamentation of the Prophet smal^ and
much inferior: wherein he bewaileth that the hands of Barbarians had profaned
the holy place, and that the enemies fire had destroyed the Temple, and that
the Cherubin and the Arc were defiled, and that the mercy seat, with the
tables of stone, and the golden pot, were polluted For this lamentation which
I use, is by so much more piteous and bitter than the other; by how much more
truly and evidently all these things were to be seen in thy soul, than
between the walls of that Temple; the Temple which was in thee, was much holier
than the other. It shined not with the metals of gold and silver, but with the
virtues of the mind, and gifts of the holy Ghost: fit had within it the Arc
and the two Cherubins, that is, the faith of the father, and the son, and the
holy Ghost. The wretched plight whereinto this man was fallen.
Yet now naught of all these is left, all things are taken from thy soul, she
is bereft of all her beauty, and all the gifts which God bestowed on her, she
remains spoiled, deformed, foul, she has lost all her aid and safeguard. No
door now is shut in her, no entry is kept, but she lies open to all naughty
spirits, which corrupt the soul. No unclean thought, no filthy desire is
thence expelled, but if the spirit of fornication come, it enters in, if the
spirit of pride, if the spirit of avarice, if more hellish and vnpure, than
these shall come, none forbids them, none beats them back. For she has
no keeper, no Sexton. And as to the secrets of heaven there is no access for
an ungodly person; so at the first no infection could touch thy mind.

But perhaps I may seem to speak incredible things, to those especially that
knew not thy former state, and only see the destruction wherein thy soul now
lies. This surely is the cause why I weep without remedy, because I knew
thee: and whyd sorrow incessantly, because I remember how long it is, until I
see thee return to thy wonted and pristine glory. Which for all that men may
judge impossible, yet to God al things are possible. Mat. 19.26.
Psalm. 113.8.9. 1. Sam. 2.8.
For he it is, that raises the needy out of the dust, and lifts up the
poor out of the dunge. That he may set him with princes, (even) with the
princes of his people. He it is that makes the barren woman to dwell with a
family, and a joyful mother of chil^ren.

Let us not then doubt nor de^paire, If satan draw to sin, God can pull back
to goodness.
but that thou may be ^onuerted into a better case. For ^f the devil could
do so much in ^hee, as to draw thee from the ^eight of virtue to the depth of
wickedness, how much more shall God be able to reclaim thee to ^he highest pitch
of goodness, and ^ot only make thee that thou wast once, but far more blessed
^han thou did seem in thy own conceit. Only be of stout courage, neither
cast off the hope of goodness: let not, I pray thee, that betide thee, which
does the godless. Ungodliness without penitencie breeds to despair.
It is impiety not the multitude of sins, that ^ringeth a fool to
desperation: and therefore Solomon said not, that each one when he comes into
the depth of evils contemns, but, Prou. 18, 3.
the wicked (says he) if he come into the depth of evils contemns. Or, when
the wicked comes, then comes contempt
It is then a point of the impious to have no hope of salvation, and to
contemn when they come into the depth of sins, ungodliness not permitting
them to have respect to God, and to return thither from whence they fell. So
that this thought which cutteth away all hope of conversion, issues from
impiety, and as a most heavy stone accloying the soul, i^ perpetually
compels it to be hold the earth and never to loo^ upward on God. When we sin
we must not despair.
But a lusty stomach and lofty mind will cas^ down this hurtful weight of
hi^ soul, and tread under feet Satan, that being his own governor he may
sing the Psalmist words to God, Psalm. 113, 2.
As the eyes o^ servants look upon the hands o^ their masters, and as the eyes
o^ a maiden upon the hands of hi^ mistres: so our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God, till he have mercy upon us. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon
us, for we have suffered to much contempt. And in these word^ ^f this heavenly
prophecy, there ^s singular doctrine, we have suf^ered too much comtempt. This
^s that he would have us say, that although for the multitude ^f our sins we
have suffered much contempt, and are surrounded with reproaches, yet our eyes
shall wait upon the Lord our God til we have mercy upon us, and that ^e will
not leave of beseeching, ^ntill we be vouchsafed forgiue^es. We ought to be
earnest in prayer, when we sue for forgiveness, and not to rest till God have
fulfilled our petitions.
For this is the badge of a ^onstant and settled mind, that is not weary of
perseuering in ^ treaty through despair to ob^ain, but continues and
persisteth ^n craving, until the Lord have ^ercy upon it. These two periods
following G. F. Capito has not in his translation.
And least you should think you offend greatly before the Lord, if not
vouchsa^ed to be heard, you continue ^mportunately in prayers, call to ^emorie
the evangelical para^le, and there you shall find, that ^he Lord shows, that
stiff and ^erseuering beggars are not vn^cceptable to him. For he says, Luke
11, 8.
Though he would not give hi^ because he is his friend, yet because of his
importunity, he w^ rise, and give him as much as h^ needs. Understand
therefo^^ (dear friend) that the diu^ puts into our minds despai^ of
obteining, to this end, that h^ may cut from us the hope of t^ goodness of God,
which is t^ ancor of our salvation, the foundation of life, the guide of t^ way
through which we pass heaven: in brief, the Apos^ says, Romans 8, 24.
by hope we are saved. so much that our salvation consists in hope, which
draweh^ our souls from out the eart^ knit (as it were) to certain chains
hanging down from heaven, and calls again the to the heavenly dwelling pla^^
which cleave to themselves, e^alting them securely above the troubles of this
life, and earth miseries. Wherefore if any e^cumbred with these calamity be
dissolute, and let go out of hi^ ^andes the ancor of hope, he ^ust needs fall,
and be carried ^ to the bottomless pit and pro^nditie of evils. The dangers of
despair.
Which as soon ^s the enemy shall perceive, and ^ee us loath the multitude of
our ^ns, and fear through remorse of ^onscience, straight way he dra^eth
near, and casts before ^ur eyes cogitations of despair, ^ore heavy than
any lead or ^rauel: which if we undertake, we ^ust of necessity be drowned in
^he depth of evils, because, with ^he very load, the stays of our ^aluation
are broken. Into the which depth because thou art ^ast, thou do throw
behind ^hee the precepts of a good and gentle lord, and thou do obey ^he
beck of a bloody and mertiles tyrant, the enemy of thy ^aluation. Thou have
shaken off the sweet yoke of Christ, Mat. 11, 30.
and have said on thy neck for it, the hard and iron fetters of sin: thou
have shaken off the easy burden of a lowly and meek Lord, and for it have
hanged about thy nec^ a millstone, but how long do thou so continue? Stand now
^ the last, and cease to drown the unhappy soul, without any car^ without any
advise: how lon^ do thou haste it forth, and ca^ it down headlong to thy
own decaie? Luke. 15.
And truly the woman the Gospel, which found again^ the lost groate, called
togith^ her friends and neighbors, the they should rejoice with her: b^ I will
call your and my friends neighbors together, and will e^ treat them to meet,
not the they should be glad, but tha^ they should lament with me: no^ that
they should rejoice, bu^ mourn with me, and greatly so^rowe, lifting up their
hands t^ heaven, as they shall see me t^ do, and I will say unto them howl
and lament with me, o m^ friends, power out and bring forth with me
fountains an^ floudes of tears, not for that have lost vnpoisable weights o^
^lde, or innumerable talents of ^er; not because I have lost reads full of
costly pearls, but ^ that my friend Amicus alter ipse.
dearer than ^y gold, and more precious than ^y stone, is (I know not how)
^ile he sailed with us over the ^ge and broad sea of this life, ^en down into
the very depth destruction. And if some one my friends shall go about to
^mfort, and will me to leave of ^rowing, I will answer him in ^e Prophets
words: Or, let me alone, I will weep bitterly, you can not comfort me.
Suffer me weep most bitterly, neither ^^de on comforting me: for I ^epe not
through the affection the flesh, neither is my lamen^^tion woman like, wherein
ap^are immoderate tears to be ^med. I mourn for that, which ^e great and
famous Apostle S. ^^ule says he mourns for, ^^en as he says: 2. Cor. 12,
22.
That I may ^ourne for them that have sin^d, and have not repented.

Certes with reason shall one buke those that for the common The death of the
soul is pitifully to be lamented, seeing the death of the body is so bitterly
taken.
death of their friends we without mean; but when t^ wounds not of a body but
o^ soul are lamented, and of suc^ soul, which in death it se^ shows signs
of her former betie, and wondrous gains, a with lively tokens displayeth t^
flower of virtues extinguished her, who is so cruel, and vnquainted with
virtue, that wo^^ not be moved to lamentati^ that would not be provoked
tears? For as it is a pointe^ philosophy, to forbear weep^ for common death:
so in a death of a soul, and such a sou^ to receive comfort, I adiud both
ungodly and irreligious. ^^ ordinary death to keep the e^ from tears, is the
chiefest thin^ in the study of wisdom: b^ how shall not he seem to be
^mented for without intermissio^ who of late reckned the wh^ brauenes of the
body but li^ carved stones, who account gold as clay, who respected ^ lights
as dirt, and now atra^^ed by the sudden fevers of lust ^^d voluptie, being
deprived of ^e integrity and beauty of his ^inde, has shaken hands with
^^rtue, and is become a slave to ^ce and pleasure? This man shall ^ot bewail?
This man shall I ^t moysten so long with a river tears, until with weeping I
^r up feeling in him, and by the ^rmth of tears I raise some ^ely motions in
him, if mour^ng may do ought? And if mour^rs of the body cease not from
^menting, though they assured^ know, their weeping profit ^^em nothing, to
renew the life him that is dead: why should ^t we, that know the soul may ^^
called from death by conuer^^^n, earnestly follow after the ^edicine of
repentance, that (e^^n the sepulcher being opened) ^^th abundance of tears he
^ay be recovered? Yea also I ^inke we are to be accused of ^ggardie, since the
lamenters of bodies and ordinary death o^ weep so much and continu^ (yet
certain, as we said, t^^ they shall not raise again the dead,) if we that
know, that repentance (lamentation cou^led with it) a soul may be ref^red to
his former state, (for t^ kingly prophet said, Psalm 6, 5. Or, in the grave who
shall praise thee.
In hell^^ shall confess thy name?) do thing so.

We know too, that diverse the days both of us and our a^cestors having sliden
out of ^^ straight path, and straied fr^^ the entrance of the narrow w^ were so
again restored, the their end answered their beg^ning, obtaining the goal a
crown, yea they were thoug^ to have place among the number of the Saints. But
as long one remains in the flame a furnace of lust, these thing seem
impossible to him althou^ A thousand.
infinite examples should be al^^ged. But if some small conuersi^^ be began, and
the penitent po^^^on cast upward his eyes, that ^ourning flame will tarry
behind ^im, and by how much more ^wiftly he shall take his pace, by ^o much
more, before him shall ^e see all things sumpled with ^e coal of an heavenly
dew. Despair the greatest enemy to our salvation.
So much worth is it that we beware of one thing, the greatest ^nimy to our
salvation, to our ^onuersion, to our repentance, ^o wit desperation: which if
it ^ake hold in our mind, how great ^esire soever we have of saluati^n, how
great purpose soever to ^^ue everlastingly, if (I say) de^paire come, all the
entry to sal^ation is stopped, the way to re^entance is hindered, and the
^eginning of anguish is engen^red. And how then shall he, that ^s out of the
way, and to whom ^he door is shut, be able to do any good work, when as
(bi^ause despair prohibiteth) he cannot come to the entrance of goodness? For
this cause the Di^ell goes about with tooth and nail, to plant in our hearts
such manner of cogitations. For i^ the fear of despair shall remove us from
the way of virtue, he has no long combat with us, for why should he assault
when none resists? An^ whosoever shall have the power to undo this knot,
incontinent hi^ strength returns, the lustine of his mind increases, he shall
b^ delighted with the renewing o^ those contentions, the reason is he shall see
himself chase the chaser, and pursue the persecute^ And if in case, (as in
wrestling i^ falls out) he faulter again and fall, let him not be out of hope
for shame, but remember, that is no^ the law of wrestling and iusting not once
to fall, (for he may no^ be said to be conquered that falls) but in the end
not to yield for he that despair has maystered, how can he either recover
might in contention, or with stand and fight, seeing he takes his heels, and
does not at al return to the conflict? Neither think that I speak of those
alonely, that have transgressed in small and not much important things, but my
speech is of him that has made himself a villain to all mischief, and has
damned to himself the way to the kingdom of heaven, and was once of the
number not of the incredulous miscreants, but of them that liked God, and after
this has fallen either into fornication, or into all sorts of unchastity,
which (as the Apostle says.) Ephesians. 5.3.
to name is unseemly. This man (I say) ought not to misdoubt of salvation,
though such wickedness enuiron him even to the last gasp. The anger of God is
not passible, and therefore though we sin, yet his wrath may be changed into
mercy.
But harken what the cause of this is. If the wrath of God were an affection
that did work a passion, we might rightly say, that the flame of it kindled
with so many and such evils, might not be quenched: but for as much as the
truth teaches, that the nature of God is void of passions, we must learn that
though God punish, though he plague, he does it not with a wrathful passion,
but with unspeakable gentleness, going about to cure us, not to confound us,
and therefore with gladness will receive the penitent. For the plaster of
repentance (if thou seek it) heals the soul, and defends thee from the
anger of God, which he conceived for thine offenses. God does not (as I said)
punish a sinner for his own fantasy, Why God punishes man.
when he reuengeth his wrong, (for the nature of God is not capable of such an
affection) but for our profit; he does all things for our utility, and he
chastises and corrects not to avenge himself, but to amend us.

And if any persist in hardness, as the man that turns his eyes from the
light, damnifieth nothing the light, but damneth himself to darkness; so he
that contemns virtue through a heart that can not repent, estrangeth himself
from salvation. And as a Physician that suffers wrong at the hands of
phrenticke and brainesicke men, sorroweth not, nor is displeased a whit at it,
but does all things that appertain to ease the malady of the patient, (for
the wrong is caused by pain:) and as you may see the Physician glad at a little
amendment of the sick person, and to execute the residue of his charge with
joy and chearefulnes, not keeping in mind the wrong don, but respecting the
health of the patient: so, much rather God, God is willing to have us return.
when we are become stark wood, is not greedy of vengeance for our trespasses,
but desirous to heal our old and putrified biles; for to this end he says
and does al things, thirsting after our safety, not our punishment.

And albeit reason sufficiently show the contrary, yet least you should stagger
in the matter, we are able to auouche it out of the holy Scriptures. Tell me
what more wicked body was there ever than the king of Babylon? Who having
found out in many things the omnipotency of God, in so much that he worshipped
his Prophet, Dan. 2.46.
and commanded frankencense and myrrh to be offered to him: yet again in
despite of God he returned to his wonted hawtines, Dan. 3.
and did cast jointly into the oven of burning fire, those that refused to
worship his image, because they preferred the service of God. Nevertheless, God
allured to repentance, and gave occasion of recanting to this so bloody, so
wicked a king. First in this, that with the three children he appeared unto him
in the oven; Dan. 3.
afterward, in that he caused him to see the vision which Daniel interpreted,
Dan. 4.
that was able to mollify even an heart of flint. But when he was warned by
works, the Prophet also exhorted him by words, and he received the counsel
of the Prophet, saying: Dan. 4.
Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy
sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor, lo, let
there be an healing of thine error.

What say thou to this, O thou wise and blessed man? Yet is there a
returning after so great slides? credit me there is, after grievous sickness
and from the door of death proceeds health, and after desperate sins many
wax wise. For lo (as we showed before) this king of Babel had now stopped all
way of salvation, in that he provoked the Lord to wrath, who made him, and
exalted him to the throne of a kingdom, who revealed also to him heavenly
mysteries, who imparted on him the knowledge of things to come, and disclosed
to him the secrets of all his kingdom, who confounded by the divine solution
of his prophet, the iuglings of the wise men, Astrologers, Gazarens, and
Caldeans, and opened to the capacity of a child, by a divine interpretation a
hidden secret: in so much that he seemed not only to believe in the highest
God, but to proclaim throughout all the world, that the God of Daniell was the
true God; yet after this, he fell into such an outrage, that he threw headlong
into the hoate burning oven the servants of God that would not worship his
image. And yet ne here does the mercy of God forget to cure and remedy him, but
in the midst of the fire, when he had put to the flame the children that
worshipped God, there he asswageth him not with quenching the fire with water,
but with working a wonder. For he could both extinguish the fire, and distill
down a shower from heaven, but this he does not, least he should increase the
force of his rage, but permits the flame to be made as great, as the fury
of the tortor desired, and he does not forbid him to punish, but takes away
power from the torment. And that no one that saw the children not burnt, might
suppose it was a vain imagination, no fire in deed that he saw, he suffered
the executioners (namely those that stood about the furnace) to be consumed,
that he might make manifest, that not only fire in truth was seen, but that
Gods commandment was more forcible than any strength of fire. For every thing
that is, obeieth him of whom it had his beginning. That fire received the
bodies of those saints and by the ordinance and will of God forgetting his
nature whereby it burns, upon it showed only his nature of illumining,
rendering again the holy and faithful thing committed to his charge nothing
hurted; for they came forth out of the flaming furnace as it had been out of
a princes palace, worthy to be admired of all, of all to be reverenced. None
then cast his eyes on the king who glittered in purple, with a diadem on his
head, but he was forsaken of all a^ though he had been no body, for that the
children had rapt euerichone into an admiration. For who would not be astonished
that the fire was afrighted at the fight of the young men's bodies, and that it
did not only fly from the flesh of those saints, but also did not touch one
hair of their head (which was but little) nor the uttermost hem of their
garments?

Who would not admire, that their members were stronger than mountains, their
garments than metals, their hairs than diamondes? And herein is the wonder
aggrauated, that when they were in the midst of the fire, they sang a Psalm
to God, albeit experience teaches, that they that are committed to the flame,
be consumed as soon as they open their mouth. To conclude, those blessed
children remain with God glorious, with men woonderful; but the naughty king
was neither moved with these miracles, nor woondered at the vision and the
foretelling of his confusion, but abode heard of belief, neither yet was
punished. And hitherto Gods patience was not tired, but when he had forborne
him a long time, at length he uneath corrected him, not punishing the offenses
past, but respecting the amendment to come: in a word, he condemned him not
everlastingly, but chastised for a little space, Dan. 4, 33.
but reformed for a few years, he got again his former estate, so that by
the punishment he sustained no loss, but by the amendment gat great good.

Such (believe me) such is the goodness of God toward men, never rejecting
repentance if it be truly and uprightly offered; although one come to the top
of wickedness, Nunquam se^a est ad bonos mores via. Sen.
notwithstanding if he have a desire to return to the way of virtue, he gladly
reteineth and imbraceth him, and does althings whereby he may be reclaimed to
his wonted condition. Yea, and that which is more worth the noting, although
any be not able wholly to abandon the ure of sin, he will not refuse how small
soever repentance, and in how little time soever undertaken, he will take it,
and not suffer the least conversion go vnreguerdoned. For this (me thinks)
Isaiah shows, Is. 57. Or, for his sins, J have made him sorry a little while,
etc. and J have been sad, and I have walked heavily, and J have healed him, J
have comforted him.
where he speaks after this manner of the people of the Jews, for his sin I
have made him somewhat sorry, and I have smitten him, and I have turned my face
from him, and he was sorry and walked heavily, and I healed him, and comforted
him.

But the wicked king, that by reason of the naughtines of his wife sought a
booty for his lust, may be a more evident testimony of this matter; who being
troubled with the hainousnes of his sins repented, and clothed in sackcloth
bewailed his doing, and here in so drew the mercy of God upon him, that he
pardoned all his trespasses. For so it is said, 1. King. 21, 28.29.
and the word of the Lord came to Eliah the Tishbite, saying, see thou how
Ahab is humbled before me? because he submits himself before me, I will not
bring that evil in his days. Also after him again Manasses, who bare the
bell from all pittiles tyrants, who overthrew the service of God and the
worship of his laws, who replenished the temple of the Lord with Idols,
thrusting out the worshipping of the Lord, this king (I say) surpassing the
wickedness that ever has been heard of, albeit repented, and after was numbered
among the friends of God. 2. Chron. 33.
Now if he or they of whom before we mentioned, pondering the vnmeasurablenes of
the transgressions, had despaired o^ return by conversion and repentance,
doubtless they had lost a those good things which hapened unto them by amendmen^
of life. But contrariwise they be holding the mercy that cannon be uttered,
and God his infini^ and profound goodness, untie from their necks the diueli^^
bonds of despair, and spurring v^ themselves, were converted t^ the way of
virtue, and by withdrawing their foot from headlong ruin finished a good
course. And so far of the examples of the holy men.

Psalm. 95, 1.
Now harken how God by the prophet allureth us in words to repentance, to day
(says he) if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, etc. And in that
he says to day, he means all our life time, Short repentance loses not
reward.
even unto the last part (if so it chance) of our old age; for not the length
of time but the trunes of repenting ^s considered, or else how is it ^ead that
the Ninevites in the ^itle space of one day not in long ^ime purged a most
grievous sin. Jonas. 3.
And the thief also which hanged on the cross, Luke 23.
needed not a very long season to be made fit for paradise, but so much space
was enough as was spent in pronouncing one speech. Insomuch that in a moment,
having all his sins cleansed, he was thought worthy to enter heaven before
even the Apostles. And semblably, do we not oftentimes see the martyrs in one
day, and percase in the space of one hour, to receive the crowns of great
rewards? Wherefore hardines is al, and a boldness conioined with prompt and
ready minds, that moved (as it were) with a certain wrath, we be displeased
with lust our inueagler, and offer all our desire and love on the altar of
virtue. For this is that thing that God wills, and requires of us, he
seeks not continuance of time, nor vexations of us, he respects true and
unfeigned conversion Seeing many that were last, have by earnest labor exceeded
those that were before them.
. It is not then so bad to fall, as after a fall to ly still, and be unwilling
to rise, covering the vitiousnes of our ill intent (taking no delight but in
sin) with desperate speeches. For wtih indignation the prophet cries out
against these; Does not he rise up that falls, and he return that is turned
away Ierem. 8.
?

Godly men may rise by repentance after their fall.
Now if thou say; What if one of the faithful should fall, may he be restored?
To this I answer; in that we say he has fallen, we confess he stood before he
fell: for it is an absurd thing to be spoken, that any man fell, that has
still lien and never stood. We will produce also out of the book of God
allegations, if ought has been spoken of this matter, either in parables or in
plain speeches, or if any thing may be found in the examples of our elders.
What represents that sheep, Luke 15.
which when it wandered from the ninety and nine, was sought by the shepherd,
and brought home on his shoulders? does it not evidently show ^he sliding and
the repairing of a faithful body? For it was a sheep like as were the
ninety and nine, not of any other, but of the self same flock, it had the
selfsame guider, it was first ^ed in the same pasture, with the same water,
and the same fold contained it that did the rest. But it straied not a little,
and wandered through the mountains and hills, that is, it went far from the
right path, yet the good ^hepheard suffers it not to ^ine away in straying,
but see^eth it, and calls it again, and be calls it home, not driving it
^iolently, neither beating it with ^rokes, but supporting it with ^is own
shoulders. For as all ^kilfull physicians by mitigation ^f medicine deal more
nicely and tenderly, with those that ^aue been long vexed with infirmity: so
God does not reclaim those that have been long corrupt with sin to the way
of virtue with any tariand at all, but by peece-meale, an^ little and little,
bearing wi^^ their weakness in many thing and assisting them often, the
conversion on the sudden man not be unpleasant to them, a^ that they may not go
again lewdnes, for the difficulty of r^turning.

But not this parable only d^clareth the moderatenes of a^teration, Luke 15.
but that likewise whi^^ is written of the prodigal son^ He was a son also no
a lia^ his natural brother that ne^ went from his father: he (I sa^ was a
son that went far in t^^ borders of iniquity: for he we into a far country,
and far from the Lord, he that was rich an of good name, was made bas^ than a
servant and hireling, b^ sorrowfully returning, he was taken into his ancient
estate, an ^uested in his former glory. ^ow if he had lost hope, and ^d been
ashamed to come a^ne to his father, because of ^^ mischances, and had abode way
in a strange and foreign ^untrie, he had not gotten that ^ gat, but perishing
for want of ^od, had died a miserable death. ^u see therefore how great
ne^^ssitie repentance has, what ^ce in turning hope has, by ^^entance the
prodigal son covered the old condition of ^e glory, which the elder bro^er
had without repentance. ^^d if I might speak that I ^ould in these matters, me
see^eth he gat more by conversion ^an the other had. verse. 29, 30.
For so he ^mselfe says, lo these many ^eres have I done thee service, ^^d
yet thou never gave me a ^^d that I might make merry with ^y friends. Sinners
converted get more than they which stumbled not.
But when this thy ^^nne was come, which has de^ured thy goods with harlots,
^ou have for his sake killed the fat calfe. Why should I not the think, that
he that turns b^ repentance obteineth more the other, since he had never a kid
g^uen him, but for this the fat cal^ was killed? Wherefore beloue having these
examples of repentance, let us not persist in euil^ nor despair of atonement:
h^ will never (put affiance in m^ turn his eyes from the conu^^ted, if we our
selves remove n^ our selves from God. Hier. 23, 23. Our sins separate us from
God. Isai. 59, 2.
For h^ says, I am a God at hand, an not a God far off. And again b^ the
prophet, Or, your iniquities have separated between you and your God.
Your sins separa^^ between me and you. If the our sins disseuer us from God
let us take away this bar, and n^thing may let us to be brough^ into the favor
of God.

Will you that I show it not only spoken in parables, but form in deed? There
was a man among the Corinthians by a likelihood of no small calling, h^ had
committed such a sin as wa^ not committed amongst the Gentiles, being of the
number of the ^aithfull, and Christ his frindes, ^or some report (me thinks)
that he was of the lineage of the ^riests. What then? Paul never ^arted him from
the number of those, that hope to attain sal^ation. But when he had
suffici^ntly rebuked the Corinthians ^or him, purposing to show that ^here is
no wound nor disease that may not be cured and made whole by repentance, 1.
Cor. 5, 5.
he commands to deliver him over unto Satan, for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord jesus. But this he
commands before he was done to wit of his repentance; 2. Cor. 2, 6.
for when he had sorowed, it is sufficient (says he) to him, 8.
that he has been rebuked of many, and adds, Wherefore I pray you that you
would confirm your love toward him: 11.
lest Satan should circumuent us, for we are not ignorant of his enterprises.
The nation of the Galathians after it had pe^fectly believed in Christ, and h^
received the holy Ghost, in ^ much that it wrought signs a^ miracles by the
spirit, after, the faith of Christ it had sust^ned many things, after all the
things (I say) it fell from t^ faith, and was renewed again the exhortations
of the Apos^^ And that thou may know the by the spirit they had done wonders
and miracles, hear ho^ the Apostle says: Gal. 3, 5.
he therefo^^ that ministers to you the spi^^ and works miracles amon^ you,
does he it by the works the law, or by the hearing faith preached? And
again, the they had sustained many thin^ after the receipt of faith, he
tes^fieth where he says: Verse. 4.
Have yo^ suffered so many things in vain Now after so great a step i^
faith, they committed a sin^ which was able to abaliena^ them from Christ, of
which the Apostle himself says: Gal. 5, 2.
Behol^ Paul say unto you, that if you be ^ircumcised, Christ shall profit ^ou
nothing. And again, Verse. 4.
whosoever are justified by the law, ye ^re fallen from grace. And
notwithstanding after these slydes ^n faith, after so grievous a fall, ^^e
reclaimeth them, and (as I ^ay say) with motherlike com^assion reformeth them,
saying: My little children, Gal. 4, 19.
of whom I ^rauell in birth again, until Christ be formed in you. What ^lse
therefore by all this is there ^aught, but that it may be, that Christ may be
formed anewe in him, that has sold himself to work iniquity, Ezech. 18, 32
for he will not ^he death of a sinner, but that he should be converted and
live. For this cause (most entirely be^oued) let us go about to fulfill the
will of God, therefore has God created us, and caused us to be that we were
not, Heaven was made for man, hell for the diuils.
that he may bestow everlasting good things upon us, and enfranchise us into
the heavenly city, for he made us not faggots for hell fire The kingdom of
heaven was ordained for us, and hell for the d^uell. And that this is true, the
gospel reaches: for the Lord sha^ say to them on his right hand Come ye
blessed of my father, Mat. 25, 34.
inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
Verse. 42.
But he shall say ^^ them on his left hand, depa^^ from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels. By thi^
reason, the kingdom of heaven was made for man, and hell f^^ for the devil,
even from the foundation of the world.

So much does it concern us that by perseuering in evils, w^ do not frowardly
exclude o^^ selus from the entrance of goodness. Repentance in this life
profits much, after this life naught.
And while we are in this life how great soever sins we commit, it is possible
by repentance to purge them: but when we are once dead, then though we sorry
(and we shall be very sorry) yet there will be no profit of repentance.
Although there be gnashing of teeth, although there be howling and lamenting,
although we pray and beg with innumerable petitions, yet none shall hear us,
none shall help us, no not our tongue tormented in flames shall be wet with the
tip of a finger dipped in water. But we shall hear that which the rich man
heard of Abraham, that there is a great swallowing pit set between us and you,
Luke 16, 26.
so that they which would go from hence to you can not: neither can they come
from thence to us. Therefore let us repent (my brother) and as good and
profitable servants seek our Lord Jesus Christ, neither let us be discouraged
to obtain pardon (while we live here) by repentance, for in hell (as I said)
the medicines of repentance will not be available, but in this life, though in
the end of your days and extreme old age you use it, it shall cure you. Which
to stop the devil sturreth and laboreth, that he may make us despair, for he
knows that even in a little time, if any be penitent though it be a short
turning, yet it will not be unfruitful. For as the man that gives a cup of
cold water loses not his meed; so he that has remorse for his evil deeds,
though his repentance seem not counterpoisable to his offenses, yet how little
soever it be, and in the twinkling of an eye, the recompense shall not be
lacking. No one good deed though very small, shall be contemned of the Lord a
just judge: for if he be so hard a computist of our misdeeds, as that every one
must be punished for his words and thoughts, Matt. 12.
how much more shall our good deeds both great and small be rewarded in the day
of doom? Wherefore if thou think it impossible to be restored to thy
accustomed order of life, yet prune off a little from that great extremity of
riot and lust, which thou shall perceive not a whit vnfructuous. Make only a
beginning and smooth the way to goodness, which tread, albeit with the tips of
thy toes; and till thou begin, the way of virtue seems difficile and hard.
For such is the nature of all things, that all labor is thought grievous while
it is weighed only in our minds, but when we come to the matter, and have
ouercommed some of the work, then all fear and fainting is shaken off, and
the success of the work breeds delight: so also the renewing of virtue
causes gladness to the mind, and then are we stronger, when we see the hope of
salvation approach.

For this cause also the enemy took Judas hence, least in case knowing there
was a return to salvation, he might reform his fall by repentance. And I say
not (although it be wonderful) that that sin of Judas might not be purged by
repentance: for which cause I entreat and beg o^ thee that thou abandon out o^
thy mind all devilish cogitations, and quickly beturne thee to the way of
salvation. If I should suddenly and wholly call thee to that old height of
virtue, tho^ might not without cause tremble, not without deem i^ hard.
But considering this only I desire at thy hands, tha^ thou increase not in
iniquities neither every day go nearer t^ perdition, that thou leave off ^ make
an end of offending, wh^ do thou doubt and linger drawing back thy foot,
for fear only to receive the though^ of goodness? Has not the superfluity of
lust bred loathsomnes, as yet in thee? Pleasure of the body vadeth away.
What has it bettered them that abode in bodily sensuality and in the
pleasure of this present life until the end of their lives? Look now on the
their sepulchers, and see whethe^ there be any show of glorious io^litie?
Whether there be any token of dainties and sumptuous fare. Demand where now
their gorgeous weeds and strange perfumes be, whither the pleasure of their
games, the troops of their attendants, the daintines of their feasts is gone?
Whither their laughtures, sports, immoderate and unbridled lust is ^ecome and
vanished? Where ^hey themselves are with all ^hese things? What was the end of
them both? Behold more narrowly and come more near to their graves, look on
the dust ^nely and the filthy relics of worms, remember that this is ^he end
of bodies, although in ^elights and joy, although in la^our and chastity men
spend their life. And would God all the matter were ended in dust and worms,
these loffes would seem ^ut little, and the state of nature ^ought easily be
excused. But ^ow glid thine eyes from these ashes and graves, How terrible the
judgment seat of God shall be to the wicked.
and think upon, that horrible seat of the judgment of God, which is
environed with a burning river o^ fiery streams, where is weeping and gnashing
of teeth, wherei^ utter darkness, where is that worm of conscience that never
dies, and the unquenchable fire. Forget not the parable of Lazarus and the
rich man, Luke 16.
who being once an owner of great wealth, and clad in purple and silk, could
not find (afterward) one drop of water, and that when he was in the heat of
the fire. Tell me (I beseech thee) what is there in this life but a dream? Our
life but a dream.
For as those that are condemned to live among metals, or afflicted with any
other punishment, when they take some rest after the hard labors of their
troublesome life, believe themselves to enjoy the manifold dainties they see
before them; but when they arise they feel full well, there is nothing left of
the delicatenes of the dream, so that rich man who in a dream had the
voluptuousnes of this life, when he deceased, naught remained with him, but
grief of the things past, and pain of the things present. Remember this (my
friend) and oppose hell fire to this flame of lust and concupiscence that now
tormenteth thee. And it is a strange kind of medicine that fire should be
quenched by fire; but if this fire shall not be stinted which now so troubles
thee, it will cause to thee that euer-enduring fire more fierce and
unquenchable.

Also, The pleasures of this life are momentanie, in respect of the punishment
for them.
how long do thou judge the pleasures of thy present life may endure? As I
think thou can not live 50. years more, admit thy old age be long. But in
the mean while see what things befall, first in this behalf, that no body is
certain he may live till night; next, for that the condition of humane
affairs is still moveable, for many times life continues many years, but
wealth and riches fail, and often some make shipwreck of goods before they
die. But grant we, that thou may both live a long time, and suffer no
alteration of times; yet what is this space to everlasting pains; what is this
voluptie to those miserable and intolerable plagues? For in this life whether
it be good or evil, it has his limitation, and that speedily, but in the
world to come both are everlasting. Over and besides, the state of the very
punishment is different: for the fire in this life co^sumeth al things it
takes, but that fire whom it once takes hold on, it vexes and always
reserueth to the torment. And therefore is it termed unquenchable, not only
bicaus it cannot be quenched it self, but because it does not quench or sley
the^ it takes. For the scripture says, that sinners put on immortality, to
wit, profitable, not to honor of life, but to perpetuity of correction.

Now the force of the punishment, and that punishment of that fire which is so
forcible, no voice will serve to declare, no speech will serve to utter: for in
good or evil things subject to corruption, there is nothing like them. The
torments of hell set forth in their colors.
Nevertheless that we may conceive some motion of that fire and torment, call
to mind, in him that has a burning ague, what tribulation, what anxietie of
body and soul stands on each side, and by this temporal malady gather
what those torments be which are inflamed with an eternal fire, which are
watered before that horrible judgment seat with a fiery stream of tormenting
waves. There what shall we do? What shall we answer? Nothing shall be there but
gnashing of teeth, but scritching and weeping, and too to late repentance, no
way any help being found, and every way the torments increasing without any
comfort. We shall see none but the executioners and tortours dreadful to be
beholden, and (which is woorst of all) we shall have no solace of the very
air. For utter darkness shall compass the place of torments, and the fire which
as it has not a nature of consuming, so has it not of illumining, but it is a
dark fire, the flame thereof giving no light. So that to them that are in it,
what fear, what renting of their bowels, what dismembring of their bodies,
what crosses there be to every sense, no tongue can tell. And as the sorts of
torments do vary and differ, so proportionably euerichone to his sins has
his pain multiplied.

Now if thou should say, how can the body continue in so wretched and such
an endless tormenting? Consider what things now and then in this life betide us,
and by these small things conjecture great. How that sometimes we see some
troubled with long sickness, and yet their life to endure: and howbeit the body
be dissolved by some death, yet the soul is not dissolved nor consumed: whence
it is apparent that when the body shall also become immortal, no death may kill
the soul or body. For in this present life it cannot be, that the punishment
of the body should be both grievous and perpetual, but the one yields to the
other, for that the body cannot abide both. But when each shall put off
corruption, the co^ruption before received shall end, but the incorruption gotten
shall be endless. So let us not think, the very exceeding greatness of
punishment will cause an end of dolor, but (as I said) our sins shall aggrauate
the chastisement, and the incorruption of the body or soul shall not limite
it.

Tell me now, what space of sensuality and dainties will thou liken to these
torments? Let us (if we list) bestow on delights an hundredth years, add
thereto an hundredth more, and ten times an hundredth, what benefit will there
be gotten of it, if we consider this euer-remaining pain? May not the whole
time of this life, wherein we seem to take pleasure in pastimes, and wallow in
wantonness, be rekoned as the dream of one night, in comparison of that
eternity? Is there any therefore, who to have a delightsome dream one night,
would undertake sempiternall pains? Or take that for this, or this for that?

I dispraise not as yet delights, nor unfold the bitterness of them, because
the time serves not for such speeches now, but then I shall be occasioned when
I see thee able to avoid the same. For, because thou art addicted to them, thou
may guess we doated, if we avouch that pleasure, which all men reckon
acceptable and gladsome, were yrkesome and sour. But if by the mercy of God,
thou may escape out of this sort of sickness, at that time, yea at that time
thou shall find out, what bitterness, yea what bane sensuality has. Now mean
while let us imagine, that pastimes and pleasure and voluptuousnes are honest
and comely: What shall we say to the punishments laid up in store for them?
What shall we say to them, because the delights vade like a shadow, and
hastily fly away, but the pain abides for ever and ever?

Grant the time and space of pastime and punishment were al one, is there any
so foolish, or so deprived of his five wits, that would choose to tolerate one
day of pain for a day of pleasure? since the pangs of one hour, and every
vexation of the body, commonly causes us to forget all the time past consumed
in de^ight. Wherefore for as much as we may be rid (if in a moment we be turned)
from every of those tormenting chastisements, and enjoy eternal goodness, why
defe^ we? why stay we? why do we no^ use the bountifulnes of God? For this is
provided by the unspeakable and infinite clemency o^ God, that labor and
toil should not be stretched far, nor be lon^ or endless, but short, and (as
may say) for a minute of a^ hour. Such is this present life, ^^ it be
conferred with that everlasting. The clemency (I say) o^ God has provided, 2.
Cor. 4.
that in thi^ fleeting and short life, the should be labors and agonies, but
tha^ in the life eternal, there should be crowns and rewards of goo^ works,
and that travel should soon be ended, but the reward^ of good deeds should
last forever. And even as this maket^ them glad that through ind^ring of toil
endure a crown: ^^ it shall grieve and trouble thos^ in the time to come, that
se^ they have lost (for a little and small time of delights) perpetual good
things, and have sought for still enduring evil things.

Let us not therefore incur this anguish of soul, let us awake while we have
time. And lo now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, now is
opportunity of repentance, and a time wherein repentance will not be fruitles.
But if we be careless of our life, we shall sustain in hell not these
calamities alone, whereof we have spoken, but a more grievous mischief. For to
be excluded from bliss, and to be debarred from the things prepared for the
Saints, causes such affliction, such wofulnes, as (if no outward punishment
tormented) it were sufficient. It surpasses all pains of hell, to want that
beatitude, the fruition of which lay in thy power. For muse (I desire you) on
the state of that life, Heavenly bliss set forth.
as much as a man may consider it, for as it is in deed, no speech can utter.
Yet let us comprehend an image thereof, to the utmost it may be, by that we
have read, and the dark speeches we have received. It is said of it in a
certain place, Reu. 21, 4. Isai. 35.
There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall
there be any more pain. What more felicity is there than this life, wherein no
fear of poverty, nor sickness hurts, none deals unjustly, none is
endangered, none conceiueth indignation, none enuieth, no desire inflameth, no
lust of meat, no greedines of honor and renown troubles: but every spot of
vice is blotted out and washed away, where all things are in peace and
ioyousnes, all things in quiet and rest, where is light and brightness, not such
as is among us, but by so much more clear and glittering, by how much more
bright the sun is now than any candle? There is no night, no darkness, no
concourse of clouds, no extremity of cold or heat; but such a temperature
shall there be of all things, as they alone shall know which are worthy to
inioye the same. There is not old age, nor the misery thereof, but every
corruptible thing is done away, and the glory of incorruption is every where.
But moreover to have society with the Angels and Archangels, and of all the
celestial and supernall powers to enjoy the company, is much to be esteemed:
but to obtain the radiant sight of our Lord Christ Jesus, and to be lightened
with the brightness of his majesty, that can not be described, passes all such
and such like honor.

But lest thou be daunted with these things on the sudden, I will allure thee
by little and little to the attainement of them. Behold now and look upon the
heaven, let thy thought also pierce a little above heaven, after ponder the
transforming of the whole creature. For it shall not abide in this quality
wherein it is, but it shall be changed into another much more fine and fair, as
much (let me say so) as gold exceeds lead. Saint Paul teaches this shall
come to pass, when he says, that the creature it self shall be freed from the
bondage of corruption. Romans 8, 21.
For now under corruption it suffers many things which corruptible bodies
must needs suffer: but when it shall cast off all frailetie and corruption, it
shall be adorned with wonderful beauty, for it shall not suffer corruptible
bodies, but it shall receive them (by resurrection) void of corruption, whereby
the very creature shall be metamorphised into an excellenter habit. There shall be
then no dissension any where, but all things shall agree in amity, for the
agreement of the Saints shall be one, there shall be no dread of the Devil, no
ambushes of to unclean spirits, the fear of hell shall be far off, there shall be
death neither of the body, nor of the soul, but fear by the means of
immortality shall be shaken off.

Like as a kings son if first of all he be fostered up in a poor cottage
being apparailed in base raiment, lives under the fear of Tutors, and
governance of Masters, whereby his young age under streite discipline may bring
his mans-estate into good liking, and make it worthy his famous progenitors;
but when the time comes, that he must both enter the Court of his dominion,
and take in hand his fathers scepter, all homely apparaile being rejected, he
arayeth himself in princely attire, and on a sudden puts on the mitre of
his father, the glittering of purple incontinently is added, the brightness of
his diadem, the rowte of his guard, the power of his name is increased, and he
is made a new man; so after such a manner shall the alteration of Saints be.

And to the end you may be given to understand, that painted words is not all
we speak, let us cast our eyes on that mountain wherein Christ was
transformed, and let us behold his brightness, that, wherein (when he was
transformed) he shined; neither for all that by this means, all the glory of
the world to come shall be revealed unto us. For that transformation was declared
not fully as in deed the blessedness to come shall be, but as much as the beholders
eyes could bear. And the Gospel says Matt. 17, 2.
his face did shine as the sun: but the glory of the incorruptible shall not
only send forth such a light, nor such as the eyes of men can look on, but
such shall be the future brightness, as eye sight may not endure, although it
abode that in the transforming on the mount. Whereby it is clear, that so much
was revealed as the eyes of mortal men could suffer, neither yet did they
fully suffer it, for it is said, They fell on their faces. Verse. 6.


Again, if thou should be brought into an assembly, where every one should
sit apparrelled in golden robes, in the midst of whom one should shine
decked in pearls and purple, and if he promised that thou might be one of
the number of those men of honor, would thou not assay and attempt all
things to attain unto it? So then open thy sight on the heavens, and behold
there an assembly gathered together, not in brightness of gold, neither in
trimnes of garments, nor glistering in precious stones, but clearer in
righteousness than either the stars glitter, or the sun shines. Behold there a
company not of men alone, but of Angels, Archaungels, thrones, dominions,
principalities, and powers; and of the king that sits in the midst of
them, no speech may be, for he surmounteth all speech and conceit of the mind
of man, by reason of his beauty, his strength, his glory, his roialty, his
majesty. What then? Tell me, shall we beguile our selves of all these honors,
because of sloth in susteining some labor, and in resisting for a while the
allurements of lust? For if we should daily sustain torments, and suffer a
little time hell fire, to the end we might see Christ coming in glory, and
accompanied with his Saints, were it not good to endure all sorrow, that we
might be made partakers of so great bliss, of so great glory? Hear what the
blessed Apostle Peter says; Matt. 17, 4.
It is good for us to be here. If he seeing a slender glimse of the glory to
come, suddenly rejected all things out of his mind, relieng on the delectation
of the vision he saw, what will one say, if he beheld the things, as they are
in truth? Namely at what ^ime, the court of heaven shall be ^pened, and the king
of heaven shall be revealed, not in a glass ^arkly, but face to face, not by
^aith, but by visage.

Many ignorant folk think it ^ thing all-sufficient, and to be wished for,
alone to be delivered from the pains of hell; I say, The torments of hell not
so grievous as the loss of the sight of Christ.
to ^e removed and cast off from that glory, is a more grievous ^orment than
hell: neither judge ^^ the torments there so grievous, as it is to be driven
from the sight of Christ, for this (I as^ure you) is more miserable than any
punishment, this only exceeds hell. When we see an earthly king entering his
palace, with his adherents and guard, we admire and call those great men who
wait upon him, and suppose our selves wretched, if we be not vouchsafed any
place amongst them: though we know the weakness and instabilitie of these
terrene things, sometimes for foreign wars, sometimes for civil conterwaites,
and sometime for malicious spite, yet howsoever it be, it grieueth those tha^
have fallen thence. How the^ shall it not much more vex v^ if with the
highest king, Isai. 40.
who ho^deth the whole globe of the eart^ (not a part thereof only) ye^ who
holds it in his fist, wh^ measures the heaven with a^ hand-breadth, who
supporte^ each thing by the word of hi^ power, who reckneth the Gentil^ as
nothing, yea as spettle, wit^ this (I say) when he bestows honor that shall
last for ever, w^ have no place, neither be numbered among his servants? Will
it not pinche us more than any pain?

But peradventure thou say it will suffice us to escape hell, albeit we be
not thought worthi^ of the sight of the king. Wha^ more unhappy and wretche^
soul is there, than to which thi^ is sufficient? Supposest thou tha^ the king
whereof we speak, sha^ come to judge the earth, carried in chariots of Mules,
or in gilded wagons, or with the terrible power of a diadem? Nay harke^ how
the Prophets have foretold (as much as might be declared to men) the coming of
Christ. One of them says thus: Our God shall come, Psalm. 50, 3.
and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and a mighty
tempest shall be moved round about him, he shall call the heaven above, and
the earth to judge his people. And harken how another, to wit, Isaiah, shows
the diverse sorts of punishments; these are his words; Isai. 13, 9.
Behold the day of the Lord comes, cruel, with wrath, and fierce anger, to
lay the land waste; and he shall destroy the sinners out of it. Verse. 10.
For the stars of heaven, and the planets thereof, shall not give their
light, the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not
cause her light to shine. Verse. 11.
And I will visit the wickedness upon the world, an^ their iniquity upon the
wicked and I will cause the arrogancy o^ the proud to cease. Verse. 12.
I will make a man more precious than fin^ gold, even a man above the wedge of
gold of Ophir. Therefore I will shake the heaven, Verse. 13.
an^ the earth shall remove out o^ her place, in the wrath of the Lord of
hosts, and in the day of hi^ fierce anger. And again he says, the windows
from on high are open, Isa. 24, 18.
and the foundations of the earth do shake. 19.
The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is
exceedingly moved. 20.
The earth shall reele too and fro like a drunken man, and shall be removed like
a tent, the iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it, so that it shall fall and
rise no more. And in that day, 21.
shall the Lord visit the hoa^^ above, that is on high, even the kings of the
world, that are upon the earth, and they shall be gathered together as the
prisoners in the pit, and they shall be shut up in the prison. And the prophet
Malachies words are consonant hereto; Malac. 3.
Behold he shall come, says the Lord of hosts. Verse. 1.2.
But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure when he
appears? For he is like a purging fire, and like fullers soap. Verse. 3.
And he shall sit down to fine and try the silver, he shall even fine the
sons of Levy, and purify them as gold and silver. And again he says,
Chap. 4, 1.
for behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud,
yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave them neither
root nor branch. And another of the prophets says, Dan. 7, 9.
I beheld till the thrones were set up, and the ancient of days did sit,
whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool.
Verse. 10.
A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him, the judgment was
set, and the books opened. And a little after, Verse. 13.
as I beheld in visions by night, behold one like the son of man came in the
clouds of heaven, and approached unto the ancient of days, and they brought
him before him. Verse. 14.
And he gave him dominion, and honor, and a kingdom, that all people, nations
and languages should serve him, his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which
shall never be taken away, and his kingdom shall never be destroyed. Verse. 15.
I Daniel was troubled in my spirit, in the midst of my body, and the visions
of mine head made me afraid.

So then when these things shall begin, the gates of heaven shall be opened,
yea rather the very heaven shall be taken away, as if the couerings of a
pauilion were drawn together, to wit, that it may be restored and transfigured
into better. Then all things shall be in fear, amazednes and trembling shall
fill every place. Then also fear shall shake the angels, and not the angels
alone, but perchance the archangels, thrones, dominions, rules and powers. For
this is signified where it is said, Isai. 13, 13.
I will shake the heaven; for they are the fellow servants of them that must be
judged, and must give an account of this life. If when one city is to be
judged by the judges of this world, other fear and shake, although it be not
for great danger like to ensue: when the universal world shall come to be
judged of him that lacks not witness, that does not seek arguments, that does
not require an orator for the cause, but all these things being removed that
does reveal the deeds, words, and thoughts of men, that places each thing in
open sight, and shows every fact, as it were in a painted table, before the
eyes, both of the transgressors, and of the beholders, how much more shall
every creature be moved with fear? And if then no fiery stream should issue
forth, neither the terrible angels, or greesely executioners should stand by;
but if thus only it were, that men should be called before the king, and some
should be praised and honored, other some without honor cast to confusion; if
men did only suffer this punishment, would it not surpass the torments of
hell, that when other were endowed with gifts of the king, they should shamefully
suffer the repulse? Which pain how intolerable it is, although speech now may
not declare, yet then shall we clearly perceive it, when we come to experience.

Furthermore, besides al these anguishes of torments, set before your eyes, not
confusion alone, and utter shame, but the way, how men are drawn to fire, and
delivered up to racking. Think upon those cruel and ougly tortours, which
throw sinners down headlond, and in that time, in which other that have done
well, by the bright and gentle Angels being carried before the high throne of
the everlasting King, shall be rewarded with immortal gifts.

These things are accidents to that day, judgment, and time, but that which
ensues, what tongue can tell? What pelasure, what joy shall it be, to be with
Christ, when the soul coming to her proper vigor, shall with confidence begin
to look on God? none can declare the greatness of that joy. For she triumphs
not alone for the fruition of the things present, but she reioiceth much more
because she knows, there shall be no end of her blessedness. And howbeit no
speech can set forth that gladness and mirth, nor any thought contain it, yet
seeing (as it were) a certain shadow of the thing to come, we will also
endeavor to acquaint you with it, Demand we of the rich and welthie of this
world, who vaunt in honors and power, with what gladness they are puffed out?
With how great delectation and pleasure they are in love with these things, so
that sometime they carry their noses very high in the wind? And that, though
they themselves know, that these things are neither right happy, nor yet
everlasting, but vanishe away sooner than a dream: which if they endure while
this life remains, if we make the most of them we can, they can endure no
longer. Wherefore if men are so exceedingly ioious, for frail and transitory
things: with what joy shall we think those souls to be filled, which have
gotten heavenly and eternal bliss? In which both quantity and quality
differs so much from the other in excellency, (for all that in this life we
account them good,) so that, Isai. 64, 4. 1. Cor. 2, 9.
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart as yet has understood
them. For as a little one is in the belly of his mother; so are we in the
world inwrapped streitly in darkness, and can not behold the light and
liberty of the world to come. But when the time shall come, Such corn at we
sow here, such bread shall we eat in the world to come.
that this world shall travel in birth with us, and shall bring forth into
the brightness of the future world all it has conceived, if any shall be found
(by the means of sin) putrified or not of full growth, they go from
darkness to darkness, from tribulation to more bitter tribulation. But they
that shall be perfect and like unto the king, she profereth to the father, as a
worthy issue, to be placed in the ministry of Angels, and in the seats of
Archangels.

Therefore will you go that way (my friend) that the countenance and kingly
bewty of thy soul may be polluted, and this world at the last reject thee, but
repair quickly the image of thy father, repair thy virtue, beauty, and
gallantnes, that among other thou may be known of thy father. The soul
must be pollished more than the body, and God has thus appointed.
The beauty of the body God has limited with certain natural bonds, but
the beauty of the soul he has made free, and subject to no necessity,
which leaves far behind the comlines of the body. Insomuch that the trimnes
of our soul is at the beck of God, yet in our power. For if the Lord had
granted us license to use our own fancy in our bodily bravery, we should
have been burdened with superfluous and naught available cares, spending all
the time of our life in them, whereby the soul must needs not be decked. Since
even now, when we have no power over the trimnes of our bodies, we so carke and
care, that by all possible means we pollish them, assaying by the painting of
colors, by the frisling of our hairs, by the roaling of our eyes, by variety
of vestiments, by exquisite practices to augment our bodily bravery. But how
much more convenient were it for us, to go about to garnish the soul, wherein
the true beauty is, and such as may by us daily be made more beautiful? Yet
we on the contrary, consume the whole race of our life in spoiling the
mistress, and in adorning the maiden: leaving the mistress (like a vile bond
woman) untrimmed, bespotted, utterly covered with all unseemly sluttishnes.
When as God for this cause exempted us from the carke of this body, and
enclosed it within the bonds of nature, least being occupied in needeles cares,
we should neglect the beautifieng of our soul, Souls defiled with sin, may
be trimmed again.
whose beauty and brauenes, albeit it be brought to extreme pollution, yet by
our labor and diligence she may be restored to notable gainesse, and be
recovered so far, that she may not only be admired of all good men, but be
desired and loved of the king himself, who is Lord of all. As the Prophet
speaks to it in the Psalms: Psalm. 45, 11.
The king shall have pleasure in thy beauty.

Often times experience proves, that of those women which have been inured to
common brothelrie, if any be somewhat handsome, for fairenes sake she has
been united in matrimony to some good man, and has been drawn to honesty.
How much rather will not God contemn ne despise the souls, which have fallen
from their divine excellency by the tyranny of the devil, into the
brothel-house and stews of this present life? You shall find that the prophets
have used these examples when they spoke to Jerusalem, for she played the
dishonest woman, and went a whooring after a strange sort, as shows the
prophet Ezechiel, saying, Ezech. 16, 33.
they give gifts to all other whoores, but thou give gifts unto thy lovers,
Verse. 34.
and the contrary is in thee from other women. And again another says, thou
have sitten upon the way waiting for them, as a desolate G. quail. Or, thou
have sit waiting for them in the ways, as the Arabian in the wilderness. Hier.
3, 2.
Chough. This people which had so played the harlot the Lord reclaimed to
himself, for their captivity was not so much for their punishment, as for
their amendment. For if in case GOD would have punished and destroyed them
withal, he would not have brought them home again to their native soil,
neither would have caused them to reedifie with greater magnificency, their
city and temple which were overthrown, Hagg. 2, 10.
the glory (says he) of this last house, shall be greater than the first. So
then if God do not forbid repentance to those that have so manifoldly practiced
whoordome, he will much more willingly reclaim thy soul, which now first has
grievously fallen. God is jealous over our souls.
The reason is, for that no carnal lover, though never so hoate, can be so
jealous over the love of his derling, as God is kindled with the love of our
souls. Which albeit daily it may be gathered, yet it may be apparently proved
out of the word of God. In a word, read that is spoken of God, in the beginning
either of Jeremy, or of the other Prophets, how when he was despised and set
light by of the people, yet he returned again to them, and thirsting after
their love, he continually followed them. And this is that, which God himself
declares in the Gospel, where he says: Jerusalem, Mat. 23, 37. Luke 13, 34.
Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent to
thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the Hen
gathers her chickens, and ^e would not. And Paul says to the Corinthians:
2. Cor. 2, 19.
For God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing
their sins unto them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation.
Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ: 20.
as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that
ye be reconciled to God. Let us think these things spoken to us, for not
only infidelity, but the pollution and uncleanness of life makes this
execrable enimitie betwixt God and men, and so the Apostle says, that Romans 8,
7.
the wisdom of the flesh is enimitie against God. Go to then, let us raze to
the ground this wall of enimitie, let us smooth the way to an attoneme^t with
God, that we may be loved and desired of him again.

I am sure you wonder not a little at the beauty of Hermione, Hermione
daughter to Menelaus and Helena very beautiful for whom Orestes the son of
Agamemnon slew Pyrrhus the son of Achilles, because he married his betrothed
minion.
and think the like may not be found on the whole earth. But if you would (my
friend) yo^ may be so much fairer and comlier than she, by how much gold
exceeds dirte. For if many have in admiration the beauty of that body, and
fall in love therewith; what fairenes do you think to be in a soul, if every
point therein were lively portraited? How much more amiable, how much more
woonderful would it be? For the substance of bodily beauty consists in
naught else, but in phlegm, blood, moisture, and Or, melancholy.
gal, which are maintained by the corruptible iuyces of meats? Hereby the
apples of the eyes glister, hereby the cheeks are ruddie, and hereby the whole
face is adourned. And unless they be daily moistened with such juice, which
ascends out of the liver, incontinent the skin is dried up, the eyes wax
hollow, al ruddines and beauty departs from the visage. Now if thou consider
what is hidden within that skin which ^^ou iudgest beautiful, what is ^ut up
within the nosethriles, that within the jaws and bel^y, thou will protest that
this ^rauery of body, is nothing but a ^^anched sepulcher, which without
appears fair to men, but within is full of filthiness and uncleanness.
Moreover, if thou see on a ragged cloth, the phlegm and spittle that
proceeds from the body, thou loathest it, and wilt not touch it with the tip
of the finger, looking askew thereon: and how then can thou love and desire
the cel and seat of phlegm? But thy beauty was not such. For by how much
heaven is more beautiful than the earth, by so much did the trimnes of thy
soul surmount the beauty of the fairest body. And notwithstanding none at any
time has seen a soul departed from the body, yet some other time I will
attempt to declare the comlines of it, by the powers thereof. At this time let
it suffice to rehearse the words of the Lord which say, Matt. 22, 30. Mark.
12, 25.
they are as the ange^ of God in heaven. Again, in the of bodies there is so
great a difference, between those that a^^ thin, and those that are thick and
heavy, (as for example heaven passes the earth, fire water the stars stones,
the rainbow al^ terrestrial flowers:) what would we say, if it might so
chance, tha^ with corporal eyes, we might behold the gains of the soul.
Would thou not scoff at all external beauty and bravery, in consideration
of that internal^ substance? I pray thee then let us not contemn so great a
felicity, nor not lightly regard so great a treasure that is in us,
especially since a return is not hard, and with no great labor may all the
beauty of our soul be renewed. For as soon as thou shall imagine the things
to come, and shall be inamered with them, straightway the soul retireth to her
former brauenes. ^o it is written; For our light af^ction, 2. Cor. 4, 17.
which is but for a mo^ent, causes unto us a far more ^xcellent, and an
eternal weight ^f glory. 18.
While we look not on ^he things which are seen, but ^n the things which are
not ^eene, for the things which are ^een are corporal, but the things which are
not seen are eternal. Now if Paul call tribulations ^^ght and easy, for that
we look ^ot on the things which are ^een, but on the things which are not
seen: how much more easy shall it be for thee, to shake off the soul burden
of uncleanness? Neither now do I exhort thee to those labors and dangers, or
to those daily deaths, which the Apostles suffered, or to those persecutions, or
stripes, or bands, or imprisonments, or the contempt of all worldly riches, or
famine, or nakedness, or many watchings, or perils of iourneying, or shipwracks
on sea, or dangers of robbers, or dangers of thy own nation, or dangers of
false br^thren, for all those afflictions the apostles endured: nothing of a^
these I require of thee, but this desire alone, that servitude being forsaken,
thou return to the former liberty, considering both the plague which follows
riot and the glory which is laid up for virtues. It is no marvel, i^ those
which believe there shall be no resurrection, neglect their life, fear nothing
the judgment to come, and are nothing pricked in heart: but we which look more
certainly on future than present things, ought we to live so miserably, and so
wretchedly, that we not only should not fear, at the remembrance of the
judgment to come, but utterly contemn it?

A part it is of extreme madness, and no mischief is comparable, that believing
we be like the unbelieving. Yea amongst the^ not a few have been found, who
have flourished in this life, in ^he virtues of the mind, and what shall be our
excuse, what our so^ace, if in the day of doom those shall be brought forth
for examples against us? Some that exercise marchandice we see have suffered
shipwreck, and the ^osse of all their goods: yet for this they have not been
dismayed, but again have applied the same way and traffike. These did leese
their substance not by sloth, but by violence of winds. But we which know
before undoubtedly, that if we our selves will, we may incur neither shipwreck,
neither damage of soul; should we not take in hand again our former
exercises, and renew our business by negligence ouerslipped? Nevertheless we lie
retchlesly, and fold our idle hands on our breast, after the manner of
sluggards: and would God our hands were idle, and did not work our own decay.
Which if they do it has great affinity with most manifest outrage, as if
(for example a champion leaving his aduers^ry, should turn his hands on hi^
own head, and buffet himself The devil has put us to fligh^ and has dashed
us in sunder, w^ have need then to rise an^ to resist him. When thou an^ once
cast down, if thou be willing not only to lie still, but t^ throw down thy
self headlong this is to assent to thine enemy, and to take in defense hi^
part.

Blessed David fell after the same sort thou did, neither so alone, but in
more grievous wise, for he combined murder with adultery: and what did he then?
Did he lie so? Did he not rise and resist the enemy, and so overcame him,
that his good deeds profited his posterity when he was gone? For when Solomon
had committed that heinous crime, and was deemed worthy of a thousand deaths,
yet for David's sake the Lord said he would bestow the kingdom on him longer.
These be the words; 2. King. 11, 11
I will surely rent the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.
Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it, 12.
because of David thy father, but I will rent it out of the hand of thy son.
Hezechiah when he was much endangered, (albeit he were a just man himself,)
yet for blessed David the Lord promised to help him, Or, J will defend this
city to save it for mine own sake, and for David my servants sake.
I will defend this city for mine own sake, 2. King. 19, 34
and for David my servants sake, I will save it. See what was the strength of
repentance, see what power conversion had. But if he had thus thought, (which
thou now think,) and had said, it is impossible that the Lord should now
be merciful to me, he has greatly honored me, and has endued me with the
gift of prophecy, he has exalted me to a kingdom, he has delivered me from
manifold dangers, how then can I promerite clemency at the hands of God,
forasmuch as ^ have thus fallen? If David ha^ thus thought, he had lost no^
only that went before, but tha^ that followed also. For not only the wounds of
the body if they be neglected bring death; but the wounds of the soul
semblably. Are we so sottish to put a plaster to a bodily wound, and never
attempt to cure the soul Many wounds of our bodies may not be cured, yet we
despair not, and though the Chirurgions say, the wound is incurable, yet we
earnestly and vrgently beseech them, that they would mittigate somewhat the
pain. But in the wounds of the soul, which are not vnsanable, (for the soul
is not tied to necessity, neither abides any passion) we are remiss, we are
past hope, we are pricked with no care. When there is no hope our grief of
body may be healed, yet we withdraw nothing from our care: but here when no
occasion is of desperation, without using any labor, we omite all care. So you
perceive, how that more ardently we love our body than our soul, knowing not,
that if we regard not our soul, we cannot save our body. For the soul was not
ordained for the body, but the body for the soul: and he that esteems
nothing the higher, but polisheth the inferior, marreth both. But he that
observes an order, and garnisheth the first, admit he do not pass for the
second, by the salvation nevertheless of the first, the second shall be saved.
The which is builded on the plot of Christ his words, Matt. 10, 28.
Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell.

Think you we have done enough, and satisfied you in this thing, that no
infirmity of the soul is incurable? Or else is it needful we should use
other reasons, and confirm it yet farther? For although a thousand times thou
despair of thy self, we will never despair of thee. Neither do we this that
we mislike in other, howbeit there be ods, whether one despair of himself, or
another of him. To despair of another is pardonable, but to despair of
himself, is not: because he is not master of another mind, this rules his
own purpose. Wherefore we hope there is a return for you to the state of your
former life, and to the virtues of the mind, which we know are in you. Besides
these things, this we add.

Ion. 2, 4.
The Nineuites heard the prophet saying definitely, Yet forty days and
Nineueh shall be overthrown, notwithstanding they were not discouraged. No not
when they were not certain, that the Lord would not bring to pass his words,
and when (in man's judgment) there was no hope of forgiveness. And as soon as
that abrupt saying was ended, they determined repentance, saying, Verse. 9. 10.
who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away his fierce wrath
that we perish not. And God saw their works that they turned from their evil
ways: and God repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them,
and he did it not. If Barbarians and ignorant folk could understand so much of
the mercy of God, does it not much more behoue us to do so, who are enstructed
in the word of God, and know this example was before our time, and that many
more like are contained in Gods Book, either in words, or in acts? For my
thoughts are not your thoughts, Isai. 55, 8.
neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord. 9.
For as the heavens are hier than the earth, so are my ways higher than your
ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts.

Futhermore if we receive our servants, who have offended us, when they promise
they will amend, and account of them as before, nay many times credit them more
after reconcileme^t; will not God much rather deal thus with us? If he had
made us to punish us, thou might well despair, and doubt of thy salvation:
but if for his goodness only he made us, to enjoy hi^ euer-enduring bliss and
rewards, and does all things from the beginning of the world til this day, to
this end and purpose, that he may save us: what matter of despairing, what
matter of misdoubting is there left?

We have offended him (say you) more than ever any man. For this cause
should thou more speedily and earnestly make satisfaction, and be
sorrowful^ for thine offense, and abandon those deeds with which God is
offended. Neither does a grievous injury offend any body so much, as to
continue in it, when there is time and opportunity of satisfaction. To sin
is humane, but to persevere in sin, is diabolical. To conclude, behold how
God by the Prophet misliketh this more than that: Hier. 3, 7.
And I have said (says he) after that she has in all this gone a whooring,
Or, and I said, when she had done all this, turn thou unto me, but she
returned not.
be thou turned to me, and she is not turned. And otherwhere, when he had
rebuked the transgressions of the people, by his Prophet, and they had promised
amendment, he shows how lovingly he receives the conversion of sinners, who
will grant their heart may be so in them, that they may fear me, and keep
my commandments all the days of their life, that it may be well with them,
and their children for evermore? Moses likewise, when he would teach the
people, what God requires of men, says thus: And now, Israel, Deuteronomy. 10, 12.
what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to
walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul?

God then, who is desirous that himself be beloved of us, and for this does
all things, not sparing his only begotten for our salvation, and the love he
bare toward us, would feign (after what sort soever, if I may so speak,) we
should be reconciled to him; and how can it be, that he should not receive and
love us being penitents converted unto him, and that as cheerfully as he does
his children? For, in what respect do you think, spoke he by the Prophet,
saying: Tell thou thine iniquities first, that thou may be justified?
Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est.
Was it not, for that he coueted to revoke us to his love, and tender
affection? He that loves his friend, if perchance he suffer many injuries at
his hands, his love is not for that cooled toward his beloved, if in case he
will let the wrongs to be opened and discovered, and certes he that is
iniuried, does desire this for no other cause, but that their renewing of love
may be of more force and validity. Now, if the confession of sins mattreth
so much to atonement, how much greater may be our hope of reconciliation, if
by works of repentance, we blot out the offenses we have committed? For if God
prohibited the fallen to return to the right way, either none, or very few,
should enter the kingdom of heaven. Yea, the chief Patriarchs whom we have in
admiration, after backeslides in sins, they have been restored. For they that
were earnest in evil, being turned to goodness, use the same forwardnes,
knowing that their debt is great. In the gospel this is taught of the Lord,
when he said to Simon of a certain woman, Luke 7, 44.
See thou this woman? I entered into thine house, and thou gave me no water
to my feet, but she has washed my feet with tears, an^ wiped them with the
hairs o^ her head. 45.
Thou gave me no kiss, but she since the time I came in, has not ceased to
kiss my feet. 46.
My head with oil thou did not anoint: but she has anointed my feet
with ointment. 47.
Wherefore I say unto thee, many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much. To
whom a little is forgiven, he does love a little. And he said unto her, 48.
thy sins are forgiven thee. ^^r which cause the devil knowing that they which
have sold themselves to work iniquity, if they revolt are diligent and
serious, and as in their transgressions they were hasty, so in their amendment
they are heedful (because now they know what they have done,) he fears and
shakes least any of the^ should make the onset to repentance. For if they once
begin, they may not be withstaied, but ^^^dled with the heat of repentance as
it were with a fire, they make their souls purer than fi^ed gold, and by the
remembrance of their former misdeeds and as it were by the blowing wind of
their conscience, having hope their pilote, they arrive in ^he haven of health.
And because of the honors past, the circumspecter they are in their journey;
so that in this wel-nigh they may seem to pass those that never faultered,
Experientia stultorum matter.
because experience makes them more charie. For (I know not how) we love more
entirely the things we had and have lost, than the things we have not and
desire to get.

Then a hard thing it is (as I said) to make a beginning, in this lies all
the difficulty, to prepare the way to repentance. For straightway at the
entrance the enemy blows out threats and manacings, and in his rage drives
us back, when we would go forth. The smokie puffes, and cloud of whose
terrors, if thou contemn, when the way is entered, thou shall see thy self
corroborated, and obteining the conquest thou will rejoice thine enemy manaced
thee, and thou shall perceive the rest of this combat easy. Go to, go to in
the name of God, now let us enter the path of life, let us return to the
heavenly city, seeing we are appointed and enrolled citizens. The gates of
this city despair shurteth against us, hope and confidence will open them
fully; the which if we cast behind us, we incur the crime not of sloth
alone, but of arrogancy. For satan was made as he is, by no other means, but
for that after his sin, first he despaired, and next fell from despair into
hawtines and pride. So likewise the soul if it once begin to despair of
salvation, it understands not into what mischiefs it runs, fearing not to
speak or do whatsoever may stop salvation. Commonly we see in those that are
mad, when once they have lost their wit, they fear naught any longer, they
blush at nothing, but licentiously they dare speak and do every thing. If they
fall into the fire, they avoid it not; if they be going into a headlong place,
they pull not back their foot. After the same manner they that are in despair
commit intolerable acts, they range in all the ways of wickedness, shame is no
let, fear hinders nothing, the things present do not refrain them, the
things to come do not terrify, death only it is that they cannot escape.

Wherefore I humbly request thee, before the poison of this sin more infect
thee, arise and awake at the last, and lay aside this devilish droonkennes. If
on the sudden thou can not gather thy wits together, yet do it leisurely,
although (in my opinion) it be the easier way at once to break off all the
stays of this evil, to sheere it in sunder fully, and to begin repentance
anew. But if this be difficile unto thee, as thou will and art able, begin a
better conversation, and covet eternal life. Run therefore I pray and
beseech you dear friend, (I beseech you for those good deeds you have done
heretofore, I pray you for the liberty that first you had,) let me see you
climb up to the top of virtue, as truly a repentant as you were before.
Yield to me thy friend, yield to all them that are offended through thee, and
fall because of thy fall, yield to all them that are in despair because of thy
despair, that they may not surmise they can not tread the true way, unless
they see thee return. Regard (I desire you) the pensiuenes of the whole
congregation of the faithful brethren, the great joy and triumphing of the
faithles, the usual by word of slothful youths, regard what authority thou
art to many to wallowe in the mire of riot. And if so be that you return into
the way of your former virtues, all these things will be turned into the
contrary. Our shame and confusion shall light on them, we shall be ioifull and
glad. For we will blaze abroad throughout the world, that thou art a subduer
of lust, a subduer of unclean and foolish voluptie and riot, and we will brute
far and wide thy glorious triumph. That victory is the greater that is gotten
after a fall, and that is restored after flight. And you shall not only be
rewarded for your own labor and reformation, but shall receive a meede for the
safety of them, who leuelling their life to thy conversation, have (without
despair) be turned themselves to repentance. Neither any hereafter having
fallen howsoever, will not be greedy by and by to rise, and incontinently to
be restored. Despise not (if you love me) these great profits, neither bring
our souls with sorrow to the grave: but vouchsafe us some rest, and chase
away the cloud of heaviness, which for thy sake has ouercouered us; for lo
letting pass our own evils, we bewail thy fall. But if you would a little
look upward, and be in love with celestial things, we should be eased of this
lamenting, and we might be caused to consider our own offenses.

That men may by repentance repair their pristine gains, yea sometimes be made
more excellent than before they were, hitherto we have confirmed out of the
word of God. And to conclude this point, this is the cause why that harlots
and Publicans inherit the kingdom of heaven, and that many that were last,
shall be first. Henceforth I will add the things that have been done in our
age, of which G. F. C. of which my self may be a witness.
thou thy self art a witness.

G. F. C. I know.
You know that young man the son of VRBANVS, the chiefest of that province,
whose parents died in his minority, but left him very wealthy in household
stuff, gold, silver, and possessions. That youth co^temning at the first all
pomp, and pride, (which that age and riches for the most part follow) he left
the schools of humane arts, and betook himself to a base life, in which
putting on course and homely arayment, he departed to the mountains and desert
places. Where being exercised in the temperancie of true philosophy, he not
only matched (which is but seldom seen in those years,) but passed to,
great and wonderful men in the virtue of abstinencie; yea, when afterward he
was baptized he passingly increased in virtues. At which thing all reioiced,
and praised the Lord, that borne to so great wealth, and descended of such a
family, even in the April of his dais he trod underfoot at once all vanity
of this momentary life, and had an hungry desire of eternal joy.

Living after this sort, and in this admiration, among all, certain of his
kindred (but naughty persons) at the first came to see him, Evil speeches
corrupt good manners.
and after by continuance of lewd talk, drew him again to that he hated and
loathed, so that all philosophy (which he studied) being laid apart, he came
from the hills to the market place. Then carried on a palfrey through the midst
of the city, and guarded with footmen he vauntingly began to wander up and down
the streets. Insomuch that the rains of chastity were also let loose, because
it has no fellowship with dainties and riot. After this he was snarled in the
bait of filthy love, and led into captivity by every lust, which caused all
men to despair of his salvation. For swarms of parasites environed ^his
hope-lost yonker, the adul^erous rabble compassed him in. and what hope would
a man ^hinke to be remaining? Those ^lso which were given very much ^^
reprehending, found fault ^ith this likewise, that in the be^^nning he entered
a course, he ^ould not continue in, and had ^spired to that was above his
^each, forsaking the study of ^earning wherein he might have ^rofited.

When these and such like things as touching his life being ^umored abroad were
known to all, and we also were ashamed ^f his doing; certain holy men, expert
in this kind of hunting, and who had found out by long use and experience,
that naught was to be despaired, putting on the armor of hope, they began to
watch him more narrowly. And if it fortuned he were in the streat, they
approached near and courteously saluted him; but he on horseback scarce
greeted them again, or thought them worthy an answer, when they went by his
side; such was his pride and wickedness. But those merciful men, accounting
none of these an injury, respected only that they had intended, that they
might (if it were possible by any means) deliver the lamb out of the teeth of
woolues; which by patience was in fine atchiued. For weighing they did this
often, and prying into his own life with the inward eyes of his mind, he
blushed somewhat at their boldness and tendering, and when he marked they came a
far off, he would dismount from his horse, and bowing his head toward the
earth, he hearkened diligently to their speeches, and in process of time he
reverenced them more. And so reuolting by peece-meale, through the grace of
God, and their meek counsel, and rid fromall the nets of death wherein he was
entangled, he went again to the wilderness, to the mountains, and to the
woonted exercises of philosophy, and after was of such humility, that his
latter doings exceeded his wonderful beginning. He learned by proof the
occasion of his fall, and the allurement of all his error. That also he did,
which (doubtless) was agreeable to Christ's commandment in the Gospel; Matt.
19, 21.
Selling all he had, and distributing it on the poor, to the end he might
remove his treasure from the earth to heaven, and his heart might be there,
where his treasure was. But because as yet he had somewhat left on earth, his
heart returned to the earth, and making an estimate of all his goods, (for he
cared nothing for them,) he bestowed much on the needy, that so freeing
himself from care of mind, he might take away all occasion of stumbling. And
thus walking in the way to heaven, by amendment he is come to each accomplement
of virtue. So you see, how this young man fell quickly, and arose speedily.

Another also after many labors he had sustained in the wilderness, having
only the company of one in his life and mansion-place, continued an
Angelical life, from his young age, to his very old days. But (I know not
how) drowsily yielding to the suggestion and first battery of the devil, Good
Lord, how much difference is there between the Romish Masse-mongring Moonks
now being, and the Monks which were in Chrysostoms days? Those were continent,
and sequestered (although they should have had a care of the salvation of their
brethren also) themselves from the vulgar sort of men, to the end they might
give themselves wholly to contemplation and meditation, (for this was the cause
why Basil the great went to Pontus, and invited his friend Gregory the Divine
to him;) these are lecherous and lustful, coveting that sort of life for
idleness alone, and belliecheere. Those as soon as they perceived their
uncleanness (this fellow here alleged is a witness) fell to repentance without
stay: these through sensuality committing gross and carnal sins, never truly
repent for it, and yet bear men in hand they are the holiest persons under the
sun. Of whom it was said rightly, though in a rithme, O monachi, vestri
stomachi,
sunt amphora Bacchi!
Vos estis, Deus est testis, turpissima pestis.


Let none then of the ignoranter sort suppose, that this example makes ought
for the vprightnes of Moonks now a days.


he fell into the desire of a woman, when as he never saw any, sithence he
becam a Moonke. First, then he desired his fellow with whom he lived, to
bring him wine, and flesh to feed on, who making no haste, he threatened him,
that he would go down into the city. Which he said not that he might eat
flesh, but that he might find opportunity to satisfy his lust. His
compaignion marueling at this, and fearing least he should do him more harm,
if he should deny his request, gave that he asked, and fulfilled his will.
When he saw no way to guile, openly and shamelessely he reuealeth his
desire, and confesses he will go down to the city. The other by much
persuasion not able to retain him, let him go, and followed him far off, to
see what he would do, and whither he would go. And when a great way behind,
he saw him entering a brothell-house, and to have cooled his lust with the
company of a strumpet, tarieng at the door, straightway when he came forth,
he exhorted him to repentance, he embraced him, and lovingly kissed him, and
rebuked him not for his fall, but desired him, that now his lust being cooled,
he would return to his old habitation, and to the solitary wilderness. But he
marking in him such meekenes and gentleness, was ashamed, and stricken through
with the force of his words and deeds, and condemning himself for his
misdemeanor, goes with his fellow (which was so good and humble) into the
mountain. Whither when they came, he entreated of him, that when he was shut
up closely in his cell, and heremitage, he would G. F. C. daily.
every second day bring him bread and water. If any should seek him, he
willed him say, that he was G. F. C. asleep.
dead. Which things obtained, he shut himself in, and there abode, clensing
the foulenes of his sin, with fasting, prayers, and weeping.

Few days passed over, when a drowth (because of the want of rain) had hurted
the country near about him, and all the inhabitants of that land lamented
much. But one of them was warned in a dream to go to that man enclosed in a
cell, that he might pray, and that by no other way rain might be procured,
but by his prayers. So departing with some other taken to him, he found this
Monks complice alone, and demanded where he was, whom the vision admonished
him to seek. When he heard he was dead, he deemed his vision false, and they
returned all to prayer, but the same vision told him again the same things.
Whereat earnestlye entreating him, that before had deceived them, they
requested him to show them the man, affirming that by the authority of so
marvelous a vision, they were sent to him being alive, not dead. Seeing it was
the will of God, he brings them to that godly man, and the wall being broken
down (because he had shut the door) they enter in and fall before hi^ feet,
desiring him (when the truth of the matter was declared) to release the famine
by intercession. First, his excuse was, that he could not demerite so great a
thing: at which words, he burst forth into weeping for the offense he had
committed, as if he had seen it fresh before his eyes. At length for the
importunity of the requesters, (for as much as he perceived GOD would have it
so,) he gave himself to supplication, and out of hand there followed great
store of rain, wherewith both the earth and men were refreshed.

Read Eusebius hist. eccl. lib. 3. cap. 23.
What should I speak of him which first was the Disciple of John the G. F. C.
son of Zebedeus.
Apostle, but after practiced robbing for a long time? Nevertheless afterward,
the Apostle gat hold on him, as he came out from the robbers den, and brought
him again (as you well know) to his former life, so that his beginning was
not to be conferred with his end. I remember when you read this story, you
admired the incredible meeknes of this blessed Apostle, and among other tokens
of his sincere love toward him, which he showed, this you said you most
wondered at, that he kissed the hand of the young man besmeared with blood, and
so with embracing reclaimed him to everlasting life, when as by all likelihood
he was near the brinke of the pit of death.

Saint Paul also not only loved and embraced Onesimus being converted, who was
an unprofitable servant, and fugitive thief, but makes petition to his
master, that he should esteem him as himself, and that because he recanted.
These be the Apostles words, Philem. from the 10. verse to the 18.
I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds. Which
in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable both to thee and to
me, whom I have sent again, thou therefore receive him, that is mine own
bowels. Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have
ministered unto me in the bonds of the Gospel. But without thy mind, would I do
nothing, that thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but
willingly. It may be that he therefore departed for a season, that thou
should receive him for ever, not now as a servant, but above a servant, even
as a brother beloved, specially to me; how much more then unto thee, both in
the flesh and in the Lord? If therefore thou account our things common, receive
him, as my self.

The same Apostle writes to the Corrinthians touching the^ that have sinned,
in this wise, ^east when I come again, 2. Cor. 12, 22.
I shall bewail many of them which have sinned already, and have not repented
of the uncleanness, and fornication, and wantonness which they have committed. And
again, I told you before, 2. Cor. 13, 2.
and tell you before, if I come again, I will not spare. You see then whom the
Apostle bewaileth, and whom he will not spare; not those which have sinned, but
those which have not repented, and not only not repented, but once or twice
admonished of their faults have refused to obey. For in that he says, I told
you before, and tell you before, as though I had been present the second time,
so write I now being absent, he signifies thus much, that being warned they
contemned counsel.

For which cause, I fear me, the same will fall out to us; and although the
same Paul, who threatened the Corinthians, be not at our elbowes, yet Christ is
present, who spoke by him, and if we persevere in hardness of heart, he will say
to us, I will not spare you, not only in the time present, but not in the time
to come neither. We must acknowledge our sins, and in confession intend not
to commit them again, assuring our selves of remission.
Wherefore let us prevent his face by confession, and let us power our our hearts
in his sight, Ecclus. 21, 1
Have thou sinned? Says the Scripture, do so no more, pray for thy fore-sins,
that they may be forgiven thee. And again, Prou. 18, 17. Or, he that is first
in his cause is just.
The just is an accuser of himself in the beginning of his speech. Let us not
then look till our adversary accuse us, but let us prevent him by confession,
and so make the judge more favorable toward us.

And surely this I assuredly know, thou confessest thy transgressions, and
mournest for thy self, but this I do not alonely require of thee; for I would
have the amendment of the things to come arise, of the confession of the things
past, and so I would have it done, that whilst thou do it, thou be
ascertained of forgiveness. For every one that does ought, unless he know the
thing he has in hand will profit him, goes about it, either carelessly, or not
seriously. For example; he that sows seed, unless he be sure and certain
there will be rain, that the earth will send forth the blade, and that the
fruit will ripen, he will never reap. And as none would feign spend labor in
wast, nor bestow diligence in that which shall not be beneficial unto him: so
he that sows visiens, tears, and confession which is without hope
unprofitable, cannot cease from sin, being holden fast by incredulity. But
as the husbandman which has no hope to reap fruit, cares not to drive off
the birds from his corn, or beasts, or any other nociue things: right so he
that sows confession with tears, and hops not it will be gainefull,
puts and drives nothing from his heart, which may hurt repentance.
Repentance is hurted, i^ one be enwrapped in such evils as he was first;
Ecclus. 34, 24.
When one builds and another breaks down, what profit have they then
(says the scripture) but labor? And he that is purged from the touching of a
corse, and again touches the dead, what avails washing? So he that fasteth
to decline sins, and goes back again to them, who will hear his prayers?
Ecclus. 26, 29.
And again it is said, when one departs from righteousness to sin, the Lord
appoints such to the sword. And as a dog is odious that licketh up his vomit
again, Prou. 26, 11.
so is a fool, when he returns to his transgressions.

So then this suffices not, to accuse thy self by declaring thy sins, but
do it with that zeal, that hope of justification may proceed of repentance,
and so you may bridle your soul to commit never the things again, of which you
have made confession. One for to give censure against himself, is common to
the faithful and faithless. Many enactors on stage which represent unchaste
queanes and whoremongers call themselves sinners and naughty folk, but not
with purpose to amend, and therefore in very deed it is no confession. For
they speak it not for grief of heart, nor with bitterness of tears, nor with
hatred of the things they confess, as if they could no more either hear or do
the like, but the words be all the matter, which they lab out with their lips,
not touched or pinched in mind, but after a sort hunting for praise, through
the elegancie and trimnes of speech, which they use to their auditors. Neither
are sins so grievous when they are colourably declared, as when indeed they
are committed. Again some are so benumbed with ouer-great despair, and are so
deuoide of sense, that making like account of good and ill report, with great
impudency they disclose their sins, as though they were another bodies. But
I would have thee to do nothing so, neither for despair to come to
confession, but with good and sure hope of forgiveness, the very root of
despair being cut off. Now the root of despair is sloathfulnes, and not the
root only but the nourse to. For as a garment breeds mothes, and nourishes
the^ also; A man is caused to think that any good thing is hard, and not
possible to be obtained by him or any other through too great bashfulnes: which
when it rules in ones affection, he thinks it may be eased by no good thing.
And because slothfulnes is a certain deiectiue pensiuenes of the spirit, it
comes to pass, that despair arises of sloth. Thom. Aquin. lib. 2. s. p. q.
20. de desper.
so sloth does not alone beget desperatio^, but nourishes and also fostereth
it. Insomuch that they wax and grow together, the one being cut off, the other
(without question) waneth and decreaseth. Wherefore separate this link of
sins, and break their yoke. By the yoke of thy soul, I mean vice, whereto
as it were a yoke, the life of man is tied: for when the thought of man is not
right, the axle-tree of life is carried headlong.

Harken yet what more we will say. Often times it falls out that a man
amendeth many and great sins by repentance, yet he commits faults after the
good he has wrought. And this is it, which lays chiefly despair on the
soul, because she seems to pull down that she builded, and vainly to have
spent al her travel, this cogitation (I say) depriueth the soul of hope and
confidence. Contrariwise we must think, what way this bad and hurtful thought
may be expelled; namely, that unless the good we do, and the amendment gotten
by repentance prohibited, and were (as it were) a contrary weight to our
sins, there were no stay, but that we should be carried downewarde into the
depth of mischief. And as a strong habergeon suffers not a kine and poisoned
dart to pierce the intrailes of the body, but in some part stops the force
thereof: so is it certain, that he that carries hence many good things and
many bad, shall find some ease in his punishment: and he that shall depart
without any goodness, and with great store of evil, what should I speak of
his punishment? For there (questionles) good and had works shall be rewarded,
and each (as it were) shall be balanced, and the part that sinketh, shall draw
with it the worker. Rewards in the life to come of works both good and bad.
If the multitude of evils shall ouer-poise, it will pull the worker to hell;
but if the good works shall be greater, they will resist and repugne against
the evils, and will bring their worker to the place of the living, even from
the gate of hell. This is not phantastically imagined of my brain, the divine
Scriptures disassent not from it, for thus the word of God speaks: Psalm. 62,
12. Matt. 16, 27.
Thou rewardest every one according to his work. For not in hell only, but in
the kingdom of God, Differences of ioies and plagues in the life to come.
Calvin. Institut, lib. 3. cap. 25. sect. 10 Bulling. in Comment. and Erasmus in
Paraphrase. in 41. verse. cap. 15. 1. Cor.
there shall be many differences. Ioh. 14, 2.
In my fathers house (says he) are many dwelling places. And again: 1. Cor.
15, 41.
There is another glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon. What is
more wonderful, than that he shows how exactly the measure of our deeds shall
be weighed? One star (says he) differs from another star in glory, that by
it he might show that amongst all and every one that shall be in that
kingdom, there will be a difference. Therefore since we know all this, let us
not withdraw our selves from good works, neither yield to sloth and
sluggardie, by the pretense of despair. And admit we cannot attain to the
clearenes of the Sun or Moon, yet we must desire the brightness of a star,
howbeit inferior to them, let us seek at the least for some light by our good
deeds, let us labor to be found worthy, to enlarge somewhat the shining of
heaven. If we cannot be gold, if we cannot be precious stones, yet let us be in
stead of silver, only let us not be turned into that matter, which fire may
consume, that we be not found to be wood, hay, or stubble, let us be even the
last in goodness, not the first in evil. By often adding a little to a little,
there will arise a great heap, as wittily said Hesiodus, (...),
(...).



And as worldly riches increase, when every small gain is regarded: so it
fares in heavenly riches, in increasing the which no little good deed must
be contemned. Small good works conioined with faith and repentance go not
without reward.
Surely it is an absurdity, (seeing our Judge does not deny a reward for
Matt. 10.
a cup of cold water,) for us to say, that unless we do great things, it will
be nothing available. Yea this more I add, that he that despises not small
and little things, will by little and little come to great things, and Ecclus.
19, 1
he that contemns small things, (which concordeth with the Scripture) shall
fall by little and little. And therefore I think for this cause, our Lord and
Savior did ordeine for small things great rewards. For what is less, than to
visit the sick? And yet for this small work, he has laid up a great reward.
And again, what is so easy, as to give the hungry bread, the thirsty drink,
the naked raiment, and to seek out him that is shut up in prison? Yet these
things that be so little and small, he reckeneth so great, as that he
accounts them ministered not to man, but to himself, and for them has
promised the celestial kingdom.

Wherefore (most dearly beloved) enter, enter the way to eternal life, and
put on again My yoke is light, and my burden is light This burden ^^ not the
weigh^ of him that is laden, but the wings of him that flies. For birds have
bu^dens of their feathers, which on earth they bear, and them they are borne
into the heaven. Augustine.
the yoke of Christ which is easy, and his burden which is light, recover the
virtues of thy mind, make thine end like to thy beginning, let not the
treasure of spiritual graces, gotten by such labor, decaie; and they will
verily perish, if thou persist in evils, and exasperate the wrath of God
against thy deeds. But before thou lose much of thy treasure, and before thy
manured field be surrounded with hurtefull deluges, if thou exclude the
entrance, and stop the ouerflowing of sin, thou may bring it again to his
pristine fertility, and by husbanding make it very battle.

Arise therefore, arise and shake off the dust from thee, arise from the earth,
and straightway (believe me) thine enemy will be afraid. For he threw thee
down, as though thou should never rise up, but if he shall see thee to rise
from the earth, and lift thine eyes toward the heavens, incontinent thy
boldness will out-countenance him, Resist the devil, and he will fly from you.
Jam. 4, 7. Jf one fly the devil, he is a lion: if one resist, he has (for he
is Beelzebub, that is, a god of flies) no more power than a weak fly:
according to the old verse, Hostis non laedir, nisi cum te^tatus obedit,
Est leo si cedis, si stas quasi musca recedit.



and the more ready thou art, the more fearful he will be, and the more thou
presumest, the more frail and infirm thou make him. Think also on this,
that the more hardiness God shall indue thee withal, the more he will weaken
both his boldness and might.

If so be thou have affiance in my words, me thinks I see toward thee the
mercy and aid of God, but thine adversary to be affrighted by reason of shame
and confusion. Me thinks I perceive now in my mind, that with all gratefulnes
and favor every virtue allureth thee to her, hold on then earnestly, labor
chearefully, run forward willingly. Thou shall find no want of me in that I
can, but I will still reason with thee in speech, I will continually exhort and
stir thee up, both present with lively voice, and absent with letters. Albeit I
persuade my self, if thou gladly read this I have now written, there will be
no cause, why thou should seek for farther medicines.

Deo soli sapienti, laus and gloria.
To the Christian Reader.
IF the wicked would earnestly consider, the terriblenes of the day of the
Lord, it must needs be, that they would either wholly renounce sin, or at
least, not so much be delighted therewith. Which Chrysostom right well
perceived, for that so copiously, so lively (as it were with a pencile) he
depainteth that day and time. On the other side, to ponder equally the rewards
that in heaven abide for them, who in this life seek^ chiefly the setting
forth of Gods glory, and the benefiting of their neighbor, who bewailing their
sins with true and unfeigned repentance, by the hand of faith lay hold on Gods
promises, avails not a little, to the abandoning of sin and iniquity.
Wherefore (gentle Reader) in the sentences following I have used this order,
that those which apperteine to the second coming of Christ, and the
punishment of the ungodly are set first, in the second place those that show
the joys of the world to come, and in the last room those that teach, that by
faith, sincere repentance, and amendment of our lives, we may enjoy that
heavenly bliss. My petition to thee is this, that thou daine to accept my
labor, which if thou do, I shall be occasioned to judge my travel well
bestowed. The Lord of his mercy grant, that, since wickedness never more
abounded, nor men never less remembered the coming of Christ unto judgment,
we may heartily repent us of our sins, because the wrath of God hangs over
our heads: and that we may, as good Christians, live worthy of our vocation,
(living so as though every one particularly should say, with that holy man
Saint Hierome, as often as I remember that day, every member of my body
quaketh: for whether I eat, or drink, or do any thing else, me thinks
always that dreadful trumpet sounds in mine ears, Arise O ye dead, and
come to judgment,) because the last hour is at hand. Amen.

As desirous of thy profit, as of his own, in the School of Christ Jesus, R.
WOL. OENIPODES. Non cistae, sed pectori.

Sentences collected out of the Fathers works, which have such agreement with
the former Treatise, as that they are not unfit for this place.
Of the punishments of hell, and the day of judgment.
IN that terrible hour of the death of a wretched sinner, Bernard. in spec.
pec.
immediately there will come evil spirits (like roaring lions) to snatch away
their pray. Then suddenly shall appear the horrible places of torments, the
Chaos and obscurity of darkness, the dread of misery and confusion, the terror
of that fearful mansion, where is the place of weepers, where is the place of
groners, where is the voice of them that cry, WOE, WOE, Woe be to us the children
of Euah! When the miserable soul departing from the body shall hear, see, and
feel these and semblable things, yea a thousand times worse than may be
spoken, in what (I pray,) how great, and how wondrous fear and trembling
shall she be? What tongue can utter it, what book declare it? What will now
avail the boasting of knowledge, the pomp of the people, the vanity of the
world, the greedines of earthly dignity? what shall then avail the appetite of
riot, delitiousnes of meat, exquisite drink, curiosity of garments nicenes
of the flesh, gluttony of the belly, superfluousnesse of food, surfeiting and
drunkenness, curious building of houses, possession of terrene goods, scraping
together of prebends, hoording of riches? Whether can these things deliver the
wretched soul of a man from the ^outh of the headious and hor^ble lion, that
is, from the iawe (...) the cursed dragon.

When that cunning decei^er, Idem ibid.
that son of iniquity, that ^ost eager enemy of our souls, ^all miserably
and dreadfully ^eete with thy soul, how wilt ^hou be able to abide the
feare^ll sight of his terrible counte^ance, the intolerable stink of ^is
mouth, the brimstone-like ^ames of his eyes? How then wilt ^hou be of force to
abide so ^reat fear, of so horrible a ^east? Be assured, that the fear ^f his
dreadful presence, excee^eth every kind of torments, which may be devised in
this world. At which the Prophet quaking betook himself to prayer, saying,
hear my prayer O God when I call upon thee, deliver my soul from the fear of
the enemy. He said not from the power of the enemy, but from the fear of
the enemy. But alas! my brother, if the sinful soul be so much, and so
greatly daunted at the sight only of satan, how great confusion (...) how
great horror, how great affliction and how great lamentation shall she have,
through his touching and tormenting?

Hierom. ad Heliod.
When the Lord shall be about to judge the sorrowful world, it shall make a
great noise, and one kindred shall strike the breast to another kindred. The
kings once most puissant, shall quake without a guard, foolish Plato with his
scholars shall be brought forth, then Aristotle's arguments shall not be
profitable, when that son of the poor woman which exercised a craft shall
come to judge the ends of the earth.

August. lib. 3. de symb.
That judge is neither prevented with favor, nor moved with pity, nor bribed
with money, neither will he be appeased with satisfaction, or repentance. Here
let the soul deal for it self while it has time, as long as there is a
place for mercy, because there will be a place of justice.

In the last day of judgment, Greg. hom. 15.
when the heavens being opened, the Angels ministering, the Apostles sitting
together, Christ shall appear in the seat of his majesty, all the elect and
reprobate shall see him, that both the just may rejoice without end of the
gift of their reward, and the unjust ever lament, for the reuengement of their
plague.

On the right hand there shall be our sins to accuse us, Ansel. de
similitudinibus mundi.
on the left hand infinite devils, beneath the horrible confusion of hell,
above an angry Judge, without the world flaming, within our conscience
burning, there scarce the just shall be saved. Alack wretched sinner, whither
will thou flee? It is impossible to be hidden, intolerable to appear.

The joy of the time present must be so used, Greg. hom. 32.
that the remembrance of the bitterness of the judgment to come, may never
depart from us.

Of the ioies of heaven.
Aug. lib. de morb.
SO great is the beauty of righteousness, so great is the sweetenes of the
everlasting light, that is, of the immutable wisdom, that although we might
not tarry in it more than one day, for this alone innumerable years of this
life replenished with delights and abundance of temporal goods, were not
without cause and reason to be contemned.

Idem lib. 3. de symb.
We can easilier tell what there is not in that eternal life, than what there
is. There is not death, there is not mourning, there is not wearines, there is
not weakness, there is not hunger, there is no thirst, no parching heat, no
corruption, no lack, no sorrow, no sadness.

Idem de vtil. again. poenit.
Make haste thither, where you may live for ever. For if you so love this
miserable and transitory life, wherein you live with such labor, and wherein
by running, traveling, sweating, breathing, thou scarce get things necessary
for the body: how much more ought you to love the life everlasting, where you
shall sustain no labor, where always is great quietness, great felicity,
happy liberty, happy blessedness, where shall be fulfilled that the Lord
spoke in the Gospel, Men shall be like the Angels. And that, the just shall
shine, etc.

Temporal life compared with eternal life, Greg. in homil.
is rather to be called death than life. For the daily fainting of corruption,
what is it else, but a certain long continuance of death? But what tongue can
tell, or what understanding conceive, how great those ioies are of that
supernall city, to be in the assembly of Angels, with the most blessed souls
to stand by the glory of the Creator, to behold in presence the face of God,
to see that immeasurable light, to feel no pangs of death, to enjoy the gift
of euer-induring incorruption.

Against despair.
Aug. in lib. de symb.
THE thief acknowledged, Peter denied. In Peter there is showed, that no just
man ought to presume of himself: in the thief, that no wicked man being
converted, should despair. Therefore let the good fear, least he perish
through pride, and let not the wicked despair through much naughtines.

Idem de vtil. again. poen.
Let none despair of Judas the traitor; not so much the heinous wickedness which
he committed, was the cause of his eternal destruction, as the despair of
forgiveness.

Amb. sup. Luc. lib. 2.
Let none distrust, let none in the priuitie of his old sins despair of the
rewards of God. God knows how to change his determination, if thou know how
to amend thy fault.

Let no man despair of pardon, Isido. de sum. bon. lib. 2.
although about the end of his life, he be turned to repentance. God judges
every one according to his end, not according to his life past.

To commit some foul offense is the death of the soul: Idem. ibid.
but to despair, is to descend into hell.

Of Repentance.
IF I proffer thee gold, Ambr. in ser de eleem. and ieiun.
thou say not, I will come to morrow, but at the instant thou requirest it,
none prolongeth, none makes excuse: the redeeming of our soul is promised,
and none makes haste. Conversion is never too late, Hier. in ep. ad Laetam.
Gregor. hom 34. sup. euan.
the thief went from the cross to Paradise.

There is greater joy in heaven of a sinner converted, than of a righteous man
that stands: for a captain also in war loves that soldier more, who being
returned from flight has valiantly slain his foe, than him, that never fled,
and has never done any manly act. So the husbandman, loves more that ground,
which after thorns yeldeth forth plentiful corn; than that which never had
thorns, and never bare a fertile grain.

Ambr. ep. 3. ad Simplicianum.
In nothing to sin is only the property of God, it is the property of a wise
man, both to correct his fault, and to repent for his sin.

Hierom. in quod. sermon.
With God not so much the measure of time, as the measure of grief prevails,
not so much the abstinencie of meats, as the mortification of vices.

Isid. lib. 3. de sum. bon.
Repentance is the medicine of our wound, the hope of salvation, by which
sinners are salued, by which God is provoked to mercy. The which is not weighed
by time, but by deepenes of lamentation and tears.

O repentance, Cyprian. de laud. poen.
what new thing shall I speak of thee? Thou loosest al things which are
bounde^, thou openest all things which are shut, thou mitigatest all
adversity, thou healest that is bruised, thou enluminest that is confounded,
thou incouragest all that is out of hope.

Be not negligent because the Lord forbeareth you when you sin, Aug. in lib. de
vtil. poen.
for how much the longer he waits that ye amend, so much the more grievously
will he punish, if you be negligent.

Better is a little bitterness in the cheeks, Idem de 10. chordis.
than a perpetual torment in the bowels.

Although the thief was pardoned in his latter end of all his sins, Id. de
poen.
yet he gave not an example to them that are baptized to sin, and persevere in
evil. For then he was first baptized with the baptism of the spirit, in that
then first he professed Christ. Hier. super Matt.


The sweetenes of the apple recompenceth the sowrenes of the root, the dangers
of the sea for hope of gain delight us, the hope of health asswageth the
grief of Physic. He that desires the kirnell, breaks the nut, and he that
will be partaker of everlasting goodness, repents.

Chrysostom. in ep. ad Heliod, Monach.
It is no great matter to fall in wrestling, but to lie when one is cast down.
It is not deadly to be wounded in battle: but after the wound is inflicted,
through despair to be cured, to deny a plaster to the bile. And oftentimes
we see wrestlers crowned, after often slides, and many downe-casts. We see
also a soldiour after many flights to be a stout man, and to overcome him that
discomfited him.

Aug. de spir. and anima.
Behold the kingdom of God is to be sold; buy it if thou will. Neither think
of some great thing for the greatness of the price, it is worth so much as thou
have, seek not what thou have, but what manner of body thou art. This thing is
worth so much as thou art, give thy self and thou shall have it. But I am
evil, thou will say, and happily it will not receive me, by giving thy self
unto it thou shall be good.

That repentance is in vain, Idem in soliloquijs.
which afterward a fault polluteth, lamentations profit nothing, if sins be
doubled. It avails nothing to crave pardon of evils, and anew to commit evils.

He that knocks his breast, Idem in quodam sermon.
and corrects not himself, strengthens his sins, and does not take them
away.

NAZIANZENVS.
(...),
(...).
Sicubi chalcographus titubarit lector amice,
Da veniam, lapso sic petis ipse tibi.
FINIS.

