Anglorum Lacrimae: In a sad passion complaining the death of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen ELIZABETH:

Yet comforted again by the virtuous hopes of our most Royal and Renowned
King JAMES: whose Majesty God long continue.

royal blazon or coat of arms

Imprinted at London for T. Pauier, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Catte and Parr^ts near the Exchange. 1603.

To the right Honorable ROBERT LEE, Lord Mayor of the Honorable City of
London, and to the right Worshipful the Knights and Aldermen of the same:
health and happiness long to continue.
RIght Honorable, and Worshipful of this City, being ouerpressed with the
heavy burden of Sorrow, and almost overcome with grief, for the loss of our
late deceassed Queen; whom both you, and all others, sustaines a part: I am in
duty bound (in the behalf of many thousands) to give a sad farewell to her
Excellency; the only and last service that a Subjects true heart can bestow.
Vouchsafe therefore (Right Honorable and Worshipful) as a memorial of your
late love to her Majesty, to Patronize these tearefull Lines: and then no
doubt, but Anglorum Lacrimae will be comforted with Anglorum Gaudia, being
guyded by the virtues of our gracious King: under whose Royal government, all
England is made happy, and a golden time is brought unto our Country.

Yours in all duty to be commanded, a poor Freeman of this City, Richard
Johnson.

Anglorum Lacrimae.
O Sacred QVEENE, ^ith now thy life is spent,
And that our lives, out-liues the life of thee:
Pale sorrows kingdom shall our hearts frequent
Tears and true passions shall our mourners be:
For England now more sorrows does contain,
Then there is wealth in all the Ocian maine.
Oh now what doleful Ditties shall we make?
What mournful Songs of sorrow shall we sing?
What comfort or sweet pleasure can we take,
When Death has broke ELIZAES vital string?
Break hearts with grief, and let each living soul,
Exchange earthes joys, for everlasting dole.
Oh wherefore does not Phoebus loose his light,
And fall from Heaven, upon the Earth to mourn?
Why is not days fair brightness changde to night?
And joys to grief: all loves to hatred turn?
For Beauties sovereign, and true Virtues Queen,
May now with mortal eyes no more be seen.
With bleeding ^^ares come wash all joys away,
That discontent upon o^^ brows may shine:
The Deste^ies have wrought her lives decay,
Whom Europe termed Celestial and Divine*
Oh England then bewail this ^^tall cross,
For never had English men a greater loss.
Our eyes shall (...) her Tomb^ with shewers of tears:
Our m^anes shall make the ^^ones to weep for pity:
All those which this sadd^ way^efull murmr hears,
Shall ring Grie^es echo in each English City.
No Kingdom lik^^o this has over mournd,
For her whose flesh the (...) to dust have turned.
All you that lived in her Princely Court,
Come (...) your pleasant Songs to doleful Cries:
With tragic Tears ^omm^^ your Comicke sport,
And let your (...) be (...) with weeping Eyes:
For she too soon has bid the world adue:
Thus by her loss, we are compeld to rue.
How can we choose but fall into a sound,
When we remember this sweet Princes fall:
Let our true sorrows make her death renound,
And with hearts grief grace out her Funeral:
Exclayming still with everlasting cries,
Virtue grows sickly; and true Honor dies
As Nobles mourn, so let the Plough man weep:
As Courtiers griue, so let the Country groan.
Let all estates in sorrows mansion keep:
A sadder time was never in England known:
what is he that can vouchsafe a smile,
Having lost ELIZA, Monarch of this I Will.
Weep now Oh Clouds upon the grassie Earth,
With drops of sorrow pierce the hardest Stones*
while we lament our Gracious Princes death?
whose soul (...) in the Celestial thrones:
Open wide you (...) of the ^^^stall Sky,
Send down more shewers for her mortallitie.
Where shall we woeful men go ^orrow tears,
To teach the Rocks in streaming shewers to weep:
All times and seasons, (...), months, and years,
Consult to keep our wished joys asleep.
Thus all in vain we daily have deplorde
Her loss of life, which cannot be restorde.
The cruel Destenies are much to blame,
To cut her thread of life ere thoroughly spunne:
Her life burnde out like to a Tapers flame:
And thus the Hour glass of our joys is run,
Yea all those joys (...) we had want to have,
Are fled to (...) in her grave.
We mus^ what eye there is that will not weep,
When we shall tell this lamentable story,
That she is dead and in the dust does sleep,
Although her soul is crowned with lasting glory;
I think the world will be dissolved to tears,
When this sad tale shall penitrate men's ears.
Were it not that King JAMES did now survive,
Our drooping souls with grief would surely perish:
If this worlds mirror only, he alive
did not with virtue still our comfortes nurrish:
we should go languish in some obscure den,
From heavens fair sight, and company of men.
We rue the loss of true Nobility,
Whilome invested in her noble breast:
Wisdom and Virtue linckt with Majesty,
Were all in her: yet she by death suppressed:
We more lament then all the world beside,
Our dear loves loss, that late in England did.
She ever sought her Subjects wrongs to right:
She still maintainde her native Countries laws.
She that in truth and justice did delight,
Is now consumde by deaths deuowring jaws.
All flesh is frail, and unto dust must turn:
Yet for her loss, all England needs must mourn.
Let all men know that she deserves more praise,
Then our poor tongues are able to bestow:
Well may we crown her death with glorious Bays,
For through the world her honored Fame does blow:
Her Virtues merit Homers golden Pen,
To print her praise with tears of Gods and men.
Oh that from Heavens high throne thy soul might see,
The mournful days that for thy loss we spend:
The floodes of tears that we have shed for thee,
Are numberless: our sorrows have no end:
But all in vain, her body lies in Lead,
Whom sad lamentes cannot recall from dead.
Let Scholars pens write Volumes of our grief,
For sorrows makes us passionate and dombe:
Let every Tongue tell woeful tales in brief:
Eternal sadness to our hearts is come:
Let every Hand act passion of his mind,
And still complain the Fates are too unkind.
Oh wretched world where still the fairest flowers
Are soonest blasted with the storms of Death.
Oh furious Fates! Oh all you angry Powers!
You might have granted her mortal breath:
But, Ah, all heaven rejoicing at her praise,
For virtues sake abridg'd her earthly days.
Me thinks I see all Arts and Skilles disgrast,
All Sciences with bitter woes oppressed:
Fine Eloquence and Rethoricke quight defast:
And all the Virtues in her Royal breast:
The learned Tongues which she was perfect in,
Are now grown dumb, in penance for our sin.
Her looks were sober, full of pleasant cheer:
Her Wisdom great, with Majesty admierd:
From Subjects hearts she won both love and fear:
With heavenly graces was her soul inspierd:
Then England swim in tears, thy light is lost,
Thy Sun is set, whose beams did cheer thy coast.
Me thinks I see in mourning weeds arayde,
How Chasterie now sighing sittes alone.
Me thinks I see how Soldiers are dismayde,
And every States-mans heart made sick with moan.
Those eyes that wept not many a day before,
Of tears are now constraind to shed great store.
Oh that some heavenly Muse would paynt her praise,
Whose breast was termed true Wisdoms sacred spring.
^^ueth and Religion florisht in her days,
Peereles to all the world; but to our KING:
Heaven loves this Country, and does grace it thus,
In sending one like Solomon to us.
Yet gracious QVEENE, needs must we hold thee dear,
And evermore think on thy Virgin reign:
In peace thou ruld us four and forty year,
Spite of proud Rome, and ambitious Spain.
Oh Heavens! why fround you on this sinful earth,
In taking from us Queen ELIZABETH.
But since the Destenies have been seueare
To rob the earth of her azurd delight:
There is a place in Heaven deuoyde of fear,
Then any earthly Mansion far more bright:
Where free from harms or any sad anoy,
ELIZAS soul shall have eternal joy.
And now her soul infranchised from thrall
Of sinful flesh, assendes the crystal Sky:
Where as the Trumpets of the Lord does call
His chosen flock to joys eternetie:
Let Reason then reform each sad man's Sense:
The world is woe: they happyest that are hence.
Me thinks I see her soul now freed from thrall
Of sinful flesh, assending to the Sky:
Scorning to dwell here in this earthly vale,
Where all men rise to fall, and live to die.
Therefore she soard above a human pitch,
And with her Virtues does all Heaven enrich.
Then joy oh Heavens, enjoy earthes Ornament,
Whose soul up to the Cherubines is fled:
Her body to the Earth does now r^lent:
Both Heaven and Earth loved her alive and dead:
Her flesh unto the Earth resolved, does die,
Her soul up to the highest Heavens does fly.
She now amongst the blessed Saints does dwell,
Where Patriarchs and the Apostles sit:
Which shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel,
According as to their desartes is fit:
And there she now obtaines a glorious room,
According to the Lords most sacred doom.
As here on earth, this QVEENE was magnified
Above the common sort in high degree,
In Heaven she shall be much more glorified,
And shall enjoy the full felicetie.
And all such Princes as here reign a right,
Shall have their place in Heaven with Angels bright.
R. I.

FINIS.

