The Way to Glory: OR, The preaching of the Gospel is the ordinary means of
our Salvation.

Wherein is showed what difference there is between the Text of the Gospel,
and the preaching, Exposition, and gloss thereof.

With A confutation of our adversaries opinion, that the Popes defining and
expounding Scriptures ex Cathedra, is to be believed as undoubted truth, and
held for the most certain rule and ground of Faith.

Herein also is showed The dignity and necessity of the office of preaching the
Gospel, and how that Tithes and offerings are designed by almighty God for the
ordinary maintenance thereof.

With A brief confutation of all opinions repugnant to this truth.

Preached in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul's, for the Cross Sermon, the
tenth of December. 1620.

By To. Johnson Bachelour of Divinity.

2. COR. 4 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. 1. COR.
9.14. So also has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel. LONDON. Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, and are to be sold by
John Pyper. 1621.

To the most Reverend Father in God, George, by the divine providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canturbury: Metropolitan, and Primate of all England: and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MOst Reverend Father in God: your love and zeal to the truth, have encouraged
me to presume to dedicate this Sermon to your Grace: which beggeth shelter
under your religious and judicious Approbation. And the subject thereof, which
is the preaching of the Gospel (against whose truth and maintenance, there are
so many opposites, which would (if they could) overthrow Gods house, and eat
up his chosen people as they would eat bread) may seem justly to challenge no
less at your hands. And the Church knows your zeal to Religion to be such,
that although you may be well wearied with multitude of causes, yet you will
never be deficient in undertaking the defense of the truth: you being a
principal Pillar of State, and Patron of Virtue and Justice Hic ames dici
pater atque primas. I suppose I shall have both Papists and Schismatickes
against me: it has always bin my lot hitherto, and I glory in it, and pass
not for them al, so I may enjoy your Graces lawful favor to defend this truth.
And so with my daily prayers unto almighty God, to protect your Grace from all
dangers, and to grant you many and happy days:

I humbly take my leave, this 13. of January 1621.

Your Graces to be commanded in all duties, Robert Johnson.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I present to thy view in this Sermon, two maine Subjects
concerning the Gospel; the one depending betwixt us and the Papists, 2. Tim.
3.16. Titus 1.2.
touching the Text of the Gospel, which was written by the Penmen of the holy
Ghost, and given them by inspiration of God, in which there can be no error or
lie: and the Exposition and gloss thereof, by men of mediate and secondary
calling, in which there may be error. Baron. Tom. 1. annal 25.
Our adversaries hold and mainetaine, that the Popes defining and expounding
Scriptures, ex Cathedra, is to be believed as undoubted truth, and held for
the most certain rule and ground of faith; Bozius de sig. ecclesiae page 133
paralleling their traditions with the text of the Gospel, and holding that
their Church cannot err in matters of faith: this is the fountain of many
superstitious errors amongst them. The other touching the dignity and necessity
of preaching the Gospel, with that maintenance which God has designed in his
word to his Ministers and Preachers thereof, which are tithes and offerings.
Which truth has bin much opposed in this age, by many profane Atheists on the
one side, and schismatic spirits on the other side; which under a color of
zeal, would, if they could, devour Gods house and his Ministers. The Apostle
says, God has ordained, 1. Cor. 9.14.
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. If God has
ordained it, first, it is Gods ordinance, and not man's: Secondly, if Gods
ordinance, then no other ordinance then that which he has appointed in his
Word, which is tithes and offerings, without any mention of man's pretended
competency. 1. Cor. Ibid. Mat. 23.23. Heb. 7.8.
Thirdly, if Gods ordinance as a moral duty, and in the time of the Gospel,
then not to be abrogated. Has God called you to salvation by our Gospel, here
in my text, and to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ by the preaching
thereof? And shall not we obtain at your hands those temporal things which
are not yours, but Gods and ours, and that not of alms, begging Frierlike, but
of right belonging unto us? Will Christians be worse then the Pharisis in the
performance of this duty? How then does our righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees? Quomodo abundat iustitia nostra plus
quam scribarum and Pharisaeorum, Origin Homil. 11. in Numb.
si illi de fructibus terrae suae gustare non audent, priusquam primitias
sacerdotibus efferant, et Leuitis decimae separentur: et ego nihil horum
faciens, fructibus terrae ita abutar, vt sacerdos nesciat, Levites ignoret,
diuinum altar non sentiat? Hieron. in glos. super illud Mala. 3. Omnem
decimam. and Chrysostom super illud Mathaei, Quidecimatis.
And hear what S. Hierom says to like purpose: Quia non reddidistis decimas
et primitias, idcirco in penuria et fame maledicti estis: quia dum parua
subtraxistis, et totam abundantiam frugum et possessionum vestrarum
perdidistis, sciatis vos ideo perdidisse abundantiam, quia fraudastis me part
me^, moneo igitur vt reddatis mihi mea, er ego restituam vobis vestra. Because
ye have not given me my tithes and first fruits, ye are cursed with penury and
famine: because that whilst ye with held small things from me, ye lost the
whole abundance of the fruits of your possessions. Know ye then, that
therefore ye have lost abundance, because ye have defrauded me of my part.
Therefore I warn you that you restore unto me those things that are mine, and
I will restore those things that are yours. And these words, The tenth is mine,
says the Lord, Leuit. 27.30.
is a moral position, not abrogated with other ceremonies of the Law, but is
still in force: for as long as Melchizedecks, that is, Christ's Priesthood,
remains, which is for ever, vsque ad huius seculi consummationem, to the end
of the world so long does the maintenance belong unto the Priesthood.

It is against the rules of Logic to write or dispute De^iis rebus de quibus
non est dubitandum: An ignis sit calidus? And therefore I am sorry that there
was ever occasion given by any to question this truth, which is so apparent,
both by authority of Scriptures, Math. 23.24.
Fathers, and Councels: Wherein we may see the payment of tithes to be due to
Gods Ministers, de iure, of right; although by reason of the corruption of
times, they were not in some ages paid, de facto, in deed as they ought to be.
And this is the very point, if there were a thousand volumes written on this
subject. What I have said briefly hereon, I return it to Gods glory, not
seeking mine own praise; and leave it to the Churches good and benefit, not
doubting, but amongst a multitude of gaine-saiers, some there will be with
wisdom and a good conscience, to consider and practice this truth. And let
all men take heed, which go about to defraud God and his Ministers of their
right: That that heavy curse of God fall not on them and their children, which
is spoken of by the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 3.
To be curssed with a curse for despoyling the Lord and his Ministers by this
sacrilege. And on the contrary, let all such (as by fearing God yield this
obedience unto him) to their comforts likewise here learn: Ibidem verse. 10.
That he will open the windows of Heaven unto them, and power them out a
blessing without measure. And so with my prayers to almighty God for Sions
prosperity, I rest. This 13. of January. 1621.

Thine in all Christian love and kindness, R. I.

The way to Glory. The Text.
2. THESE. 2.14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of
our Lord Jesus Christ.


THis text is like the Olive leaf which Noah's Dove brought in her mouth into
the Arc in the evening, Genesis 8.11. whereby he knew the Flood ceased, the
waters decreased, and that salvation for himself and his family approached. So
is this Gospel which our Apostle S. Paul brings here as an Olive leaf unto
the Church of Thessalonica; it intimates joy, and brings with it joyful news,
as the word (...) does imply; for it is the joyful embassy for the salvation
of their souls. So S. Paul calls it Verbum salutis, The word of salvation,
Act. 13.26. Acts 13.26.
Vobis hoc verbum salutis est missum: To you is this word of salvation sent, so
it is defined by the Apostle, (...), Romans 1.16.
The power of God unto salvation to every one that does believe, to the Jew
first, and also to the Greek. It is lux magna, Esaias 9.2.
that great light illuminating the darkness of our understandings: It is
sceptrum regni, Heb. 1.^.
the scepter of the kingdom of Grace, to bring us to the Kingdom of Glory.
Here is Jupiters Nectar, the more it is drunk of, the more it runs over:
here is water to refresh us, wine to cheer us, and bread to strengthen our
hearts; here is water, John 4.10.
yea the water of Life, who so drinks thereof shall never thirst, and yet the
more he drinks the more he may. Esaias 55. Rupert in Math. lib. 3.
Omnes fitientes venite adiaquam (...): aqua est euangelium, in quo omnium
spiritualium g^atiarum continentur mysteris. All ye that thirst come to this
water; this water is the Gospel of Christ, in which the mysteries of all
spiritual graces are contained. Exodus 16.
Here is that Manna et cibus bidu^, feeding our souls in this life, to that
which is to come.

To be short, here is vera pax et tranquillitas animi, true peace and
tranquillity of the mind, wherein you may solace your selves if you please. It
is S. Paul, our divine Orpheus, wisdom, to allure us with the sweet
melodious strings and tunes of his Gospel: it should be our delight to solace
our selves therein; Virg. eglo 1.
for here he sings not syluestrem musam, a country note, but canticum diuinum,
a divine song or Anthem, wherein we cannot but take delight.

Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Not to stay any longer at the entrance of my text, let us go in and
behold the beauty and glory therein contained; and which way soever you cast
your eyes, there are most pleasant and glorious objects to behold. If you look
unto the Author of our calling, 2. These. ^.13.
he is glorious, for it is he qui ab initio elegerit vos ad salutem, in the
precedent verse; he which chose you unto salvation from the beginning; and he
is Rex gloriae, Psalm. 24. the King of glory, and Deus gloriae, 1. Pet. 5. the
God of glory, which by his Gospel calls us to obtain his glory, and the glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

If you look unto the calling it self, that He called you.

If you look unto the instrument or means

If you please to behold the end thereof, it is here that terminus ad quem,
that leads unto all glory, (...). To obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Qui vocauit.
In this heavenly calling is first to be considered, the Author thereof, which
is God, who is also the Author of our election and sanctification, in the
former verse. So that all the causes of our salvation, both primary and
secondary, both first and last, are only of and from him, Revel. 1.
who is said to be the first and last, qui elegerit vos, he which elected you
in the former verse: 1. These. 5.24.
idem vocauit, the same called you, here in the text.

Vocauit vos.
Secondly, vocauit vos, he called you; and here we see how almighty God does
euocate and call his Elect from the reprobate, until which time there is no
difference between them in respect of nature: For until he called Matthew he
was but a publican; Mat. 9.9. Acts 9.
until he called Saul, he was but a persecutor; until he called Zachee, he
was but a worldling; until he called Peter, he was but a fisher of fishes, and
not of men, and favored not the things that were of God, but the things that
were of men.

per Euangelium nostrum, by our Gospel, that is per praedicationem Euangelij
nobis commissam: is to be considered, that the preaching of the Gospel, is
the ordinary means, which God has appointed to call us to salvation; (...),
by our Gospel, that is, by our preaching the Gospel committed unto us, he
called you to salvation. And here also in this place may be observed, the
dignity and necessity of the office of preaching the Gospel, that it is
neither so base nor so needless an office as many account of it. For as the
best men that ever were, and God himself and his Son, graced this calling;
Genes. 2. Math. 9.35.
so the necessity thereof is such, that it concerns the salvation of our
souls.

Lastly, in acquisitionem gloriae, to obtain

Here is then a (...) a Narration of our heavenly vocation and calling, Part 1.
by the preaching of the Gospel; in which these four circumstances offer
themselves to our consideration.

First, the Author of our calling, Cir. 1.
which is God, having reference unto the relative qui, in the former verse; he
which elected you, the same also calls you, here in my text.

vocauit vos, he called you.

per Euangelium nostrum, by our Gospel.

in acquisitionem gloriae, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And first of the Author of our calling, which is God, He called you. In the
former verse, and in this text, the Apostle sets down all the causes of our
salvation.

quod ab initio elegerit vos Deus ad salutem, that God chose you to salvation
from per Euangelium nostrum, By our Gospel. The fourth and last is the
terminus ad quem, that leads unto all glory, In acquisitionem gloriae Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, To obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. And all
these come from above, James 1,
and from the Father of lights, so that here we learn:

Posito prima.
All the causes of our salvation both primary and secondary, first and last, the
beginning, progress, and ending, are of, and from God only. He it is only
which elected us, which called, Romans 8.30.
which justified, sanctified and saved us: et fidelis est qui vos vocauit, qui
hoc etiam per ficiet, Faithful is he which called you, which will also do it:
1. These. 5.24.
as he has begun our salvation by election, so he will also finish the same
by our vocation, through the preaching of the Gospel, and thereby bring us to
obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Our duty therefore in this place, Appli.
is to render the Apostles Debemus gratias semper, in the precedent verse; We
ought to give thanks always unto God, for that from the beginning he chose us
to salvation, and from whom also all the causes of our salvation do come. And
with David to sing a song of thanksgiving unto his name, O thou most Highest.
David had many songs in the praise of God, he had his Canticum laudis, his
Song of praise and thanksgiving; Psalm. 117.
Praise the Lord all ye people, and laud him all ye Nations. And he had his
Canticum misericordiae, his Song of Gods mercy; My Song shall be of the mercy
and loving kindness of the Lord, with my mouth will I ever be showing thy
praise, from one generation to another: And he had his Canticum gratiarum
actionis, his Song of thanksgiving, I will always give thanks unto the Lord,
his praise shall be ever in my mouth. And therefore I will conclude this point
with the Apostles Cui, 2. Pet. 3.18.
To whom be glory and dominion forever and ever, Amen.

I come to the second circumstance, which is the calling it self, in these
words, Vocauit vos, He called you.

And here I need not much stand to show how many ways this word Vocation and
calling is taken in holy Scriptures. As sometime it is taken for an external
civil vocation or calling; as to be called to the office or dignity of a King,
to enjoy the soueraignety, 1. Pet. 2.13.
which S. Peter says is Officium praecellens or supereminens, The supreme
Office. And this word alone lays flat in the dust, the Popes usurped
transcendency over all, which he falsely challenges to himself. Or sometimes
it is taken for an external Ecclesiastical calling, as to be called to the
Office and dignity of a Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.1.
which is Opus bonum, a good work and a weighty. Or to be called to the Office
of a Magistrate, to punish wickedness and vice, and to mainetaine virtue. All
these are but external callings, unto which both good and bad men may be
called: but yet not called inwardly, with this spiritual and heavenly vocation
and calling: 1. Sam. 8 9.
for so was Saul outwardly called to be a King, Mark 14. August. lib. de gra.
and Judas outwardly called to be an Apostle, but not inwardly called with this
effectual calling, which is, Doni, non meriti; gratiae, non naturae, from God
and not from man, the work of Grace and not of Nature: and this is primus
applicationis Christi gradus, our first degree in the school of Christ,
Description.
called by S. Augustine ingressus ad salutem, et primus ad fidem aditus, Our
entrance to salvation, and first approach to faith: more especially, it is
Actio Dei efficax et gratiosa, Definitio.
qua electi ex Dei beneplacito, propter meritu^ Christi, per Spiritum sanctum,
intus informantur ad preceptionem et communionem et gratiae et gloriae Dei: The
spiritual, internal, effectual vocation and calling, is the gracious and
effectual work of God, whereby his elect, of Gods good will, for the merit of
Christ, by the operation of his Spirit, are inwardly informed for the receiving
and participation of the grace of God; and outwardly reformed in their lives
unto good works, for his glory. The efficient cause whereof, is the good will
of God; the isntrumental cause twofold, internal, the operation of Gods
Spirit; external, the preaching of the Gospel: Idem.
Vocauit vos per Euangelium nostrum, he called you by our Gospel, to the
participation of grace in this life, and glory in the life to come.

In this vocation which follows election, as ye may see in these two verses,
(for first God elected us from the beginning unto salvation, and then here he
calls us, in my Text:) we may observe this position, That Simil.
is to walk by the river that runs into the sea; so he that would find out
his election, let him walk thereunto by his calling, as by a river running and
flowing out of the sea of Gods election; so that the best way to find out our
election, is by yielding obedience to this heavenly calling. These. 5.
Art thou called to work righteousness? This is a manifest token of thy
election. Art thou not called and moved (but who can say so) to work
righteousness? or do thou not find a readiness in thy mind to obey the
motions of Gods Spirit, to yield obedience to the Gospel, to be ready to
every good work? Thou can no way yet assure thy self, that thou art of the
number of Gods Elect, and to belong unto the election of Grace.

Applicatio.
For application of which place, I say only as John the Baptist said unto the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 3.
Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, and be not of such mind to say,
We have Abraham to our father; for I say, that God is able of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham: God is able to break off the natural branches
through their disobedience, and to graft in the wild branches, and raise up
dead stones, contrary to nature, by grace. And again, he is of power to break
and burn the wild branches, and to graft in again the natural, Romans 11.
if they continue not still in their unbelief.



That there is no difference by nature between Deus cognouit, 2. Tim. 2.
be true with God, The Lord knows who are his, and whom he has chosen; yet
until he make it apparent by his effectual calling, there is no difference
between them and the reprobate, in their obedience to God. Acts 9.
For Paul before he was called, as bold a persecutor of the Church of God, as
ever was Domitian, or Julian the Apostate.

And Zache before he was called, Luke. 19.2.
for ought appears, as unconscionable a worldling, as ever was the rich
glutton damned to hell: That in respect of the corruption of nature, there is
no difference between the Elect and reprobate, until God make it by his
heavenly calling. And the Apostles Tales fueritis in the Romans, does show it:
Rom, 6
such ye were; but ye are washed, but ye are justified, but ye are
sanctified, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God.
Thirdly, (...), He chose and Lot our of Sodom that filthy place, and sent his
Angels to call him out: at first, not knowing the danger, he lingered and was
reluctant to obey their call, till at length they put hands unto him and forced
him to go out: and being set upon the mountain in the plain, when he saw
Sodom fiered from heaven, and burning with brimstone, then, no doubt, he
acknowledged the wonderful love and mercy of God toward him. Appli.
It is even so with us, we are soiourning here in Sodom, which God will destroy
with fire, and we are among those whose portion is in this life, but reserved
unto the burning lake of fire and brimstone. But God of his mercy purposing to
save us, Judges 2.2.
sent his Angels his Ministers, not once, nor twice, but many times, calling
and exhorting us to fly from the wrath to come. And thus much for Vo cauit
vos, He called you.

3. Cir.
I come unto the third circumstance, which is the instrument or means of our
calling, per Euangelium nostrum, Per Euangelium
by our Gospel, Whereunto he called you by our Gospel. Why is it called here
our Gospel? Is it not the Gospel of God and of Christ? Yes verily, both as it
sprung from him, and as he is the author of it. 1. These. 2.2.
So S. Paul calls it the Gospel of God: We were bold to speak unto you the
Gospel of God, and S. Peter so calls it also, 1. Pet. 4.17.
What shall be the end of those that obey not the Gospel of God? And it is
properly called also the Gospel of Christ. Mar. 1.1.
For so the Evangelists style it: Romans 1.16.
and the Apostle S. Paul so calls it; I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ: and again, Phil. 1.27.
in the Epistle to the Philippians; Only let your conversation be as it
becomes the Gospel of Christ.

our Gospel, Paul's gospel, and Peter's gospel, and John's gospel, and our
gospel? For so it is called here, He called you by our Gospel.

And so in the Corinths it is called our gospel; If our Gospel be hid, 2.
Cor. 4.3.
it is hid to them that are lost. Nay, sometimes it is more especially called
my gospel; Romans 2.16.
as in the Epistle to the Romans; At that day when God shall judge the secrets
of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel: and again in the same
Epistle; To him now that is of power to stablish you according to my Gospel,
and preaching of Jesus Christ. Romans 16.25.


Paul's gospel, and our Gospel? Aretius on this Text answers well to this
question: Says he, Dei est, et Pauli est Euangelium; Dei est, tanquam
Authoris; Pauli est Euangelium, vt eius ei commissa est praedicatio. It is Gods
gospel and Paul's gospel: It is Gods gospel, as he is the author of it, and
as it sprung from him; it is Paul's gospel, as the preaching thereof is
committed unto him.

Likewise says Marlorat on this Text; Apostolus Euangelium appellat suum,
Marlorat on the Text.
non quasi apud se natum, sed cuius illi praedicatio mandata fuerat. The
Apostle calls the gospel his gospel, not that it sprung from him, or that he
was the author of it, but as the preaching thereof was commanded him.

Sense.
The meaning of these words, he called you, per Euangelium nostrum, by our
Gospel, is, per praedicationem Euangelij nobis commissam, by our preaching the
gospel which is committed unto us. It is then Christ's gospel properly, and it
is our gospel as the preaching thereof is committed and commanded us. So then
in respect of preaching the gospel, it is S. Paul's gospel, it is S. Peter's
gospel, it is S. John's gospel, and it is the gospel of every faithful
minister of Christ, as the preaching and dispensation thereof is committed unto
him: For God gave in the Apostles a commission to all his Ministers their
successors, Their commission from God. Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15.
Ite in mundum, go into all the world, and preach the gospel: he that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved; he that will not believe shall be
damned. So that they having a commission from God, to preach the gospel, it is
said to be theirs in respect of the preaching thereof.

our exposition and gloss thereof, in which there may be errors: as we have
seen in many of the famous and worthy Fathers, Aug. de ciuitat. lib. 21. Idem
de doctr. Christian.
and Pillars of the Church. First, the Text of the gospel cannot err nor lie;
so says the Apostle, Under the hope of eternal life, which God that cannot
lie, Tit. 1.2.
has promised before the world began. And again, We cannot but speak the
truth of those things we have seen and heard. And again, Acts 4.20.
We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 1. Cor. 13.8.
And again, in the Epistle to the Galatians, Though that we or an Angel from
heaven, Gal 1.8.
preach unto you otherwise then that which we have preached, let him be
accursed. And here S. Paul does pronounce the Pope, If his traditions and
laws be against Gods word.
Peter's successor (if the Papists will have him so) accursed, if he teach or
preach otherwise, or contrary to S. Paul's Doctrine; and that he does so, who
sees not that has eyes? Most of his Doctrines, Pardons, Indulgences, Acts,
Excommunications, and Laws, being flat against the Doctrine of S. Paul, and
the truth of Gods word, as I shall hereafter touch. But here we see that there
is, and may be a great difference and imparity between the Text of the gospel
and our preaching thereof: For so says also S. Augustine, Aug. de videndo Deo
ad Paulinum, cap. 16.
Numquid vllo modo Euangelio scripta mea comparabis, aut ea Scripturis
canonicis coaequabis? Profecto si recte diiudicando sapis, long infra nos
vides ab illa authoritate distare, Trel^^. Qua authoritate egeat scriptura,
^geat non propter se sed propter alia. The Church delivers the truth, but
proves not the same:

That must be done by scriptures. Scripture is best expounded by Scripture.
Tit. 1.2. The Devils restoration. Aug. de ciui. lib. 21. 2 Beginning.


et me quidem longius. Do any way compare my writings with the gospel, or
equalize them with the Text of the Canonical Scriptures? Truly, if thou
understand with a right judgment, thou may perceive us and our writings
much inferior to their authority, and my self most inferior of all.

Now here we see the text of Gods gospel and word cannot lie, there is no
error in it. But in the writings and books of men of subordinate calling,
there may be error, as was in Origin, Augustine, and many of the Fathers of
the Church; why may it not be in the Pope also, and his expositions and
glosses of Scripture? which our adversaries deny: for they hold and maintain
this doctrine: That the Popes defining and expounding Scriptures ex Cathedra,
Posito Papistica
is to be believed as the undoubted truth, and held for the most certain rule
and ground of faith; and equalize his expositions, and traditions, with the
gospel. Baron Tom. 1. in Annal. 25.
So says Baronius: By the tradition of the Church all the gospel receives
his authority, and is built thereupon as upon a foundation, and cannot subsist
without it. Tom. 2. de sign. eccles page 133.
Likewise says Bozius, The Scriptures are not to be reckoned among such
principle as before all things are to be credited: Blasphemy against
Scriptures.
But they are proved and confirmed by the Church, as by a certain principle
which has authority to reject and allow Scripture. Here is flat heresy and
blasphemy against the truth of Scriptures; equalizing, nay preferring their
writings and authority before the Scriptures. Stapleton Triplinicat. aduersus
Whitak.
Yet Stapleton one of their own side, of a milder spirit, is clean of
contrary opinion: For he says, The inward testimony of the Spirit, is so
effectual, that by it alone, any matter may be believed, though the Church
hold her peace.

Here we see our adversaries errors and contradictions about this point; they
equalize and prefer their writings with Scriptures: they will believe no
Scripture, No Scripture ought to be expounded against the Analysis and ground
of Faith.
unless their Church expound it; and though their Church expound the same
never so contradictory to the truth of Scriptures, yet they then will believe
it, and not before. And that place which they urge out of S. Augustine for
their purpose herein, is also flat against themselves; Aug. Tome 6. lib.
contra epist. Fundamenti, cap. 5.
Ego vero non crederem Euangelio, nisi me catholicae Ecclesiae commoueret
authoritas: I my self should not have been a Christian and believed the
Gospel, if the authority of the catholic Church had not moved and pressed me
thereunto. These words are Augustines text indeed, in his sixth Tome, in his
Book Contra Epistolam Fundamenti, cap. 5. for that sixth Tome, he has written
against diverse heresies of the Jews, Manichies, Arians and Iouinians. And this
book he writes against the aforementioned Fundaments Epistle which was a
Manichie, and held two natures or beginnings, one good, and another bad or
evil; and says these words to this intent, to convince him of his error, by
the authority and consent of the catholic Church, which has power to compel
a Christian to believe in Christ: for says S. Augustine to him, Do thou not
believe the catholic Churches whole consent? Why I my self had not been a
Christian, unless the authority and general consent of the Church had moved
me thereunto; putting according to phrase the preterimperfectence for the
preterpluperfectence: meaning, I had not my self been a Christian, unless
the Churches authority, that is, general consent, at the first had pressed me
to believe the Gospel: for this is apparent in his words following; Quibus ego
obtemperem dicentibus Credit Euangelio; Idem.
cur non eis ob temperem dicentibus mihi, Noli credere Manichaeo? elige quid
vis; si dixeris creed catholicis, ipsi me mouent vt nullam fidem accommodem
vobis. Whom I have obeyed, saying, Believe the Gospel, why should I not also
obey them saying, Believe not a Manachie? choose what thou will: If thou say
unto me, Believe the orthodox catholics; they shall move me so far, as that
I should never believe the Manichies. The consent of an orthodox Church ought
to convince one and to make him a Christian to believe the Gospel. S.
Augustine speaks of the Catholic Church, not of the Roman. The Church of Rome
and her Doctrine differs much from what it did in former time. The Church of
Rome was subordinate to other Patriarchs. Carrion Cron.


That which may be gathered from thence, is this, That the consent of the
orthodox Church has power and authority to press one to believe the Gospel,
and to be a Christian: we grant it, but not to believe every position and
doctrine, that a Church maintains, especially against the truth of Scriptures.

Secondly, at that time there were no such errors and superstitions in the
Church of Rome, as now there are.

Thirdly, he that is read in stories knows well, that the Church of Rome then
had not the primacy of all other Churches. For the Patriarchs of Antioch,
Alexandria, and Jerusalem, did challenge a parity at least, with the Patriarch
of Rome, before Phocas a murderer gave it unto him.

Therefore I conclude this point, if any Church, or any Angel from heaven,
Gal. 1.
should teach and maintain doctrine contrary to Scripture and the truth
thereof, and contrary to the Analysis, and grounds of Faith, we ought not to
believe him, or to ground upon his doctrine. But if you will compare S. Paul's
or S. Peter's Doctrine (whose successor they affirm the Pope to be, Peter's
succession must be in Doctrine, not in person or place.
) you shall surely see not a succession in doctrine, if in place. Nay if you
will examine the Gospel of S. Peter or S. Paul, with the Gospel and doctrine
that now the church of Rome maintains, he that has but a spark of
indifferent judgment may see, that there is a wonderful difference between
them: 1. Pet. 2.13.
For S. Peter's Gospel says, the Kings office is the supreme office, the
Popes Gospel says no: That all Kings are subordinate to him. He has also
temporal authority, for he challenges not only to excommunicate them, but
to depose them, and dispose of their Kingdoms as he pleases: as we see it
came to pass by the lamentable experirience of many Emperors, and of Henry
the 4. of the house of Austria, who being first excommunicated by Pope Gregory
the 7. called Hildebrand, his Kingdom was also by him given away to Ralphe
Duke of Sweathland with this golden inscription, Carrion. 4. Monarch.
Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho: The Rock gave to Peter, and Peter
gave the Diadem and sovereignty of the Empire of Rome to Ralphe Duke of
Sweathland.

And who knows not, that Zachary Bishop of Rome, did depose Childerich the
right full King of France, and place Pipine his traitorous usurping servant in
his stead? Plat. in vita Adrian. et Leo. 3.
And Pope Adrian afterward went about to translate the Empire from the Greeks
to the French in the person of Charles the Great, who was but the son of the
aforementioned Pipine the usurper. And Pope Leo the third established him, and
therein gave him the title of Charles the Great.

Pope Alexander excommunicated Frederick Barbarossa, Cario. 4. Monarch.
and when he humbled himself to the Bishop, he imprisoned him in his house,
and trod upon him, and caused his Friars to sing, Super aspidem et basiliscum
ambulabis, etc. Thou shall go upon the Lion and the Dragon, the young Lion
shall thou tread under thy feet, etc. O horrendam regi indignitatem!

What should I say of the murders of the Henry's of France, French Chro.
of the famous houses of Valois and Burbon? who were traitorously murdered by
the practice of the Iacobines and Jesuits, the Popes Gospellers? And who is
ignorant of the manifold treasons that were complotted by these Gospellers,
against the late Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory? Doctor Abbots answer to
Hills reasons.
The excommunications against her by Pope Pius the 5. the declaration of the
same made manifest by Sixtus the 5. the same ratified by Clement the 8. The
manifold treasons intended against her by Parry, Lopaz, Squier, Babington, and
others: The aiding of that invincible Navy in 1588. all which traitorous
designs were warranted by the gospel of the Pope, his Priests and Jesuits.

Gods word and Gospel says, Psalm. 105
Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. The Jesuits gospel
is, Touch them, curse them, depose them, dispose of their Kingdoms, stab them,
murder them, blow them up with gunpouder, and what not? And this is their
gospel, which they teach, and which they put in practice; which things being
most apparently known to be as true as gospel, Jesuits Catechism.
it were to be wished that al christian Princes would take heed and beware of
such gospellers (if such there be found) amongst them, 4. Kings 10.25.
to reward the^ as Iehu did Baals priests, to let none escape that is found: or
to do unto them as Samuel did, 1. Sam. 15.33.
hew these traitorous Agags in pieces before the Lord.

But leaving these gospellers to their gospel, Text.
let us return to the Gospel of our Apostle S. Paul, Whereunto he called you
by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus And here first we
learn, That the preaching of the Gospel is the secondary means that God has
appointed to bring us unto salvation. For whereunto he called you by our
gospel, that is, by our preaching the gospel: and therefore it is called
Potentia Dei ad salutem, Romans 1.16.
The power of God unto salvation, unto them that believe, and obey the same.
Psalm. 119.
It is Lucerna pedibus, a Lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths,
to lead us from ignorance and impiety, to true understanding and godliness.

learn the dignity and necessity of this office of preaching the Gospel.

It is not such a mean and base office as many account of, for the best men
that ever were have in their own persons graced this calling: for David is as
often styled David the prophet, as David the King, and Solomon styled himself
The preacher. Ecclest. 1.
And almighty God himself was the first preacher that ever was in the world,
Genesis 1.
for he preached both the law and the gospel, to our parents in paradise: and
our Savior though he were every way a rightful King, being heir of all
things, yet took upon him the office of preaching: Jesus went about all Cities
and Towns, teaching in their Synagogues, Mat. 9.35.
and preaching the gospel of the Kingdom, and healing every sickness, and
every disease among the people. And the very titles that the holy Ghost does
give them in Scripture, shows both the dignity and necessity of their office:
as they are called Seers, Saviors, Chariots of Israel, Planters, Waterers,
Builders, Stewards, Watchmen, Soldiers, Nurses, the Servants of the high God,
Acts 2. Cor. 6.
Workers together with God, Fathers, Elders, Men of God, friends of God,
dispensers of the secrets of God, Prophets, Angels, Judges 2.2.
titles of great dignity and honor.

Their office then is not inuentum humanum, an invention of man, 1. Cor. 12.28.
but Institutum diuinum, an Ordinance of God; for they are appointed of God, to
be Patres nutritij, nursing Fathers, feeding us with the sincere milk of the
word of God, 1. Pet. 2.2.
that thereby we may grow up to salvation: and to be short, that thereby we
may at last obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Appli. 1.
Seeing then that the preaching of the Gospel is the ordinary means that God
has appointed to call us unto salvation, and since also such is the dignity
and necessity of the office of preaching the Gospel, that it co^cernes our
salvation; let al true Christians here learn, to give them their rights and
dues that belong unto such men of so high an office and calling, both in their
dignity and maintenance: For their dignity the Apostle says, Videte, See that
you have them in singular reverence for their works sake, and be at peace with
them. Aristotle was reverenced by Alexander as his father, because that from
his father he had but life, but from his master he had knowledge how to live.

And truly, if, Fear the Lord, and honor his Ministers, be married together,
then certainly they which dishonor the servants of the living God, Eccle. 7.
there is but little love to their master, and little fear of God before
their eyes. 1. Cor. 4.
Sic aestimet nos, Let a man so esteem us as the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the secrets of God. Howbeit, such is the iniquity of our times,
that as the shadow went back ten degrees in the dial of Ahaz, 2. King. 10.11.
so ten degrees do the shadows of Christ (his Ministers I mean) go back in
their esteem in the world: and as they go ten degrees back in their esteem,
so they go 20. degrees back in their maintenance, for the most part of them.
And that maintenance which almighty God has designed these his servants in his
word for their wages, is now in this critic age called in question, whether
God assigned it or no in his word; as if God would command his servants in his
word the great work of preaching, and not in the same word allow them also
wages for their work: or leave it to the courtesy or discretion of men, to
determine by humane laws a competent maintenance, as they term it, for them.

As touching therefore the several and contradictory opinions about this
question in this age, An Decimae sint iure diuino: Positio.
That tithes are due, iure diuino, by the divine and moral law of God, and
that they ought to be paid, de iure, of right, although through the corruption
of the times, they have not been paid, de facto, as they ought to be. And this
I will prove by Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and Arguments; and lastly,
answer the objections against this truth. First let us look on these places of
Scripture: Genesis 14.20.
Abraham (and Leuy in Abraham) paid Tithes to Melchizedeck: The Priesthood
remains for ever, ergo the maintenance belongs to that Priesthood for ever.

Genesis 28.22.
Jacob built an house unto God, and gave unto him the tenth of all he had: And
this stone which I have set up shall be Gods house, and of all that thou shall
give me, I will give the tenth unto thee. Leuit. 27.30.
Also all the tithe of the land, both of the seed and of the ground, and of
the fruit of the trees, is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord.



Leuiticus, are moral positions, and are not abrogated.

As in Leuiticus 17.7. They must not offer offerings unto devils, for that man
shall be cut off from his people, is a moral position.

And Leuiticus 18. How marriages are lawful, and not, are moral precepts. And
again, Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, neither lie one to another.
Leuit. 19.11.12
Also ye shall not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou defile the
Name of God, I am the Lord.

These are moral positions in Leuiticus, Thou shall not swear falsely, thou
shall not steal, etc. and therefore not abrogated. So is also this law of
paying tithes a moral duty, as I will hereafter show, and therefore not
abrogated.

For breuities sake I will only quote places for the proof of this truth.

As Numb. 18.21. Deuteronomy. 14.22. Nehem. 10.37. Malachie 3.8. Math. 23.23. Luke
18.12. 1. Cor. 9.7. 1. Cor. 9.13. Heb. 7.8. All which places are most pregnant
proofs that tithes are due, iure diuino, by Gods moral law; and the
objections which the adverse patt can extract out of these places to contradict
this truth, are vain and triuiall. But above all in my judgment, these two
places in Scripture are very pertinent to the purpose we have now in hand.

Ye tithe mint and annise and commin, Math. 23.23.
and leave the weightier matters of the Law, as judgment, mercy, and truth.
These ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone. Here our
Savior vpbraides the Pharisees for doing the least moral duties, and
neglecting the weightiest. But yet he concludes, Origin homil. 11. in Numb.
that they are all moral duties, for they ought all to be done. Paying of
tithes is here reckoned as a moral duty, and with the moral duties of
judgment, mercy, and truth, which ought both in the time of the Law and the
Gospel to have been done.



Origin ibid.
ergo paying of tithes, justice and mercy, being moral duties, ought to be
done in the time of the Gospel, as well as in the time of the Law: and this
word oportet ought or must, implies, that they are all moral duties. Again,
in Hebrews 7.8. Here men that dye receive tithes, but there he receives them
of whom it is witnessed that he lives; and to say as the thing is, Leuy also
which received tithes, paid tithes in Abraham.

Here first we see, that tithes ought to be paid unto Christ's Ministers, as
they have a lease of them from him; during their mortal lives: But the
inheritance of tithes belongs to Melchisedecks, that is, to Christ's
Priesthood, which lives a Priest for ever; and unto whom they are rightfully
and truly due, and ought to be paid so long as his Priesthood remains,
which is, Ad huius seculi consummationem, to the end of the world; so long does
the maintenance belong thereunto: and this is not a temporary leuiticall right,
as due only in Leuies time (for he had but the assignation and lease of
tithes but during his priesthood) but a perpetual duty done before Leuies
time: for Leuy, says the text, paid tithes in Abraham; Heb 7.9.
and must be done also after Leuies time, to Melchisedecks, that is, to
Christ's perpetual priesthood for ever.

As touching the opinion of the Fathers for paying tithes, 2 The Fathers
opinion of Tithes.
I will only cite two or three places for breuities sake. Origin in his 11.
homily upon Numb. has these words, Quomodo abundat Iustitia nostra plus quam
Scribarum et Pharisaeorum, si illi de fructibus terrae suae gustare non audent
priusquam primitias sacerdotibus efferant, et Leuitis decimae separentur: et
ego nihil horum faciens, fructibus terrae ita abutar, vt Sacerdos nesciat,
Levites ignoret, diuinum altar non sentiat? How does our righteousness abound
more then the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if they durst not
once taste of the fruits of the earth, before they had paid tithes thereof to
their Priests, and the tenth separated to the Levites: and I doing none of
these, do so abuse the fruits of the earth, that neither the Priest, nor
Leuite, nor the divine altar has any taste or feeling thereof.

Cypri. in epist. 66
The presbyters have nothing to do with secular affairs, but as the Levites
which had nothing to do but to attend on the altar: so has the Lord provided
for Ministers, that they might not be drawn by worldly occasions from their
holy business, but might live of that honorable stipend with their brethren,
as they who received tithes of the fruit of the earth. Here is no new coined
competence mentioned: but that honorable stipend due to Leuies successors.

Aug. in Math. cap. 23.
Haec est Domini iustissima consuetudo, vt si tu illi decimam non dederis, tu
ad decimam reuocaberis, id est, Daemonibus, quae est decima Angelorum,
associaberis, dabis inquit impio militi, quod non vis dare sacerdoti. This is
the just custom of God, that if thou will not give him his tenth, thou shall
be brought back to thy tenth, and shall be joined with devils, which is the
tenth part of Angels etc. Si decimam dederis, Aug. ibid.
non solum abundantia^ fructuum accipies, sed etiam sanitatem animae et
corporis consequeris etc. If thou paist tithes, thou shall not only receive
abundance of fruits of the earth, but the sweet fruit also of the soul and
body. S. Jerome also has these words.

Quia non dedistis decimas et primitias, Hier. in glos. super illud, Mal. 3.
idcirco in penuria et fame maledicti estis: quia dum parua subtraxistis, et
totam abundantiam frugum et possessionum vestrarum perdidistis: sciatis vos
ideo perdidisse abundantiam, quia fraudauistis me part mea; moneo igitur, vt
reddatis mihi mea, et ego restituam vobis vestra. Because ye have not given
unto me my tenths and first fruits, ye are cursed with penury and famine;
because that whilst you withheld small things from me, ye lost the whole
abundance of the fruits of your possessions. Know ye then, that therefore ye
have lost abundance, because ye have defrauded me of my part: Therefore I warn
you that you restore unto me those things that are mine, and I will restore
unto you those things that are yours.

Infinite places more I might rehearse to this purpose, but for breuities sake I
will only quote them.

As Augustine in sermo. de decimis: Inferte omnem decimam.
Chrysostom. super illud Mathaei, cap. 23. Qui decimatis, etc. Hiero. in
Malachiam 3. Inferte omnem decimam, etc. et reuertimini, etc. Chrysostom. ibidem,
Chrysostom homil. 3. aduersus Iudaeos; idem homil. 4. de verbis Isayae. Idem
super Math. Idem hom. 8. imperf. Operis. Idem homil. 34. homil. 38. homil. 43.
Operis imperfecti: with many more places to like purpose. And as concerning
Counsels, Decrees and Counsels.
I will only but quote them for breuities sake in the margent: for after the
divisions of parishes which was by Dionysius Bishop of Rome, Decreta Dionys.
and cause. 13. q. 14 Dionys. cause. 3. q. 2. Plat. in vita Dionysii. Polydor.
Virgil. lib. 4. c. 6. Decret. Dionysi. cause. 3.
about the year 266. were tithes assigned to their several baptismall and
parish Churches, that none might intrude upon each other; which was long before
the Council of Lateran. And therefore it is an error which some hold, that
tithes were not due nor assigned to parish Churches before the Council of
Lateran: for Dionysius himself says, Cause. 3. q. 2. Singulas Ecclesias pro
suis ministris assignauimus, etc. We have assigned several Churches for
several Ministers, Leo. 4. de decimis. Council. Toled. cause. 16. 1. Idem,
Quicunq voluerit.
and divided to each their parishes and Churchyards, and appointed that every
one should have their proper right, so that none may intrude upon the parish of
another.

So says Anastasius in his Canon, Statuimus, etc. To the like purpose says
the Council of Worcester. q. 7. Et Marcellus Patauinus, Defens. Pac. part 2. Can.
14. Conc. Toled. ses. 4. Can. 32. Concilium Matisconense. ses 2. Can. 6. et
cause. 16. q. 1.

Thus we see tithes to be due, iure diuino, by divine right, by Scriptures,
Fathers, and Councels. Now 3. or 4. arguments for proof thereof.

Arguments that tithes are due iure diuino.
First, it is granted by all men, the Ministers must have by Gods Word
sufficient maintenance, and wages for their work, 1. Cor. 9.7. and 9.13. and
other places.

If by Gods Word Ministers must have Levites had, or less then the Levites
had, or the same which they had assigned unto them by almighty God.

But Ministers must have maintenance by Gods Word, Math. 23.23. 1. Cor. 9.7. 1.
Cor. 9.13.
ergo either more then the Levites had, or less, or the same.

Now more then the Levites had, the world will not allow them, neither do the
Ministers require it, but are content with that portion that God assigned to
their brethren.

And to give them less then the Levites had, is to undervalue their
Ministry, and to make it inferior to the Levites Mosaicall Ministry; and to
prefer the ministration of condemnation, before the ministration of
righteousness, which does exceed in glory. Therefore if their maintenance be
not more nor less then Leuies, it must be the same, which is the tenth.

Again, that which God commanded never abrogated: Ergo the duty of paying
tithes is still in force. That God commands this duty, that fearful
execration of almighty God, Deuteronomy. 14.22. Mal. 3.8. Nehe. 10.37. Math. 23.23.
Genesis 14.20. and 28.22.
by the mouth of his Prophet Malachie, in his third chapter, shows he
commands them to bring his tithes into his house, and he commands them with a
witness; for he subioynes a fearful penalty, a curse upon the heads of those
that neglect this duty: and this he never abrogated, therefore the same is
still in force.

Leuit. 27.30. and the places above cited. Leuit. 27.30.
no other man ought to usurp and take from them, but must be due unto them.
But tithes are the Lords, the benefit and use of them he has assigned to his
Ministers, Ergo, no man ought to usurp or take it from them.

Leuit. 27.30.
The Tenth is mine, says the Lord; and this he has assigned to his Ministers,
Ergo it is their dues to have it.

1. Cor. 9.7. and 9.13.
The Ministers must have their wages and maintenance, either of right or of
Alms; not of Alms, for that were too beggarly and base for so high and holy a
calling: Ergo they must have their maintenance of right, and of that kind
which is assigned in his holy Word.

Heb. 7.17.7.8.9. and 8.9.
Tithes properly belong to Christ's priesthood: The priesthood remains for ever:
Ergo the maintenance due to that priesthood must remain for ever.

The paying of tithes is no ceremonial Ergo a moral duty.

No ceremonial duty, for they were paid before Abraham, and since the
ceremonial law; Ergo no ceremonial duty: because a ceremony is but a type of
an holy thing to come; and it is for a time. Leuit. 27.30.31
Tithes are holy things themselves, and holy to the Lord, Ergo no ceremonial
duty.

And tithes are no iudicialls, for no judicials were vowed to the Lord as
tithes are. Genesis 28.22.
Secondly, Iudicialls are for the civil government of men, and for things in
Commonweal.

Again, Iudicialls are not holy things, Leuit. ibidem.
and consecrated to God as tithes are: therefore they are no Judicials. If then
tithes be neither ceremonials nor Judicials, they must needs be morals, and
due by the moral law of God.

Obiectio prima. Objections against this truth answered
Tithes were dedicated to the Levites for their service in the ceremonial law;
but that law is abrogated: therefore paying of tithes abrogated.

pro tempore, is abrogated: but not the moral duty, for that was before Leuy,
and after Leuy, perpetually to continue, and is the Lords right for ever.









per annu^ more or less, who should have the Parsonage? Laymen, why not Clergy
men? But how, by what law should tithes and maintenance be due? By man's law,
by Statute law, say they: But may not that be abrogated, and where is that
competent maintenance then? So there would be no Ministers if there were no
maintenance, and all the world would grow to paganism if there were no
Ministers or learned men to enstruct the people.

These are the frivolous objections of the Atheistical spirits of our age,
that would feign finger our Church-liuings, because they have found sweetness,
as they think, in them already: But yet it has, and always will prove
ratsbane to their souls, and their posterities destruction. And yet these
critical, schismatic spirits, under color of zeal, and for the
maintenance of their own pride and ambition, would, if they could, In the
suruay of the pretended holy discipline.
banish those Bishops which Christ and his Apostles appointed, and would turn
all discipline and government vpside-downe; Churches into Chambers, Bishops
into Syndicks, and Superintendents Ministers, into Bench-Presbyterians; and
would, if they were suffered, Pha^ton Ovid.
make a new Metamorphosis of the church and Commonweal.

But here let all those that fear the Lord God of Hosts, know, that tithes
are due unto the Ministers of the Gospel by a divine right, and learn to give
them their dues, lest that angry curse of God fall upon them and their
posterities, which is spoken by the Prophet Malachie, Mal. 3
To be cursed with a curse for spoiling and defrauding the Lord and his
Ministers of their rights: and therefore I will conclude this point with Moses,
blessing Leuy and his substance: Bless, O Lord, Deuteronomy. ^3.11.
Leuies substance, and accept the work of his hands; smite through the loins
of them that rise up against him, and of them that hate them, that they rise
not again.

4 Cir.
The fourth and last circumstance to be considered in this text, touching this
heavenly calling by the Gospel, is the terminus ad quem, Text.
The period and end of al happiness, To obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Last position.
And here we learn, that the glory of Christ shall be the end and reward of al
those that obey the Gospel: for hereunto he called you by our Gospel, to
obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. To this purpose S. John says:

1. John 3.2.
Dearly beloved, now we are the Sons of God, but yet it does not appear what
we shall be; and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is.

Romans 8.30.
And again, Whom he sanctified them he glorified: and here in the text, We
shall obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.



ex aedificij latere, of the building belonging to that Head.

It is true then, that we are called by his Gospel in this world, to obtain
his glory in the life to come; which glory of Christ is his by inheritance: it
is ours by his merits. And the glory of Christ is seen in three thing: In
eminentia, in praeeminentia, in coeminentia, Aquin. in Cant.
in eminentia coeli, in praeeminentia Angeli, in coeminentia Patris excelsi; In
eminentia coeli, cuius fruitur claritate; in praeeminentia Angeli, quem
praecedit dignitate; in coeminentia Patris excelsi, cui aequalis est Maiestate.

The glory of Christ is illustrious in his eminency, in his preheminency, in
his coeminency; in his eminency of heaven, in his preheminency of Angels, in
coeminency with his Father: in his eminency of heaven whose glory he does
enjoy; Heb. 1
in his preheminency of the Angels, whom he excells in dignity; in his
coeminency with the Father, with whom he is equal in Majesty. For Ego et Pater
vnum sumus, I and the Father am one; John 10.
and to the participation of his glory we are called, and to his eternal:
glory and here in the text, to obtain the glory of everlasting life, 1. Pet.
5.10.
and to have communion with our Lord Jesus Christ in his Kingdom.

Now as concerning this great and glorious place, the Kingdom of Heaven, there
are many great and excellent Titles and attributes given unto it in holy
Scripture, to express the glory therein contained; but yet none beyond this
here in the text: It is called a Life, a Kingdom, an Inheritance, and a Glory.
A Life, John 5.24.
and such a life as is not subject to death; a Kingdom, and such a Kingdom
that cannot be shaken. Luke 12.32.
Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom:
There can be no ruin or deuastation. Great earthly states are subject to
change, and alteration by private sedition, or public hostility, according to
that of the Poet: Hor. Ode. 2.
Saepius ventis agitatur ingens
Pinus, et celsae grauiore casu
Decidunt turres: feriuntque summos fulmina montes.


Which verses may thus be turned: To stormy tempests subject are
the Pine and Cedar tall,
The turrets high as mountains by,
are subject to a fall.


For in all the Antiquaries it is to be observed, Dan. 2. Iustine: Sleydan de
quatuor Monarchijs.
that earthly estates are most subject to change, and are often times
ouerturned, and translated to others, as we see it come to pass in all the
four Monarchies.

Caron Chron.
Astyages the last of the Medes, overcome by Cyrus the first Monarke of the
Persians; Darius vltimus, Dan. 2. Dan. 6.
the last of the Persians, overcome by Alexander the first Monarke of the
Greeks. The Monarchy of the Greeks soon mangled and rent in pieces by the
Feffees of Alexander, Seleucus, Ptolomie, Antigonus, and Cassander; who making
war each on other, were at length overcome by the Romans: first in the person
of Julius Caesar, who aimed at a Monarchy; and then afterward in the person of
Octauius Augustus; who established the same.

The Monarchy of the Romans though not worthy of that Title, Amand. Polan. in
Dan cap. 2.
neither does Amandus Polanus upon Daniel, allow thereof, because of the
tyranny done to the Saints of God, in the time of the Primitive Church, until
the time of Constantine the Great; the same being also divided amongst the
three sons of Constantine the Great, Constantine the elder, Constans, and
Constantius: They perished all by unnatural dissension, and so it became
deuolute to Julian the Apostate, Nephew, and sisters son unto Constantine the
Great.

Afterward it was oftentimes oppressed by the Arians, and other heretics:
sometimes a great part thereof usurped by Mahomet and the Turks: sometimes
disordered and diminished by the power of usurped transcendency: sometimes
translated from the Greeks to the French, Caron Chron. De quarta Monarchia.
as in the person of Charles the Great, the son of Pipine the Usurper;
afterward became elective in the time of Otho the third, for want of issue
male: and at length that same Lapis abscissus e mo^te sine manibus: Dan. 2.24.
That stone that is cut out of the Mountain without hands, shall dash all
these earthly Kingdoms in pieces: Ibidem.
For it shall strike the Image upon the feet that are of iron and clay, and
break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Psalm. 1.


But this Kingdom of Glory that is here spoken of in my text, shall never be
shaken, shall never be subject to any deuastation, change or alteration.

Thirdly, it is called an Inheritance, and an Inheritance immortal, 1. Pet.
1.4.
undefiled, and that fades not away, but which is reserved for us in heaven.

Lastly, it is called a glory, and such a glory, 2. Tim. 4.8.
as is a Crown of Glory. Now what is it that we can desire that Here we have
not? Do we desire a life? Here it is, and such a life, as is not subject to
death: Do we desire a Kingdom? Here it is, and such a Kingdom that cannot
be shaken. Do we desire an inheritance or a glory? Here they are all, above
all that can be either wished or desired. Aug. lib. de Trip. habit.
For regnum Dei est plenum lucis, laetitiae, beatitudinis et gloriae, quod nec
dici nec excogitari potest: The Kingdom of heaven is full of light, joy,
blessedness, and glory, which neither can be spoken of, nor imagined. And to
this glory of Christ here in my text we are called: And so says S. John:

Dearly beloved, 1. John. 3.2.
now we are the sons of God; but yet it does not appear what we shall be;
and we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. How shall we be like him? Not with a s^^ut of Dignity and
Equality in Glory, but of similitude and quality; we shall be like him in
glory, subordinately, because we are heirs annexed with him in Glory: Romans
8.17.
as we are here annexed with him in sufferings, we shall be there annexed with
him in glory: If we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him.

To conclude this point; If of that earthly Jerusalem such glorious things were
spoken, Psalm 87.
(Very excellent things are spoken of the City of God) how much more glorious
things might be spoken of that heavenly Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4.
and which is the Mother of us all? where are such glorious Citizens, and one
God of Glory, instar omnium, amongst them all, and above them all. Happy are
the people that be in such a case; yea, Psalm. 144.
blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God. And therefore, Exhort.
since Glory shall be the end and reward of all those that obey the Gospel, let
us yield our obedience thereunto. considering on the one side what shall be the
end of those that obey not the Gospel of God; namely, 1. Pet. 4.17.
2. These. 1.17.
That he is coming in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto such as know not
God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And considering
also on the other side, that if our conversation be as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27.
that he is coming with a reward in his hand, to give to every one at his
coming, Reu. 22.
a Life, a Kingdom, an Entrance, and a Glory, even his own Glory which is
spoken of here in the Text.

Let us therefore, Beloved, aim at this Glory, and run at this mark of
Glory with all might and main, that is here set before our eyes: 1. Cor. 9.24.
So run, that ye may obtain.

Let us not with Atalanta be allured out of the way, by the golden Apples,
either of that old crafty Hippomenes the Devil, or which the World, or our
own concupiscence throws in our way. Let us not for all this World, 1. John
2.16.
nor for all the things in this World, lose this place of Glory. But let us
hasten unto the mark that is here fixed before our eyes, even the Glory of
our Lord Jesus Christ; where is life without death, Light without darkness,
Joy without ceassing, and Glory without ending.

To which Glory as he has called us here in his Church Militant, so he
bring us thereunto in the Church Triumphant, even for his Son Jesus Christ
his sake. To whom, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be rendered and
ascribed all Glory, Majesty, and Dominion, this day and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

