TRVE Intelligence sent from a Gentleman of account.

CONCERNING, The estate of the English forces now in France, under the Conduct
of the Right Honorable the Earl of Essex.

Particularly expressing what has been done since his departure from
England, until the second of September last, 1591.



Printed for Thomas Nelson, and are to be sold at his shop over against the
great South door of Paul's, 1591.

To the gentle Reader.
THe unjust rumors secretly dispersed, concerning the distressed estate of the
english forces now in France, under the conduct of the right honorable the
Earl of Essex, has caused me to publish this short discourse, wherein is set
forth nothing but that which is to be justified for truth, by those that were
eye witnesses of the contents thereof.

And whatsoever is herein contained, be assured it is of truth, and published
only to satisfy the honest minds of those that are desirous to know the
truth and no more, of all such things, as has hitherto passed since the
departure of his honor forth of England.

Accept the same, gentle Reader, from him, who wishes the welfare of thee, and
them all, and so in courtesy leaves thee to the reading of that which ensues.

Fabian Johnson.

A Letter sent out of France, particularly expressing the true estate of the
English forces under the conduct of the right Honorable the Earl of Essex.
MY good cussen, I cannot but muse at the sundry untrue reports which (as I
hear) is bruted in England concerning the English forces now remaining in
France: For controlement whereof according to your request, I send you the
truth of all that has happened since our departure, to the end you may make
other of your friends acquainted with the same.

Know therefore that after the right Honorable the Earl of Essex, had taken
his leave of her Majesty then lying at Greenwich, he went from thence by water
to Graues-end, where being landed he took horse to Dover, mean while the
ships passed the lands end, and so came to Dover, where his Honor soon after
went aboard, who together with the whole fleet set sayls for Deep, where we
arrived on monday being the seventh day of August 1591.

At his Honors first landing, all the great ordinance on both sides the haven
(at Deep) was discharged, and the Towns men stood (ready soldier like) with
drums, phifes and Ensigns, and in token of love and joy sounded their
Trumpets, and in all courteous manner received him, who together with the
Governor of the said Town, named Mounsier de Chartres marched into the Town,
where he was royally feasted and most honorably entertained.

After the Earl our General had taken order for the landing and placing of
his soldiers, he remained at Deep about four days space, and after went to
Arques, which is about four miles from thence, where he encamped and mustred
up his men, taking advice of the said Governor what was best to be done.

Mean while that his Honor remained at Arques, he had certain intelligence
brought him, that the Kings Majesty was greatly busied about the taking of
Noyan, and that by means thereof the King could not easelye depart thence,
before he had received full possession of the said Town, which was
performed, on the nineteenth of August last past.

The Honorable Earl of Essex our general, understanding of the Kings good
succes, and having received certain intelligence from his Majesty, that he
would meet with him at Gisors, set forward thither on the one and twenty of
August, taking with him all his horse men, leaving his footmen still at
Arques,, where they continued until wednesday, being the second of September
last past, as heareafter is expressed.

On the 27. of August, about the number of 400. English foot men went from
Arques, with two hundred and fifty horse men of Deep, these marched forth at
midnight toward the river of Some in Picardy, and went to a town walled with
mud. near to Saint Valeri, holden by such as were neither in obedience to the
King, nor in league with the Leaguers. Into this town they entered the next
morning early, where they took the town and about three hundred horse and
wagons, which they conducted to Arques.

The Earl being come to Gisors, attended there for his Majesty, who came the
next day, and received the Earl most lovingly, to whom he gave so great
entertainment, as best beseemed so honorable a personage. And first greatly
thanking the Queens Majesty of England, for her highness most gracious and
loving kindness toward him, and then gave thanks unto the Earl for his great
courtesy, forwardnes, and pains taking, in attempting to hazard his own
person in so tedious a journey.

After that the king had honorably entertained the Earl, according to the
manner and custom of this country, he departed toward the German Army,
consisting of eighteen thousand both of horse and foot, who then staide about
Champaigne for the coming of his Majesty. But the Earl of Essex accompanied
with the Lord Marshall Biron, departed from thence to Pont-de-larche, where he
yet remains.

This Town of Pont-de-larche stands about ten mile from Roan, in like sort
as Kingstone stands from London, which Town is holden for the King, and has
a bridge over it as Kingstone has, having a Castle on the other side thereof,
standing as her Majesty's Manor of Hampton Court, which together does now keep
the river, and does cut off all the provision that can go to Roan by water,
by reason that the vessels of provision sent by water, must first pass under
that bridge, before it can come to Roan.

The aforesaid booty came in very good time, by reason they greatly wanted
horses and wagons for the carriage of their provision, which soon after stood
them in great stead, when the whole Army removed from Arx, which was on
Wednesday being the first of September last, on which day the army arose, and
laded their ordinance, and so departed, marching toward the place where the
General staide, being accompanied with Sir Thomas Leighton knight, who is
lately landed at Deep with great provision of ordinance. To which place also
there came ordinance from Amsterdam, and sundry other places, so that shortly
it is likely that there will be some notable service performed against Roan,
when the kings forces, consisting of French men, English men, and Germans,
do meet and join altogether, which will be forthwith God willing.

God be blessed for it, there is plenty of good victuals in the country,
whereof we want not, and the same sold at a reasonable rate. A man may buie a
good quarter of mutton for two shillinges: a capon for eighteen pence, and
twenty pence the best. Of bread, butter, cheese, and fish there is plenty:
Salt fish is there very good cheap. A man may buy a good Salt fish for
three half pence, which will serve four men to their dinners: and of this and
such like provision, the country does bring in great abundance.

And whereas the report runs, and has been spread almost ever since my Lords
departure, that sundry Captains has been lately drowned through their own
wilful negligence, and that there has also many English men died out of the
English Army since their coming over, by reason of pestilent sickness which
has risen among them: all this God be thanked is mere false, for neither
has there any Captains at all bin drowned, nor yet any such extreme sickness
happened among our Army as is reported. For of certainety there has not above
ten or twelve persons dyed by sickness at the most of that great multitude,
and the most part of those that have so died (or are now sick) is such as
being riotously given, have spent and consumed their money at dice, or in
dronkennes, and such like unmeet exercises, who, when they want money, run and
feed on green fruit, whereof there is great store, by which means some do
surfeit and fall sick, to the great indaungering of their own lives.

Thus my good kinsman, I have discovered unto you the true news of all that
has happened since our departure from England. Other news I have not as yet
to send you, but so soon as any thing is performed, you shall receive
certain intelligence.

This one thing I thought good to acquaint you withal, whereof I know England
will be right joyful to hear: namely, that the French king has by Act of
Parliament banished the Pope from having any rule, government, or authority
within the dominion of France: and has published Edicts in print concerning
the same, throughout all his kingdom: yea he has also caused his Bulls openly
to be burned before the gates of al his greatest Towns and places, to the
great amazement of those that are the chiefest pillars of the Romish Sinagogue.
And thus with my hearty commendations to all our friends and well willers in
England, I commit you to the protection of the Almighty, who prosper you for
ever more.

From Arques this 2. of September. 1591. Your loving friend and nephew. Fabian
Johnson.


