A Lanterne-light for loyal Subjects. Or, A terror for Traitors. Wherein may
be seen the odiousness of Treason, the deserved end of Traitors, and the
wonderful preservation of anointed Princes. A matter rightly agreeing with
this time of danger, where wicked persons have desired our public sorrow, and
the ruin of this Realm of England.

Fear God, Be true to thy Prince: and obey the Laws.

Printed at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane, near
Smithfield. 1603.

To the right Honorable, the Lord Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk, Baron of
Walden, Lord Chamberlain of the Kings household, Knight of the Noble order of
the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, health,
happiness, and prosperity.
I Have adventured (Right Honorable Lord) under your Noble protection, to
publish to the world, a poor testimony of my loyalty to my Prince and
Country. A little Pamphlet it is, but a sweet comfort, and a sound counsel
for good Subjects, describing many fair examples of Traitors foul ends;
showing, that the reward of Treason, is destruction, and after death, lasting
infamy.

The matter agreeing with the condition of this troublesome time, has made me
the bolder to present it to your Honorable censure: Acceptance I do not
doubt; for no good subject can mislike it. For here, in the name of Experience,
I advise all men, whose heads clyme above the heyght of their present
conditions, to make loyal and honest actions, the Ladder of their
advancement, which will commend them with a beloved life, or an honorable
death, when Treason is the Hatchet that seuereth life, and joins Infamy unto
death. The Lord be with your Honor in all your affairs; for whose health and
Honorable prosperity, the good subjects of England continually pray.

At your Honors commandment, in all humble duty, Richard Johnson.

A Lanterne-light for loyal Subjects: OR, A terror for Traitors.
GOD places Kings in their Kingdoms, and he alone will have the dissoluing of
them. If Princes be good, let us be thankful to God for them: if they be
tyrannous, let us look into our sins; for God sends Tyrants, to punish the
sins of the wicked. Therefore, whether Princes be good or bad, let subjects
be obedient, lest (for their disobedience, God take away the good, and double
the tyranny of the bad.

Then, I wonder, why men are so bewitched with the inticements of the Devil,
to lay violent hands upon the Lords Anointed, knowing, that the reward of such
enterprises, is shame and confusion.

Wherefore let all men consider this, that God by sundry examples preserves
the innocent, from the violent hands of the wicked, even in the pride and
greatest hope of their purposes.

Haman erected a gallows for Mardocheus the Jew; and he and his ten sons
suffered thereupon.

The false Judges had got sentence of death against chaste Susanna: but by
divine providence, the stones dashed out their own brains. But where the
practice tends to the murder of Anointed Princes, the odiousnes thereof so
highly offends the Majesty of God, as he has defended even notable Tyrants,
from the murdering swords of Traitors.

As for example: Commodus was a wicked Emperor, and to kill him, the Traitor
Quintianus waited at his chamber ^lutarch.
door: his dagger was ready drawn, his heart was resolute, and his hand was
striking the stroke, at what time the Traitor cried, This the Senate sends
thee. By which fore-warning, Quintianus was stayed, and the Emperor escaped
unhurt.

If God plucked wit and prudence from Traitors, that purposed to kill such
notable Tyrants, as this was, it is constantly to be believed, that with the
Shield of his strength, he will defend righteous Princes, amongst whom our most
gracious King is crowned with the sovereign renown of virtue: in which
dignity the King of Kings long continue his Majesty.

The murder of a Prince is so odious, as even nature it self cries out
against it.

King Croesus had a young son, that from his birth was dumbe^ and yet, when
one of King Cyrus soldiers (taking him for a common person) was ready to kill
him, the Infant cried out, O, kill him not; for he is the King my father.
Persia^ Hist.


Also I have read of a stranger matter; namely, of a Kings son that brake
forth of his mothers womb, to give his father warning of his enemies; and
presently after his birth, cried out, I am borne in a woeful hour, to be the
messenger of no better tidings, then that my father is in present danger, so
lose both his life and kingdom. Which being spoken, the Infant presently dyed.

We hereby perceive, how the person of an anointed Prince is so sacred, as
nature makes a passage for sucking babes and dumb persons, to deliver the
same from danger; and withal, the Traitor is so open to destruction, as the
Preacher says to the Traitor, A Bird of the air Ecclesiastes. 10. 20.
shall bewray thy voice, and with her feathers shall discover thy words.

Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, they, and all that they had, went down quick into
hell, because of their rebellion.

And certainly, whosoever marketh the sequel of treason, shall find a hundred
examples to one, to prove the end of Traitors to be most miserable.

By Statute law, it is petty treason for a servant to murder his master, being
but a subject. How detestable treason is it then, for a sworn servant, to lay
violent hands on his anointed Prince? The offense being in the extremest degree
of sins, the punishment ought to be according to the seuerest censure of
justice.

Every man's house well governed, resembles a Common wealth, wherein servants
ought to live in the awe and subjection of subjects. But the wicked policy of
men has always been such, as where open power was too weak, ambition, envy,
and money, allured the servants of Emperors and Kings, and men of all estates,
to lay violent hands on their masters, and to betray them to death.

Judas, one of the Apostles, betrayed our Savior Jesus into the hands of the
Jews.

King Alexander was poisoned by his Physicion.

The death of the Emperor Commodus, was compassed by the practice of his own
sister.

Many have had their bane by their wives; some by their sons: but innumerable
have been destroyed by the treason of their servants.

But let all good subjects, to their comfort, and Traitors, to their confusion,
know, that the wicked dig a pit, and fall therein themselves.

The Jews had Saint Paul in prison, where forty of them vowed, that they would
neither eat nor drink, until they had slain him: but God in a due time
defended him.

The Angel of the Lord led Peter forth of prison.

The Angel of the Lord defended Sidrac, Misac, and Abednago in the burning
fire.

The Angel of the Lord stopped the Lions mouths, that should have devoured
Daniel. And there is no doubt but the good Angel of the Lord, with a drawn
sword, will defend our Sovereign Lord King James, from all his enemies.

A comfortable saying it is, that this holy Angel of the Lord, with a drawn
sword (though not visibly seen) stands between the godly and their enemies.
And then, though the wicked come armed with an host of men, they shall be
overcome with their subtle devices, and their swords shall go through their
own hearts.

Call we now to mind our late sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, whom the Angel
of the Lord, even from her cradle, did miraculously preserve from the tyranny
of all her enemies. When (for our sins) Queen Mary committed both the Word
and Sword, to the hypocrisy and tyranny of the popish Clergy, good Lady
Elizabeth's life was then assailed with a thousand public and private
practices, but the Angel of the Lord still stood between her and her harms;
and from the fetters of adversity, loosed, and crowned her Majesty, with the
supreme dignity of this Realm. Afterward, in the days of her Majesty's most
happy reign, many there were, that with the superstition of Papistry were so
blinded, that they sought daily to take away this good Queens life: as Arden
and Someruile; the one whereof was quartered, and made a prey for Powles; the
other hanged himself, the night before the appointed day of his execution.

The dangerous Traitor Throgmarton, as cunningly as he disguised his odious
treasons, was intrapped in the snares, which he set for his Countries
destruction, and worthily dyed with the sword, which he had whetted for the
innocent.

The odious Atheist Parry likewise had the reward of his fellow Traitors, who,
though he had the place and opportunity, yet as graceless as he was, the very
Majesty of her princely countenance made him lose his resolution.

Many are the falls of Traitors, which I could bring in, since the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's reign, which for this time I omit. But surely, neither
her Majesty's goodness, nor their own duties could mouethem to obedience, that
had but once drunk of the dregs of Popery. Therefore all true subjects may
sigh and say, Alas: those whose hearts are hardened therein, have their
judgments blind, and their affections swift to run upon destruction.

Pharao was warned with diverse plagues, that he should not hinder the departure
of the children of Israel forth of Egypt: yet he would needs follow them, to
his utter destruction.

Gods justice struck Mahomet with the falling sickness, to make him know and
repent his blasphemy: but to strengthen the peoples misbeleefe, the Devil
taught him to say, that his trance proceeded of the conference of an Angel,
whose divine presence could not endure his earthly shape.

Upon the principal day of the bloody murder at Paris in France, as a token
that Gods word should flourish, in despite of their cruelty, a dead and
withered tree bare green leaves, in that Churchyard that received many a
murdered carkase. And yet the Papists, on the contrary part, applied this
prophesying example, to the second flourishing of the Romish church. Thus blind
they are in their wicked imaginations and traytrous attempts: and thus, with
such vain hopes, are all Traitors led unto the follies, and falls of vnloyall
subjects. Wherefore, howsoever they persuade themselves, and threaten our
Country with a change of prosperity; so long as we fear God, and be true to
his Majesty, our peace will undoubtedly last, and the Sir Walter Rawley,
disturbers thereof are like shortly to taste their own miserable fortunes,
being already justly condemned for their traiterous attempts against our most
gracious King, and Sir Griff^^ Markham, M. George Brook, M. Antony C^pley, M.
Brooksby, Watson, and Clarke.
their own native Country. Therefore let all sorts of people bear this in
mind, that whosoever loses his life by any kind of treason or violence, God
will not only revenge the blood of the same man so murdered, but will also
severely punish the murderers in a strange manner.

God punished the murder of Abel, committed by his brother Cain, with a most
bitter curse; and yet that there might be no protection in murder, God said
himself, That whosoever slew the reprobate Cain, it should be avenged seven
fold.

And now to touch the guilt of murder more nearly, God requires the blood of
Innocents, at the hands of Kings and anointed Princes, as thus: To punish the
fault of King David, in seeking the death of Vrius, God took away the life of
the child, which David had by Vrias wife.

Furthermore, in the time of King David, there were three years famine, and
David demanded the cause why? And the Lord said, It was for Saul, and the
house of blood, because he slew the Gibeonites. According to the opinion of
Erasmus, the consenter to murder, is as gilty as the doer.

Judas that betrayed Christ, and Pilate that adjudged him to death, only to
please the Jews, carried the fearful burden of murder in their consciences,
and by the horror thereof, wrought their own destructions.

Moreover, nature has taught the very Infidels and heathen people to believe,
that vengeance follows murder. Reason then may persuade all Christians, to
assure themselves, that the bloudthirsty are worse then Infidels, and cannot
escape the sword of vengeance.

Now, seeing that Kings, if they shead any blood, otherwise then by the sword
of Justice; and Judges, if they adiudge death for hatred, fear, or gain, by
Gods righteousness are punished as murderers: what may they then expect, that
in corners lay violent hands on anointed Kings, or without color of
authority, murder the innocent? If the eyes of their understanding were not
blind, they might see a bad success in their purpose, and the open confusion
of themselves.

I have read of a number of good and bad Princes, and also of other which have
been bereaved of their lives, by the violent hands of secret Traitors: but
among a hundred, you shall hardly find of one murderer, that has escaped the
torture of Gods vengeance.

Brutus and his partakers murdered Julius Casar; but not one of them escaped a
violent death.

We may yet remember the unhappy murder of the King of Scotland, father to
our Sovereign Lord, King James (whose life God long continue) how villanously
he was made away: yet the greatest favorers, and the greatest procurers of the
said murder, were by common justice drawn to commit almost all the murderers
into the hands of the hangman; and such as escaped, and were not bound to the
censure of the law, could by no means shift themselves from the vengeance of
God.

John I^r^g^, that first assailed the godly Prince of Orange, had the common
reward of Traitors. And the most odious Atheist Balthazar Serack, that slew the
said Prince, for all the blessings of the Pope, the commendations and
threatenings of the King of Spain, exchanged the Pistol wherewith he slew
him, for most horrible tortures to be executed upon himself, being the just
reward for his heinous treason.

I could allege infinite examples, to dissuade men from violent murder, which
Gods providence many ways preuenteth, when as his justice never leaves the
murderer unpunished. Yet if Traitors had reason to observe the judgments of
such practisers, or experience to look into the wisdom of this age, they
should see their attempt as vain a matter, as to throw stones against the
stars, or with a knock of their head to level a mountain, that seek to
displace a beloved Prince.

But now to wade into the depth of our subject, ambition and desire of dignity,
is the welspring of rebellion and treason: they that will fly without wings,
are like to fall before they are wise.

He that is borne to be a servant, in no wise ought to look for double
attendance.

Dignity is like a vane on a high Tower, which is subject to the chance of
fortune, as the other is to the chance of the wind. And, who so will sit
surely upon the seat of prosperity, must, like the Snayle, get experience with
slow climing; lest in taking a swifter course, like unto a Bird, he be removed
with the least stone that is thrown, I mean, with the least disgrace of
fortune. If men's minds grow bigger then their natural conditions, there are
many examples of virtue to imitate, which have raised sundry men from the cart
to the highest degree of honor: when otherwise, in clyming by treason, many
honorable Estates dye dishonorably, and to their posterity, leave no better
Inheritance, then Infamy. Therefore let all ambitious minded men know, that
destruction follows presumption, and the clyming of pride will have a fall.

And now I think it not amiss, to discourse unto you the speeches of an
English Traitor, which he spoke at his execution within these few years: and
his words were these, Oh, woe is me, unhappy man! I may now rightly compare my
estate to the state of Adam, who at first was placed in Paradise, and there
enjoyed all the pleasures of the earth, and was only forbidden to eat of the
fruit of one tree: but for his transgression, he not only procured misery
upon his own head, but upon the heads of all his posterity. So (quoth he) I
that wanted nothing, but had health, wealth, and friends, and so might long
have lived, if I could have forborne to have bin untrue to my Prince: but alas,
for my offense, I have brought my self unto this misery, by which, my good
mother, my loving wife, my four brethren, and six sisters, yea, and our whole
house (never before attaynted) is infamed, and our posterity for ever like to
be undone.

By his overthrow all men are warned to make choice of good company: for the
old Proverb is verified, Evil company corrupts good manners. And truly, the
injury he has done to his whole posterity, may be a fearful example, to
fear men from treason, especially the Nobility and better sort of Gentlemen:
for they thereby not only lose their lives and livings, but the honor of
their houses are corrupted. Contrariwise, for the virtue and dutiful service
of one man, a number of his posterity receive both honor, and many other
worldly blessings.

Hereby we may compare a Traitors offense to Adams fault, and we may liken the
sacred Majesty of our renowned King, to the pleasant and glorious fruit of the
tree of life, so precious in Gods eyes, as he forbade Adam, and all the seed of
Adam, to lay violent hands upon.

But now, to return again to the bad success of Traitors in their attempts,
consider yet these few examples, that happened in Queen Elizabeth's days.

First, consider we how Pius quintus set Doctor M^rt^^ on work (being an
English Fugitive) to raise a commotion in the North parts, where the Earl of
Westmerland, and other great personages entered into open rebellion: yet the
very sound of her Majesty's power dismayed them, and happy was he that could
run fastest away. The principals fled; but escaped not the justice due unto
Traitors: and the Earl of Westmerland himself ever after lived in poverty,
and for a bare allowance, was subject to the proud controlement of every
rascal Spanyard.

Felton, to draw her Majesty's subjects from dutiful obedience, set up the
Popes Bull upon the Bishop of Londons gate: but (God be praised) the horns,
that should have gored the innocent, turned into a halter to hang the Traitor
Felton.

The Pope expecting no good success by open force, then armed his practices
with Machiauils policies: Mader and Barlow, were made Instruments to murder
some principal Magistrates: but their confusion was speedy, and their purpose
frustrate.

The peace of England was troubled with the conspiracy of Throg^^rton,
Appleyard, Brook and others; but they had no better success, then in helping
themselves to the gallow^.

Doctor Story may be an example of Gods justice herein; the Earl of Desmond,
Doctor Saunders, Campion, the fourteen Traitors, and many others may be
sufficient witnesses of the miserable ends of Traitors.

Moreover, we may read in King Edward the sixth his time, of a general
rebellion that was almost throughout England: yet al had bad success. The
Papists tempted the commons to rebellion, with persuasions to throw down
enclosure, and for themselves foysted in, to have their old Religion again.

The banishment of strangers, has bin made the cause of many commotions. Also
the Northern men had but a bad proof of two rebellions, when they had the
Cross and Banner of five wounds borne before them.

And to conclude, thus you may see the just end and due desert of all Traitors.
Therefore my counsel is (which I speak from the true zeal of my heart) that
my loving brethren the subjects of England, open not their ears to the subtle
persuasions of Papists, lest rebellion enter into their hea^ts, and so
vengeance light upon their whole bodies. If this counsel were surely grafted
in all men's hearts, then no doubt, but the rotten branches of rebellion would
soon be cut off, and unity surely placed in England, to the great comfort of
our Soueraign Liege King James; whom the Lord of Hosts preserve and keep, and
all that wish him well.


