THE CATHOLIQVE IVDGE: OR A MODERATOR OF THE Catholic Moderator.

Where in form or manner of a Plea or Suite at Law, the differences between
those of the Reformed Church, and them of the Romish Church are decided; and
without partiality is showed which is the true Religion and Catholic Church,
for the instruction of either party. Together with eight strong Arguments or
Reasons, why the Popes cannot be competent Judges in these controversies.

Written in the Dutch and French tongue, by John of the Cross, a Catholic
Gentleman. Translated out of French into English, by the Right worshipful and
learned Knight Sir A. A.

Pro. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
they both are an abomination to the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Robert Mylbourne; and are to be sold at his shop,
at the great South-doore of Paul's. 1623.

TO MONSIVER NICHOLAS MALAYR, LORD OF TVT. etc.
SIr, The Authors Epistle.
more then twenty years are past since lighting on the substance or matter of
this present book, handled in Latin, in form of an Oration, by the inducement
of certain good Personages, I was persuaded to reduce it into the form of an
Action or Suite at Law, and to cause it to be Printed in the Flemish tongue,
with hope that this small Treatise might conduce somewhat toward the edifying
of Christians: And understanding that diverse impressions have been sold in
the Low Countries: Hereupon I at the last resolved to make it change language,
for the use of our Churches, and especially, of the Churches in the Kingdom of
France, where are to be found these two formal complaining parties, brought in
as contending or pretending title in this cause of Religion: that is to say,
they which make profession of the Roman Religion, as accusers or Plaintiffes
on the one part, and they which make profession of the Reformed Religion as the
accused or Defendants on the other part. I assure my self that both the one
and the other will herein find occasion, more seriously to consider of this so
important business and debate; yea and whosoever will not be wilfully blind,
may easily here discern, how this suite or cause of Religion has been for
many years past wranglingly and cunningly pleaded, by them that seek for
nothing else but to charge and burden their adverse party with unjust and
false accusations, and reproaches; and to hinder the coming at length to a
final decision or determination.

God grant that even the most simple and ignorant may read it heedfully, and
without prejudice or preiudging, to the end they may seriously resolve to join
with the better party, for the advancement of Gods glory, and of their
salvation in our Savior Jesus Christ.

For the rest (Sir) I have presumed to dedicate unto you the French edition, of
this religious suite or action concerning Religion: hoping you will accept,
receive, and take it in as good part, as I offer this my poor labor with a
sincere affection, especially because I understand, that you are much addicted
to the reading of books, which tend to the maintaining and defending of the
doctrine of Jesus Christ. Be pleased then (I beseech you) that I may here make
unto you some small public acknowledgement and I humbly desire our good God,
to fit you with his especial blessings, most conducing and tending to his
glory and your eternal salvation.

At Harlem about the end of January, in the year of our Lord, 1614.

Your humble and most affectionate in service and duty. John of the Cross.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, whereas this little book contains the principal
controversies of Religion, I thought good to adioyne hereto at the beginning, a
Catalogue of all the Authors, whose testimonies are cited in diverse places of
this Treatise; to the end no man may think that the points or matter therein
handled is only the opinion of some small number of people, and of late sprung
up, but of many persons, and in sundry times; to the end also, that every one
diligently examining the said authors, may satisfy and put himself out of all
doubt: So that neither the one nor the other party may have just reason to
complain of my partiality. Read heedfully and judge uprightly.

A Register of the Authors titled in this Treatise, for the better confirmation
of the Truth.
A
Augustinus. Ambrosius. Acatius. Athanasius. Andradius. Antonius Florent.
Aeneas Silvius. Albertus Cratzius. Abbas Vrspergensis. Augustinus Steuchius.
Arnobius. Actius Zan. Agrippa. Apollo. Arnulphus Aucet Epis. Arias Montanus.
B
Bernardus Abbas clu. Basilius. Bonifacius. Baldus. Benna Cardinalis. Beda.
Baronius. Bernardus Mendoza.
C
Chrysostom. Cyrillus. Clemens Alexandrinus. Cyprianus. Calixtus. Clementis
Clementinus. Coletus. Conformiatum Liber. Concilium Trident. Coment. Magist.
Pariseen. Cuspimianus.
D
Ducherius.
E
Ecchius. Evagrius. Eutropius. Extrauagants. Eusebius. Everard, Archi. Salis.
Epiphanius. Erasmus.
F
Fellinus. Francis Petrarch. Flavius Blondus. Fuccius.
G
Gregorius Nazianzen. Gelasius. Gulielmus Budaeus. Gerson. Gregorius Magnus.
Gratianus. Gabriel Biel. Grebelius. G. Lilius. Gallen-Annal.
H
Hironimus. Hulderius Huttenus. Hesius. Hermoadus. Hieron. Sauanarola. Hiron.
Marius.
I
Ieremius. Justinian. Ius. Canon. Jason. Ianus Pannon. Johannes Monlucius.
Johan. de terra Cremata. Johan. Petrus Farra. Johan. Anarsimus. Johan. Iouianus
Pontanus. Johan Functius. Johan Nouiamga.
L
Lindanus. Lombardus. Laurentius Valla. Luitperandus Ficinencis. Legenda
Sanctorum.
M
Marcilius Ficinus. Mantuan Baptista. Mabeus. Marullus. Matthaeus Parisiens.
Michael Centonas.
N
Nicholaus Cusans. Nauclerus.
O
Orosius. Origenes.
P
Paphnutius. Panormitan. Paulus Weigerius. Episcop. Petrusius Soto. Platina.
Petrus Premonstra. Pighius. Philippus Orcius. Pautalion.
R
Raphael Volaterranus. Ruardus Tap. Ruffinus.
S
Stella ventus. Sabellicus. Socrates. Sigibertus. Spiridion.
T
Tertullianus. Thomas Aquinus. Theodoretus. Trebellius. Thomas Roden.
V
Vincentius. Valerius Anselmus. Vicaelius.
Z
Zezintus.
THE CATHOLIC IVDGE. All ye people and inhabitants of the world that love the
truth in sincerity of heart, be attentive and give ear, for behold a great
and most important cause is to be tried.
THE Sovereign and Almighty God, who is a most gracious Father of all his
elect, has promised the Kingdom of Heaven to all true believers, even as to
his dear Children, in his only and well beloved Son: And has published and
exhibited this his promise of the heavenly inheritance, in the public writings
or records of the old and new Testament, and having also sealed it with the
Signet of the Sacraments, he has over and above delivered and committed it,
into the hands of the inheritors; Adjoining moreover to the writings
testimentarie, certain fatherly conditions, which the heirs of the same
inheritance should be tied to perform and observe. But the Children are fallen
into debate, and they are divided, and separated one from the other, with great
contestation. The one of the parties acknowledges the Pope of Rome to be their
visible head, yea verily and the Lieftenant of the heavenly Testatour. The
other party will not acknowledge the Pope of Rome to be such: Even thus they
challendge and pretend right to the possession of the heavenly inheritance, and
to the title of the true Church, the which each party maintains, to
appertain unto them: The Accuser or Plaintiff in this suit is the Pope,
together with all them that partake with him, or depend upon the sea of Rome.

The defendants or accused are all they that will not acknowledge nor admit of
the Pope, but make public profession of being of the reformed religion. Both
the one and the other parties, allege their reasons, their placards, and
Charters, their letters Patents, and writings sealed, and produce also
witnesses deposed: But both parties are much perplexed and troubled about
choosing of a Judge: For each of them strives to propound such a Judge as thou
beleeuest will be most favorable and inclining to their side: The Church of
Rome referres it self to the sentence and judgment of the Pope, of
Traditions, of Councels, of ancient Fathers, and of miracles: affirming
moreover, that she will not altogether exclude the word of God from this
Judgment or decision: Contrarie-wise they of the reformed religion reject and
refuse the Judges aboue-named, saying that in this case or plea, the Pope of
Rome cannot be at the same time both Judge and party, considering also that
he himself is accused of diverse impieties. They reject Traditions as
suspected Judges and reproueable: Touching Councels the Fathers and miracles,
they do not acknowledge them for Judges but rather for Antentike witnesses,
whose testimonies they are ready to accept, so that they agree with the tenor
or public writings of the Testament. The Church of Rome accuses them of the
reformed, to be revolted or fallen away from the true Church, that they have
forged or devised new divine services. That they, have not moved this debate
against them but within these few years: and therefore they affirm that the
kingdom of heaven, and the title of the true Church belongs according to all
right and reason unto them, and not in any sort unto the reformed.

These reply that they are not declined nor separated from the true Church, but
rather from the Sinagogue or Assembly, of the ungodly; that they have not
invented a new doctrine, nor new Traditions, but that they walk in the same
way of Salvation, in which all the faithful from the beginning of the world
have been saved: That indeed in times past they have been oppressed by their
tiranie; as Abell once was by his brother Caine, Isacke by Ismaell, and Jacob
by Esau, so that they were forced to hide themselves, but that now like the
moon they have again recovered their light, attributing to themselves the
names of first borne or Eldership. So that there is concourse from all parts to
these children, and inheritours, which are at such odds and debate, and great
trouble and confusion is raised. From words they pass to blows, to murders,
yea to civil wars, and shedding of blood, to burning and hanging, and in
brief to all kinds of inhumane punishments and executions. Sometimes the one,
another while the other party seems to have the upper hand: And the more they
of the reformed religion are oppressed, persecuted, burned, the more they boast
of their advancement, victory and triumph. In the mean time they protest,
that men should not in this case proceed by force and violence, but according
to right and reason. And herein they do appeal to God himself, not
acknowledging any other head or Sovereign Judge, to the end that the Testatour
himself may determine this controversy by his last will which is contained in
his holy word. And to the end that this may be the more commodiously effected,
they appeal also to an universal Counsel, wherein it may, be freely
permitted to read and examine the codicells or scheduls, and the sealed
writings of the Testament, and by them to understand the last will of the
heavenly Testatour. The Church of Rome on the contrary part protests that
she has often caused general Councels to be assembled, in which the words
of the testament have been sufficiently examined, and that by them it is found
and appears that the name and title of the Church appertains to none but to
her only. They of the reformed Church on the other side deny the said
Councels to have been universal or free, for as much as the Popes have not
suffered them there to render or make a free confession of their faith, neither
given them hearing of there defenses, but contrary to all right have been
both accusers and Judges; having sentenced and condemned the cause of there
brethren without having heard there Allegations: Whereupon they often since
protest, that they have in noe sort lost their suit and right; but that they
will continue and remain, lawful heirs of the inheritance which was
bequethed unto them by their heavenly father, so long as they shall observe the
conditions contained in the Autentique writings of the Testament. In the mean
while the reformed say, that they are prepared and determined to expect and
tarry for the just and Sovereign Judge Jesus Christ, who will at length come
to Judge, both the quick and the dead, and will make an end of these long
controversies in religion, in such sort, as that he will grant and assign to
them that shall have right, eternal life: but will cast out them that are in
the wrong to eternal condemnation. The two parties have not proceeded any
farther in this their action or demand. Now then the question is to which of
these two parties, the possession of eternal life, and the title of the true
Church ought to be adjudged. True it is that this decision and judgment
appertains to Jesus Christ above, the which also he will pronounce without
farther appeal at the judgment and Session, which he has decreed, and
notified to the whole world more then sixteen hundred years since, and
without fail will come and be within short time. Be well advised and careful
in the mean time (O ye Kings and Princes, and all the Inhabitants of the
earth) to join your selves with the better party; lest that now leaving this
difference undecided, Jesus Christ, the sovereign Judge should condemn you at
his last coming in judgment. And to the end you may pronounce just sentence
in this controversy in Religion, show your selves upright Judges, and not
partial, without condemning either of the parties before you have heard them.
But if you have hearkened with one ear as is meet, to the plea and doctrine of
the Church of Rome; I desire you to lend the other also to the plea and
doctrine of the reformed Church: imitating herein Alexander the Great, who was
wont to hear the voice of the accuser with his right ear, in the mean while
stopping his left one, which he reserved to hearken withal to him that was
accused.

I will propound then, and produce in the first place, the doctrine and opinion
of both parties, and that out of the books and writings of each of them: bona
fide I will neither add nor diminish any thing at all, and I will here mention
nothing that may not be found in their own books literally in express
terms. Afterward, I will propound the arguments and reasons, for which they
of the reformed religion, refuse to acknowledge and accept for their Judges,
the Popes, the Councels, the Fathers, Traditions, Miracles, or other such like
witnesses; but do instantly require, that all such differences of Religion,
may be decided and determined by the written Word of God. And after you shall
have apprehended and considered all these things in the fear of God, and
without any preiudicate conceit, or partiality: then I will willingly permit
you to choose the better of those two parties, pretending right, or contending
one against the other.

The differences of the reformed Christians, and the Catholic Romans touching
the principal points of Religion.
Concerning the first point, which we have at this present to entreat of:
Behold, hear the principal and most important controversies in the doctrine
of these two parties:

First, the reformed Church believes, ^ Of the holy Scripture Io. 5. Io. 10. 1 Timothy 3.
that there is nothing necessary to salvation, which is not fully comprised, or
contained, in the holy Canonical Scriptures, of the old and new Testament.

But the Church of Rome says, Aug. 49. cap. 11. in Johan. Petr. Sot. in Schol.
de Scrip. Pig. de Ecles. hierar. lib. 1. cap. 14. Cens. col. pa. 19.
that the holy Scripture is imperfect, and uncertain or doubtful; compares
the same holy Scripture to a nose of wax, to a leaden rule; It affirms also,
that without the authority of the Church, it is but as a fable of Esops; that
the Scriptures is the cause of al heresies, that it is accommodated and applied
to the time, and that therefore the reading thereof must be forbidden to
Lay People, that is to say, to the simple and common sort.

The reformed Church believes that credit must not be given neither to the
Councels, 2. Of Tradidions. Gal. 1. Esaias. 8.
nor to the Fathers, no nor to an Angel descending from heaven, if so be he
should teach contrary to the written word and doctrine of Jesus Christ.

Chrysostom. 49. in Mat. Aug. lib. 3. de Trin. Trident. Council. Sess. 4. Linden.
lib. 1. cap. 4. Hosius de verbo in Sol. in Con. Late. enlo. page 133. 3. Of the
Law of God. Romans 7. Mat. 5.1. Io. 1.
The Church of Rome teaches, that unwritten traditions must be held in as
great estimation and reverence, as the holy Scripture, as being the foundation
of Faith, without which foundation the authority and weight of the Scripture,
vanishes away, or loses the reputation.

The Reformed Church believes, that the Law of God cannot perfectly be
fulfilled or performed by man: and that whatsoever is committed against the
same Law, is sin.

Aug. lib. 2. con. Iuli. and hom. 48. in Joan. Lindu. lib. 3 cap. 19. Andrad
lib. 5. Ruord Tap.
The Church of Rome teaches, that the Law of God may be so perfectly kept and
performed, that one may do works of Supererrogation, or surplussage: also
that all which is committed against the law of God is not sin; as amongst
other things concupiscence.

4. Of Sin. 1 Io. 3. Romans 5 Aug. lib. 2. con. Iul. in hom. 41. in Iron.
The Reformed Church believes, that the want of original justice or original
corruption, concupiscence, or coveting, and whatsoever is repugnant to Gods
law, is sin, and makes men culpable of the wrath of God.

Counl. Col page 49. Ruor. Tap. de per. orig. Conc. Bes. Sess. 36.
The Church of Rome teaches that concupiscence and original sin, is not
properly sin, neither is subject to the wrath of God, nor liable to
punishment.

5. Of free will. 1 Cor. 2. Romans 7. Ephesians. 2. Aug. de Sp. and lit. cap. 30.
The Reformed Church believes, that since the fall, no free will is left in
man, touching things belonging to salvation, unless God change and move the
will of man by his holy Spirit.

The Church of Rome teaches that man can love God Ex puris naturalibus; that
is to say, only by his own power and natural faculty: Also that man even
being in mortal sin de congruo; that is to say according as is meet, proper
or agreeable, may deserve the ordinance or disposition of grace.

The reformed Church believes that the elect of God are Justified only by
faith in Jesus Christ, 6 Of Justification. Romans 3.4.5. Io. 3. Act 10. Aug. de
Trin. Ser. 114. Barn. sup, cont. Ser. 6. Con. Trid. Ses. cap. 11. Audred lib.
6. page 447. Sot. in Schol. de purga. Council. Col. page 156. 7 Of the mediator
Jesus Christ. Io. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 1 John 2. Math. 20. Esa. 53. Aug. lib. 1. c. 42
in Iran. hom. 85. Ambros. de Isa.
without any good works of the Law, in such sort notwithstanding, as the said
faith, must not be unfruitful, or dead, but a true and lively faith working by
good deeds of Charity.

The Romish Church teaches, that men are not Justified by grace and by the
imputation of Christ's Justice, but by obedience of the law as our own inherent
righteousness.

The reformed Church believes, that there is but one only mediator between
God and man; that is to say, Jesus Christ very God and very man: who by his
death and passion has canceled and done away the sins of the faithful, and
by his resurrection has for them purchased and merited life eternal.

The Church of Rome teaches, that Christ died for original sin only. And
that Jesus Christ is not our only Mediator, but together with him, all the
he-Saints and shee-Saints of Paradise.

The Reformed Church believes, 8. Of the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Heb. 10. 1
Ioh. 2. Heb. 9. and 43. Esa. 53. Act. 24.
that the faithful are reconciled to God the father by the only sacrifice of
Jesus Christ, once offered and performed or finished on the Cross.

The Church of Rome teaches, that the death of Jesus Christ, Con Trid. Sess.
6. con. 2. Cat. Romans page 11. Gab. Bell. and 11.12. Linda. lib. 4. page 375.
not the only expiatorie and purging sacrifice, but that the Mass is also
such an expiatorie or satisfying oblation, as abolisheth the sins of the
living, and of the dead; and it is also availeable to obtain all good things
both spiritual and temporal.

9 Of Repentance. Ephesians 4. Romans 3. Io. 1. c. 19. Esa. 19. c. 5.
The reformed Church believes that such a repentance is acceptable and pleasing
to God, wherein appears a true mortification of the old Adam, and a true
vivification or quickening of the new man proceeding from a true faith

Lom. lib. 4. Did. 16. Cat Romans page 421. Com. Tho. 6 cap. 241. Con. Trid.
Ses. 4. And. lib. 9. cap. 18. 10 Of the Church. Io. 10. Ephesians. 2. 1. Cor. 3.
Math. 18.
The Church of Rome teaches, that such a repentance is requisite in which there
is a perfect contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of
works, by which only salvation can be obtained.

The Reformed Church believes, that the true Church is, there where the word
of God is sincerely and purely preached, the Sacraments lawfully administered
and distributed, and where the outward discipline of the Church is duly obeyed.

Sot. def. lat: deon'e page 991. Iug. Con: Did. 4 Con Triden. Ses. 5. Con 2.
The Church of Rome teaches, that the true notes of the Church are these: that
is to say, consent in public doctrine with the Church of Rome: Secondly, the
personal succession of Bishops; Thirdly, the acknowledgment of the Pope.

11. Of Counsels. Mat. 18. Gal 5. Luke 11. 1 Cor. 11. c. 119.12.62.
The Reformed Church believes, that she is not subject nor tied to Councels,
but only to the written Word of God. Also that the Counsels and ancient
Fathers may err, when they swerue, and turn aside any whit from the word of
God.

The Church of Rome subjects and ties it self wholly to general Councels as
those that cannot err. Tap. Art 1 page 5. Sot assen. lat de Concilijs.


The Reformed Church believes that there are but two Sacraments instituted by
Jesus Christ, 12. Of Sacraments. Mat. 28. Mar. 16. 1 Cor. 11. Aug epist. 218.
ad Ian. and lib. 3 de doct. christ. cap 9. Con Triden. Ses. 7. can. 8. Linda.
lib. 4. cap. 57. 13. Of Marks. Romans 8. c. 3. 1 Timo. 2.
that is to say, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

The Church of Rome teaches, that there are seven Sacraments which confer
salvation, Ex opere operato, that is to say, by the work wrought yea even
without any good intention or affection of those that use them.

The Reformed Church believes, that the afflictions and oppressions which the
faithful endure in this world are fatherly corrections, which are sent unto
them from God, for their amendment and the chastisment of certain sins, or
else are trialls and proofs of their faith or testimonies of the true doctrine
they suffer for.

The Church of Rome teaches, Linda. lib. 4 cap. 73. Con. Triden. Ses. 4. Can.
9. Tho. Aquin. l 4. Did. 4. Art. 9. Sot Asseu: de author.
that the Martirdom or suffering of the Saints is an expiatorie or purging
oblation for sin; and that the pain or punishment which they endure,
deserves a diminishing, and mitigation of eternal punishment, and moreover
life eternal.

The Reformed Church believes, 14. Of the Magistrate. Romans 13.
that the Magistrate ought not only to take care of maintaining and defending
the temporal goods of his subjects: but also of true religion, and of
procuring their salvation.

The Church of Rome teaches, Sot. in late. schol. Ibid. in assirt. Cap.
that the Magistrate must be debarred from entermedling with Ecclesiastical
affairs, and with religion, and also that Ecclesiastical causes pertain only
to the Pope and his Prelates.

15 Of Marriage. Heb. 15. 1 Cor. 7. 1 Timothy 3.1. Chrisost hom. in Tit. 2. con.
did. 28 Pigh. cat. Rom page 552.
The Reformed Church teaches that Marriage is honorable among all: And that it
is a Devilish doctrine to forbid it to any.

The Church of Rome affirms, that such as are married live in the flesh, and
that marriage is forbidden to Priests, and to Ecclesiastical persons: And that
it were more tolerable, for an Ecclesiastical person to entertain many Whores
and Concubines, then to betake himself, to lawful marriage. 16 Of humane
traditions. Col. 2. Mat. 11. 2 John 1. Ephesians. 2. Gal. 3. Mat. 15. Con. Triden.
Ses. can. 1. Cat. Romans page 319 499. Can. Triden. Ses. 4. can. 1.1. Great. con.
did. 5.


The Reformed Church believes, that chrisme or anointing with oil, and other
such like observations, and traditions of the Church of Rome, are directly
repugnant and opposite to the word of God.

The Church of Rome teaches, that by the Sacrament which they call
confirmation, the faithful receive more graces then by the Sacrament of
Baptism, And that extreme unction confirms spiritual grace.

The Reformed Church believes, that none can be Justified before God by any
other means then only faith in Christ Jesus. 17. Of Vows. Io. 1. Heb. 10.


The Church of Rome maintains, that vows of continency, poverty, and
obedience merit eternal life. Sot. asser. Can. And page 11.


The reformed Church believes, that their sins are abolished and blotted out
by the blood of the only Mediator Jesus Christ.

The Roman Church believe, that there is not only a divine virtue in holy
water, but also an efficacy to cure, and heal, and to drive away devils; and
in sum, to defend and preserve all things, against all inconveniences.

The Reformed Church believe, 20. Of Invocation. Exodus 20. Mat. 4. Act. 4.
Apoc. 12. 1 Ioh. 4. Ecch. in Lom. lib. 4. did. 48. Con. Trid. Sess. 6. Romans 3.
Lind. l. 3.23.
that we must call upon God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, in
spirit and in truth.

The Church of Rome maintains, that we must call upon Angels, and hee-Saints,
and shee-Saints of Paradise; attributing to each Saint a particular office: as
for example, that Saint Leonard delivers prisoners, that Saint Valentine
gives bodily health, Saint Roch, or Saint Petronel, cures the fever, Saint
Clare the diseases of the eyes, and Saint Anthony the toothache.

God commands that none but he alone should be honored, worshipped and
adored. 21. Of Relics. Deuteronomy. 4. Con. Trid. Sess. 4.


The Pope commands to honor and adore the bones, relics, and images of the
Saints.

The reformed Church believes, 22. Of Fasting. 1 Timothy 4. Col. 4. Romans 14. Mat.
15. Soc. de iciun.
that the forbidding of certain meats, on certain days, out of an opinion
of merit, and holiness, is a doctrine of Devils.

The Roman Church teaches, that abstaining from certain meats is a work by
which one may satisfy for sin, and by which a man may apply unto himself the
merits of Jesus Christ.

The reformed Church believes, 23. Of Pardons and Indulgences. 1 Ioh. 1.2.
that the blood of Jesus Christ is the expiation or satisfaction for our sins.

Terrae Pro. 11.46 62. Extrava li. Tit. 9. Clem. 6.
The Church of Rome teaches, that the Pardons and Indulgences of Popes are able
to obtain not only absolution of temporal and eternal punishment: but
moreover, eternal salvation.

7. Of the absolute power or rule of the Pope. Ephesians. 4. Col. 1. Cent fro. Ie.
de Turr. lib. 3. cap. 64. Fol. lib. 1. cent. Romans
The Reformed Church believes, that Jesus Christ is the only head, who was
crucified for us, and now raigneh with great Majesty at the right hand of his
heavenly Father.

The Church of Rome affirms, that Jesus Christ is an invisible head, and that
the Pope of Rome is the visible head of the Church, who surmounteth all
Emperors, and Monarchs, so much as the Sun excels the Moon, or as gold
exceeds lead. Also that he is greater then Moses, and Saint Paul; that he is
like to Saint Peter, yea verily that he is God, and not man: that he may also
dispose and dispense contrary to the four general Councels, and against the
words of the Gospel.

25. Of the certainty of faith. Mar. 9. Romans 8. Aug. page 4. tit. 6. cap 2.7.
The Reformed Church believes, that the faithful should not doubt at all of
their salvation.

The Roman Church teaches, that we must always doubt thereof.

26. Of Antichrist. 1 Ioh. 2. Mat. 24. Dan. 12. Apoc. 17. 1 These 2.
The Reformed Church believes, that Antichrist is already come; and that he is
Antichrist that denies Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh, that is to say,
who maintains false doctrine, touching the nature and office of Jesus Christ.
The throne or seat of which Antichrist is erected, in the City standing upon
seven hills.

The Church of Rome expects yet the Antichrist from Babylon, of the Tribe of
Dan; Comp. These. l. 7. cap. 8. and 14.
who shall bear rule three years, and at the last shall be slain upon the
mount of Olives.

The Reformed Christians believe, 27. Of Purgatory. Io. 5. Apoc. 19. Cat. Romans
page 127. Com. Theolo. l. 7. cap. 3. Ingust. propo.
that presently after the death of their bodies, their souls shall be carried
up to heaven, into life eternal.

They of the Roman Church say, that there is a Purgatory; yea, that there are
five places for the souls of the deceased. 1. The hell of the damned. 2. The
place of children, which have not been baptized. 3. Purgatory. 4. Limbus, or
the suburbs of hell, where the Patriarchs are. 5. Heaven.

Eight reasons why the Popes cannot be competent Judges of Religion.
BEhold in brief the differing doctrine and controversy between these two
parties: The Church of Rome refers it self to Popes, to Councels, to
Fathers, to their Church, and to Traditions; affirming that they ought to be
Judges, and pronounce sentence and definitive resolution in all these
controversies.

The Reformed refuse all these Judges, beforenamed, adding there-withall, their
reasons wherefore they reject them. I earnestly then entreat thee (friendly
Reader) as thou hold dear and precious thine own salvation, yea so far
forth as in this debate and variance of these contending inheritors, thou
desire to join with the better party, that thou will indifferently and
patiently hearken to them both.

Now then concerning the first Judges pretended by them of the Roman Church,
that is to say, the Popes of Rome.

The Reformed defendants or accused, say, that they cannot acknowledge, nor
admit them for competent Judges in this cause, for diverse very pregnant
reasons. For first, they show, that the Popes of Rome long time since, have not
only been accused, but also convinced of eight horrible crimes and impieties,
and that by the most part of Chistendome: that is to say, England, Scotland,
France, Hungary, the greater part of Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, and
Sweden; yea likewise of the Churches and Nations, which have made, or now make
profession of Christian religion, in Afric, in Egypt, in Syria, in Greece,
and in other quarters.

The crimes and impieties of the Popes are: 1. Impiety or Atheism. 2. Tyranny.
3. Corruption of religion. 4. Sacrilege. 5. Treason. 6. Perfidiousnesse. 7.
Antichristianisme. 8. Together with ten public disgraces and infamies.


The Reformed Christians affirm, that they can prove and show the profane
impiety of the Popes by these three arguments and reasons.

Irreligion the first cause of refusal divided into three reasons.
First in that they attribute unto themselves a Deity: The First reason. Did
96. cap. Satis c. quoniam deminb. Did. 39. did 40 cap. 5. papam: plu de
consell. 37 no 3. vel. 7. Iusen. Conse. 145 no 2. vel. Bas l. vel. Son fol.
cap. Egono de Iure.
For there own ptinted books maintain that they are Gods: that they are not
subject to any person in the world; that they are the spouse of the Church:
that they may tolerate, dispose, and dispense, directly against the
Apostolical Canons or rules; beyond and above al laws and privileges.
Briefly that they must not be questioned by any person, whether they are this
or that, although they should daily condemn an infinite number of souls into
hell.

Secondly the Reformed show the impiety or prophanes of the Popes, The second,
reason.
because they themselves have often scoffed at their own religion and divine
service: For Gregory the seventh induced or drew on a certain man so far by
promise of a great sum of money that he undertook to kill the Emperor Henry
the third with a beam which he would cause to fall upon his head, Benon.
Cardin.
when he should be in the Church offering up his prayers withal devotion: but
as the murderer made have to execute his murder, the piece breaking which
vpheld the said beam, upon which he did sit, the murderous fellow and the
beam fell down from on hie both together.

The same Pope Hildebrand consulting with devils against the Emperor, Stella
Venitus lib. ad cardin. 5. maro. Raphael voluter.
made no difficulty to cast the body of the Sacrament of Christ into the fire,
even against the will, and liking of the Cardinals: which act the Bishop of
Parma has diuulged and discovered. Siluester the second, obtained that
authority papal by devilish practices upon condition that after his death, he
should be abandoned and left to the Devils.

Sixtus the fourth caused Bandin Julian to be murdered in the Church by
certain Ruffins hired for that purpose; to whom he gave the certain sign and
token by the host of the Mass: For that the Popes esteem not very much their
Eucharist or Host, it appears evidently, as the reformed say, because that
ordinarily, they entrust or commit it to an horse-keeper which carries the same
before on horseback, among the Scullions of the kitchen; as being the Auaunt
and courier of the Popes coming.

The third reason.
Thirdly the Reformed maintain that they can also prove the profaneness or
impiety of the Popes, because they have instituted more then sixty five
Ecclesiastical orders; every of those orders having a diverse fashion, of
attiring and of ornaments, and, vesment according to the diverse and sundry
customs or fashions, rules and orders of their Covent. And among all these
orders the number of the Cordeliers or Friars minors, Sabellicij. Enuead. 29.
l. 6.
of some is estimated in Europe only at more then five hundred thousand; which
may easily be gathered by that, which the general of the order of Saint
Francis has often promised and offered to the Pope; that is to deliver unto
him about the number of thirty thousand Monks, which without any hinderance
of divine service might all be employed in the wars. So it is that amongst all
other orders the Cordeliers and Iacobines are held much to excel all the rest.
And the Cordeliers (besides all other fables which one may read in the book
of the Conformities of Saint Frances) are not ashamed to call upon their patron
in these latin verses. Francisse, Jesus tipice dux normaque Minorum. See. lib.
con. Fo. 228. Col. 4.231. Col. 1.

Seeds nobis perpetuo da regni caelorum.
that is to say; Good Saint Francis head of Friars minors,
which of Jesus Christ art the true figure:
Cause us to have part of heavenly honors;
and life to obtain that ever does endure.


And the Iacobins are so bold as not only to compare there Saint Dominicke
with our Savior Jesus Christ, See epist. Flor. Aut. intust. part. 3. art. 23.
and 24.
but which is more in many things they placed him before Jesus Christ. The
golden legends of the he-Saints and shee-Saints are all at this day printed,
which sufficiently set forth the fained miracles of one Stanislaus Adulbertus
and of such other Saints. And for so much as the Popes approve and allow such
books, yea and propound them to Christians to be held in equal honor and
reverence with the written word of God: Aut. 23.27. fo. 137.
From thence also the Reformed Christians conclude, that the Popes are profane.

Tyranny the second cause of refusal.
The second reason for which the Reformed will not accept the Popes for their
Judges, The second reason.
is, that they have usurped dominion and sovereignty over the Church. For first
of all the Pope causes himself to be styled the Head, the Spouse, and
Sovereign Bishop of the Church: Howbeit, that title cannot properly appertain
to any person, but Christ Jesus alone. In the second place, because that the
Pope will bear rule and have sovereignty over all the earth, and all the
Potentates of the earth. Of the donation of Constantine.
For touching the donation of Constantine the Great, by which they strive to
confirm their dominion and rule, besides that it has been heretofore
sharply questioned, by Nicolaus Cusan, Laurentius Valla, Volaterranus, Aeneas
Silvius, and diverse other very learned Authors, the which notwithstanding
have not ceased to be patrons and defenders of the Roman Sea. The Reformed
Christians maintain, that they can convince the said donation of falsehood and
untruth, by these reasons following.

Ten reasons by which it is proved, that the donation of Constantine the Great,
is false and counterfeit.
First, because none of the best and most approoved Authors, either affirm, or
speak any thing of this donation of Constantine.

2. Because that Eusebius and other ancient Historians, testify, that the
Emperor Constantine divided the three parts of the world to his three sons.
Socr. Theolo. Evagr. Ruffin. Okeb. Beda. Sozom. hist. pan. 2 Vol. lib. grn 3.


3. Because the Instruments and Decrees which touching the same were imprinted,
are very different, and their style no whit agreeing.

4. That it is an absurd thing, and likewise incredible, that Saint Peter and
Saint Paul should have appeared to Constantine in his sleep, and that he
should have adored them as gods.

5. That he was never infected with the Leprosy.

6. That he was not baptized by Sylvester at Rome, but by Eusebius in
Nicomedia. Alb. Krant. in Sax lib. 2. ca. 1. Mansil. indefens. part. cap. 11.


7. That it is a profane kind of speech, to say that the hand of God was
seen by Constantine.

8. That he could not give to the Pope a greater right, then he had himself.

9. That he could not confer or bestow upon the Pope power or authority over
the Patriarch of Constantinople, the said title at that time being not built
nor finished.

10. And lastly, Eusebius. de vita Constan. Ruff. l. 1 c. 39. Viues l. 24. hist.
Beul. de Con. Nue, l. 8. c. 4.
because such donations contained in the privileges and grants made to the
Popes, which they have received from the Emperor Constantine, are the certain
marks of Antichrist.

Surely by all these reasons aforesaid, it manifestly appears say the
Reformed) that such donation was never made to the popes by Constantine, but
that it has been forged and counterfeited by the Popes themselves. And
concerning the words of our Savior Christ, pronounced to Saint Peter, and to
all other Preachers and Teachers of the word of God, Aug in Io. tract. 10 and
12. and de ver. dom. Ser. 20. Cyril. in Dial. de Trin. lib 4. Ambr. Epist. ad
Ephesians. cap. 2.
saying; Feed my sheep: this sentence and speech does not import or signify a
politic and outward dominion or authority, but only the ministry of the
Gospel. For in another place our Lord Jesus Christ taxes the ambition of the
Apostles, for that some would bear rule and have dominion over other some, and
for that upon this occasion they entered into consultation.

Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Math. Ber. Epist. 230. Mat. 20.25. Did. 4. ca. multi
quicunque cap. 1. Sedis did. 99. si quis. 7. Der. de por.
The Kings of the Nations (says Jesus Christ) bear rule over them, but it
should not be so among you: yea and the very Canons have expressly forbidden
that the Bishop of Rome should be called Sovereign Bishop, or universal head
of the Church (wherefore say the Reformed) the Popes beat themselves with their
own rod, seeing they cannot rightfully attribute or appropriate to
themselves such authority and domination, and that for diverse causes and
reasons,

Corruption of Religion the third cause of refusal.
The 3. reason which the Reformed Christians produce, for which they will not
submit themselves to the judgment of the Popes, is this; that they have not
only intricated and confounded religion and divine service with many vain
ceremonies, Can. 9. did. 34. Can 4. in did. 82. Can praeb. lib. decretal.
Greg. tit. 7. can. 5.
but have also grossly erred in doctrine. For some decrees affirm of the
Popes, that they are not men but gods; that they cannot be judged by any
person in the world; that they may dispose and dispense against the Apostles;
that they can change the properties of things; that they can make something of
nothing; that they have power to make justice of injustice. Io. 1.4. 2 Timothy 3.
Mat. 15. Gal. 1. Ier. 7. Iren. Epist. 4. Con. Trad. 4. con. li. cer. per. sur.
7.
Now how exceeding false all this is (say the Reformed) it appears by that
which almighty God testifies himself, that there can be but one form of
religion, that is to say, that which is contained in the writings of the
Prophets and of the Apostles: yea verily, that an Angel from heaven has no
power to add thereunto, nor from it to diminish. Whereas the Pope for all
that, will have religion to consist in humane traditions such as are the Agnus
Dei which they call, 2. The complaint of Maximilian.
the baptism of Bells, the invocations of Saints, the single life of Priests,
the withdrawing or depriving of the Cup in the Lords Supper, De coen. dom. lib.
3. decret. Greg. tit. 41. Call. cum. did. 2.
the using of a strange language, and not understood in the outward service of
the Mass, Bulls, and Indulgences, and other like traditions, all which as they
say, came to them from the Apostles. Although it is most clear and evident by
ancient Histories, that they have for most part been instituted long after by
the Popes themselves: For Pope Innocent did forbid the giving of the Cup in the
Lords Supper to Lay People, When and by what Popes the traditions of the Church
of Rome have been instituted.
following the decree of the Laterane Council. Also he ordained that the
consecrated bread should be received only upon Easter Day, which bread is more
properly called the Eucharist, or bread of thanksgiving. Eugenius the fourth,
Decreed the contrary, in the Council of Basil. Innocent and Honorius
instituted that the consecrated bread should be reserved and kept for diverse
and sundry purposes, in Churches, with great veneration and reverence.
Contrariwise Pope Clement would not suffer the said bread to be kept and
reserved till the next day. Vitilian the second, and Agatho or Agathus the
first, did decree that the Mass should be administered in Latin: And Nicholas
the first, on the other side gave leave to the Sclavonians and Polonians, to
administer and sing the Mass in their own language. Alexander the second,
commanded not to hear the Mass, which was sung by a Priest that had a
Concubine: on the contrary side, Lucius the third, permitted it. Siricius
Pelagius the second, and some other Popes have condemned the marriage of
Priests. And opposite to that, Pius the second, has left in writing this
sentence: That marriage was debarred unto Priests, for a pregnant and weighty
cause. But that it must be allowed unto them again for a reason more urgent
and peremptory. Leo the first, Gregory the second, and third, and diverse other
Popes, have approved of the worshipping of Images. Contrariwise, John the 23.
greatly detested Images in the Church. Boniface the fourth gave power and
authority to Cordiliers to preach, to Baptize, and to give absolution.
Contrary whereunto, Gregory, deprived them of that power, John the 24. Con.
16. qua. 8. adijcing.
held for a sound article of faith, that the Apostlos never made vow of
poverty, and of continency. Pius the second said, that begging Monks were
the slaves of the Devils adding these verses: Non audet stigius demon
tentare, quod audet,
Effraevis Monachus, plenaque fraudi anus:
that is to say. The very Devil Dares not undergo,
What lawless Monk, and crafty hug will do.


Pelagius the first, ordained that Clerks should daily read hours which they
call of seven hours long Gregory the first, commanded them to perform their
service not by singing, but by teaching and preaching publickely. Calixtus
says, that it is not lawful to believe otherwise then the Church of Rome
does, Pope Julian contradicted it.

Boniface commanded to celebrate the Jubilee every hundereth year; whereas
Clement the sixth has reduced and shortened it to the fifti^h year; Boniface
the ninth to the three and thirtieth. And Sixtus the fourh to the 25. and
Hadrian and Leo the third gave authority to the Emperor Charles to chose the
Popes. But Stephen the fourth and Hadrian the fourth, and Sergius the second,
have ascribed the said authority to the Ecclesiastical persons, to the
Magistrate and to the people of Rome; And Alexander the second did only permit
it to the Cardinals: Finally the Whore Matilda chose to be Popes, Victor the
third, and Vrbane the second. As also the Harlet Theodora elected John the
eleventh; Ficinensis lib. 1. cap. 3. Popes laymen, ignorant or unlearned.
the Strumpet Marozia, Sergius the third; Antheras ordained that none should be
chosen Pope who had not first been Bishop. Contrariwise to which decree
Constantine the second, and Benedict the eight, were Lay persons, Benedict the
ninth, and John the second, were altogether ignorant and unlearned.

Can. omnibus vtriusque.
Gregory the first, did forbid to eat flesh, milk, Cheese, Butter, Eggs, on
fasting days; Eleutherius ordained contrarily that no meat should
superstitiously be refused. Innocent the third brought in Auricular
confession. Nectarius Patriarch of Constantinople on the other-side did
abrogate it, because that under color of confession an Adultery was
committed. Honorius the third instituted the eliuation, De conse. did. 1. can.
vata did. 96. can. vbi. nom.
lifting up of the bread in the Mass. Gregory the ninth that a little bell
should be rung at the same Instant. And Innocent the fourth, that at the very
instant men should fall on their knees. Zephirin brought in Challices of glass
instead of wodden ones: And Urban Chalices or Cups of gold instead of glass.
Nicholas the first, excluded from the Counsel, Emp. as being lay persons. One
the other-side Marcellus, Damasus, and Julius permitted them to assist and be
present at Councels. Plat devitis. Pontifi.
Stephen abolished openly the decrees of Constantine the second Stephen the
sixth likewise rejected the decrees of Formosus, and Romanus the first
disanulled the decrees of Stephen the sixth: and Theodorus those of Romanus: and
Damasus those of Liberius, and Paul the second, those of Pius the second.

Behold (say the Reformed) the Traditions, Alphon. con. haeres. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Here. Marcel. Eckine. Johan Gerson.
decrees, and Canons, which the Papists would attribute to the Apostles, Behold
the Christian Religion which the Popes of Rome boast to have preserved and
continued so sincere and pure: without saying any thing of the most manifest
heresies of the Popes: that is to say that Pope Honorius was a Monothelite,
that Liberius was an Arrian, that Marcellinus sacrificed to the Idols of the
Pagans, that Anastatius was a Photrinian, and John the 22. held opinion that
souls perished and died before the day of Judgment.

Sacrilege the fourth cause of refusal.
The fourth cause and reason why the Reformed Christians will not consent to
receive the Popes for their Judges, is their Simonie. The fourth reason.
For it is very clear and manifest, that the Popes gather together more gold
and silver by Annates, first fruits, or vacanties, by presentations,
resignations in favor, recommendations, dispensations, for age and regularity
of bodily infirmities by graces or favors expectatiue, reuolutions, benefices,
vacant, exemptions of visitations, creations of notar^^s and protonotaries
Apostolic, for non obstantes, for Indulgences, to sculer Priests for
reuocations, for tolleration and suffering of Concubines, and for diverse such
like chaffers; then all the Roman Monarchs ever could collect or raise from
all the quarters of the world, during the time that the Roman Monarchy was in
most flourishing estate. There is extant at this day a complaint in writing of
the Kingdom of France, The complaint of the Kingdom of France touching the
Popes Simonie
that the Popes had wont yearly to draw out of the Realm only about eight and
twenty tons of gold. Diverse other such like complaints of kings may be
readily found out, yea of Clerks themselves and of other great Ecclesiastical
persons; all which accuse very greatly the Simonie of Popes. And how true all
it aforesaid is; it manifestly appears by the only example of John the 22.
The excessive treasure of John the 22.
who left after his death, in his own treasury about the sum of two
hundereth and fifteth tons of gold: As Francis Petrarch an author worthy of
credit does plainly testify. Boniface the seventh seeing he could stay no
longer at Rome in safety; by stealth conveyed away out of the Chest or Shrine
of Saint Peter, the most precious Jewels kept therein and fled to
Constantinople. Clement the eight, and diverse other Popes, have been often
convinced by their own fellows of such like sacriledges. Gregory the ninth
sold to the Emperor his absolution for an hundred thousand ounces of gold.
Benedict the twelfth, being possessed with fear, sold to Gregory the sixth the
Popedom, for five and twenty hundred pounds of silver. The simonie of
Alexander the sixth, is also sufficiently known by his Epitaph, which is yet
fresh in memory: Vendit Alexander, Coelos, Altaria, Christum:
Emerat ille prius, vendere iure potest.
That is to say; Heaven, Altars, Christ, did Alexander sell:
He bought them first, sell them he might as well.


Furthermore, how Leo the tenth, caused to be sold by Tetzalias, and diverse
other Popes by their Emissaries or Legates, their Indulgences, Bulls, and
pardons, is better known throughout all Christendom, then is wel-pleasing to
the Popes.

Treason the fifth cause of refusal.
The fifth cause wherefore the Popes cannot be good Judges in the differences
(say the Reformed) is the crime of high treason or conspiracy; The fifth reason.
for they prove by true Histories, that in all times they held the Emperors,
Kings, Extrava. de mayor. and obed. Can. 1. extra. Mat. cons. Extra de ma. and
obed.
and Princes of all Europe, not only for their vassals, and liege-men, or
homagers, but also for their vile slaves, and base servants. Pope Adrian
alighting from his horse, as the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, The Emperor
horse-keeper to the Pope.
with great reverence approached to the right side of his horse to hold his
stirrup, the Pope was offended at the fault committed by the Emperor, Hol.
chron. 5. Call. cap. 8. Nau. lib. 1. Genesis 79. Ram. in vit. Pontif.
reproving him somewhat sharply, whereupon the Emperor still full of devotion
answered in excuse, that it so fell out with him, because he was not
accustomed to hold stirrops, and that it was the first time he ever exercised
such an office. And the Popes choler being the more stirred by such an excuse;
the Emperor said unto him, I would feign know whether this my service proceed
from good will or from duty: If it come from good will, who will tax for any
negligence him that is officious and ready to do service? And if it proceed
not of duty, it imports not much on which side he holds the stirrup, who came
but to show and perform courtesy and service? The next day the Emperor met
the Pope, and being become more circumspect by the foresaid reprehension held
the left stirrup, so conducting and guiding the Pope toward his army: Behold
surely an exceeding contempt and disgrace of superior authority. Nau Ga. 39.
Bern. d^pen. Funct. in cron.
And yet the Reformed affirm that they can produce a greater despitefulnes and
indignity, that is to say, of Alexander, who became Pope after Adrian
aforesaid: For he having excommunicated the said Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, when he requested to be absolved of his excommunication, the Pope
assigned him a certain day, upon which he should appear in the great Church
of Venice: whither being come into the presence of this Pope, and of many
Cardinals and Bishops; he would not give him his absolution, unless first he
prostrated and cast himself down at his feet, entreating pardon of him: The
which the Emperor doing, the Pope lifted up his foot, and put it on his neck,
causing at the instant his Prelates to sing that verse of the 91. Psalm,
Platin^.
Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion and the Dragon shall
thou tread under thy feet: Wherewith the Emperor being much displeased,
answered hereunto: Not unto thee, but to Saint Peter: but the Pope treading the
second time on the Emperors neck, replied both to me and to Saint Peter. And
the History of Philip the fair, King of France, agrees very well with the
former: For whereas the said King was by Boniface the eight banished, or
accursed as an Heretic and Enthusiast. The King notwithstanding, surceased
not to proceed in his resolution: And after he had convinced the said Pope by
evident testimonies, of diverse grievous faults and offenses, he caused him to
be imprisoned in Rome. And as this Pope entered like a Fox, and reigned as a
Lion, in the end he died like a dog. In the year 1300. a great number of
people of all Nations being assembled in Rome to celebrate the Jubilee, the
same Boniface showed himself to the people the first day, adorned with
pontifical vestments and attire; The Pope bears the two swords. Abbas Vesp.
in P^^a. Annal. Gal. M^^. in Eusebius. cap.
and the next day appearing in Imperial habit, caused a naked sword to be
carried before him, crying with a loud voice, I am Pope and Emperor; I have
Signiorie or Dominion earthly and celestial. And a few days after, when
Albert who was chosen Emperor by the Electors, requested to be confirmed by
the said Pope; he refused at the first entreaty, saying; that such an Election
as was made without his commandment and authority, ought not to be esteemed
for good and lawful; yet within a short time after, he condescended to the
desire of the Emperor, but under this condition, that upon the first occasion
offered, he should invade the kingdom of France. Innocent the third, did so
hate the Emperor Philip, because he was chosen Emperor against his will,
that he oftentimes said: Let either the Pope take away the Imperial Crown,
or let Philip take the Apostolical Diadem from the Pope. Ab Vesp. Ser. Plat.
Mars an. Gal. and imper.
Clement the sixth, said to the Ambassadors, that he would never give
absolution to their King Lodowicke, or Lewis, for his offense; unless freely
yielding up his kingdom, he committed himself with his kingdom and all his
goods into the Popes power, with promise not to accept nor receive again any
of those things, but from the mere favor and only grace of the Pope.

The Reformed add moreover to the former, that upon the same foundation and
ground, Pope Constantine the first, was the first that caused the Emperor to
kiss his feet: That Martin the fifth, caused the Emperor Sigismund to do the
like; as also John the 17. Crescent Consul of Rome; Emperors excommunicated
by Popes.
and Benedict the third, the Emperor. Moreover, say the Reformed, this ought
not to be passed over in silence, that is to say, that Pope Innocent the third,
excommunicated O tho the fourth, as also Gregory the seventh excommunicated
Henry the fourth, and Paschall the second, Aug. stan. lib. 2. de. Constable. page
138.
Henry the fifth, Adrian the fourth, and Alexander excommunicated Frederick the
first, Innocent the third Philip, the son of Frederick. Gregory the ninth,
Frederick the second, and that three sundry times, to be brief Innocent the
fourth, Conradus the fourth: And all this was done for the most part because
they would not in all things perform the will of the Popes. And even still at
this present the greatest part of kings, and Realms, Princes, and Potentates,
of Christendom are in subjection to the Pope as his vassales and homagers.

Perfidiousnesse the sixth reason of refusal.
In the sixth place, Persidiousnes the sixth reason of refusal.
the Reformed accuse the Popes of perfidiousnesse or faithlesnesse and
sedition, showing by ancient Histories worthy of credit that the Popes have
ever tended to this end and purpose; and so soon as they understand that any
difference and dissension was raised or set on foot between kings and great
Potentates, to entertain and nourish the same debate and dissension by their
Emissaries and Messengers, but yet according or compounding with the one or the
other party, that if so be either of the two could usurp or obtain that
kingdom of his adversary, that then he should make some acknowledgment to the
Roman see for so good and happy success. And so soon as the said accord and
secret conspiracy past, was consented unto, the adverse party was forthwith
excommunicated by the Popes as an heretic, and his realm exposed as a prey,
to whomsoever would invade or conquer it first, by putting in for it. The which
the reformed show by express examples: for touching the first, although the
king of France, Lewis the 12. delivered to the Pope Julius, two certain
Cities, so it is, that the Pope not therewith contented did cast him out of his
protection, and exposed his realm to devastation or spoil. Arnobius Benn.
Iuil Bull. mass lib. 5.
And whereas the same Pope Julius for diverse wicked and scandalous facts (which
are hereafter recited) was suspended from his papal authority by the Counsel
of Pisa, (albeit the said Counsel was disturbed by the said Pope, and
transported to Lions) he was enraged with such choler, that he was resolved to
leauie an army, and to enter into France, and when al things were in
readiness, and himself mounted on horseback he caused the soldiers to
pass through the City of Rome, The Pope casts S. Peter's Keys into Tiber, and
draws S. Paul's sword.
beyond the river Tiber, and pronounced alowde and plainly these words in
presence of many thousands of people. Go to, since the keys of S. Peter are
no more availeable, let us vnsheath the rustie sword of S. Paul: and
therewithal casting Saint Peter's keys into Tiber, he drew his sword
threatening with a grim and frowning countenance and gnashing his teeth, to
ruinate and utterly destroy the Frenchmen. The ensample of Philip Augustus is
also like to the former, for the said king Philip having conquered from the
English a great part of his kingdom, Pope Innocent the third, first sent two
Legates into France, to trouble the state, and to stir up tumults and
seditions, and afterward had so incited and incensed Otho the third, and
Ferdinand Earl of Flanders, against the French, that they had at that time
lost their kingdom, if the two Princes aforesaid had not by their constancy
hindered and withstood the wicked imaginations and plotts of the Pope. But what
is this (say the reformed) to produce such ancient Histories considering that
modern examples are yet fresh in every man's memory. The year 1585. Pope
Sixtus the fifth, thundered and lightened with his excommunication against Henry
of Burbone king of France and of Navarre. Brut. fulmen. Six. 5. in regi. Gall.
and Nauar.
And against Henry of Burbone Prince of Condy: likewise against all their race
and posterity, and having excommunicated them as heretics did therewithal
give in pray all their countries and Cities.

And that also which afterward fell out is sufficiently known to all, which
is that the same Pope Sixtus the year 1588. solemnly proclaimed the kingdom of
England to be heretical, and gave the same to Philip king of Spain: If we
will also behold and consider the perfidiousnes or faithlesnesse, and
spiritual and Ecclesiastical disloyalty of Popes, we shall find in ancient
Histories that the Popes of Rome have in all times contended among themselves
for the papal Chair or dignity. For John the twenty four, being come to
Bolonia as Legate with many Soldiers, The Ecclesiastical perfidiousnes of
Popes.
much threatened all the Cardinals if they choose a Pope that were not to his
liking, and diverse being named and propounded, to none of which he would give
his consent, at length he was required, that himself would signify whom he
would have to be chosen: Then he said give me this vestment or attire of S.
Peter, Popes choose themselves. Stella venetus
and I will deliver it to him that shall be Pope, which being done he put it
upon himself, and said I am the Pope. And albeit this act greatly displeased
all the other Cardinals, they were notwithstanding forced against their wills
to yield consent. In like manner John the twenty two chose himself to be Pope
when the election was referred to him. The Reformed Christians say moreover
that they can prove that the same time there have been, Four, three and two
Popes at the same time governing.
sometimes four, sometimes three, sometimes two Popes: For Victor, Alexander
the third, Calixtus the third, and Paschall had altogether at once the papal
authority. In the time of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and Benedict the
eight, Siluester the second, and Gregory the fifth, were Popes all at a time,
until at the length Henry the third, Emperor deposed them.

Likewise Gregory the twelfth, Benedict the thirteenth, and Alexander did by
excommunications arrogate or obtain the papal authority; all of them
thundering their thunder-boults the same time. Moreover diverse of them have
challenged the triple Crown, and for the same have made war one against the
other. Stephen the third, against Constantine. Sergius the third, against
Christopher. Vrbane the fifth, against Clement the seventh. Eugenius the fourth,
against Clement the eight. And diverse other Popes (the mentioning of which,
would be too tedious and troublesome) have done the like, as is verified by
their own Historiographers: Let every man judge then (say the Reformed) if
these acts above mentioned, may not rightly be called perfidiousnesse and
sedition.

Antichristianisme the seventh cause of refusal.
In the seventh place, The seventh reason.
the Popes cannot be competent and sufficient Judges in the controversy of
Religion, for that (as the Reformed maintain) the Popes themselves were that
Antichrist, which the holy Scripture testifies to be the wicked one, the same
child of perdition, 2 These. 2. Apoc. 17. 1 Cor. 1.6. 2 Cor. 6. Ephesians. 2. 1 Timothy 4.
that opposes and lifts up himself against all which is called God: sitting
as God in the Temple of God: The whore that is drunk with the blood of the
Saints; being seated upon the Beast with seven heads, who commits
fornication with the Kings of the earth, and fights against the Lamb, by
whom she shall be overcome: and finally, shall be forsaken by seven horns,
or seven Kings. For since that the Popes attribute to themselves more honor
then to Jesus Christ, and to the Magistrate, and so advance and lift up
themselves above God. Behold the reason why they dispense against the
commandments of the Apostles; against right and the law of Nature, Ten
arguments that the Pope is Antichrist.
that they place their acts above the judgment of man; that they equal their
ordinances to divine institutions: That they attribute to themselves the power
of transferring and changing of kingdoms; That they name themselves head,
spouse, and high sovereign Priest or Bishop of the Church; The Heralds cry
before the Pope, Abasso, Abasso, that is all down on your knees. Did. 19. 11.
96. Bald. vlt. cap. Decius 1. de constit. Felin. c. eg. 1. de iure. Eber.
Hardin. Anna. Iron.
yea verily they term themselves the cause of causes, and the Lord of Lords:
That they are seated in the Temple of God, being drunken with the blood of the
Saints, possessing the City set upon seven hills, which has had sovereignty
and rule over all the Kings of the earth. In brief, seeing that all the things
which have been foretold of Antichrist in the holy Scripture, agree fitly,
sort rightly, and are proper to the Pope, we need expect no other Antichrist
from Babylon. Behold wherefore the Reformed conclude, from all the reasons
before going, that the Popes of Rome are the true Antichrist.

The villainies of the Popes the eight cause of refusal.
The eight reason.
In the eight place, the Reformed Christians will not admit the Popes for their
Judges, for these their filthy vices and villainies ensuing.

First, they have been whoremongers. 2. Tyrants. 3. Possessed by Devils. 4.
Atheists without any sense or feeling of God. 5. Tormentors or bloody
persecuters. 6. Traitors. 7. Poysoners. 8. Bastards. All the which things the
Reformed say, they can sufficiently prove true by the testimonies of such
Writers and Authors, being Papists, as in diverse ages past have written books
thereof, which are at this day every where printed and set out, and
consequently may be read by every man.

And first of all the Reformed prove, That the Popes have been whoremongers
and Sodomites.
that diverse Popes have been Brokers, or Bawds, whoremongers, incestuous, and
Sodomites. For Sergius the third committed filthiness with diverse Harlots,
but especially with Marozia that famous strumpet, of whom he begat Pope John
the twelfth. Landus the first, begat John the eleventh in beastly whoredom.
John the eleventh being heir to Landus the first, came also by right of
whoredom to the Papal dignity, by the means of the Roman Courtezan
Theodora, Luitpran. Firm. lib. 3. cap. 12. De gest imper. Patr. praem. and
Platin. Firm. l. 2.13. Luitp. lib.
the which being often enflamed with the fire of lust (I would spare or favor
chaste ears if I were not to express the very words of Luitprands) did not
only allure and provoke the Pope to use carnality with her, but did also
sometimes importune and compel him. John the thirteenth, Mantuan.
was convinced at a Sinode in the presence of the Emperor Otho the first, of
diverse notorious vices, among which, the principal was his horrible
incontinency, which was that he committed incest with both his sisters, that
he had made a brothell-house of the Laterane Palace, that he had forced
Stephana his fathers concubine, as also the widow Paniete, and Anne, together
with his Niece: And being convinced of all these villainous acts, he was
deposed from the Papal throne, but the whores restored him again, by a
sedition and mutiny that they raised among the Nobility of Rome. Alexander the
sixth suffered Peter Mendoza Cardinal of Valence to abuse his bastard son the
Marquis of Zanete, Vates Volater.
as if he had been his wife. And how much the said Pope was tainted and
polluted with lustfulnesse sufficiently appears by this Epitaph of his
daughter Lucrece; Hac iacet in tumba Lucrecia nomine; sed re,
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa nurus.


That is to say; Here lies entombed Lucrece by name, but in her life
Alexanders daughter, daughter in law, and wife.


Joan, or Ione. Pont.
John the eight, before called Gilberta, being gotten with child by a
Cardinal, was delivered in a public Procession going toward the Church of
Laterane, between the Collosse or Statue, and the Temple of Saint Clement;
Actus Sanara.
and that in the presence of all the people, in the open street, in which place
also she died in labor, upon which occasion Baptist Mantuan composed these
verses ensuing: In Alphon. l. 3. Platin. Funct.
Hic pendebat adhuc sexum mentita virilem,
Foemina cui triplici Phrigiam diademate mitram
Extollebat apax and pontificalis adulter.
Non poterat quisquis deferrantes athere claues,
Non exploratis sumere testiculis,
Curigitur nostro mus hic cum tempore cessat.
Anne probat sese quilibet esse marem.


That is to say; Here was a Wench disguised in man's attire,
to Popish triple Crown that did aspire:
She was with child, a Cardinal was the fire,
none afterward might use heavens opening keys.
Unless his marks of manhood were espied:
why cease then the custom in our days?
Because each Pope himself a man has tried.


We read that Julius the second besides diverse others did principally spoil
by Sodomie two very young noble Gentlemen which Anne queen of France, Ian.
Panop. Epist. Quin: qua ecclesia. Commenta. Mag Paris. Greuel George. Iuil.
had recommended and given in charge to Robert Cardinal of Nauetia, to train
them up in good instructions. Innocent the third was so villainous a leacher
that he abstained not even from the Cardinals; whose Sodomie having been
followed by Grouanni Delacasa a Florentine, Archbishop of Beneuent, The Book
was imprinted at Venice by Troy anq. Xanius.
he wrote a a book in Italian verses in praise of Sodomie, which he terms
diuinum opus, affirming that he merited there by: Sixtus the fourth, set up at
Rome public stews and appointed them for fleshly villains, allowing to the
Cardinal of Saint Lucie the act of Sodomie during the three hottest months of
Summer; adding for the conclusion or shutting up: Fiat quod petitur, Iron
Qucis. Joan Rauis Bap. Man. lib. 4. Alphons. Volat: in declam ad Leo.
that is, be it done that is required, or I grant thy request. John the fourth,
was deposed from his papal seat at the Council of Constance, because of his
Sodomie, rauishing of women, and such other enormious and heinous acts, and
afterward detayned prisoner at Hedelberge for the space of three years.
Valor. Anctin. Vergarius. Agrippa.
Clement the eight, was accused in the declaration upon the articles of the
Masters Sarbonists of Paris, that he was the son of an Whore, an Enchanter, a
Sodomite, a forcer of women, and a master of all abomination: Paul the third,
delivered to Alexander one of his sisters against his will, to be his Whore, to
the end he might be made Cardinal of Hestia. And the other sister whom he had
likewise defloured, he caused to be made away by poison, because he perceived
that she did bear greater affection to others, then to himself. The same
Pope Paul committed filthiness with his own daughter, Constantia; and with his
niece Laura Furnetia, and set down in his register, the number of forty five
thousand Whores from whom he received monthly the revenue or taxation imposed
for there unchaste conversation. Many more like examples (say the Reformed) of
the Popes villainies might be alleged, but it is to be feared that the ears of
well disposed persons would be thereby offended. 2. The tirannie and cruelty
of Popes.
It remains therefore in the second place for the Reformed to prove that the
Popes have been cruel tyrants: John the 13. caused the eyes of some of his
Cardinals to be put out, Luitpran. lib. 6. intog.
of others their tongues to be cut out, of others their noses, and of others
their privy parts. Boniface the seventh, caused John the 13. by ambush or
way-laying to be apprehended, and to have his eyes put out, and suffering him
to die in prison, by that means obtained the papal Chair: Vrbane the sixth
choosing new Cardinals caused 7. of the old ones to be cast into prison, five
of which he commanded to be put into sackes and cast into the water. Innocent
the eight of set purpose, Valor. Ansel. Volateri marsil.
referred certain Burgesses of Rome, who did exhort him to union and concord,
to Lewis his nephew, residing or abiding in the Hospital of the holy Ghost,
where the said Nephew having at the said instant put to death two of them, he
made them to be cast out of the window, saying, that the discord and sedition
could not by a more convenient means be pacified. Sergius the fifth caused the
body of Formosus to be taken out of the grave, eight years after he was dead,
and made him to be placed on the papal seat where he caused his head with
three of his fingers to be cut off (the other two fingers having been before
cut off by Stephan the fifth) and all this being further put in execution
according to his pleasure, he further commanded to cast the said headless
body, together with the head and three fingers into Tiber. O rage and
outragiousnesse never before herd of, say the Reformed. 3. That the Popes have
had acquaintance with Devils.
In the third place the Reformed Christians do declare the Popes have been
possessed with Devils, and have familiarity or commerce with evil spirits;
For Alexander the sixth, bound himself by contract to the Devil for his help
and means to become Pope. Paul the third, Brimo Cardinal. Luitpra. lib. 6.
was the chief among the Negromancers: Benedict the ninth by charms called up
devils into certain woods, and by devilish art or skill allured and entised
into his arms all the women that he would. In the fourth place the Reformed
show that the Popes are profane and Atheists. 4 That Popes have been Atheists.
For we read that Leo the 10. on a day answered Petro Pembo who alleged some
place of scripture: It is a good while since sufficiently known, Vita Pontif.
Exempla Hul. and Aug.
what profit and advantage the fable of Christ has brought to us and to all
our company. Nicholas the first said, that it was more honest and decent
secretly to have carnal copulation with many Whores, Peter Prom. Ren: Cardi.
then openly before all men to live with a wife in marriage. Siluester the
second, one day saying Mass was so troubled with the noise of Devils that
with the very conceit and fear, he fell into a burning fever, and
understanding the Devil would have him perform his promise, he required upon
his deathbed, that after his death they would cut off his hands, and his
tongue, and his privy parts. Gregory the seventh, being in danger of death
commanded that a certain Cardinal should be called unto him, Ben. Cardina.
to whom he himself confessed that he was worthy to be punished with death,
because he had among much people and many nations sowed disfentions and
seditions, and had wrongfully persecuted the Emperor Henry: Eating of Porke
being by his Physician forbidden to Julius the second, he spared not to vomit
this blasphemy, Pantal. Paul. Verger.
in despite of God etc. The same Pope Julius being very angry for that a cold
Peacock was eaten which he commanded should be saved or set up: brake forth
into another blasphemy against the divine Majesty, and when one of the
Cardinals sitting at his table, said unto him, that his Holiness should not be
so angry for a matter of so small importance, Julius answered him; If God were
so angry for the eating of an apple only, that he cast our first parents out
of Paradise, why should it not be lawful or allowable for me who am his Vicar,
to be offended for a peacocke, seeing it is much more exquisite and pleasing
then an apple.

In the fifth place, the Reformed show, 5. That the Popes are tormentors.
that the Popes are most cruel persecuters, which they prove by the examples
following: Julius the 2. in the space of seven years, Huld. Hut. See Gerbert.
Gilb. Duth. Erasm. Colet. Mattha. Paris.
caused more then two hundred thousand to be murdered: Gregory the ninth,
caused to be strangled against all right the Ambassadors of the Emperor, by
whom he understood, that Jerusalem was again taken Clement the fourth, made
publicly to be beheaded Conradine, son of the King of Sicilie, without any
reason, or lawful form of proceeding. And what needs it, See the Book of
Martyrs.
say the Reformed, to make here further mention of so many thousand persons, as
the Popes have caused cruelly to be martyred in diverse parts of the world, and
that only for Religion.

In the sixth place, 6. The Popes are traitors.
the Reformed Christians prove the treasons of Popes by certain notable
examples; for to cite say they, all the examples would fill a great book. The
Emperor Frederick made a public complaint in the assembly at Norenberch,
See how the Emperor was imprisoned and released by the Souldan.
of the treason of Alexander the third, and that in the presence of the Princes
of the Empire, causing openly to be read before the said Princes there
assembled, his own traiterous letter which he had sent to the Souldan or
Emperor of the Turks: Gregory the second made a secret prohibition of paying
to the Emperor his ordinary impost or customs. Alexander the sixth, took and
hired the Turks to aid him against the French. Gregory the 9. requested the
Souldan by letters, not to restore the holy Land, but rather to do his best
for the dispatching of the Emperor.

7. The Popes have been poysoners.
In the seventh place, the Reformed prove, Popes to have been poysoners: And
first of all Pope Paul the seventh, caused his own mother and niece to be
poisoned, Verger. Agap. Vicel. Volater. Mar. in Eusebius.
to the end that by this means all the hereditary goods of the Fornasses might
accrue or come unto him. Alexander the sixth, put to death by poison after the
Turkish guise, See Contaren. Verger, and other Authors
the brother of Gemene Baiezet, Emperor of the Turks, and that against all
common right, and the law of Nations; for although he were prisoner, yet the
Turks had beforehand ransomed and redeemed him for two sums of gold. And as
the said Pope went about to do the like to certain of his Cardinals, Pet. de
Viues lib. 6. Epist.
the Cupbearer erred in the pots or flagons, and having filled to him also some
of the poisoned wine, he died together with the Cardinals that drunk thereof.
Innocent the third, gave poison to the Emperor in the Host, by means of a
Priest.

In the eight place, the Reformed declare, 8. Popes have been bastards.
that the Popes for the most part have been bastards and the sons of whores:
For Martin the second, was the son of the priest Palumbus, a Negromancer,
begotten on a whore. John the second, was by whoredom the son of Pope Landus
the first. Sergius the third, did beget John the twelfth of a famous strumpet
Marozia. Likewise John the 12. had John the 14. by a whore. Also the Priest
Leo, begat John the 16. Gregory the Bishop, Benedict the 8. and John the 22.
Likewise Laurence an Archpriest, begot Sylvester the third. Robert the Monk,
Adrian the 4. Leo the 10. Clement the 8. Innocent the 3. Gregory the 9.
Innocent the 4. Adrian the 5. So that all those Popes before mentioned were
begotten in villainous and ignominious whoredom.

Finally, Prodigies that fell out and came to pass by reason of the villainies
of Popes, with strange punishments for the same.
the Reformed produce also out of Histories, many prodigies and wonders, or
myraculous signs and remarkable punishments; by which the Almighty made it
manifestly appear, that all those villainies and filthy abominations aforesaid
of the Popes, did greatly displease him.

And first of all concerning prodigies and strange signs; It came to pass at
Mapente, Sigebertus and Vincentius.
in the time of Pope Benedict the third, that the Devil hidden in the hood or
coule of a Priest that gave holy water, accused the said Priest in presence of
all the people, to have had carnal society the night before going, with the
daughter of the chief officer. Benedict the ninth having been strangled by
the Devil, to whom he had abandoned and given himself, there were seen at
the same time great imfla^mations in the air, in the shape of fiery houses and
beams. In the time of Pope Paschall there fell out also diverse and sundry
prodigies, and this especially, that at Spire blood dropped out of certain
loaves of bread. When Lucus the third was Pope, who had allowed of, and
countenanced the book called Sacra Scortatorum, that is to say, the sacred
rite of Whore-masters; there was a great earth quake which overthrew in Asia
many goodly Cities, and in Sicilie destroyed 25000. persons. In the year 1224.
when the Dominicans or Iacobins passed through Italy into England, prodigious
tempests did arise, which overwhelmed many temples, buildings, and trees, there
fell also haile-stones as big as an egg. When Vrbane the fourth was Pope,
who ordained the day of the Sacrament, commonly called Gods Feast, and that by
the persuasion of a woman, there appeared in the air a great Comet for three
months together, Joan. Novian. in illust. Batau.
the which after the same night that Vrbane died, appeared no more. Nicholas
the first, begot of his concubine or whore, a child that had hair and paws
like a Bear. John the 24. having assembled a Synod at Rome, there to invest
the King of Hungary, Roman Emperor, after that the Mass of the holy Ghost was
finished, he set him down in his Papal chair; at which very instant a
hideous Owl flew to a beam right over against the Pope, and having her eyes
continually fixed upon him, there sat and cried til the Pope withdrew
himself: and the second Session the same Owl came again to the same place,
and when they could not drive her away neither by noise, nor with cudgels, they
were at length enforced to give over, or break up the said Synod, without
having effected or concluded any thing. The day that Leo the tenth chose thirty
Cardinals a great tempest of thunder and lightening did arise after such a
manner, that the Chapel where the Ceremonies were performed with great
solemnity was stricken therewith, and the same also plucked the Image of the
little child Jesus out of his mothers arms, and the Keys out of Saint Peter's
hands. Many other signs and prodiges have come to pass, but the Reformed
passing them over with silence comes to the ample proof of certain horrible
punishments inflicted from heaven upon the grievous sins and impieties of the
Popes. Marvelous punishments of the wickedness of Popes.
Pope Siluester Campanus was banished from Rome by the strumpet Theodore.
Constantine the second, was deprived at a Counsel of both his eyes, See much
of this in the life of the Popes described and set out by the author afterward.
as also of his Papal authority, and afterward shut up in a cloister. Adrian
the fourth, flying from Rome came to Venice, in the attire of a Gardener, where
being hid in a covent he was employed in looking to the Garden. Adrian the
fourth, was strangled or choked with a fly that flew into his mouth. John the
twenty two, being crushed under with the fall of a vault of an house of
pleasure, so ended his life. John the eleventh, imprisoned by the soldiers of
Guydo, was strangled with a pillow which they held hard or close upon his face;
Benedict the sixth, was by a Burges of Rome called Cinthius shut up in the
Castle Saint Angeli; there by him strangled for his enormious villainies. The
body of Boniface the seventh, who died suddenly was tied by the foot and
thrust through with pikes, and being drawn a long the streets was
ignominiously cast into the Common place of burial. Lucius the second
enterprising to assault the Capitol whether the chancellors for their safety
were retired, was so sharply encountered and stricken with blows, that he
died very shortly after. Innocent the fourth, having unjustly condemned to
death Robert of Lincoln, because he had reprehended or taxed the horrible
impieties of Popes, as well by word of mouth as by writing, the said Robert
having appealed to the Sovereign Judge Jesus Christ, a voice was heard at the
Popes seat crying. Come wretched creature to the Judgment of God. So that the
next day the Pope was found dead upon his bed, all his body being black and
blew as if he had been beaten, and bruised with blows of a cudgel. Nicholas
the third died suddenly being stricken with an Apoplexy. Leo the tenth died
laughing and drinking roundly. Clement the eight, having conspired with Francis
king of France, against the Emperor Charles the fifth, was afterward
imprisoned by the Captains of the Emperor and derided after a strange
fashion; and after, they had pilled or sacked the City of Rome, he was
restored to his pontifical authority but finally was stifled or smothered,
with certain Cardinals by the smoke of certain Torches and waxen lights.

Hitherto have we understood the courses and reasons wherefore the Reformed
Christians will not accept the Popes for there Judges in matter of religion.
For they say in the first place, that it is repugnant to all laws and rights
both divine and humane that in this cause or suit Popes should be both accusers
and Judges. And that which is more according to the common Judgment and opinion
of the Canonists, the Pope alone cannot pronounce sentence upon an heresy but
must therein be Judged also by others. Adding farther hereunto so many wicked
acts of the Popes, whereof albeit they were not convicted and condemned, but
only accused, yet so it is that they not only cannot be Judges in religion;
but are also incapable of accusing the meanest person, before they have
sufficiently purged and excused themselves of all the before mentioned
enormities. Finally for so much as this is agreeable to all natural right and
reason, that is to say that in all affairs and consultations of importance,
every thing be resolved upon and concluded according to the opinion and
sentence of the greater and principal part; especially when the greater part
is esteemed or considered, not only according to the number of persons, but
chiefly according to the nature, worthiness and importance, of the whole affair
or matter, and goodness of the cause. And Considering that all the Realms and
nations heretofore mentioned which accuse the Popes do largly extend and
amount to the two principal parts of Christendom; and consequently there
remaining for the Roman Catholics but one of the principal parts of
Christendom. The Reformed conclude that they may with all right and reason
reject the Popes as incompetent and unlawful Judges; wherefore (say the
Reformed) Let the Popes of Rome first and foremost purge themselves of all the
aforesaid abominable acts and heinous villainies whereof they are accused, or
else if they cannot do it, let them forbear to intrude themselves, in quality
or title of Judges, touching the differences of Religion. Otherwise the
Reformed say, that they shall have just occasion to make that answer to Popes
which was heretofore addressed or returned to Pope John Bishop by the Greek
Churches; the which Churches, the Pope had written unto then, that he alone was
the head of all the Churches, and the only, and proper Vicar of Jesus Christ,
they answered him breefly in these terms.

The letter of 7. Churches to the Pope.
We firmly believe thy great authority over them that are subject unto thee,
we cannot endure thy great pride and ambition, we cannot justify thy great
covetousness. The devil be with thee, for God is with us.

The Reformed come now to declare wherefore and how far forth they will not
acknowledge the Counsels nor admit them for their Judge. For they refuse them
as they say, Why the Councils are refused to be judges in religion.
for diverse and sundry weighty reasons. And first of all they affirm that
there are diverse Councels which have grossly erred, not only in discipline and
outward order, but also in that which concerns the honor of our Savior
Jesus Christ, The 1. reason of refusal.
whence it has come to pass, that oftentimes Provincial Synodes have been
corrected and controuled by General Councels, and General Councels by
provincial.

Secondly, The 2. reason of refusal.
the principal and best Councels have not always treated of all the points
and articles of Chrstian Faith, but only of certain differences which were
then most questioned.

Moreover it appears by Histories, that even false and malicious accusation:
the Reformed affirm, that they can plainly prove it by a brief rehearsal
and register of the Councels; for who shall diligently search into ancient and
modern Histories, shall find this to be true, that even as following the
ancient tradition of the house of Elias, all the time of the continuance of
this world, is divided into thrice three thousand years. In like manner all
the time from the first coming of Jesus Christ until his last coming at the
day of judgment may be fitly distributed into three periods or parts, in
which also all Realms and Principalities have felt some alteration and change.
We find also that in those three periodes, Three periods or partitions of Time
of the new Testament.
or partitions of time, true Christian religion and the universal Church has
increased and decreased like the moon.

For until about 500. years after the birth of Christ, although that during
the said time, certain differences or controversies did arise, touching the
person of the Son of God, and other very important points of religion,
against Ebion, Cerinthus, and diverse other Heretics; yet the truth has
always obtained the upper hand: And during those first five hundred years,
the Church of Christ flourished, being as it were in full moon. For in this
first period, were held the Apostolical Councels; and afterward all the four
Oecumenicall Councels, that is to say, universal of the Primitive Church. And
indeed the first of all those Oecumenicall and General was assembled or called
at Nice by the Emperor Constantine the Great, Con. Nice.
which confuted and condemned the wicked Heretic Arrius.

The second was assembled or held at Constantinople, by the Emperor
Theodosius, Con. Constable.
which disprooued and convinced the Macedonian Heretics.

The third was assembled in Ephesus, Con. Ephesians.
by the Emperor Theodosius, the second son of Arcadius, which condemned the
Heretic Nestorius.

The fourth was called and held in Chalcedon, by Marcion, and refuted and
convinced the Heretic Eutyches.

The Reformed protest, Con. Chal.
that they will most willingly allow of the four Creeds and Confessions of
Faith, ordained by those four General Councels, as faithful expositions of
Christian religion, for so much as they be grounded upon the word of God.

But in the 500 years ensuing, The second period of 500. years.
falsehood so strugled and encountered with the truth, that so soon as man began
by little and little, to decline from the true and right rule of holy
Scripture, there did forthwith spring up diverse plants of false doctrine, and
of hurtful ceremonies, which more and more increased: for albeit, indeed in
the fifth General Council called by the Emperor Justinian, in Constantinople,
5. Con. Genesis
all they were refuted which maintained that the body of our Lord Jesus Christ
was of immortal and incorruptible nature.

Also howbeit, that at the sixth general Council which was celebrated and held
in the same place, by the authority of Constantine the fifth, the Heretics
Monotholites were convinced and condemned. So it is that afterward, and almost
all the Councels ensuing, propounded and agreed upon things altogether
unprofitable, or for the most repugnant to the express Thracia.

Constantinople, under the reign of the Emperor Basilius, where Pope Adrian by
his Legates commanded to acknowledge the Church of Rome for the head of all
other Churches, and that all lay and secular persons should be excluded from
all election of Clerks, or persons Ecclesiastical, so that thereupon so great
debate and contention did arise between the Greek and Latin Churches,
concerning the primacy or chief, so that the controversy is not at this day
altogether determined and pacified.

The 3. period of 500. years.
The other five hundred years next following, such Councels and Synodes were
held, as decreed almost nothing which was good, but rather pernicious doctrine
was therein confirmed and established. For proof whereof (say the Reformed) no
more needs to be done, but only to produce one Counsel of every age before
mentioned.

In the Council or Synod of Maience, 1049.
at which both the Emperor and the Pope were present together with an hundredth
and thirty Bishops, the point touching the forbidding of marriage to Priests
was discussed.

In the Council of Brixia which was assembled by the Emperor Henry Gregory
the seventh was deposed from the papal seat, 1080.
by reason of his blasphemies and villainies above mentioned.

In the Council of Pauiaohen when the Emp. Frederick would have had the
election of the Popes reformed; a debate or strife of 20. 1160.
years continuance was stirred up and kindled which endured until the Pope
had trodden on the neck of the Emperor in the City of Venice.

In the Council of Lions, 1243.
Innocent the fourth made a decree against the Emperor Henry the second, and
granted to the Cardinals power and leave to wear red hats, and to ride on
horseback.

In the Synod of Vienna in France, 1311.
Clement the fifth solemnly pronounced his Clementines, and albeit that
afterward lying on his deathbed he commanded they should be burned, because
he well perceived them to confirm diverse errors apt to entrappe or ensnare men's
consciences: This notwithstanding his successor John the twenty three, 1414.
did again appear and ratify the said Clementines. The Emperor Sigismund
caused a general Council to be summoned at Constance wherein Pope John the
twenty three was dismissed of the papal seat, and John Husse and Hierome of
Prage were condemned and burned; because they had embraced and followed the
doctrine of John Wicliffe an Englishman, who among diverse other points of good
doctrine taught that the Supper of the Lord ought to be distributed to the
people under both kinds without the imagination and dream of
Transubstantiation.

In the time of the said Sigismund there was also a Council held at Basil,
where it was decreed that Popes should be subject to Councels, and because this
decree did greatly displease Pope Eugenius, he caused the said Council to be
removed to Bolona, and from thence to Ferrara, and from thence again to
Florence. Finally Julius the second, assembled and called the Council of
Laterane, and Pope Paul the third, the Council of Trent, but for so much as
the proceedings in those Councels were not according to the rules prescribed in
the word of God.

The Reformed mainetaine that they are not any way obliged or tied to their
decrees. So by that which is before alleged it manifestly appears (say the
Reformed) what kind of Counsels and Sinods have been held in those last ages
by them of the Roman Church.

Now concerning the diversity of repugnances of Counsels it is also easily to
be discovered. Repugnances of Counsels.
For the Council of Chalcedon condemned Eutiches, but the Council of Ephesus
did absolve and acquit him. The Council of Nice condemned Arrius, but the
Counsels of Saricea, Smernia, and Millan maintained and vpheld him. Did. 32.
Con. praeter. host.
The Council of Numidia where Saint Cyprian was president, would have all
those rebaptized which were baptized by Heretics; which the Council of
Carthage did absolutely forbid. Did. 4. de Cons. con. Non. host.
The Council of Ephesus which was held in the time of Pope Celestine did
permit to communicate under both kinds, Did. 15. de Cons.
but that of Constance in the time of John the twenty three, and that of
Lateran did rigorously forbid it.

The Council of Chalaus did ratify offerings for the dead, that of Carthage
rejected them. The Council of Ancyra, and of Nice, of Gangrae, of Coletan, and
of Elibere, did all consent to the marriage of Priests, and other
Ecclesiastical persons; but the Counsels of Nercesaria, and of Chalcedon, and
of Agatha, and diverse other Councels did secretly forbid the same. The Council
of Toletua allowed Priests to keep Concubines; but the Council of Carthage
and that of Basil in the time of Eugenius the fourth, did sharply forbid it.

The Council of Pope Alexander did forbid to hear Mass by a Priest that kept
a Concubine, which Lucius the third did permit. The Council of Gangrets
condemned all them that ordained or commanded new traditions to the people the
which that of Constantinople did allow. Did. 34.
The Council of Tolete con. 2. and of Libere con. 36. did reject Images; but
that of Nice the second and diverse others did admit them. What would ye more.
The Council of Arminium denied the primacie of the Pope of Rome, but that of
Chalcedon the sixth and some others auerred and acknowledged it. The Council of
Gelase, decreed against Transubstantiation, contrariwise that of Florence in
the time of Victor the second, and that of Lateran in the time of Innocent the
third, maintained and ratified it. Consider now well (say the Reformed) of what
force and authority Councels can be, and how little they consent and agree
together. So that for those and such like reasons the Reformed will not accept
or acknowledge the Councels for Judges of the differences in Religion; but they
will admit them for witnesses deposed in this action or suit, so far forth as
their testimonies agree with the public Letters Patents or words of the
testament, and with the words and meaning and intention of God our Sovereign
testator.

As also S. Austine advises us very well, that is to say, that in differences
of the Church we must neither follow the authority of the Council of Ephesus,
nor the Council of Arminium, seeing we are not thereunto obliged, but rather
that by the authority, and force of the holy Scripture we should set and weigh
cause against cause, and reason against reason. Also that we ought to give more
credit to a Layman who speaks the truth accoring to that which is contained
in holy Scripture, then to a general Council alleging falsehoods contrary to
the Scripture.

Here now further follows the third kind of Judges, that is to say, the
ancient Fathers, The ancient Fathers cannot be Judges in Religion.
which are also produced as Judges of religion by them of the Church of Rome;
but they of the Reformed Church will not admit them absolutely for their
Judges. For first of all (say they) that there are very false doctors that are
very ancient, and which is more, ancient Fathers have also confessed of
themselves, that they might all err and be deceived. On the other side,
because that in the ages ensuing, the false opinion and perverse persuasion
touching the invocation of Saints deceased, the too great veneration or
reuerencing of Martyrs, the allegorical and too curious exposition of holy
Scripture, single life or abstinence from marriage, Monkerie and Monastical or
retired kind of life, and the great number of ceremonies have bin long since so
deeply rooted, that even some learned Doctors have not only endeavored to
suppress the aforesaid errors, but contrariwise, have rather vpheld them,
partly through covetousness, partly of ambition, The faults and errors of the
Fathers.
partly also of set subtle purpose. The which the Reformed say, they can
plainly prove by diverse and sundry examples, but they suppose that those
ensuing will satisfy for this purpose.

All Christians acknowledge in the first place Tertullian for a good ancient
Father and an vncorrupt and Orthodoxe Doctor, Tertullian.
so far forth that he confuted by the written word of God the Heretics
Marcion and Praxias, both which denied the divine and humane nature of Jesus
Christ: but for so much that he maintains the error of the Chilliasts, and
disalloweth of second marriages, all Christians must confess he erred.

Cipryan.
Cyprian held very true opinions of the holy Trinity, of the Baptism of little
children; and of the right usage of the holy Supper; yet herein also has he
failed, that is to say; That he holds that such should be baptized again,
as were formerly baptized with Heretics, that he too excessiuely praises
single life, and abstaining from marriage.

Ambrose.
Saint Ambrose has written diverse godly books of the holy Trinity, and of the
doctrine of Justification; but the subborned or supposed books in our time
published under his name, are refused by the Reformed.

Hierome.
Hierome has greatly edified the Christian Church by his writings, wherein he
teaches that the true regeneration or renewing of man, proceeds not from the
power and natural faculties of free will: but he greatly over-shoots and
denies himself when he so much disesteemes and disgraceth the state of
marriage, as to pronounce her a whore that after her first marriage marries
again.

Augustine.
Saint Augustine being the most vncorrupt Doctor of all the ancient Fathers;
has in truth done great service to the Church of Jesus Christ, when he
fundamentally by the Word of God confuted the Arrians, the Manicheans, the
Donatists, and the Pelagians, but for so much as manet hoc, that children
should receive the Lords Supper, herein he did not sufficiently consult with
the Word of God.

Saint Gregory held a good opinion, Gregory.
in saying that he was Antichrist who caused himself to be called supreme
and universal Bishop, yet did he greatly err in forbidding and infringing
the lawful marriage of Pastors and Ministers of Gods Word; when he thus
writes; That it is by no means lawful to renounce or give over a monastical
life, and when he is so carried away with apparitions, spirits and, visions,
that he is absolutely repugnant to the Word of God.

Furthermore how (say the Reformed) can we simply accept of the ancient Fathers
fully and wholly for our Judges, Sentences and testimonies of the Fathers
contrary to the doctrine of the Church of Rome. Ambrosius.
considering that our accusers the Popes themselves, do not allow and admit
all the sentences and testimonies of the ancient Fathers. S. Ambrose says,
that for honesty sake and for seemly respect unto the dead, they should be
suffered to remain at rest in their graves. Gelasius l. 1. de Aba. in Con. Re.
Gelasius says, that the substance or essence of Bread and Wine in the holy
Supper remains inseparable, even as in our Savior Christ the humane nature
abides united with his own nature. Aug. l. 2. per. morit. cap. vlt.
Saint Augustine says, that it is presumption to conclude or determine any
thing on any side in divine things which are obscure, without clear and
manifest testimonies of holy Scripture. Calix. did. 6. de Con.
Calixtus distributed the Sacrament of the holy Supper to all the Church, and
debarred from it dissolute persons, and excommunicated all them which being
present in the assembly received not for all that the supper of the Lord. Cyp.
l. 1 epist. 2.
Saint Cyprian said, that the blood of the Lord ought not to be denied to
Christians, for the confession whereof they are bound to shead their blood.
Apollon^us taxed Minta^us with this heresy among others, Apol eccl. hist. lib.
5 cap. 22.
to have been the first that had instituted certain laws and ordinances
concerning fasting. Paph. hist. lib. 2. cap 14.
Paphnutius maintained that marriage should not be forbidden to Priests or
Pastors of the Church, declaring that the company with a man's own wife is
chastity. Cyp. l. 1 epist. 3.
Saint Cyprian affirms, that the Lord Jesus alone is to be hearkened unto
concerning whom it is pronounced or commanded, hear him. Also, that we must
not regard what they which have been before us have said or done; but what
Christ who is before all has commanded. S. Augustine says, that the Christian
Church should not lift it self up above Christ, Aug. con. Crosc. cap. 2.
because he judged always truly and rightfully; but Ecclesiastical Judges
often fail and fall into error. Amb. lib 2. de Offi. cap. 18.
Saint Ambrose says, that religion and divine service requires neither gold
nor silver, and also that by gold we have not the fruition of those things
which cannot be bought for gold. Spirdion says, that he did freely eat flesh
upon such days as others did abstain from it, because he was a Christian:
Aug. super meno. reap. 17. Epiphanius.
Austine writes that Monks should not live on other men's goods, although they
were continually occupied in speculations or contemplations, in praying and
studying: Epiphanius says that it is a shameful and vile thing to see in the
Churches of Christians any Images painted, or resemblance of Christ, or any
other he or she Saint.

Now then for so much as the Church of Rome it self transgresses and passes
over such and like sentences, and maxims of the ancient fathers and doctors; I
pray you with what right (say the Reformed) can it prescribe to others to
observe fully and wholly that which it self leaves undone and unregarded.

And since that neither Popes nor Counsels nor fathers can in any sort decide
this controversy and difference in religion, That traditions cannot be Judges
in religion.
to whose Judgment then must we refer and yield our selves? Must we rely
upon Traditions? By Traditions must be necessarily understood either Ritus,
the rites, the ordinary vsages or Customs of the Church: Eusebius. lib. 3. hist
cap. 4. lib. 5 cap. 8. Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 14. lib. 1. cap. 13.12. Tertull
in praescript. ad haeres.
or else Christian doctrine it self. Concerning vsages or customs
Ecclesiastical, how ancient soever they may be, notwithstanding so far forth
as they are either hurtful or improfitable or repugnant to the word of God, or
have been heretofore abrogated or disanulled they should by no means be
tolerated, much less entertained or observed in the Christian Church. For the
Lord expressly forbids to serve or honor him with a doctrine forged or
devised out of man's brain or fancy. Tertull in prae. fat. here is.
And concerning Traditions which concern doctrine they must necessarily
contain either the written word of God, or the words and expositions of the
faith against Heretics which by consequence are drawn and fetched from the
foundation of the holy Scripture; or else Traditions of doctrine comprehend and
contain things either added or diminished and taken away from the written word
of God; be it apparently done or covertly.

When by Traditions the written word of God is understood, or the Creed and
Orthodoxe expositions of Christian faith, who would not most readily, and
willingly embrace and allow such Traditions? But if by traditions be meant
things invented and devised beside and against the word God, who would not set
light by and reject them that is desirous to keep a good and sound conscience
before God? Moreover what virtue and authority, Traditions can have to
suppress or appease the debate and differences about Religion, ancient
Histories do sufficiently certify. Aug. ad Lasulam Epist. 8.
For whereas in times past a great contention did arise in the Church about the
feast of Easter, and that such a stir and contention, that almost all the
world was there with disquieted. Both betook themselves for their refuge to
the Traditions which are called Apostolical, which are neither written nor
contained in any certain book; and whereas either party maintained that they
observed the feast of Easter at the same very time which was ordained and set
down by the Apostles, at length the matter came to this point, Irenaeus Epist.
vit. Epist. Romans Aug lib de vera religo.
that in such and the like indifferent things the Christian Churches should be
left to their liberty. So that by this example it manifestly appears, how
weak humane traditions are to remove and determine differences in religion.

Shall they then be miracles which must give us to understand who follow the
better party, That miracles cannot be true works of religion.
and which is the true Catholic Church. It is impossible (say the Reformed)
because the end or purpose and gift it self of miracles now cease. For in
these days no new Gospel or strange doctrine is Preached in the Christian
Church, which has need to be confirmed by miracles, but the same doctrine is
taught which our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Apostles have long since
sufficiently confirmed and seated by their miracles.

Moreover we do not read that all such as have heretofore reformed Religion
and divine service have done miracles. In which rank and number we may reckon
and place John Baptist under the new Testament, and under the old testament,
Asaph, Ethan, Iedithem, Iliman, Core, 1 Chronicles. 22.30. Ierom. 10.35. and 8.16.
and certain Prophets. And if the gift of doing miracles be not referred to
the only and wise government and guiding of God, miracles cannot confirm any
doctrine: It being very certain that even the miracles of Jesus Christ, as
excellent and full of efficacy as they were, Luke 11.19.
did not help forward the obstinate Jews toward Christian faith and true
piety: Ioh. 12.26. 2 These. 2. Deuteronomy. 13.
Finally, how (say the Reformed) should miracles in themselves and of themselves
be necessary marks or tokens of true religion; seeing it is most evident that
Antichrist himself, and the false Prophets have showed and done many signs
and miracles, and so may do in time to come. Wherefore the Reformed affirm,
that all such as at these days require miracles, should be themselves esteemed
maruilous men and strange monsters, seeing that they rely so much upon
miracles, after that the gift of them have long ago ceased. Howbeit for all
that we cannot, but account it a kind of miracle that true Religion and
Christian doctrine, should be Preached and advanced or set up without miracles,
among such resistances and furious endeavors of Antichrist.

That the personal succession of Popes and Bishops cannot be Judges of true
Religion.
Shall it be then the continual succession of the Bishop of Rome, that must
distinguish the true Religion from the false? No man surely can deny, but that
there is a succession of true doctrine, and a succession personal, of persons
only; and therefore the Reformed maintain, that when succession of persons is
accompanied with the succession of true doctrine Prophetical and Apostolical,
that then without all doubt, such a succession is of great efficacy. And in
this sense and meaning it is, that heretofore all the Orthodoxe doctors of the
Christian Church opposed their successions against heretics. For he that
makes profession of a doctrine (those are the words of Nazianzen) is also
pertaker of the the same Throne, Chair, or State; but he that embraces
contrary doctrines, such an one shall not be accounted as a true successor. And
this second has the name and title, but the first has true effect of
succession, without which succession is but a bare following of one thing after
another, when the disease is said to succeed or follow after health, darkness
after light, tempests after calm, folly and rashness after wisdom and
prudence, lees or dregs after wine or beer: Hitherto continue the words of
Nazianzen.
Also as we say, that Nero succeeded Augustus, and Cambyses Cyrus: Considering
then, that the succession of the Prophetical and Apostolical doctrine has
long since ceased in the Church of Rome, the Reformed conclude, that the
ordinary succession of the Popes of Rome, and of the Bishops of the Roman
Church, is not sufficient to establish true religion, When the succession of
doctrine ceased in the Roman Church.
nor in any sort thereof to determine.

But it may be they of the Roman Church, will demand of the Reformed
Christians, at what time, and under what Pope the succession of true doctrine
was interrupted, changed, and altered? To which the Reformed answer; that the
Popes and Bishops of Rome must be distinguished and divided into three ranks or
sorts: For first all, the Reformed deny not, The first rank of Roman Bishops.
but that from Linus to Melchiades, the first Bishops of Rome (being thirty
and one in number) were faithful Pastors of the Church of Christ, who labored
in the vineyard and harvest of the Lord even unto death; and therefore they may
rightly be called stars, remaining in the right hand of our Lord Jesus
Christ: but from Sylvester the first, The second sort of Popes.
to Sabian the Thuscan (thirty three in number) they (say the Reformed) were
but Bishops with Miters, which albeit they were not the worst, did
notwithstanding by their traditions and decrees, prepare the state and throne
for the great Antichrist. All the other Popes from him unto the Pope at this
present, The third sort of Popes.
are called and held by the Reformed for Antichrists, in such sort
notwithstanding, as that the first of those Popes unto twenty and nine after
Boniface the fifth, and Leo the fourth, are accounted to be in the kingdom of
the great Beast: the other thirty and one Popes ensuing from John the eight
unto John the seventeenth are registered and recounted in the kingdom of the
great Whore: Apoc. 17.
and the other nine and thirty Popes succeding unto Celestine the fourth, Apoc.
17. Apoc. 20. Apoc 9.
belong to the kingdom of the great Dragon: and all the last Popes from
Innocent the fourth, unto the present Pope, which exceeds the number of
fifty, are enrowled or numbered in the kingdom of Grasshoppers, according to
the ancient prophecy, which the Lord has vouchsafed to reveal unto us
concerning the kingdom of Antichrist. Behold how plainly it appears (say
the Reformed) that the personal succession of Bishops is of very small
importance and authority to decide the difference of religion.

The consent and accord in the outward service cannot be a mark of true
religion.
But yet (say they of the Roman Church) cannot the union, good agreement, and
consent in public doctrine and outward service demonstrate which is the true
Catholic Church.

To which the Reformed reply, that if bare consent and accord in outward
service could perform so much, that then neither the Jews, nor the Turks,
nor any other Heretics, Pagans and Infidels, could be excluded from the
Catholic Church; for as much as experience in all times does sufficiently
prove them marvelously to agree, and to be of one judgment and consent in
their perverse heresies and false errors. whereas contrariwise, we see
oftentimes great and excellent Orthodoxe Doctors, Dissension of diverse
excellent Doctors. Act. 15.
to have had sharp and bitter dissension and contention one with the other.
Between Paul and Barnabas such strife was stirred and kindled, that one
departed from the other; even so Peter Alexandrine and Melitus did strive and
contend each against other; as also Epiphanius and Saint Crysostome; Soz. l. 1
c. 16. Socr. l. 4. c. 32. Orig. con. Cells. lib. 7. Srom. 7.
Saint Jerome, and Saint Augustine and Ruffin: likewise Ciril, John of Antioch,
and Theodoret. Yea pagan Infidels have often vpbraided and reproched
Christians, for their disagreement and disunion: Whence it appears more
clear then the Sun at noonday (say the Reformed) that as external
agreement, or the only union and consent in the outward service of God, cannot
decide or determine of the truth of religion; so on the contrary part also,
every kind of dissenting and partaking is not by and by a token or mark of
false religion. Yet with this proviso or caution, that the foundation of the
truth be not subverted by the debate and difference in the dissension.

That the most ancient custom is not a mark of the true Church.
Shall it be then the common and public custom of diverse ages that can show us
where we must seek and find the true Church? The Reformed answer, that as the
eternal God has expressly forbidden the faithful to permit and suffer his
eternal and divine truth in any sort to be impaired, defaced, or diminished,
either because of time, or proscription of many years, or by any custom be
it never so ancient^ or by any conspiring and general assent whatsoever, yea
although it were of the whole world. So that we see that the good Patriarch
Noe with all his family, Genesis 7. Heb. 11.
although he saw all men to conspire and consent together in impiety, and
dissolute life, it being grown to a custom in certain ages afore-going, he
notwithstanding did rather embrace with those of his family divine doctrine,
then consent with all other to the impiety and profanation of the whole world;
Must it then be the Church that ought to suppress and compound all these
grear controversies in religion? The Reformed say, that first and foremost we
must learn well to distinguish the true Church from the false Synagogue and
the assembly of the ungodly; That the only written Word of God should be Judge
of religion.
which cannot be effected by any other means then by the only written Word of
God. Must then the holy Scripture be full and sole, or competent Judge of the
difference and state depending between these disagreeing and divided
inheritors? The Reformed Christians are altogether of this opinion, and
thereupon are fully resolved.

For indeed they maintain and certainly show with S. Austine, S. Ciprian, and
diverse other very ancient fathers and Orthodox doctors, that the things which
are necessary to the salvation of the faithful, and children of God, Luke 16.
Io. 4. Io. 6. Io. 15. Act. 28. Pro. 30. 2 Timothy 3. Esa. 8.
are all exactly contained in the written word of God which is commonly called
the holy Scripture. For Saint Austine very well says. Aug. tract. in Johan.
ca. 11. Chrysostom. hom. 41. c. 22. in Ioh.
It is only to the books of holy Scripture now called Canonical that we must
attribute and give this honor and reverence firmly to believe that none of
their authors have tripped or erred in their writings: But concerning other
writers and authors we read them in such manner, that although they have been
very holy and Godly and of much knowledge, yet so it is that we hold not,
what they have written for true only because they taught this or that; but
because they have been able to persuade, and to make us understand it so to
be, either by those Canonical writings or by some other reasons, which in
substance agree with the truth and word of God. So that we owe this only to
the Canonical Books (as Saint Austine says elsewhere) that is to submit our
selves to them without any contradiction. Lib. de na. and gra. cap. 6. Con.
Faust. lib. cap. 5. ad Oros. cap. 11. ad Pan. ad Fortu. lib. 2. Con.
Moreover it may be lawful to refuse any other writtings, and to vary from
them in opinion, but all persons must yield consent to the Canonical writings
be he Laicke, be he Priest, be he King, be he Emperor, let him give heed and
attention to the holy Scripture, for in the whole world nothing can be found so
holy, and so necessary as the holy Scripture. Crescon. gram. cap. 32. Ad Vnam
Don: Epst. 4.8.
What I pray you can be found or met with all more clear and evident, then all
those excellent testimonies and sentences of Saint Austine. And in truth, say
the Reformed, if we could once come to this point that God himself might be
acknowledged to be Judge of all differences in Religion, and that by his voice
which clearly sounds and utters it self in the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles, we would not refuse likewise to accept and allow the Counsels,
Fathers, and Miracles, and such like for deposed witnesses in this cause or
action. Provided always, that first of all distinction be discreetly and
considerately made between the true Church, which is the assembly of Jesus
Christ, and the Sinagogue, and assembly of Satan; between the ancient
fathers and Orthodoxe doctors worthy of creedit; and Heretics; between the
lawful Councels and Synods; and Tirannicall Councels and Sinods; between the
true writings of Orthodoxe men; and bastard books or suborned writings;
between true miracles, and and counterfeit ones: between rightful succession
of true Doctrine, and the disguised succession of persons; between true
consent and holy Union, and perverse and obstinate complotting and agreement in
opinion. Briefly between the true Traditions of the Apostles, and the false
glosses or expositions of men: Hereunto reply they of the Romish Church and
demand how all this can be effected by the written word of God, seeing that in
like manner all Heretics defend arm or strengthen themselves with this
written word of God. The Reformed answer, How the Scripture may be judge
albeit all Heritekes abuse it.
that Heretics cannot more conveniently and fitly be confuted and convinced
(which abuse this holy Scripture) then by the same written word of God, the
which only and alone can suppress and determine all controversies in religion;
Ad Cresum lib. 2. cap. 31.
for as Saint Austine very well says, we must by no means Judge or control
the books of the Prophets and Apostles, but we ought rather according to those
books to Judge of all other books of Religious professors, or of Infidels.
Even so we see that our Savior Jesus Christ confuted and confounded by the
holy Scripture, Mat. 12. and 4.
the Scribes Pharisees and Sadduces, yea Satan himself all which abused the
Scriptures; So likewise Saint Stephen convinced the Jews, and Philip converted
the Eunuch of Queen Candace by the holy Scriptures. Act. 6.7.
In like manner did the Apostles confirm the doctrine of the Gospel by the
writings of the Prophets. And the Jews of Beraea compared the Preaching and
doctrine of the Apostle S. Paul with the doctrine of the Prophets, by this
means trying whether it agreed with the writings of the Prophets.

In sum after the same manner the Council of Nice condemned the Heretic
Arrius; that of Constantinople the Heretic Macedonius; that of Ephesus
Nestorius; that of Chalcedon Eutiches; that is to say by the only word of God.
Even as Saint Augustine also convinced the Heretic Pelagius, Aug. de con sen.
Epist. 163. lib 3. Con ca. 6. Sozom. l. 1. c. 3.
and Tertullian the Heretic Drapeas: Briefly all the other faithful Doctors
have so resisted (that is) by the holy Scripture all Heretics. These are the
very words of Saint Austen lib 2 cap 32. contr. Cresc.
Wherefore as (Saint Augustine very well says) Let no man in disputations
presumptuously object or oppose against us the writings of the ancient Fathers
or Councels, for we hold them, not in themselves Canonical, but do examine
them by the Canonical writings; and whatsoever agrees with the authority and
excellency of the holy Scripture, we accept of with commendation; but that
which accords not therewith, we reject it with their leave and consent.

That the Scripture is neither hard nor obscure.
If they of the Roman Church reply, that the holy Scripture is obscure, and
hard to be understood,: Saint Augustine answers them, that we more
certainly wade or pass through the holy Scripture, then through Traditions.
For when we will diligently search into it, being darkened with some obscure
words, nothing will ensue that can breed any difficulty, or if there do arise
any difference or doubtfulnesse, it must be at length cleared and decided by
sundry more plain testimonies of the same Scripture. And indeed (as the same
ancient Father says) the holy Ghost has so tempered and composed the
Scripture, that whatsoever seems obscure in one passage, is more clearly
expounded in some other. Wherefore the Reformed conclude, for all the reasons
afore-saide, that this is the only means, powerful to satisfy and appease
those two pretending or contending parties; that is to say, if endeavor be
used to suppress and decide by the pure Word of God the controversies above
mentioned, adiudging that alone to be the true religion and Catholic Church,
which agrees fully and wholly with the Word of God, rightly expounded, and
understood according to the same Word of God, and the Analogy of the Articles
of the Christian Faith. The exception of the Church of Rome.
They of the Roman Church pondering these reasons of the Reformed Christians,
do protest, that albeit indeed they well perceive the religion of the Reformed
not much to decline from the written Word of God, and if it wholly accord with
the the same, that yet they would not hold and pronounce the same Reformed
religion to be good, because (say they) the said Reformed religion was first
set on foot and published by Heretics, and Doctors that were not sent by God,
nor had a lawful calling, and who were innovators and new devisors in
religion. The answer of the Reformed.
The Reformed Christians do earnestly entreat, that they of the Roman Church
would not accuse them of such faults, that is to say, of heresy, unlawful
calling, and innovation or bringing in of novelties; but rather perceiving
their religion to consent and accord with the truth of God, contained in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, that they would embrace the Reformed
religion. For first of all the Reformed Christians complain very much of the
wrong that is offered them, in acvsing their religion of heresy, Lib. 2. cap.
de Har. 2. Man Joan. Auent. lib. 3. Annal.
because they can prove that such are not Heretics, as in some points dissent
from the opinion of the Roman Church, neither they which maintain that there
are Antipodes, Antipodes are they which tread against our feet. Glos. did. 10.
ca. Mul. did. 2. Eusebius. l. 5 c 26. Lib. confess fol. 274. 6. 4. Ar. Flor. hist.
par. 3. cap. 13.
as Pope Zachary did think; nor all they which will not obey all the
commandments and ordinances of the Pope, as the Canonists have determined; nor
they which give not consent to the celebrating of Easter, as Pope Victor
appointed; neither they which believe not all the traditions which are
instituted and observed as good and godly by the Roman Church: For then all
such should be heretics as believe not that Dominick wrought more miracles
then our Lord Jesus Christ, and all the Apostles: Also that the said Dominick
is greater then Ioh. Baptist.

Moreover, that we must firmly believe all the Legends of Saint Francis,
Bernardine, and other such like, under pain and penalty of being damned,
excommunicated and burned as Heretics. To conclude, all those must not be
reputed Heretics, which believe not that all Emperors, Kings and
Magistrates, and consequently all humane creatures are subject to the power,
and to the outward sword of the Popes. But the Reformed Christians esteem them
to be Heretics; Who ought to be held for Heretics.
First of all, which bring into the Church of Christ, such a doctrine as is
repugnant to the Analogy and rule of Faith, briefly contained in the Apostles
Creed. Secondly, such as turn aside from the true Catholic Church, that is
to say, universal: which retains the pure doctrine of God. And finally, such
as being often and seriously admonished, do notwithstanding absolutely
persevere in their errors, for which they have been many times reprehended and
condemned. The protestation of the Reformed Church.
The Reformed now protest, that they have not declined or gone astray one whit,
from the Analogy and rule of Christian Faith, and confession of the faithful,
nor from the four most ancient general Councels, that is to say, of Nice, of
Constantinople, of Ephesus, and of Chalcedon; nor from the Creed of Saint
Athanasius, nor finally from any part of the Word of God. They further protest,
that they were never lawfully cited in due and rightful form and manner, or
condemned by competent Judges, nor convinced of any errors, but rather that
they always either rendered a reason, and made confession of their Faith, or
have appealed publicly to a general free Council of all Christendom: For
touching the Council of Trent, That the Counsel of Trent was not free.
that it was not free or open they can (as they say) clearly prove by
Histories, in which it appears manifestly, that Cervinus Polus, and diverse
other Cardinals were excluded from this Council; as also Jacques Nacluaist,
Bishop of Clodiafossa; Dominicke Withelme of Venice; Paul Verger Bishop of
Iustinopolis, with certain others; and that only because they were suspected
somewhat to incline to the Reformed religion, and for certain reasons and
speeches which they delivered or uttered against the Popes.

Concerning the sending and calling of the Reformed Doctors, which first did
repugne or resist the Sea of Rome, the Reformed affirm, that they were called
in part immediately, that is to say, they were called by God without any
outward means, and that God disposed their hearts, enflaming them with a true
zeal for the advancement of his glory, and of the kingdom of his Son Jesus
Christ. In part also mediatly, that is to say, by outward means; that is, by
the approving, enccouragement, and forwarding of Christian Princes, Lords, and
Magistrates, stirred up by God for this purpose; as also diverse Nations which
with humble prayers praise the Lord for so great a grace and singular benefit
of Reformation. And this is not only lawful for Christian Princes and
Magistrates to do, but they are bound and tied unto it by the duty of their
Calling at all times, when the outward and visible state of the Church
requires any reformation of errors, which may have crept into the Church by
the malice or bad dealing and ignorance of the Pastors. That is manifestly
perceived (say the Reformed) as well by the express commandment of God, in so
many places of his Word, as by all the notable examples of Ezekias, Iosaphat,
Josias, and diverse other religious Kings that feared God, who in their time
caused the service of God to be reformed, which was corrupted with Idolatry and
superstition, as the holy History at large does testify.

Finally, whereas they of the Roman Church accuse the Reformed religion of
nouelty. The doctrine of the Reformed is not new.
The Reformed Christians thereupon complain that thereby great wrong is done
unto Gods truth; because the Reformed plainly show that they neither
acknowledge nor make profession of any other doctrine then that by which Adam,
Seth, Noe, Abraham, and all the other Patriarchs and faithful men have been
saved, and the which our Savior Jesus Christ, his Apostles, and the first six
Counsels, and the most ancient Fathers, and Orthodoxe Doctors have delivered
and set forth: So that finally the devil, whilst the workmen did sleep, has
filled the Lords field with so much darnell that the good corn can scarcely be
discerned and perceived: For albeit our Lord God has always firmly decreed to
maintain and continue his Church: yet his will is not that his Church should be
always a like flourishing and prosperous, but like the moon he suffers it
sometime to increase sometimes to be in the waine or decrease, Genesis 7. 1 King
19. Mat. 2.
even so we see that in the time of Noe there were but eight persons saved in
the Arc from the waters of the flood. It is also said that in the time of the
Prophet Elias there were 7000. which embraced the true doctrine: Likewise when
the coming of Jesus Christ was expected, the Church was so obscure and
concealed that scarce one faithful person seemed to be remaining. How true
doctrine was by little falsified.
In like manner after the happy birth of our Savior the Christian Church
began to decline by little and little for the space of 1500 years. For in the
first 500. years falsehood began to oppose and resist the truth. In the other
500. years ensuing truth began to give place to falsehood, and at the length in
the last 500. years truth was so subdued and opposed by falsehood, that she
could in a manner no where show or manifest her self. All this
notwithstanding, hence it follows not, That the Church of Jesus Christ was
never wanting.
that the Church either has been at sometime abolished or extinguished and
quite smoothered; or that the Reformed do contend and strive against the true
Church. For the Church of Christ has ever subsisted, been and continued, and
shall endure so long time as the Lord Jesus Christ shall reign, under the sure
protection and safeguard of whom it is secured and defended, howbeit
notwithstanding the outward form is not always alike visible and apparent. So
that the Reformed maintain, that they impugn or go not against the true
Church in any sort, but together with the same they call upon and adore with
perfect union one selfsame God, believe in one alone Jesus Christ, who has
bin in all times called upon and worshipped by all the faithful children of
God. But the Reformed Christians protest on the other side, that they are
separated from that Synagogue or Assembly which has not retained or preserved
true faith and religion, but advanced humane traditions above divine Oracles,
which would lay upon men's consciences burdens insupportable, which has attempted
imperiously to bear sway over their faith, forbidden and hindered the pure
preaching of the Word of God, and the due and rightful administration of the
Sacraments, which is accustomed yearly to excommunicate them, together with
all the Christian Churches of Afric, Egypt, Syria, Asia, and Greece, which
persecuteth religious people, and such as fear God, which will not admit or
allow of any reformation; which corrupts and blemisheth things necessary in
the Christian Church; which has made necessary things indifferent, and
corrupted Laws; which has tied the Catholic or universal Church to one
City. Orbem in Vrbe; briefly which is stained and defiled with all kind of
sins and iniquities. By reason whereof the Reformed again protest, that they
have been enforced to forsake this Assembly, to obey the commandment of God,
and that they ought not to pollute nor charge their consciences with the false
Romish doctrine, lest they be made partakers of the just and fearful
punishments of God, which may befall the same.

They of the Roman Church for a final conclusion, demand hereupon, Where the
true Church has been so long hidden.
where the Church has been so long hidden. For if the Church of Rome (say
they) has not been the true Catholic Church, must we not necessarily
condemn all those which hitherto have lived under the Popedom. The Reformed
make answer, that there have been found in all times Christians, as well in
the Eastern Christian Churches, as also in the Western, under the Popes
jurisdiction, which Christians have rejected those Popish abuses and
corruptions: and which is more, has sometimes encountered them, both with
lively voice and word of mouth, In Regist. lib. 4. cap. 82. Ad Johan. Ep.
Constan. Epist. 35. ad Maurit. Impera. Greg. Mag.
and by their books and writings; for not to speak of the ancient Fathers,
and of the Primitive Church, which the Reformed declare to have been wholly of
one accord and consent with them, in all the Articles of the true Faith and
Christian Religion: they can also plainly show, that there have been many in
these last ages which have consented to the reformation of Religion. For albeit
that Gregory the Great maintained some errors, yet herein he held a good
and sound opinion that he is Antichrist who suffers himself to be called
sovereign or universal Bishop.

Everardus Salisburg.
Everard Bishop of Salisberch, proved in an eloquent Oration which he made at
the Council of Regensberch, that the Popes were Antichrists, and that Pope
Hildebrand laid the foundation of this domination or sovereignty of Antichrist.

Ioachim Calaber. Francis. Petr. more then 800. years ago.
Ioachim Calaber at the same time did often call the Popes Antichrist.

Francis Petrarch in his writings, especially in his twentieth Epistle, has
very sharply enveighed against the Popes.

Arnulphus.
Arnulph Bishop of Orleance, openly at the Counsel of Rhemes, called the Popes
Antichrist.

Bernardus.
Saint Bernard in the year M. did challenge and encounter the Popes as servants
of Antichrist. At the same time Michael Centenas affirmed the Popes to be
Antichrist.

Jerome Sauanorola borne in Ferrara, Hieronymus Sauanorola.
preached throughout all Italy, that the Popes were Antichrists, also that
their doctrine were profane; for which he was burned at Florence by the
commandment of Pope Alexander the sixth.

Thomas Reiden did absolutely contemn and reject the Popedom, Thomas Reiden.
and was therefore also burned under Pope Eugenius the fourth.

Laurentius Valla about an hundred years past, Laurentius Val.
called Rome Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist: he further said, that the
donation of Constantine was forged by the Popes themselves, in such sort that
he opposed himself earnestly against the Popes; by reason whereof being
exciled, he was very honorably received by the King of Naples.

John Wickliffe did stoutly and worthily impugn and resist the Popedom in
England, Iohann. Wickilf.
who was shortly after seconded by John Hus, Johannes Hus. Hieron. Prague.
and Jerome of Prague, both which were imprisoned at the Council of Constance,
and there were also burned for the profession of true religion. So that
finally, an hundred years after, followed Martin Luther, who more plainly
expounded and laid open the true religion, and openly encountered with the
Popedom.

Now the principal Potentates of Christendom have endeavored in diverse
sorts and manners to hinder and restrain the great multitude of them that have
embraced or followed this doctrine. Diverse examinations of Luthers doctrine.
For the Emperor Maximilian at Ausbureg in the year 1518. and Charles the
fifth, and Ferdinand, with diverse other Kings and Princes; first of all, the
year 1520. at Worms; next, the year 1523. at Noremberch; afterward, the
year 1529. at Spires; after that, the year 1530. at Auspurge; again and
finally, the year 1532. at Regensburge; and the year 1540. at Hagenau; All
these Potentates aforesaid (say the Reformed) at these sundry times have in
part themselves heard the remonstrance and declaration of Luther, made with his
own mouth, and in part caused his doctrine to be examined by their own
Doctors.

But afterward when they perceived that by all their banishment,
imprisonments, and by all the fire and gibbets, they could bring nothing to
pass. They were at length constrained to follow the counsel of Gamaliel, The
counsel of Gamaliel. Act 5.
who advised the Jews to permit the Apostles to preach; For if their work
were of men it would quickly come to naught; but if it were of Goa they could
not overthrow it: Let every man then in like manner conclude, or resolve of the
religion of the Reformed Church.

In the mean while ye Kings, Princes, and all ye Inhabitants of the earth,
who desire to obtain eternal salvation, be wise and well advised, Serve the
Lord with fear, and rejoice in him with trembling. Kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the way. When his wrath is kindled but a little,
blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

FINIS.

