A GODLY EXHORTATION MADE unto the people of Antioch, by John Chrysostom,
sometime Archbishop of Constantinople: Touching patience and suffering
affliction, by the examples of Job, and the three children: and of refraining
from swearing.

Translated out of Latin into English, By Robert Rowse Minister of the word of
God.

Iam. 5. ver. 10, 11, 12. Take, my brethren, the Prophets for an ensample of
suffering adversity, and of long patience, which have spoken in the name of the
Lord. Behold, we count them blessed which endure, etc. But before all things,
my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other
oath, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed, 1597.

To the right worshipful Sir Arthur Heueningham Knight, one of her Majesty's
Justices of Peace and Quorum, within the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, the
continuance and increase both of spiritual, and temporal blessings in this
life: and after death, the inestimable blessing of eternal life.
RIght worshipful: Having of late some occasion, more then I did expert, for
some small time, to sequester my mind, (as it were) from more serious studies;
I thought it good, for mine own private exercise, to read over and peruse
certain Sermons of the learned Father Chrysostom, among the which this
Exhortation ensuing, being the fourth Sermon which he preached at Antioch, is
extant. Which I have now for the benefit of others, translated into English,
the rather for the matter therein contained. For if it be duly considered, and
weighed with judgment, we may see it is a most lively mirror, teaching all
Christians how to behave themselves in afflictions, to use patience in all
manner of tribulations; to continue steadfast and immovable in the faith, and
to hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life. The occasion that this
godly father made this Exhortation unto the people of Antioch, was this. The
Emperor Theodosius, and some of his predecessors, had caused certain
Monuments to be set up at Antioch, for a memorial of their imperial
dignity, and royal magnificence. And so it was that this Emperor had imposed
an hard Tribute upon the people, and sent his Letters to Antioch, commanding
the Inhabitants there, to make payment thereof. VVhereupon all the citizens
were in such perplexity, and so sore grieved, that a great number of them
assembling together, did greatly murmr, and complain, saying, that such an
intolerable Tribute was laid upon them, that they were not able to bear it:
and that they were utterly undone. This rumor being heard throughout the
City, immediately a company of the baser sort, unruly and vnstayd persons,
made a tumult and sedition in the City: and this seditious crew, to avenge
themselves, took upon them in contempt of the Emperor, to deface, subvert,
and overthrow the said Monuments. Which enterprise being effected, they
procured the great displeasure of the Emperor. The Magistrates (as their
loyal duty was) did presently sit in judgment, to execute the Law upon
those malefactors: and many of them being apprehended, were convicted, and
condemned to death. Some were cut off with the sword, some were burned, some
were cast unto wild beasts to be devoured, not only the men, but also their
children. The women being in miserable perplexity, seeing their husbands and
children led away to be put to death, durst not complain of their calamity,
for fear of imminent danger. Many of the men to save themselves, fled into
desert places. The rest that remained in the City, weighing the miserable
estate that they were in, by means of those malignant offenders, diligently
repaired to the Church to serve God in prayer, and to hear the word of God
preached, to their edification and comfort, in that most dangerous time, they
kept a fast. And at that instant Chrysostom made this exhortatiue Sermon unto
them, besides many other Sermons, laboring what he could to move the people
to tranquillity and peace, to comfort the minds of the afflicted; and to arm
them with patience, that they should not be dismayed with the present
troubles; considering that tribulation is sent unto the godly, for the trial
of their faith* and that in the end, the Lord will give a happy event to all
that constantly persevere in their godly profession, if they tarry the Lords
leisure; and depend upon his providence, as at the length it come to pass unto
this people of Antioch. For after that Chrysostom, as a faithful Pastor had
employed much time and diligence in teaching them the good and right way, they
being attentive to hear him; it pleased God to give such a blessing unto them,
that by his instancy in preaching, the wicked were stayed from attempting
further evil; and the godly were greatly edified and confirmed in the faith.
And by the discreet wisdom of Flauianus their Bishop, who went as an
Ambassador unto the Emperor, in the name of the whole City, to pacify him,
and to crave their pardon: where as before, the Emperor had threatened to
subvert the City, and to destroy the inhabitants: the Lord turned his heart,
so that he pardoned them, and he and the City were reconciled, to the great
joy and comfort of them al. By this example of them of Antioch, we may see,
how dangerous a thing it is, for Subjects to attempt any thing against their
Prince, and the hurt that comes of sedition. Again, we may see, what great
good redoundeth unto the godly, by the diligent preaching of painful Pastors,
who labor to bring the people unto repentance, and amendment of life: and how
the Lord does bless them, who being truly penitent for their sins, do
vnfaignedlie turn unto him, and are content to be reformed by the true
Preachers of his word. Although they suffer a great conflict of tribulation
and afflictons yet the Lord in his good time, does mercifully deliver them,
mittigating their sorrows, and turning their heaviness into joy: whereby they
have most ample occasion to render thanks unto him, for his great goodness
and mercy extended toward them. Now having finished the translation hereof,
and earnestly desiring that some profit might thereby grow unto others, to
Gods glory, and their comfort: I thought it not impertinent to publish it, and
to present the same unto your Worship, as the first fruits of my labor in
this kind: the rather for that you are a zealous favorer of the Gospel, and
true Religion established. If therefore your good worship shall accept in good
part this my small exercise, and shall vouchsafe to protect the same, I shall
think my labor herein the better employed. And thus praying God to continue
his blessings toward you, and long to preserve you, for the further good and
benefit of our Country: I humbly take my leave of your worship. Stratton
Michaell, 12. of October. 1597.

Your worships most humble in the Lord, Robert Rowse.

A godly Exhortaion made unto the people of Antioch, by John Chrysostom,
sometime Archbishop of Constantinople: touching patience and suffering
affliction, by the examples of Job, and the three children, and of refraining
from swearing.
BLessed be God, who has comforted your heavy souls; and strengthened your
wavering minds, for by this your care and readiness of hearing, ye have
showed yt you have received agreeable consolation. For it is not commonly
granted, that the soul being sorrowful and pressed down with the cloud of
heaviness, can hear with readiness the things that are spoken. But I see
you giving heed unto us, with much favor and earnest diligence, having shaken
off all heavy cogitations, and that ye have driven away the instant anguish
with the desire of hearing. Therefore I thank GOD, with you, that misery has
not impaired our Discipline, neither has fear slacked our earnestness, nor
tribulation quenched your feruentnesse, nor the greatness of danger corrupted
your zeal: neither has the fear of men overcome your desire to Godward, nor
the iniquity of the time overthrown your study. Not only has it not
ouerthowne it, but stayed it up as with wings; not only has it not
diminished, but increased; not quenched, but more and more kindled your study.
The common place of daily assemblies, is empty; but the Church is filled, the
one is a matter of mourning and lamentation; the other is an occasion of joy
and spiritual gladness. Therefore (beloved) when thou go into the common
place of usual meetings, and mournest because thou see no body there, fly
unto thy mother the Church, Gal. 4.26.
and streight-way she will comfort thee with the multitude of her own
children: and she will show thee a perfect and divine company of brethren,
and will drive away all heaviness. Verily, we dwelling as it were in desert
places, do desire to see men in the City; but fleeing unto the Church, we
are pressed with a multitude. And as when the Sea flows fiercely, and rages
extremely with many storms, fear constrains all men to fly unto the
haven: so also at this instant, the storms of Affliction in the Judicial
place, and the winter that is in the City, do compel all men on every side
to fly unto the Church: and do bind the members together among themselves,
with the bond of Charity. Let us therefore give thanks to God also for these
benefits, that we have reaped such commodity by tribulation, and for that
we have received so great profit by temptation. Except there be temptation,
there is no Crown: except there be conflicts, there be no rewards: without
study, there is no honor; without tribulation, no mitigation of grief;
without Winter, no Summer. And this we may see, not only in men, but in the
very seeds. For these it behooves that there be much rain, much breaking
out of clouds, and lastly much ice: if the sprowting ear shall kindly spring
up, and when seed time is, then also is the time of rain.

Seeing then that now in like manner the Winter of our souls and not of the
Air, is imminent; Let us also sow in this VVinter, that we may reap in
Summer; Let us sow tears, that we may reap joy. This is not my speech,
Psalm. 126.6
but the denunciation of the Prophette. They that sow in Tears, shall reap
in joy. A shower of rain falling, does not make the Seeds so to branch and
grow up, as the shower of tears that falls does stir up thee seed
of godliness, and makes it to spread forth his branches.

This shower cleanses the soul, waters the mind, and causes the branches
of doctrine in short time to come forth. Therefore it is needful to cut a
deep furrowe, for so also has the Prophet admonished us, Iere. 4.
saying: Break up your fallowe ground, and sow not among Thorns.
Therefore, as he that sets in the Plough downewarde, opens the earth,
preparing a safe keeping for the seeds, least when they be thrown abroad,
they should remain on the uppermost part of the ground: but that they
should be conveyed into the very bosom of the earth, and safely take root:
so also it is necessary for us to do, and using tribulation as a Plough, to
cut unto the bottom of the heart. For this does another Prophette admonish
us, saying; Joel. 2.
Rent your hearts, and not your Garments. Let us therefore rent our hearts: so
that if there be any deceyuable weed, and wicked cogitation in us, we may
pull it up by the root, and make our ground pure and clean with the Seeds
of godliness: For except we now make ready our ground, except we sow now,
except we now power forth tears, when tribulation and fasting is present;
when shall we ever come to have compunction of heart? Shall we have it in the
time of ease and pleasure? But that can not be. For ease and pleasure are
wont to bring men into slothfulness; as tribulation is the mean to draw
men unto study, and to convert the mind which wandereth, and is outwardly
occupied about many things. Therefore let us not be grieved at this doleful
sadness, but let us give thanks unto God, for of tribulation comes much
gain. For when the husbandman also sows the seeds that he with much labor
has gathered together: one that is ignorant and without skill will wonder at
it, and perhaps will say within himself, what does this man now at the last? he
scatters abroad the seeds which he has gathered together, neither does he
scatter them only, but does mingle them in the earth with much care, that they
cannot easily be gathered together. Neither does he only mixed them with the
earth, but also he wishes that a great rain may come, that all the seeds
that he has cast abroad may putrify and become as clay: and this man seeing
the lightnings and glitterings appear, will be troubled and dismayed. But as for
the husbandman it is not so with him, but he rejoices and is glad, when he
beholds the winter: for he respects not the things present, but he
beholds the things that are to come: he has no respect to the lightnings,
but he counts his sheafes: he respects not the putrefying seeds, but the
springing ears of corn: he regards not the great showers, but the pleasant
winnowing of his corn upon the floor. In like manner let us behold not the
present tribulation or sorrow, but the profitte that springs of it, and the
fruit that grows of it: let us expect the store chest and the handfulles.
For if we be vigilant, we may gather of this time much fruit, and may fill
the storehouse of our mind. If we watch, we shall not only suffer no
grieuance, but also we shall receive innumerable store of good things: but if
we be slothful, slacknesse and rest will spoil us. For both watchfulness
and rest do hurt him that takes no heed to his conversation: but to him that
with diligent care directs his life aright, they are both profitable. And as
gold although it remain in the water, does yet show his apparent hue, or if it
fall into the furnace, it appears again more bright: but clay and grass if it
happen them to be mixed in the water, the one rotteth, and the other is
dissolved: or if the one falls into the fire, it is dried, and the other is
burnt: so also it is with the righteous man and the sinner: the righteous man
whether he enjoy rest, remains bright and clear, as gold drenched in the
water: or whether he fall by temptation, he becomes more bright, even as
gold tried in the fire. But the sinful man, whether he obtain ease, is
dissolved and consumed as the grass and clay abiding in the water: or whether
he suffer temptation he is burnt up and destroyed as the clay and grass in
the fire. Let us not therefore be consumed with the present afflictions, for
if thou have committed sins, they are destroyed and easily burnt up by
tribulation: but if thou have virtue, thou art lightened and made bright by the
same. If thou watch continually and be sober, thou shall overcome all evil.
For not the nature of temptations, but the sluggishnes of them that are
tempted, is wont to cause the ruin. Therefore, if thou will be glad, and
enjoy both ease and pleasure, neither seek pleasure nor ease, but seek to
have thy soul full of patitince, and able to endure and suffer afflictions. If
thou have not this gift, temptation shall not only convince thee, but also ease
shall destroy thee, and cast thee down the more. And that not the invasion of
grievous casualties, but the untowardness of our minds does subvert our
salvation: hear what Christ says: Whosoever hears of me these words, and
does them, Mat. 7.24.25.26.27
shall be likened unto a wise man, which has builded his house upon a Rock,
and the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon
that house, and it fell not, for it was grounded upon a Rock. But every one
that hears these my words, and does them not, shall be likened unto a
foolish man, which has builded his house upon the Sand, and the rain fell,
and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that House, and it
fell, and the fall thereof was great. Thou see that not the assaults of
temptations, but the foolishness of the Builders caused the ruin: for there
was rain, and here rain: there were floudes, and here were floods, and there
was invasion of winds, and here was the like: And that man builded, and this
man builded, and the building was all one, and the tryalles all one, but they
had not all one end, because they had not both one foundation. For the nature
of the tryalles caused not the fall, but the folly of the builder: or else the
House that was builded upon the Rock must also have fallen: but now that
House suffered no such overthrow. But think not you that these things are
spoken concerning a house, but the speech is meant concerning the soul, which
by works either shows or else rejects the hearing of the word of God. So
in like manner did Job build his soul. The rain descended, Job 1.
for the fire fell from heaven, and consumed all his herds of cattle. The
floods came, that is to say, often and continual messengers without ceasing,
showing him of his calamities, one telling him that his flocks of Cattle were
destroyed; another telling him of the death of his Children. The winds blewe,
that is, the bitter words of his wife, Curse GOD (says she) and die. And yet
his house fell not, his soul was not undermined. This Righteous man did not
blaspheme, but gave thanks unto God, saying: The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away: even as it pleased the Lord so also is it come to pass:
blessed be the name of the Lord. See thou not that not the nature of
temptations, but the slacknesse of the slothful is wont to cause the
overthrow. Therefore tribulation makes a man stronger and stronger. But who
speaks this? the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, being nourished in tribulation:
for thus he says: Tribulation brings forth patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope. And as the violence of winds happening, and
tossing the strong trees too and fro, does not pluck them up, but makes them
more strong and firm by those invasions: so in like manner do the assaults of
temptations and tribulatio^s, not overthrow the soul that is holy and lives
godly, but also do prepare the same unto greater patience, as they made blessed
Job more famous and renowned. And now verily a man is angry with us; a man
subject to the same punishments, and having the like soul, and we are afraied;
but then the malignant and cruel Devil was angry: neither was he only
angry, but he practiced all manner of crafts, and applied all his subtlety;
and yet did he not overcome the valiant strength of this just man. And the
King indeed being but a man, is now angry, and soon after appeased, and yet
we are dead with fear: but then when Job was assaulted, the Devil bestirred
him, who is never reconciled to the nature of men: but has denounced war
against our lynage, without any league, and battle without any truce: and yet
this just man scorned his arrows, and had them in contempt. What excuse then,
or what pardon shall we have, which cannot bear the temptation of man: whereas
he being before the time of grace, and under the old Testament, did so
valiantly bear that so intolerable a battle? Therefore, beloved, let us
always reason of these things among our selves, and let us by these speeches
exhort our selves; for ye your selves are witnesses, and our own consciences
also, what great profit we have had by this temptation and trial. For, by
means hereof, the loose liver is become modest: the bold and venturous person
is become more gentle: the slouthful person more stucious: they that never saw
the Church, but spent whole days in beholding plays upon the stages, do now
abide all day in the Church. Therefore be not thou sorry, that God has made
thee studious through fear; and that by tribulation he has brought thee to
the feeling of thy salvation. But is thy conscience tormented? Is thy mind
daily dismayed, expecting death and great threatenings? But hereby also shall we
have great access unto virtue, while Religion increases in us by anguish. For
God is able this day to release us from all our heavy afflictions; but until
he see us purged, until he see our conversion accomplished, and our repentance
firm and stable, he will not dissolve our tribulation. For the Goldsmith until
he see the gold well purified, does not draw it out of the forge; so likewise
God will not remove this cloud, until he has fully amended us. For he that
has suffered us to be tempted, knows also the time to take away this
temptation. And as he that plays upon a Harp, neither stretches the string
too much, least he break it, neither slacketh it out of measure, least he
hurt the consent of the harmony: so likewise does God, he appoints our
souls to be neither in continual rest, nor yet in long tribulation, doing
both these things according to his heavenly wisdom: for he suffers us not
to enjoy continual ease, least we should become more slothful: and again,
he suffers us not to be in continual trouble, least we should utterly fall
or despair. Therefore let us leave the time of releasing our griefs unto him,
and let us only live in holiness. For the work that we have to do, is to be
changed unto virtue: but it is the work of God to dissolve adversities: for he
has a more ready will to quench this burning flame, then thou thy self have,
but he expects thy salvation. Therefore as tribulation comes of ease, so
also it is expedient, after trouble to look for ease, and mittigation of our
griefs. For neither is it always winter, nor always summer, nor always storms,
nor always calm weather; nor always night, nor always day; so neither shall we
always have tribulation, but there shall be a mittigation, if we always give
thanks unto God in trouble. Dan. 3
For the three children were cast into the burning Oven: and yet for all that,
they forgot not to stand in their Religion: neither did the fire make them
afraid, but sitting in the Furnace as in a Chamber, and feeling no grief,
being circumspectly compassed bout with fire, they powered out those holy
prayers which they made. Therefore the fire became unto them as a wall, the
flame a garment, and the oven a fountane; and the fire receiving them bound,
made them loose. It received their bodies which were mortal, and abstained
from them as if they had been immortal: the fire knew not his own nature,
but showed reverence unto godliness. The tyrant bound their feet, and their
feet did overcome the force of the fire. O wonderful thing! the flame loosed
them that were bound; and again the flame was overcome of them that were
bound. For the religion of the young men did change the nature of things. Yea
verily, it changed not nature it self, but that which was more wonderful,
it restrained the force of nature, which is permanent and durable. It quenched
not the fire, but made it to be without force, while it burned. And that which
is wonderful, and may make us astonished: this was not done only in their bodies
which were holy: but also in their garments, Act 9.11 12 Act. 5.15.16
and shoes. And as in the Apostles, the raiment of Paul did expel sicknesses,
and devils: and the shadow of Peter did drive away death: so likewise here, the
shoes of the children quenched the power of the fire. I know not in what manner
I should declare it. The miracle exceeds all declaration that can be, by
words. For the force of the fire was quenched, and it was not quenched: for
when it was occupied about ye bodies of those saints, it was quenched, and when
it should break their bonds in sunder, it was not quenched: therefore it brake
their fetters, and yet it touched not so much as their Ancles. Thou see what
a near connection there was: neither was the fire changed and deprived of his
power, neither durst it proceed to execute his power, being kept, as it were,
within bonds. The tyrant bound them, and the flame loosed them: that thou
may learn both what was the cruelty of that barbarous man, and also the
obedience of the Element. But for what cause did he bind them to cast them into
the fire? That ye miracle might be the greater, that the sign might be the
more wonderful, that thou should not think, that the things which were
seen, were a deceyuing of the eyes: for except that that fire had been fire,
it had not taken away their bonds: and (that which is a far greater thing)
it had not devoured those Soldiers which sat without: But now the fire
showed his violence to those that were without: and obedience to those who were
within. But consider thou with me in all respects, how the devil by what
things he strives against the servants of God, by the same things he
destroys his own power: not willingly indeed, but the wisdom and
providence of God using his own weapons and crafts upon his own head. Which
thing also here came to pass. For the devil then insinuating himself into
that Tyrant, did neither permit that the heads of those Saints should be cut
off with the sword, nor that they should be given unto beasts: nor that they
should be punished by any other such means: but he counseled him, that they
should be cast into the fire; to the end that not so much as the relics of
those Saints might remain, their bodies being consumed, and the ashes of the^
mixed with the ashes of sticks and fuel. But God used this mean to the
destruction of the devils wickedness. And after the same manner (as I shall
presently declare) among the Persians the fire is supposed to be God, and the
barbarous people also which do now inhabit that country, do worship the same
with much honor. God therefore willing utterly to root out this matter of
ungodliness, granted a moderation to this torment, to the end that he might
give victory unto his servants, before the eyes of all them that truly
worshipped him: willing to persuade them by those his works, that the Gods of
the Gentiles do not only stand in fear of God, but also they fear the
servants of God. And consider the Crown of victory formed by contraries, and
the enemies themselves which were made witnesses of the victory. For (says
the Prophet) Nabuchodonosor the king sent forth to gather together the nobles,
the rulers and dukes, the judges, the Princes, the counselors, and officers,
and all the governors of the provinces, that they should come to the
dedication of the new image: and they were all assembled together. The enemy
compels the beholders, and gathers the^ together to the sight: he
bestows diligence, and a Theater, not of common persons, not of certain
private men, but of all the honorable, and of all the Magistrates, that there
might also be witness worthy of credit among many. They that were called
came to see one sight, and when they beheld other sights, they went all away.
They came to worship the Image, and when they saw what had happened, they
scorned the Image, and departed wondering at the power of God, by the miracle
showed in these children. And behold where he had set this stage, not in the
city, nor in any several coast, but the plain and bare fields do receive
this Theater of the world: for he set up the Image in the field of Dura,
without the City. And an Herald passed by, and cried aloude, Be it known to
you, O ye people, nations, and languages, that when ye hear the sound of the
trumpet, pipe, and harp, the dulcimer, the psaltery and simphonie, and al kind
of instruments of music, ye fall down and worship the golden Image (for to
worship the Image was to fall indeed) and whosoever falls not down and
worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into a burning furnace of fire. Thou
see what hard conflicts were prepared, and how many necessities of subtle
practices they had, and what a deep gulf and downfall there was on both
sides. But be not thou afraid: for by how much more the enemy increased his
crafty engines, by so much the more he shows the valiant courage of those
children. For to this end were there so many consents of instruments of
music: and to this end was the hot burning furnace, that both pleasure and
fear might take place in the hearts of the standers by. Is any man that
stands by dumpish and unpleasant, says the Tyrant? let the delightful
melody of all kind of music mollify him. Is any man of higher conceit then
these subtle practices? let the sight of the flaming fire terrify him, and
strike him amazed. And inded there was both fear and pleasure: pleasure
privily entering into their ears, and fear secretly pearcing through their
eyes into their souls: but none of these things did daunt the noble courage of
those young men: but as they were cast into the fire, and did overcome the
flame, so they laughed to scorn all concupiscence and sorrowful perplexity.
For the devil had prepared al these things for them: he doubted not of the
Subjects, but rather he had much confidence that there was no man that would
set himself against the Kings law. And after that, they all fell down and
were overcome: then these Children were brought forth alone into the midst of
the throng, that so the victory also might be more famous: for that they
among so great a multitude, should get the victory, and be publicly extolled
with commendation. Neither had it been so wonderful a thing, if (when no man
was overcome) these young men had been the first that had valiantly behaved
themselves: but this is the greatest thing, and to be maruailed at, that the
multitude of those that fell down, did not make them afraid nor discourage
them. They said not within themselves any such thing, as many are accustomed
to say. If we indeed should be the first that should worship the Image,
that should be a sin in us: but if we do this with so many thousands of
people, who will not pardon us? who will not judge us worthy to be excused?
But they neither spoke nor thought any such thing, when they beheld the
overthrows of so many Tyrants. But consider thou with me the malignant
disposition of those that accused them, and how lewdly and how bitterly they
accused them. There be (say they) certain men which are Jews, whom thou have
set over the charge of the province of Babell: for they did not only make
mention of the Country, but also they called to mind their honor and
dignity: and that they might kindle the kings displeasure against them, this
they alleged. Thou, O King, have made our princes as it were slanes, without
any city, and captives: but these men do stain with dishonor, this so great
honor, and do behave themselves proudly against him who has advanced them
unto honor: therefore say they, these Jews whom thou have set over the
province of the country of Babell, have not obeyed thy decree, and they will
not serve thy gods. Their accusation was a great commendation, and the crimes
objected against them do turn to their prayers, even the enenemies themselves
bearing undoubted record. But what does the king? he commanded the^ to be
brought forth into the midst of the assembly, to the intent he might
terrify them on every side. But yet nothing made them abashed: not the fury
of the King: not because they were left alone in the midst of so great
potentates: not the sight of the fire: not the noise of the trumpet sou^ding:
nor al they that did cast the^ into the fire: but they laughing al these things
to scorn, entered into the furnace, as if they had been to be cast into a cold
spring of water: giving out that blessed voice; O King, we will not serve thy
Gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up. I have not
unadvisedly recited this History, but to the end that ye may learn, that
although the king be now displeased and angry with us: although the men of
war do lay wait for us, although the envy of the enemies do afflict us;
though there be captivity, and berefting of children, although there be
fire, although there be a furnace, and an innumerable sort of evils: yet
nothing can dismay or terrify the righteous man. For if when there was a
wicked King, these young men did not fear the rage of the Tyrant, much more
does it behooue us to be of good comfort, having a gentle and a meek King,
and to give God thanks for this trouble, being taught by that which before
has been spoken, that tribulations do make us more noble, both with God, and
with our selves being men; knowing how to bear them valiantly. For if these
young men had not been servants, we had not known their liberty; if they had
not bin captives, we had not learned their nobleness of mind. Except they had
fallen from their country here beneath, we had not known their virtue to be
from the heavenly City above: except the earthly king had been angry with
them, we had not heard of the good will which the heavenly king did bear to
them. Therefore if thou also have him bountiful and kind unto thee, although
thou fall into a furnace, despair not. Likewise if he be angry, although thou
be in Paradise, presume not. For Adam was in Paradise: and after that he
provoked God to wrath, Paradise did nothing at all profitte him. These young
men were in the furnace, and for that they behaved themselves well, the fire did
not hurt the^. Adam was in Paradise, and because he was slothful, he was
undermined and deceived. Job sat in the dung, and because he was watchful,
he obtained the victory: although without comparison, Paradise was the better
and more excellent place. But the virtue of the place did nothing profit him
that dwelt in it, after that he had betrayed himself: as also the vileness
of the place did not hurt him, that was fortified on every side with virtue.
Let us also likewise arm our selves with virtue: For whether the penalty of
our money be inflicted upon us, or whether death be imminent, yet no man can
take away godliness: and having that, we are more happy then all others. For
this has Christ also commanded us, saying; Mat. 10.16.
Be ye wise therefore as serpents. For as the serpent thrusts forth the
other parts of his body, that he may save his head: so likewise do thou,
whether thou be to loose thy money, or thy body, or this present life, or all
things beside, to the end that thou may preserve godliness: be not
sorrowful, for if thou depart hence having godliness, God will render again
al things unto thee with greater excellency: he will both restore thy body
again with greater glory, and in steed of thy money he will give thee such
goods, as do surmount all the power of reason to esteem of. For Job sat naked
upon the dunghill, leading a life more grievous the^ a number of deaths: but
because he rejected not godliness, all his goods which he had at the first,
were restored unto him with greater abou^dance: the health and comely hue of
his body, the whole company of his children, and al his possessions; and that
which is the greatest thing of all, the glorious crown of patience was given
unto him. For as it happens in trees, if a man take away the fruit with the
leaves, and cut off all the boughs, yet if the root remains, the whole tree
springs up again with greater comeliness. So is it also with us, if the
root of godliness remain in us, though our riches be taken away, and our
bodies corrupted or destroyed; yet all things shall return again unto us with
greater glory. Therefore casting away all sorrowful anguish of the soul, and
superfluous care, let us return again unto our selves: let us garnish our
bodies and souls with the orname^t of virtue, making the members of our bodies
weapons of righteousness, and not of sin. And before all things, let us
teach our tongue to be the minister of grace, putting away out of our mouths
all poisoned and malicious speech, and the meditation of filthy words. For by
the grace of God assisting us, we may make every one of our members
instruments of righteousness: as they whom grace do not prevent, do make their
members instruments of wickedness. Hear therefore how some have made their
tongues weapons of sin, and how some have made them weapons of
righteousness. The Prophet David says of some, Psalm. 57.5. Psalm. 45.2.
Their tongue is a sharp sword: but of himself he says, My tongue is the pen
of a ready writer. The tongue of the one wrote death: the other did write the
law of God. Therefore the tongue of the one was a sword, and the tongue of the
other a pen: not in respect of their own nature, but in regard of the
disposition of those that used them. For the nature of the tongue both of the
one party and of ye other, was all one, but they had not both one operation.
And again, ye like we may see concerning the mouth, for some had their mouth
full of filthy corruption and wickedness, therefore ye prophet accusing them,
said, Psalm. 10.7.
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. But his mouth was otherwise
inclined: Psalm 49.3.
therefore he says, My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and my heart shall muse of
understanding. Again, some had hands full of wickedness, and blaming the^ he
said, Iniquity is in their hands, Psalm. 26.10:
and their right hand is full of gifts: but he had his hands chiefly accustomed
to nothing else, but to be lifted up toward heaven: and therefore he also
speaking of the^ says, Psalm. 141.2.
Let the lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. And the like we may
see in ye heart, for their heart was vain, but his heart was true and upright.
Therefore he says of them, Psalm. 5.9. Psalm. 45.1.
Their heart is foul and vain: but of his own heart he says, My heart is
inditing of a good matter. And again a man may see the like example concerning
the hearing, for some had such a kind of hearing as beasts have: that is to
say, a fierce and impatient hearing: and reproouing them he says. Psalm. 58.4.
They are like the deaf Adder that stops her ears. But his hearing was a
receptacle of the words of God, and this he declared, saying: I will incline
mine ear unto the Parable, Psalm. 19.4.
and show my dark speech upon the harp. Therefore seeing that we know these
things, let us arm our selves on every side with virtue, and so we shall
escape the wrath of God. And let us make our bodily members weapons of
righteousness, and let us teach our eyes, and our mouths, and our hands, and
our feet, and our heart, and our tongue, and all our body to be conformable
unto virtue. And let us remember those three precepts, whereof I spoke unto you
in the former Sermon, desiring you that ye bear enimitie to no man, neither
speak ye evil of any of them that have caused your sorrow; and that ye would
put away that ungodly custom of swearing out of your mouths. And of these
two first precepts, we shall entreat at an other time: but all this present
week, we will speak unto you as touching swearing, beginning at the easier
precept. For it is no labor to overcome the custom of vain oaths, if we
would bestow but a little study, one of us to exhort another, and to advertise
and mark one another, requiring an account of our selves, and rehearsing the
punishments that we deserve, for the the things which we have forgotten to
observe. For I pray you what shall the abstinence from meats profit us, except
we expel the wicked customs of the mind? Behold, we have now passed this
whole day in fasting, in the evening therefore let us set forth our table: not
like as it was yesterday, but let our diet be changed, and more moderate. Can
any of us now say, yt this day he has changed his life, as he has changed
his table? that he has changed his wicked custom of sinning, as he has
changed his diet? else what shall our fasting profit us? Therefore I exhort
you, and cease not to exhort you, that ye take every several precept by it
self, and diligently bestow two or three days in performing the same: and so
to proceed and per severe in obedience. And as there be some that envy
others in fasting, and do wonderfully contend about abstaining from meats: and
some do pass two whole days fasting, and other some excluding from their
table, not only the use of wine and oil, but also every kind of dish, do
pass ye whole time of Lent, using only bread and water: so let us also
contend, to chase away the hurtful showers of swearing, and to banish that
ungodly custom from us: for this is more profitable then al fasting: this is
more commodious then al straightness of living. And ye care that we have about
abstaining from meats, let us employ it about refraining from swearing: for
we shall incur the crime of extreme folly, if we have no regard to shun the
things that are forbidden us, and apply al our study about things indifferent.
For to eat our meat is a thing not forbidden: but to swear we are forbidden.
Dare we the^ abstaining from things granted, commit things that are forbidden?
Therefore of charity I exhort you, to make some change of your evil life, and
upon this exhortation, to show a beginning hereof in yourselues. For if we
shall accomplish this present fast with so great care, putting this in effect,
namely that this week we will not swear, and ye week next ensuing, to
extinguish wrath and envy, and the next week after, utterly to root out
backbiting and evil speaking, and then after that, amending other faults and
abuses: so going forward the right way, we shall by little and little come to
the high degree of virtue, and shall escape this present danger, and shall
pacify the Lord our God: and the multitude shall come again unto us into the
City. And then we shall teach them that are fallen away by flying, to
commit the hope of our safety, not to any strong munition of places, nor to
any vain refuge or flying away, but unto godliness of mind, good disposition,
and virtuous inclination. And thus directing our lives in ye fear of God, we
shall both enjoy these temporal good things, and also those eternal and
unspeakable joys of heaven. Of the which joys, God grant that we all may be
made worthy, by the grace and bountifulness of our Lord Jesus Christ: by
whom, and with whom, all glory, honor, and power, be ascribed unto the
father, with the most holy quickening and coeternal spirit, now and for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

