A

CORNVCOPIAE, Or diverse secrets:

Wherein is contained the rare secrets in Man, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Trees,
Plants, Stones and such like, most pleasant and profitable, and not before
committed to be printed in English.

Newly drawn out of diverse Latin Authors into English by Thomas Johnson.



AT LONDON.

Printed for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop at the upper end
of Gracious street nere Leaden Hall. 1595.

CORNVCOPIAE, OR diverse secrets: wherein is contained the rare secrets in Man,
Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Trees, Plants, Stones and such like, most pleasant
and profitable and not before committed to be printed in English.
Many are the woonders and mar^ailes in this world, and almost incredible,
were it not that experience teaches the contrary: for who could be persuaded
to believe that the Owstridge could eat or devour cold and hard Iron, or that
hot burning Iron could not hurt her stomach, were it not that it has and is
daily seen and known.

There is a little fish called Echines, which cleaving to the keele or mast of
the Shipe, will so retain the ship that no violence of wind or weather can
remove it.

The Salamaunder and the worm Piransta live in the fire, and although they
seem to consume and burn away yet are they not hurt or burned at all.

The Satyrs have heads like unto men, and bodies like unto goats, and are
capable of reason and speech, which is both strange and wonderful.

The Loadstone has virtue to drawyron to it: yet if you hold a Diamond by
him, that virtue will be taken away so long as the Adamant is by him.

The stone found in an Eagles neast, bound to the left arm of a woman with
child preserves from abortion, but bound to her thigh in her travail, causes
easy and speedy deliverance. Also it is said that if a thief eat a piece
of this stone any manner of way, it shall ueuer pass through him. A thief can
not swallow any broth wherein this stone has bin sodden.

The Jasper stone restrayneth bleeding.

If any thing be laid in salt and there left remaining, in process of time it
becomes salt itself.

Many things are helped by their like, as Physicians can tell that the brains
of many things are helpefull to the brain of man, the Iunges to the Iunges,
the eye to the eye, and foot to the foot, etc.

The right eye of a Frogge applied to the right eye of one that is purblinde,
or the left eye to the left heals the party.

So does the eye of a Crabfish.

The snaile applied in the same sort helps the gout.

Every barren Beast or Foul causes sterility or barrennes, especially the
Uri^e, matrice or stones any ways taken.

So does the milk of a Mule once in a month eaten, oause her that ea^e it not
to conceive.

If you would move love, take such creatures as love most, such are the Turtle,
the Sparrow, the Swallow, the Waggetaile.

If you would move audacity, respect the Lion and the Cock.

The dog, the raven, the cock, the nightinggale, the bat or remouse and such
like, especially the head the heart and the eyes are said to profit in
vigilance, or to keep one from sleeping.

The heart of a Crow or a Batte borne upon one suffers not the party to
sleep till it ^ee taken away.

The head of the Batte brought to powder, and bound to the right arm does the
like, but put upon the stomach of one that is a sleep, it is said that he
shall not a wake till it be taken away.

The Frogge and the Toade are much effectual to make one talkatiue.

The tongue of a water Frogge put on the head of one sleeping: causes him to
speak in his sleep.

The heart of a Toade or of a Night Crow, or the fat of a Hare put upon the
breast of one sleeping, causes them to tell whatsoever shall be asked them.

All beasts of long life are said to be helpers to long life.

The Heart renueth his age by eating of the Serpent.

The Phoenix by the fire.

If the right foot of the Pelican be put in hot dung for three months,
thereof will be engendered a Pelican.

The Lodestone does not only draw iron to it, but also makes that iron to
draw other iron to it, if the Lodestone berubbed therewith.

It is supposed that in like manner the smock or other apparel of a strumpet
being worn of others, gives a certain impudency and shameless boldness to
those parties.

Even so if a Woman behold her self ^fte in the glass wherein an whore has
accustomed to look in, it makes her not only impudent bold but also the more
prompt to further offending.

Also a black cloth which has been used over the Coffin of dead folks
brings a certain kind of sadness or melancholy to them that wear it in
apparel.

The Lodestone has the virtue attractiue, the Emerauld gives great
probability to obtain riches, the Jasper helps byrths, the stone Achates
gives sweet and pleasant speech.

The root of the herb Aproxis draws fire to it a far off.

The Palm tree of the male kind and of the female kind growing together, do
fold the branches one within another, as it were embracing each other, neither
will the female bear any fruit without the company of the male.

The Uine is greatly delighted with the Elm and yields more fruit being
placed together.

The Almond tree sollitarily planted is less fruitful.

The myrtle tree and the Olive tree love each other mutually, even so does the
Olive tree and the fig tree.

In like manner as in plants, so also in fowls and beasts is there a mutual
amity, as between the Owsell and the Felfare; between the Crow and the
Hernshawe; between the Dove and the Peacocke, between the Turtle and the
Popiniay.

Also the fish called Musculus loves the Whale so, that he leads the Whale
from danger of Rocks: Also there is a great amity betwixt it and the
Chirlepoole.

It is supposed that the Cat so much rejoices with the herb Nep, that even by
the rubbing o^ her self against it, she brings young by that means,
supplying the defect of the Male.

Also many Mares in Capadocia conceive even by the blowing of the wind, and
drawing in of the same by the nostrils.

Frogs, Toades, Serpents and all kind of venomous things, rejoice greatly in
a kind of Persly called Apium risus, a most venemons weed, whereupon who
soever eats dies soon after in laughing.

The Snaile being hurt of the Serpent, is comforted by earing Organie and in
like case the Storke. The weasell helps her self o^ poison by eating of Rue.
And by these means it is found out that Organy and Rue are great resisters of
poison.

The Toade being bitten or hurt by any means hastes to Rue or Sage, and
rubbeth the wound there against, and by that means is healed.

So men have learned many precious remedies for many diseases even by brute
(...), as we see by the swallow, who has taught us that the ioice of Celandine
is singular for the eyes, for that she restores sight to her young ones with
Celandine.

The chattering Pie being sick brings the bay leaf into her nest and so is
restored.

The Gay, the Partridge, the Owsell and such do yearly purge themselves with
Bay leaves, and in like case the Craw with the same extinguisheth the poison of
the Cameleon.

The Lion being diseased is helped in devouring the Ape. The Lapwing with
eating maiden hair.

The Heart stricken with an arrow, knows how to drive it out with eating of
Dict^m herb.

The Hind before her time be to bring forth young, purges her self with the
herb Siler.

Swine hurt of Serpents, are healed by the Crabfish.

The Bear hurt in eating of Mandrakes, takes help in devouring the Pismires or
Ants.

Duckes, Geese and other birds of the water help themselves with an herb
called Siderits that grows on walls and tyles.

Pigions. Turtles, ^ennes and such like are healed with the herb Helxine:
Cranes with bulrushes, Panthers with man's order, Bores with Iuie, Hindes with
Artechokes.

Neither do Plants, Herbs, Beasts and such like, want a certain kind of
hatred or enmity* as we see Ru^ar be hates choler. Treacle, poison, the
S^hire stone, al^o burning fevers and griefs of the eyes. The Amatist
resists drunkenness, and the Jasper bleeding and hurtful fantasies. The
Emrauld restrains lust. The stone Achates resists poison: the Topace
couetuos^es, lnxurie and all outrages of love.

The Pismire detesteth the herb Organie and Coleworts, that the one kills
the other placed together.

The Olive tree so detesteth the Coweumber that being placed nere together,
they will turn back and grow hookewise lest they should touch one another.

The gall of a Crow hid in some privy or unknown place, is said to fear men
for coming to that place where it is hidden.

The Adamant disagreeth in such sort with the Lodestone, that being together
Iron will not be drawn.

Sheep fly from the Herb called Apimu rauinum, as from a most deadly poison
and which is most strange in the liver of such sheep as di^ of the eating of
that herb, the very picture of the herb is to be found.

Goats of all other herbs detest Bassll.

The Weasell and the Mouse are at deadly hate, so that if you put the brain
of a Weasell into your rennet or cheeslepe wherewith you gather the curde of
cheese, the Mise will never taste or eat the cheeses.

There is a beast like a Lizard that is called Stellio having black spots like
stars, which is so contrary unto the Scorpion, that his very sight
terrefieth him that he presently putrifieth and becomes an oil which is
singular to heal hurt received by Scorpions or other venomo^s beasts.

There is also a mortal hate betwixt the Mouse and the Scorpion, in such sort
that a Mouse applied to the biting of a Scorpion, helps the grief.

Serpents have no greater enemies than Crabfishes, and for that cause swine
bitten with Serpents are helped with Crabbes.

If a Crocadile b^uched with a quill or fether of the bird called Ibis, it
makes immovable.

There is a bird like a Partridge called Otidis that cannot abide the sight of
an horse.

The Heart cannot abide the sight of the Raven, neither the sight of the Uiper.

The Elephant is feared most when he hears the grunting of a swine: the Lion
when he sees a Cock.

There is also enmity between the Wolf, the ^wan, the Bull and the Raven.

There is continual war betwixt the Crow and the Owl, the Kite and the crow,
the Heart and the Dragon.

Enmity also between the Dolphin and the (...), the Codfish and the Seawolfe,
the Cunger and the Lampraie.

The Lobster so fears the fish Polipus, that at his sight he dies
incontinent.

The Lamb and the Wolf are at enmity, and the Lamb so fears the Wolf,
that if a piece of the skin of a Wolf be hanged on the crib, they will not
eat for very fear.

It is thought that the Olive tree is so contrary to whoredom, that if an
harlot do plant it, either it will die or else bare no fruit.

The Lion is thought to be tamed by none other means than with burned
firebrandes, which he utterly detesteth and is a feared of: and the Wolf who
fears neither staff nor iron, yet the casting of a stone is so contrary to
him, that in the same place where he is hit with a stone are worms engendered.

The Horse fears the Cammell greatly, so that he can not brook neither his
sight nor smell.

The Elephant though never so outrage, yet seeing a Ram is eftsoon tamed.

A Snake flies and fears a naked man, and pursues or follows one that is
not naked.

A Bull though never so fierce, becomes quickly very gentle being tied
unto a fig tree.

Amber commonly draws all things unto it but Bassell and such things as
are anointed with Oil, which shows some natural discord between them.

Moreover it is wonderful to consider the courage in the Lion, and the Cock,
the fear and timerousnes in the Hare and in the Lamb, the capacity and
gluttony of the Wolf, the craft and deceit of the Fox, the flattery of the
Dog, the covetousness of the Crow and the Raven, the pride and stomach of
the Horse, the reuengement in the Tiger and the Bore, the melancholic sadness
in the Catte, the venerie or lust in the Sparrow, the boldness of an Harlot,
the fear of a Thief, and such like innumerable.

The eye of the Basili^ke is so odious to man that it sees man before he come
nere him, even by looking upon him.

So does the eye of a certain Wolf called Hyena astonish every Beast that
he sees, in such sort that they cannot mo^e nor stir.

There be certain wild beasts in the woods of Germany that have no joints in
their legs, and therefore never lie down but stand and lean to rest them, which
the Hunters knowing saw the Trees (whereunto they are accustomed to lean
unto) half a sunder, then the trees falling the Beasts also are taken.

Even so there be many Wolfes which if they see a man before the man see them,
does amaze them even with their sight, and makes them hoarse, so that they
cannot cry nor call because they have taken away the use of their voice.

Also if a man carry the heart of a Dog about him, all Dogs will fly from
him.

The liver of a Goat is quite contrary to butterflies, and moathes and such
like* and Wolfes will not eat such pullen as have eaten of the liver of a
Wolf.

The Pelican reuiues her young ones being killed with her own blood.

When the Oister gapeth for air against the tide, the Crabbe puts a stone
between the two shelles to keep them open while he eats the meat.

The stone of a mad Dog put into drink is said to cause dissension between
the parties that drink thereof.

Pliny reports that if when you first hear the Cucko, you mark where your
right foot stands and take up of that earth, fleas will not breed where it
is thrown.

Also Pliny affirms that if one that has the f^lling sickness do mark the
place where his head fell at the first beginning of the disease and in that
place do drive an Iron nail over the head, that it will presently help or
deliver him from falling any more.

Take the paringes of the nails of any that has the quartaine Ague, and put
them in a linn^n cloth, and tie the same about the neck of a quick ^ele,
putting the said Eele into the water, and it will deliver the party from his
disease.

The Raven brings forth two eggs, whereof are engendered a Male and a Female
Raven.

If you phance to see ^ne Raven flying alone, it signifies the party to be a
Widdower, or to lead his life as a Widow.

If a Raven or a Crow do crook toward (...) it pretends some adverse
fortune, either of person, honor, wife, children or substance, as Epictitus
Stoicus ^ most grave Philosophet does affirm.

The merry countenance of the Swan does presage to shipmen a happy adventure,
and to passengers joy by their journey.

The Eagle is said to drink no water but blood, and therefore flying over an
host or army of Soldiers, does signify an happy victory.

The (...) promises most happy success, but the Uultur most lamentable
stratagems.

The Pelican notes some danger for doing (...) to others.

The (...) is ^ sign of concord, the chattering (...) shows* some guestes
from that part from whence he looks, and this is true by daily experience.

The Scrich Owl and the Night-Crow, evermore prognosticate death, and this
also is daily approved.

The finding of a toade in any uncouth (...) notes death.

The Hawke flying over your head pr^tendeth death to the party.

The fighting of Hawks one with an other* notes mutation of kingdoms.

The Swallow is a sign of enjoying a patrimony or inheritance.

The meeting of a Remouse or (...), signifies evasion from enemies.

To meet the sparrow flying is a sign of evil luck, but in love matters it
notes good.

The meeting of a (...) is accounted fortunable.

It is not good to meet with an Hare in a journey, for many have proved it
evil ^y common experience.

Also the Mule, the Hog and the Horse are not very fortunable to meet in
desert places. Sheep and Goats pretend good: So do Oxen and Dogs to be met
in a journey.

The Mouse pretends evil.

The Spider drawing (...) her thredde from ab^ue, is a sign that there is hope
to receive money, and this is a common sentence.

The meeting of a snake gives warning to beware of some evil tonged enemy.

Wonderful are the portraitures and proportions of men.

Let a man stand upright and hold up his hands over his head, then is there
his cubitte from the top of his head to the long fingers end.

The length of the arm from the elbow to the end of the fingers, is just the
length from the middle of the whorlebone to the sole of the fo^te.

The nauill is just in the middle of a man, for look how much distance is
from the fingers ends holden upright over the head to the nauil, so much is
there from the nauill to the sole of the feet, and so like wise in the breadth.

The nauill is also the middle point from the crown of the head to the knee.

From the top of the shoulder bone to the elbow is the fourth part of a man.

Four cubittes, or four times the length of half the arm: that is to say,
from the elbow to the fingers end is the stature of the man.

The length of the whole arm from the top of the shoulder to the end of the
longest finger, is half the length of the man.

The space between the top of the one shoulder to the top of the other over
the back, is also the fourth part of that man's length*

Six handfulles make (...) oubite (...) ^ome handfulles make a foot, and four
fingers make an hands breadth.

The length of a man, is four and twenty of his hand bredths.

Six f^et of a well set man makes his full length, but of slender tall men,
seven feet in length are his height.

Fourscore and sixteen si^gers breadth is also the length of the party that
measures them.

The length of the breast from the top to the bottom is the sixth part of his
stature.

The space from the highest part of the breast to the top of the forhead even to
the roots of the hairs is the seventh part of his length.

From the crown of the head to the bottom of the chin makes the eight part of
the length of a man.

If you measure the compass of a man's head along by the fore head and roots
of the hair, then have you the first part of his length.

The length of the face from the top of the middle of the forehead to the
bottom of the chinn^ is the tenth part: so is the length of the hand from the
wrest to the forefingers end: so also the distance between the two dugges, and
from the bottom of the throat to either of the dugges is the like distance,
making right triangle equal on every side.

The compass of the neoke is as much as from the top of the breast to the chin:
even like distance is from the haight of the breast to the nauill.

From the top or crown of the head to the (...), shows half the compass of
the middle.

From the end of the forefinger measured on the back of the hand to the third
joint of the said finger, is of equality with the length from that joint to
the back side of the wrest.

Also the length of the long finger by the out side from the end of the nail
to the third joint thereof, is of equal length with the space from the wrest,
to the bending of the first joint of the said finger in the inner side of the
hand.

The space from the nethermost joint of the thumb to the greater joint of the
same, is equal to the haight of the forehead.

The two hands are as much as the whole face, for with their inside may you
cover rightly the whole conntenance.

The length of the nose, the haight of the fore^, and breadth of the mouth are
equal one with another.

The breadth of the sole of the foot and the palm of the hand are both alike.

The compass both of the eye, and also the ^are, and the opening of the mouth
are all one.

If you measure from the crown of the head under the chin to the crown of the
head again, then have you the compass of your middle.

The length of your hand from the wrest to the longest fingers end, is the
length of the foot.

The compass of the caulfe of the leg, is the compass of the neck.

Twice the compass of the wreste, is the compass of the caulfe of the leg.

Thrice the compass of the first joint of the thumb, is the compass of the
wrest.

Twice the length of the long finger from the great or third joint to the end
of the finger, is the length of your span.

These ought to be observed in me^ of mean stature, and such as are not
missformed nor diseased.

Marvelous in our eyes are the hidden qualities in other things, as is the
nature of a stone named Abeston found in Araby, of the color of Iron, which
has not only a kind of Wool growing about it, which some say is the down
of the Salamaunder, and of truth will not burn and consume away with fire:
but the stone also it self being once hot will never afterward be cooled
again.

Achates the stone sometimes has the representation of the nine Muses,
sometimes the picture of Uenus, sometime it has the color of Coral,
sometimes of Crystal.

Pliny and others affirm that by the smoke made by burning of this stone,
storms and tempests are driven away, even as it is a common experiment in
all countries that the ringing of Belles, does scatter and put away thunder.

Galactides the stone being very black without, yet being broken sends out
a licour both of the same taste and whiteness of milk:

Strange it is that the fish called an Hornbeake, ca^eth out her spaune by
none other means, but only by opening of her belly, and that after the
casting of the spaune, the wou^d closes again.

The Adamant or Diamonde stone is so hard, that nothing may break it but the
blood of a Goat.

Among strange matters, this may seem to be none of the least, that in Egypt
it seldom or never raineth: yet by the ouer-flowing of the river Nilus, it is
so abundant of all things, that it may be compared even with the chiefest*
yet is there not a Uine in all Egypt.

The Eele comes or is engendered of the earth and mud without any spawne,
neither is there either male or female of them.

It is said that an Hare is one year male, and another year female.

There is in Syria a water called Asphaltum, whose virtue is such, that there
cannot any thing sink or be drowned in it that has life.

Affricke yields a little s^rpent called Aspis, the stinging stroke whereof
cannot by any^ means be healed but by the drinking of the stone of some
ancient king.

Wonderful it is that Pliny writes of this misc^ieuous worm: for the male
(says he) and the female go both together, and if any man kill one of them,
the other still pursues the slaier, and will never leave him til he be revenged:
yea and will follow him even through an assembl^ of people, so that there is
no help but to pass over some water which it cannot pass.

Athanasi^s the famous Bishop of Alexandria is reported to have lived six whole
yea^s in a dry cesterne where he never saw the sun*

It is strange to consider the hugeu^s of the City of Babylon, for by report
it was in compass threescore miles, the walls thereof three hundred feet in
^night, three^core and fifteen foot in breadth, having one hundred gates of
brass, the tower that Nimroth builded, abo^e fine miles in haight.

Wonderful is the inhumanitie of the people in the further most part of
Persia, who when their Parents be very sick or aged they throw them unto
fierce and wild dogs which do rent and devour them.

The dogge-fish is said to make a noise like the barking of a dog when the
fisher has taken him.

In the banks of the river Nilus is engendered a little beast which has such
venemositie in his eyes, that who so be holds them dies incontinent.

The Cammelles of Bractria will run above an hundred miles in one day.

There is a kind of Carbuncle stone called Carehedonius of a wonderful
nature, for being in an house it is of a purple color, but in the air it is
fiery against the sun, it sends forth sparks, and if wax be put to it,
it melts away.

Strabo writes that in Tartarie nere the Sea Caspium, be a kind of people,
that if they perceive that their Parents li^e or exceed the age of three
score and ten years, they put them into a close place, and so most unnaturally
do famish them, which done they draw them out and leave them in some desert,
going a far off from them, and beholding them. Now if birds do devour them,
they then accounte them blessed: if dogs or wild-beastes do it, they do not
account it so happy: but if Dogs and wild beasts do, they esteem those me^
most unhappy.

There are Cedar trees in Siria one hundred and thirty foot high, and five or
six fathom in compass: the wood will never rotte neither will worms breed in
them.

The little beast the Chamelion being spotted, changes those spots at his
pleasure, according to the thing then present in his sight, he sleeps with
his eyes open, so that his eyes be never shut, he never eats nor drinks
but lives only by the air.

It is suposed that the Stork has no tongue, and that the young ones much succor
and provide meat for the old ones.

Corrall is a tree or bush growing in the sea, which being once gathered and
out of the water becomes a stone: such is the strange nature thereof.

Strange it is that the Goat should be continually troubled with an Ague, and
the Quail with the falling sickness.

In Sicile Ileland are Giants which have but one eye and that is in the middle
of their foreheades.

In Sicillia is a River which runs from the great Mountain Taurus of such
an exceeding cold nature, that if any man remain therein any time, it
mortifieth the whole body.

The beast Canips which is some what like an Ape, but that he is more greater
and more puissant, and his head more like unto a Dog: is of a wonderful
strange nature: for besides that they have a voice like a man, they show every
hour of the day and night by their making of water, for at every hour do
they piss: to wit four and twenty times in a natural day. Also they so
lament the wane of the Moon, that during the time of her darkness before her
change they never will look upward or eat any thing, but hanging down their
heads show a countenance of sorrow.

There be people under the great Cham which have heads like unto our dogs.

In A^thiope by a town called Debris is a Well of a strange property, for the
water in the day time is cold as y^e, and in the night it is boiling hot.

The Dolphin is so wonderful swift in swimming, that were it not that his mouth
is so nere his belly no fish might escape him, but by reason of his mouth he can
tak no fish but lying with his belly upward: his m^uable tongue is apt for voice,
and is greatly delighted with music and is thought of all fishes best to love
mankind.

Certain people called Derli^es, have this custom: when their friends come to
the age of 70. years, they slay them and eat them calling all their neighbors
to the feast, but the women they strangle and then bury them as they do
others that die within that age: they punish every offense be it never so
little even with death.

There is a stone to be had in the head of a Dragon if you suddenly strike
off the Dragons head, for otherwise the stone dissolueth while the Dragon dies.

The Dromedarie being in iournying, can endure from any drink, for the space
of three days.

In the root of an Oak is found a little worm of so mischievous poison,
that if one tread on him barefooted, forthwith the skin comes o^ and all the
leg swells, and which is more to be maruailed at they that do handle him
that is hurt loses his skin.

In Solinus you may sinde it mentioned, that in Affricke there be certain
people which if they praise fair (...), goodly corn, pretty children, goodly
cattle, and such like they die presently. And Pliny also writes of some,
which beholding any person stedfastlye with an angry countenance they destroy
them; and this is found true man^etimes here even amongst us.

Of all four footed beasts the Elephant is the greatest (...)* and most (...)
and of most understanding* ^his age is (...) dred years. Pliny says that
(...) none aduontrie, and that if they meet with a man in the Wilderness being
out of any way, they will gently go before him and bring him into the plain
way. To this Solinus seems to agree.

The Elephant is at continual war with the Dragon, who like an envious
person will not be satisfied but with the blood of the Elephant, and therefore
lying in wait as the Elephant passes by the Dragon, being of an exceeding
length, windeth his tail about the hinder legs of the Elephant and so
lets his going, and then thrusts his head into the Elephants nose and
sucketh or exhausteth his breath, or else biteth him in the ear, whereto he may
not reach with his nose, and when the Elephant is faint, so that he can no
longer endure, he falls down upon the Dragon which is full of blood and
with the poysen of his body breaks him: so that the blood of the Dragon and
of the Elephant, runs about mingled together, which is that which we rall
Sinopre.

If one do steadfastly behold the bird Ealgulus that has the yeallow
Iaundise* forthwith the party is dliuered and the bird has the disease.

Amongst many strange things found in India, this is to be remembered. There
is a beast called Gazella, which naturally has a superfluous blood congealed
on his belly and grows like an impostume, and when it is ripe, the beast
goes to a tree, or a stone and rubbeth his belly thereon until that humor
breaks out like unto corrupt matter, which at the first does stink filthely,
but when it has been hanged in the air for a season it waxes ripe, and than
has it an odoriferous savor, and that is it which we commonly call musk.

That which we call Ciuet is nothing else but as it were a superfluous sweat
found between the flanks of a beast much like unto a Cat.

It is reported that the Hearing lives only by water.

The tree whereof grows the wood Ebenus which is as black as ieat, bears
neither leaf nor fruit which is rare.

There are people called Hippopodes dwelling in the Scithicke Ocean, which have
feet like unto horses.

In Iudye they have ever two summers, and fruits and grain is twice a year
gathered, the winds are always there very calm, temperate, and not troubleus:
their beasts and fowls more greater than in other Countries, and of many more
kinds.

Strange is the nature of the Larix tree which perishes not neither by
totting nor by eating of worms, neither will it burn in a flame, nor be
brought into coals, neither will it swim upon the water as other trees do,
and therefore they are either carried in ships or laid upon fur trees, and
so pinned together close that they may not stir one from an other when they
are brought at any time over the sea.

The urine of the beast called Linx who is faced like a Lion and spotted like a
Panther, has this quality in his urine, that immediately after the making or
coming away from it suddenly turns to a stone.

It is said that there is a certain kind of fish which in latin is called
Loligo, we have no english name for it, this fish has his head placed between
his feet and his belly most strangly, and has two bones one like a knife, and
the other like a pen.

Among things of wonder this is not the meanest, that is written of the tree
called Lutos, which grows in Afric, for if any stranger does eat of the
fruit thereof, he does incontinently forget his own Country wherein l, ^ was
borne.

In the Isles of Maniolae beyond the river Ganges, are such rocks all of Load
stones that they draw even whole ships that have iron nails in them.

There have been diverse men by report that have had no teeth but only one
bone, so had king Phirrus and Monodos.

In the east part of the world are men ha^ but one leg, wherewith they go
by ^apes, and that more swiftly than any beast.

Such like also are said to be in Ind^e that one leg being so great that
therewith they they cover themselves from the sun^e.

It cannot be but strange that the vermin called a Shrew going over any
beast, should make that part lame which she touches, yea and if she bite
aniething it swells up to the heart, and the beast dies thereof.

Strabo writes of a certain kind of Calkey clay, whereunto if fire be put it
kindles in such wise, that if a little water be cast thereon it burns more
fervently, and may only be (...) with abundance of water or viniger, allume
and birdlime. Plutarche says there is ^ore thereof in Babylon.

They that inhabitite in the country of Hungary, report that they have a
certain river, in the which if Iron be often dipped it will turn to copper.

Strange it is that all beasts so marueslously delight with the sweet (...)
that comes from the Panther: in so much that smelling the sweet air where
they have their resort, thither will all beasts come, and are not afraid but
only of the Panther his fierce looks: wherein also mark as strange a secret
in nature, the Panther perceauing this, of a subtlety hides his head
suffering the rest of his body to be gazed upon, that he may at the better
advantage take his pray of the silly dismayed cattle.

These Panthers the Hircanes rather poison with a poison called acoint than
with weapon: wherein also see an other secret in the nature of the Panther,
feeling himself to be poisoned, hastes immediately to find the ordure or
dunge of mankind, and by the eating thereof are preserved. If all the bowelles
of these beasts be quite taken out of their bodies, yet will they live a long
while as some report.

Who can but wonder at the Bird called a Phoenix should live six hundred
years, and (...) carrying sweet spices up to a mountain (...) the heat of the
sun and labor of her wings, kindles fire, whereby she being all consumed
and burned, of her ashes rises another of that kind, and it is supposed that
there is but only one of them.

What should I say of the Giant Polycrates, who in (...) suffered any grief, ^
(...)) into the Sea, to the intent he (...) suffer (...) and thereby (...) the
(...) But mark the end, the ring cast into the sea the fish devoured the
ring, and the same day was caught of the fisher and given to the King for (...)
thereof, and being opened the ring was found in the fishes belly, whereat as
well he and all other about him maruailed greatly.

The fly Pytalis is engendered of the fire, and as long as it is in the fire it
lives, but when it is far from it, it dies incontinently.

The Robin-red-brest if he find a man or woman dead, will cover all his face
with moss, and some think that if the body should remain unburied, that he
would cover the whole body also.

Pliny says, that if a traveler bind Mugwort to any part of him, it keeps
him from being weary in travel.

The Sicamore tree bears not fruit out of the tops of the boughs as the
fig tree does unto which it is like neither will the grain nor fruit ripen
except it be scraped with an iron instrument.

It is strange that in the I Will Tiros which is in the Indian sea, should be
trees whose leaves do never fall. Also woo^ grows there upon trees which do
bear gourds of the (...) of Quinces, which being ripe, (...) the (...) is
contained the wool whereof is made very fine clothes.

In the River Ganges, men say are certain fishes called Vermes, three score
Cubits in length having such strength that when Oliphants come to the water and
do drink, they will take them by the nose, and by great force draw them unto
them.

All beasts do detest the female Pimpernell and not the male: Also it is
reported, that Pimpernell laid under the threshold of the door drives away
all manner of enchantments and witchcraft.

Chickwood begins to spring in the middle of winter, and in the middle of
summer it vanishes away.

Fuchius writes that that house is never stricken with Thunder nor Lightning,
upon the which does grow Housleeke, or Syngreene.

Prickmadam floureth thrice every year.

Pliny reports that Mugwort is of wonderful effect for women's diseases, in
so much as if women do but usually carry it about them they shall not at any
time be hurt neither of corrupt medicines, nor of any beast, nor of any beast,
nor of the sun his heat.

If you tie a brown thread, packthreed, or other like about the brim or outer
edge of a bell, if that bell be so rong, it will break incontinent.

It is to be maruailed at, that upon Midsomer Eve which is the Eve of the
feast day of saint John Baptist, just at noone is to be found under every
Root of Plantine and also of Mugwort, a Coal either of Charcole or else a
seacole, which cole as diverse affirm is profitable to be borne about one
against the plague, the ague and other like diseases. In credit it is that it
should theu be found and at no time else but even just at noone. I dare be
bold to'note it for truth, for that I my self have found it diverse times in
the presence of many at that hour, and having sought for the same at other
times, it is not to be found: but whether it has such virtue as some affirm,
I cannot justly affirm: yet do I conjecture that it may well be, for the
strange finding of it at such an hour, in my judgment is more wonderful than
the virtues, yea and I dare assure you that I never knew any that ever carried
it about them, that ever had the plague or was troubled with any kind of ague.

It is also incredible that Mugwort put info Ale or Beer in the heat of
summer, should keep the same from sowring, yet daily experience she weth the
contrary: so that you put in quantity according to the proportion of your
drink, for the greater quantity requires also the greater quantity of
Mugwort.

Who can but wonder that in some countries the Sun should day by day
continually rise at six of the clock in the morning, and set at six at night
without alteration: Also that in other countries some days to be a month, two,
three, or four months: I mean that in so longtime the Sun sets not but
shines continually. Yea and that those that dwell directlye under the poles of
the world, have but one only day in the whole year, that is to say that they
have for six months, or for half the year continual day and the other half
year have the continual night with seeing the Sun.

When the Sun rises with us, it is noone with some, with others Sun
setting, with others midnight etc.

Above other countries Spain, Iberia, Dalmatia, Tolosa, India and the
Ethiopian Islands, are most fruitfullest of gold, by the report of Matialis,
Pliny, Michaell, Anglicus and others.

Corinthus, Caristos, Dodoua, abou^d in Brass.

Above all other places, England, Italy, Thracia, and Calabria, excel in
multituds of beasts and cattle,

Affricke, and Arcadia, in plenty of Asses.

For plenty of Crees, the mount Atlas and Caucasus: the fortunate Islands,
India, Cirene, and Hiccinia.

The City of Antron in Thessalie, for dens and caves.

In the fortunate Islands by the report of Pliny, are trees that are above 144.
feet in height.

Also he says that in India are trees of such an exceeding height that one
cannot shoot to the top of them.

Hibla in Sicilie surpasses for Bees and plenty of honey. Also for Hares the
hill Erimanthus in Arcadie for wild Boares.

The fortunate Islands, for plenty of byrds of all sorts, and store of Apples.

The Englishmen, Armenians, Arabians, Ithyreians, some Parthians excel in
shooting.

The Irish in casting of the dart.

Pliny reports that in Iudie are reeds or canes of such length and greatness,
that between knot and knot may be made a Boat to carry three or four men.

In Egypt is vinegar made so excellent, that it is sold for more thau the wine
it self.

Egypt brings forth the venemons serpents Aspids of whom if any man be
stricken, there is no remedy but to cut out the wound so deep that none of the
venomous matter be remaining otherwise they dye.

For Aromaticall things Persia challenges principality.

An Eels will live 300. years and will endure eight days without water. The
River Ganges by the report of Pliny and Solinus, breeds Eeles 30 feet in
length.

Egypt, Macedonie, and the Island Melus, has the best Alum.

The best Anise seeds are in Siria.

Aloe in India and the gum Aloe out of Arabia and asia.

The chiefest Alablaster comes from India, Damascus, and from Sparta.

The Silk out from the River Orantes and from Assit^*

Celadusa, she (...) in Sicely and England abound in Oxen and Kine.

In Phenicia the kine are of such hugenes, that the women do stand and milk
them. (...) says; that by the red sea be Oxen that have horns which you may
wind or bend, which way you please.

In India they will (...) as fat as Horses.

In Euboia all their beasts for the most part, be white.

The wild Beasts of Aethiop do move their (...), even in like case as (...)
the^r ea^es.

(...), a town in Cilicia, is accounted to have the best and greatest plenty
of Saffron, but now our English Saffron is most accepted of in all Countries.

The Canarie Islands has the greatest store of Dogs, and thereof (after
Pliny) took the name. Others affirm that Sparta is most plentiful of Dogs.

The Islands of Creete, took his name of the abundance of Chalk or Fullers
earth that is found there.

The River Nilus, of all other places brings (...) Crocodiles. These being
bred of eggs, grow into a greater form tha^ any other thing whatsoever that
is hatched of an egg. They have no tongues, and live both upon land and also
water; and for four months in the winter season* (...) any thing at all.

The Island Capra^ took the name of the number of Goats that (...) there.

The City of Auella (...) has the greatest store of nuts and the (...) the
called in latin nuces Auellanae.

The mountain Hym^ and (...) ^ue t^ greatest sto^e of (...) ^tude of Bees.

It is reported that (...) is such great abundance of igeons that (...) they
go forth to fight against them.

The hill of (...) (...) the (...) of Lydia (...) b^he price: yet Volater (...)
other ^ly and England for plenty of (...).

The Inhabitance about the Alps have great plenty (...) ^ron and steel, but in
m^de not co^ ^to England.

The City (...) in the I Will of Pontus is most abounding (...) to^*

England has the greatest plenty of Conyes.

Calabria and Malta have the name for plenty of Cotton.

Aquitane abounds in Chestnuts: Massilia in Afric for Dragons. Also in India
be Dragons that be of equal bigness with the Elephant. Pliny.

Of all other cities Syracusa has been supposed to be the richest in the
world.

Scithia abounds in Horses; Argos for the best Horses amongst* the best*
(...) (...) in Ireland.

Afric for Elephants, Aethiop for the ^ood ^nus. India has Ants and Pismires
as big as Dogs.

Babilonia by Herodotus report is one of the fruitfullest countries in the
world: as well for the plenty of trees, vines, oiles, and such like: as also
for corn and Fodder.

(...) and Scythia are most plentiful of wild beasts: and no marvel since
they have no certain place of abode, but are carried (...) and (...) in Carts
like vagarant people.

The (...) of Egypt is so great, that the sheep there bring forth Lambs twice
a year, and there the Sheep are shorn twice every year.

The best Marble comes from Sinada in Phrigia. The next to it comes out of
Numidia and it is speckled with purple spots.

The green marble is brought from Laconia and of many is accounted the most
precious.

The City of Corinthus was so laciuions and given to venerie, that they built
there a Temple of Uenus, where there was about a thousand of the fairest and
finest common women that could be found, which were obedient to each man's
call, the chiefest of them were called Lais, Ceren^, Leaena, Synope, Phryne,
and Si^.

Damascus in Siria surpasses for (...), Calabria for Pears* (...) i^ (...)
for leeks and Onions.

Briefly Calabria is most (...) ^ Assiria for the profitable (...) ^ (...)
Aymetus ^ a for (...), Dodoua in Greece for (...), (...) ^ Spain for ^mbling
ho^ses, Indi^ (...) ^ mirre, the city (...) by Room for (...) ^ (...),
Germany for black-bi^ds, (...) (...), the river Ganges for Pearls, and to ^y
the truth England for all things: for if it (...) well waied, what store of
grain this Ila^ (...) is wonderful: having both suffici^ (...) inhabitance
thereof, and also to help (...) countries that want. that country in (...) to
England? what more (...)? wherein if it be con^ (...) of fe^ell? what store
(...) what multitude of Cattle are occu^ (...), it may seem strange from
(...) they have it? that city in the world (...), (...) merchantable, more
rich, more (...) with women of most amiable counte^ and beauty, more ciueller
in their atire? (...) is there more (...) buildings? what (...) stored with
(...), with pre^ions ^ples? what nation more (...) for honey, for ^nne, (...)
lead, for soul, for beasts and cattle, for (...), for plenty of wool, for
clothing, for (...) and costly hangings? ^here (...) gold and plenty of
s^luer? where (...) ^ittes, more profound and learned (...)? nay where so many,
where (...) and schools of learning? (...) valiant and courageous soldiers? ^
(...), to the persecuted, to the afflicted? (...) what cou^ie or nation in the
world is the at this (...) that ^urisheth so many (...) from (...) p^rts of
the world as England does? ^e have our mines, ou^ quarries for stones, our
gems, our precious stones and all other necessary and profitable things, our
good God he blessed and praised that (...).

We are not troubled with poyioning Serpents, nor with fierce Lions, or with
deu^nring Tigers, Bears, Wolfes, Panthe^ (...) any such hurtful beas^es as
other (...) are.

The city Bifuntium in (...) has a field, wherein there be two wel^es, the
water of the one is very sweet, and the water of the other is apt to be made
salt.

Alos the City of (...) is famous for s^lt, even so is England.

In (...) Swine (...) so (...) and ^ed so fat, they can scarce move themsel^es:
so that Pliny says, there has ^in (...) ^at making her ^est upon the bodies.

Aquitanie has the name for Salmo^s: ^o may England.

Sparta excels for ^orke, ^ricia and (...) mascus for (...), A^abia for
(...).

In India they have (...) she is that they ^uer the houses there with, as we
do^ ours with s^ate and tile, yea in some places they use them for boats.

Statius says that there is River in (...), which causes all the beasts that
drink ^herof to become white; which is the reason at their beasts for the most
part (...) of white color.

England and the City (...) in Camp (...) for bathes are most notable.

Thessalie, the I Will of Pontus, and Colches, I^eria and Scithia, have more
poison and veno^ous ^erbes than all other Countries.

In (...) be white Bears so infected with poison, that they kill such dogs
as hunt them even with the breath.

Genoesa a city in Aetolia is always and continually (...) with great winds.

No country to ^es compared to Iudie for glass.

Varr^ says what country is comperable to Campania for meals, to (...) for
wine, to (...) for wheat, to England for wool^, tin, and lead.

Strange it is that the Island G^uleegalata by Carthage, breeds no Scorpions:
nay the very earth kills them.

Even so in Ireland we know no ^enomous beast is bred, or if any be brought
from other places thither they die.

The Island Sicaros in Arabia breeds no da^s, and if a^ie be set on shore
there, they run ra^ing up and down till they die.

Affricke only has no Dear, neither is there any Bears.

Scithia and the I Will of Pontus have no Asses breeding in them, by reason that
they be cold countries, for Asses can not well endure the cold.

Arabia brings fort^ne (...) of any ^orte: Neither is there a (...) found in
Bo^otia, or Hares in Itha^a.

In Ebusus are found no Connies, nor on the mountain Olimpus, any wolfes:
neither ^oth England breed any wolfes, and as some affirm: such as are brought
thither will not live.

In the I Will of Creet are no foxes, nor bears nor any other noisome beast.

Pliny says that in Afric there (...) bores, nor Har^s nor Goats, nor
Beats.

In the City of Thebes comes n^ swallows.

In Creete are no Owls nor Night cr^wes, yea and if any be brought thither
they will not live.

There is a place in Italy where is not any Storkes: so also in a field by
Room.

There is not any bird to be seen in the I Will of Pontus, where Achisses was
buried.

In Egypt could never Cherrie tree be made to grow by any means that ever
could be used.

The herb Time was never (...) he to grow in Arcadia: neither on the
mountain (...) in Creete was ever any fly found.

There is no moathes found to be either in Thrasia or Phrigi^.

In India they have neither (...) nor lead, but do exchange precious stone
and such like for them.

In the I Will of (...) are never seen^ any mise.

In the town of Dawlis by Delphos is never heard Nightingale.

Strabo says that in Portugal are no hills nor mountains.

Gauleon breeds no Serpents, neither does Coronea in Boeotia bring out any
mouldewarpes.

Italy hatchet^ (...), ^raunce excess of pride, England (...) Scotland
craftiness, Ireland (...), Flaunders drunkenness.

FINIS.
Laboris condimentum ocium.

