ESSAIES, OR Rather Imperfect Offers, BY ROB. JOHNSON Gent.

Seen and allowed.

LONDON Printed by John Windet, for John Barnes. 1601.

Essay. 1. OF Greatness of mind.
GReatenes of Mind is an ornament to virtue, setting it forth in an higher
degree of excellency, teaching us to contemn all these imaginate worldly
greatnesses, and confirming us with a puissant resolution to enter upon the
bracest enterprises: where this aptness is wanting, the virtues which
specially befitte great fortunes (as depth of wisdom, height of courage and
liberality) are also wanting, and it is as impossible to enlarge a little mind
to any of these virtues, as with the puff of the mouth to force a tall vessel
against a strong and deep stream.

For how can they be carried to embrace worthy deeds, who so highly prize
this interim of life, how can they be wise, who distracted with vain fears,
do not settle in this resolution, that all worldly happiness has his being
only by opinion* how can they be liberal, whose minds confined to the world,
think of living continually?

Contrariwise, where learning has gotten such a disposition to work upon, it
is most powerful, and can plant an opinion against the strongest fear of
death. Then a man is easily induced not to esteem the gifts of Fortune for
their specious show (for that were to admire them) but for their use, and that
is to govern them. ^t teaches that it is a better thing to give then to
receive: Illud enim est supera^tis, hoc ver^ eius qui superatur, the one being
the insigne of superiority, the other the s^gnifying note of subjection,
arguing a defect with acknowledgement of a better. And indeed great minds
cannot endure to make show of a beholdingnes They love their own benefits, and
it is better by co^memoration of former favors to draw them to accomplish
our desires, then by mentioning those good good turns, which proceeding from us
to them, might in reason bind a granting our petitions: for by so doing they
think Destrui fortunam sua^ and interpret it to a diminution of their
greatness, and disabling them of ability to requite: and when the benefits are
greater then hope of recompense, in lieu of a grateful acceptance, they are
repayed with a most malicious ill will* for there is no worse and more
dangerous hatred then the shame and inward guilt of an abused benefit

With those men the most prevailing manner of intercession is to give thanks,
as in Traians time the best Phrase of suting for offices was to show that he
had been lately endowed with one: Optime magistratus magistratu, honor honos
peritur.

These minds with a noble despisingnes, ouerpassing small matters, contend for
an excess of estimation reserving and husbanding their prowess for the
greatest employmentes, AEnaeas in the Poet.

-solum densa in caligine Turnu^ Vestigat lustrans: Solum in certamina poscit.
Neither can I more fitly compare them, then to those noble dogs; which
presented to Alexander by the king of Albanie, would not stir at small
beasts, but with an ouerflowing of courage contemned to encounter but with
Lions and Elephantes.

They are spare in speech, open in action, ever musing and retired, such as
Scipio is described by Cicero, and Sylla (by the most cunning searcher of men's
minds) Salust in whom he says: there was an incredible height of spirit in
concealing his courses. They are neither proudly conceited in prosperity, nor
discouraged with the storms of adversity, no way impeachable or subjected to
the base dominion of Fortune. Such was Furius Camillus, who being always like
himself, neither by attaining the Dictatorship, was enflamed to haughtines,
nor by being forbidden his country, was strooken into melancholy: and surely
in this virtue the Romans were generally admirable, who neither in their
conquering age were puffed up to insole^cy, nor in their cross and unlooked
for accidents stooped to despair. As in the disaster at Cannae, (when all the
world did ring out peales, that their fortunes were dead) they did nothing
unworthy themselves, that might be a derogation to the ancient dignity of
their name: for being driven to that exigent, that having lost the flower and
strength of their nations, they armed their servants and aged men to the
battle, yet they never offered any capitulations for a truce, neither would
they redeem their captives, both which actions imported an invincible
confidence: and afterward in the enterprise of Asia, they proposed before the
victory conditions to Antiochus, as i^ they had overcome, and after the
conquest out of a wonderful moderation, as if they had not vanquished.

But little minds having risen with a prosperous wind, are lifted up far
beyond the level of their own discourse: Then they begin to speak in a
commanding accent to condemn other men's actions, to affect singularity, to
usurp undue authorities, to contrauert in argument without respect, and to
persevere with an unflexible stubbornnes, persuaded that al things become them,
and thus drunken with vain greatness, founded upon no worthiness are easily
trained into opinion, that their state was achieved by their virtue, and that
their virtue was worthy of a better state. But when they begin to taste any
disfavor, presently discountenanced in themselves, they are either by seldom
comfortless flatterers, brought to some unreasonable purpose (as Claudius
blinded with the false informatio^s of Pallas to adopt Nero) or else having no
greatness but outward, and standing on no true ground inwardly, are more ready
to fall then calamity can depresse them, and presently like vile and abject
creatures, not aduenturing to recover, despair of renewing, and reintegrating
their fortunes.

But as the best wine becomes the egrest vinegar, and what degree of
goodness a thing holds while it abides in his nature, the same degree of
evil it takes, when it is abused: So this greatness of mind, if it be not
accompanied with virtue, makes men dangerously bad and terrible, producing
the same effects, which it did in Catiline, Immoderata, incredibilia, nimis
alta se^per cupiendo: but being guided by clearenesse of judgment, causes men
to be soly earnest for the public good, not to be contentious,
self-seeking, or any thing respecting their peculiar advantages.

Essay. 2, Of Wit.
MEN of slow capacity, are more apt to serve, then to rule, their conceit
is so tough, that neither the rules of learning, nor precepts of wisdom* nor
habit of virtue can make any impression. Tardis mentibus virtus no^
committitur, says Cicero. They have a dulnes enemy to wisdom, a slownes
hurtful to the moments of occasion, a certain understanding always f^aught
with suspicion, the less they perceive, the more they conceive, (for the
selfe-guiltines of their own defectes makes them willing to appear curious)
rather following chance, then doing any thing upon free election: they fail in
that greatness of mind, that noblenes in their ends, that reason to resolve,
that spirit to execute, that feeling of disgraces, which a man ought to have.

Some in the choice of Ministers, elect men of this disposition, contemptu
magis, quam gratia, who stand so far good, as a simple voidnes of evil
serves them for a ground of fidelity: but I cannot see how to allow this
opinion, since we ought to prefer those which are good, and know why they
are good, when again these simple wits are easily both altered and deceived.

A Wit too pregnant and sharp is not good: It is like a rasor whose edge the
keener it is, the sooner it is rebated, or like soft wood which is ready to
receive the impression of the Limner, but for warping is unable to keep, and
therefore not fit for any worthy portraiture.. Men of this disposition are
of a more quick then sound conceit, having store of thoughts rather stirred
the disgested, in all their actions unstayed and fickle, one while embracing an
opinion, as seeming the best, then again looking more nearelie, and not able
to answer the doubts, which are ready to enter an open invention, fall to a
straing kind of uncertainty: the more thinking, the more not knowing what to
think, very irresolue where there is some probability to breed on both
sides coniecturall likelihoodes: For a working and crafty wit draws
commonly with it a doubtful and wavering judgment: Such was noted in
Tiberius stirring up trifling regards to contain him in suspense, rather
increasing new doubts, then giving any ground to settle an opinion, being the
true cause, why his speech was commonly obscurelie doubtful, subject to a
double interpretation, dissolved in it self, and not knit to any constant end.
Such was Clement the seventh, who having a pregnant wit, and a deep
knowledge in all the affairs of the world, yet coming to points of
execution, was very unfortunately irresolute, ready to reduce the reasons
into discourse, which first moved him to any deseigne.

In Negotiations they deem that of other men's proceeding, which in their own
case they would do, and in this security are oftentimes so ouerreached by
their adversary, that they cannot return without great disadvantage and
loss: Commonly they follow rather subtle then wise counsels, which for the
most part do not speed: they are pri^ae specie laeta, things of appearance,
and no substance, rather great and magnificent, then easy and secure, they are
Tractu dura, and by how much the subtletie is the greater, by so much it is
necessary, that the handling be very precise, or else they will sort to no
end, being like the clock which most artificiously composed, is soonest
disordered, and put out of frame, they are Euentu tristia, most odious to the
world, and so disfauoured of God, that they are always waited on with most
unprosperous ends The same of craft is always hateful, and procures enemies,
and these cunning companions are of opinion that they can dispose the whole
world at their pleasure, and I think this imperfection has some similitude
with that arrogancy of the Stoikes, which makes men busie-headed and
turbulent, desirous to be set a work.

Again, quick wits are ready in speech, but affected, high-flying Poets, but
seldom Grave Orators, commonly betaking themselves to an humorous kind of
jesting, to play upon any thing, and stir the spleen, rather finding causes
why a thing should be amiss, then willing to amend.

And therefore wit does in some respect resemble the Sun, which so long as
his beams wander abroad according to their natural liberty, does gently
warm the earth, but when they are by a violent union assembled in the holow of
a burning Glass, consumes that which ought to be refreshed: so Wit the
lamp of man's little world, indewed with a sensible volubilitie, governs our
actions according to our desire: but being armed with vehement and working
spirits becomes the traitor of our blessedness, and therefore grief is said
to be the touchstone of the finest wit.

To close up this discourse, I approve a quiet discourse of reason: It is
ordinarily in a sanguine complexion, which is so tempered with a measure of
melancholy, that the sudden motions and enforcements of the blood be allayed.
These men are of a stately presence, sound body, long life, ready to invent,
firm of memory, copious to dilate, silent in tongue, secret of heart,
determinate in advise, regular in proceeding, wise in seeing the best, just in
performing it, temperant in abstaining from the contrary. They are actu
otiosi^ simillimi they dispatch their buisines with such moderation.

Such a wit will even in the execution perceive, and upon present occasion
determine, and take counsel, as fencers do in the listes, whom the countenance
of the adversary, the bending of his body, the moving of his hands does
admonish, how to proportion the distance, how to offend where is lest ward,
how to defend where is strongest assault.

Essay. 3. Of Education.
EDucation is a good and continual manuring of the mind, the principal
foundation of all humain happiness, and as the soul is the formal cause of
our life: so this is the efficient of a good life, giving light to the
understanding to know Good, and make differen^e from the contrary: confinement
to the will soly to perform it, restraint to the growing affections,
government in actions, ablenes to the body, without which, men are burdens and
eye sores to the common weal, nothing but a number.

-Et fruges consumere nati.
Honest company is like an wholesome air, a man may profit much even by the
chanceable enterview of a good man, and he that applies himself to the
conversation of the wicked, is subjected to the co^tagion of their vices: but
especially it is a thing of great consequence in young minds, which are
pliable and apt to be seasoned, either with virtuous or wicked resolutions, and
to receive the impression of any customs which their first company (a warrant
for common errors) shall by the silent persuasions of their proper actions
impose upon them.

This is the reason why the qualities of the mind do commonly run on a blood,
and become hereditarie, insomuch that some families retain proper customs
naturalized in them. As in Rome the Pisoes were frugall: the Metelli religious:
the App^^ ambitious, the Manli^ austere, the Laeli^ wise, the Publicolae
courteous, which qualities, proceeded not from the difference in tempera^ur^,
(for that does vary by interchangeable marriages) but of the diuersnes of
breed, which I may properly call a second, and better nature.

In restrayning the humors which may feed vices in youth, it is not good to
aggrauate small errors with terms of affected indignation: for it is a
dangerous thing to use a medicine stronger then the nature of the disease and
complexion of the patient. The best course and of most efficacy in disposing
generous minds is with reprehensions to mix praises: imitating wise
commanders, who seeing their soldiers dismayed do not vpb^aid them with the
name of cowardice, but by recording their honorable services, inflame them to
imitate and surpass themselves. The form is in the Poet: O Achilles where is
that valor which has filed the world with your fame: doubtless you forget your
self in overthrowing all the excellent things you have done, and distaining
them with so shameful a retirednes Thus having awaked him out of his sleep of
idleness, he tells him, Tibise peritura reseruant Pergama, and so makes
demonstration how he may honorably redeem the already conceived infamies.

For as evil eyes, although they they can see there is a Sun, yet through
weakness cannot delight in the Sun: so a mind ouerweighed with the violence
of passions, hardly admits that freeness of speech, which reason might
warrant, but requires such a Physician, who can let blood in the right vein,
and then again bind up the wound. Such corrections are smoothly covered
with an unexpected praise: and the memory of their former virtues touches the
mind with a noble and feeling shame of the present fault.

Again, it is better to entreat by persuasions, then enforce by
commandments, for fear and servile restraint (the instruments to
compulsion) exasperate free spirits* making them who would be ouerweighed
with the sweet violence of reasonable words, to cast away shame and
persevere in faults. Every man desires to have this commendation added to his
actions, that they are natural, and not affected either for fear of
punishment, or hope of reward. He governs better, who suffers men to be
good, then he that makes men good: but above all I approve that moderation in
parents, which shall seem rather to have found then re^dred their children
dutiful.

Fathers must love their children with that affection that they ought: but let
them perceive as little, as the gentleness of their nature will bear, neither
too lauishly giving them the reins: nor too carefully grieuing them for want
of well ruled libe^ty. And although the best rules be to inure them to labor,
to acquaint the^ with simple diet, so that by custom all miserable actions may
be natural: yet if there be not a moderation used, young minds will be
presently discountenanced, and great spirits embased with no small empairement
of their worth: for little minds, though never so full of virtue, can be but a
little virtuous.

Essay. 4. Of Exercise.
THe exercise ought to be such, which may occupy every part of the body,
as the play at the ball, never sufficiently commended by Gallen: or hunting, by
which men are accustomed to contraries, to heates, to coldes, to watchinges* to
fastings, to water* to beer, to wine.

To commend hunting I need not, only I will say, that it makes men
laborious, labor begets good customs, good customs are the roots of good
laws, laws founded upon such grounds, the producers of military prowes,
and that where these three concur in any degree of excellency, they cannot
but make a strong and puissant common weal. But above all other recreations it
confirms the body in ability both of doing and suffering, and acquainteth
the mind by degrees with danger: so that I may say as Cicero did of Fenc^ng:
that it is, Fortissima aduersus mortem, and dolorem disciplina: For in that, it
resembles peril, it makes us familiar with peril, (custom diminishing the
terror of those things, which by nature are indeed fearful,) and so by
little and little resolves us against any dauntings, which the imminency of
danger might draw with it. So Mar^us before he would bring out his soldiers
to fight with the Cimbres, set them upon the trenches to acquaint themselves
with the terrible aspect, and immane bodies of those Savages: and by this
counsel^ brought to pass, that now they began to contemn those which at the
first sight they amasedly feared.

His artibus futuri duces imbuebantur, says Pliny: for by these sportes
images of battles were delivered to the memory, which afterward abler
judgment might dispense: whereupon the ancient Worthies, and Heroes which
ranged the whole world to their obeisance, are reported to have been bred in
the woods, and employed in continual huntinges: by which they did not only
strengthen their body, resolve their minds, but also being ridden in all
Grounds became good discouerers (a quality very mainelie required in a
conductor): for a man having perfectly beaten one place, may sooner attain to
know the situation of another, because all regions do somewhat resemble one
another in proportion, and so by comparing one known, a man may compe^diously
inform himself of m^nie unknown.

Essay. 5. Of Learning.
ALthough Learning have a private and pleasing end in it self, as being the
harbor where the free and untroubled consideration has a delightful repose
from the Sea of more unquiet thoughts, yet it is but a serving quality,
preparing the mind to a nobler end of well doing, which (as the proud
inconsta^t Stoikes held) does not consist in refrayning or ceasing, but in
working and performing, and is not a defect or not doing of things, but an
effect or doing of things.

For knowledge teaches not her own use, but as a necessary mean inableth us
for good actions, and it ought to be measured by virtue, and if loved for any
thing, it must be, because it enformeth to do virtuously. It is an excellent
co^mendatio^, that Pliny attributes to Traia^: Praestas quaecunque tr^cip^u^t
^antu^que eas (literas) diligis, quantu^ ab illisprobaris. We must use the
precepte^ of Learning as the Laws of our behavior, accounting of them in no
other proportion, then as the waiting Ministers, by whose mediation a more
easy access is prepared to wisdom: we must remember, that the glory and
increase of knowledge consists in the exercising goodness: that these maiden
muses do not answer the hope of men, except they be joined to that masculine
and active power of the mind, which makes us perform good things and great
things.

So when Rome was in her flourishing age, and began to terrefie all Countries
with the fame of her expected greatness, even at that time, Ingeniura nemo sine
corpore exercebat, there was none who freed his mind to take repast on these
so divine sciences, but he remembered that he had a body with fit organs to
inure their behests, and that he should be a forgetful receiver of his
countries benefits, except he in some sort made recompense by employing his
powers for her advancement and good.

Too much to retire to these studies does not accord with state or gravity:
but by separating a man from more worthy deuoires, brings him into contempt:
It is an happy thing to keep a mean of wisdom, least while we think too
much of doing, we leave undone the effect of thinking: but especially we
must eschew with too vehement feruencie to embrace this glorious profession,
and record that saying of Cato, that active minds can not be with a more honest
^dlenesse, then the study of letters, corrupted nor idleness by any greater or
more dangerous policy, find easy entertainment in a well governed
commonweal.

Some object, that howsoever this refiner of invention learning is commendable
in lower fortunes, yet in Great men it is an occasion of more intolerable
vices: that it rayseth their thoughts into vain regions of ambition, and to
the accomplishment of things not Feasible, that it overmastreth their reason
with the sweet insinuation of haughty matters, directing them to work their
private ambitions with the public inconvenience. To this I answer that the
argument is taken only from the abuse, and therefore of no validity, because
al reasons either of praise or dispraise ought to be taken from the right use,
to which a thing is directed. Moreover I think, that their conceit is
inueagled with the same fury, which possessing some such goodlesse minds, has
taught them to inueigh against the unspeakable wisdom of the Creator, for
this reason only, because he had endewed them with reason. For (say they) as
wine because it does seldom help, but often distemper the sick, is better
deteyned, least through a soothing hope of doubtful health, a certain danger
be incurred: so (this swift moving of the mind) reason is better denied to
creatures, because more abuse it to naughtiness, then rightly use it in
virtuous enterprises.

And a little to urge on this so strange position, Is there any wrong glozed,
any right eluded, any discord sowed, any machination, or guile laid to
entrappe the wel-meaning of honest men, but reason works it even with a more
refined sharpnes of invention. Ingeniosior enim est ad excogitandum simulation
vertitate, seruitu^ liberate, metus amore. In the Tragedies we may see Medea,
with what cunning and quaint discourse of reason, what subtle preparation she
seeks to compass her deseignes, while laying this grou^dhold of proceeding.
Fructus est scelerum tibi nullum scelus putare.
She works by congratulating her enemies with gifts, knowing that to be a
course, where wary distrust might make no prevention of her malice. Nay, to
leave fables, and come to the life of truth history: had not Nero great reason
to supplant all those. whose liberty of mind he could not endure, as a thing
hurtful to his seat of tyranny. His reason told him, that absolute power was
given him from the Gods, that he only as Lord could give fortune to the
world, and distribute haps, and mishaps at his pleasure* that it was an
untimely policy to preserve those men, who standing strong in their own virtue
and love of the people might heave him out of that abominable injustice and
usurpation.

But these reasons are but colors, to keep our judgment from entering into
consideration of the true cause, which in these smiling railers stirs up an
ungrateful scorn against literature: And I think their hatred proceeds
either from Domitians reason, who privy to him^elf^ of most horrible vices,
exiled ^hese arts: Ne quid vsquam honesti oc^les occurreres or from reverence,
as to a mind guilty there is nothing more terrible then the sight of that
which might pluck into the remembrance the omitting of doing worthily. Even
so if virtue were beheld in bodily organs, undoubtedly she would not as some
Philosophers have taught, stir up the degenerate minds to embrace her effects,
but rather work a desire never to come to look upon her: for as men did see, so
they would again be seen by her, and the sight would rub into their
minds, and urge their consciences with deserved infamy and vice in such
comparison would seem fuller of deformity, and then men so hardly aggrieued
would forsake both fear and shame (the only means to withdraw eui^l men
from wicked courses, and put on such a proud contempt, as should take a
bravery and felicity in naughtines.

Essay. 6. Of Experience.
EXperience is the guide of the understanding, the rule of will, the ouerruler
of opinion, the soul, and most intier part of wisdom, without which even
the most absolute Scholars cannot attain to any degree of perfection in civil
actions. There is more certainty in the principles of practice, then in the
most necessary demonstrations or clearest discourses of reason: and these men
that are intendants and practiced in the occurrents of Courts, are fitter for
any active emploiment, and can with better easiness dispatch any businesses:
Quoniam enim habe^t ^culum ab ipsa experientia, vident ipsu^ principium. These
are as it were trusty Oracles, on whose judgment a man may safely reappose his
whole fortunes: they are upon earth instar praesciorum numinum, whose advise a
man ought to take, before he engage himself in any action.

For the mean, by which wisdom in ableth us to foresee the success, and
accordingly after due consideration rule the present is conjecture, which by
comparing things passed, presupposes out of the same causes, the same
effects: Now in this obscure and incertaine deliberation upon the future, a man
experienced is like him, who having tried a dangerous passage in his own
person, and noted the by turnings which might divert him into an error, can in
the darkest night with a secure and forward alacrity, go the same way, and
ouercomming all the difficulties, ariue at the appointed place, whereas another
though furnished with the soundest directions) yet never having proved it,
quaketh at every shadow) and having his spirits shut up in amazement,
plainly hazardeth his person.

The rules to perfect experience are, to frequent the courts of justice, as
Free schools of civil learning, to endeavor to understand all occuriences, to
confer concerning the news of the world with men expert, real, of a deep
insight, such as are not carried away with appara^ces, but can spy day light
at a little hole, and make judgment out of matters themselves, and discern
between truth and truth likeness, and know when ouert deseignes are the foyles
of more eminent intentions.

Essay. 7. Of Hystories.
History is the mixture of profit and delight, the seasoning of more serious
studies, the reporter of cases adjudged by event, the interlude of our haps,
the image of our present fortune, the compendiary director of our affairs, by
which valor is quickened, judgment ripened, and resolution entertained. Here
are the reasons, why some estates live quietly, others turmoiled in continual
disturbances, some flourish by the delights of peace, others by continuing
war, some spend lauishlie without profit, others sparingly with honor. Here
we may see ruins without fe^^e, dangerous wars without peril, the
customs of all nations without expense.

By this observation of noting causes and effects, counselles and successes,
likeness between nature and nature, action and action, fortune and fortune is
obtained that wisdom, which teaches us to deliberate with ripenes of
judgment, to persevere in things deliberated, to execute with readiness, to
temporise with inconveniences, to abide adversity, to moderate prosperity, to
know the Scriptures, but in such sort, that neither superstition make us
vainly fearful, nor neglect cause us to be contemptuously presuming. And by
opening to us the plottes, which gave life to all the actions, it teaches more
then twenty men living successively can learn by practice, as the General by
seeing the counselles which govern the event must necessarily profit more
then the Soldier, who not able to search into the causes, perceives only the
naked events.

But as Histories are diverse, so their operation in benefiting the perusers
are diverse. In some as it were in Cleanthes table, virtue is set out in her
best ornaments, as in the describing of famous battelles, where specious wars,
the ruin of nations, the situation of Countries, the uncertain trauerses of
fortune, the death of brave Commanders, have a certain kind of Majesty linked
with delight, and the mind by conuersing in them is not only delighted, but
also lifted up with a spirit of better resolution, and raised to think of
imitating: These fill a man with better courage, but fail in inabling him for
the manage of civil actions.

Another kind there is like labyrinths, relating cunning and deceitful
friendshippes, how rage is suppressed with silence, treason disguised in
innocence, how the wealthy have been proscribed for their riches, and the
worthy undermined for their virtue. These provoke us to eschew their viletie
and lack of virtue, and to be rather viceles then greatly virtuous: and
although they be distasted by those who measure History by delight, yet they
are of most use in instructing the mind to the like accidents. And since
men prostituting their wits to all hopeful ends of gain, are ready to
adventure themselves in the like actions, they are the most necessary things,
that can be warned us, to the intent that in the like practices, me may seek
means of prevention and frustrate all the attempts of such subtlely evil
companions.

In this rank I prefer Tacitus as the best that any man can dwell upon: He
shows the miseries of a torn and declining state, where it was a capital
crime to be virtuous, and nothing so unsafe as to be securely innocent, where
great men's gestures were particularly interpreted, their actions aggrauated,
and construed to proceed from an aspiring intent: and the prince too
suspitiously jealous touching points of concurrancie, suppressed men of great
deserte, as competitors with them in that chiefest ground, the love of the
people: When Princes rather delighted in the vices of their Subjects, either
because every man is pleased with his own disposition in another, or because
by a secret of long use, they thought those would most patiently endure
servitude, whose contemptible manners and viletie, might excuse their base
subjection. He shows how enformers men of desperate ambition, sharpe-sighted
in spying faults, and cunning in amplifying occasions of dislike, forsware all
honesty, redeeming the security of their own persons with the loss of good
name, and living on the vices of men, as scarrabeckes on vicerous sores: How
vain men were preferred to be treasurers, that they might fall with their
proper vanities and want of government, being used like spu^ges, which after
they had been wet with the spoils and extortions, were crushed and condemned
that their long gathered wealth might return to the Princes coffers.

Here some infer, that the knowledge of evil does induce and draw men to
effect, that the imitation of an evil does always excel the pr^sident in
height of mischief, but the following of virtue does scarce aequalize the
example in any degree of goodness, that the conuersing in Tacitus does deter
men from doing worthily, where are Canii, Senecae, Sorani, Aruntii, men of
admirable virtues in so corrupt a government, ouerliuing their prosperity, and
dying, like Traitors in the same age, when Se^aanus an impudent informer
straungelie compounded of the two co^trarieties of pride and flattery, in show
modest, and therefore more dangerously aspiring, sweigheth the fortunes of men
at his pleasure, and by lucky passing through mischievous devises, is grown
Ferox sceleris, and emboldned in his trecheries*

But yet these men ought to remember that those mischiefs are but mischiefs
to a baser mind. Quemcunque sortem videris, miserum neges: that although they
were oppressed, yet they remained still superiors, governors of necessity,
rather directing then obeying the vexations. And I will not deny but such
corrupt minds may also suckle venom out of the most wholesome flowers, and
armed with some dangerous Positions out of the treasure of books, may like
poison mingled with the best wine more forciblie hurt by trayning on their
mischievous purposes more cunningly: But yet me thinks, men have great
incitements to hold themselves up in virtue, by seeing evil men so
contemptuously set forth, quaking with the inner vpbraidings of conscience,
not entertaining sleep, but disquieted with a continually tormenting
executioner: We may learn also to praise God for our gracious Sovereign,
under whose peaceful reign, we are secured from all those miseries, and
enjoy all those benefits whose worth we shall know, when we suffer privation
of the^, under whom our subjection is to the law, our service observation, our
obedience a care not to offend.

In Tacitus are three notes, which are required in a perfect History, first,
truth insincerely relating without having any thing Haustum ex va^o: secondly,
explanation in discovering not only the sequels of things but also the causes
and reasons: thirdly judgment indistinguishing things by approving the best,
and disallowing the contrary, but yet he performs this with such an art,
hiding art, as if he were al^ud agens, by enterlacing the seri^s of the tale,
with some judicial, but strangely brief sentences.

In making use of this History knowledge, we must not ascertaine to our selves
the sequel of any thing to fall out just according to the like case in the
History, but determine of it, as a thing apt to chance otherwise: for an
example only enformes a likelyhoode, and if we govern our counselles by it,
there must be a concurrance of the same reasons, not only in general, but
also in particularities.

In making judgment of History, and consideratelie applying it to our present
interestes, we must specially regard the dispositions of the agentes, and
diligently remarke how they are affected in mind, which is the least
deceyuing ground of forming opinion: for without this pondering, and knowledge
of the qualities of those nations, which we meet with in reading, a man is
unable to make any due comparison between the present particular, and the
former example. But to leave these disputations, and the causes of variety in
Customs to the schools, as a matter some will not grant, and fewer
understand, I will only give some instances of the proper qualities of some
Countries, which most familiarly occur in reading. The ancient Romans were
men of an invincible spirit, not dismayed with what frowning disasters soever
fortune could suppress their courage, and having a mind superior to all
adversity, resembled Antaeus in the Poet, who so often as he was thrown to
the ground received fresh strength, but being lifted up, was soon tamed by
his adversary: so they in their declining state, promising better of their
hopes, armed up their valor, and were fil^ed with a greater bravery of mind,
but coming to the height of fel^citie, and flowing with the spoils of the
whole world, ouerswayed with their own grandeure, began to quail in the
last act, and after a safe escape from the maine sea of foreign encumbrances,
to suffer shipwreck in the haven: then over many good fortunes bred in them a
proud reckleshnes, then through the disuse of arms all things fell into the
relapse and private dissentions were kindled to ruin themselves, then the
city which was wont to give law to the whole world, began to be facunda
inimicitiis, fruitful in provoking partialities, desirous of civil tumults,
crafty in espying and aggravating secret dislikes, ready to catch at any
occasion of innovation. Their valor made them quiet, and quiet wealthy: but
according to the revolution of al things with a swift and violent return their
wealth effiminated their valor with idleness, idleness occasioned disorder,
disorder made ruin. And as the iron begets rust which consumes it, and
ripe fruits produce worms which eat it, so their greatness nourished such
vices as by little and little brought them to confusion, insomuch that a great
time their state was maintained more by reputation of things done, then any
other present foundation.

The French are too aduenturous in the imminency and nea^enes of peril,
ouerwaging the difficulties of terror with a too furious resolution, in assault
more then men, in maintaining the medley less then women, very irregular in
their actions, grou^ding them upon fallible hopes and vain expectations,
light, inconstant, insolent in prosperity, destined rather to conquer, then
keep: as contrarily the Venetians have recovered by the arts of peace and
composition that, which they have forgon by war.

The Spaniards are subtle, wrapping their drifts in close secrecy, expressing
surely in their words, but keeping their intentions dissembled under
disguised assurance of amity, betraying the innocence of their friends, in
malice infinite* and so over carried with that passion, that for the most part
they execute a revenge far above the nature of the offense: not giving any
sudden appearance of it, but waiting for opportunity so much redouble the
blow, by how much it has been nourished with tract of time, and hung in
suspense.

Essay. 8. Of Art Military.
THere is a barbarous opinion of the contrariety of arms and learning, and
the impossibility of their meeting in any person: which unreasonable Paradoxe
well sits those who know nothing but the fury of strength, and not the
virtue of courage. For without this, fortitude is intiteled to those actions
which hold rather of vice, and the more it seeks to hurt, the less it is
able to hurt, and is either a rashness which after the first brunt dies in it
self, Et vt quaedam animalia, amisso acul^o torpit, and cannot hurt, like some
beasts which shoot the sting, and partake no more with the poison, or a false
vigor proceeding from despair, when men weary of the worlds eyes shall thrust
themselves into manifest peril without any sufficient ground of reason: or a
fiercenes, when choler and the effects of anger are made the motives of valor,
or a confidence, when a man after the often aspect of danger, and by the lucky
passing of diverse sightes is become hazardous, and enterprising in such sort,
as the vice of drinking* In pralia trudit ^^erme^. Without lerning Hercules is
furious, Dares insolent, Achilles overcome with vain delights, unable to
command his own decent appetites, and ready to have ingloriously separated
himself from revealing his virtue, if wise Ulysses had not by a timely policy
drawn him to retire into himself, and consider the frail foundations of
those weaknesses, which did so infeeble his resolution.

But although learning be of great consequence in perfection of a martial
man, yet experience is the chiefest point, neither can a man be absolute by
reading other men's exploites. The true School of war, is the field, and not
the Chamber* the teacher is use, and the best course for attaining is to be
present in the important deliberations, to observe and ponder upon the
executions, to consider the events, and the counsels which governed them, from
which observation arises that wisdom, which inableth us to make choice of
our advantages, to advance opportunities, to cut off by celeritie all discourse
of counsel from the enemy, to make his inventions sort to his proper ruin,
to overcome by quicknes the difficulty of those things which could not be
suppressed by expecting, to accommodate prouisoes to all chances, to alter our
determinations according to the suddennes and variety of occurrences, neither
to fear nor despise the enemy, but to remember, Vt semper pendeat hamus, to be
ready to catch at that period of time, occasion, which by a fortunate meeting
of circumstances does ease us in the compassing our proiectes.

Great men ought to frequent the war, proposing to themselves these three
reasons which moved Tiberius to address Drusus into Illyricum: The first was,
suescere militiae, to inure and experience him in warfare: for it is not
sufficient to have military science in our mind, but by often meditations to
make it familiar to our hands and feet. He is the best soldier that is most
experimented, neither can I more fitly compare these book knights then to a
Musician, who insisting only upon the Theoricke, is not able to express any
thing.

The second was, Studia exercitus parare, to wind himself into the favor of
the Soldiers: which thing of what consequence it is in raising and preferring
a man, we may see in Hannibal, who being whol^e a martial man, borne and
nourished in his Fathers pauilion and sight of the soldiers, was before the
prime of his youth chosen general through their consent and applause: neither
was there any other apparent cause of the obtaining that dignity at so unripe
years but the affection of the army: which always desires such a Leader, whose
manners they are most familiarly acquainted with.

The chief rules to get this fame and reputation are these, to have a
watchful eye, a diligent hand, a resolute heart, at the beginning to do rather
too much then too little, sometime to hazard fairly, to watch and ward, to
glory in being content with a little, not to be more costly apparrelled, then
a private soldier, Arma and equi conspiciantur: in action, to be heedfully
earnest, to refuse no employment for fear, nor enter into any upon an humor
of ostentation, to suppress the esteem of your atchiuements, and
vnde^ualewing them humbly like a Minister, refer the honor to the Fortune of
the General. For such modesty augmenteth the fame of virtue, being indeed
like those shadows which cunning painters use to increase the luster, and
grace of their protraytures: and men seeing such respectles such account made
of things done, will preoccupy conceits of some nobler future successes:
Iugurthaes art in inworthying himself was, purimum facere, and ^i^il de
s^ipso loqui, and so he conquered envy, and the passion of aemulation with an
infinite glory.

The third reason was, Simul Iu^uenem vrbano luxu lasciu^entem, melius in
castris haberi rebatur Tiberius. Therefore the Camp must not be frequented as
a secure and privileged place of licentiousnes, but as a School where the
body ought to be inured, and by continual labor subjected to the miseries
of travel, thereby not to be daunted in the imminencie of danger, nor to
fear a wound but with an invincible vigor to endure all corporal adversities.

Essay. 9. Of Travel.
Travel entertaineth a man with delight, neither is there any ^o confirmed in
a contempt of all worldly things, who finds not himself out of a mere
instinct of nature, infinitely pleased with the stately representation and
Majesty of strange and famous cities: But what an inward oblectation it is to
see the ruins of Theaters, of triumphall Arcusses, to view the places which
do yet testify the virtues of the ancient Worthies, Et campos vbi Troia fuit,
They know best, whose minds so are higher, and become greater by beholding the
memorials of other men's glory and magnificence.

But because reason bids us to proui^e rather for the beautifying of our
nobler part the mind, then for the flattring of sense, the chief scope must be
ability, and the greatest delight to feel with Solon: Senescere se multa
indies addiscentem. For although these studies require rather retirednes and
immunitie from those disquiets which this (unsettled kind of life) traveling
does draw with it: yet let us know that to this orname^t of ^nowledge concur
not only the sense of seeing, to converse in the momuments and treasure of
books* but also of hearing in conferring with men, excellent in every
profession: in enfelowshipping with diverse natures and dispositions. For this
variety of company bettereth behavior, subtelizeth arts, awaketh and
exercises wit, ripeneth judgment, confirms wisdom, and enricheth the mind
with many worthy and profitable observations: performing all these by so secret
a working, and insensible alteration, that a man does sooner acknowledge
himself much abler, then he can apprehende the means: Even as in the growing
of a tree we perceive not the successiue motion of increase, but at length may
sufficiently assure our selves, that there has been an augmentation.

In this observation, as there are many general things, with which a man may
trust himself, so there are many particularities which are more specially to
be observed, as most powerful to inspire us with civil wisdom, and enable
our judgment for any active employment, vid. the religion, laws, form of
government, situation, castles, fortifications, cities, forces, what
neighbors confine, of what power, how inclined: The noble Families, their
discents, intermarriages, their potencie, either immediate of themselves, or by
reason of the kings countenance, their adherences, sects, dependencies,
partialities, and the causes of all.

But because in foreign countries there are many peculiar vices covered with
the spetious semblanc^ of humanity, which having born^ long sweigh and growing
into custom, unworthily find not also pardon, but also commendation: an^ our
weakness is prone to participa^^ those evil habites, which eythe^ flatter it
with novelty, or deceiue^ with a glo^ious show of virtue, ther^^fore a man
ready to enter such expeditions must observe these rules, (...) the chiefest
preseruations of reason against any such infection, so much the more
dangerous, when the contagion inueagleth and ente^reth in the air of a
perverse appro^bation.

For assuring our selves that whe^^ are many vices, there are also inf^^nite
virtues (because no evil is (...) bad, as that which proceeds from the
corrupt seeds of goodness we must in such places affect the familiarity of
the best, by all convenient obseruances, endearing them who as they preacede in
all worthy qualities: so especially in this virtue of easines and humanity.
And although many dangerous minds are hidden under the false Glass and
deceiuable apparances of feighned meekenes (a virtue rather taken on, then
taken into them) yet the best rule is (if there be no other manifest cause of
prohibition) to apply to their conversation, who are most excellent in the
Forms of behavior: For thereby men are bettered in a certain external
virtue of civility and gentleness: which if it flow kindly, natural without
forcing against the hare and void of the two imperfections affecting, and
ostentation undoubtedly cannot but worthily commend a man, and make
demonstration of a mind aunswerable.

In meeting with natures close and retired, spare in revealing them selves,
conformed to all turninges of sleightes, skillful in dissembling passions, such
as can pretexe spite with a countenance of amity, it is good (if they be
innocent and harmeles) to use semblinges, as opportune defenses to frust^ate
their proiectes, but not as machinations invented for mischieuing. Therefore the
countenance (the gate of the mind) must be open and free to al, the tongue
sparing in utterance of things of importance, the mind closed, and this
remembered. Chi vuol andar per pass, deue hanere bocca d^ porcello, L'orechie
d' asinello.

Essay. 10. Of Affability.
Affability is like Music, which is made by a judicial correspondency of a
sharp and flat, it is a mixture of pleasingnes, and severity in such sort,
that neither gentleness by being a derogation, weaken reverence, nor severity
love. It is not sufficient to be alto^ether real in performing the effects of
a loving mind: but also every man requires to be assured by utter
apparances, as messengers of the inner intentions: And if by these oblations a
man give not his friend confidence and surety, I may not unfitly compare his
benevolence to an image, which in it self well proportioned, but not
apparrelled in apt colors, does want that delightful luster, which should
satisfy the greedy eyes of the spectators.

A man must be not only present in ministering any conuenience office, but
also by sending forth in the countenance the paunes and assurance of love, by
exciting men to open and reveal their businesses, and by promising al
convenient furtherance. For as men warm in the youthful desires of love, take
greatest comfort by being seen of their Mistress, and receive more joy from
a wanton look, then from any other sense: so among all the kind offices of
friendship, there is none so desired, as this acknowledgement by outward
respects, especially when the end is mere salutation: for there is no more
contrary enemy to true friendship, then the motion of proper interest.

The Romans not to defraud any man of a due and convenient Congie, retained
certain Admonitors (called N^menclatores) who should suggest the name,
quality, and accounte of every one they incountred, that they might be saluted
in a conformable style: for to look strange and disdainefull, to be backward
in returning these respects procures hatred even in the dearest friends, so
much more dangerous, by how much men can less endure to be despised, then
iniuried, because other grieuances concern only the body, and bring this
comfort, that he is some body in his conceit that so offended him: but the
injuries of contempt are a disreputation, and the offended takes himself to
be accounted no body, and therefore such omissions can hardly by any means
be redeemed.

Caesar through his wonderful virtues had settled himself in the strong love of
the people, and with his easiness and affability, (as with sugar sprinkled
upon a bitter medicine,) had mittigated the g^iefe, which a Roman spirit
might take from the precious remembrance of lost liberty: while by seeming to
arrogate nothing, he obtained that all affairs of consequence should remain
at his devotion: yet one vncircumspection in not receiving the senate with due
reverence, cancelled all memory of former deserts, gave his enemies honest
color to bear him ill will, and authorized an opinion, that his death was
meritorious and lawful.

The seasoning of these oblations and ceremonies is, a readiness to pleasure,
devotion, faith sincerity, which we ought to add^esse according to the
present opportunity. In these apparances aequalles must be esteemed
superiors, and no circumstance must be omitted, either of meeting, or of
accompaniing, or of salutation: for these outward forms are observed as
demonstrations of the inward affection: Inferiors must be received with
manifestation of an hopeful willingness to see them compeares, by acknowledging
their merit and worthiness: but if they be of aequall rank, (as followers of
some great state) a man must stand indifferent to all: otherwise some will be
discontent, and think him moved with pass^ons: others insolent, when they know
that he is necessited to depend on them, howsoever they entreat him.

If any shall importune an unwonted request, the repulse must be modest by
showing the quality of the matter to be intractable, by rendering some
sufficient excuse (which may arise from the circumstances of time and place, or
other infinite accidents) by revealing a desire to open in a more fit time
those effects which envious occasion will not now permit. Thus Denials will be
interpreted as special favors, and me^ filled with a certain hopeful
reviving of mind will be contented with promise. Sic homines front and
oratione mag^s, quam ips^ beneficio, reque capiuntur.

The way to attain acceptable behauiours, is not a point of endeavor, (for
then it is feighned, and it always chances that feighned courtesy turns to
pride) but rather consists in a certain induction and readiness of the mind,
which if it be excellent, will easily suit it self in these Forms: for (as
it was said by one, whom to name were presumption) behavior is but a
garment, and it is easy to make a comely garment for a body in it self well
proportioned, whereas a deformed body can never be so helped by Taylorsarte,
but the counterfeiting will appear. Observation also is a good mean, but a
carelessness in expressing does add a singular grace, as one motion in
dancing kindly proceeding, performed recklesly, cunningly implies that a man
can do better then he can. If there be any art used, it must be in hiding
art, otherwise it will hold either of affected self conceit, or of tedious
ostentation.

Again, it is not sufficient to provoke men to disclose their interestes, by
giving ready audience and easy access: but also a man must patiently attend
their suits, the behavior being such, as may show all our powers occupied in
consideration of them, but by contradicting or foreconceiuing of the conclusion
to break off their conceits is a contempt, which touches the mind, and
cannot be redeemed with never so great good pleasures.

To deny a suit does dismiss men discontented, therefore in some cases it is
better to promise, although there appear no conueniencie for the effectuating:
for howsoever the present affair be disappointed, yet men are more pleased
with him, whom they see hindered in dispatch of weightier occurrences, then
they would be if they received a flat denial. This rule although it cannot
stand with the strict precepts and square of honesty, yet it is a special
point of this quality, (which I may call with Cicero, Artificium beneuolentia
colligendae) which is either a virtue, or cannot stand without virtue.

Also benefits must seem to be received rather of courtesy then of deserving:
and (amplifications drawn from the circumstances) it is good highly to
esteem them, as matters of great moment and very necessary, and employed in
time: for men love to be accounted profitatable, and to have their services
acknowledged.

Essay. 11 Of Iestes.
IT is a point of Affability to interlarde our discourses with some sayings
which may come from a readiness of Wit, and to place Mercury (as it were)
in the midst of the graces. A continued grave spe^chdoth hold of tediousnes:
To abuse Iestes too often does diminish the reputation of the business, and
impair^th gravity: but as a little water does not quench the fire, but is
used to inflame it: so these witty sayings serving opportunity, and
sparingly scattered in our speech, are acceptable in reenforcing of it, and
causing a stronger apprehension. They are the seasoning, and must not want that
matter and judgment which ought to be seasoned: otherwise in stead of giving
a delicate taste, they become tediously troublesome: He rein let us imitate wise
painters, who chi^fly propose to cou^terfeyt the miniature less intentive to
the utter ornaments as things apt to be varied, as shall best serve for
setting forth the principal: so the mind must be accommodated to the present
business, and iestes (the apparrelling of our speech) used as Parentheses, which
being in bewtifie, and mar not the sense.

And as skillful Architectes so dispose the windows in a stately edifice,
that neither the multitude weaken the house, nor the want be a deficient cause
of darkness: so a man must provide that neither the often use of Iestes cause
him to incur the name of ridiculous, nor the want breed opinion of
incourteous a^steritie. And as they take in the light where the air swimming
along a pleasant place, may make the prospect more excellent: so we ought to
inlette a jest into the body of more grave reasonings, when the opportunity and
lucky meeting of circumstances may make the delight more full.

These iestes are of special force in avoiding idle questions (many things
being fit so to be answered least they might be thought worthy of a grave
determination) vanita^^ proprie festiuitas cedit. They are more passable after
provocation and the apprehension of the wit appe^reth greater, especially if
the countenance be^ grave, and set, and if more may be surmised then the bare
letter does express: All dishonest forms or vulgar baseness must be eschewed:
They must not note any true defect, and therefore with weak and small natures,
not standing upon the might and strength of their own virtues, it is good to
contain many words, which may relish of a witty pleasingnes. For presently,
men guilty, think their ^^ate is touched, whereas another, who prete^deth to
virtue, and out of well grounded confidence, fears no disreputation would be
delighted. They must not concern any man's present calamity: for men in
misery are prone to suspect, and receive any thing as a contumely, by an
impotency persuaded that their misery is derided, and in minds already trobled,
new displeasures make a deeper impression, then they do in such spirits as are
free and void of passion.

Essay. 12. Of Discretion.
DIscretion is the Gouernesse of virtue, the rule of our behavior, the measure
of our affections, the Mistress of demeanure, that seasoning of our actions,
which makes them acceptable, teaching us to be comely without wantonness,
handsome without curiosity, solemn without tediousnes, learned without
vainglory, friendly without factiousnesse, severe without disquiet, valiant
without brauing, courteous with gravity, and benign with Majesty: and to
conclude it is the balance, in which we should weigh all our actions. But
least in setting forth the points of this quality, I should stray into the
confines of wisdom, and entitle it to those actions which hold of an higher
virtue, I will restrain it to such indifferent things, whose form and
quality of usage may appertain either to virtue or vice: But in performing
them a man must be precise: for the vulgar sort, (Qui stupet in titulis, and
imaginubus)
not able to see into matters themselves, will ever judge of the substance by
the circumstances, and according to the outward semblance preoccupie conceits
of the inward intentions: This is that which Cicero commends in great
Fortunes: non solum animis, sed etiam oculis ser^iro cinium, and not to think
himself discharged, except he accompany his actions with fair
likeliehoodes. This modesty (if it be not taken on for show, nor affected and
violent) is an external composure, and decency of Customs, rising out of that
inward moderation, by which all disordinate passions and irregular motions, are
subjected to the rule of reason, and through which a man fulfilleth that
Decorum, which by a sweet Harmony and good accord of fit time and place,
adds a singular grace to all our actions: teaching us to put a difference in
persons, and which diverse natures to treat diversely: with familiars to be
open hearted, with strangers suspicious, with clear dealing men secure, with
subtle Companions wary, with pleasants delicate, with the learned real, with
the ambitious desirous of their greatness, with the modest free from passions,
with the interessed distrustful, to evil men spa^ing in giving trust: And by
this applying to every man's humor, things difficult become facile, and matters
of trouble loose their grieuousnes.

Some men are so incapable, that they make small things great, easy
businesses impossible, and enterprise nothing, which through their perverse
grace is not difficultly accomplished, whose frowardness a man may compare to
the unskillfulness of some Chirurgions, who in stead of healing, fester a
wound, and in lieu of mitigation make the torments more grievously dangerous,
whereas expert Leaches do with gentle lenitiues redress the malady before
the Patient have any feeling of pain. So men discreet having their spirits
awaked to all circumstances manage matters with a more delicate deportment, and
by certain premised preparatiues so dispose the mind of the other agent, as it
may be apt to receive any form which they shall impose: And with the same art
deal with those, who by a crooked nature show themselves insupportable, or
transported with the fury of passions utter words full of disdain. Now men
indewed with this virtue of easiness, (as cunning Vaulters by a nimble slight
save themselves from the impetuous assault of the adversary) either by
drawing their reasons from some unexpected place, or by passing with a readiness
of apprehension to a more plausible subject, or by sounding a far off with
some extrauagant words, so follow their understanding, that at length they
condescend, using the same consideration, which good Players at ball have, who
not to suffer a rest, do not only stand attentive to send it to their
companion, but with like heed provide to retake it, by accommodating their
person, and expecting is in the likeliest place: so they to avoid all
hindrances do not only suit their own words, but also give favorable
co^structions to the speeches of the other agent, by dissembling the
discontentments which might arise: even as the Sun does not altogether move
with the highest heaven, nor yet is moved directly contrary, but fetching a
compass a little ouertwhart, makes an oblique circle, and by variety of
approaching and departing keeps the world in good temperature: So Otho being
not well established, and knowing that he must moderate that discipline, which
might seem to be exacted in such a case, in repressing a mutiny, imputes the
confusion and disturbances, to a tender and excessive affection of the
Soldiers toward him, more zealous then considerate. Nimia pieta^ vestra,
etc. And thus he quieted those, who (being by the guilt of rebellion excluded
from all hope of pardon) might according to the nature of man, (which hates
those whom it has hurt) fall to desperatio^ of recovering favor, when
desperation in such times of commotions might draw them to a settled resolution
to keep themselves out of reach of correction. For if one play false, the best
rule is, to seem not, to perceive it, and (if he begin (as suspected) to
clear himself) to semble never to have doubted of his fidelity. Qui enim so
non pu^at satafacere, amicus esse nullo mod^ po^est: Therefore Agripp^^^ in
Tacitus knowing her life attempted by N^ro, knew well, that her only remedy
was to take no notice of the treasons.

Neither is it the part of a seruilie fawning nature, to answer them with
moderation, which urge out of passion, but rather a quiet te^per grounded upon
a certain and infallible confidence in virtue. A man must rule his affections
and make reason like another Automedon to direct them, thereby to tolerate
other men's defectes, and make a virtuous resistance against pride, arrogancy,
and other such unjust rebellions of passions.

We must use the shield of mansuetude, which may mitigate the suddennes and
fury of anger, compose the inner powers of the mind, and conform the appetite
of revenge to reason: for this affection not regulated by an higher power,
makes a man forgetful of God and conscience, depriving the mind of the light
of judgment, distempering the humors of the body, and giving them a pray to
diverse dangerous diseases.

Essay. 13. Of Speech.
Our language must be natural without affectation* honest, comely,
significant, expressiue, proper, void of all feate and effeminate terms. In
speaking the rules are to utter our mind freely without dissembling: for words
doubtful and obscure reserved in particular, bound to respect or fear, or
arguments of a base mind, and tokens of imbecilitie of spirit: To avoid in
private discourses to take up the chair: for there is nothing more odious then
to affect to be wise out of time, and learning tastes not kindly to every
Pallet: To use sometimes conceits of learning, as the embroderies, but in an
hiden manner like as apparel does represent the proportion, but not the
barenes of our members. To point at Histories without making any particular
relation of the circumstances: to avoid comparisons, except they be restrained
to a Metaphore, for otherwise they cannot be sine apparatu Rhetorico, or some
other unseasonable insinuation, To avoid preposterousnes, for to know what is
treated, is the mother of attention in the hearer. But generally it is the
greatest wisdom rather to attend others, then to be an eloquent Merchant of
self conceits, for men expert and practiced, can out a man's words deduce
great consequences, and take light of matters of great importance.

Essay. 14. Of Wisdom.
IF we will know, what wisdom is, let us lay aside the curious questions of
Schoolmen, and such as are truly Nominalles, and consider it in the frame of
our Microcosme: where are two eyes signifying foresight with pondering upon the
likelihoode of success, two ears patiently to admit the counsel of others,
and not to be carried away with self complacence: one heart for perseuering in
an uniform resolution, and two hands for quick dispatching, and putting it
in execution: And this is wisdom, whereof there cannot be devised a more
expressiue Hierogliphicke, then the composition of our bodies.

This heavenly gift, begetting in our hearts a secret and invisible light,
has some resemblance to the eyes of some courageous wild beasts, which in the
morning when every silly creature makes use of the sight, repose themselves:
but in the dark night see clearest, and then address themselves to pray: So
wisdom in difficulte affairs such as are beyond the strain, and level of
a common discourse, behaueth herself excellently: but triuiall matters with a
certain despisingnes neglects or handles them under expectation a^ a common
judgment would do. Therefore men of a deep insight and great understanding,
having neither degree nor riches, nor authorities, equal to their sufficiency
in things of small momente, as disproportionated to their virtue, behave
themselves sometime inconsideratelie careless: but admitted to the sweighing
of great matters, vnexpectedlie come to reveal in deeds and conceits that
greatness and majesty which by the baseness of their fortune was oppressed
and kept under. Excitantur enim ad meliora magnitudine rerum, and they love to
be employed in that which might be, rare excellent, singular, and above the
ordinary capacity.

The first part of Wisdom is deliberation, in which we must resolve neither
with have nor affection, the one not giving time enough to discuss those
things which ought to be considered, the other so occupying the mind, that no
thought creep in which does not in all regards conform it self to give
sufferance to that passion: we must promise our selves nothing before our
conceptions are by great presumptions assured of success. For the feruencie of
hope makes men somewhat more reckleshly negligent, insomuch that when they are
disapointed, they are as impatiently grieved, as if they had fallen from an
essential felicity, like nouice Marchantes, who forecounting great gains,
and failing of their fresh expectation, are suddenly embarked in that
unrecoverable mischief of debt.

In counsel it is the greatest excellency (and in many natures rather to be
wished then hoped for) to prefer the opportunity of time before the
suggestion of disdain, to moderate deseignes according to the adverse, or
prosperous wind of occasion, to serve time and not obstinatlie wrestle with
foul weather, but like an experienced Pilotte put into some harbor till the
cleared sky promise a more secure passage. But we must not betake our selves
to those remedies, which do rather declare the greatness of danger, then
redress the inconveniences, neither must we think in great deliberations to
avoid all inconveniences: for it is impossible that in this world one thing
be engendered without the corruption of another, and every commodity is
unfortunately annexed to some discommoditie, But let us remember Rade volte
aduien, che ad alte imprese
Fortuna ingiuriosa non contrasti.
Slow counselles are fit rather to preserve then increase a state, speedy and
quick do rather increase then preserve: Agendo, audendoque res Romana creuit.
But in cases of exigencie, the worst course is to be governed by middle
counselles, neither to be cautelous sufficiently in providing, nor earnest
enough in executing.

But as mines if they be secretly made, produce wonderful effects, otherwise
endamage more then they avail: so counsels if they be wrapped up in silence,
are very fortunately powerful in civil actions, but diuulgated loose their
force, when the other party has time to frustrate their ends.

The way to keep a thing private is to acquainte no body with it: Those things
which are known only to ourselves, cannot be common, those things which are
imparted to another cannot be secret. No man but has some friend, whose
fidelity he holds so assured that he may safely entrust him with his
nearest touching secret, and he presently will with equal confidence to
another disclose, till at length it be generally known.

And how can a man exact that faith in another, which he has violated in
himself? or how require silence when he has not performed it? or what
indiscretion is it by opening to another to enter a voluntary servitude, and to
live awed, lest we discontent him? But in committing any secrets to another, we
must imitate those, who in trying a new vesse^l, first prove it with water,
before they trust it with wine.

There is nothing more contrary to this quality, then the passion of anger,
which a man ought especially to moderate, by empyring over his affections, and
triumphing in commanding himself to forgive in such sort, that it break not
out into words, specially against those, who stand able to justify themselves
in the full of reputation: Those men, (which as Cosmo said) carry their heart
in their mouth, are rather to be pitied then feared, their threatninges serving
for no other end, the^ to arm him that is threatened.

The chiefest rules of Wisdom are these* To provide against the beginnings of
evil: for disorders at the first little gather strength in tract of time, even
as insensible vapors bring forth horrible tempests: But when the evil does
exceed power of resistance, it is best by timing and discreet waiting to
expect opportunity, for things in time receive contrary reuolutions, and
conclude clean different from their first appearance and likelihoode.

To continue in action and menaging of matters: for new businesses arise out of
the former, both by reason of the coherency and way, that one open to another,
and als^ by the authority which is regained by being engaged in the handling
of the^: Cas^r at his first rising into great expectation, would not suffer any
matters of moment to pass at Rome, without his participation and notice,
insomuch that even no conspiracy or matter of innovation could happen but he
was an agent: For he was a party in the combination of Crassus and his
companies, of Cai^t P^s^ and of Cateline. But to be interessed in many
businesses of consequence at one time, does divide a man, and cause him to make
imperfect offers, and reuerse things before they be perfected.

To accompany all actions with a good color, for many ( quibus magno^ vinos
per ambitionem est imare moest) not able to see into things themselves, will
make judgment by the circumstances.

To avoid sudden chaunges: for that does hold of violence, and violence does
seldom sort to any prosperous ends.

To prefer the present state, before innouations, and that which is it in
turbido: for this is nothing else but to account rather of certainety, then
incertainety, rather of things easy and safe, then magnificent and dangerous.

Not to give sufferance to the first wrongs: for that breeds proper
derogation: Such unworthy tollerations inspire the party wi^h boldness, and
are (as it were) pullies to draw on injuries: but to call things into
correction, preserves authority.

To dissemble according to the apparances and fashions of the time: Tiberius
gloried in nothing so much as his cunning in cloaking his purposes with fair
pretenses, and going inuisibly, in which surely he was excellent.

To settle more assurance in him, that expects, the^ in him who has received
a benefit: for by speeding in suits, men become slack waiters, when hope of
honor and gain (the only sovereign mean to conserve men in due devotion)
shall be satisfied.

To be wisely diffident, and put on a judicial distrust: Put on I say because
there is nothing less familiar, and easy to honest men then to suspect: for
they think the strength of virtue in another, whereof they find the
foundation in themselves, for it is very true that men most fairly conditioned
are of the first impression and apt to be trained into errors: but such as are
practiced in wickedness, goo always armed against the like. To suspect causlesly
in stead of imagined wrong, returns an effectual injury, and many have
invited their friends to deceive them while too injuriously their fidelity is
called in question.

To despise injuries of honor nobly, and with an highness of mind: for contume
lies not regarded vanish of themselves into oblivion, but repined at, argue a
guilty conscience, Men envious (desiring to perish rather with their own
vices, then be saved by another virtue) are ready to diminish the reputation
of a more worthier: But the best answer to their slanders is to answer
nothing, and so to steward the effects of revenge, as if the adversary were
rather to be contemptuously pitied, then reckoned of: or rather a man must
endeavor by doing well to authorize an ill opinion of them. For as envy is the
shadow of virtue: So when virtue shall come to that perfection, as to reveal
it self to the world, then like the vertical sun it abateth all shadows,
which the low creeping obie^tions of detraction can stir. In suffering
things of this quality is showed the grea^est force and magnaminitie, and a
sure confidence in virtue: Let us remember that an honest and wise man can no
way be dishonored: that it is an excellent and divine commendation, Ab
^^ditione mala non timeba^.

To qualify envy (which undoubtedly will arise in men of no action, in
sufficiency being very apprehensiue) the best course is to attribute the
successes rather to faelicitie th^n virtue. Therefore Sylla to suppress any
such humors, as prejudicial to his rising and greatness, referred the honor of
his exploites to the special grace of Fortune, and the better to increase that
opinion oftentimes auerred, that enterprises hazarded according to the sudden
occasion, better prospered with him, then those which by good advise he
determined of.

Envy also has no force when it appears, that the actions are directed
rather to virtue, then to fame. Great Fortunes having achieved matters worthy
themselves, must not ambitiousely seek ceremonies, nor abuse the pr^sperous
ends to vanity of Speech: but by avoiding popular meetinges, by moderating
the rumor of deserte, they must begin, - Otium and somnum loqus, and excuse
themselves from entering into any actions of the like quality, but in such
sort, that neither through the motion of worldly appetite, and ambition, they
seek to embrace more then is convenient, nor through too many suspicions, and
too-much incredulity, they deprive themselves of great occasions.

Essay. 15 Of Reputation.
REputation is a common conceit of extraordinary virtue acquired not by the
multitude, but by the gretnes of acts, by so stewarding a man's seasonable
endeavors, as that which is done may be apprehended, as rare, singular, great,
without paragon, admirable. Small virtues and of ordinary excellency win both
trust and love: for the understanding presently finding in them a degree of
worthiness, moves the will to embrace them: but great virtues drawing with them
a certain divine competencie and greatness, so amuse the intellectual part in
contemplation of their vale^^, that the affection of love is excluded as not
able to honor, when the mind is never satisfied in admiring.

Those actions do chiefly settle this impression, which proceed from a
discreet despising of those things, which the common sense of worldlinges
apprehends to be desired: as to refrain from those lustful affections, into
which human imbecilitie is prone to seduce the most restrained imagination:
or to resolve against death, and rather encounter the most hideous forms of
danger, then overcome by any unjust advantages: or by commanding over all
private interestes, by forgetting all natural affections, when they stand not
with an higher virtue: So Scipio by offering no dishonor or violence to that
fair damsel Allucius his Spouse: So Fabritius in returning the traytorous
Physician to his deserved punishment, So Manlius by performing exemplary
justice upon his sole son, obtained this esteem, and a love mixed with
authority. Surely that action imported a wonderful temper of mind, and an
absolute victory of those passions which in such cases would ouersweigh the best
grounded resolution: For even Aeneas himself, in whom magnanimity does shine
through all mistie fearefulnes, having with a secure bravery of mind, passed
multitudes of his enemies, yet when he has taken charge of his Father, and
his son (...), he finds himself disarmed of that virtuous indifferency,
fearing their fear, quaking at every shadow, Et pariter comitique, onerique
timentem.


To confirm our minds in this despisingnes, we must direct our course to
attain the Haven, and quiet of a good conscience, accounting all other things
in no other proportion, then as the winds and tempests, which would remove us
from this determination, by forcing us with a weak despair, and coward hating
of life to retire into the harbor of idleness: we must remember to accustom our
thoughts to expectation of troubles, to receive them with no perturbation, to
rule over Fortune, to think her nothing if human ignorance and imbecilitie
did not deifie her, if our vain ambitions and disordinate concupicences did
not arm her in that usurpation of reasons seignory: we must seek true
felicity in the center of the mind, and not in the circumference of worldly
things, which are subject to continual revolution: for that is to give our
selves a pray to those alterarions, which follow the interchaunge of fair and
contrary accidents: we must know, that as we are compounded of an heavenly,
and earthy substance, so our care must be to provide for the good of the
better part, and for the body but in a lower degree, as the instrument of the
soul. And as we must not contemn in this life, fame, honor, wealth,
friends, and those things which in the deceiuable style of appetite are
called goods, and attributed to fortune, but by honest means endeavor their
fruition, as things good or bad according to the use: so we must not delight
in them for themselves, nor be troubled in suffering their privation, nor out
of an humor of confidence provoke miseries: Ascanius in a youthful bravery,
Optat aprum, aut fuluum descendere monte leonem:
But that desire proceeds from a not well guided (but yet excusable) heat of
unripe years: We perform our deuoires, if void of fear (the only thing to
be feared) we so tolerate unavoidable mischiefs, that they neither disturb
reason, nor drive the mind to unrest: otherwise as a fever does hinder the
operatio^s of the body, so sorrow springing from these chances (if it be not
moderated) disquieteth reason, admits many corrupt and disdainful
inclinations, subiecteth the mind to infinite defections, and stays the
execution of great and worthy actions.

This aptresse of resolution, or of disposing a man's inward self, is waited on
with valor and wisdom which are the two most principal pillars of Reputation,
not only in respect of their coherency in the same manner, as the eye and the
hand, but because they rather come of a benefit of nature, then intent and
choice (the one proceeding from a readiness of wit, the other from a
presence and courage of mind) drawing with them in a kind of depende^cie
these heroical virtues, magnanimity, patronage of justice against all
oppressions and magnificence. Other virtues of meekenes, humanity and
courtesy, in ministering to the wantes of men, in preferring them to places of
honor, in redeeming the offender from the rigor of the law, do stir
affection: but these ^ertues, if the common weal be a party in enjoying
them; win admiration. The actions which chiefly reveal them are victories in
the field beyond expectation, surprisinges of Cities, erections of stately
houses for common uses, grave and fortunate counsailing the State, discreet
discharging of Embassages.

To the obtaining this opinion, must concur two other helping causes, as
^specially remarkable in great Fortunes: first Nobility, for if the
auncesters were men of valor, and eminency in virtue, the vulgar ^ort (out of
a true love to men of deferr) will preoccupie the same conceit of their issue.
Secondly conversation, which if it be among men worthy, presently argues a
likeness in manners, to the people which see^ nothing but apparances and makes
judgment by that which is subject to fight, thinking a man so qualified (...)
those with whom he does enfelowship. But these reasons, although they are of
great consequence, yet are doubtful, and the expectation is weakelie g^ounded
upon opinion only, which presently changes, except it be established by
some ouert action, which may be worthy themselves both for difficulty of
accomplishing and sucessefull end.

Those things which are done in youth (because this age is not only not
envied, but also favored) are of great moment in giving life to the opinion of
the world, and in nourishing such presumptions, as confirmed by some great and
noble exploite, may suddenly grow into this actual reputation. Therefore in
Rome the young men of greatest hope did either prefer some law in behalf of
the people, or put lawbreakers in suit (a thing as Plutark^ says, pleasing
the people as much as to see a notable course of a dog at an hair) or which
is more commendable, defended the innoc^n^^ of the oppressed against the
injurious ^ntreaties of the powerable and great ones, (as Ciceroes patronizing
of Rosciu^ at so unripe years, and with such liberty of speech against the
potency of proud Sylla, was the first step to the possibility of his
greatness,) Or did some thing which might move talk and become Fabula vulgi
through the whole City, as Manlius his rescue of his Father from the
Tribunes, or Caes^rs dealing in compounding the ciu^ll dissentions of Pompey
and Crassus, by showing them, that their mutual depressions served for nothing,
but to increase the authority of their enemies, and arm a third with ^h^t
credit, which now remained inviolable in themselves: This action argued a wit
far ouergoing the greenness of his age, and was the first moouer of the
peoples affection toward him: for what is more honorable then to treat in
according two so noble personages, which had lived so long in separation. But
because an opinion thus obtained must be fed by the like means, or else
vanishes as soon as it appears to the world: This commendation must be
accounted in no other measure, but as an encouragement to do better, or as the
air, which makes men grow up in virtue, and quickneth the appetite to
enterprise things of high deserving praise.

For preserving Reputation is required Religion, and (that concurrance of
divine virtue) felicity: When the opinion of being religious is established, it
seems that all other virtues must follow of necessity, and by it all
suspicions of any v^^etie, or lack of virtue are silenced. But here we must
avoid two rocks, superstition, and dissimulation: In the one is small
wisdom, because these bug^beares, and Chimeraes of opinion, render a man
incapable of weighty matters, idle, contemptuous, vainly fearful, simple
and open to be practiced upon by all deceitfulnes: In the other appears great
cra^t, and when zeal is put on, as a pretext to palliate wickedness, it
brings such Nullifidians to be odious, suspected and abhorred by the common
consent of men: and therefore it is best to be sociall in show, but precise in
effect: to keep God sparingly in our mouth, but abundantly in our heart.

The works which chiefly betoken a man religious are, to apprehende, to
advance the Ministry, to provide for those, who do not in plausible forms
preach themselves, but despising such a pompous and malepert manner breath
grace and truth: to furnish them with sufficient livings, because there is
nothing which more impaireth the reverence due to that profession, then
needinesse.

Concerning felicity, some men are borne under a propitious aspect of heaven,
or rather favored with divine grace, which guides their actions under a
continual protection of good luck* These men bringing their deseignes to
prosperous issues, are thought of ^ iu^^ement and valor equal for the
accomplishment of the like, and as the Comedient says, -Exinde eos sapere
omnes dicimus,
While not considering the weakness and imperfections of their counsels, we
make judgment by the event.

The chief Rules to maintain Reputation are these: To have more deeds then
words, rather doing things worthy to be spoken, then speaking things worthy
to be done: To avoid words of vaunting or bravery, and in relations to be
reserved in self commendations: for fame by suppressing is augmented, and
praise in this resembles a quaint Dame, which follows those that despise
her, and flies those that follow her: To acknowledge no dependencie, for that
is to confess vncapablenes and defec^es: To be uniform in life and actions,
constantly maintaining ^orde and prom^se: To attempt ^hinges within power and
feasible: ^or easily to give over enterpises ^mplieth either small iud^ement
in ^ssaying, or a little min^e in not ^roseq^uting: To neglect sma^l ac^ions
after the accomplishment of ^reat* for to a Personag^ of valor ^here is not a
more nece^sar^ thing, ^hen to know the height of his great^esse. M^rius in not
contenting ^imselfe with the reputation gotten ^n the Cimbrian war diminished
it ^y entering into other actions: Not ^o be discountenanced in missing any
place, or office: for sometime, ^uch failing in suits augmenteth this ^steeme:
We may read of Lamias ^n Tacitus a Senator of birth and quali^y, whosuing to
be governor of Siri^ was repelled: At non promissa prouin^ia digna^ionem
addiderat. ^he cause was, because the people which is a beholder of the Princes
actions, makes ouerbolde interpretations of them, and ambitiouslie comparing
men of merit, when they find desert vnacknowledged, presently with
presumptuous rashness conclude the defect in the Prince, and by making it the
subject of their conference, increase his esteem that was disappointed: for
this reason Cato said, that he had rather that the people should enquire why
he had no statue erected to his memory, then why he had. And again, I
observe that at the solemnising of Iunias funeralles among the images of
twenty noble houses, were left out that of Cassius, her husband and Brutus her
brother, to the intent to extinguish their memory: but yet they did shine above
all the rest for this only, because their images were not represented.

Moreover, things must be entrusted to men responsall and sufficient: To use
base and unable men for instruments in executions of weight, does empaire
their credit. No office must be undertaken with any extraordinary opinion*
For (...) not aunswering such conceits, (men desiring things impossible) does
in time breed infamy.

This Reputation once obtained, worke^h a loving fear in the people, (love
stirring their affection, and fear mingling it with authority) Love is the
most forcible of all our p^ssions, and as the principal gives vigor and motion
to the rest: but it is a thing doubtful and deceaueable, in respect of the
imperfection of men: for no mam can demean himself with such circumspection,
that he can satisfy and please all, because men's minds are by nature
insatiable, upon every accident changing opinion, inconstant, murmuring for
trifling regards, always disliking the present, and preferring things of
expectation and hope, before certainety and quietness, insomuch that one
favor, if it be not equally given to all, but in any greatet proportion
measured to one particular, clean cancelleth the memory of forepassed good
turns: Such is the nature of man, that late benefits are clean lost if there
be not an hope to receive more, and although the obligations be never so
great, yet one thing denied does soly possess the memory, and all our favors
are drowned in forgetfulness. Fear is a more certain ground, then love for
maintaining authority, because love is in the power of the lover, fear in
him, that makes himself feared: But yet fear procures hatred, which
although it be dissembled so long as it is unable to shake off obedience, yet
when a greater force shall untie that knotte, it will burst out into open
contesting.

Now because men easy bring themselves into contempt, men terrible and austere
incur hatred, there is another middle quality, which I may either call a
loving fear, or a reuerencing love following Reputation. This is a conseruer
of that obedience and authority, in which men of great quality ought to
retain the multitude: for as the Elements which otherwise stand at defiance,
are by the heavenly Spheres conformed into well ruled motions without violence
or enforcement, only obeyeing the noblenes of their nature: so men show
themselves willing to be didirected by those, who preceade, and are enobled by
an eminency of virtue.

Essay. 16. Of Liberality.
SOme receive and entertain favorites with kind gestures only, unmeasurable
in promises, but spare in ministering to their wantes, whom I may fitly compare
to some fruits, which by a lushious smell, and delightful color inuit a man
to eat, but prove unsavory and distasteful. They that are the dispensers of
Gods temporal graces must apply themselves to find out men of an honest and
exemplarie life and to acknowledge their desert, Vt non sit tantum ex
conscientia merces. They are the second causes, which by giving life and
entertainment to virtue, must so dispose and prepare me^ of honest demeanure,
as they may be fit to receive any form of honor or place, which (the first
mouer of the common weal) the prince shall bestow upon them: It is a fair
title to be the fosterer of desert, and the countenance of those, who through
modesty are ready to retire from revealing themselves in doing their country
good.

The rewards of goodness, or vice frame me^ accordingly: few are of so
judicial a wit, as they measure virtue for the inner peace and contentment,
and not according to success: others seeing the guerdon due to merit, abused
in maintaining wickedness, think to obtain by the same means, and fashion
themselves accordingly, and when evil men receive favor and place (besides
the injury done to virtue) Hand facile quisquam gratuito bonus est:
Liberality thus employed in favoring good wits, in nourishing arts, in
quickening those lifefull seeds of goodn^sse, in inuiting men to surpas
themselves, is the only ve^tue, wh^^h overcomes envy, and breed^^h regard
even in our enemies: for men learned once endeared by an^^ obligation, as the
heads and o^^rrulers of the common opinion of the world, bind all other men
to reverence their patron, and by sweet commemoration of received benesites
win them to pattern themselves to their courses, as the only hopeful ends
to rise by.

This virtue must be natural and amongst those things which cannot be
imputed to election, and exercised with delight to do good: when it is
encouraged by a grateful return of hoped gain, it is nothing but a base kind
of counterchange and marchandizing; It resembles the divine nature, which
communicates to all, and expects no future advantages: and although the use
of this virtue is sw^ete, when a man finds the ^eturne of thankfulness, yet
Liberalitatem cl^riorem ingratus debtor facit: it is more noble when it
finds the repayment of ingratitude: Discretion must govern this virtue,
otherwise the ^races which are virgins will turn whores: Followers ought to
be countenanced both in their own suits, and also in the requests of their
familiars: for as apparel at first cold, receiving heat from us, conserueth
our bodies with the heat, we have given it, so the Ministers or attendantes
of a great state, being advanced by their patron, increase his reputation and
power ablenes: But they must not be over importune, or urge oftener then is
convenient: For so they become like the Iu^e, which by an over hard embracing
hinders the growing of the oak. It is good also to be reserved in giving to
those, who quicksighted in spying secret dislikes, will make use of such
occasions, and by multiplying suspicions, wind themselves into favor, by
working a more worthier into disgrace: These men know no other habites but
avarice, selfeseeking contempt of others, and an high esteem of their own
unworthiness. It is a difficult thing to sound their hollow dispositions, and
cauterized consciences, but the best notes to know them by are these. They have
no conformity with themselves, now commending, anon discommending the same
thing, taking or putting of a person, as the time or place shall require: they
never stand well affected with men of their own rank or society, but if they
love any, they must be Great men, It is an infallible sign of a crooked
nature, (as Cicero says,) to seem affected to none but to Praetors.

FINIS.

