CHRIST'S VVATCH-VVORD.

BEING THE PARABLE OF the Virgins, expounded and applied to these times of
security.

Or an Exhortation of our Saviors to us, that we may watch and prepare our
selves for the unknown times of death and judgment.

MATTHEW. 25.13. Watch, for you know not the day nor the hour when the Son of
man will come.

LONDON Printed by W. J. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Golden Cup in Cheapeside. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD DOCTOR THEOPHILUS BVCKVVORTH, by the
providence of God Lord Bishop of Dromore, my singular good Lord and Patron.
THE manifold exhortations of Christ and his Apostles considered with the
security of these times, are reasons sufficient both to command and encourage
his servants to be watchful, and to awaken others both by voice and writings,
that they hold the times of death and judgment before their eyes: yet for mine
own particular J have reasons leading me unto this forwardness, not only
excusing, but also enforceing me to the publishing of this present Treatise.
First, J was not able by writing to satisfy the importunity of those who heard
some of it delivered, nor of those unto whom (upon entreaty) some of it was
communicated, except it had been published. Secondly, I considered, that the
same Scripture was not particularly handled by any either ancient or modern,
(so far as J can learn) though Commentatours have given brief notes upon
it; which moved me the rather to communicate this Exposition, or by my
rashness to stir up others more learned, to give sufficient contentment unto
such, who by this motion may be set on longing. Thirdly, the disposition of men
requires, that in so necessary a subject they have not only admonition in
words, but that there remain a daily admonisher standing in sight: yea they
who loathe repetition of one thing, yet love to read often over such things as
they find to move their consciences: unto which may be added Saint Peter's
example, who endeavored not by word alone, 2 Pet: 1, 13.
but by writing also to put his heareres in remembrance. Lastly, J always
desired, as both my duty first, and your Lordships unexpected bounty in the
next place tied me, to render account of my labor unto you, and to express
my thankfulness both to God and to the world, for your ordinary
encouragements of Gods servants, your favors in particular to me, and your
willingness to have the flock of Christ exhorted by these my weak endeavors,
who are bounden to return prayers to God for your Lordship only, for
whatsoever benefit they may reap reap hereby. J dare not (as building a
stately gate for lowly cottages) invite the Readers with goodly promises,
seeing I am conscious of mine own weakness and unability to perform: neither
need I entreat the zealous Christian; seeing the title, the subject, and his
own desire to Gods word, are incitements sufficient unto him. And I doubt not
but the countenance of you, (...), (who in name, Luke 12, 35 etc and 17, 24.
etc and 21, 17. etc.
honor and religion, are the same with that honorable Christian, to whom this
subject was commended by S. Luke at the beginning) will make it to have better
acceptance at all their hands, who are (according as your name imports) the
friends and lovers of God. So praying God long to continue you an instrument of
his glory, I take leave; acknowledging my self ever

Your Lpps. most bounden Chaplain, THOMAS IOHNSTON.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST PART OF THE XXV. CHAPTER OF SAINT MATTHEW: Being an
exhortation of our Savior to us, that we may watch and prepare our selves, for
the unknown times of death and judgment.
OF all Doctrines to be Preached, that great and fearful day of account,
ought never to be forgotton; when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from
heaven, Our Savior and his Messengers have been careful to remember the
trumpet that shall call us to judgment. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
with his mighty Angels, In flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that do
not know God, and which obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ:
which shall be punished with everlasting perdition; from the presence of the
Lord, and from the Glory of his power. Whosoever believes and remembers the
terror of the Lord, and the strict account that he must make, will be careful
to walk the more honestly, and so frame his life, as he wishes to have favor
in judgment. Therefore the holy men of God, have been careful to remember
us, of the fearful sound of the Trumpet calling us to judgment; Ecclesiast
11.9.
Solomon sounds this Trumpet in young men's ears, saying, Remember for all this
that God will bring thee to judgment: He sounds it in the ears of all men,
Chap. 12.14.
that God will bring every work to Judgment, and every secret thing, whether
it be good or evil. Saint Paul is a fearful sounder of it, to the
Corinthians and Thessalonians, when he considered of it, he trembled knowing
the terror of the Lord. 2 Cor 5.11. In Reg. Monach. Cap. 30.
Jerome said, that whether he eat or drank, or whatsoever he did, he thought,
that he heard this Trumpet sounding in his Ears, Rise dead and come to
Judgment. And the Church of God, has laid before us in our Creed, to be
said every day, that Christ shall come again, to judge the quick and the
dead. Most of all, our Lord Jesus Christ, who best knew both our danger and
remedy, is careful to put us in remembrance of it, who in this sermon,
preached it three times, twice in the former Chapter, and proved it by the
example and experience of the world in the days of Noe, verse. 42.44.
and of the common carfulness of men in less dangers; Verse, 43.
for who would sleep and suffer his house to be dug through? Now because
it stands every one upon the damnation of his soul that labors not to prevent
it, and men are careless of unseene and unfelt dangers, therefore our Savior
preaches it the third time, and labors to imprint it in our hearts, by the
comparison and success of wise and foolish Virgins. But why does he repeat
this matter so often, and insist in it so much? Barnard Sermon. 1, super Missus
est.
Credo quia noluit nos negligenter audire, quod tam diligenter studuit
enarrare; I believe, it is because he would not have us careless to hear,
that which he is so careful to set down: and that we may know, Idem cap. 2,
meditat.
quanto diligentior est Deus admonendo, tanto strictior erit, judicando, si
neglexerimus; that the more careful the Lord is, to admonish us, the more
severe shall he be, to punish us if we neglect.

This Chapter is the History of Christ his second coming, comprehending in it;
Division of the Chapter.
First his unexpected coming in the Parable of the Virgins. Secondly the
severe and exact account, that shall be taken, in the Parable of the Talents.
Thirdly, the just sentence of the judgment, pronounced and executed, in the
history of the sheep and goats: which three are the sum of this Chapter.

This Parable of the Virgins, has three parts, Division of the Parable.
(for in every comparison, we are to consider, the propounding, amplifying, and
applying.) First the Parable is propounded, verse. 1. Secondly amplified, unto
the 13 verse. Thirdly, applied unto the intended purpose verse 13.

In expounding this, or any other Parable, A Rule to be observed in expounding
Parables.
we may not curiously inquire every particular, nor think (...) God, and the
actual Government thereof, as in this Parable, which shows, though in this
part of the heavenly kingdom, (wherein we see the true or counterfeite
preparing for Heaven) there be wise and foolish, yet the time will come when
they shall be separated, and these who deceived themselves shall find them
barred out of the Kingdom.

The state of the Church in this world.
By this name, our Savior gives, 1. a general threatening to all, whilst he
teaches the general state of men, concerning Salvation; that the Church has
wise and foolish, Elect and Reprobate, and many shall be rejected, who were
esteemed, and esteemed themselves of the Kingdom of Heaven. Heaven, Earth and
hell, are places appointed for men; In Heaven none are but good, in Hell none
but evil men, the Earth is a common receiver of good and evil, from which in
end, both good and evil do go. But while we are in this world, Greg. Mor.
lib. 31 ca. 12.
we must live and be joined together, et vt mali mutentur per exempla bonorum,
et boni purgentur per tormenta malorum, that the evil may be changed by the
examples of good men, and the good may be purged by the torments of wicked men.
Therefore we must remember, Math. 13.47.
that as a nett gathers Fishes of all kinds, which being in the Sea are not
known, but are discerned on the shore; so is it in the end of the world, what
sort of Christians we are, the world hides, but judgment shall discover: in
one barn are wheat and chafe, Math. 3. Math. 25.
in one field the Sheep and Goats feed together, which shall be separate in
Judgment; Tares remains with the good seed until the harvest, clean and
unclean beasts stayed in Noah's Arc while the flood endured: so wicked and
godly men, must be together, whilst this troublesome world indureth; and this
is taught us, that we may discern, and mark of what sort and faction we are
of, whether of the Church prepared for salvation; or in the Church, and yet
reserved for destruction.

Secondly, Heaven is our native country. Ioh. 18.36.
whilst the Church is called the Kingdom of heaven, it is to put us in mind,
that our kingdom and native country is Heaven and not earth: Christ our King
said, that his Kingdom was not of this world, it was the kingdom of Heaven.
So are the servants of God, here they are strangers and out of their country,
they dwell in a strange land, they are in the world, not of the world, they are
of the Kingdom, Heb. 11.13. Psalm 39.12. Heb. 11.14.
not in the kingdom. Abraham confessed himself a Pilgrim, David a stranger,
as his Fathers were: in all their actions they showed, that they sought another
country, if their happiness and kingdom had been in this life, then of all
men they were most miserable, whose greatest joys were, to be valiant in
greatest miseries. As they that are borne in this Land, are Denizons in
England, so though we are borne and live here, our title of freedom is in
Heaven, there are we Denizons. God for three sorts of people has made three
places: Math 25 41. Act. ^.25.
Hell for the Devil and his Angels, of which wicked men are a part, the
Scripture says of Judas, that he went to his own place; So this is their
Country: Psalm. 17:14.
the Earth for ungodly men, David calls them the men of this world, who have
their portion in this life; Math. 25.34.
this is their country: Heaven is our Country. Christ says to his elect,
that it is the Kingdom prepared for them: this therefore is our Country for
which we are chosen. For which we are set to be trained up.
Here we are as children, set a nursing and breeding in this strange place,
wherein (as little children) we are ready to fall in fire and water, Math.
8.11. and 9.15.
to perish both by having and wanting, in many perils are we, before we be
perfect men and women in Christ, or fitted to inherit the Kingdom; and
therefore while we are a training up for heaven, our Savior calls us, the
Children of the Kingdom, and children of the marriage chamber.

This comfort our Savior gives us, to assure us of the continual care our
heavenly Father has of us, Therefore the Lord takes the greater care of us.
John 17.15.16. Repetit igitur in mundo non sunt, multo subsidio habent opus
Theophil. in locum.

And we should take the greater care to prepare our selves


we are not of the world, and therefore the Lord ought have the greater care of
us (as Christ teaches us) and if the Lord has care to keep the strangers, (
Psalm. 147.9.) much more will he have care to keep the strangers, that
appertain to his own Kingdom. Secondly, if we be set to be brought up for
the kingdom of Heaven, which is prepared for us long ago, then ought we to
prepare our selves for it; this is the use and sum of the whole Parable. A
Heathen answering to the question, why are we suffered to remain so long as
strangers and banished men in the earth; Cicero lib. de Senectut.
answers, Qui coelestium ordinem contemplantes, vitae modo imitarentur et
constantia, that being set to behold the order of the Celestial bodies, they
might imitate them, (...) 5.19 Dignum va^de est and omnino exigit ratio
aequitatis, ut quibus a constitutione mundi regnu^ paratur, ipsi etiam sese
regno parare non negligant etc.
in manner and constancy of life; but to speak plainly (with S. Bernard) It
is most worthy, and the reason of equity requires, that they for whom a
Kingdom was prepared before the beginning of the world, should likewise prepare
themselves for the Kingdom, least it be of them, that was said of the guestes
of the great Supper, that the Supper was ready, but they that were called were
unworthy.

To what is this Kingdom prepared? Even to ten Virgins, etc. That is to say,
to the solemnizing of a great marriage. Now although the fashion of solemnizing
Marriages in our times, do not in every point agree with this Parable, yet does
it agree with the fashion of Marriages, Fashion of Jews marriage.
which the Jews used in Christ's days, and when their state and commonwealth
flourished: Iansenius in hunc locum. Mat. 1.
that the parties to be married, were by promise and oath bound each to the
other (as we read that Joseph and Mary were betrothed) and the Marriage, at
more convenient time to be solemnized, which was done most in the night (the
fittest time for mirth and banketting as St. Paul says. Romans 13.12.13.
) Now while the Bridegroom was at hand, the Bryde with a company of virgins met
him, with lamps and torches, who all entered into the mariage-house with the
Bride and Brydgrome. When David prophesies of the marriage between Christ and
his Church, he describes it in the foresaid manner, saying, Psalm. 45.14.15.
The Bryde shall be brought unto the King, in raiment of needle work, the
Virgins that follow after her, and her companions, shall be brought unto thee;
with joy and gladness shall they be brought, and shall enter into the Kings
Palace. Thus much for History. In which we are to consider, the Bridgrome,
the Virgins, their lamps, their oil, their going out, and meeting the
Bridgrome: of which particulars, some appertain to the second part of the
Parable.

But for the comparison, observe, that Christ says (it shall be likened.) In
Math: 22.2. he says, it is like unto a wedding, where servants were sent out
to invite guests, in this Parable he says, It shall be so likened: in this
there is no diversity. Gods Kingdom, according to diverse states and times,
may have several comparisons; in this life God is preparing these things for
us, This life is only for preparing our selves.
and by his word and servants inviting us unto this Marriage: but in the life to
come, it shall be like unto another comparison, to a marriage in the
solemnizing, that is, all time and means of preparation shall be past, that
they who lose this day of Salvation, shall be as foolish virgins, and said
unto, that the Lord knows them not.

The Bridgrome and Virgins.
Who is the Bridgrome.
SAint John Baptist, shows us who is the Brydgrome, in these words; He is the
Brydgrome that has the Bryde, the friend of the Bridgrome, is he, who hears
his voice, John 3.29.
and rejoices greatly, But who is this that has the Bride? St. Paul tells the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.2.
I have betrothed you to one man, to present you, a pure virgin unto Christ.
And by the other mark, Christ is the Bridegroom, for all his servants shall
rejoice to hear his voice, at the great day, at which, John. 5.28. Who is the
Bride.
the dead shall come out of their graves. The Bride must be these Virgins that
go out to meet him.

Observe (by the way) that (where certain virgins did present themselves in
one company, to the Bridgrome) that marriage is then most honorable in the fight
of God and men, When is marriage truly honorable.
when it is of such as have been Virgins, that is to say, have for their
actions ben honest, Heb. 13.4.
for their carriage modest and shamefast; Paul says, that marriage is honorable
among all, and the bed undefiled, but whooremongers and adulterers God will
judge; besides the weight of this judgment of God, the marriage is greatly
dishonored, when it is of shameless unhonest persons. And although marriage be
a preventing from sins of that kind to come, and therefore in that case is
honorable among all; yet it is not a pardon for wickedness past before marriage,
but as Jacob said of his son Reuben (for this fault) so does God esteem of
others, that fall in the like, Genesis 49.4.
that their dignity and excellency is gone because they darken the honor of
their mariage-day. The Devil (who is a liar from the beginning) has blinded
the eyes of many young persons, to esteem these tricks of their youth, which
by God are condemned, and by all civil and honest men abhorred; and it has so
prevailed, that the men cannot be securely received into marriage, who have not
approved their ability in begetting Bastards. Whooremongers and adulterers God
will judge: O when God shall either judge or punish this, no Cross can prevent
it, no Priests Commission absolve it, nor holy water is able to wash it away.
Remember Christ's Spouse is a Virgin.

If you demand, why these that are to meet Christ are called Virgins? I
answer, because this is a comparison of Marriage, in which only Virgins,
chosen and appointed, went out to meet the Bridegroom. But if you ask, which
of all them that shall meet Christ is his Spouse? I answer, Who is the Spouse
of Christ.
Every soul, that has in this life washed himself from sin by repentance,
and calling on the name of the Lord, and prepared himself, with a confidence
in the sweet love and mercy of God, shall be the spouse of Jesus Christ. But
to speak (as the Scripture does) all the Elect servants of God, who agree in
unity of one faith and love to Jesus Christ, are his one and undivided Spouse:
from which notwithstanding, we may not conceive, an equality of dignity and
love to be in the Church, to be worthy the uniting unto the glorious God, who
for worth, is Lord of heaven and earth, and of love beyond all comparison, Ioh
15 13.
for no man can show greater love for his friend, than to give his life for
him, Christ showed greater, Romans 5.10.
in giving his life for his enemies. And though all the faithful cannot be
sufficiently meet for to be his Spouse, yet are they counted worthy, Philip. 3
9.
when they are considered as joined to Christ, and one with him, and are seen
of God, not with their own righteousness, but clothed and overshadowed with
the worth and righteousness of Christ.

We are to observe two things: 1, Christ's servants called Virgins.
that the faithful soul is called a Virgin. Christ a Virgin, the Son of a
Virgin, will have a Virgin to his Spouse. But what kind of Virgin? Hieron. in
Epist.
Virginis definitio est, sanctam esse corpore and mente: A Virgin is one that
is holy both in mind and body; in mind, because the Lord does (in this
Parable) condemn the corrupted minds of the foolish Virgins, whose bodies
were not corrupted: in body, 1 Cor 6.15.19
because an unclean body cannot be the Temple of the holy Ghost, nor member of
Christ. But if we consider why Gods Church was called a Virgin, we shall the
better understand, what is here meant by a Virgin. God from the beginning, ever
showed himself unto the people that were his, as if he had been their husband
or spouse: unto the Jews, he showed himself as a husband; unto the Christian
Church, he showed himself a spouse: the Jews he took to him, when their
fathers were Idolaters, Josh. 24.2.
and themselves too; he married himself to them, who by Idolatry had lost
their Virginity; who notwithstanding, after they came to serve God, fell to
Idolatry many times again, and provoked him to wrath: therefore he, in the
Prophets, complains, that they had committed adultery against him; in stead
of the living and true God, they bowed, kissed, and offered sacrifice to Idols,
consecrated to the honor of Devils, or damned men: so they who before wanted
spiritual Virginity, fell from matrimonial chastity. Christ's Spouse to be free
from Idolatry.
The Christians has he betrothed unto himself for his Spouse, as Virgins,
because he took no notice of the old Gentiles Idolatry, as Saint Paul told
the Athenians of their Idolatry, Acts 17.30.
that the time of that ignorance God regarded not. Therefore, are they all
Virgins, because they worship God in truth. Another condition is required of
the spiritual Virgin, And free from pride Esaias 66.2.
that he be humble: Upon whom will I look says the Lord? Even upon the lowly
in heart: This the blessed Virgin knew well, when she said, that God looked upon
the lowliness of his handmaid, Luke 1. Ser. 1. super Missus est.
Respexit humilitatem, potius quam virginitatem, (says Bernard) He beheld her
humility, rather than virginity. By which every soul may examine himself, if
he be a spiritual Virgin or no.

Secondly, we have to observe, that the faithful soul is espoused or
betrothed to Christ Jesus. St. Paul says, Ephesians. 5 23.
that as the husband is to the wife, so is Christ to his Church; that is, he is
husband: it is true in effect. The faithful soul is betrothed to Christ.
But if we consider what is to come, (our great Marriage) which begins to
be solemnized at the day when our souls go to glory, and consummate, when
both souls and body go thither, and our dwelling for ever in his house: we
are but espoused or betrothed unto him; Ioh. 14.2.
for as yet he is gone before us, to prepare a place for us. This, the name of
Spouse does declare, Bern. in Locum.
for Sponsus, is a spondendo, from promising, that either shall keep
themselves for other. Finally, as Christ did to the faithful Corinthians, so
he does to all other his faithful servants, whom by the ministry of St. Paul
he betrothed to himself: 2 Cor. 11.2.

The use of this doctrine may be known, That he may love and long for Christ
the more.
by the use of betrothing, that a certain time, sometimes more, sometimes
less, being set between it and the Marriage day, the love of both might be
increased, by the earnest desire of their meeting. Cupienti animae nihil satis
festinatur; Salust.
Nothing can hasten enough to a longing soul: Institutum est, ut iam pacta
spousae non tradantur statim, ne vilem habeat maritus datam, quam non suspira
verit sponsus dilatam. Aug. Confess. lib 8. cap. 3. sect. 3.
and this was that which made Jacob love Rachell the better, who for seven
years together after betrothing, was sometimes faint with extreme work, now
burnt with the Sun, another time frozen with cold, most time pined with
scarsity, all times tormented between love to Rachell, and fear of Labans
subtleties. So is it between Christ and us, we are by faith in espousage joined
unto him, to the end, that our desire and love unto him may more earnestly wish
for the full enjoying of him. This longing in love David felt, Psalm 84.2.
when he said, Phil. 1.23.
My soul longs and faints for the Courts of the Lord: and Saint Paul, when
he wished to be dissolved, and be with Christ Blessed were we, if this desire
were in us, Bern in Locum. ex Poeta.
and if we sighed and groaned, because we are absent from our Lord: Palleat
omnis amans, Prove. 13.12.
Every true lover has for signs in him, palenesse and leanness, for when
hope is deferred it makes the heart to faint, that no pleasure can make thee
body well liking. Are these signs in thee of thy love to Christ? Away with
delicate and dainty meats, the desire of wines, the pleasures of worldly
riches and honor, the love of these better fit him that never looks for any
comfort by Christ. If thou sigh and be pale and lean for desire of that
blessed day, he shall send to thee his comforting Spirit, and afterward hasten
his coming: Happy is this desire, for though the deferring of our meeting
with Christ, is a sorrow in the soul, yet is the hope of enjoying it above al
pleasure the world can yield; both which may be seen in this saying of David,
I should have fainted, Psalm. 27.13.
except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
living.

Ten Virgins went out to meet the Bridegroom.
As for the number of the Virgins, (ten) we are not to trouble our selves to
inquire. The curiosity of some have given a reason though very fruitless;
because there are ten Commandments to be observed by Gods servants: I think,
he understood according to sobriety and edification, who said, Non est curiose
serutandum quare december sunt Virgins, Euthym. in locum.
etc? That we are not to search curiously why there are ten Virgins, etc. But
in Parables some things are set to for framing the comparison, some for
expressing the intended purpose; whereof this number (ten) is to continue, an
apt similitude of the Jews Marriages, wherein eight, nine or ten, were
appointed attendants, according as was fit for the estate and degree of the
parties to be married.

Went out etc.] We go out to meet Christ, when leaving Nature, Sin, and
Satan, What it is to meet Christ.
and denying and disclaiming them, we profess our selves to attend the
service of Jesus Christ. Abraham was called out to meet his Master by this
charge, Get thee out of thy Country, Genesis 12.1.
from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house. Likewise Lot was called out of
Sodom, Genesis 19.
and charged not to look back. The Spouse of Christ is called out, Psalm.
45.10. Esa 52 11.
Forget thy own people and fathers house: Depart ye, depart ye, touch no
unclean thing: yea Christians are called out from the love of father, mother,
and friends, or else they cannot be worthy of Christ; Mat 16.24.
yea from their own will, that they may submit themselves unto the will of God.

If we either stay in our natural state, We cannot meet Christ until we go
out of Nature.
or in our selves, we cannot meet Christ; in our dwelling of nature remains
the anger of God, bent against the inclinations of the soul, that even in
birth Saint Paul calls us Children of wrath. Ephesians. 2.2.
In our common natural state we have Satan's craftiness encompassing against
us, with secret suggestions, and occasions of sin, our friends and neighbors
with their practice to teach and countenance it; we have the deceits of the
world upon our right hand, to seduce us from the love of God, the miseries and
terrors of this world, to draw us from the only fearing of God; that so long
as we profess our selves of this company and faction, we cannot meet our
Master, and therefore out we must go.

We may see, Some go not out, others make a show.
that most have not as yet taken journey to meet Christ, as Jews, Turks, and
Heathen: (...) tity, the number of the wise five Virgins, the number of the
foolish five.

God only knows the number of the Elect and Reprobate.
As for the Number of the Elect and Reprobate, it is without question, that he
who numbreth the stars, and calls them all by their names, has also counted
them: and as men have for their business in this world books of notes and
accounts, so does God express his particular knowledge and care to us in this
behalf, that there is a book with him, wherein he has enrolled and counted
the names and number of his servants, Philip. 4.3.
writing their names in the book of life. It were an improfitable matter to
us, And it were to no purpose to show it unto us.
that the number of Elect and Reprobate were in Gods Word expressed unto us,
who are not able to understand sensibly the quantity of lesser numbers; and if
any had the knowledge of it, yet it were not a cause to make him to rejoice,
but in this we have true joy, when we know our selves to be of the elected
number, and that our names are written in the book of life. Luke 10.20.


The great number to be damned, and the little number to be saved.
The equality of the number of wise and foolish Virgins, gives no ground to us
to conceive, that the one half of mankind is to be saved, the other to be
damned, because this is a Parable, which as we know of comparisons, they hold
not in all points, as may appear hereafter in the particulars of verses 8, 9,
10, etc. for one cannot borrow grace of another, it being incommunicable, as
the foolish would borrow oil of the wise Virgins. But natural reason, the
sentence of Doctors, and (above all) the Scriptures do plainly show how few
the number of the elect are in respect of the damned. We see all Asia, Africa,
America, and the parts of Magellanica that are inhabited, are without the
means of obtaining salvation, some of them have no understanding, others have
their knowledge darkened with a Tygerlike cruelty: the visible Church is most in
Europe, of whom the tenth part are more ignorant of Religion, than the former
are cunning of heathenish superstition: Ier. 7.4.
among them that know Religion, many cry The Temple of the Lord, who have all
their Religion in word, or on the tongues end; many have Lord, Lord, in their
mouth, in whose heart Satan dwells, Mat: 9.23.
they claim interest in Christ who know him not, nor are acknowledged of him:
adulterers, fornicators, drunkards, oppressors, covetous, and the like, think
themselves Christians good enough, because they be so called, and yet fight
against him whose honor they profess. When Satan has singled out his own,
we see that few are left to be saved. The Doctors have said the same, In
locum Math: 13.8. Tres parts seminis pericrant, and quarta sola servata est:
pauci enim sunt qui salvantur. Theophel: Number: 1, 46
Puto quod prudentium numerum long superat multiplicitas fatuarum, says Saint
Bernard, I think rather that the multitude of the foolish did far surpass
the number of the wise: Origenes considering the great number of the
Israelites, that were come to man's estate, before they came out of Egypt,
being 603 550. (of which all were barred from entering the holy land except two)
says, the number of the damned does so far pass the elect, as the
unbeleevers did surpass the believers of these Israelites: before Noah and
seven hundred years after his time, Gods Church was in some few families: when
he revealed himself unto a whole Nation, few could be saved, because of
unbeleefe. Heb. 3.19
But to pass from particular conjecture, Math. 22.14.
Christ tells us plainly, Many are called, but few are chosen.

This should make us labor to enter in at etc. Math. 7.13.14.
The use hereof is given by Christ himself, in these words, Enter in at the
strait gate, for broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there
be that go in thereat; but strait is the gate, and narrow is the path that
leads to life, and few there be who enter therein. While few are to enter, I
wonder but every soul should tremble. The greatness of the number cannot save
any from destruction, Hieron Wolf in Some. Scip.
for, Lupum curare numerum, proverbio negatur, quod aeque oves numeratas ac non
numeratas devoret, (as the proverb says) the Wolf cares not for number, for
he destroys as well the numbered, as the unnumbred sheep; so, Satan cares not
how many he carry to hell, only he is in fear lest he get too few. Neither is
the great multitude of the damned any comfort to them, as in this world the
sufferings of companions is an ease to the afflicted, An minus ardebis quia cum
multis ardebis? Shall thou burn the less, because many are burnt with thee?
No, the more fuel, the more fire, on which God shall have the better
occasion, to sharp the infiniteness of his power. Each of you consider of
which number you are, Christ has forwarned you, Solomon points at both the
wise and foolish Virgins, Prove. 22.3.
The wise man sees the plague, a far off, and hides himself; the foolish
run on, and are punished: the wise men believe and prevent, whilst they are
foretold of it, the foolish account them mockers, Genesis 19, 14.
who foretell their misery (as some of the Sodomites thought Lot to be,) and
are forced by experience to believe it, and when it is too late they intend to
prevent it.

Now, as these Virgins are distinguished by number, so are they by quality,
some are wise, some foolish. The foolish Virgins, they knew not their own
natural misery and wants, Many perish who brag of their Christian name. Romans
9, 25.
and therefore were not spiritual Virgins indeed, yet as God called the
Israelites beloved, who were not beloved, so here are they called virgins who
are like the Christians of Laod^cea, who thought that they were spiritually
rich, and increased with goods, but had not grace to see, Revel. 3.17.
that they were wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked. But seeing that
(nudi nom^nis nullus est reatus) the bare name of a Christian, Tertull. Apolog.
was not sufficient to prove a Roman, a traitor to the Roman Empire, neither
to prove him a true servant to Christ, whom Satan carries headlong to hell: we
must give men leave to call themselves by this honorable name, whilst they
labor for their own destruction, only making that a lesson for us, which
their foolishnes makes woeful experience unto them.

I am not in all particulars, to consider the foolishnes of the damned, and the
wisdom of the elect, because Christ sets out the foolishnes of the one, to be
in two particulars, (that they did not rightly weigh, how much oil or grace
they wanted, neither did equally and proportionably provide for what they knew
they did or might want) these must be urged, that we may know how much oil to
carry in our lamps, and how much to provide in our vessels besides.

Manifold are our miseries by nature, sin, death and judgment.
That I speak not too mystically, lest the miseries of our souls be not
believed, for few believe our report, I will set down our misery, as the most
ignorant men either sensibly feel, or by natural inclination do fear.

Bern. Meditat. cap. 2. almost set down word for word.
We are come of such parents, (qui prius fecerunt da^natos qua^ natos) by whom
we were sooner condemned than brought into the world; and if we consider the
first stocks, from whence we all sprung, we may say to them, as the same
Father says, Idem Ser. 2. super Missus est.
(ut fuistis parents, ita omnium fuistis peremptores) as you were the bringers
out, so you were the destroyers of all, (et quod miserius est, prius
peremptores, quam parents) and which is more miserable, sooner destroyed, than
brought us forth into the world; sinners have begotten us sinners, and in sin
have nourished us, miserable creatures have led us that are miserable into this
miserable light; of whom we have gotten nothing but sin, misery, and this
corruptible body we bear about us, which as they have brought them into dust
and corruption at last, so do they drive us forward to follow them; when we
look into their graves, we see nothing but ashes, worms, filthiness, and
fear: as they were, so are we now, as they are, so shall we shortly be:
conceived we were not without them, yet without their knowledge, with weeping
and sorrow are we sent out to be banished in this world; in which we stay full
of iniquities from which banishment we are in a haste apprehended and
presented to give a strict account of all we have done; when it shall be said,
Behold the man and his works, with what fearful and shameful countenance
shall we look, or speak? when without speaking our conscience and
countenance shall utter so much as might condemn a thousand: and how long
soever the Lord defer this, that we may amend, the more strictly and
severely shall he judge if we neglect it; notwithstanding the longer we live,
our sin grows greater, this debt of judgment increases. Hitherto St. Bernard.

I need not urge this any more, he that least believes it, shall feel it
most, Mat 24.51.
his portion (says Christ) shall be with the unbeleevers and hypocrites. But
as Augustine says, Epist. ad Hieron.
if one see his brother in a ditch, and ask how he came thither, his best
answer is, For curing of which all the faithful find Christ a sufficient
salve.
that he think not so much how he came thither, but how he may be relieved: so
my best describing of our misery is, (not to discourse that man is so, or how
he became so, but) how I may cure or comfort him, or get oil to power in his
wounds, or to suffice his Lamp. Whilst by Oil we understand all grace
needful to salvation, we know where to find it, Coloss: 2.9.
even in Christ Jesus, for in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily,
and we are complete in him, he has the Oil of gladness above his fellows,
Psalm. 45.7.
His head is anointed (...) meeting verse. 6. etc. The preparation is set down
of all the Virgins, first in similitude, then in dissimilitude. In similitude,
all prepared their lamps, but in this they were unlike, for the foolish
prepared no oil for the darkness of the night: the wise filled their lamps,
and because they feared the length of the night, and long tarying of the
Bridegroom, they filled their vessels also.

First then, that I may speak of their lamps, we must remember somewhat
spoken of before, that this life is the time and place, in which some profess
that they are meeting Christ, and others are truly upon their journey, looking
and longing for his coming, either by their departure to him, or his coming
to them by judgment. It is therefore agreed upon by the consent and practice
of all, both the servants of God and the servants of sin, that lamps are
needful to be prepared for their journey, to inlighten them in this world,
until Christ who is the true light appear, when we shall not need Sun,
Moon, lamps, nor candles to direct us. As the maids of the holy Land, even
the unwisest of them had this wit, that for celebrating a wedding, they had
need of a lamp, and that the Bridegroomes should (according to custom) come
in the nightime (the natural darkness of the Creatures:) So all the Virgins,
The practice almost of all men shows that our way to heaven is dark.
I mean all that are called by the name of Christians, do show by their
actions, that our journey and way to meet Christ is naturally dark, and that
we have need of some light to show us the way. But that I appropriate not this
truth only to true Christians, who best know how dark this way is, I find all
(except them that are truly Atheists) to pronounce the same, and by their
deeds show that nature does darken us, in some errand which the soul of man
of it self naturally intends. Our profanest sort of professed Christians
prove it who have taken and professed Baptism and all the conditions of it,
they avouch that Christ appertains to them so much as to any, they say that
Gods word is true, and that of their own knowledge, they know well enough
both what it and the Minister can say; these therefore do confess the darkness
and imperfection of Nature in this business, and to have taken Lamps. Pagans
also have espied this; for to what purpose should Turk, or any Savage, carry
the love of any Religion with him, if he thought not, that common natural
knowledge were imperfite herein, and that it were not able to direct and
conduct the soul so far as it is to go? for he that would only live, and
dye with this life, needs not any sort of Religion at all. But none of all
this kind are so blinded, but that they scorn to remain content with the
light of nature, and therefore will take one sort of Religion or other by the
end (as a lamp) to direct him, some way he should go, but he knows not
whither. Only the Atheist that is sure (as he conceives) that there is no God,
neither seeks or professes any Lamp, because he has none that made him to
whom he should go, except Nature, with whom he already remains: of all men
his case is the strangest, for hell which is utter darkness to all that are
damned, is the brightest Lamp that ever he saw; for nothing could ever show
him that there was or where there was a God, until hell made him sensible of
it.

But all others profess that either they would have Lamps, as Turks, and
others the like; or that they have them, as the foolish Virgins or Christians;
or that they have them, and Oil in them, as Gods true servants, declaring the
want of light they conceive in the way between Christ and us.

The use hereof is, that we consider how our souls bend further then this
world, and further they will go either right or wrong; and that we are not
able by our own judgments to enlighten or direct our selves in the way: and
therefore woeful and miserable is their case, that see or know no more
concerning their estate, than their bodily eyes do show them; for know no more
of the way to heaven, or of meeting Christ, than they did when they were
children. The Heathen would gladly have Lamps, but God has denied them; the
foolish Virgins have Lamps, but have no Oil: Take therefore this holy intent,
and let it never go out of your mind, that you are desirous to meet Christ,
and call to God to inlighten and direct you; until you come and appear in the
presence of God.

But took no Oil with them.
Here is the dissimilitude, the foolish took no Oil with them: As it were
folly in whosoever would think that the candlestick were the cause of light,
and not the Oil, so are they who think the outward profession, without the
inward spirit of sanctification, to be more requisite or only sufficient to
the obtaining of salvation. And therefore the helps of Gods servants for
salvation, These things that are helps to Gods children do hasten the wicked
to destruction.
are the instruments and helpers of wicked men to damnation: for Lamps are
profitable, if Oil be with them, if not, they are without their proper end, or
profitable use. As meat, drink, and all other things are pure and sanctified
to them that are sanctified, so unto the ungodly even good things are helpers
of their mischief, Ecclesiasticus 39.25.26.27. That table which is a comfort
and refreshment to a good man, if it be set before a wicked man, Psalm. 69.23.
Romans 11.9.
David and Paul say, that it is turned to a snare, a net, and a stumbling
block, to catch, fall, and keep him in gluttony, drunkenness, blasphemous
and filthy carriage: In like manner if the lamps of the foolish were set in a
gracious hand, they would help them to heaven. For as Lamps, for the most
part, are of brittle and weak substance, filled with Oil which is apt to be
set on fire, so this world (which is the light and joy of foolish men) does
betray her lovers with uncertain prosperity, with carnal lust, and the fiery
burnings of many covetous desires: and as a lamp or candle by the brightness
of it entiseth the butterfly to embrace it, which by that means is either
drowned in the oil, or burned in the flame; so the shows of sin, and of the
pleasures of the world, entice the minds of men, that their hearts are drowned
in many fears and sorrows; 1 Timothy 6.10.
and when they suppose they have caught all, they themselves are caught: when
they think that fortune, riches, the world and all are fallen in love with
them, they are deceived, for it is their heart that is fallen in love with the
world; finally corruption and destruction (the natural ends of all things
under heaven) lays hold upon them; qui lachrimarum causas tripudiantes
peragunt, Greg. Moral. lib. 20. cap. 8.
et ridentes mortis negotium exequuntur: who go dancing through the causes of
their mourning, and with laughter act the tragedy of their own death. And thus
does this world (which is their Lamp) lead them to their overthrow: Where on
the contrary, the blessings of this world are a furtherance to the servant of
God, to sustain his wants, to be his servants, to teach and instruct him, that
he is in his journey meeting Christ; if they entertain him kindly, he thanks
God, and is glad that he is refreshed in his pilgrimage: if this world cross
him, yet he rejoices, because he knows that he would not be so used if he
were in his own Country.

We ought to beware lest we make the world our lamps.
That the blessings of this world may be profitable for us, we must make uses of
them thus: first, that we make not our lamps or preparation of the pleasures
of our own will, which is commonly the deceitfulness of sin, nor the
entising goods of this world, which are no preparations in our journey toward
heaven, but the greatest cloggs and hindrances that can be: the abundance of
sin weighs and presses down the soul, out of Gods favor; the
deceitfulnes of worldly felicity, maketth the heart insensible of greater
happiness, and so blind that it cannot see nor believe, that there is any
eternal misery to follow after; These are the two which do hinder most men
from heaven, Ob has duas causas potissimum excludu^ tur, vel propter corporales
voluptates, vel avaritiae morbu^. Theophylac in Math. 22. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
as our Savior shows plainly in the parable of the great Supper, Luk 14.18,
19.20. This was the cross and curse of the Israelits in the wilderness, and
when they possessed Canaan: Deuteronomy. 32.13.14.15. and therefore as Moses wished to
forewarne them, so wish I for all others, O that they were wise, then would
they understand this, they would consider their latter end.

Secondly, 2 We must use the world warily.

Mu^emuscu^peos Danaum in figniaque nobis aptemus.


let us make better use of the lamps of foolish Virgins, and make the world
profitable for our salvation, which is an hinderance unto theirs; the Trojans
made use of the Grecians bucklers, to make them ensigns of glory and victory:
so let us use this world as we may thereby show, that we have overcome the
world; or so to place the goods of it, as they may help us, Sublimabunt, Eusebius.
Emiss. de ascen. Domini. Sermon. 1.
nos si fuerint infra nos, if we set them under us, they shall be as ladders
helping us to mount upwards. Care not how little friendship this world show
you; if you prosper in it, look it betray not your soul and withdraw your
affections; beware least any thing in this world be better loved by you, then
you know to be loved by God: as God has made the earth his footstool, let it
be your footestoole, and Jesus Christ advantage unto you both in life and death.

VERSE 4. But the wise took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps.
IN these words is the dissimilitude; the wise furnished their Lamps with
Oil, and prepared store besides. As the deceits of the world, are the Lamp
which the worldlings provide themselves withal, The soul and body of man is
only capable of spiritual grace.
and in it consume themselves like Oil: so on the contrary, the Lamps of Gods
servants are their souls and bodies, the Oil wherewith they are filled are
the graces of Gods Spirit, as shall hereafter evidently appear.

Seeing that God has only made Man and Angels (participes rationis, Born.
Ser. 1. Advent.
capaces beatitudinis) partakers of reason, and capable of happiness, it
follows, The spirit of man is the Lamp of the Lord, etc. Prove 20.27.
that nothing can be meant by our Lamps but soul and body, the faculties and
powers whereof are only capable of the grace that leads and directs us to
glory: Saint Paul exhorts us to offer up our souls and bodies unto God as a
living and acceptable sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
his reason is, that this only is our reasonable serving of him; he that would
prepare and offer all things else to receive Gods benefits in, and not
himself, is without understanding, and shows not himself a reasonable
server of God. Christ held himself unfit to meet both with God and man in the
office of a Mediator, until he had an humane soul and body made, (as his
Lamp) wherein he should receive the Oil of gladness above his fellows;
which soul and body being given him, he said, Psalm. 40. Hebr. 10.
A body have thou given me, I come to do thy will o^ God. You learn therefore
both what your Lamps are, and how you are forewarned to prepare them: And
therefore God must be served with them, or else all we do is in vain.
it is only your selves that are capable of Gods grace, and that are to be
prepared for receiving and enterteining Christ. King Balak was not capable of a
blessing, who prepared dumb beasts enough for offering to God, but never meant
to prepare himself; yea the first mercenary Prophet Balaam, though the spirit
of prophecy came upon him, yet there was no grace in him, his Lamp was
counterfeit, it had no place to receive and contain this Oil; his heart was
so filled with ambition and covetousness, that he could not cease from
perverting the straight way of the Lord, he had a body for the outward service
of God, but he had no soul for him. Whilst wicked King Saul in bodily
humility and consonancy of words prophesied with the Schoole-Prophets at
Ramath, 1 Samuel 19.24.
his heart was filled (as Samuel had told him before) with rebellion against
the manifest will and commandments of God: from which it appears, 1 Samuel 15
23.
that all servers of God by goods, deputies, or mustering shows, shall be
banished from Gods favor. Mark 7.
The young libertine Jews in Christ's time, thought that they had honored
their parents well enough, when they offered any thing in sacrifice, or to the
Temple-Treasurie, for their health and prosperity; though notwithstanding they
neither supplied their wants, nor obeyed them in any lawful demand whatsoever,
in no better fashion do they serve God, who prepare with their goods, their
friends, servants to serve God, yea or their bodies, when their hearts are the
most gainsayers of his will; the first ought to be done, but the second must
not be left undone: God must be served with all, but especially with a sincere
and unfeigned heart, which is more than all, as himself says, Prove. 23.
My son give me thy heart. Remember the miserable examples of many like
Salomons Proverbiall adulteress, Prove. 7.14.
who had done well enough when all her vows and sacrifices were performed and
offered, her duties and offerings paid to the Priest, yet went she to her old
wickedness, for that was next her heart; God says, that she made swift pace
to destruction. Prove. 2.18.
Balaam (before named for this fault) has a pitiful complaint; Numb. 24.2.
He was by prophecy blessing Israel, who standing afar off from them, even by
this action confessed that he was not in the number and company of the blessed:
so he said, that his state should be at the coming of Christ, Verse 17.
I shall behold him but not near: so all whose heart and affections are now
estranged from God, he shall be estranged in the end from them, and shall say,
Depart from me; but in this life and day of salvation he exhorts you,
saying, Iam. 4.8.
Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you: This can neither be urged,
nor considered of too much.

As the Israelites were to carry the Candlestickes and Lamps of the
Tabernacle, with instruments sitting for their keeping and use: For the right
ordering of soul and body
so wise Christians must have with them such things as be useful for the
orderly keeping of soul and body. The Lamp in Moses Tabernacle had two
necessary instruments, the snuffers, and receiving-pipe, in which they powered
the Oil; and that nothing be wanting, I make bold to add a third, A
manuscript to which the Author set not his name. In Prafat.
after the example of one who wrote the life of St. Patrike, out of diverse
uncertain and fabulous scattered legends, (at the request of Hugh de Lacy
Earl of Vlster, Thomas Archbishop of Ardmagh, and Malachy Bishop of Down) who
said, that he behooved to use the instruments appointed for Lamps in Moses
law, which were emunctorium, infusorium, extinctorium, snuffers, infusers,
extinguishers, Exodus 25.
(Gods word only names the first two, for it was commanded that the Lamp
should continually burn) because (says he) the idle and superfluous things
are to be snuffed away, the things that were true to be received into the
work, the things that were altogether false were to be clean put out: So
Christians in their souls and bodies must have sin put out, virtue
cherished, and superfluities snuft and cut away. The Prophet Esaias says, Esaias
40.4.
that Christ came to this purpose into the world, and St. John Baptist before
him, that every valley should be exalted; (here are the receivers, when the
foul empty of knowledge and comfort is filled up) that every hill should be
made low, (here are the extinguishers, where every sin, and whatsoever is
exalted or stiffenecked against the Majesty of God, is (...) Gods Word
approved, Non negligenda sunt ea bona, August.
per quae, ad meliora pervenire possumus, We are not to neglect these good
things by which we may come to better; yea our Savior compares the first
beginning of grace, unto a grain of mustard seed, Math. 13 31.
which has need of cherishing, before it come to the bigness of a tree.

And some things moderated and corrected.
Thirdly, some things must be moderated and corrected, but not put clean out,
and these are our natural affections and the entiesements of this world. Our
natural desires would be satisfied with things natural, but there is a
covetise enclosed in it, that instead of satisfiyng, is ever in danger to draw
a surfett upon us: and therefore our natural desires, howsoever they are the
necessary parts of a good creature (and therefore by nature good,) yet the
immoderate desire of them is to be abridged. 1 Cor. 9.
St. Paul claimed all liberties of a Christian, 2 Cor. 11.27.
due to himself as well as to others, yet he chastised his body and kept it
under, In labor and travel, in watching often, in hunger and thirst, in
fasting often: and if our desires had scope, they would carry us quickly to
destruction, and therefore they must be holden in with bitt and bridle.

By considering Gods wrath, his mercy and our mortality.
Now the means which are to be used, or instruments for doing of these, are in
the word of God plentifully to be found. The means to cut off all that is
contrary to God, is to consider Gods command, Romans 7.
and his unspeakeable wrath against offenders. Paul thought it nothing to covet
his neighbors goods, until the commandment (thou shall not lust) checked
him; Romans 7. 2 Samuel 25.
this hindered David from killing Naball, and Theodosius the Emperor from
destroying the Antiochians. Secondly, the infusers are the word of God, by
which the knowledge of the misery that we are in, the love of God toward us,
his unspeakeable mercy, and such like are powered into the soul. Thirdly the
best correctors of our natural desires, is to consider that we are dust
pampered for destruction.

Non poterit melius caro luxuriosa domari,
Quam been qualis eris post mortem remeditari:
There is no better means to daunt our wanton flesh, then to consider what we
shall be after death; In the last verse of this Parable cited out of Augustine.
which hereafter in another place is described at large. So much concerning the
lamps of the wise Virgins.

[Of the Vessels.]
Seeing the Lord has made Angels and Men, ( rationis participes, Bernard Sermon
1. Adu.
beatitudinis capaces) only partakers of reason, capable of blessedness, it
follows, that whatsoever receives oil or grace unto salvation, must be
called the soul and body of man: and therefore as I called our lamps, so must
these Vessels be likewise, observing only this difference; that whilst we are
in this life, Vessels are now used, but Lamps shall be used at our Lords
coming
we are in respect of Gods grace as vessels are to oil, for we have this
treasure in earthen vessels. 2. Cor. 4.7. But when we meet our Lord, our
Lamps shall only be in request, no need of our vessels. Luke 12.35. This is
expressed in the words of this Parable, the Oil was in their vessels as yet,
the light of their Lamps was not seen. Gods gifts in us are as the pitchers
and lamps were in the hands of Gideon and the Israelites: Judge. 7.16.
when they were to fight against the Midianites, their lamps were burning and
yet not seen, because they were in the pitchers, until their pitchers were
broken, and the light on a sudden terrified their enemies: For Gods gifts are
now hidden in us. Matthew. 5.16.
So are the gifts of Gods servants in this world, they are in a manner shut up
and not seen; or if any man's good works so shine, that the spectatours are
moved to glorify our heavenly Father, yet their gifts are not fully seen, but
appear as glances of the hidden power of Gods Spirit. Romans 7.19.
The power of regeneration is much hindered by the appetite of nature, that they
cannot do the good that they would; lo here the Spirit of holiness is
constrained to hide it self in the Vessels of our body, O who shall deliver
us from this body of death! when our pitchers shall be broken, our lamps shall
shine as stars in the firmament.

Beloved, observe here that by the appointment and working of God, his servants
in this life are more in substance than in show. When they fast, Christ says,
Matthew. 6.
that they are to anoint their faces, when they give alms, Wherefore we ought
to do all good as in secret.
Let not thy left hand (says he) know what thy right hand does, be even as if
thou would take no notice what good thou do: Good actions are not rewarded
here, and therefore in vain do men muster and set them out upon beadroles in
this life; but labor to get the approbation of God, and so do good, that thy
conscience may be well stored in Gods sight, who seeing thee in secret may
reward thee openly, and make thy light shine clear as the perfect day. Thus
do the wise Virgins, they have store of Oil, but they shut it up in their
Vessels, Bern. in locum.
(Perire existimant omne illud quod cernitur) Whatsoever is seen they account
it lost. The practice of vaineglorious men is contrary to Gods dealing, his
Angel would bury Moses that no man might know it, the Devil strove with him,
Compare Deu. 34 6. with Jude 9.
that he might be openly buried, that Israel who was bent to Idolatry, might
have occasion to adore his dead body: To avoid hypocrisy and vaineglory.
So do hypocrites that the world may adore them, that all men may admire and
look at them. And this greedy desire of the praise of men has led away many
noble Spirits, (so they call themselves) from the only love of goodness, that
they leave many good things undone, because they fear it will not be enough
taken notice of, and they had rather do no good at all, before they would lose
the fame and honor of it. Thus men labor more for a good thought of their
equals and inferiors, than they do for the approbation of God; And that we
be not hindered with by respects from doing good.
and therefore the reason why they want these blessings which they most desire,
is, for that either they do not that good which they may do, or what they
do, they are hindered and furthered with by-respects, and Gods honor never
respected in it. Beloved, as these Virgins prepare to meet their Lord, so do
we see every day the Lord call some old, some young, some kindred, some
acquaintance, some noble, some poor; and whilst we stand as dead images,
beholding these presidents, we are on a sudden caught and presented before
God, to give account especially of what we left undone; Did you see the hungry,
and gave him no meat? (Si quem pascendo salvare potuisti, Gregor^
si non paveris, occidisti) If thou could save any man by feeding, if thou
feed him not, thou have killed him: Do you see the naked and cloathe him not?
Had thou them at thy command, who with blasphemy and contempt of Sabbath have
offended God, and corrected them not? Did thou hear the afflicted soul
crying day and night unto thee, and with thy silence made his affliction more?
What shall we answer the Lord in these or any the like demands? no place for
our by respects, when the Lord shows no respect of persons. Even of these
whom we daily exhort, some are suddenly called to give this account, who cannot
deny lawful warning. Many would do thus when it is too late: Labor therefore
that your zealous actions in Gods glory, may show how obedient you were when he
commanded you.

The worthiness of Gods servants cannot be seen in this life.
Secondly, observe, that seeing the wise Virgins have their Oil in their
Vessels, that is, have their holiness and beauty hidden, and their actions
only to be taken notice of by God; it follows by good reason, that the
Saints of God are not seen nor truly known so long as they are in this life:
they come to be known by degrees; in this life by repentance, faith, good
works, and humility, in all these we know that we are the children of God, 1
John 3.2. Attendis quasi aridas arbores per hieme^. Qui non novit videre,
aridam putat vitem et for te iuxta est quae vere aruit. Similes sunt ambae per
hiemem illa vivit, illa mortua est, sed illius vita et illius mors in ab.
scondito est: aestas procedit, vita illius clarificatur, mors illius
manifestatur. Procedit honor foliot^^, faecunditas fructuum, vestitur vitis in
facie ex eo quod habet in radice. Ergo modo fratres tales sumus quales and
alii, etc. August. in Psalm. 148.
but what we shall be is not yet known; that is, the glory of these children
cannot now be seen, as the Israelites could not be espied by the Midianites,
whilst their lamps were hidden, until they appeared upon a sudden, no more
can their worth be: It appears somewhat better when the soul goes to glory,
but the full show of it is kept for the judgment day, at which time the sons
of God shall be revealed, Romans 8.16. And no wonder, for we cannot be truly
joyful, until we see our Lord upon whom all our desire hangs, we can never
be glorious, until we be in company with Christ who is our glory, we cannot
show the actions of holiness, until we be fully freed from sin and
corruption, and restored to the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Saint
Paul told the Colossians, In this world you are in a manner dead, and your
life is hid with Christ in God, when Christ who is your life shall appear,
then shall you also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.3.4.

Therefore no marvel if these whom God respects most, are but despised of the
world. Christ's glory was hidden within the vessel or veil of his flesh, 1
Cor. 2.8. Acts 3.17.
and therefore because the Jews knew not, they crucified the Lord of glory.
But as he (says the Apostle) endured the Cross, Heb: 12.2.
and despised the shame, care not you how men account of you, if you be sure
that God respects you; Psalm. 40.20.
I am poor and in misery, (says David) but the Lord cares for me; and if by
shame and misery our life be lost, yet this is the way to make our glory the
better to appear.

Thus leaving their Oil enclosed and hid in their vessels until the
Bridegroomes coming, let us consider the Vessels, being our souls and bodies
according to phrase of Scripture. David in his conference with the high Priest
at Nob, called the bodies of his followers, the vessels of the young men. 1 Samuel 21.5.
St. Paul tells the Thessalonians, that it was the will of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
that every man should know, how to keep his vessel in holiness and honor;
and speaking of himself and his gift of preaching, said, that that treasure
was in weak and earthen vessels. But seeing the Scripture speaks most of
these vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. Every one is to consider wherein he excels all
his other gifts and labor to exercise it most.
in two considerations, to wit of their matter and use, these two I will
briefly touch. If I consider the matter, I find them all (de communi limo)
that the Potter has made all of clay, or of earth; yet if I compare these
vessels among themselves, I shall find that as the earth has some parts of
dust and filth, and in other parts are the minerals and plants, as gold,
silver, wood, etc. So has the Lord made us all of earth, but some more refined
as the quality and force of the vessel does evidently declare. Saint Paul
says, that in a great house, 2 Timothy 2.20.
are vessels of gold, silver, wood, and earth, so are the differences among
men; some seem to be made of gold, for their patience, who are continually
bettered by the fire of trouble and adversity, the more they suffer the faster
they cleave to God; some seem to be as of silver, in whom the knowledge of
Gods word dwells plentifully, Psalm. 12.
which is as the silver purified seven times; some are as vessels of wood and
earth, who are so lowly, and their looks so dejected, that they think it
fitter to sit in dust and ashes, and count the earth, Sumpsit Deus limum terrae
Gen 2. Quando tandem tui oblivisci potes? tu deniq, tui obliviscere cum
disiunctus eris a terra; sin nunquam a terra disiungeris, etc. haud procul
demissionis tuae proposita imago et significatio est Basil. Hexam. Ser. 11.
dust and worms their mother brethren and sisters, nor to look up to heaven,
or with conceited toys to abase the brightness of the Sun. Let every man
therefore try himself, what power or gift the Lord has indewed him with, and
in that exercise himself, seeing 1 Cor. 7.7. Cic. lib. 2. de Not. deorum.
every man has his proper gift, he ought to search and find out wherein he
excels his other gifts; he that knows not this much of himself, nor
labors to make use of Gods benefit, wise men have compared his soul to salt,
only to keep the body from sowring or stinking, Cicero calls them (animae
porcorum) souls or rather pearls cast out to swine.

The use of all these vessels or of all mankind, is, that some are appointed
to honor some to dishonor, this is finis vltimus. But while all men do hope
to be of the number that shall be honored with salvation, we are to consider
how to use our selves. Unto some are given gifts more then to others, but unto
all the occasion of using what gifts so ever: therefore he that has wisdom to
what purpose has he it, if he be not an earnest student of Gods word, the
means to eternal life? Why has any man power to rule himself, if he be a
slave to his lust? What use is there of charity, where a man labors not to do
good? and so of other gifts: God leaves none without occasion to use every
virtue, we may be idle, but God bestows nothing without use, nor gift without
occasion of exercise, Ambros. de Vocat. Gent. lib. 2. cap. ult.
(cum laudabilius atque faelicius sit pugnantem non potuisse vinci, quam
desidem non potuisse tentari) seeing it is more praiseworthy and happy, that
the fighter could not be overcome, than that being idle, he could not be tried;
let every man put himself to use, and not be as an empty or unused Vessel in
the sight of God. It is for them that have no use at all, that Christ has an
iron rod, Psalm. 2.
to break them as the potter does his vessel.

[Of the Oil.]

Gifts of Gods Spirit compared to Oil.
Now we are come to speak of the Oil, and what is meant by it. All our
treasures of riches which are in Christ are comprehended in the name of Oil, 1
John 2.27.
all the graces of Gods Spirit in us are meant by annoynting, and when Moses
would set down the outward and inward blessings to be bestowed upon the Tribe
of Asher, he says, He shall dip his foot in Oil. Deuteronomy. 33.24.


But as there are many sorts of Oil, as of Roses, Spikenard, Myrrh, etc.
whereof each has his proper virtue and operation: So says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
12.4.
There are diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit, so al receive the name of
Oil. As the virtues of Oil are peculiar either in health or sickness, some
cooling, others heating; some binding, others loosing; some cause ripening,
others cause rotting: In like manner the graces of Gods Spirit, one virtue
heates and warmeth us, as charity, another is cooling, as chastity; one
ripeneth, as Christian discretion, another binds, as temperance and
abstinence; one loses the palsy of sluggishnesse, as labor, another drives
away the fever and heat of avarice, as devotion and compassion; one breaks
the impostume of pride, as humility, etc. But in general, Oil is noted in the
Scriptures to have 3 properties. First, to cherish and make a man joyful, and
this is supposed, Psalm. 104.15. And Oil to make him of a cheerful
countenance; and therefore it was a sign of gladness, as Christ appointed his
Disciples to anoint their faces with Oil. Mat: 6, 17.
So has God appointed gifts of his Spirit to make his servants joyful, Gods
gifts make his servants not to feel worldly sorrows. Acts 5, 41.
although all the world would heap sorrows upon them: when the Jews labored
to break the Apostles hearts, they went rejoicing to and from the Council.
And this is done either by taking somewhat away, or by giving. By taking away,
when we are made not to feel the evils that are on us, as the Oil of Poppie
causes sleep, and the Oil of Mandrakes makes us insensible, though a leg
or arm were cut off us, so has the Lord made his servants, who by
contemplation had only their minds in heaven, that they felt not what was
doing to them on earth; as is principally to be seen in our Arch-type Jesus
Christ, who of all men was the man of sorrows, Esaias 53, 3.
yet he in a manner felt not nor cared what the world did to him, Psalm: 45.
for he was anointed with the Oil of gladness: and many Martyrs burning in
fire, in stead of crying, rejoiced and sung Psalms, because they truly had
received what Christ had promised to his Disciples, John 16.22.
Your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you. Partly,
the Lord does it, by making them feel causes of joy and gladness: when our
conscience does testify our love to God, and hatred to sin, 2 Cor: 1.12.
our joy is herein more than our sorrow can be for any thing in the world; when
we are assured that our sins are forgiven us, then the Lord makes us hear
the voice of joy and gladness, Psalm. 51.8. and 63.4.
and his loving kindness is sweeter than life it self. We learn then, that
it is one effect of Gods Spirit to deliver us, that worldly sorrows break not
our hearts; Romans 5.3. Psalm. 23.
We rejoice in tribulation, said Paul, and David, thy rod and thy staff
comfort me: Whereby it appears, that they whose hearts are cast down for
the world, the envious, rageing and desperate, have not this spiritual
annoynting; this comfort the Lord has holden from them, and left them to be
tormented by their own thoughts, as an evil Spirit to vex them: an example
of all which (I mean envy, anger, melancholy, and finally despair) we
find in King Saul, which made David sing his funeral Elegy according to this
doctrine, The shield of the mighty is cast down, 2 Samuel 1.21.
even the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with Oil.

To comfort others.
The second property of Oil, and effect of Gods Spirit is, that as Oil is a
nourisher of the poor, and asswager of hurts: So Gods Spirit works the same
effects in us: The widow of Sarepta was long sustained by the little Oil she
had, 1 Kings 17.16 Luke ^0.34.
and the Samaritan powered Oil into the hurt man's wounds; where the Lord gives
a compassionate spirit, it both maintains others in necessity, and
comfort them in their sorrows. It appears hereby that covetous, cruel
and hard-hearted men have never been mollified by grace, nor have interest in
Gods Spirit.

The third property of Oil is to give light, And to show us our way to heaven.
Papia^ citatur a Pet. Beveborio in Indice, voce Oleum.
especially if it touch fire, and of this I have read a wonder, (I know not how
true) that if a man fill his mouth with Oil, and were let down into the
bottom of the sea, if he put it out of his mouth, it will make light, and
give him room to breathe about him; howsoever, the Spirit of God gives light
in the darkness of nature, and of this world, by which we are directed to
heaven, Psalm. 143.10.
Let thy good Spirit lead me into the land of righteousness, said Davih,
which he does by his word, and given us understanding to conceive it. This is
the third effect of Gods Spirit, (who as Christ told his Disciples, John 16.13.
should lead them into all truth) and therefore all ignorant souls have not
the Spirit, nor are come within the way of salvation.

As the effects of Oil are proportionably seen in Gods servants, Wicked men
have some properties of Oil
so are wicked men possessed with the vices of our time in some things like
Oil. The lightness of Oil is fully represented by the proud, inconstant,
malicious and wicked hearts, who are full of malice, Psalm. 109.18.
and drink it up as Oil powered into their bones: and for the smoothness and
softness of Oil flatterers and dissemblers have appropriated it to
themselves: David's enemy had words softer than oil, Psalm. 55 21.
and the conversation of the effeminate is accordingly; Prove. 5.3.
when the Israelites flattered the Egyptians, they presented them with smooth
words, Hos. 12.1.
and abundance of oil.

Conditions of good Oil.
Finally, (because we are not to believe every Spirit, but try them) if you
would try whether the oil that you have be good, or how we may know it in time
to come, the properties of good oil are three. 1. That it be new and fresh;
Gods gifts must be daily renewed by prayer and meditation. 2. That it may be
easily powered out, what good we do must be willingly and cheerfully done,
Senec: in Proverb.
Beneficium qui cito dat indigenti, bis dat, One good deed done in season, is a
double kindness. Thirdly, that it be not earthy or mixed with slime, so true
graces must not be defiled with ostentation and worldly glory.

The foolery of the Templaries
I must not omit the foolishness of some, who have by practice shown how they
expound this verse: the Romish Leigers at the Sepulcher in Jerusalem, Musculus
in lacum.
have made it a material business in their preparation to heavenward, to
have lamps in that Church continually burning and maintained with oil: The
Greek Church follow the same superstition, but increased more than the former,
who coming in multitudes to the Sepulcher, Sands travel, page: 173.
compass it often, and in the end following an Ethiopian Priest, and some of
their own Bishops, rush in confusedly to get fire to lighten their lamps,
which remain unlighted, with other fire until that day twelve-moneth. This
folly more heathenish than Christian-like, deserves more pity, than refutation.

VERSE 5. Now while the Bridegroom tarried long, all slumbred and slept.
HItherto has been their preparation for this great Wedding, now the
Bridegroomes coming is to be considered of, and their meeting of him. But that
we may be the better prepared to meet Christ, he tells us, that we must be
watchful to attend his pleasure and appointed time. As the Virgins of Israel
attendants on their Marriages knew certainly that the Bridegroom would come,
but were uncertain at what precise hour he should come: So we are certain
that Christ shall come, but what year, month, or day, we cannot imagine:
Therefore we are to provide for his staying, as well as his coming. This
Verse contains Christ's stay, and the effects of it; the Verses following have
his coming, and effects thereof.

Christ in his coming is said to stay long, Christ seems to stay long: 1. In
respect of his Saints.
first, in respect of his Saints, who in the miseries of this world, and desire
of eternal life, are ever crying, Come Lord Jesus; and knowing that the day of
his coming to judgment is the first day of their true perfection both in body
and soul, they sigh in themselves, Romans 8, 23.
waiting for the redemption of their body, and this Christian Religion teaches
us, that we wait for that blessed hope: Tit: 2, 13.
and the practice of the Saints, Job 14, 14.
the soul of Job in glory is still waiting till his renewing do come; and not
Paul only shall receive the Crown of glory, but all that love Christ's
appearing. 2 Timothy: 4, 8
Now because he comes not so soon as they desire, rather than fail, his
servants in this life would take up the matter with the day of their death,
Philip. 1.21.
and wish to be dissolved to be with Christ.

2 In respect of wicked men.
Secondly, the stay of Christ is thought long, in respect of wicked men, both by
the opinion of Gods servants, and their own opinion: Gods servants do wonder
that God should suffer the Sun to give light, the air to give breath, or the
earth to bear his enemies, and that he suffers Satan's Kingdom to be so long
without final destruction, Rev. 6, 10.
their bloods and oppressions to be so long unrevenged with the infinite wrath
of God: And in the opinion of wicked men Christ stays long from judgment, for
some will not believe it, 2 Pet: 3, 2.
but mock to hear of it; others (as Solomon says) put the day of evil far
from them, Mat: 24.
and do plainly resolve, that their Master does defer his coming to
judgment, and that their life is for many years, and therefore they play the
tyrants and do what they list; but the Master shall come in the day when they
look not for him, and at the hour that they are not aware of; if many thought
the day of their death was so near, or judgment presently to follow, they
would not live as they do.

3. In respect of the creature.
3. Christ's coming is thought longby the instinct and nature of the creatures,
though they be not chained to sin as we are, yet they are sometimes partakers
of the punishment of our sin, that the heaven is sometimes hard as brass for
want of moisture, Deuteronomy: 28, 23.
other times the sea seems to be above because of rain and waters: all times
the heavens wax old as a garment, Psalm: 102.
the powers of it grow weak, that in stead of distinguishing they often
confound the seasons; now they are subject to change and weakness, but the day
of Christ's coming shall releeve them, and restore them to the liberty of Gods
children, which is, both to be free from sin, and corruption the punishment
of sin: and the creatures seem to travail in pain, being subject to
vanity, Rom: 8, 20, 21, 22.
desiring to be delivered from that bondage, unto the glorious liberty of the
sons of God.

What is the meaning of Christ's stay.

Long staying may be either in respect of appointed, or expected time: although
the time of Christ's coming is not set down, yet because there were certain
marks given before he come, which some observing, others mistaking, yet most of
all inquirers, could never imagine that he should have stayed so long:
therefore not coming as he was expected, he is thought to stay long.

In all the times when the Gospel flourished, When Christ was expected, and
the curious foully deceived.
there were some that enquired for it, and some concluded the time, which came
not to pass, the Lord thereby showing the folly of their curiosity. In St.
Paul's days, as the Grecians, in all manner of learning were curious, so at
Thessalonica especially they began to beat their brains about this, and
because St Paul had written in his first Epistle (chap. 4. verse. 15.) For this
I say by the word of the Lord, that we who live shall not prevent them that
sleep; they presently concluded that his coming was at hand: for repressing of
which opinion Paul wrote his second Epistle unto them; 2 Thessalonians: 2, 1, 2.
some said that they knew it by revelation, others avouched that they heard it
from Saint Paul's mouth, others that they could show his letters for it. A
little after the Apostles days it was a common opinion among unconverted
Gentiles, August. de Civit. Dei lib: 18, cap: 53.
that the world should stand 365 years. About the year of Christ 250, Cyprian
writes to a friend of his, Epist: ad Fortunatum.
that the common opinion was, that the end was at hand, and in another letter
says his own mind with application of it, Ad Cecili: lib: 2, Ep: 3.
(Et quia jam secundus adventus nobis appropinquat, magis ac magis benigna ejus
dignatio corda nostra illustrat, etc) And because his second coming comes
near, Instit: lib: 7, cap: 25.
etc. In the year 317 Lactantius says, that all expectation was of no more
time than 200 years at most. After the year 400, Augustine and Jerome say,
that many were of Lactantius mind, that even in their own time Christ would
come to judgment: and that St. Jerome was of this mind appears by his
fearful words, In Regist: Monach: cap: 30.
Sive edam, sive bibam, aut aliud quid agam, semper insonat auribus vox illa
horrifica, Surgite, etc. Whether I eat, drink, or whatsoever I do, that
fearful voice sounds ever in mine ears, Rise dead and come to Judgment.
Hesichius a Bishop wrote to Augustine, that Christ should come in the year
700, because of Daniels Prophecy of 70 weeks, which was only concerning the
first coming of Christ: Augustine answers him in the words of Christ, that
of that day knows no man, nor the Angels, but only God himself. All these
expectations and conjectures proving false, Christ is said to stay long. I have
further observed diverse, who being curious to know and determine the time of
the great Judgment, were suddenly themselves taken away by death. Wherefore
we are to retain only the signs, and that modesty to be believed, and daily
expect it. But seeing many have been deceived, even by mistaking the signs
themselves, it may be asked, Which of them may we take hold of as a mark,
and not to be mistaken, concerning his coming?

I answer, The plainest and surest mark of Christ's coming
the surest of all is the conversion of the Jews. But when shall this be? I
answer, they are let by Daniels Prophecy, chap. 2. for seeing the Roman
Empire as yet stands in the Pope, they cannot believe that Messiah is come, and
therefore until this power of his be beaten to powder, they cannot see how the
King of Kings can reign: and whosoever does this (as they think) is their
savior and deliverer; then shall their hearts be turned to the Lord, and be
opened to see the hardheartednesse of their forefathers, in crucifying the Lord
of glory; and their own blindness, that so many hundredth years could not
epsy the day of salvation. What do the Jews see in the Christian Churches?
The many thousands that are tributaries in Rome, Naples, All this mischief is
set down particularly in Muscul com pla^. de Ministris verbi, under the name
of Nundin Pont.
Venice, Spain, and other places see that they directly stand against the
holiness of Gods law, in commanding public Idolatry, dispensing with
blasphemies, treasons, rebellions, murders, and sometimes commanding and
authorizing them; in countenancing incests, adulteries, fornication, receiving
rent for stews, selling souls and bodies, and making lawful and unlawful
what they will, commanding people to believe, and yet they may not enquire
what; The books of Corn Agrippa, Joan. Baptistae poreae, and Johan.
T^itenemius de occult. Scripturis do plainly show this, and chiefly this last
author, who upon his salvation protests the said book may be used with a safe
conscience, etc In Prafat: (...).
finally admitting Jewish superstition to be mixed with their own, and
permitting witchcraft and conjuration, (which is the invocation of Satan) to be
accounted so lawful as either of them. Whilst this Babel, and kingdom of
confusion does stand, how is it possible, that a Jew should be converted, or
believe that these are the true servants of God? As for such Jews as are in
Germany, or other places near the reformed, they see few visible Churches, and
know that all of them are far from the large extent spoken of Dan. 2.35. But
when once this is taken away, and they converted, their learning and devotion
shall be the riches of the world, that the secure and careless shall by their
example be pierced with sorrow, and turn unfeinedly unto the Lord: after which
time both they and other Nations shall fall in a dead security, and lose the
power of religion; that Gods particular punishments, nor the cry of Preachers
shall be little able to awake, or make them look about them. Then on a sudden
shall the Lord come, the heavens go away with a noise, the elements melt with
heat, the earth fall a burning, the quick and dead mount up to meet the Lord
in the air.

But when shall those things come to pass? It can not certainly be known:
but if it be asked, When to come to pass unknown, yet (as appears by
example) may soon come.
how soon all this may be? I pray you consider what alteration the Lord has
made in Christendom since Luther was taken notice of, but 112 years ago;
especially what God has done in Great Britain in less time, turned out the
Prince of Babell, endued old and young with knowledge and other gifts of God,
especially inflamed their hearts with zeal, that they were readier to suffer
torments, than their enemies were to impose them upon them; filled all with
knowledge, that none were hid from the sound of Gods word; and finally has
cast them into such a security, that most have lost the power and strength of
religion, that no sin wants actours, no wickedness but it has excusers,
patrons, and defenders, hundreds of Preachers are become dumb, and these best
heard and befriended, that either cannot, or will not speak a word in Gods
name, and these who forewarne men of this state, never taken notice of, what
they say or command. O what a security is this! Certainly if the great
Judgment day were far off, God could not suffer this so long. He therefore
that considers how God has wrought these things in so short a time, may
easily see how soon the Lord can bring all the aforesaid to pass, and hasten
the Judgment day.

Now we are to make use of this: Death and Judgment go together.
I cannot think or speak of this great day, but I must needs continually
think of death, and therefore if any say that it is near at hand, then I
answer, that death must bring him thither: If he say that it is far off, and
shall not be these many hundred years, I answer, that death shall presently
apprehend him, and pull him unto Judgment: The world may stand long, but how
know thou, but thou may fall before to morrow? the great judgment may be
far, but thy judgment may be this night, and as death leaves thee, the
great judgment shall find thee. Death a prophecy of judgment.
Finally, so often as thou see one die, so many prophecies the Lord shows thee,
foretelling the ruin of the whole world; in which, the heaven (which is the
light of the world) shall go away with a noise, 2 Pet: 3.
and in death (Vitaque cum gemitu fugit) the life which is the light of men)
goes likewise away with a groan. Virg. AEneid 12 John 1 4.
In the last day all the elements shall be confused and leave their natural
operations: so in death, the parts of the elements whereof we be made, shall be
confused and all dead without operation. In the last day the earth (which shall
be the remainder of the world) must be overrunne with fire to purify it: so in
death, the carcass, all the remainder of the whole man, must be purified by
rotting, from the dross of corruption. Lastly, in the judgment day the souls
are brought before the Lord in the air, to be tried for all they did: so in
death the soul is presented before the Lord, where the Lord has set up his
seat of judgment, and therefore after trial and sentence given is sent
either to heaven or hell. Both unknown, both have signs going before.


Besides (as death does show thee the state of the world,) so the knowledge
that we may have of death, shows what knowledge we may have of the judgment
day. As the Lord has hidden the knowledge of that day from men and Angels, so
is the day of our death hidden from men and Angels: but as the Lord has
prefixed signs and marks to know when it approaches, (if we have eyes to
see them) so the Lord has foreshewen signs in our body and behavior, (if
we mark and observe them) which prophecy our mortality: And as blindness
shall overcome men in the end of the world, and they shall cry peace and
safety, when sudden destruction is coming: so when men are surest to live
long, to enjoy the world, and improve it to the most, then are they caught
away, and we see them no more.

I therefore entreat that all men would provide and study what concerns their
death, when they think of the last coming of Christ, according to both which
this doctrine is to be applied.

First, The reason of Christ's stay.
in both we see (ofttimes) the Lord tarry long; Saint Peter tells us the
reason, not that he is slack, or desirous to put off the time, but that he
is patient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but that all should
come to repentance: the Lord has some chosen to salvation, that are either
unborne or uncalled, and therefore the judgment day cannot come until this
be done. Again, see thou a wicked man to live long the Lord stays to give
him time to repent, which he not doing is made inexcusable; if God gave him
repentance, then for this did the Lord suffer him to live. Know the reason why
the Lord preserves your life, even that you may have time to turn and amend:
beware therefore that this time given for repentance be not used to the
hardening of your hearts, and heaping up of judgment. And this was the cause
why the great judgment came not long ago.

Time uncertain that we may prepare.
Secondly, you see that the Lord will have the time of death and judgment
uncertain, lest we conceiving the Lord gives us time of repentance, should
convert and use it to our destruction; that being certain that they shall
come, but uncertain of the time, we may prepare our selves, shake off sin
more speedily, and avoid it more carefully. Are we then uncertain of the time
when we shall die and be brought to judgment? First then let us be ever
prepared; Christ compares the uncertainty of them to a snare, Luke 21, 35.
Mat: 24, 43.
that shall come upon the inhabitants of the earth; likewise Christ, 2 Pet. 3,
10. 2 Thessalonians: 5, 2.
Peter and Paul compare them to the unexpected coming of a thief; Christ
compares them to the flood in Noah's time: Mat: 24, 37.
O then how prepared ought we to be? For if the bird feared the snare, if the
goodman feared the thief, if the world would fear an universal flood to
drown them; what providence, how many locks, how many watches would be used,
and how many prayers would be said? When the Spouse is uncertain of her
husbands coming, how is her sleep broken in the night, her labor hindered in
the day, with thinking on him! So says Christ, Luke 21, 35.
Watch therefore (for the day when you shall go to your Lord, or your Lord
come to you) that you may be accounted worthy to stand before the Son of man
in his coming. Secondly, And shake off sin.
seeing the time of death and judgment are uncertain, take the Wisemans
Counsel, Make no delay in turning to the Lord, and put not off from day to
day, etc. Ecclesiasticus 5.7. If the King were to give one pardon for life, or
a grant for preferment, upon condition to have his patent engrossed in one day,
what haste would he make? It may be that thou see some live long, and
therefore thou presumest for the like. Who would not beware of a mad man, who
kills all before him, as we see death does every day? But as hogs stand by,
whilst some of themselves are a killing, and cry for company with that which
is killed, and so go away without any care or fear of the like; so it is with
most of us, we lament and bemoane for our friends, whom the Lord calls, but
never consider, that the next day the like is to befall us. Seeing therefore we
must go out of the world to make account, let us not defer time to cast off
sin, lest we be forced to carry it to judgment: A ship may be overloadened
and overburdened; so may the soul be, if a man heap up sin never so fast,
it may be the Lord will never punish in this life, that after death he may be
damned: Israel has sinned, Esaias 1, 5. Ezekiel: 16, 42.
I will smite him no more; he will free him from dangers, that destruction when
it comes may be the more intolerable. Theramenes got our, and escaped
killing, Aelian de var. hist. lib. 9.
when his house in Athens fell suddenly, he crying out, Jupiter, for what time
do thou keep me? when shortly after, thirty robbers compelled him to eat
and drink of the hemlock, till it killed him. Therefore let the uncertainty of
the time, and fear of greater judgment move you to turn truly to God.

And prevent it in time to come.
Finally the uncertainty of the time of death and judgment, are sovereign
helps to make us fear sin, and prevent it; if the Ninivites had not feared,
they had perished, as did Lots sons in law, that feared not: Jacobs sons at
their first going into Egypt feared little, and fared ill; at their second
going they were in great fear, and fared the better. Hosea 13.1.
When Ephraim spoke as trembling, the Lord exalted him, but when he committed
idolatry (without fear) the Lord destroyed him. Sozom. lib. 7. ca. 31.
Chrysostom counseiling the people of Antioch to call upon God, to remove his
anger, lest Theodosius should destroy them for defacing his wives Image,
Chrysostom. hom. 15 ad Popul. Antiochen.
the whole City seemed rather to be (religiosorum Coenobium, quam congregatio
Civium) an Abbey of religious people, than a meeting of Citizens: So if the
terror of death and the judgment day go to our hearts, it will work
strongly against sin, and make us show another manner of life.

Of Afflictions.
HItherto is shown the stay of Christ from death and judgment: Let us now
consider another stay of this spiritual Bridegroom. Every faithful soul
has his meetings with Christ, both in this life and after: in this life he is
to expect that Christ should come as a visiting Father, to correct him for
faults he has fallen into, or to bestow his blessings and gifts upon him.

The first is one of Gods favors shown to his children, God visits his
servant here with corrections. Heb. 12, 6.
for he chasteneth every son whom he receives: and where the Lord does
promise blessings, this is one, that of all he most accounts: in King David's
grant, 2 Samuel 7. Psalm. 89, 31, 32.
this promise is mentioned; If thy children forsake my law, I will visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes: for they are
chastened of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11, 32.
lest they should be condemned with the world. Job. 33.16.
Elihu gives a reason, that when the Lord does often exhort us, yet our ears
are sealed, until the Lord use the last remedy, which is, to open them with
his corrections. It is a mark to spy out the men whom God hates, that they
Psalm. 73.4, 5
are not in bonds like other men, and certainly they are most punished, when
they feel themselves not punished at all, for then they are given up to the
desires of their own heart, to live so wickedly as they list. It is both
doubtful and dangerous for Gods servant to be without the use of the rod, for
look and thou shall find that all Gods Saints (says Quis Sancto rum sine
certamine coronatus est? Abel instus occiditur, Abraham uxotem periclitatur
amittere, and ne in immensum volumen extonda^, quaere et invenies sanctos omnes
adversa perpessos, solus Solomon in delitiis perpetuo fuit, and forsan ideo
corruit. Hieron. ad Eufloch.
Jerome) suffered adversity, only Solomon lived continually in pleasures, and
therefore it so proved with him. Now whilst God suffers his children to
fall, and to be long uncorrected, this is his delay, as when David without a
check for three quarters of a year, continued in his sins of Adultery,
Murder, and Hypocrisy. Mora hec Domini longanimitas est, quia non statim, et
e vestigio poenam imponit: In Mat 24. As Solomon Eccles. 8, 11. Bern in Cant.
Ser. 42.
This stay of the Lord (says Theophilact) is his long-suffering, when he
apprehends not the sinner in the fact, nor suddenly inflicts punishment:
Misericordiam hanc nolo, God deliver me from this mercy, by which the
Reprobates without bit or bridle spur on to eternal destruction. Try
therefore your selves, if you be thus acquainted to meet your Master, and
consider all the children of God, and find out but one son, Heb. 12, 7.
that our heavenly Father chasteneth not. If we thus expected the coming of
our Lord, we would believe this to be true of every Christian, August. de Past
(Si exceptus est a passione flagellorum, exceptus est de numero filiorum) That
he who is freed from suffering the rod, is blotted out from the number of Gods
sons; and be rather afraid to be cast out of our heavenly inheritance, than
to be a sufferer of profitable correction.

And sometime with temporal blessings.
But lest the fear of Gods heavy hand should be a thraldom to Gods servants,
he visits them in this life with gifts, comfortable both to soul and body.
David (who the most time of Saules reign was a sufferer) looked for this
favor, that God would yet at length give him some ease and visit him with some
worldly comforts, and therefore waited when God would be pleased to come unto
him. Psalm 101, 2.
But because his servants are not to expect their felicity to be here, of a
certain they must look for sorrow and trouble: Psalm. 34, 10.
and for prosperity, only so much as may ease them a little, and as God (in
his wisdom) knows to be for their good.

[All slumbered and slept.]
Now follows the effect of the Bridegroomes staying, even all slumbered and
sleeped. As the time for solemnization of a marriage is deferred and proposed
unto a nominate time, to this end, that all who are bidden may be ready for the
meeting: But if fools were invited, they (not understanding what concerned
their profit and honor) would neither prepare nor expect the appointed time,
or others though wise enough to provide, and yet with watching and expectation,
should be weary, heavy, and so slumber and sleep; the Bridegroom should find
them all short of their intended readiness: So when our Savior comes to his
judgment, many shall be altogether unready, and even of his dear servants,
some shall be weary and heavy, and those that are dead, found sleeping in the
dust. And therefore where God is liberal of time, some are careless, some
faint in it, most men are prodigal of it.

Herein we see the right use of the time that God lends us, The right use of
time.
and the abuse unto which the sinfulnes of men turns it. Our time is bestowed
upon us, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, Psalm. 90 12.
that we may recover out of that weakness, Psalm 39.13.
whereinto sin has cast us, 2 Pet 3, 9. 2 Cor. 6, 2.
and that we may come to repentance, and make it the day of purchasing
salvation. It is not for small consequence, that days, months and years are
bestowed upon us; seeing that all the worth and friendship the world can
afford, cannot procure one week or a day to be added, to make up a man's life
to be the full sum of an hundred years. The heavens serve for the framing of
time, and God gives life, that we should not lose the use of it. The
Philosophers searching out what time was, found it to be ( numerus motus) the
counter of celestial motions; Arist. Phys. acro. lib. 3.
so the Lord accounts the time of our life, not the time of his lingering from
judgment, but of his stay, that all may come to repentance, and so to number
their days, that they may find them so many steps of our motion heavenward.
And thus Hilary tells us what is the stay of the Bridegroom, Mora sponsi tempus
poenitentiae est, even the time of repentance. And this blessed benefit does
the Lord bestow upon his servants, so much as needs for their spiritual
preparation; and upon the reprobate, as may make them inexcusable, and a
measurer of the wrath they have heaped upon themselves: his elect have an
acceptable time, a day of salvation; the reprobate a time to disobey his voice,
to harden their hearts, and so spend forty years or more, as in the
provocation, and day of temptation in the wilderness: this is the abuse of
time, which of all things that are consumed should be most grievous unto us,
Here Is si scires unum tua tempora mensem: Rides cum non sit forsitan una dies.
Th. Mor.
if we knew how precious and short it were. He that were certain to live no
more but a month, or at most a year, would be sure to spend his apparel in
mourning, and yet it may be his life prove not so long as the length of a day.
As God gave Iezabel the means of repentance, 1 Kings 21, 23
by the preaching of Eliah, so as a special benefit, he gave her time to
repent, (even fourteen years after the death of Ahab) but she would not, and
therefore the promised wrath of God lighted upon her: Christ in his Epistle
written from heaven unto the Church of Thyatira, Revel. 2, 21.
desires them to consider her fearful example, in abusing the time. When God
takes account of all, he reckons for the time too, and therefore (beloved)
strive to buy time by all labor and industry, and for what we have or may
lose, let us redeem, by making double use and profit of it.

But such is the miserable estate of our sinful nature, that our eye is evil,
because God is good, We abuse time as we do other blessings.
in our actions we are prodigal, because God in bounty is liberal; God gives
good things cheerfully, we receive them grudgingly, and use them cursedly. And
although all his benefits be good, yet we cannot use them so, for all our
imaginations and intentions are evil; and therefore this great benefit in
sparing us, and giving us time of repentance, and preparation for death and
judgment, brings (by our crossenesse) a contrary effect, as appears by
example both in elect and reprobate men. Gods long-suffering from correcting of
his own servants, causes them to be slack in his service, what shall we
then think of others? If for a few years wicked men go uncurbed, they say
the words of the Psalm, God neither sees, Psalm. 10.11.
neither is there knowledge in the Almighty: and how far Gods children go
astray, may appear in the behavior of that sometimes flourishing Commonwealth
of Israel, in every time, when they had most of Gods temporal blessings, of
whom Moses in his death-song both by experience and prophecy said, that when
they were full, Deuteronomy. 32, 15.
they waxed wanton; and David's fearful fall, and Salomons idolatry, shows
the danger of his children when God stays long from correcting them.

But seeing in this sleeping and slumbering the blessed or miserable estate of
these Virgins is set down, we are to consider how far faulty each of them
shall be found at the coming of Christ; for the Parable says generally, all
slumbered and slept, which is to be considered as the Scripture does take the
name of sleep, either for sin, security, or natural death.

Of the daily increase of sin, and the fulness thereof at Christ's coming.
FIrst, the Scripture uses the word sleeping for sinning, 1 Cor. 15, 34. Romans
13.11.
as in these places, Awake truly out of sleep and sin not; The hour is that
we should rise from sleep, where the Apostle expounds it of sin; and in
Ephesians. 5.14. it is named for sin, which is also there called a death, (as 1 Timothy 5, 6) to teach us, Esaias 59.2.
that sin separateth us from God, who is the life of the soul; And that as
he that sleeps wants use of his senses, and is not capable of the actions
which concern reasonable men to do; so the sinner, The abundance of sin
before the great day, may appear by the daily increase of it.
until he be awaked by repentance, is not able to do these things which God
requires of an understanding man. In sleep the senses leave their proper use,
but then the natural powers are busiest, as appetite, digestion of meat,
concoction, and feeding of the body: so in sin the soul is made without
feeling of God, or its own state, but for the powers of corrupted and sinful
nature, they receive strength, and are busy to fulfill the sinful lusts of
the flesh. And thus we find, that Gods servants do often slumber, but after
they be effectuallly called, seldom do they sleep in sin, but so soon as
they slumber, they are affrighted by Gods angry threatenings, and awaked by
repentance. As for the Reprobates, God gives them over unto the spirit of
slumber, Esaias 29, 10. and 6, 9.
without feeling of what they do, or being able to hear any call of God for
their awaking, because the Lord intends to destroy them, 1 Samuel 2, 25.
as is evident in the sons of Eli. Therefore in Christ's Church immediately
before his coming, his true servants shall (as men possessed with a sleepy
heavines) wrestle against the heavines and importunity of natural
concupiscence, and continue the battle between the spirit and flesh, as all
the godly before them have done in the days of their flesh. But for the
Vessels of wrath, as in the old world, they waxed worse and worse, more
cruel, beastly, sensual, and profane; and the Sodomites wickedness for guilt
reached heaven, yea and in the end they offered (...) shutting ears, eyes,
books, shunning the company of them who are likeliest to mark or admonish
them; like those who affect to be sleepy indeed, to shut doors, windows,
avoid noise and company, and finally draw curtains over their eyes, and commit
their heads to the company of a pillow, until God from heaven read their
dreams with a hasty mischief. We see many to have particular experience of
this, and it shall be the awaking at the last day, for men shall be playing
the Epicures, Luc 17.26, 27, 28.30. 2 Pet 2, 7, 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
as in the days of Noah, vexing the few righteous, as the Sodomites did Lot;
crying peace, peace, when on a sudden, in the twinkling of an eye, God shall
send the flood of his wrath, fire from heaven, and eternal destruction, to
bring all foregone conceited pleasures to nothing.

No age of the world wherein religion flourished, has been free from this
sleepiness of security (except the rod of persecution or affliction were
above them to teach them how dangerous their state were, if once they slumbred)
but above all, the security that shall generally be at the last day, could
never be exemplified in any former experience; for all their senses shall be
bound, and without power of feeling the force of religion, or understanding the
terror of Gods wrath; therefore our Savior compares this deadness to sleep,
for if men were awake, there were hope, that (though they were blind) yet they
might hear, if they wanted both senses, yet they might feel, having this
ability in every joint of the least member: but such shall this security be,
that as a man fast on sleep has his life and all his senses, yet is as an
Image, that neither sees, feels, hears, nor smells, and has no part of a
living man in use, excepting only his breath; so this final security shall be
such, that though it were no wonder that most men neglect to hear their
danger, and oftentimes neglect to see unavoidable evils before their eyes, yet
shall they not be able to perceive and feel these burdens under which they
groan. That those things shall so be, all prophecies of the last judgment
have confirmed, with manifold exhortations unto watchfulness for death and
judgment. And though we have heard of diverse examples of wonderful security,
yet if we consider the great light of the Gospel, which shall shine more and
more toward the end, it makes security to show it self the greater.

He that in this light of the Gospel has this lethargy, let him know that
his destruction is hard at hand; when the Lord cast Adam into a dead sleep, it
was to take a rib out of him; the sound sleep of Sisera was that he might not
feel the nail entering into his temples: and Physicians think that this dead
sleep is only fittest to cut away a leg or an arm from a man and he not to
feel it. Certainly there are too many near destruction by this mark, that
every day gives us example, that security is only fit to make them feel their
pain, whom no means in the world besides could persuade to think upon their
peril.

God can and will provide means to save his elect from security.
What shall we now say of the elect, that they likewise shall be senseless and
careless of the wrath to come? God forbid. Saint Peter gives us a comfortable
instruction herein, that if we appertain to God, this security (that goes
before destruction) cannot be able to chain us in; his words are, 2 Pet. 2.9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve
the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished: He brings in two
examples, when all were past feeling before the Flood, yet the Lord saved Noah,
and some others, and quickened his Spirit, that he preached the way of
righteousness to the rest; when Sodom was to be made example to all
generations, for an ungodly secure life, he so sanctified the heart of Lot,
that he was grieved and mourned for their wickedness.

Likewise our Lord Jesus, when he shows his Disciples of this fearful
security, and threatens that it shall be punished with his fearful and hasty
coming, Compare Mat. 24.42, 43. with Luke 12 38.
has in his threatening enfolded a secret comfort for his servants, he says,
You know not at what watch he will come. Soldiers camping or keeping upon life
and death, divide the night into certain watches, that although all the army
be asleep, yet are the Sentinels and watchers awake, who by usual notice of
the hours from one another, keep many awake, raise some from sleep, and
cause numbers to be in readiness at all times: So God (who best knows the
dangers of his own) does raise up his zealous servants, and makes their voice
effectual, to add into and keep in the Church from day to day such as should
be saved: Acts 2.47.
their voice (though not heard by the deaf and secure world) is yet the voice
of a crier in the wilderness, Revel. 14.3.
Math. 3.
to forewarne others to fly from the wrath to come, and as the voice of a
trumpet sounding terribly in the silent time of sleeping. Esaias 58.1.
And so the Lord (that has his eyes on them that fear him) watches his own
in all such dangers, that he may save them, and they awake to prevent their
destruction.

Thirdly, the Scripture uses to call the death of his servants, yea and of
reprobates, a sleeping, and thus you shall find at Christ's coming, the most
of Gods Saints will be in the grave, or as Daniel says, sleeping in the dust;
and so Augustine expounds this place of bodily death. Dan. 12 2. Epist 120.
ad Henoratum.
The Fathers say thus concerning the wise Virgins, Dormicrunt quidem, sed
suav^ter in Domino, They sleept indeed, but sweetly in the Lord: Bernard in
locu^.
and therefore (expectantium somnus, Hilarious in locu^. Dormire est mori,
dormitare est languescere, quia per pondus aegritudinis pervenitur ad somnu^
nortis. Greg. in Evang Ho^. 12 Hieron. in locum.
credentium quies est) the sleeping of those that wait for him, is the rest of
them that believe in him: And justly is death by the Scripture called a sleep,
because at judgment the dead shall be awaked, as men out of sleep:
Consequen^er dicitur (dormierunt) quia postea suscitandae sunt, For good reason
is it said that they slept, because that afterward they are to be awaked
again. Indeed the Fathers have herein spoken truly, but they have not fully
answered the question, for the Lord shall have his Saints at his coming, who
in stead of death shall be (as Henoch and Elias were) changed, and so meet the
Lord in the Air, who cannot be found sleeping in the grave.

Christ says, that (all slept) that every one may tremble and prevent it.
And therefore to answer this question, we must consider, that the Scripture
names the word [All] for the greatest part of men, as in these like places, 2
Cor. 5.17. Coloss. 1.20. John 12.32. Esaias 40.4. Ambros. de Vocat. Gent. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
Joel 2.28. Sicut etiam cum de impijs sermo est, ita loquutionem suam divinus
stilus ordinat, ut ea quae de quadam part dicuntur, ad omnes homines pertinere
videantur: In like manner when speech is made of wicked men, the holy style is
so framed, that the things which are spoken of a certain part, do seem to
pertain to all men generally, as Ioh. 3.32. Philip. 2.21. In like manner
Christ says, All slept, because few would be found otherwise; the dead that
died in the Lord, would be found in their graves, most of men alive would be
senseless of the wrath to come, the godly minished from among the children of
men, and those that were so, would be as eight persons saved of a whole world,
as Lot and three more of five flourishing Cities; as a very small remnant,
like as when the Jews in Judea were carried away to Babylon, Esaias 1.9.
or as the number of Christian Jews in St. Paul's days: Romans 10, 5.
All which considered we understand that Christ's words are meant
(universaliter in toto, non communiter in singulis) universally of all men,
that all slumbered and slept, not commonly of every particular man, for the
Lord knows how to awake and save his own, and of all committed to Christ not
one can be lost, except he be a child of perdition.

Finally, our Lord said, All slept, (few doing otherwise) that all may tremble,
and fear lest the Lord come upon them by death and judgment, as a thief in
the night.

Tremble therefore before death, that you tremble not in it, watch for that
hour, lest it watch for you, and find you asleep; make ready for judgment,
for fear it be heaped up for you; examine your selves, if you be some of them
whom Christ says are now asleep; and consider the fearful taking you would
be in, if in this instant death should apprehend you, and bring you to
judgment, as who knows but it may, or at some other time, when you are as
unresolvedly prepared, found careless of heaven, fearelesse of hell, slack in
religion, dead and buried in wickedness: all that are thus found, shall a
thousand times curse father, mother, friends and acquaintance; the world and
all that were their helpers and comforters in this mortal life.

VERSE 6. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold the Bridegroom comes:
go out to meet him.
NOw follows this solemn meeting, and the marriage day, which begins with
a Proclamation, containing a public notice, and a general command, Go ye, etc.
As it concerns the honor of the married, that so honorable a work should be
accordingly performed to the degree and estate of the parties espoused: So
seeing Jesus Christ (who is Lord above all blessed for ever) is the
Bridegroom, it stands with his honor, that his coming personally and
bodily, should be with the fight of Majesty, voice of heavenly Heralds, and
attendance of all his creatures, which (with the time) we are now to consider
of.

[And at midnight.]
As Christ when he speaks of the time of his coming, usually does it by the
sign; so here when he says [at midnight] he continues the Parable
according to the former particulars, because it is the usual time, in which
all men betake them to their natural rest, and are found asleep in their
beds. So that Christ means not hereby to point out any time, in an age,
year, or natural day, at which he would come: but thereby doubleth his former
words, to show, that the security of the world at his coming shall not be, as
an ordinary sleep, but as the dead sleep in the night, in which many are
(according to their own confession) so without sense, that you may beat drums
by them, and carry them whither you will.

Gods word has not set down the time of Christ's coming.
As for knowledge of the time of Christ's coming, the word of God has shown us
nothing, which may make us certain of the age, year, or day; Christ gives a
reason to his Apostles, because it does not concern you, (...). Non est
vestru^, etc. Acts 1.7.
or it is not profitable for you. If every man's death, or the general
judgment were known to be far off, it would make his servants faint and
weary, and wicked men would be more dissolute and ungodly, The reason hereof.
who (for all their conterfeiting) are often compelled to tremble, Vigilate
quia nescitis diem neque horam, etc. Crebro id repetit, ut ignorantiam exitus
ab hac vita utilem esse ostenda^. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 79.
doubting the fearful approach of that day. If these times were known to be
near, his servants would be troubled with natural fear of death, which is a
greater pain when we fear it, than when we feel it: and wicked men would be
tormented with desperate fear of worse than a thousand deaths, which would
make them leap into hell sooner than need were. Our Savior (as he said in the
forenamed place, that the Father had put up the times and seasons in his own
power, so he) had answered this question to his Disciples before, Admonet ne
discere tentent quod Angeli ignorant. Theophilact. in Mat: 24, 36. Mark 13, 32
as unwilling to show it, and unwilling that either they should think it
possible to be known, or fitting ever to be demanded of again: For of that
day and hour (says he) knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven, neither
the Son, but the Father. It is certain that Christ knew it, Pet: Mart: in 1
Cor: 10, 11.
although not as he was man, but as his divine nature showed him: but he says,
he knows it not, Theophilact in Mark 13, 32.
even as a loving Father unwilling either to deny his child, or to grieve his
tender heart, when he is asking some thing which the father will not give, he
hides it in his hand, and afterward shows him his empty hand for
satisfaction: so Christ hides it from his Apostles and us with a reason, that
we grieve not because we cannot know it, seeing the Angels in heaven know it
not, and yet are not the less blessed, because they do not know it: nor the
blessed humane nature of Christ less glorious, though nature has not
affoorded the knowledge thereof unto him. And though Christ in this Parable
name midnight, yet it cannot be to point out the time, seeing every place in
the world as it differs from other in situation, east or westward, differs
also in hours, there can no hour be given which is the same in half a
quarter of the earth; Exodus 12, 29. Traditio ludaeorum est, etc. Vnde reor
traditionem illam permansisse, ut in die vigiliaru^ Paschae, ante noctis
dimidium populos dimittere non liceat, expectantes adventum Christi. Hieron. in
Matthew. 25. See more of the time upon Verse 13.
and though the destroying Angel came at midnight among the Egyptians, yet was
it an idle tradition, that the convert Jews (in Saint Ieroms time) had, that
Christ should come at midnight. Only I wish that we were so of this conceit,
that every day past were the last of our life, then would we enter our bed, as
we would wish to go to our grave; for many go sound to their bed (as we
commonly say) who are found dead in the morning: and it is certain that it
must be midnight in some part of the world at Christ's coming.

By these things we should learn how unprofitable their curiosity is, We ought
to leave curiosity in searching of it.
that labor to know this day of judgment, and how blinded we are, in
neglecting what is set down and profitable for us, and to hunt with sorrow and
trouble for the thing that is not to be had: Saint Augustine said truly,
Prophetiae citius implentur quam intelliguntur, That Prophecies are sooner
fulfilled than understood. And therefore we are not to enquire for that day,
but how ready we are for it; and as we perceive by signs the approaching of
that wrath, so we may call to the merciful God to be delivered from the
terror of it.

Our Savior by naming the time of his coming (midnight) teaches us two
things. First, Security a forerunner of destruction.
that security or carelessness is ever the last forerunner of destruction, and
the greater it will be, Cum fatali^ equus saltu super ardua venit Pergama, Tum
me confectum curis, somnoque gravatum; Infelix habuit thalamus, pressitque
lacentem ^uicis and alta quies, placidaeque similllima morti Virg. 6 AEneid.
The greater security the greater judgment follows.
it shows that the greater vengeance is to follow, as appears in all
written examples of Gods wrath; and when any are so far past, as to contemn
Gods justice, and think that he will not punish, or regards not the warning
of it, destruction is near unto them.

Secondly, we are taught that when Christ comes, for all the labor that can
be taken to awake them, yet shall the world be in dead sleep of ungodliness
and carelessness, as they were in Noah's time, and in Sodom unto the hour that
Lot went out of it. When Cyrus his army besieged Babylon, Belshazzar gave his
subjects (of the City) notice, how little he feared any threatened danger, by
his public feasting and drinking, Dan. 6.1.3.
and almost the whole City blinded with the same impiety, Herodot. lib 1.
followed his example of drunkenness; the enemies entered the City in the
night, Invadunt urbem somno vinoque sepultam, Virg.
and killed them whom they found buried in drunkenness and sleep;
notwithstanding that Daniel had expressly forewarned both his predecessor and
himself of it. So the day of Christ shall come as a snare upon the inhabitants
of the earth, when labor shall be little profitable, or seasonable to awake
them. The same cause gives us occasion of the same complaint in our time; many
continue in a seen and known carelessness and contempt of God, all
forewarning is to no purpose, 1 Samuel 15.35. Non in solis divitiis est
misericordia, sed and in sermon, and si nihil habes, etiam in lachrymis.
Theophilact. in Mat. 5, 7.
until they fall into the hands of an angry God. But as Samuel did for Saul,
so must we bemoane their misery, if our example cannot move them: then they can
witness, that God sent his children who mourned for and unto them, who would
not lament for themselves, this is all the help that we can bestow upon them,
who neither can nor will be helped.

[There was a cry made.]
When no means can avail to awake security, the last cry shall do it.
As marriages in solemnizing have diverse sights for delight, the voices of
singers and instruments, to give content to the ear, and variety of meats to
please the taste and stomach; and if the Bridegroom be of the Nobility he
wants not the voice of a Trumpet to proclaim the greatness of his person:
So our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming to judgment, shall send in stead of a
cry, the voice of a Trumpet before him, with terror whereof heaven, earth and
hell shall have notice of the power and greatness of his Majesty.

This voice shall be that which the Scripture calls the sound of the Trumpet,
(as shall appear) yet our Savior sets it out by the name of a cry, because of
the former security, wherein the Lord shall be careful to give forewarning
according to the capacity of every one. The Lord suffers not the deaf to be
without warning, for as we express our selves to the deaf by signs and
tokens, so does the Lord foretell the end of the world by signs of particular
wrath in some, when others for a time go free; by the weakening of nature in
diverse creatures, diverse prodigies and wonders of natures imperfection; by
weakness of the operation of heaven, by subversion of worldly power and glory,
and the increase of iniquity beyond measure: which being compared with the
relation and experience of former times, Bern. in Fest. Pentet Ser. 3.
ut ex praeteritis fidem astruat futurorum, that from things by past he may
understand the certainty of what is to follow. These that have ears to hear,
let them hear, Mat. 13 9.
for the Lord sends to them the admonitions of his word. But they that have
hearing, and yet are so thick, that no counsel can reach so deep as their
dullness is, or are so asleep, that common calling cannot awake them, nothing
will prevail but a voice, loud as a Trumpet, Esaias 58.1.
to make the earth shake, and the air to be resounder of terror: So at the
last day there can be no place for a secure deafness, when the heavens go away
with a noise, the elements melt and the earth burns with fire, who shall not
hear and feel the power of this Cry? this will end their sleep with the
beginning of endless torments.

Now for the greatness and terror of this cry which shall summon all men to
judgment, The greatness of the cry.
neither can it be sufficiently expressed nor understood. If the Trumpet, Exodus
19, 16.
that called the Israelits to hear the Law, was a terror unto them, how
terrible shall that voice be, which shall call all men to account for not
keeping of it? If the noise of thunder (which is not far heard) be so
terrible that it allayes the courage of the proudest, and is even a terror to
the fishes of the Sea, Psalm. 104 7.
and shows a power in the waters, what may we think of this voice, Contents
of Psalm 29. Vere vox magna, vox tubae terribilis, cui omnia obediunt elementa,
quae Petras scindit, inferos aperit, portas aereas frangit, vincula mortuorum
difrumpit etc. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Psalm. 50.1.
which shall be heard in heaven, earth and hell? The 29 Psalm. extolleth and
shows the power of Gods voice, for fear whereof all Creatures tremble, that
the security of men may be thereby shaken; but at this last voice all
creatures shall declare the terror of it. Lastly, if we consider whose voice
it shall be, we shall conceive it the better: St. Paul tells us, The Lord
himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute, for he himself shall call
his people: lo this is the Trumpet, even the voice not of Angel, but of him
who is Lord and Master of the Angels, the voice of the Son of man, (...)
but sounding with the power of the Son of God; and because the secure world
would never hear him nor the voice of his servants, he says, That the hour
shall come, in which, all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice, and
come out either to salvation or damnation. It is the voice of Christ himself.
The Scripture calls this voice of Christ, the sound of the last Trumpet.
Mar. 14 62. John 5.28.
1 To show the power and majesty of his coming, as he showed in his
ascending, prophesied of in the Psalms, who being exalted above all when he
went to heaven, Psalm. 47.5.7, 8, 9.
in his coming he shall show that all his enemies are trod under feet.
Secondly, to show the great and fearful things that are then to be done, thus
a Trumpet sounded before the Law was given: and in the Revelation, the great
alterations of the Church, and judgments upon the enemies thereof, Revel. 8,
6, 7.8.
from the time of Christ unto the last day, are foretold by the blowing of
Trumpets, which notwithstanding was never heard by them who felt the fearful
events. Thirdly, to show that the cry is for the assembling of his people, Joel
2.15. and Psalm 81.3.
not an uncertain sound, but a certain, that all may prepare and appear, 1
Cor. 14.8.

Hence we understand the diverse effects of this Cry; The effects of it.
When the destroying Angel came down to Egypt in the night, Exodus 12.30.
the terror of God caused them to make an outcry over all the land: How many
voices of Lamentations shall be heard at once, when the general Cry shall be,
Hills and mountains fall upon us, Rev. 6.16.
and hide us from the presence of him that sits upon the throne, for the
great day of his wrath is come, who can stand? They that were never moved with
the words of Christ now tremble at his voice, and their hard hearts shall make
unseasonable lamentation. But with the servants of God it is not so, for as the
same voice of Christ before his suffering which made his enemies fall as dead
to the ground, yet encouraged Peter and others of his Disciples: John 18, 6.
so this voice of Christ at the great day, though it shall be the most terrible
that ever wicked men heard, yet it shall be the most joyful that ever Gods
true servants heard, John 3, 29.
(for he that is the friend of the Bridegroom, must needs rejoice greatly
because he hears his voice) for thereby their bodies shall receive life and
immortality. Psalm. 91.1.5.
As in their life time they betook themselves unto the shadow of the Almighty,
and therefore when wicked men (afraid with the terrors of the night) made an
Egyptian outcry, Psalm. 118, 15.
his servants find that the voice of joy and gladness is in the dwelling of the
righteous, because prosperity is within their gates, Quanta crit electis
laetitia, in adventu Domini, quem comparat adventui Sponsi? Muscul. in Mat. 25
1 Look Ier. 33.10.11.
no evil can come unto them, nor any plague near unto their dwelling: Much
more shall they be glad at the voice of Christ, in that day for which their
souls and bodies have waited long in hope to hear.

Would you know if the voice of Christ shall be joyful to you in that day, or
not? The Prophet Esaias from the Lords mouth tells us, Esaias 66.2. They who
tremble at Christ's voice now, shall rejoice hereafter
that if we tremble at his words in this life, he will look upon us, and we
shall rejoice to hear his voice in the fearful day, calling us the blessed
children of his Father; if with humility and fear we draw near to hear what
the Lord says now in his word, we shall not appear in judgment to be
censured, but commended: And this is most certain, that seeing all the
creatures tremble at the Lords voice, we must either do so in this life when
God commands us, or in the life to come when he condemns us.

[Beholde the Bridegroom comes.
Here is the first part of the Proclamation, being a notice given of the
Bridegroomes coming.

If these that were prepared for a marriage solemnity, heard a warning given
without certain notice for what purpose, how could they understand that it
concerned them? So if in the great day the voice of the Lord showed not the
particular person that came, it could not be the trumpet of the Almighty: but
his voice shall declare, that the Bridegroom comes, because the power of God
shall go along with it, the diligence of the Angels shall second the sound of
it, in gathering his Saints unto the great assembly.

The Scriptures say that Christ shall come; for although he fills all places,
being God infinite and incomprehensible, yet because of his humane nature he
shall show a local descent, The glory of Christ's person is now hid.
and set his throne in the air: But for his divine nature, it fills the
world; and of it I say, Bern. Ser. 3. Advent.
as Bernard said of Christ's incarnation, that he was in the world, and the
world was made by him, but the world knew him not, Non ergo veniet qui aberat,
sed apparebit qui latebat, He shall not therefore come as one that was absent,
but appear as one that was hidden before, and show the glory of his Majesty
shining in his humane nature, the glory of both which is now hidden from our
eyes, for the clouds and spheres of heaven have taken him out of our sight;
and according to the Psalm, Psalm. 18, 11. Compare 1 Timothy 6.16. with Act. 22,
11.
He has made darkness his pavilion and secret place; which though it be in
it self a light inaccessible, yet it darkeneth our sight. Thus our Lord as a
Bridegroom is entered into his chamber, and there he stays until the day
come, and then shall he come out of his chamber, as a mighty man, and show
himself before all mankind; and as nothing is hid from the heat of the
natural Sun, so no man shall be able to hide himself when the Sun of
Righteousness shall declare his glory and power; for every eye shall see him,
yea even they that pierced him through, Revel: 1, 7.
and all kindreds of the earth shall wail before him.

This doctrine is of great antiquity, for when the old world by their
impieties began to be the first presidents of this last vengeance of God,
Henoch terrified them with this doctrine, Behold the Lord comes with
thousands of his Saints, Jude verse 14.
to be revenged on them: but their graceless hearts took no notice of it: so
while we have the same Proclamation giving us warning so long before hand, who
are moved to prepare and attend? But as often as we read or hear these words
(Behold the Lord comes, or the Bridegroom comes) so often is this voice
either in characters or sounds, sent from heaven to our eyes and ears, to give
us warning of this last meeting. When Moses forewarned Israel of their ensuing
calamities, Deuteronomy. 4, 26.
and the cause of them, he called heaven and earth to be witness that he had
given them warning, and left it registered to be read to all posterity, and so
if they perished their own neglect should be the cause of it; so in the day of
judgment the Lord shall call heaven and earth before him to judge his people:
Psalm. 50, 4.
and to prove how often we have heard the Proclamation, though we forget and be
careless, yet the Sun and Moon that give us light, Psalm. 89, 37.
are faithful witnesses in heaven, and the rest of the creatures are able to
witness against us. Let every man therefore remember how often he has
received warning of Christ's coming.

[Goe out to meet him.]
Now follows the notice given to all the Virgins, to go out to meet the
Bridegroom. Seeing at Christ's coming the voice shall declare his greatness,
and the matter in hand, it may be demanded, What shall be the words that shall
be uttered in that cry? I answer, the Scripture has not named them
particularly, but in all reason they are like to be these, or surely to the
same effect. Also St. Paul longed for it, and yet trembled to think on it. 2 Timothy 4.8. and 2 Cor. 5.11.

Hieron in Reg. Monach. ^.30. Miserum me dum haec cogito and scribo, cor timore
palpitat, hum^nt oculi, and tribulater nimium si nescirem miscricordiam Domini.
Bern. in hanc Parabolam.


Saint Jerome a man much desirous to have that blessed day once come, and yet
trembled when he thought on the terror of it, by his often meditating on it,
apprehended these to be the words, witnessing thus, Sive edam, sive bibam, sive
aliud aliquid agam, semper insonat auribus meis vox illa horrifica, Surgite
mortui, venite ad judicium: Whether I eat, drink, or whatsoever else I do,
this fearful voice sounds ever in mine ears, Rise dead and come to judgment.
But whatsoever the words be, the effect shall be to call us to judgment.

The use hereof is the same which the aforesaid Doctor makes of it, for he
exhorts others to think continually upon this voice. It is without question
a great bridle even to the wickedest men, that they must come to a reckoning
for all; Solomon exhorts us almost with Saint Ieromes words and meaning,
Eccles. 11, 9.
Remember that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment: and
lays them in the ways of these who lead their life as they list. When Gods
servants think on it, it makes them tremble, 2 Cor: 5, 11.
(this sentence) We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ to
give account; Saint Paul calls it the terror of the Lord which moves him
and others to be careful in their calling. Would to God that this sentence
would often, yea ever sound in our ears, (Rise dead and come to judgment) it
were not to be doubted, but it would make us more careful in every thing we
do, remembering that shameful and sorrowful account, that we must give of
them: which would make us often to conclude, that we would not buy this
Repentance so dear, as with the greatest pleasure the world can give, Sperne
voluptates, necat empta dolor voluptas. Horat. 1. Epist 12.
nor so make our markets in this world, that we should lose in our reckening
all our labors, Gods favor, and eternal happiness.

VERSE 7. Then all those Virgins arose, and trimmed their Lamps.
HItherto has been the Proclamation, now follows the meeting, which that it
be accordingly performed, two things are required. 1. That they arise. 2. That
they trim themselves in such decency, as may become the friends and honourers
of a marriage solemnity, the first is set down in this verse, the second
partly in this verse, partly in the 8.9. and 10. Verses. In like manner, when
Christ shall come from heaven to us, all must rise, whether their sleep be
natural death, sin or security, and in have address themselves, for to give
an account of all that ever they did, and to be partakers of endless joy or
everlasting torment.

The first, we call the Resurrection of the body, when God shall restore unto
all mankind, The Resurrection comfortable to the godly.

In omni re aut actu virtus age^di, spes est futuri Qui enim arat, arat vt
metat, qui pugnat, pugnat vt vincat etc. Ergo etc. Chrysostom in Math. 22.23. Qui
dicunt non esse resurrectionem.


that body which death bereft them of, and which was detayned within the power
of earthly corruption. A great comfort to us who know it; for as it would be a
great grief to the husbandman, that all his store should be bestowed upon the
ground only to rotte it, who on the contrary, commits it cheerfully to dust
and corruption, in sure and certain hope that it shall spring again with
triple reward, for his wanting it for a season; so it would be a great grief
to us, if the bodies of our selves or friends, committed to the dust, should
have an everlasting winter without a spring time; who now rejoice, Revel. 1.18.
knowing that as our Redeemer lives, who once was dead, so shall we rise at
the last day, Job 19 28.
and be covered again with our flesh and behold with our eyes, Act. 17.28.
the blessed body and person of him, In whom we live, move, and have our being,
Philip. 3, 21.
and that he will change our vile bodies (which shame causes us now to hide
from our own eyes) and make it like unto his own glorious body.

To this purpose therefore, the God of all comfort assures us of the
Resurrection, that as that day shall be the beginning of our endless
happiness, so the knowledge of it should be a comfort, to make us bear
patiently all the sorrows which we sustain in our body, which was (as
appears) a great help to Jobs patience: Job. 19, 26, 27, 28. Titus 3.12.
and this S. Paul calls the blessed hope of Gods servants, wherein they shall
be declared in presence of all creatures, to be they that are honored of the
Almighty; and their oppressors and enemies in this world, Psalm: 149, 8.
trodden under feet, Kings and Nobles (which were their enemies) chained and
fettered by the power of God unto eternal woe; after that the Saints
themselves have censured the Devils and them, 1 Cor: 6 2, 3. Wisd: 3, 8.
and sentenced both to be worthy of everlasting perdition, from the presence of
the Lord, and the glory of his power; then shall the Lord Jesus be glorified in
his Saints, 2 These: 1, 9, 10*
and made marvailous in all them that believe: this is the honor due unto all
his Saints. Psalm: 149, 9.
When wicked men shall see it, they shall be vexed with horrible fear, and
with fruitless repentance confess their justly deserved misery, a pattern
whereof is set down in Wisdom throughout the whole fifth chapter. Whereby we
may see the joy and comfort Gods children have by the hope of their
resurrection.

Ignorance of the resurrection causes a wicked life and fearful death.
But as other Christian comforts are assaulted by Satan, and shaken by our
weakness; so our hope of the resurrection has been a fort for Gods servants,
against which Satan has warred, and prevailed against many, and turned them
into Atheists and Epicures in all ages, who in their belief have but this one
Article, that they are bound to live and dye like beasts, as indeed they do.
And therefore we ought to fasten us to the rock of Gods word, and build our
faith on it, so shall we be able to abide all the tempests and temptations, and
quench the fiery darts of the Devil.

It is all one to be without all religion, as to be without hope of the
resurrection, for they cannot have the knowledge of God (says Saint Paul) for
if our hope be only of this life, 1 Cor: 15, 34.
Ibid: verse 19.
then of all creatures are we most miserable, because we have more miseries
following us than all the creatures besides; and if we fear God only for what
may befall us here, it can no more save us from the evils we most fear, than
fear can save a beast going to the slaughter. Acts 23, 8.
The Heathen and the Sadduces a kind of them, who were and would be ignorant
of the resurrection, insensible of their own soul, making their Disciples
tenants to religion only during life, filled them with fruitless fears,
disappointed them of immortal hopes, by an uncertain promise of their famous
memory, to walk as their ghost in the world, after their deceasse, yet could
they never reach the conscience: and therefore In coelo est meretrix, in coelo
est turpis adulter, etc. Quid non mentiri, vel quid non protinus audet, Fingere
mortale ingenium: ut sibi mayor cundi In praeceps pateat via, liberiorque
potestas peccandi detur, etc. Marc. Pal^^g. lib. 1.
all their religion was to be only religious in wickedness, and these in
likest possibility, to be near their Gods, who were next to them in
wickedness. So that it must be true that Saint Paul said once of the
Ephesians, that they were without hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians.
2.12. For they that have no expecting of the life to come, must live without
respecting of God in this world.

The cause of the ignorance of the resurrection (says Christ) is, that men are
deceived, Matthew: 22, 29.
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. The causes of ignorance of
the resurrection.
If men consult with natural knowledge, they may easily be deceived; for
although we find the form of it, (which is the joining together of soul and
body) to stand with natural reason, yet nature cannot show by what power, and
in what fashion it shall be done: and though we see many examples in nature,
(some whereof I will hereafter set down) yet are they not able to beget faith
in us, but are as apochryphall proofs, helping (so far as they are able) to
strengthen our faith begun, and are sufficient to confound naturalists, and to
disprove the impossibility they conceive in it. Again, if men consult with
flesh and blood, that is, with their own strength, appetite and desire, their
affection will blind their knowledge: for seeing their wicked life in all
justice deserves a wretched recompense, Execrabilis plane and crudelis
malitia, quae Dei potentiam, sapientiam, iustitiam perire desiderat, Bern. de
Resurr. ser. 3. Credimus (quis enim damnet sua vota libenter) and spem fovimus.
Martial. lib. 9, Epig. 41.
they wish that there were neither Judge of power, nor time, nor place for
their punishment: and seeing they cannot condemn their own desires, they
feed themselves in hope, and finding no experience of what they need to fear,
rest fully persuaded that they shall have no other life than this which they
desire. But if you consult with the Scriptures, and consider the power of God,
you shall find that of necessity we must rise again, and how easy it is to
God to bring it to pass.

The Mercy, Justice and Truth of God confirm the Resurrection unto us.
If we consider the Lord either as merciful, just, or true, then our bodies
must needs be raised again. The great mercy of God appears in the Redemption
of man, which cannot be fully done, if corruption (the punishment of sin)
keep Gods servants prisoners for ever: and therefore as he is merciful in
redeeming us, he must needs raise up our bodies again; which God by the
Prophet acknowledges to be a part of our Redemption, saying, I will deliver
thee from the power of the grave. Hosea 13, 14.


The Justice of God requires it also, Vna poena implicat quos unus amor in
crimine ligat, Bernard.

Si resurrectio non est, nec Deus est, nec providentia est Videmus enim
plurimos iustos esurientes, and iniuriam patientes: peccatores autem et in
iustos in divitiis and in omni voluptate abundantes. etc. Damasc. lib. 4.


that soul and body which have joined hand in hand for sin, should be
coupled together again for punishment, and wicked men are loaded with Gods
benefits, and Gods servants with miseries: if God be just, he must change their
states, and each must receive in their bodies according to what they have done,
be it good or evil; which is only to be done, when Consider 2 Cor. 5, 10.
Dan. 12, 2.
we shall appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, and not before, for in
Justice, neither can rewards be given, nor punishment inflicted, before the
persons be brought in place, taken account of, and their deservings rewarded
unto them accordingly.

Thirdly, God has been pleased to engage his truth unto us for the certainty
of the Resurrection, he said by Daniel, They that sleep in the dust shall
awak, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt: By
Hosea, Hosea 13, 14.
I will deliver thee from the power of the grave: And Christ says, The hour
shall come, John 5.28, 29.
in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they shall come
forth, that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, but they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation: And Saint Paul says, 1 Cor.
15, 22.
The dead shall rise incorruptible, 1 Thessalonians: 4.15, 16, 17.
and in Christ all men shall be made alive, the dead in Christ shall rise
first, etc. These are his promises, which cannot fail, though heaven and earth
should pass away: and though men in diverse ages have waited long for the
fulfilling of Gods promises, yet they never failed to come; and men were only
deceived in them, This appears both by the name of Noah, and the reason of it
given Genesis 5, 29.
because they knew not the time: so from before Noah's flood until Christ's
first coming he was looked for, the space of 2900 years before he came. And
in the primitive Church there was more looking for Christ's coming 1100. years
ago, than there seems to be now: But the rule of the Prophet must be
considered in all Gods promises, Habbac. 2, 3.
that the vision is appointed for a certain time, but at the last it shall
speak, and not lie, though it tarry, yet we ought to wait, for it shall surely
come.

Our faith herein has two helps.
Now because the possibility of it has caused many to err, the Scripture has
given us two helps to underprop our weakness. First, that we behold the
resurrection of Christ to be a glass, 1 Pet: 1, 21.
wherein we may see and behold our own, who passing through this mortal life,
purchased immortality that he might be a pledge of the like unto us, that we
who in suffering miseries bear about in our bodies the dying of the Lord
Jesus, 2 Cor: 4, 11.
may also have his life manifest in our mortal bodies. When Joseph was
committed to prison, Gen: 39, 22.
the keeper of the prison committed to his hands all the prisoners that were in
hold, Mors ipsa in sua regione captiva, expavit subito talem mortuum: and quem
debitorem suum putabat, creditorem atque exactorem esse cognovit. Eusebius Emiss.
Hom. 7. de Pascha.
and whatsoever he pleased he did with them: So Jesus Christ being buried, made
death it self a prisoner, and in stead of a debtor, death found him a
commander, and one that called him to account of all that was committed to his
charge. Christ is our head, and his death and rising was in our behalf, and he
is the beginning of our resurrection: so as the body cannot be drowned, so long
as the head is above water, neither can our bodies be lost, seeing Christ has
risen from corruption: so that the Scripture concludes, that although our
bodies remain as yet in the dust, Ephesians: 2, 5.6. Coloss: 3, 1.
notwithstanding we are risen with Christ. This is the victory of faith, when
we believe that as Christ was raised up, even so shall we that are his body:
and he that considers, that all our sins imputed to Christ could not hold
him within the power of death, shall see our resurrection more easy, seeing
our sins are not imputed unto our selves.

But with this experience the Scripture would have us to consider the power of
God, Matthew: 22, 29.
and Saint Paul when he speaks of the changing of our vile body, says,
Philip: 3, 21.
it shall be by the mighty power whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself. Indeed if our resurrection were in the power of any except God
himself, we had reason to doubt it, because we could see no likelihood of it.
Luke 1.34, 37.
The Virgin Mary wondered how she should conceive, not knowing a man, the Angel
answered, that with God nothing is impossible. When the Lord promised that
Abraham should have a son, Rom: 4.19, 20, 21.
he neither feared the deadness of himself, nor the barrenness and age of
his wife, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to God, being fully
assured, that he who had promised was able to perform it: and the reason which
made Abraham so ready to offer up his son, and yet to believe the promised
blessing to be performed in him, was (says the Apostle) because he considered
that God was able to raise him up from the dead, Heb: 11, 19.
from whence (both in his conception and birth) he received him also after a
sort. So whilst the Lord says, that he will raise up thy body in the last
day, doubt not of it, Eusebius. Emiss. Hom. 2, de Symbolo.
for though it be a great work, yet (qui magna credere jussit, Omnipotens est)
he that bids thee believe great things, is Almighty, and the Lord that created
thee, it is even he that has taken in hand to raise thee up again.

So then we see the resurrection possible to him to whom nothing is impossible:
now if we consider the experience of former times, and Gods daily works, Gods
works like the resurrection.
we shall find it easy to him that does it. He translated Henoch and Eliah
to heaven, a hard and rarer work than raising the dead; he caused Aarons
Rod, Numb: 17, 8.
(which was dry and withered) in an instant to bud, raised the daughter of
Iairus from death, the widows son of Naim and Lazarus that had lain four
days in the grave; Auson Eclogariu^ Accipe quod mirere magis: tenuissima
tantis principia and nostros non admittentia visus etc. Job 10, 10, 1 Cor: 15,
36.
and by his servants did the like, Eliah raised up the Shunamites child, and
Peter raised Dorcas from the dead: What power then has he who gave so much to
others? We see the Lord daily make men of such beginnings, as men would not
believe, if they saw it not with their eyes; even, says Job, of a little seed,
which is as water powered on the ground. And whilst the Apostle Paul
considers the growing of the corn, he calls him a fool, who denies the
resurrection. And the like we see in trees and herbs, for what is it that we
see daily in the world, but examples and imitation of the resurrection? The
trees lose their green leaves, they leave giving of fruit, Quid enim quotidie
nisi resurrectionem nostram in elementis suis mundus imitatur? Nam per momenta
temporum cernimus arbusta viriditatem foliorum amittere, a fructib. cessare, et
eccesubito quasi ex arescenti ligno velut quadam resurrectione veniente videmus
folia crumpere, fructus gra^descere, and totam arborem redevivo decore vestiri.
Et sequitur: Confideremus parvum cuiuslibet arboris semen, quod in terram
iacitur, ut arbor ex illo producatur. and comprehendamus si possumusub in (...)
cortex? ubi viriditas foliorum? ubi ubertas fructuum? (...) in famine (...)
batur, cum in terram iaceretur? Greg Mor. in Job 19, 25
and behold on a sudden, as it were by a new resurrection coming, we see
leaves come forth, the fruit grow big, and the whole tree clothed again
with a fresh and lively comeliness. If we consider the little seed of any
tree, how the tree comes out of it, and let us comprehend if we can, how in
so little a seed the huge tree did lurk which came out of it? where is the
stock? where the bark? where the green leaves, where is the great plenty of
fruits? Was there any such thing seen in the seed when it was cast into the
ground? We see likewise diverse sorts of living creatures breed of corrupt and
rotten earth, the light is buried in darkness, and the next morning shows
it self again: yea in our sleeping and awaking there is showed unto us a
shadow of the Resurrection: and the relation of the Heathen historians make
good to us, how the young Phaenix rises out of the ashes of the old. Now to
all these examples which we daily see, this may be added, and ( Greg Mor. lib. 6
id omnibus constare debet, long difficilius esse creare quae non fuerant,
quam ea reparare quae fuerant) it is manifest to all men, that it is a far
harder thing to create these things which were not, than to make up again the
things which were decayed.

But that all of us may be the surer in faith of the Resurrection, we have
need of the aforesaid two helps, and to pray the Lord to grant them unto us,
as St. Paul does jointly for both to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1, 19, 20.
That the Lord would open the eyes of our understanding, that we might know,
what is the exceeding greatness of his power, in them that believe, according
to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead.

The Lord has sufficiently assured us of the Resurrection, All must rise.
when by such experiences he shows how easily he may do it: now therefore,
though wicked men would abandon all thoughts of it, yet it is in vain; for all
must rise, both wise and foolish, and present themselves before the Lord.
Whereby it appears, that whether men believe it or not, yet they shall rise:
but when the Lord would have his servants to believe it, it is to this end that
they might know and be assured of the means, whereby their bodies come to
immortality and glory; and only to them the Resurrection is a benefit, and
therefore Christ calls it, Luke 14, 14.
the Resurrection of the just: unto the wicked it is a punishment, and it were
good for them they should never be raised, as it had been for Judas, if he had
never been borne.

Our bodies shall be immortal.
All therefore rise, but there shall be great difference between the wise and
foolish.

First, the godly shall be immortal, for this mortal shall put on
immortality; 1 Cor. 15, 53.
the body shall not be bound to a necessity of dying as now it is, nor shall
it be possible that death should have power over it. Adam indeed before his
fall was not of necessity subject to death, yet was he mortal, because he
might dye: but in the Resurrection, we shall be free both of the power and
possibility of the grave, 2 Cor. 5, 4.
and mortality shall be swallowed up of life; and by this immortality, we
shall be made capable of everlasting felicity.

Secondly, 2 Glorious.
their bodies shall be glorious and shining, for Christ shall change our vile
bodies, Philip. 3, 21.
and make them like his glorious body; the body which is now sown in
dishonor, it rises again in glory, 1 Cor. 15.43.
and such glory (says the Prophet) as the stars of heaven appear clothed
withal, Dan. 12 13. Math 13.43.
or (as Christ says) so bright as the Sun; by which comparisons, the
Scripture would raise up our understandings as by degrees, to conceive in some
part, how great this glory shall be. Some examples and shadows has the Lord
showen us of it; when Moses came down from the mount, Exodus 34.29.30.
his face was so bright that the Israelites could not behold him. Christ
promised to his Disciples to give them a view of it; within six days after,
The words (there be some here which shall not taste of death until, etc.) are
much mistaken by many, for Christ means not the Preaching of the Gospel
(though that also was true,) but that he would comfort them against the Cross,
and confirm them concerning his glorious coming, and finally show them what
glory they shall be in, who bear the Cross and follow him, by one show and
sight of his transfiguration, as Theophylact observes upon Matthew, and for
truth of all, we may mark in all the three Gospells the doctrine of the
Cross, this promise and the transfiguration follow other: see before and
after, Math 1^.28. Marc. 9.1. Luc. 9 27.
he was transfigured upon the Mount, and his face was like the Sun, and his
clothes white as the light. Likewise by Art, we have a view of glory and
brightness, which our sight is not able (without hurt) to endure the clearest
glasses are made of ashes and of the dross of the earth and wreak of the sea,
yet if one of them (being broad) stand before the Sun, it is so bright and
glorious, that it seems to match the Sun it self, that we are not able to
behold it; 2 Cor: 3, 18. Quae nos sola cogitatione s^paramus, etiam re ipsa ab
effectore secerni possunt, and ad interitum inimicorum in aeternum, lucem ab
extremo calore ignis separabit, ut coelestibus illam lucem communicet. Basil.
in Hexamer. Orat. 6.
what then shall our glory be, when we shall behold the glory of the Lord with
open face, and be changed into the same image from glory to glory? and though
we shall be as light and shining, yet not according as the fire is, being of
power to burn, for we see that precious stones give light, and yet are
without heat; and the Lord (whose voice divides the flames of fire, Psalm.
29.7.) shall unto his servants give brightness without the great heat of
fire, and unto his enemies the burning and consuming without the brightness
and light of the fire. This then does show their glory.

3. Spiritual. 1 Cor: 15, 44.
Thirdly, our bodies shall be spiritual, They are sown natural bodies, they
rise again spiritual: there shall be no change of the substance, but the body
shall show it self in the actions with such agility and quickness, for which
it may justly be called spiritual. In this life our bodies are natural, for
as in other creatures, so in them (natura est principium motus) nature makes
them (because of their weight) to bend downward, but in the resurrection they
shall be spiritual, for the soul or spirit shall cause the body to move as it
will; and as our Savior before his death walked miraculously upon the water,
and after his resurrection showed this spiritual motion, by his sudden
appearings and departings: Wisd. 3.7.
so shall the Saints run through (any space) as the sparkles among the
stubble, and they shall show it by their first action after the resurrection, 1
These. 4, 17.
for they shall mount up and meet the Lord in the air.

Lastly, our bodies shall be free from suffering, for they shall not be
subject to hunger, thirst, grief, sickness, or the like; and the delights
which the senses shall have shall not be hurtful, but helpful unto them.

And though we gather these things out of Gods word concerning our bodies in
the resurrection, yet all that we conceive or speak of them, must come short,
for as it is written, 1 Cor. 2.9.
Neither has eye seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man, what God has prepared for them that love him.

On the other part, Qualities of wicked men's bodies.
the Lord will make wicked men immortal, that they may be capable of eternal
misery, for if once they could die again, then were their bodily misery at an
end; but as for the rest of the aforesaid qualities, they shall have their
contraryes; instead of a glorious brightness, they shall even be deprived of
common light, Math. 8.12. Math 22.13.
for they shall be cast into utter darkness: instead of quickness for motion,
they shall be bound hand and foot, and the soul clogged to the body; and
lastly their bodies and souls are capable of nothing, but sufferings and
torments, Mar 9.44.
for their worm dies not, and their fire never goes out. So when all arise,
the godly and wicked shall differ more then the blackness of a blackamore,
from the brightness of the Sun. Consider these things, and so behave your
selves, as you wish in the Resurrection to be a vessel of honor or dishonor,
according as you shall, to your unspeakable joy or sorrow, find it in that
fearful day.

[And trimmed their Lamps.]
Lest Virgins appointed to be attendants at marriage, be unfitt for the honor
that becomes their place, it is requisite, that they be adorned with wedding
garments, and furnished with lamps or wedding Torches, for preparing whereof,
they have an appointed and competent time. So the Lord has granted unto us
such competency of time, as in his wisdom he knows is sufficient for our
preparation, to meet him when he shall call by death or the last judgment. Now
when the Bridegroom is coming, and the Virgins on foot to meet him, it only
remains that they trim their Lamps, as they are in meeting of him. So when
in death and judgment we are meeting the Lord, we shall turn our minds to
the consideration, of what state our souls and bodies were in; and whether in
our life time we were prepared for meeting him or not: this is the meaning of
trimming their lamps, (aptaverunt lampades suas, id est, rations reddendas
operum) which is, August. de Temp. Ser. 23.
that they were to address them, to give account of their works.

This is the business that every one shall take in hand, both after death and
the Resurrection. Our lamps for this spiritual and everlasting employment,
are our souls and bodies, which are never known how ready they were, until
they be brought in examination and trial before the Lord; read Math. 22.11.
which must be in death when we go to the Lord, or in the general judgment
when he comes to us: in both which, this trimming and addressing our selves
to account shall be used.

In death, Heb. 9.^9.
the soul must be brought to this account, (for after death comes
judgment,) after it has left the body, then does it call it self to account,
how it may answer at the tribunal seat of Gods justice, unto which it is
then conveyed.

In the great Judgment, both soul and body, do jointly return, to consider
what they shall answer, to the great and fearful reckoning, they shall be
charged withal: For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
2 Cor. 5.10.
and give account of whatsoever we have done. The prodigal Son, was long
before he studied an answer and account of his life, yet he did it, when he
was to meet his Father; All this doctrine may be read, as it is set down in
Esaias, 29. verse. 15.18.19.20.21.22.23.24.
so though men be now content to forget their own experience, and to
counterfeit the ignorance of their own knowledge, in all things that concern
themselves, yet when they are coming to the judgment seat of Christ, they
shall search for some answer, which may prove most current for their delivery.
This shall be done by two helps; first, all men shall examine themselves how
prepared they were, when they were in this world, and that this may the more
truly and speedily be performed, Revel. 20.12.
the book of the conscience shall be opened, wherein is written all that ever
men have done: for as men have books to this purpose, that they put in them
the treasury of things which the memory cannot contain; so shall the
consciences of all men, show at one fearful sight, unto every man, Math.
12.36.
the Legend of their life and actions, with all the circumstances of them,
every idle word shall be remembered, Ecclesias. 12 14.
and every work shall be brought to judgment, with every secret thing
whether it be good or evil: then shall this power of Conscience, Romans 2.15.
show it self either in accusing or excusing, and all eyes shall be opened to
see, if they be naked or clothed in the sight of God.

Our sinful actions in this life, are they which make up this large book of
reckoning against us, for both it is our own actions, and it shall be our own
knowledge and memory that shall witness against us. If therefore this debt of
ours does daily increase, with which we shall accuse our selves in Gods
presence; let us like wise debtors, look our count book often, and be ever
discharging some by often examining what our conscience can witness against us,
and when we find our faults, cry (according as our Savior instructed us,)
Lord forgive us our debts: if we do thus often, our conscience shall have the
less to accuse us of, and the more easily shall our lamps be trimmed in the
judgment day.

Secondly, the servants of God had other lamps in this world then wicked men
had, and therefore they shall find it, in trimming and addressing themselves
to give account. Gods servants for their lamp, used their soul and body,
which they offered as a quick and lively sacrifice unto God; Rom, 12.1.
and therefore in the Resurrection, they find them ready to give account, for
which they labored so much all their life time, and are found ready to go in
with the Lord of glory, into his heavenly habitation, as will appear, verse
10. Reprobate men in their life, labor only wearying themselves in the ways
of wickedness: some are so sensual, that they distaste all things except
pleasure, until they surfeit of it; and by bodily weakness their minds grow
queasie, as formerly their stomachs were: Dissidet ambiguis semper men's obvia
votis. Nee voluisse homini satis est, optata recusat, Auson. Ely^. 15.
others for their lamps are enamoured with the luster, that the deceiving
world has, and toil as much, to fill the belly of their chests with trash, as
the sensual do, to stopp their belly full of detestable doung. Both these
kinds of men (of which kinds most Reprobates are) have mistaken their lamps,
and instead of making soul and body ready for account, labor to fatten and
make delicate their body, to feast worms withal; or to fill all their stores
with riches, which proves often times fuel to unexpected fire, a sword for
robbers to kill them withal, but sure in the end, a bar to shutt them out of
heaven, and to hinder them from preparing for judgment: and therefore how can
these be ready who never prepared themselves?

Thirdly, by trimming of their lamps is understood the framing of them to that
readiness, they were in, when they laid them down to sleep; So when all men
shall address them to go to judgment, it shall be by calling before them,
the state they were in, when life left them; for as life leaves us, in the same
state judgment finds us. When men awake from sleep, they betake them to
their actions and labors they were in when they lay down, and begin where
they left off, so shall we do in the Resurrection. Happy therefore is that
servant, Math 24.
whom in his death, his Master shall find him so doing, that he may be prepared
to go into glory with the Son of man: Numb 23 10.
Balaam or any wicked man may well wish, Let me dye the death of the Righteous,
and let my last end be like his. But we see (besides their wicked life) how
many dye drunk and loose their lives in quarrels, of robbery, extortion, of
pride and vain glory, and so sacrifice the last day of their life, to most
abominable courses. In what fashion can these, in their death or in the great
judgment address themselves for account? And therefore, in that day, the
trimming of their lamps shall only be, that they would prepare themselves, but
shall be altogether unprepared: for it follows in the text.

VERSE 8. And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our
Lamps are out.
AS Virgins that had neglected the time for preparation, until the last moment
of time, wherein it was too late to prepare, should for shame complain of their
own unfittingnes, and cry unto others for help: So when reprobates shall rise
again from the dead, they shall show their shameful and sorrowful complaint,
and wish that it were possible for others to help them. Notwithstanding, they
shall not at that time speak unto the true servants of God, or think that
they can help them, neither can wicked men hope, that counsel or help can be
stedable; but they shall rather seek help at Mountains and hills (if it were
possible) to hyde them. Therefore, we must remember (as I said before) that all
the words of a Parable, cannot be literally or historically applied, neither
are propounded so to be made use of, but some parts must be added for
amplifiyng and adorning the comparison. I doubt not but among the Jews, it
has fallen out, that in meeting the Bridegroom, some have proved foolish
Virgins, in not providing so as was expected of them, and upon the instance of
service, have craved help from others, that could not spare it, and have with
shame been expulsed the place of solemnity, as not proving of the acquaintaince
and friendship of the Bridegroom: so that these words of the foolish unto the
wise, and their answer again agrees well with the rest of the Parable, and
likewise for our application, they are rightly placed to be considered of,
after the addressing of all to judgment, because that wicked men never see
their folly till then; and also Christ would teach, how willing and desirous
they would be to amend, if they might get time and occasion.

For the first; it is always the property of fools, to be wise behind hand,
(sero sapere vero stultorvm est,) and it is the wretchedness of wicked men,
never to call for grace, until the day of vengeance be fully come, and then
like fools they learn the wit to call: therefore the hour of death, and day
of judgment are the times to make mad men tame, and the foolish wise, who
before in this world could not be ruled with bit or bridle, Prove: 27, 22. Psalm:
92, 6.
nor made wise, when God grinded them in the mortar of affliction; but an
unwise man does not know this, and a fool does not consider this: Quis autem
sit sapiens, and quis stultus audi and cave tibi. Insipiens est quise etc.
Bern. in spec. peccat.
who is a wise man, and who is a fool hear, and beware of thy self, that
thou be not a fool; he is an unwise man, who considers not that he is a
stranger from heaven, and as it were a banished man in this world; He is a
fool, who though he know these things, yet labors not to be delivered from
this misery: he is an unwise man, who believes not the eternal state of men,
either in glory or in misery: he is a fool, who believing these things, yet
labors not to be freed from the one, and obtain the other: Psalm: 49, 10.
and therefore the Scripture has well said, that both the ignorant and foolish
shall perish together.

Secondly, Christ hereby shows us, how willing and desirous damned men would
be to amend and come to Gods favor. What pains would the rich Glutton take,
if he could be released? what sorrow would he make? what alms would he give?
what labor and fasting would he undertake? If Sodom were as yet undestroyed,
(they knowing now what they know) can we think what means they would make to
escape the eternal torments of fire and brimstone? But it is too late, they
spend their eternity of time in repentance and tears, all is in vain, they
are in the harvest of sorrow and tears, we are in the springtime; they may
lament, but their tears are fruitless, God will never be moved, nor take
notice of them: but now if we sow in tears, Psalm: 126.5, 6.
and turn to the Lord with all our hearts, we shall afterward reap in joy,
and bring the eternal sheaves of it with us, when the irrevocable wrath of God
shall seize upon others for ever. He is both happy and wise, that can take
good counsel in seasonable time, Tempus in quo peccata fugere non licet,
semper cogitare debemus dum peccata fugere licet.
and this counsel and instruction I recommend to all, that while we have time
to fly from sin, we ever consider and think upon the time, when we cannot
fly from it.

[Give us of your Oil.]
As it were folly for one to demand that which another has for necessity and
present use: So shall it be to no purpose, that at Christ's coming wicked men
shall wish for that grace which cannot be had: but seeing necessity makes the
beggar, their Lamps are out, and therefore they must beg Oil.

Wherein we may observe the strange alteration which the Lord brings upon
wicked men, The punishment of the hard-hearted.
and how they are forced to seek and wish for help of them, whom they hate
most. In this world wicked men, if they know the man that fears God, of all
men they will have least concourse or intermedling with him, they have a
hundred reasons, whereas their own conceit is cause enough to hate him. If
John Baptist had lived a delicate and licentious life, his time had been spent
in Kings palaces. But specially if they be driven to beg of them, Give us
for Gods sake of your oil, meal, or corn, scarce will they bestow the words
of this Parable on them, (Go to them that sell) but stand afar off, and look
over the other shoulder. The rich Glutton starved Lazarus at his door; such
measure must Gods servant expect, if only a wicked man must help him.

But seeing it falls often out by the hardness of men's hearts, that the
poor messengers of God are contemned and denied, God in his just judgment so
overturnes them, that they are glad to crave help of them whom they have
despised before in their necessity: Luke 16. Dives epulo sero oculos aperuit,
compulsus in damnatione cognoscere quid perdidit quando Lazarum non agnovit.
Just autem qui de abundantia peccavit, aestuanti crematur inopia; guttam aquae
petiit, qui micas panis negavit Greg. Mor lib. 18. cap. 10.
Christ in another Parable has a passage like unto this, the rich glutton
being in hell, desires that he might be a little refreshed by Lazarus helping
him to a little water to cool his tongue which was tormented in the flame: I
think he wished hereby, that whilst he was alive, he had been so charitable
to Lazarus, as to have refreshed him with a cup of cold water, when he was
tormented with the heat of boyles and sores: yet when neither Lazarus can
help him, nor he be capable of help, he knows what comfort a little charity
would do unto him, and now he begges drops of water, who before refused the
crummes of his bread. Thus the eternal wish of the damned shall be, that they
had never extorted nor devoured the poor, and that they had been more
charitable unto them. Sometimes the Lord plagues cruel and hardhearted men,
even in this world, that they are glad to beg help of them, to whose cries
they shut their ears before: Joseph could scarce beg or obtain his life, to
be saved from the cruelty of his brethren, who were afterward constrained to
beg bread of him to save their lives, and offer money for it too. And of this
kind every age and place has examples, that every one may learn so to behave
himself humbly and charitably, that he despise the estate of no man, nor
harden his heart at the case of the afflicted, (especially if it be one that
fears God) lest God turn his hand, to set him in the same misery, or make
him in hell to do eternal and unprofitable penance.

[For our Lamps are out.]
This is the reason of the former words, wherein we may observe, that Satan's
servants are never brought to understand themselves, until they are brought to
give account before the Lord. Reprobates labor to hide their estate in
salvation from all men. Esaias 19, 15. Rev. 3.
In their life time, as they labor to conceal their estate in salvation from
others, so they bring it to pass, that they live unknown to themselves, and
so conceive themselves to be as they imagine, and wish they were. The people of
Laod^cea stored their brains full with false conclusions, that they were
enriched with all gifts and graces needful for soul and body; but soon
after, they felt by experience, that their lamps were out, that both in soul
and body they were miserable, naked and blind; Calvin. ex Oros. Praefat, ad
Colos
when by an earthquake they were bereft of their lives, and spued out of Gods
mouth; then were their eyes open, when their lives were shut up. Life is the
natural light of men, which if it be not seconded with the spiritual and
heavenly life, it shall prove but as darkness, when it comes to be examined
in the presence of God: if therefore the light that is in reprobates be
darkness, how great is that darkness? It shall be best known, when all their
lights are extinguished, and they entered into utter darkness.

Utter darkness what.
In this life reprobates are in darkness, because the Sun of righteousness
never shines upon them, yet are not they in utter darkness, because they may
(so long as life remains) be converted and enlightened, Theophilact. in Mat.
25, 30.
(Porro ubi mortuus fuerit, et institerit examen factorum, excipiunt eum
exteriores) but when life is gone, and the party approaching to judgment, then
enters he into utter darkness, because there is no hope that ever the Lord
will give light to his soul or body any more. This is the fearful state
prepared for reprobates; If we wanted the light of the Sun, what pleasure
could the whole world do unto us? much more they who are cast into utter
darkness shall have weeping and wailing, when they find themselves deprived
of light for ever. Happy are they that labor to understand themselves in this
life, and to be enlightened with knowledge, and furnished with graces and good
works needful for salvation.

VERSE 9. But the wise answered, saying, (Not so) lest there be not enough for
us and you, but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.
HEre is a wise answer to a foolish petition. Though the careless showed their
folly in not providing for themselves, yet the wise account it both shameful
and hurtful to disfurnish themselves, Non minor est virtus quam quaere parta
tu cri. Hora^.
for it is as great virtue to show wisdom in keeping, as to show diligence in
getting. As I said, that in the resurrection reprobate men shall not have time,
occasion or reason to entreat help of the elect, so neither shall the elect
answer them; but as Christ named their petition, to teach us what sorrow and
shame, with desire of amendment they shall have: so by this answer he would
teach us, that there is neither mercy nor help kept in store for them that in
this life wait upon lying vanities, Jonah 2, 8.
and forsake their own mercy, and that therefore their repentance is to no
purpose, and their amendment impossible. If therefore the Reprobate would
become so wise, to cry to the Elect for help, when they are going to answer in
the presence of their fearful and angry Lord, they could have no other
answer, but these words; No, lest there be not enough for us and you, but go
and do as we did, and in like manner provide for your selves: words indeed
which rather would increase the torment of the damned, than any wise abate it.

This (...) wise deny them, Worldlings reason for uncharity.
they give a reason, lest there be not enough for us and you: The very answer
and reason of a worldling, that he will not help others, fearing that he have
not enough for himself.

We may observe, that in this answer Christ has painted out the covetous and
uncharitable in their own words and reason, for they say still, that there is
not enough for themsemselves: and all the comfort they give the distressed is,
that they have nothing but what they purchased with their own money; and
therefore he that wants any thing, let him (as they did) go to them that sell,
and buy for themselves. By which our Savior teaches us, that Reprobates in
the day of the Lord shall be answered in their own cruel words, which they
may remember to their greater grief and shame: August. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 23.
(Non est consulentium, sed irridentium est ista responsio) This answer is not
to give counsel, but to mock them, and this is all they get for help or
pity.

To us therefore does our Savior speak these words, to forewarne us, that we
never cast our count so, as to think that which we have to be too little for
our selves, nor thus to answer the distressed, lest the shame be shamefully
cast in our teeth, when we hope for a more merciful answer in judgment.

This reason of the covetous shows us what is the cause which makes men so
unwilling to help others who are in necessity, because they cannot believe
that ever they can have enough for themselves. This is one of the greatest
plagues that can fall upon a man, to be insatiable in affecting a thing that is
far inferior to the worth of himself. The causes of covetousness and
uncharity.
This Covetice proceeds from a great blindness of the mind, which (as it
seems) does build it self upon these or the like divelish and darkened
conceits.

First, that it cannot possibly stand with his

Secondly, that there is no means to give his

Thirdly, that he must needs live many years, Luke 12, 19


Fourthly, he does doubt, that God will not be Psalm: 10, 3.
and him that speaks good of him. Therefore, if we would be merciful to
others, and save our selves from the wrath to come, (...) man, Ephesians, 4.7.
even as he pleases, and according to what measure he will. So that we are
hereby taught, to whom we shall have recourse in all our spiritual
necessities, even to our blessed Savior, In whom dwells all the treasures of
grace bodily, Col. 2.9.
who is able to bestow this Oil of his Spirit, to enlighten our sinful
souls and bodies, and to prepare us for his coming. Now if Gods word (in the
above named places) be true, the works of supererogation cannot be found in
any; or though it were so, Colos 1, 19.
none is communicable unto another, except from Christ, in whom only, it has
pleased God that all fullness should dwell, 1 Cor. 1.30. Act. 4.12.
and who only, is made our Righteousness; and in whom only we have hope of
salvation.

[Goe ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selues]

In appliyng of these words, we find them to be a bitter mock of the
reprobate (to bid them in the day of account to go and buy, Some take the
Kingdom of heaven by violence, others steal it, some beg it, others buy it.
or provide grace for themselves) for then there are no sellers, nor means to
be found.

We have in these words two things to be considered, buying and selling, how
either of them can be applied to our labor for salvation.

For buying. It is to us that have means and time to provide for that
fearful account, that our Savior speaks these words of seasonable
counsel, as he did to the Laodiceans, to buy and store themselves with the
treasures of spiritual life. Revel 3.18.
The sum of the counsel is, that we use traffic for salvation. As there are
diverse means used, some lawful, some unlawful, to mainteyne this mortal
life: so does the word of God use the comparison of them, to exhort us unto all
labor and diligence, 2. Peter 1 10. Quis expedivit Psittacosuum Chai^e.
Magister artis, ingeniique largitor venture Persent.

Ecclesiast. 6 7. Bernard. in libro sententiarum.


to make our calling and election sure, and to purchase an immortal life. The
belly (says a Poet) makes Master of Art, both gives cunning and industry, for
satisfiyng whereof, some rob, others steal, some beg, others buy, and all
(as Solomon says) is to content back and belly: In like manner, Gods servants
(if we look unto their life and works) some rob, and take the kingdom of
heaven by violence, others steal it, some beg it, others go to those that
sell, and buy it for themselves.

Christ told the Jews, Math. 11, 12.
that from that time John Baptist began to teach, the Kingdom of heaven
suffered violence, and the violent took it by force: these are they whose
breasts are inflamed with zeal, and who either for fear of Gods anger, or for
love of his mercyes, turn suddenly to the Lord; The Publicans and sinners by
this means won heaven, who flocked about John Baptist, Luke 3, 10, 12. Act.
2, 37. Luk 19, 6.
and cried Master, what shall we do? and the hearers of Peter's Sermon upon
Whitsontide, and Zaccheus, who came down from the tree quickly, and received
Christ joyfully, and St. Augustine who in his conversion, Lib. 8 Conf. cap. 3.
sect. 1.
cried unto God, why shall I be converted to morrow, why not to day? unlearned
men get up and take heaven by violence, and we with our diversity of learning,
do wallow in flesh and blood. And all whosoever, turn with have and fervency
unto the Lord, may be said to take heaven violently. Grandis etc. It is a great
violence, (...) 11.
to be borne on earth, and to enter into heaven, and to obtain that by
strength which we cannot have by nature; Theophylact. in Mat 11.
or what greater violence can be, than on a sudden to forsake father and
mother, to quite all pleasure the world can give, yea and contemn life it
self, rather than to want Gods favor, or be disappointed of eternal life?

Horum figura^ tenuit mulier patiens fluxum sanguinis, quae cogitavit intra se
dicens, si, etc Mar 5, 28. Bernard. ibid. 1 Kings 19, 18.
Others (in a manner) take heaven by stealth: these are they that labor for
heaven, and yet so secretly, that they are not espied by the common multitude;
they are far from hypocrisy, they have their oil in their vessels: as were
the seven thousand in Eliah's time, who worshipped the Lord so secretly, that
the Prophet could not epsy them; and I doubt not but every age has of this
kind, John 3, 2.
that with Nicodemus, come to the Lord in the night.

Some beg heaven: these are they who are earnest in prayer, and usually with
sighs and petitions prostrate themselves unto God, until he be pleased to
bestow it upon them. David, Daniel, Cornelius, and the like, obtain heaven by
petition: and this is a most sure way to obtain it, for (as Christ says) our
heavenly Father cannot choose but give good things to them that ask him,
Matthew. 7.11.

Others buy heaven, who are charitable to the poor and distressed, to feed
the hungry, to cloathe the naked, lodge the stranger, visit the sick and
prisoner, and the like; and for this cause do bestow their goods to relieve
others, these have treasures in heaven, and their merciful deeds ascend
before the Lord, Acts 10.4.
and declare that howsoever their state be in this world, yet they lay up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19
for obtaining of eternal life.

By all these means God would have us labor to obtain spiritual grace, Art
thou rich? Christ exhorts thee to buy heaven, Give to the poor, Luke 18, 22.
and thou shall have treasure in heaven: art thou strong in thy affections,
fervent in thy actions, Ecclesiasticus 5.7? Take heaven by violence and make no
delay by turning to the Lord: Art thou slow in thy faculties of soul and
body? then use cunning, steal heaven, and in humility and quietness, Heb. 10,
22.
approach nearer and nearer unto the Lord. But if thou neither have goods to
buy it, strength of spirit to take it by force, nor the wisdom to take it
secretly; Psalm 95, 6.
then be not ashamed to fall lowly before the Lords footstool, and beg of
his Majesty what otherwise thou can not obtain: if thou can not buy
heaven with riches, yet buy it with poverty and begging; if thou want
silver, redeem it with tears, as Peter, who said, Acts 3, 6.
Silver and gold have I none, when he was to redeem his Masters favor
again, Mat. 26.75.
he went out and wept bitterly: yea even in begging be diligent, and thy labor
shall buy heaven, as Christ both in Parables, and plain words, has promised
us; Luke 18, 5.
for as the widow asked justice against her adversary, until it was given her;
Luke 15.9.
another sought a lost piece of silver until she found it; Luke 11.8, 9.
a man knocked at his friends door for bread in the night, until he (...)
mandements, though the Pharise blinded with ignorance thought so, yet in stead
thereof do (as Peter said) Lord, Matthew: 19, 27
we have forsaken all and followed thee: count nothing so dear unto you, but
that you be content to quite it, to do your soul good. What have you ever
suffered in this world? The Christian Jews scattered abroad, Heb: 10, 33, 34
Christi sub nomine probra placebunt: Et laus hic contempta redit mihi iudice
Christo. Paulinus Epist. 1. ad Auson.
commonly lost all their goods, some their blood, many their lives: if you have
not had the like occasions, be thankful to God, and yet resolve your self,
(if God so will) to suffer whatsoever he please. If you have not shown your
charity according as you saw others necessity, yet amend and buy heaven, so
long as you have time: and he that is poor and unable to help the distressed,
yet let him remember, that Christ has promised to reward the giving of a cup
of cold water, Mark 9, 41.
to encourage him, that if he be never so poor, yet he may get so much
treasure as may buy the kingdom of heaven.

Who are the sellers.
Now we come to the sellers, and to consider who they are. This sale is only to
be had of God, and the poor or distressed. The Lord exposes the treasure of
his riches, by the Prophet, saying, Esaias 55, 1.
Every one that thirsts, come to the waters, and ye that have no silver, come
buy and eat, buy wine and milk without silver, and without money: so that the
poorest may buy sufficient. Christ counsels the Laodiceans, Revel: 3.
whom he calls naked and blind, to buy gold, raiment, and eye salve from
him. As for the poor, they are sellers; Quinam vendunt? qui pauperie
premuntur: Who are they (says Chrysostom) who sell? Even they who are
oppressed with poverty: yet I count them not so much the sellers, as receivers
of the price: the poor receive the alms, but the Lord does value it,
according to the heart of him that gives it, and he gives that grace which
the buyer desires to have. Luke 10.
The Samaritan friendly and charitably powered oil into the wounds of the
traveller, but it was the Lord that filled his lamps with oil, or his soul
with grace, even whilst he was doing his charity.

He therefore that would buy grace, let him have recourse to the Lord, who
calls us in his mercy; and to the distressed, who calls because of his
misery. If thou have sorrow for sin, a petition for mercy, a thanksgiving for
a benefit received, an humble heart, an obedient desire; come lay them down
before the Lord, and offer them for an inheritance in heaven; if thou have an
alms and power and desire to help, a comfort, a good counsel; repair to the
poor or otherwise distressed, distribute among them what thou have, and thou
shall not want thy reward.

If you consider these things, A question why is eternal life the gift of God
if etc.
you may ask how is eternal life the free gift of God, seeing we buy it and
purchase it with hardness? I answer, Cant: 8, 7.
for if love be of such value, that all the goods a man has, is not able to
requite it, what can we think it can be worth, that can buy an eternal
kingdom? And therefore the Lord bids us buy it freely, Esaias 55, 1.
Quid autem est emere sine argento et sine commutatione? Bernard. de Resurr.
Dom sermon. 2.
Non talis est emptio apud amatores huius seculi, sed apud autorem seculi, alia
esse non potest, What means this to buy without money or exchange? Indeed the
lovers of this world, can have no selling without money or exchange, but with
the Creator of the world there can be no other sale but this, Baradius in
Evang. Concord. Tom. 3. lib. 10. cap. 19. I think he borrows these from
Bernard, who says Gratia gratis datur, etiam cum emitur gratis datur, quia
quod datur pro ea, nobis melius retinetur. Bernard. ser. 2 de Resurr. Domini.
that what he gives must be freely bestowed, for he can have no need of our
goods. But we are said to buy these spiritual blessings, because without
labor and pains, we cannot have them, Gratia gratis datur, etiamsi magno
labor ematur, etc. Grace is freely given, although it were bought with great
labor, yea when it is bought it is freely bestowed. It is a Jesuit who
writes thus; if he had, or if others would consider the words, they should
have little reason to name the word of merit any more. 2. While the Lord calls
us buyers, it is a great honor and comfort unto us. David Temple, 1 Chronicles.
29.14.
but who did owe the silver and gold? David said he had given to God that which
was his own: so whilst we are bidden buy, that wherewith we are bidden buy, the
Lord lends us, for we cannot have so much as a good thought of our selves.
(quod datur melius, nobis retinetur) that which we give is kept in store for
us, Gen 42.25.
and the price is returned unto us again with profit, as Joseph returned his
Oil increased the more she gave to Eliah of it. 1 King 17.16.
Who can say that he is poorer, for any thing he gives to the poor? or that
he loses so much of his life time, in which he tends the service of God,
yea or rather is not that day multiplied, that is bestowed on the Lord? When we
count all that we can, all that we have, the Lord gives us freely, yea when we
bestow it upon the Lords service, he returns it with profit into our bosoms
again. So much for the sellers.

Seeing many who are foolish in spiritual matters obtain praise enough for
their wisdom in the world, Worldly applause shall be no comfort in the fear
full day.
we must consider with whom they traffic in their lives and actions. These
words [goe to them that sell] are only a reproach to reprobate men, and
therefore their miserable comforts in the day of the fearful account, are no
where to be found. I observed (upon verse 4) that if the foolish Virgins had
any oil, they had it in their Lamps, exposed to the view of the world, but
the wise who had Oil sufficient, put it in their vessels until they had need
of it. So that if wicked men do any good actions, it is to make flatterers
bestow praise enough upon them, and to gain that favor of men, to be tossed
up and down in the air, as children blow bubbles, and to be accounted to have
some happiness in themselves, whose felicity has only the dwelling in the
brain, or wandreth up and down with the opinion of others. The special
respect that such men have in all their doings, is, that (to use their own
words) the world may give (...) expect, or are least prepared. The day that
Adam brake Gods command, it was said, thou shall die the death, to dust shall
thou return; yet though he lived 930 years after, he could not conclude,
that his life should be crowned with immortality. Methusalem who lived longer,
yet at last met the Bridegroom: And to be brief, Who is he that lives,
Psalm: 89, 48.
and shall not see death? So then let us deceive our selves as we will, and
make a covenant with life and death, once we must meet the Bridegroom, nay
rather twice; we must meet him at our death, and when he comes to
judgment, to take account of all men together.

[They that were ready.]
Concerning the second, which is, the readiness of the Virgins, the day of
examination and trial does declare it: the wise were found ready, the foolish
began to prepare, for then they went to buy.

Seeing we are to use traffic for obtaining salvation, we may understand,
that the readiness of Gods Saints to meet the Lord, stands in this, that we
do account and discharge whatsoever may hinder us, and provide for whatsoever
we need.

We have a reckoning with God, that we be not unready when we should meet
him, and another with the world, lest it should detain and hinder us.

We must reckon with God for our sins.
We must account with God for our manifold debts of sin, which for payment
require our everlasting damnation, or else some satisfaction, which is infinite
in price, to countervaile the infiniteness of time which justice requires in
our punishment, for offending an infinite God. But to the end that we may have
the means for this satisfaction, our merciful God has set before us the
death and sufferings of his own Son, equal to himself in majesty; the
worth of whose sufferings does in justice make more than equality to whatsoever
we can be charged withal.

The Lord having made so easy a way for our discharge, now lays the charge
upon us, that we count and sum up our misdeedes in his presence, and when we
have so done, to present (in stead of our personal satisfaction) the
satisfaction that his Son (in whom only he is well pleased) made to obtain
a pardon and discharge unto us.

First then we must call our selves to account before the Lord, If we judge
our selves we shall not be judged of the Lord.
and truly without hiding from him any thing, to whom nothing can be secret,
and bewail our estate before him, otherwise we can never be ready. The wise
man counsels us, As we take physic to prevent sickness, so we ought to
examine our selves before we be judged, that in the day of visitation we may
find mercy, Ecclesiasticus 18.18, 19. And Saint Paul assures us, that if we
judged our selves, 1 Cor: 11, 31.
we should not be judged of the Lord. Now because most men neglect to take this
course, the Lord enters into judgment with them, Psalm: 50, 21.
lays their misdeedes in order before them, chastneth some in this world, and
(...) be so respective, From Pithagoras many learned and thought the wisest man
to be, he who judged himself every day Vir bonus et sae pieas, qualem v^x
repperit vnum, Millibus emulti^ hominu^ consulius Apollo, Iudex ipse sut etc
Sic dicta and facta per omnia Ingrediens, ortoque a vespere cuncta revoluens,
Offensus pravis, det palmam and praemia rectis. Auson. Edyll. 16.

What is required in a Judge. Cic. Offic. lib. 3.


to repent and amend every particular fault done to our neighbor, how careful
should we be, that no sin (which we can know of) pass unreconciled; for with
our heavenly Father, we find the proverb true, That often reckoning keeps long
friends, but there is no means to obtain or be sure of Gods friendship,
except we make often account with him for them.

As we must respect the times of examinyng our selves, that we use it often, so
must we the manner, If we would free our selves from accou^ting with the
dreadful Judge, we must be judges of our selves, that is, as we make a party
in reckoning our sins, so must we be as judges in calling our selves to
account, in receiving the reckoning, in justly condemning our selves who are
the offenders, remembering that it is the part of a Judge, (qui ponit personam
amici, cum induit judicis) that he then lays down the person of a friend,
when he takes on him the person of a judge. If we forsake our selves, or our
frindship with sin, when we confess our sins to God, we shall find it to
increase the sorrow of our repentance, and help us to be readier for a
discharge, when God sees how we condemn and hate our selves, for the wrong we
have done unto him.

Secondly, there is another thing, without the which, Christ's satisfaction
makes us ready.
our repentance cannot make us ready. Though we repent, yet God looks for
satisfaction, or one to suffer the punishment due unto us; which being
performed by our Savior, and the Covenant of Gods mercy confirmed unto us by
the sheding of his blood, we may justly disclaim the guilt of our sins,
which he was charged withal; and for full satisfaction unto God, and discharge
of our selves, cry unto God in these words of David, Psalm. 84.9. Iustus
advocatus noster, iustos nos defendet in Iudicio, quia and nosmet ipfos
cognoscimus and accusamus iniustos. Non ergo etc. Greg. in Ezech. lib. 1. Hom 7.
Regard o Lord and look upon the face of thine Annoyneed. And therefore as
Gregory says, Our just Advocate shall defend us, as just in judgment, because
we know and accuse our selves as unjust, Non ergo in fletibus, non in actibus
nostris, sed in Advocati nostri allegatione, confidamus; and therefore let us
not trust in our weeping or in our deeds, but in the defending which our
Advocate makes: and by consequence (qui se caelesti precio vident redemptos,
ad caelestia non dubitent praeparatos) They who see themselves redeemed by an
heavenly price, Eusebius. Emiss. de Pasch. Hom. 1, 3.
need not doubt but that they are prepared for heavenly things. Thus are we at
all times to do, and at all times the Lord shall find us ready to be called
to judgment.

When the account is past, Gods servants find it easy to reckon with the
world, and consider what interest they have in it, or it in them: That which
makes us cleave so much to the world, is the separation that our sins make
between us and God; when this partition wall is taken away, the world can give
no relish unto us, who seek our comfort from above. Philip. 3.8.
St. Paul counted the best of it, doung and loss; Eliah who tasted but little
comfort of it, 1 King 19, 4.
said (long before he did leave it) Lord it is enough. Thus Gods servants loath
the world, because so long as they are in it, they are kept (...) recourse unto
the Lord, that is, they shall well understand, how good it had been for them,
if in their life time they had sought unto the Lord, and amended their life,
which they shall then desire to do, when they can neither do other wise, nor
gain any profit by it. Christ hereby would teach us, that after death, and in
the general judgment wicked men begin to repent heartily, and when all tears
are wiped from the eyes of others, Repentance of Reprobates in this, and the
life to come.
they begin their eternal lamentations. In this life Reprobates may repent,
but in sorrowing they are either too severe, that when they feel it, they shun
comfort and aggravate it, until it overcome them, and proves to be despair,
which is that eternal worm that possesses the soul after unseasonable
repentance: but most commonly their repentance is too slack; Ahab repented,
but sorrow pierced not his heart, otherwise he would have amended his idolatry.
And so, many bow the body, who have bowed little at the heart; and therefore
though they seem to repent, yet they shall in the day of judgment repent,
because they repented no better before. Labor therefore to end your repentance
with your life, and let death which cures all sores, bring also an end to your
sorrows, and labor to repent to salvation, which never needs to be repented
of. 2 Cor: 7, 11.
This, says Paul, causes us to have great care to clear our selves, and to
be more zealous of our life in time to come.

[They that were ready went in with him to the Marriage, and the gate was shut.]
Now follows the effect of their readiness, some were admitted and went in,
some were excluded. As a Bridegroom in solemnizing his marriage has just
reason to take notice of them, that took notice and prepared for his coming;
and without regard of others, stop all ways for their admittance: So shall
our Lord in his coming take into his own company and fellowship them that
loved and longed for his coming, 2 Timothy: 4, 8.
where wicked men shall not come in the assembly of the righteous, Psalm 1, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 1, 9.
but shall be banished away from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his power.

After judgment is the Marriage between Christ and his servants, who in this
life stand espoused unto him by faith and truth, and wait for the joyful
meeting; after which they shall not be longing in love, nor separate for a
time, but shall enjoy his blessed presence and company, and (as husband and
spouse) love and live together for ever. Gods Saints acknowledge this, for they
find the experience of sorrows, that they have in their spiritual love, for
they sigh and are burdened with sorrow, 2 Cor: 5.4, 6.
because they are absent from the Lord: But at Christ's coming, they shall
rejoice and be glad, crying with glory unto God, The marriage of the Lamb is
come, Revel. 19, 7.
his Spouse has made her self ready. Our union with Christ compared to a
marriage.
Our everlasting remaining with Christ, is compared to a marriage solemnizing.

First to teach us, that then only begins delivered from sin and
corruption, and restored to righteousness and immortality. In this life we are
one with Christ, and Christ with us; but the tie of this union is faith and
love, whereby we desire none but him, and hereafter are certain to be joined
to none other but himself. It is true that he who joyneth himself by love
unto the Lord is one spirit with him; 1 Cor: 6, 17.
but at the marriage our union shall be such, that we shall be declared to be
members of his glorious body, Ephesians: 5, 30.
flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone.

John 15.13, 14, 15.
in respect that they knew not their Masters will, but considering his love to
them, he calls them friends; and yet with such a bond of friendship on his
part, that was rare to be seen, that he should give his life for his friends.
Also by the example of parents (who are nearest of our kindred) saying, Psalm:
103, 13.
As the father loves and has compassion on his son, so has the Lord on
those that fear him: The Lord thinks the love great which the mother has to
the child, asking, if she can forsake it, Esaias 49, 15.
though many both fathers and mothers have fulfilled the prophecy of the last
time, 2 Timothy: 3, 3. Psalm: 27.10
(in being without natural affection:) and though father and mother may
forsake the child, yet the Lord will take up his own. But above all, Christ
compares the bond between him and us, to love between the husband and the
wife, for as the highest of his honor is showed by being head of the Church,
Ephesians 1, 22. Chap 5, 23, 30, 31.
which is his body, so the inexpressible love between him and us, is set out
unto us by the example of the love of husband and wife, in respect of which we
must forsake (if need require) the friendship of father, mother, or any friends
whatsoever. In this life we love the Lord, but in the great meeting and
marriage our love shall increase to such a height, which now passes our
understanding. Such as our knowledge is, such is our love, here we know in
part, and therefore our love is the less; 1 Cor. 13, 12.
but when we shall know as we are known, what mortal man is able to imagine
how dearly we shall love the Lord? And then shall we understand how dearly
the Lord has loved us, and comprehend that for which we are comprehended of
Christ. Philip 3, 11.
The manifestation hereof does better befit the solemnity of our spiritual
marriage; for as the personal meeting of lovers increases love, and the
aptest time that their love should show itself to the beholders; so in our
meeting of Christ, our love shall be greatly increased, and it is the fittest
time in which the mutual love of Christ and his members shall be declared;
which love, how great it is now on Christ's, and shall be then on our part, is
not possible to be understood, because love cannot be understood, but in such
measure as it is felt.

Luke 12, 37.
Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find waking;
verily I say unto you, he will gird himself about, and make them sit down at
table, and will come forth and serve them. And to the end, that his Disciples
might reject the ambitious conceits of worldly honor, Luk, 22, 27.
he says unto them, Who is greater, he that sits at table? And I am among
you, as he that serves, 28.
and ye are they which have continued with me in my tentations, therefore I
appoint unto you a Kingdom, 29.30.
as my Father has appointed to me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in
my kingdom. No delight shall be wanting either to soul or body, God shall be
all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Psalm. 16.11.
in whose presence is fulness of joy for evermore. But above all, the love we
shall have to our Lord and Savior, and the unspeakable glory he is in, shall
be as a heaven of joys, to every glorified soul, which he himself says,
shall be our chief happiness, that we may be where he is, and behold his
glory; he said not, that they may enjoy my glory, but see my glory: John 17.24.
Homini enim maxim^ requies videre filium Dei. Theophil. and David said the same
Psalm. 17.15. 2 Cor. 3.18.
and indeed as S. Paul says, by seeing the Lords glory, we are changed into
the same image, by the Spirit of the Lord, as is evident, by the shining of
Moses face, before he was freed from his corruptible body.

Fourthly, by this comparison; is showed the eternity of those joys, which we
shall possess in this spiritual Marriage. The Lord has made a Math 19.6.
that no man put asunder those, whom God has coupled together. So that
whatsoever devideth man and wife, must be the enemy of God or man: if sin do
it, yet sin not being imputed, becomes as no sin; so though adultery is one
of the enemies of Marriage, yet if be not imputed, it causes not a separation:
but the last enemy of man which is death, is only the unremediable breaker of
Wedlock, and freeth the one from the law of the other. Of all our comforts and
pleasures in this life, the gall and bitterness is enclosed in death, the
remembrance of it, before it approach near, is bitter unto us, Ecclesiasticus
41.1. the coming terrible, no fence is able to hold it out, so long as the
gappes of sin attend to receive it; when it comes, it divides us from
friends, goods, acquaintance, pleasures, and so makes a separation between
man and wife, yea between soul and body, body and life. But while they both
live, the law has dominion of both, (says the Apostle) meaning that death
only does make separation, Romans 7.1, 2.
without hope of dwelling together any more as husband and wife. So in our
spiritual marriage, (whilst it receives this name) it shows our state to
remain immutable for ever, because there shall neither be sin nor death to
annoy us, or threaten to separate us from him: and seeing all the enemies of
our salvation are not able to separate us from the love of God in Jesus Christ,
what then can hurt us, Rom 8, 35.
when we have no enemies at all?

This union with Christ is only compared to the solemnizing of a marriage.
But because long life without separation, proves not a happiness to all that
are married, (for we see the disordered and discontented lives of many, that
they would be glad to be rid of marriage, so they could save their life) yea
even in them that agree best, the godly life cannot set them free of all
troubles, 1 Cor. 7, 32.
for every sort of life is intermixed with its own griefs and inconveniences:
therefore we may observe, that our eternal joys in heaven are not compared to
the best life in marriage that ever was led, but only to the solemnizing and
time of it; that as the time and day of marriage is an image of honor, joy and
pleasure of all kinds that this earth can give, insomuch that both opinion and
experience has framed the Proverb, that the day of marriage is the only
joyful day in a man's life, which incontinent has its own changes as all
things else have: so our eternal glory shall be as a solemnizing of a
marriage, the joy and pleasure of it cannot pass away, but continually remain
unchangeably with us, and we with it. Esth. 1, 4.
When Ahasuerus did show the riches and glory of his Kingdom, and honor of
his Majesty, he did it in feasting the Nobles and Commonalty of two Kingdoms,
both which feasts continued above half a year; what shall we think of him
who counts the heaven with the spanne, Esaias 40, 12.
Verse 22.
comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure, Verse 23.
counts all the inhabitants of it as grasshoppers, and brings Princes to
nothing? Shall not he show it to be everlasting? Psalm 145.10, 11, 13.
when his Saints shall bless him, and show the glory of his Kingdom, and
speak of his power, which is (says David) everlasting, and enduring for ever:
Psalm: 102.27. Stat unus dies, quia nec habet ortum nec occasum, nec inchoatur
ab hesterno, nec excluditur a crastino. August. in Psalm. 122.3. cuius
participatio in seipsum.
This everlasting is as one year that fails not, yea this year is as one
day, because it changes not, it never has Sunset, nor can it give place to
the morrow, even this is the day which the Lord has ordained for us, that we
should everlastingly rejoice and be glad in it. So it appears wherein our
eternal glory is like unto the solemnity of marriage.

As I have compared our eternal union with Christ unto a marriage: so is it
fit that I should compare marriage unto our union with Christ.

This union is not an imitation of marriage, but marriage is an imitation of
it. Exodus: 25, 40.
What ever Moses did, it was according to the Arch-type and pattern showed him
in the Mount; so whatsoever is here taught us to practice, it is that by
earthly rudiments we may ascend higher, and consider heavenly things in them:
And therefore many things are taught us, to be read in the plain letters of
our own actions, that as children are taught to act those things which may
teach them to know what men do, and what they shall do in men's estate, that
they may frame themselves accordingly: so does the Lord teach us many things,
that they may be glasses for our instruction, and that we may (though in
earthly manner) frame our selves for a prepared state of glory; The dealing of
Christ with his Church is the pattern and direction of marriage. Ephesians: 5, 22.
of which marriage is one, and drawn out after the heavenly pattern; for it is
the Lord that framed both, and our practice is no rule to direct the Lord, but
from the Lords dealing toward his Church, and the Churches toward him, the
Apostle draws instructions to teach husbands and wives how to behave
themselves one to another.

The maker, time, place, form, matter, and end of marriage.
First, what account we should have of Marriage, if we look to the original of
it, it is framed to the similitude of Gods eternal purpose, of uniting man to
himself, an extract copyed out of the heavenly Pattern by the hand of God
himself; For the form of it: the most excellent union that we sinful men can
claim or wish for, is to be knit to the man Jesus Christ and to be of his
body; so marriage is according to this pattern to make the strictest bond that
the soul can admit on earth, and to unite them in one who were several bodies
before. For the matter of it, of all mortal creatures, the excellency
pertains to man, and therefore this union the more excellent: and lastly,
(for the end of it) the preservation of man, is better, than of any other
mortal creature, which cannot be without confusion, if marriage were wanting.
And therefore if you respect the time, and place, the maker, the matter, the
form and end of marriage, you may see how honorable it is, and how reverently
to be accounted of. Paul calls it a doctrine of devils to forbid marriage, 1 Timothy: 4.1, 3.
because none else would be an enemy to make it dishonorable in some, which
God has pronounced honorable among all; Heb. 13, 4.
or take away the lawful imitation of so heavenly a pattern: and they are the
children of Satan, that dishonor it either in their own person, or in the
practice of others, by fornication, adultery, contempt of the lawful liberty
of it, or unadvised undertaking of it. I would gladly wish the Church of Rome
to ask St. Paul, whether it is God or the Devil, that would have us teach
such doctrine, as to forbid marriage unto any.

The common ends of marriage.
Secondly, we are taught what use to make of marriage. The common ends for which
marriage was ordained, were, 1. The conservation of mankind from utter decay,
by procreation of children, Malach 2.15.
to be the seed of the Church. 2. The bounding and limiting of wandering lusts
and affections; 1 Cor. 7.2.
that men should not become like beasts, the Lord has ordained lawful means,
to preserve them from falling into unlawful. 3. That two being together,
Eccles. 4 10. Gen 2.18.
the one might be company and help unto other. Yet are we to make further use
of it, that when we either read or hear the institution of marriage, our
hearts may ascend higher, The spiritual uses of marriage.
and consider the union between Christ and his Church, what it is in this
life, and how our love shall increase when we are possessed of glory. And when
we are invited to a marriage, to remember the day of the marriage of the
Bridegroom, when his friends shall enter in, and foolish men be shut without
doors. These things Christ teaches under the similitude of a marriage, that in
all such we may call to mind that marriage, which sin cannot divorce, nor
death make void. And that we may do this the better, the Scripture has laid
lessons in our way, which we stand in need of, by seeking of which we may
find somewhat for our eternal comfort. The duties required of man and wife
may be learned by the actions of God and his Church; the love of the man to the
wife is taught by the love of Christ to his Church, Ephesians 5.22, 23, etc.
when he gave his life rather than it should be lost: how tenderly they should
show themselves in all their actions, is taught by Christ's nourishing and
cherishing the Church. And on the other part, the subjection and reverence the
woman ought to have toward her husband, is taught by the subjection of the
Church unto Christ, who only has an eye to him, and desires to be governed
according to his direction. It is an heavenly pattern so to govern our selves
as we have Christ for an example; and on the other part, we wrong our selves in
marriage, when we bereave our selves of this heavenly comfort; for this is only
the way to make our marriage comfortable and heavenly, often to call to
remembrance the union of Christ to his Church, and especially to our souls;
and according as we are dealt with, and behave our selves in the spiritual
marriage, so to frame our lives and actions in the duties of marriage according
to the same example. I dare boldly promise in the name of God, Gal. 6.16.
that he who sanctifies his marriage, in walking after this rule, peace shall
be on him in this life, and mercy shall be his portion in the life to come, in
being admitted to that society of marriage with Christ in heaven, which he so
much loved, and imitated whilst he remained upon earth.

If I should take a survey of many married persons, and enquire if they learn
and practice any thing according to the rule of Christ and his Church, I should
find them of another spirit; that where Christ appoints their life according
to the rule of heaven, they live in imitation of hell, as if they were bound
together to be tormenters one to another. The unquiet lives of many do show
that Satan has gotten power to curse them, and when all things else do
pleasure both, they find want of nothing but love and quietness: Is the God
of peace and love dwelling with such a couple? No sure, it is the enemy of
peace: Or can we exhort them to love their neighbor, and be tenderhearted to
him, when they hate and torment their own flesh? Love is a mark of Christ's
scholar; and it is certain that he must be taught and led by Satan's
overruling hand, that begins hatred so near home, as to be enemy unto
their heart which God has appointed to lie in his own bosom. No fault, but
it can pretend just ground, and married couples can pretend reason too. But
will a man be angry, if the one hand cut the other, seeing they are both alike
his own? and should he be angry though faults happen among them? must he fall
at variance for every fault? What should become of him, if the Lord should for
every fault show his wrath against him? Or if there were cause given, should
he then be angry and show hatred? This is not the example of our Savior, who
loved every member of his Church, and gave his life for them, even when they
were enemies, and did what they could to offend him. If the fault be in the
wives carriage, St. Paul counsels, Col. 3.19.
yet to love them, and be not bitter unto them, always remembering the example
of Christ, who labored to cleanse his Church, and to make it without spot or
blame. Ephesians 5 26, 27.
If the fault be in the men, and they be untoward, Saint Peter counsels the
women, 1 Pet. 3.1.
that by all means they subject themselves to their husbands, that though they
were infidels, yet they might be won by the conversation of their wives.
There is no place for contention between man and wife, all should be love: and
if the married would take care to behave themselves like Christians in their
houses toward themselves, we should not see or hear them so often in the
streets behaving themselves like Turks toward others, nor suffer Satan to go
between them and the blessing of their marriage.

Of the joys of heaven it is said, [They that were ready went in with him to
the Marriage.]
THE marriage entertainment is now to be spoken of, whereof all the prepared
Virgins shall in the glorious day of Christ's coming be made partakers.

True it is, that Gods servants after death shall be followers of Christ into
the glory of heaven, and there are in bliss, glory and joy, which is not
possible to be conceaved. But in this Parable I must direct my speech unto that
felicity which we are to have both in body and soul after the day of
judgment; because the text tends that way, and Christ in it respects the
question that was propounded unto him concerning his coming, Math. 24.3.
and now applies, and in this Parable concludes the doctrine of his coming,
with an exhortation to watching. Notwithstanding whatsoever can be said of the
glory both of body and soul, (...) miseries there, Math. 6.20.
so says the Scripture, that (in heaven) neither the moth nor canker
corrupts, neither thieves dig through nor steal; Revel. 21.4.
and God shall wype all tears from their eyes, there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, neither crying, neither any more pain: for the sorrows of
this world shall be gone.

In manner of excellency, when we see any thing good, comfortable, profitable
or honorable for us, we straight conclude, a greater excellency of all such
things to be desired are in heaven, the only seat of felicity. Quotiescunque
(says Hierom.) te vana seculi delectabit ambitio, Ad Eustoch.
quotiescunque in seculo videris aliquid gloriosum, ad paradisum mente
transgredere: Whenever the vain desires of this world does delight thee,
whenever thou see any thing in the world glorious, then let thy mind mount
up to Paradise, and in this kind excellent things are spoken of heavenly
Jerusalem. Psalm. 87.3.
The thing that all men account best and sweetest, is life, therefore the
Scripture has promised us a life in heaven, ((...)) for excellency whereof, it
may be justly said to us, Cic. in some. Scip.
Vestra vero quae dicitur vita, mors est, that our life is but a death. Nothing
more comfortable to them that live, then assurance of long life; from whence we
conclude, that in heaven which has fulness of all comfort, we shall have
eternal life: The most profitable life that we can desire is, to have all
things that can make us happy, of which (we finding some things in this life,
for our comfort and refreshment,) we conclude that in heaven are all things
that need to make us perfectly blessed: the greatest honor this world has, is
to be head of one or more Kingdoms; from which we conclude, that heaven (the
true place of glory) has kingdoms for us; and such that for glory, so far
surpass the glory of an earthly kingdom.

We may know what is not there, rather then what is there. What things are not
in heaven.
This world is full of miseries and sorrows, sure there is none in heaven, it
is a place of rest. A necessity of supplying our natural wants, is upon us in
this life; we are grieved with the miseries and necessities of others, but most
of all, for the sins of our selves and others, Non arant, non seminant, non
molunt, non coquunt: opera enim sunt ista necessitatis, ibi necessitas non est.
etc. August in Psalm. 148 6 pra ceptum posuit et non praeteribit.
and the inconveniences that follow them: but in heaven it is not so, for they
till no ground, they sow not, they neither grind nor boil for meat, these
are only works of necessity, but in heaven there is no necessity. They break
no bread to the hungry, they cloathe not the naked, they take not the stranger
in, they visit not the sick, they make no peace, they bury not the dead;
these are the works of mercy, but in heaven there is no misery on which mercy
should be showen. There is no oppression, stealing or uncleanness, these are
the works of iniquity and darkness, Nuptiae sunt auxilium vitae mortalis and
impletio cius quod defecit: ibi autem nihil deficit, quid ergo opus implente?
Throph. in Luc. 20.35. Math. 22, 30.
which have no place in heaven. This life is cut off by death, which soon
would bring mankind to an end, if remedy were not provided, to supply that
which decays; but in heaven there shall nothing be lost, none can die, so
that they need no supplying, therefore in the Resurrection (or in heaven) they
neither marry wives, nor wives are bestowed in Marriage, but all are as the
Angels of God.

What things are in heaven. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Now if we desire to know what is in heaven, the Apostle tells us, that, Neither
has eye seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man,
what good things God has prepared for them that love him: that is, neither can
his senses feel, nor his understanding comprehend, the joys and contenment
that they are able to give. If entertainment of men's devising be able to
overjoy us in conceit, and to translate our spirits from midst of worldly
sorrows, as if we had obtained some happiness indeed: What happiness is it,
to be partaker of the everlasting table, of the inexpressible harmony of Angels
and glorified souls, singing praises to God? We count it the greatest honor
that can be given to a subject, to sit at his Sovereigns table: What honor
shall it be to have fellowship with God and our blessed Savior? 1 Kings 10.8.
The Queen of Sheba pronounced Salomons servants happy, that might always be
hearing the words of wisdom; What happiness shall it be, to stand always in
the presence of One greater than Solomon, Luke 21.36.
even our Lord Jesus Christ, In whom dwells all the treasures of wisdom
bodily? Col. 2.3.
If God (says Augustine) does give unto wicked men the common benefits of
heaven and earth, August in Psalm. 85. in Hebraeo 86 5 It Is Domine misericors.
health, children, riches, plenteousnesse; what does he keep for his faithful
servants? Even not earth but heaven; and that I speak not too basely, when I
say heaven, even he that made heaven keeps himself for us, Si enim ea quae
ad exiguum tempus durant ciusmodi sunt, cuiusmodi erunt illa quae nulla tempora
delebunt, etc. Basil. in Hexa. mer. Orat. 6.
the heaven is glorious, but more glorious is he that made it. If these things
are such, which endure for a little time, what shall those things be, which no
time can bring to an end? And if such be the beauty of things that are seen,
how glorious is the City of God? When Peter saw a sight of Christ's glory, and
of Moses and Eliah, Matthew: 17, 4.
and desired to continue there, without desire of any sight of this world
after, what contentment has he now to see Christ, and other blessed Spirits
in glory? Christ says, Matthew: 5, 6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness: which an holy man
applies thus, O quam faelicem facit ipsa plena refectio, Episcopus Lincoln.
cujus sola esuries facit beatum! O how happy does the full refreshment make
us, of that, whereof the only hungring makes us blessed! David says, O Lord
how amiable are thy Tabernacles, Psalm. 84.1, 2.
My soul longs, yea and faints for the Courts of the Lord, my heart and
flesh rejoice in the living God. If his desire was so sweet, how sweet is the
enjoying? if he rejoiced only seeing in a glass, what joy has he in seeing
face to face? if the Courts of Gods house gave such delight, what is the house
it self able to give?

These are but general, as all that can be said concerning the joys of
heaven; but every soul shall wholly possess the pleasures and joys of
heaven, neither is it hindrance to one, what is bestowed on another. Gods mercy
is infinite, Greg. Mor. l. 4.
Et tanta vis amoris in illa pace nos sociat, ut quod in se quisquis non
acceperit, hoc se accepisse in alio exultet: And so great power of love makes
our fellowship in that everlasting peace, that whatsoever every one has not
received in himself, he rejoices, because he has received it in another.

Difference of earthly and heavenly joy.
In all earthly joy we have sorrow intermixed, that we may the rather labor for
this sweetness, which deceives us not. When we have all the joy we can
conceive by worldly pleasure, it never satisfies us, until it cloy with
boisterous abundance, and cause us to surfeit, and then it satisfies least of
all, and yet our desires are not satisfied, when we have obtained more than we
were capable of: therefore all that the world can give cannot bring the soul
to contentment, or set it beyond the region of wishes and wants, or free it
from the tyranny of fear or desire. This is only to be expected of the joys
of heaven, Lib. 1. de doct. Christ.
for between them (says Augustine) and temporal things, this is one
difference, that a temporal thing is more loved before it be obtained, but is
contemned when we have got it; aeternum autem ardentius diligitur adeptum quam
desideratum: that which is eternal, is more loved being obtained, than it was
when it was desired. We cannot conceive joy without fear of distaste to ensue,
but in heaven we shall be so filled with the sweetness and delight of God, and
the glory we shall receive, Greg.
that we shall be far from loathing, (quia sitientes satiabimur, and satiati
sitiemus) for in thirsting after the same we shall be filled, and being filled
we shall thirst. What shall we do in heaven? (says Augustine: Psalm. 84.4.
) The Psalm says, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be
always praising thee; this shall be our eternal action. Thou ceasest to
praise him, if thou cease to love him; but thou shall not leave loving of him,
for he whom thou see can never be too much looked upon, (his presence
causes fullness of joy) nor offend thee with loathing. Et satiat te and non
satiat: Mirum est quod dico; si dicam quia satiat te, timeo ne, etc. August. in
Psalm. 85 in Hebr. 86.17. Adiu visti me and consolatus es me.
He both fills and fills thee not: this is a wonder that I say, for if I
say he fills thee, I fear thou should conceive it in earthly manner, that
thou should depart as one filled with a dinner or supper; if I say he does
not fill thee, I fear thou should seem to want, and be empty in some part
which should be filled: why then shall I say that which cannot be uttered,
cannot be conceived?

It is easier to obtain than declare the joys of heaven, whatsoever we can
conceive or speak, we shall to our great comfort find it true, which is
written, As we have heard, Psalm. 48.8.
so have we seen in the City of the Lord: but what we shall hear and see
cannot come by report. Wonderful things were told the Queen of Sheba, 2 Chronicles. 9.6.
of Salomons wisdom, and glory of his Kingdom, she believed them not, until
she saw and heard them, and then she confessed that the one half was not
reported unto her. Glorious things are spoken of heaven unto us, and such as
we shall understand, could not be delivered and conceived with words: Let us
therefore believe the Lord, and rely with hope, until that blessedness be
shown upon us: he has done a harder thing than bringing us to immortality;
For it is harder to believe (says Aug.) that he who is eternal should die, In
Psalm 148.6. Posuit mandatum, etc.
than that a mortal man should live for ever. We believe the death of the
Son of God; if God died for man, shall not man live with God? or he live
eternally, for whom one died who lives for ever?

Uses of this doctrine.
The use the Scripture teaches us of this doctrine Paul who once tasted of this
joy, sighed and groaned ever after to be gone out of the world, and little
reason have we, (if we appertain unto God) to be in love with our worldly
estate, for it hinders us of a better.

August. in Psalm. 93. in Hebr. 94.20. Nunquid seeds iniquitatis etc.
If we speak the truth, eternal rest is worthy to be bought with eternal
labor; yet the Lord is merciful in hastening us to get possession. Let us
therefore consider at what rate we would sell those joys, if once we had them,
and we shall the better know what labor and pains is worthy to be paid for
them.

the things which are not seen, that nothing prove so intolerable, which they
fear to suffer, that they may see Christ in glory; In Manual.
therefore Augustine did encourage himself against miseries, and meditated
thus: O soul, if we behooved to suffer daily torments, if to suffer hell it
self a long time, that we might see Christ in glory, and be fellowed with his
Saints: were it not worthy to suffer all that is painful, that we may be
partakers of so great a glory? Let therefore the infernal spirits beset us,
let them prepare their temptations, let fasting break the body, let labors
burden, watching dry up, let whosoever disquiet me, let my conscience murmr,
heat burn me, the body sicken, the breast be enflamed, the stomach swell, let
the countenance grow pale, let all be weak, let my life end in sorrow, and my
years in mourning, Habac: 3, 16.
let rottenness enter into my bones, so that I may have rest in the day of
tribulation.

[And the gate was shut.]
Now follows the reward of foolishness, the foolish are kept without doors,
and not admitted to the company of the wise, nor accounted worthy that the same
place should receive the careless and improvident, which is appointed as a
reward unto the understanding and industrious. The greatest punishment that
could be imposed upon the unprovided for a common wedding, was to be exposed to
shame, and shut out of doors; Therefore Christ according hereunto says, that
the Reprobate shall be shut out from partaking the felicity of the elect: when
notwithstanding this is not their greatest sorrow, for if they were neither
capable of joy, Pana damni.
nor sorrow, their estate might seem more tolerable: but their misery can
never be enough pitied, for they shall be punished with everlasting perdition
from the presence of the Lord: 2 Thessalonians. 1.
if once their misery could come to an end, it were some hope of comfort; but
eternally, this word is more painful then all the pain besides, that so long
they must suffer torment as God is God: And so everlastingly they shall be
banished from the presence of God who is merciful, and chained in the land of
forgetfullnesse.

When our Savior shows, that they shall be deprived of a glorious
inheritance, and expresses no more, he would have us thereby to understand
that there is no man so forgetful of salvation, if he knew how great good he
were to have, needed to be threatened with any further punishment. The like is
set down in the Revelation, that the punishment of filthy and wicked men shall
be, to be without the gates of heavenly Jerusalem. Revel, 22, 15.
St. Paul in punishment of diverse kinds of wickedness pronounces, 1 Cor.
6.10. Gal, 5, 21. Ephesians, 5, 5.
that they shall not inherit the kingdom of God; who is able to abide such a
doom? To be sure that others in our presence, shall enter to possess
unspeakable joys, and our selves receive ashamefull repulse? Who can patiently
abide to be disinherited? When Caine was banished from the Lords presence and
favor, he complained in this life, Genesis 4, 13.
That his punishment was greater than he could could bear: and Absalom
desired to be killed, 2 Samuel 14.32.
if he could not have leave to enjoy the Kings presence: the child shut out of
the fathers doors is in a miserable estate, or the subject excluded from the
Kings defense and protection. Therefore now consider how grievous it will be to
you to be thrust out of our heavenly Fathers house; and so walk now to please
him, that in that day, when you are to be possessed of that long expected
inheritance, others, and not you, may be shut out of doors.

But if this punishment is not effectual to move you, Poena sensus.
then the Lord declares his wrath from heaven, that he has prepared
unquenchable fire to be their portion, that will upon such fair entreaty
neglect to prepare for a heavenly inheritance, August. in spec. hum. mis.
there is utter or most extreme darkness, hunger and thirst, extremenesse of
cold and heat, nothing is heard but curses, lamentations and groans, no
company but tormenting devils, and cursing souls, they shall seek for death
and not obtain it; and this is their estate for ever. It shall be a miserable
sight, that the body shall continually burn, and not be consumed; who could
think this possible, if the Lords word had not said so? And besides he has
confirmed it with our experience; The stone Asbestus, August de Civit. Dei l.
21. c. 5.
if once it be set on fire, it can never be quenched, (...). Math 3.12.
and yet it never consumes; and therefore has the name. When John Baptist
expresses the durance of hell fire, he uses the same word, unquenchable fire.
Were it not good to be delivered from this eternal woe? and not to be
disappointed of an eternal and unspeakable good; yet weigh both now, that you
be not compelled to suffer both hereafter.

Secondly, our Savior does hereby teach us, that as unmercifull men deal with
others, Vncharitie requited.
so shall they be dealt with: when they go to meat, the poor are cast out,
and lest they should get to reach the crummes of their table, the door must be
shut. In like manner, when our Lord shall convey his servants into Abraham's
bosom, the gate shall be shut, and these who held out others in this life,
God shall hold without the gates of bliss in the life to come. This is the
third reason we have found in this Parable, to move us to be merciful to the
distressed: for first, in the beginning of eternal woe and necessity, the
hard hearted shall wish if it were possible, that they might be helped by
others: Secondly, their former cruel dealing, shall be cast in their teeth,
and their own answers meet them in judgment: and Thirdly, with anger thrust
from the presence of God, and the gate of glory shut upon them. He that
expects to sit on a throne in Gods company for ever, must cause the
distressed to sit at his table. Gods word has often commanded, and commended
hospitality; I mean not common feastings of them that are able to double it
in the like again, Abraham's charity requited.
but to call the sick, naked, and blind, the lame, the stranger and the
prisoner. Abraham Heb. 13.2. Genesis 18.22.
besides his eternal reward in heaven. 1. In lodging strangers, he received
Angels, yea the great Angel of the Covenant, even the Son of God. Malach
3.1.
2 That none shall be accounted to be a true Israelite to God, John 8.39.
except he do the works of Abraham, of which this is a chief: And therefore,
Theophilact in Luke 16.23.
for good reason does Christ in the Parable call the rich glutton to be judged
by Abraham, who compelled those that were strangers on the way, to receive
entertainment of him, where the rich Glutton starved them that lay continually
within a call to his table. 3. Abraham's bosom, because his heart and bosom
was open to all the distressed, who received heat, comfort, and nourishment in
this life: and shall (though all the unmercifull in the world would starve the^
at their gate,) be received into the hospitality of heaven, with as great
compassion and comfort, as ever the distressed was received into the house or
bosom of Abraham. As the Lord has made the faith of Abraham an example of
believing to all the faithful, so has he commended his hospitality, that all
who desire to follow him to glory, may imitate him in his charity.

But as God deals with the hard hearted, according to their works in
shutting doors on them, as they do upon others; yet there is a difference,
when the poor is denied or shut out at one time, yet he hopes he may be
helped at anotime, Heavens Gates once shutt cannot be open.
and therefore wailes and importunes for help and relief though it stay long;
because he that has shutt his door may open it, and the hard hearted may at
length be moved with compassion: compassion: but when the Lord shuts the
gate of mercy, it is never opened again; there is no waiting, nor hope of any
comfort to ensue: for (clauditur, Bern. in hunc. (...)
janua audiendi, respondendi, miserandi) the Lord has shut the gate of
hearing, of answering, or taking compassion.

But what gate is this? Even the gate that is now open unto all that come from
the east and west to sit with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven: the gate of him who says, He that comes to me I will not cast out.
John 6.37.
The murderers come and are admitted, the Publicans and sinners are received,
the wanton, adulteress, fornicators, thieves, blasphemers, and oppressors,
and the open gate is not denied unto them. Behold how the gate is now open,
which shall be shut for ever, even that which is open to tears, sighs, and
groans of sinners, which received Aaron after his idolatry, David after his
murder and adultery, Peter after his denying of Christ, now it is shut for
ever. If the Lord open our eyes to make use of this, we may perceive with
Jacob the gate of heaven; Genesis 23.17. Acts 7, 56.
or with Steven see the heavens open; because it is the occasion and time to
hear our prayers, to answer our calls, and have mercy upon us. And therefore,
to day if you will make use of it, harden not your hearts, but strive to enter
in at this gate, before it be shut upon you.

VERSE 11. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord open to us.
NOw the Parable shows us the last refuge of reprobate men, even to the Lord,
but he shall not hear them. We are very ready to deceive and bear our selves
in hand, with conceits beyond all reason and ground: and therefore, as by the
former entreaty to the elect, and their answer, Christ taught us how little
help the elect can give; so by this entreaty to himself, and his answer, he
shows that he will not help them, though with repentance, trembling, and
tears, they cry, and call him, Lord, never so often.

You see therefore how particularly and plainly he would have us take notice
what we may expect; and because the damned shall not have opportunity to cry,
Lord, Lord open to us: therefore to us is this instruction sent, that we now
call upon the name of the Lord, and while the gate of salvation is not shut and
sealed up for ever, we may knock and call, Lord, Lord open unto us.

We have all possible warning given us, many to exhort us, Christ, all the
Prophets and Apostles; to us do their writings belong, they can do no good
when once death has possessed us, for in destruction there is no place for
amendment. We have Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.
if we will not take their counsel, we will far less hearken though one
should come from the dead. They that do not take warning at Gods word, their
punishment is, that nothing shall be able to move them.
If it had been fitting, or profitable, we should not have wanted that help:
but whosoever will not be instructed, by Gods own words, their punishment is,
that though one should come from heaven or hell, yet they should esteem all
false and counterfeit, or though they knew the truth of it, yet where Gods word
works not, no vision or miracle is able to move. The Jews, who still called
for signs and warnings from the dead, they had them; Math 9.25. Luke 7, 15.
for Iairus daughter was raised, a widows son at Naim; but above all, a
well known man, and one that dwelt hard by Jerusalem, Lazarus was raised, for
whom the Jews believed not in Christ, but hardened their hearts, and labored
to kill him, John 12, 10.
on whom God had bestowed life the second time: And though many that were well
known in Jerusalem rose at Christ's resurrection, Mat: 27.52, 53.
and showed themselves to their old acquaintances, yet for all this the rage of
the Jews grew greater, and more fiercely persecuted them that believed, and
put them in remembrance of these things, (the truth whereof) they could not
deny. Therefore as the last destruction is of all most terrible and
intolerable; so Christ has used his word to persuade us, which is the most
effectual to make us prevent it, if any means be available.

[Afterward came also, etc.] Seeing that our Savior has been so careful to
forewarne us of the danger, it appears that justly they be called foolish,
who never knock at the gate of Gods mercy until it be shut. So did Esau seek
his fathers blessing with tears, Genesis 27.30.
after it was bestowed on Jacob, tears could not call it again, there was no
place for his repentance, because he despised it and sold it away for a matter
of nothing. Genesis 25 32.
Let no man be a profane man as Esau was, Hebr. 12.16.
to account that of no value which God esteems precious. When the plague of
hailestones and thunder was threatened in Egypt, such as regarded not the word
of the Lord, Exodus: 9, 19, 21, 25.
left their servants and their cattle in the field, and were destroyed,
because they removed not all out of the field according to the counsel of
Moses; so they with whom these words of Christ are not effectual, must feel
this woe, and knock and cry without any answer. Let us do as the Egyptians
that feared the Lord, they followed the counsel of Moses, and so escaped the
aforesaid plague: and though there were but few to be excluded from eternal
life, yet were it enough to make every man tremble, and to labor for
prevention that he be not one. When Christ told his Disciples that one of them
should betray him, Matthew: 26, 22.
all of them were exceeding sorrowful, and asked, Is it I? But Christ tells
us, that nor a few, but many shall knock, and call, Lord, Lord, and be denied;
which ought to put us in greater fear, until we have obtained means to be
delivered from the danger of this multitude. This verse shows the fruit of
delay in turning to the Lord.

VERSE 12. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.
SEeing that by entering into the Mariage-chamber with the Bridegroom is
signified unto us the receiving of the possession of our eternal inheritance,
it follows that the voice of lamentation or complaint of the damned cannot
reach thither, for nothing shall be heard in it but the voice of joy and
gladness, neither shall any answer be given unto them: But if any answer were
to be given them, it would be like this, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.
So that no means can avail either in judgment or after, but reprobates shall
be denied both the help of charitable men, and of a most merciful God.

Comparison of the words of verses 8, 9, 11, 12.
Between the petition of foolish Virgins unto the wise, and their petition to
God, there is this difference: when they speak to the Virgins, they give a
reason why they petition to them, and so receive a reason again why they are
denied, because their fellows might be ignorant of their necessity, and the
foolish ignorant of the ability of the other: but when they cry to God, they
name no reason, because without their information he knows their misery well
enough; and so are now answered without any reason expressed, (although the
words have a reason in themselves) because the damned understand and feel
their own misery, and the cause of it well enough, without any further
expressing of it unto them. Secondly, Vide patiente^ sanctum, dicitur enim (
Ecclesiasticus 4.3) Animam humiliatam ne turbaveris: ipse respondet, fili.
Theophylact in Luc. 16.25.
in speaking to men, they add a reason of necessity to move them to take
compassion on them; and they are answered with a reason, to show, that although
they cannot help, yet they are not cruel and unmercifull: but in speaking to
God, they add no reason to move him, for he of himself is very merciful and
full of compassion; and so receive answer without any reason added, because
they would not harken unto him, when with reasons he moved them. Lastly,
whilst they have an extraordinary demand to others, to be furnished with
their provision, they receive an ordinary answer, for every one thinks they
have too little for themselves: but when they have an ordinary petition to God,
to open heaven unto them; they receive an extraordinary answer, for God never
disclaimeth them that do draw near unto him. I omit the application of these,
I only would by these, as by the rest of the particulars of this Parable, give
a taste of the great wisdom of our Savior who preached it, and what concent
one word gives to another.

[Verily I say unto you.]
These words contain the Lords denial of all favor unto the damned after
death and judgment: And to make us assured of it, he has not spoken it only,
without further confirmation, but added an oath, Verily I say unto you. The
word (verily) is often used by Christ, in the Greek it is Amen, which Christ
takes to be his own name, These things says Amen, Revel. 3.14.
the true and faithful witness; for he is the way, the truth, and the life,: As
if he had said, as the truth is truth, I say unto you: and so having no greater
to protest, witness and seal this doctrine with then himself, Verbum
confirmationis praemittitu, magnum noveris esse quod sequitur. Bern Declamat.
confirms it with his truth. Wheresoever this word is used in Scripture, it
shows a vehemence and earnestnes of the affection of him that speaks, and
does import some great consequence. So that wheresoever it is pronounced by
Christ, it should be unto us, as a mark upon that Scripture, to move us to
consider the weight of it, because he would not have us negligent to hear,
that which he is so careful to teach. Now, he says (verily,) to show, that as
he is true, this is the answer they may look for, I know you not. If words
were taken hold of, and believed, the Lord needs not thus to add an oath for
confirmation; We will hardly believe any thing to hurt us.
and because we will never believe any thing that will hurt us, the Lord
ingageth his truth, that so it shall be, if we labor not to make our
acquaintaince with him in time; and all this is to draw us out of the snare of
presumption, that we pass not our life so idly, Examples.
or according to our own fantasy, This is the hope of Papists to be released
out of Purgatory, by the prayers of the living.
that sure God will be merciful unto all men, and it were a sinful conceit
to think otherwise. Others more grossly, have laid it as a ground to all
their hopes, that when the pains of hell have taken hold on their soul, that
Theophilact. in Math. 25.46. Sets down this error of the Originians,
contrary to Christ's own words: and like to this is the Papists deliverance
from Purgatory, both smelling of the Stoics conceits, of which Cicero,
Neither the souls in ^unc lo um nisi multis exagitati seculi^, reveruntur. in
Some. Scip.
and that after they regarded not to hear the Lord all their life time, yet he
will hear others for them, and recall them for their torments they suffer. And
because error has no bridle to it, nor end at which it does determine; even
mercy has been preached by some, to be granted to the Devils and other damned
Spirits, after that the world does end, and they have suffered the torments of
hell a little after. So that all these only give leave, that men may lead
what life they will, or never expect to have, or see heaven open, whilst they
are in this life, and have occasion to have it open: wherefore all these give
no credit to this protestation that Christ makes, Verily I say unto you, I
know you not.

[I know you not.]
As Christ has forewarned (us in this Parable) what part Reprobates shall have
in his favor; The meaning and truth of the words.
so in other places, he tells us, that when the matter shall come to open
trial in judgment, when they shall claim familiarity and acquaintance with
Christ saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, Luk 13.25.26.
and he shall answer and say, I know you not; then shall they say, we have
eaten and drunken in thy presence, Math 7.22.23.
and thou have taught in our streets: By thy name we have prophesied, and cast
out Devils, and done many works; Notwithstanding all this, Theophilact. in
Math. 7.23.
Christ will profess and say unto them, I never knew you, Neque tunc quando
miracula faciebatis, diligebam vos; even then when you preached, and did
miracles in my name, I loved you not: by which appears the same is the truth
of God for ever. This concerns all that are in Gods employments, to consider
for all that they do, if the Lord hate them, or if he be preparing eternal
wrath for them. He makes wicked men to do him good service, Ioh. 6.70.
Judas preached salvation to others and overcame the power of Satan in them,
who was no better than a Devil himself. He calls Nebuchadnezer his servant,
Ezech. 29.18. Esaias. 44.28.
and Cyrus his Shepherd, and many other to do him service, whom he will
protest in the great day that he never loved.

The words have a reason in themselves. The foolish Virgins desire him to open
heaven unto them, his answer is, I know you not; according to the rest of this
Parable: for at solemn feasts they that desire entrance, but ought not to be
admitted, the common answer is, I know you not, and therefore there is no
reason I should open unto you. Especially this is the reason of the
uncharitable, who being by the command of God to open their doors to strangers,
they do no good, except they know well to whom, and to the poor and
distressed they answer, I know you not. Even so shall their answer be from the
Lord, as they answered others, and as they did good to none but whom they
loved, so the Lord will not hear them, because he never loved them. The
meaning of the words [I know you not] is, I will take no notice of you: for as
these that are promoted to honor, when their old acquaintance would claim
interest in them, The elect and reprobate known to God, but diverse ways.
use to say, I do not know you: So Jesus Christ in the great judgment, when
Reprobates would claim some interest in him, shall say the like, I know you
not, that is, I will have no commerce nor fellowship with you. August de verb.
Dom, Ser. 22.
Quid est Nescio vos? Est improbo vos, reprobo vos: What is, I know you not? It
is, I refuse you, I cast you off. The Lord knows both the godly and reprobate,
but after diverse manners; love is joined with the knowledge of the one, and
hatred with the knowledge of the other. Of the elect it is said, The Lord
knows who are his: 2 Timothy 2.19. Romans 8.29.
and, Those that he had known before, he elected to salvation: And of the
Jews, Romans 10.2.
that he knew them before: that is, he loved them before: and in this respect
it is true that the Lord knows not wicked men, for he loves them not. But
otherwise he knows all their thoughts and deeds; happy were they if they
knew themselves in some measure, with that pure and holy knowledge that the
Lord has of them, it would make them take some more labor for his love and
acquaintance, which seeing they do not, they fulfill the Lords threatening to
their shame, seeing they are foretold of it, and care not to prevent it.
Christ foretold us, that he who confessed him, Matthew: 10 32. Mark 10.38.
he would acknowledge him before his Father and the Angels; but he that would
be ashamed of him, he would deny him. Lo now he makes it good, for he
professes openly, I know you not. What means to confess or to be ashamed of
Christ.
In this life our Savior calls for our friendship and acquaintance, in his
fair offer of salvation: if we will think it an honor for us, that Christ
was once in misery and poverty for our sake, and account this our greatest
glory; he sends his messengers, the poor and distressed, who are his
brethren, Fratres vocat omnes simpliciter pauperes; Omnis enim pauper frater
est Christi, quandoquide^ and Christus in egestate vixit. Theophylact. in Mat.
25.40.
to be acquainted with us in his name, to see how we would like of their
friendship, or how we would entertain Christ, if he himself came to us in
that fashion, as indeed once he did. If we rejoice to be thus acquainted with
Christ, and confess him in this life, then shall he openly acknowledge us, and
to our glory pronounce before God, and all that shall be gathered in the great
judgment, how we loved and respected him and his messengers. He that is
ashamed of the poverty of Christ, the misery and tribulation of a Christian, or
the distress of the poor, or to profess love and acquaintance to them, they
shall be rewarded accordingly. Idem in Iuc. 9.26.
As he that has an evil servant is ashamed to call him his servant; so Christ
shall deny them, and say, I know you not. Happy is the soul that has a part
in the commendation and prayer of Paul for Onesiphorus, whose service and
confession he prays the Lord to remember in the great day; in these words,
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, 1 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18.
for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain; but when he was
at Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me; the Lord grant unto
him that he may find mercy with the Lord in that day; and in how many things
he has ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou know very well.

Lastly, these words [I know you not] show us, that not only Christ shall take
away his compassion from them, but shall be their enemy to be avenged on them.
Theophilact. in Marc. 8.34
He that denies another, if it be his familiar friend, his brother, or father,
although he see him whipped or killed, he takes no notice, he laments not, he
has no compassion or suffering with him, being once estranged from him; so
when Christ has denied the reprobate, they must look for no compassion, but
(which is worse) they must expect punishment. When some of the Levites were
killing of their own kindred for their idolatry; of Levi it is said in their
name, He said unto his father and mother, Deuteronomy. 33 9.
I have not seen you, neither knew he his brethren, nor knew he his own
children: So when the date of acquaintance and mercy is past with Christ, then
there is nothing to be expected but the execution of vengeance, for he will
not know one more than another: When his wrath is kindled, Psalm. 2.12.
it will be known how happy they are that put their trust in him.

Now there is a question to be answered: Seeing Christ both exhorts and
promises, Knock and it shall be open unto you, how is it that he says he
will deny them that both knock and call upon him in the day of judgment? I
answer, they defraud themselves of the benefit of this promise, Two things to
be observed by all that would knock at heavens gate.
for obtaining whereof two conditions are required of us: First, that we
knock and call while it is the time and day of salvation, which day is the
time of our life, because that life and August. in Ioh. 6
Ad hoc debet prodesse unicuique vivere, ut detur ei semper vivere: And indeed
life is only a benefit to every man, that he may thereby obtain the benefit
of living eternally. Secondly, we must in requisite honor God with their
lips, Esaias 29.13^
but their hearts are far from him, yea and will ask of God with tears, yet
they ask not aright, because it is not with heart, word and deed; of which
they want two; for their hearts call not to him for love of him or of eternal
life, but other by-respects are cause of their complaints, neither do their
deeds concur, to knock and move the Lord. These who would enter into life,
must open their hearts to let the Lord in, and dwell in them, Psalm. 24.7.
according as David exhorts, Lift up your heads, you gates, and be ye lift
up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in: Psalm. 118.20.
for this is the gate of the Lord, only the righteous shall enter into it; who
only may truly say, Verse 19.
Open me the gates of righteousness, that I may go into them, and praise the
Lord for ever; no unclean or wicked person dare say this, their deeds can
neither knock nor enter. Acts 10, 4.
Cornelius prayer appeared in Gods presence, but his fasting and alms went up
to heaven: heaven cannot be purchased with bare words, we must make friends of
worldly riches, to gain everlasting habitations, and make treasures in heaven,
yea and have our hearts there also, or else our calling cannot be taken notice
of, nor be able to unlocke the inaccessible place of glory.

VERSE 13. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day, nor the hour, when
the Son of man will come.
THese words are the 3. part of this Parable, containing the application of it.
Wherein our Savior shows plainly the great love and care he has to his
servants, and his abundant mercy which he has on all men, that he desireh not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and
live; gives a general cry, forewarning their danger, and preventing their
destruction, but in such particular manner, that it is sufficient to move the
most senseles heart to retreat. Two times already (as I said in the beginning)
has Christ in this same Sermon given the same warning. Now because the danger
is great, even the damnation of every soul that labors not to prevent it, and
men are careless and fearelesse of unseene and unfelt dangers, therefore he
preaches it the third time, and by a common comparison labors to imprint it
in the minds of his hearers. Job 33 14.29 30.
The Lord (says Elihu) speaks once or twice, and a man perceives it not,
yea (and being abundant in compassion) will labor twice or thrice with a man,
that he may turn back his soul from the pit, to be illuminate in the light
of the living. As a careful Captain, before he betake him to rest,
considering the great danger of his army, if they become sleepy and careless,
will give charge that the watches be placed; and not contented with direction
and entreaty, will go in person, to see his own satisfaction and their
security: So our Lord Jesus Christ being to leave this world, and considering
the watchfulness and labor of our spiritual enemies, seeking to devour us,
which may hastily be done, if once we be taken at unawares; he often exhorts us
to stand to our guard, and at last in his own person sets the watch, and
seals it with a charge of punishment to be inflicted upon those that neglect.
And as a man going into a strange Country, and leaves his house, Mark 13, 34.
gives authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and commands
the porter and all to work and watch, that upon his uncertain time of
return, they may be upon an instant ready to give account of their charge: So
our Lord before his going into our heavenly Country, prescribed and delivered
to every man his charge; and because not only the Disciples, but every other
soul stands at the gate of heaven, until it be open, and our Savior meet
us, he therefore gave charge, and exhorted all to watch, lest they be found
sleeping and negligent, Matthew. 25.30.
and with the sloathfull servant be cast into utter darkness, where is weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Consider how careful Christ is to preach and beat this
doctrine into our ears, and make use of it, for the more careful the Lord is
to give us warning, the more severe shall he be in judgeing, if we neglect.

This exhortation [Watch therefore] springs from many roots, each whereof
leads us to this fruit, even from every maine particular in this Parable,
which proceeding along by the uncertainty of time, are as so many motives and
counselors that we watch and awaite for the coming of Christ to us. The
great River Nilus receives water and strength from many springs, all which
concurring overflow much of Egypt, and causes fruitfulness: So the former
doctrines of this Parable, all concur in one, and taking their current
through the uncertainty of our life, or Christ's coming, do overflow the
soul, and make it fruitful, causing us to walk worthy of our calling, and to
watch for Christ's coming. The greatest argument to move us to watchfulness,
and carfulness of a Christian life, is the uncertainty of our life, and the
continual danger we stand in, to be arrested by death, and so brought
presently to a fearful account. He that fears the thief to come at every
hour of the night, will be sure to spend the whole night in watching: We are
ever in danger, yea in the midst of life we be in death: and therefore while we
live, our souls should continually watch for the time that our Lord Jesus
shall appear for our deliverance out of this mortal life. Therefore when our
Lord exhorts us to watch, he gives this for a reason, [We know not the day,
etc.] And because, of all the foolishness, and miserable estate of the foolish
Virgins, this is most lamentable, that beginning and laboring for the
marriage, they should notwithstanding allow a purposed prodigality, to consume
an uncertain time, and so be taken at unawares in carelessness, lose their
expected credit and benefit, to their great shame and confusion: so should we
stand in awe, and watch, lest that day come upon us as a snare, when we least
think of it, [For we know not the day, etc.] And this is the particular that
Christ urges out of this Parable, and which he makes express use of.

But seeing there are many other circumstances in it which do urge this
exhortation, and by good consequence conclude the same doctrine, it is not
unfitting to set them down, as so many hands, laying one and the same burden
of necessary watchfulness upon us: but so as they may be linked with this
maine reason (of the uncertainty of the time) to give greater strength unto
them. When all our reasons are seasoned and salted with the uncertain time of
death, they give no other relish, nor bring out any other effect in an
understanding soul, than wariness and watchfulness in all things, according
to the wise man's saying, Remember death, and thou shall never sin,
Ecclesiasticus 7.36.

There have been six principal doctrines in this Parable, which all concur
to teach us this exhortation. These reasons I have set down thus for brevities
sake, which may be easily drawn into syllogismes.
From the first Verse. Heaven is our native Country, for which we are brought
up; now we are children of the kingdom, and are pilgrims in another Country,
and have no certainty when the Lord will translate us from this miserable
estate, to receive our merciful expectation: and therefore we should watch,
seeing we know not the day, etc. From the second Verse. We heard that few were
to be saved, and the power of damnation is an equal enemy to all, and at all
times ready to take hold of us: therefore we should be watchful seeing we
know not, etc. From the third Verse. We find it true, that most of men content
themselves with a show of grace and preparation, and so labor with cunning and
industry that they may be damned, and with this show consume the time, which
they neither know nor have power of: and therefore we should give labor, that
we prove not of this graceless number, but watch, for we know not, etc. From
the fifth Verse. The time of our life and of Christ's stay is bestowed upon us,
to the end that we may make ready against he come, which if it be within a day,
or an hour, we know not: and therefore we should watch, seeing we know not,
etc. From the fifth and sixth Verses. Security is a common forerunner of danger,
and the usher which makes way to destruction, which is commonly nearest when
it seems to be furthest off, but when it comes is uncertain, but ever
doubtful: and therefore we should be ever upon our guard, and watch, seeing we
know not, etc. From the following Verses is by reasons concluded, that there is
neither time to provide and prepare, nor any help to be hoped for, from God or
man, after the day of death, which is ever waiting to carry us to judgment:
And therefore we should ever prepare and watch, seeing we know neither the day
nor hour when the Son of man comes.

Now we are in particular to consider the main reason; we know not the day nor
the hour, when the Son of man comes. Secondly, as a conclusion to all this
Parable, to expound and urge this exhortation, Watch.

The reason imports two things: First, the certainty of Christ's coming:
secondly, the uncertainty of the time to our knowledge. The first is taken as
granted and believed, being promised by Christ oftentimes before. The second,
on which we presume most, though we know it least, is proved by this
comparison, in the unexpected coming of the Bridegroom, (and in the chapter
before) by the example of the sudden overtaking the world by the flood not
looked for, even until the day that Noah entered into the Arc: and by the
sudden destruction of Sodom, Genesis 19.23.
not likely nor looked for an hour before it came, for the Sun shined
brightly upon it. And lastly, in all the said places, our Lord promises, that
his coming shall be (for sodainnesse) in the same manner, that as the world
had not a days knowledge of the flood before it came, nor the Sodomites an
hours warning of their destruction before it came, so no man shall know the
day, nor the hour when the Son of man shall come.

[When the Son of man will come.]
This is a name of comfort unto us.
In the way, let us comfort our selves amidst this fearful doctrine, wherein
though Christ does preach of death and judgment, yet to his Disciples and us,
(who have laid all our hopes of comfort upon himself) he has interlaced a
word of comfort, in preaching of general judgment to others, he preaches
particular mercy unto us. He calls himself the Son of man, to remember us
of the interest we have in his nature, his person, his deeds and sufferings;
and by this name of humility and affection to mankind, we may be encouraged to
draw near to him, who is so near to us, and to put our trust in him, whose
love we are so assured of. As this name [Sonne of man] is comfortable to us, so
is it a name of instruction for us, And a pattern of wonderful humility.
for in it we see a wonderful humility. It was the common name that Christ
continually called himself by, Christ never called himself Son of man after
his death; reasons.
in all his teaching before he suffered. But we may observe, that after his
death he never called himself by that name. First, because (as the Apostle
says) by the resurrection from the dead he was mightily declared to Secondly,
Romans 1.2.
after his resurrection he was not any more subject to humane infirmities,
Examples are in Luke 24.16 Ioh 20 14. and 21.4.
though by his power he held the eyes of all that beheld him, that they should
only see him as a man conversing upon the earth. Thirdly and Acts 1, 3.
he vouchsafed to do these things which might assure us of the truth of his
resurrection: and therefore when Mary Magdalen would have fallen on his feet,
as she used before his death, he says, Touch me not: but when Thomas
distrusted, John 20.17, 27
he bid him feel his hands and his side. We never read that the Apostles
called him Son of man, for questionless they were astonished at this name of
wonderful humility. When the Lord had showed his glory to the Prophet Ezekiel,
he called him ever after, Son of man, Marginal note in Ezekiel. 2, 1.
to remember him that he was dust and ashes, and so to humble him ever when he
remembered his own estate, and Gods grace. But after the Lord had witnessed
from heaven, in the hearing of John and his followers, that he was his
welbeloved Son, in whom he was well pleased, yet ever after would call
himself the Son of man, as professing himself to be come of the mortal and
corrupted stock of Adam, as miserable men were; yea and to descend lower, he
thought it no disparagement, that he was not equal in state and condition with
others, (though above all by nature) but framed himself to the form and
fashion of a servant, to serve Joseph and Mary, and his Disciples; to claim no
higher honor in this world, than to be called the Son of man, that is, by
nature bound a servant to man: for though the son differ from a servant in
this, Gal. 4.1.
that he is heir of all, yet so long as he can be called a son, both nature
and Gods law binds him service and obedience. Bern. Ser. 1. super Missus est.
O wonderful example of humility, he went (says the Gospel) to Nazareth,
and was subject unto them, to wit to Joseph and Mary: choose of both, which you
will wonder at, either the bountiful vouchsafing of the Son, or the most
excellent honor the parents have, both amazefull, both wonderful: that God
should become obedient unto men, an humility beyond all example; that men
should be commanders of God, an highness beyond all comparison. Idem. Ser. 3.
Advent.
(Certainly the Angels are amazed at this, to see him so far lower than
themselves, and yet crowned with such glory and worship, that he is God above
all blessed for ever, and do now manifestly ascend and descend unto the Son
of man. Vbi superius. Disee homo obtemperare, disce terra subdi, etc.
) O man learn to obey, O earth learn to be subject. Of thy Maker the Gospel
says, he was subject unto them: be ashamed, O dust, God humbles himself, and
thou exaltest thy self, he makes himself subject to men, and thou desiring
to have rule of men, set thy self to take place of God. Learn of Christ,
Matthew: 11.
that he is meek and lowly in mind, do you the like, and you shall find
rest in your souls.

Having now heard a wonderful example of Christ's humility, let us now return,
and take a view of his glory. If any wonder with Caiphas, that a man of so
mean estate can be the God of glory, let him receive Christ's answer, I am he,
Mark 14.62.
and ye shall see the Son of man sit at the right hand of the power of God,
and come in the clouds of heaven.

The glory of Christ in his coming, (according as he means in this text) is
partly invisible, partly visible. When he calls us to death and particular
judgment, his person is not seen with our eyes, though his power be felt,
Acts 3.15. Revel. 1.18.
so that he who is Lord of life and death works in us: Genesis 28.16.
and we may say with Jacob, Surely God was in this place, and I was not aware.
That our Savior does in this exhortation mean also of his coming at the day
of our death, appears by example; for unto the Church of Sardis he sends
the meaning of the same words, in which he punished many by death and temporal
punishments; his words are these: Revel. 3.3.
If thou will not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not
know what hour I will come upon thee. This coming of Christ we expect and are
certain of, yet we are not afraid, nor watch, because we see not the glory of
that power which others feel, which comes and dispossesseth them of life.
The other coming of Christ to judgment, even the very word of it is terrible,
because of the fearful sights we shall see, and the glory which Christ shall
show, that reprobate men shall fear nothing so much, as the presence of him
who sits upon the throne. This coming of Christ is chiefly meant of by
Christ, as appears by the purpose of this and the chapter going before. But
seeing that death and judgment do go together, and that the preparation for
the one is for both, let us take consideration of that which comes first.

Of all things only death is certain. Psalm 89.48. In Psalm. 38. in Hebr. 39
11. surely every man is vanity.
The certainty of Christ's coming by death, is the only thing that we are all
sure of. Who is he (says Ethan) that lives, and shall not see death? Or what
is sure (says Augustine) in this life except death? Consider all whether good
or bad things of this life, righteousness or iniquity, what is certain except
death? Have thou profited well? what thou art to day thou know, what thou
shall be tomorrow, thou know not: Lookst thou for money? it is uncertain to
come; Thou look for a wife, this is uncertain, or what an one thou shall
have: thou hopest for children, they are uncertain to be born; are they borne,
their life is uncertain; if they live, their thriving is uncertain.
Whatsoever way thou turnest thee, all is uncertain except death: Art thou
poor? it is uncertain if thou shall be rich; art thou unlearned? it is
uncertain if thou shall be learned; art thou sick? it is uncertain if thou
shall recover; art thou borne? thou art sure to die. This is the enemy, that
(as the Prophet says Esaias 28.15.18.
) we make a covenant with, making falsehood our refuge, and hiding our selves
under vanity, which notwithstanding is and must be disanulled; as all
experiences do confirm. An Archer shootes sometimes beyond the mark,
sometimes comes short of it, now on the one side, then on the other; but though
he miss the mark for a time, at length hits it: so we see death strike at
great ones above us, sometimes at children and servants under us; on the right
hand it takes our friends, on the left hand our enemies: shall we think to
escape, seeing he has so long aimed at us? We are al entering into death, and
this is the difference, only who shall take the way; every one whom he takes,
leaves the Wisemans counsel unto us, Remember my judgment, so shall thine
be; to me to day, to thee to morrow, Ecclus. 38.22.

Make use of this certain misery. O man remember thy end, August. in spec.
hum. mis.
remember what thou shall be, and when thou shall go out of this life. Naked
came thou out of thy mothers womb, and naked under the earth shall thou go,
worms shall consume thy body; why should the flesh rejoice, which is prepared
to be worms meat? rejoice not to day, lest thou dye to morrow; why labourest
thou to stretch out the belly with variety of dishes? think I pray thee, for
whom thou do prepare this fatness, seeing as a bag thou shall be cast out
to the worms? Why gloriest thou, that thou art a precious vanity, compassed
with gold and precious stones, and so despisest others? The day shall come
when thou shall (...) therefore if we know not but he may come within a day or
an hours space, much less are we certain that he shall stay a month, a
year, or more years before he come: I suppose, that whosoever knows Gods
word, will acknowledge these to be true, in doing of which they cannot but
utterly condemn their curiosity, who labor to determine or know when Christ
shall come to judgment, being quite contrary to his word, and intent of
doctrine, and now a known foolishnes, in many learned and godly men among the
ancient Fathers. Quae sermon omnium celebratur Astrologia, stultitia multo
labor constans. Basil. in Hexam. Orat. 1.

The foolery,


I need not the counsel of judicious Astrologians, to know the truth of our
ignorance herein; their much admired labor and fooleries are contrary to the
study of Christians; we are forbidden to meddle with secrets which only belong
to God, especially with the knowledge of the times, for God has put them in
his own power; but we are commanded to provide for them which at all times
expect us: we should desire to be of Gods Court, but not presume to be of his
Council: they on the contrary strive to be of his Council, and not of his
Court, laboring by all means to know the particulars of Gods providence and
time of their death. and punishment of Astrologians.
The Lord gives just reward for their presumption, for we may observe, that
when they have obtained (as they think) some knowledge, he crosses them in
what they desire most. If they find out a long life, they rejoice, but the
Lord never commonly suffers that to be performed which the stars promise
them, but takes them away in some hasty and visible judgment: If they find
death at the doors, and appoint a day for the approach of it, these are
fearful news which the Lord brings commonly to pass upon them for a
recompense of their error. It remains therefore that we remember, that death
tarrieth not, and that the covenant of the grave is not showed thee,
Ecclesiasticus 14.12. And seeing the first coming of Christ is revealed unto
us, (for it concerns us to know the day of our visitation,) that we labor
that his second coming be not at unawares on us, or as a snare that we never
looked for, by making profitable use of his first coming, to make our
salvation sure; and for his coming by death or judgment, to watch, for we
know not the day nor the hour when the Son of man comes.

Secondly, to the end that we may continually watch for the time when our Lord
Jesus shall come, he says not, you know not the year, Our lifetime is
measured out unto us by days and hours.
but [you know not the day nor the houre] teaching us thereby, that our lives
are measured out by days and hours, and not bestowed at random upon us, or
squared out by the great, but are numbered out by little and little unto us. Job
14.5.
Are not the days of man (says Job) determined? the number of his months are
with thee, thou have appointed his bounds which he cannot pass. When God set
the time to Noah, that he would destroy the world with a flood, he measured it
out by days, Genesis 6.3.
The days of man shall be an 120 years: teaching, that although their
general destruction should be then, yet each man should hold his life by
name and (...) yet told his wives that he was able (according as he had before
used) to kill the youngest and lustiest man that could be found. But if this
were generally true, that only natural weakness and age were to bring death
upon all men, then wicked men might have room enough to turn them in, and
laugh at death as an enemy standing without the reach of shot. But (ut omnis
aetas peccato inquinata, ita omnis morti obnoxia) as every age is polluted by
sin, so is every age subject to death, (as the Apostle joyneth them) which
needs no other proof, Romans 5.12.
than our common grief for the loss of children, Servius Sulpitius Galba
Emperor said, (being 72 years old, and lame both of hands and feet) Eta moi
menos empedon estin: (Hom. Liad. 5) I have strength at command, Sueton. in vita
eius.
of men and women in their prime, of parents and friends who have lived many
years with us. Therefore let us refrain the madness of those that are past all
feeling, who even are in opinion sure to live, when their life is at an end,
and believe that death is far away, even when they feel it. Let us therefore
1. imitate David, who commonly delivered up his spirit in tuition unto God, as
if he had been instantly to die, although he knew that both his life and
time were in Gods hand: Psalm 31, 5.15.
Or as the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, Acts 15.16.
who gave up their lives for our Lord Jesus, and behaved themselves as every
day to depart the world. And though we may live long, yet to account our
selves to have received the sentence of death: Ezekiel. 18.20.
(The soul that sins shall dye the death) and so trust no more in our
selves, but in God who is only able to deliver us from death, 2 Cor: 1.9, 10.
and though we were already dead, shall raise us to life again. A Heathen
counsels us to think every day of our life the last, much more a Christian
should think so, Greg. Mor. lib. 8. cap. 11.
(quia enim vita indesinenter labitur, spes ei vivendi amputatur) because life
does go away without ceasing, he is cut off from hope of life.

Secondly, seeing our life is only granted by a repreevall, and that during
the pleasure of God, we know not what day or hour to be taken out; and
therefore let us put off the love and immoderate care of this world. As he that
is condemned to die takes no pleasure in shows or triumphs of joy, gives off
all the former care he took of the world, to enrich himself, and be settled
for many years: and so this I say brethren, 1 Cor 7.29, 30, 31.
(says Paul) because the time is short, that they that have wives, be as if
they had none, and they that weep, as though they wept not, and they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy, as though they
possessed not, and they that use this world, as though they used it not, for
the fashion of this world goes away.

Thirdly, let us follow our Saviors example, While it is day let us work,
John 9, 4.
the night comes wherein no man can work: Or as Solomon exhorting us to the
same purpose, Eccles. 9, 10.
All that thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power, for there is
neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou go. Our time is short, our business is great: When the Angel of God
fed Eliah, it is written, that he did eat and drink, 1 Kings 19.6, 7
and returned and slept; The Angel of the Lord came unto him, and said, Up, for
thou have a great journey, even forty days and forty nights travel, to come
to Horeb the (...) teach us how we should reckon our time, To teach us to
account it so, and to measure it.
and consequently to bestow our selves accordingly. Moses reckoned thus, and
prayed, that he and others might ever do so: Psalm: 90, 12
Teach us (O Lord) to number our days. Though Jacob numbered his years to
Pharaoh, yet he subdivides them into days; Few and evil have the days of my
life been. Gen: 47, 9.
David counted by days, Psalm: 39, 6.
Lord thou have numbered my days like a span. And because we ought to reckon
nearer, lest we lose a day idly, our Savior has divided our time into hours,
John 11, 9.
Are there not twelve hours in the day? He reckoned his own watching by the
hour, Mark 14, 37.
and reproved his Disciples for not doing the like, Could ye not watch with me
one hour? Peter counted thus, Acts 2, 15.
when he told the Jews, It was not the third hour of the day. And as men
that get no rest, count all the hours of the night, so Paul and other
Christians persecuted in his time, counted their times into hours: 1 Cor: 4,
11.
Unto this hour we both hunger and thirst, are naked, and are buffetted, etc.

And our labors accordingly. Psalm: 90, 12.
And as the Saints of God did thus count their time, so they measured their
work by the time: Moses desired to count his days, that he might apply his
heart unto wisdom: the instructing of the people, ministering of justice,
providing materials for the Tabernacle, and sacrifices, penning of Scripture,
and praying for himself and the peohle, suffered him not to make idle hours
in the Wilderness. Job lost not a day for exercise of religion, Job 1, 5.
besides his manifold worldly business, for he offered sacrifice every day.
David (notwithstanding his great affairs in ruling a Kingdom, yet) often used
at evening, Psalm: 55, 17.
morning and noone days to pray, Psalm. 119, 164.
and sometimes withdrawed himself seven times to prayer, and would rise at
midnight to pray, Psalm. 6, 6.
or use his bed for a Chapel to weep in Daniel, one of three for governing
many kingdoms, used continually holy exercises of private prayer three times a
day: And to be brief, Dan: 6, 10.
our blessed Savior spent his time by day, teaching in the Temple, Luke 21, 37.
and in the night on the Mount of Olives in prayer: his Disciples spent day and
night (as occasion caused) in laboring with their hands, preaching and prayer:
Totum temporis spatium quod inter auroram and vesperam intercedit, in pia
quadam exercitatione collocant, etc. Cibum autem aut potionem ante solis
occasum nemo illorum. capit. Quippe divinae sapientiae studium, quo se
involvunt lucem promereri iudicant: corporis autem necessitates tenebras solum
merito sibi vindicare. Philo uti citat. in Eus^t. Paw. Eccles. hist. lib. 2
cap. 16
And great is the commendation that Philo (the learned Jew) gives to the
Christians in Egypt in Saint Marks time, how and in what holy exercises they
spent the day only for the good of the soul, accounting the necessities of
the body to be supplied and cared for rather in the night: which customs being
used in other places, in process of time they divided the night into several
watches, (of which I will speak hereafter) by all which appears, how
careful the true servants of God have been to count and employ their time.

But ignorance being the mother of presumption, it appears, that this is one
of the marks of reprobate men, (because they know not how precious the time
is) to make a count of many years, but care not how they bestow them. If God
gave time according to their desire, they would at least choose the years of
Methusalah: The rich man counted not his life by days, but counted a part of
his life to be the sum of many years: Luke 12, 19.
and it is the property of an evil servant, to say, My master does defer his
coming. Matthew: 24, 48.
As they count their time lightly gotten, so they intend to bestow it lavishly,
in feasting, gameing and sleeping; but most of them with the evil servant, to
commit all manner of violence and oppression: and because they never counted
their time by days and hours, they ever find Christ's promise true, that
their master will come in a day when they looked not for him, and in an hour
that they are not aware of.

Learn therefore to number your days, and as the Wiseman says, Ecclus.
14.14. Be not disappointed of the good day, but so employ it, that the time be
not lost without some fitting gain to soul and body, according as the times
are convenient. This is verbatim out of Suetonius in the life of Tit. Flau.
Vespas. Augus. Sect. 7.
It is a memorable example of an Heathen Emperor, Titus Vespasian, who calling
to mind one time as he sat at supper, that he had done nothing for any man
that day, he uttered this memorable and praiseworthy Apophthegme, "My friends
I have lost a day. O what lost time have we to answer for, wherein we have
neither done good to others nor our selves! Let them that love glasses to see
their faces in, look also upon houre-glasses, to see how their time goes away
and comes not again.

[Watch therefore, for you know not the day nor the hour, etc.]
Lastly follows the charge. Seeing we know all these things, how careful
should we be that death and judgment overtake us not when we are sleeping in
sin, and without thought of heaven or hell? Better it is to watch and to be
saved, than sleep and be destroyed.

We have herein to be considered three things. 1. The meaning of the word
[Watch.] 2. The persons to whom this watch is spoken. 3. What is required for
performance of it.

The word is used from warfare, in which the army ever count themselves to be
in danger, (if the enemy be not certainly known to be far off,) and
therefore adventure not to sleep, without spies appointed and set in the most
convenient places, to perceive the approach of the enemy, and with a loud
voice, when danger is at hand, may sound an alarm to awake others to stand to
their defense. So soon as any lessons of military discipline were given, this
was accounted one most necessary of all. And for the better performance of the
charge (which stood them all on their lives) it was counted dangerous to trust
a whole nights watching to one man, they divided the night into four parts, by
the name of watches, though in these parts of the world it was necessary that
the watches be changed oftener than four times. This constitution has been
long used; for it is written, that Gideon came upon the host of the Midianites
in the beginning of the middle watch: Judge. 7, 19.
1 Samuel 11 11.
and Saul upon the Ammonites in the morning watch. From hence it came to be
used as a common division of the night; David says, He waited on the Lord more
than the morning watch did for the morning. Psalm. 130 6.
Mat 14, 25.
Christ came walking on the sea in the fourth watch: and uses the same
division in this exhortation, in these words, Watch therefore, Mark 13, 35.
for ye know not when the master of the house will come, at even, or at
midnight, at the cocke-crow, or in the dawning. This exercise was used by holy
people in religion, 1 Samuel: 2, 22. Pet. Mart. in Iud. 7, 19. In vita Hilario^.
as by those women at the Tabernacle which the sons of Eli abused: And Jerome
reports of the watches kept in his time, whole nights at the graves of holy
men, which being intended for holy conference, meditation, and praising of God;
by continuance in the time of darkness, caused much intemperance, and gave way
to lascivious persons for diverse sorts of wickedness: whose effects are to be
seen in the Wakes observed in some places, which are the fruits of the former
superstition: Of which I say thus much, (though they were used as first
intended, to the remembrance of holy men, that their life and actions might
relish the better for imitation, yet) with the Apostle, that bodily exercise
profits little: 1 Timothy: 4, 8.
and how little profit this kind of exercise has done to the Church,
appears by the effects of it, which have been no better than those among the
Gentiles, Of Ianus is said Quam multas matres f^cerat ille Deus. Ovid. Trist.
lib. 2. Joseph: Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 4.
in which diverse fornications and adulteries have been committed, and
fathered upon the Idols; as one (which Josephus named) with a Gentlewoman in
Rome, had been put and reputed to the kindness of the god Anubis, and the
woman with her husband Saturnius, very thankful to the Idol and the Priests of
it, if Decius Mundus who had abused her, had kept his own counsel, and not
cast it despitefully in her teeth. A French man has in this particular
unmasked their wickedness to the world.
Certainly if a rabble who are canonized for Saints by the Romish Church, whose
mothers were Nuns, were duly enquired of, they shall be found (according as
their friends and Confessors of their mothers avouched it to the world) to be
the children of Ghostly Fathers indeed. But omitting these abuses, our
watching for Christ is only our Christian preparation, by a holy carriage, and
often remembrance, yea and longing for his coming, which is better understood
by practice than preaching.

Now for the persons that should watch. No man is free from this charge: and
lest any should conceive immunity, our Savior tells us, Mark. 13, 37.
That which I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. From the highest to the
lowest, none can have liberty to think himself out of danger, for the
destruction of the soul, or preventing it, lies upon watching. What persons
should watch.
There are four sorts of persons in this world whose danger must be prevented
by watching, Soldiers, Shepherds, Seamen, and Citizens.

Soldiers beset with their enemies, 1. Soldiers.
how great their danger is every man does conceive; even to be no less than
their life, if at any hour they watch not. So are we who are Christ's soldiers
in this life, if ever we be careless of sin, fearelesse of Satan, our souls
will presently be betrayed, if not altogether destroyed. In war a league may
be made between enemies, or a time of truce, because of some common
inconvenience, but between Satan and every soul there is such a hatred, that
though we would wish sometimes for ease and rest, yet unless Satan has taken
and possessed the soul, Mat. 12, 43.
he goes through dry places, seeking rest and finds none; Theophilact. in
Matthew: 8, 29.
yea he thinks it a torment unto him, not to be tormenting or betraying the
poor soldiers of Christ: 2 Cor: 6, 14.
There can be no agreement between the Prince of darkness and children of
light: And if peace were possible with Satan, yet were it more dangerous than
open war, for he destroys none, but those to whom he seems a friend, and
is at peace and league with; none can perish that stands on his guard. Saint
James who was not ignorant of his practices, Iam: 4, 7.
says Resist the Devil, and he shall fly from you. Now because the Devil is
never weary, but is ever assaulting, Gregor.
(ut saltem tedio vincat, quos vi vincere non potest) that he may at least
overcome them with weariness, whom he could not by violence; therefore every
soul should watch and look about him. St. Paul, when he appoints every
Christian soul with armor, he exhorts them to consider what power, what
despitefulnesse and cunning they have to deal withal, ends all his
instruction with setting a sure watch, in these words, Ephesians. 6.18.
And watch with perseverance. All of us are sworn soldiers, and therefore all
must watch, or else perish.

2 Shepherds 1 Samuel: 17, 34.
Secondly, Shepherds must watch or they can not prevent danger. David was a
good watcher of his flock, and thereby saved them from the Lion and the Bear.
So the Lord has appointed everyone to take care of the soul committed unto
him, lest the Lion or Bear take it from him. This is like the charge of Vriah
the Hittite, 2 Samuel: 12.3, 4.
We have one little sheep, which we nourish up with us, it eats of our
bread, drinks of our cup, sleeps in our bosom; now one that had many more,
must needs have this one, which was all the man had. The covetous and
malicious hearts are never filled: Satan being chained to eternal darkness,
with the legions of his damned fellows, are not satisfied with their own
torments, but labor to catch one of Christ's flock from every one that has it
committed to his charge; and therefore it stands every man upon it, to look to
that one soul, (a member of the Flock redeemed with the blood of the Son of
God) that Satan devour it not. Acts 20, 28.
St. Peter has given this charge of Christ's in this manner, exhorting every
man to beware of the enemy of Christ's flock, in these words, Watch, 1 Pet. 5,
8.
for your adversary the Devell goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he
may devour.

Thirdly, Seamen must be watchful, 3 Seamen. Navis enim sive lignum cum quo
transimus hoc mare, est hoc corpus quod est vas fragile, etc. Helwici^ lib. de
similitud. lib. 1. cap. 51.

Sic pereunt in mari hoc magno and spatioso, sic pereunt miseri, etc. Bernar.
Ser. 1. Advent.


who in storms are in danger to be swallowed in the deep, or burst asunder
upon Rocks, yea though it were calm, they are in danger that the Vessel
receive not in water; and though they have past many dangers, yet they are not
safe: So we live as upon the broad sea, ready at all times to be drowned in
sin, and swallowed up by destruction, no man can assure himself to be free
from danger: The great nets of Satan are continually open, his secret baits
are ever in our way. And though we were not loaded with occasions, nor entised
by sundry devices, to undo our selves by sin, yet the inward corruption we
have is enough to keep us in continual fear, lest we draw in iniquity like
water, and so sink down to destruction. And though we have escaped long, yet
we may not adventure to sleep, for in one hour we may perish, Vltima me
perdunt, imoque sub aequore mergit, incolumem toties una procella ratem. Ovid.
Trist. lib. 3.
and make the lamentation of many, that our last deeds have undone us, who
have escaped Satan's fury so long, as a ship that has long traveled safely,
is devoured in one storm. And therefore seeing our spiritual danger is no
less than our bodily danger, who are ever upon sea, we have reason to be
watchful, and expect the same time of our arrival in the Haven where we would
be.

4. Citizens, Masters of Households.
Lastly, Citizens and Masters of housholdes ought to be watchful, common
dangers are incident to both, thieves are busy to take advantage of time, and
fire may then most prevail, if it be not carefully heeded. All of us claim to
be Citizens of heaven, we have the treasure and dispensation of grace, kept in
earthly vessels; our houses are of clay, thieves may easily break through and
rob us. We are likewise Masters of a house, our house the Apostle calls our
earthly body, 2 Cor: 5, 1.
in which are placed our senses, wherein dwell the powers of the reasonable
soul. Our senses are weak to resist the darts of the Devil or power of
Satan, and which is worse, they are as so many open gates, which are ready to
receive all uncleanness, and so overthrow the soul. Satan is ever busy to
steal away all the remainder of grace that is in us, and if we sleep but a
little, he will sow his tares among the good corn the Lord has sown in us
before. And besides, there is no City nor house more subject to be destroyed
by fire, than we are by our own lusts, which Satan taking the best advantage
of (if we neglect but a little) is blown and kindled up, that hardly can they
be quenched again, repentance and floods of tears are little enough to allay
the fury of them, but before they be put out, we must be sprinkled with the
blood of Christ. David fell to be careless, sin entered into his soul, his
concupiscence gave flame, wherein he dangered the soul of himself, and
destroyed the lives of many; so that the saying of Job is true, Job 3^, 12.
that our lust is a sire that shall devour to destruction, and root out all
our increase: or as the translation called Ieromes has it, omnia virtutu^
genimina eradicans, that is, it rooteth out all the buds of virtue, and makes
sin flourish in stead of them. These dangers we have in us, either to lose
the grace of God given us, or to have it burnt and choked by Satan's cunning;
and therefore no means to prevent and disappoint him, but to watch and resist
him and the occasions of sinning. Our Savior gives this same exhortation of
watching, with the same reasons of his sudden coming, and our careful
looking that sin surprise us not, and shows his blessedness that does
accordingly, in these words, Behold I come as a thief, Revel. 16, 15.
blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked,
and men see his filthiness.

Thus as a Commander charge all under his government to watch, and stand to
their guard, under the pain of losing their life honor and all: So our Lord
Jesus Christ who knows our danger, has given us charge to watch, or else we
shall undoubtedly perish: we are ever assaulted for our soul, and when our
life shall be called for we know not; Horat.
(Horae autem momento, aut certa mors venit, aut victoria laeta) and in a
moment, either comes certain death, or a joyful victory.

Now though every one be here charged to watch for themselves, The great charge
of Ministers of the Church.
that they may he prepared to stand before the Lord in his coming: yet there
are some that are both to watch their own souls, and the souls of others,
even those who are both to watch (ex officio) by charge and calling unto it,
and who have received their names, to put them in remembrance of their charge,
the Watchmen of Israel, Ezekiel: 3, 1. 1 Samuel: 9, 9. Ezekiel: 34, 2. Acts 20, 28.
Seers, Shepherds, ((...)) Bishops or Overseers of the flock which God has
bought with his own blood. Of all others their charge is heaviest in this
watching, their account shall be most sharply exacted; and as Christ lost not
one of all them whom the Father committed unto him, so they shall be charged
with every soul that perishes by their negligence. The Lord charge Ezekiel
to be a Watchman upon this peril, Ezekiel: 3, 18.
that if he gave not warning to the wicked man, he should die in his iniquity,
but his blood should be required of him: To whom much is committed, of him much
shall be required: and when the Lord gives each one according to his works,
most severe judgment shall be unto them that are set over others: Wisd. 6.5.
And therefore Churchmen are to consider what danger both their own and the
souls of others are in, if once they grow careless, or sleep in sin
without awaking, and if they be not ever careful to watch in prayer, and
declare to their charge by crying and admonition, what danger they foresee them
in, and by their example lead them the way, by which they may escape the
snares which Satan has laid for them. Now if they fail in their watching,
they may see their danger by example of others whose charges are lighter: Their
danger in unwatchfulnes to be seen in the examples of
Of all sorts of men sleeping is most dangerous in three; Shepherds, Pilots,
Watchmen of towns, or those who keep Gates.

First, it is dangerous for a shepherd to sleep, 1 Shepherds
because thieves are ever watching opportunity, and when others betake them to
rest, (ut jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones) then thieves betake them
to their occupation. The flock is also subject to be devoured, and dispersed
abroad by wild beasts, whereof are numbers of diverse sorts, for when it is
night, Psalm. 104, 20
all the beasts of the forest creep forth, and hunt after their prey. If
therefore the shepherd sleep, (though while he wake he be as watchful as
Argus) yet he may lose some of his flock, and his own life too: and though in
body he escape danger, yet having a charge whatsoever is lost he must make it
good, Jacob said to Laban, Whatsoever was torn of beasts, Gen 31, 39.
I brought it not to thee, but made it good my self, of mine own hands did
thou require it, were it stolen by day or by night. In like manner, when the
shepherd of souls falls slack or negligent over the flock, then does Satan
fall on work, begins to roar after his prey; some he drives before him in
the way of all wickedness, because there is none to rescue them, nor to turn
the sinner from his evil way; others he binds up in the bundell of ignorance,
because there is none to hold out a light unto their feet, nor a lantern unto
their steps; and to make all sure, he smites the shepherd, and then takes his
time to gather the remainder, and makes the place where once Gods name was
called upon, to become a den of thieves, the valley of darkness, and shadow
of death. Miserable experience had the Jews of all this proceeding, before
they were carried to Babylon; and the Christian Church, when their watchmen
fell to sleep, Satan came out among them, and raged many years, This is at
large proved by the table of taxes in Muscul. com. plac. Nundin. Pontif (...).
de Ministris verb. Dei.
filled the world with old wives fables, ghosts and apparitions, and made such
way for his kingdom, that he obtained the Visible Christian Church to be
disposers of liberty for every kind of sin. Blessed be God, who has
delivered us from the open power of darkness, and has not left our salvation in
the dispose of the confederates of darkness. We are therefore to beware, that he
overcome us not again; we are not ignorant of his practices, how he labors
in every private Congregation; Rev. 2, 13.
he had a throne in the Congregation of Pergamus, and in process of time
obtained all. Mat: 24.
Who is that faithful steward, whom God has set over his house, to give them
moate in due season, let him hear the last exhortation which Paul gave to
Timothy a little before his death: But watch thou in all things, suffer
adversity, 2 Timothy: 4, 5.
do the work of an Evangelist, cause thy Ministry to be truly liked of;
according to his own example, by which he exhorts the Elders of Ephesus,
Watch, and remember, Acts 20, 31.
that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one both day and
night with tears.

Secondly, 2. Pilots.
it is dangerous to have a sleepy Pilot in a ship, whose negligence may be
the overthrow of many others. It is all one to be without a Pilot, as to have
one that is not watchful: but to be without one, is to want the ordinary
means to be saved, Acts 27, 31.
according as St. Paul said to the Centurion, Except these abide in the ship,
you cannot be safe. But if (like Jonas) he be heavy and sleepy in time of
danger, Prove. 23, 34.
as it were in the Sea or topmast, what hope have the company to be saved? In
like manner, the flock of Christ in this world, is tossed between wind and
wave, Satan buffets them with storms, the gate of affliction is ever open to
receive them; but if there be a Messenger amongst them, or an interpreter, one
of a thousand, Job 33.23, 24.
to declare to them the way of righteousness, then will the Lord have mercy
upon them, and say, deliver them that they go not down in to the pit, for I
have received a reconciliation. Therefore there is a great charge laid upon a
Pilot of the Church, that the Apostle says, 2 Cor: 2, 16.
Who is sufficient for these things? St. Augustine found a great weight of it
in himself, who fled from many places, lest he should be urged to take this
charge upon him, and at length when he could escape no longer, Gul. Paris. de
vitijs par. 6. ut citatur in destructor. vicior. part. 5. cap. 10. C.
says, In nullo sentio Deum mihi magis iratum, sicut in hoc, quod cum indignus
essem poni ad remum, positus sum ad gubernandum in apice regiminis Ecclesiae: I
feel not God more angry with me in any thing than this, that when I was
unworthy to be set to an oar, I am placed to rule in the chief government of
the Church. And these are the words of S. Bernard, Quid ego infoelix, quo me
vertam? etc. Bern^r. Ser. 3. Advent.
What shall I do unhappy man, whither shall I turn me, if I shall happen to
be negligent in keeping that precious thing which Christ has judged to be more
precious than his own blood? If I had gathered the blood of our Lord, as it
dropped from him on the Cross, and it were kept by me in a vessel of glass,
which behooved often to be carried about, what could I think in so great a
danger? But certainly I have received that thing to keep, for which a Merchant
that was not unwise, (for it was even wisdom it self) gave the aforesaid
blood; but I have this treasure in earthen vessels, unto which more dangers are
imminent than to glass. And which adds unto the heap of my cares, and
weight of my grief, that being of necessity bound, for the keeping of my own,
and the conscience of my neighbor, neither of both is well known unto me,
both are a depth unsearchable, both are as the dark night unto me: and
notwithstanding the watching of both are required at my hands; and it is cried,
Watchman, what see thou in the night? Esaias 21, 11.
I must not say with Cain, Am I my brothers keeper? Gen 4, 9.
But I must humbly confess with the Prophet, Psalm. 127, 1.
Except the Lord keep the City, the watcher keeps in vain, etc. Here is a
wonderful modesty and watchfulnes in these holy men; what shall we answer to
God, who are puffed up as if we had all knowledge, and so careless as if we
had no charge to be required at our hands?

Thirdly, 3 Porters, Watchmen, Sentinells.
it is dangerous for Porters of Cities, or Watchmen of Towns, or of an Army
to be given to sleep. If while a Porter has the gates open he fall on
sleep, the enemies have way and time to take the City: So if the Minister is
not careful, Satan privily, sin openly, instruments of heresies and
divisions rush in upon their flocks. If the Porter shut the gate, and fall on
sleep, then is the passage stopped, that they cannot go to others, nor others
come to them. The Stewards of Christ have the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
(the Word and Sacraments in their custody) if they take away the key of
knowledge, the people are barred; Christ is the Way, Ioh: 14.
who is only to be seen and found in his Word, which being kept from us, we
are locked out of heaven: For as Eliah his word was a means (for a time) to
open and shut heaven; so the word of God committed unto the Ministers, is the
key whereby we see the heaven open, and Jesus at the right hand of God, and get
way to go unto the Holiest of all. If Watchmen sleep, then is the Army or
City betrayed, which they have in charge; and for their negligence (though no
hurt ensue) if it be known, the law adjudgeth them to die: So if the Watchmen
of the Church grow careless, they do what in them lies, to betray the flock
of Christ, and therefore their security is the messenger of death. A wake
therefore, beloved brethren, quite your selves like men, show your selves
leaders of your flock through this worldly wilderness, with watching and
carfulness, until you have placed them before the Lord in glory. Hebr: 12,
20, 21
The God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great
shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make
you perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in you that which is
pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever and
ever, Amen.

What is required for performance of this Christian Watching.
EVery Watchman must in the first place be able for performance, and the next,
faithful in discharging the trust committed unto him. By these two does Christ
choose out his true watchmen, Mat: 24, 45.
saying, Who is that faithful servant and wise? Wisdom to enable, and
faithfulness to make him careful in his place. The want of either of the two,
must be the cause of betraying all that he has in trust. Many of Gods
servants, faithful to God in all their intents, have by weakness and
unability fallen and given advantage unto sin, as David and Peter. Others
labor to make show of their careful serving of God, and ablenes in every
work of religion, but they deal not faithfully with God, nor with their own
foul, but are full of hypocrisy, and without contradiction, give way to all
uncleannes to enter and overcome them. And therefore that the watchful
Christian may be truly able, and truly careful to keep himself watchful
and undefiled for his Masters coming, Conditions required in a Watchman.
we are to consider wherein both of these consist.

The sum of the conditions are these. A watchman must be able in body, able
in preparation. In his body he must have a good eye, a quick ear, a good
tongue, and able hands. His preparation must be inward and outward. Inward,
that the mind be not troubled with the cares of this life; that the body be not
overcharged with excess of meat and drink, which may make him heavy and
sleepy. Outward, that he be well furnished with armor to defend himself, and
be ready to join in the common defense. Lastly, in his charge he must be
faithful, that is, diligent to mark and spy out all danger, and give true
notice of it unto others. All sorts of persons who are charged to watch, in
whatsoever kind of charge, must be thus prepared and appointed, or in kind
answerable hereunto, which by comparison herewith may easily appear: Much more
the servant of Christ, who has the Image of God in custody, a soul and body
appointed for a heavenly kingdom, continually assaulted, and in danger to be
taken by Satan, detained by wickedness, and to be committed unbaleable unto the
torments of hell for ever.

1. A watchman must have a good eye, 1 A good eye.
the light of the body is the eye, says Christ, yea the sight of the whole
Army (for the time) is the eyes of sentinels and watchmen, and from this they
have the name of watchmen, Esaias 21, 6.
according to the words of the Prophet, Go set a watchman to tell what he
sees. So every Christian must have a good eye, to spy out the devices of our
spiritual enemy. Satan comes privately, and then is nearest, when we think him
to be far off, and assailes us by those means, which we least suspect. It is
all one to him, what sin it is that overthrow us, so he be sure we be detained
in his power by one or other: and hereby he deceives many thousands, who are
watchful in some things, and esteem Satan to lie hid in some sins, but
account other wickednesses to be the lawful actions of a Christian, wherein
Satan has no hand at all. Thus having lost the right eye, (as Nahash would
have picked out of the Israelites) and accounting Satan an enemy when he comes
in the grossest fashion, 1 Samuel 11.
but a friend when he comes as an Angel of light, their soul is betrayed, and
in the end they find that they were in the way of destruction. The common
religion professed and practiced in these places and times, may give godly
hearts great occasion of mourning, to see how many souls Satan has in
captivity by this unwatchfulnesse. These words are out of Oliver Pigg on Psalm.
101. page 4^. which book was printed at London, Anno 1591.
They will be the zealous professors of religion, and abhorrers of lewd persons,
who only make conscience of murder, theft, adultery, fornication, drunkenness,
and open blasphemy: but they are profaners of the Sabbath by journeyes,
markets, accounts casting, and sending servants here and there; they be cruel
and oppress, they extort and draw out the lives of the poor; they be proud,
they make no scruple at all to spend that riotously, and in vain unnecessary
pomp, which ought to be laid out to maintain Gods service. I speak what I
know and daily see, I measure not the consciences of any by my private
judgment, nor speak these words as mine own: but think him a true
Christian, in whose life we find not these latter and common faults of the
professors of our time, but walks with a straighter foot in the way of
godliness. Satan knew Eve to be the weaker of the two, and therefore laid
battery at the salvation of man rather in her than in Adam: So where Satan
spies thee weakest, hold thine eye to that place, there he intends to surprise
thee, knowing it a fruitless labor to assault thee with those vices, of whose
beastliness thou art ashamed. Art thou given to covetousnes, beware that thou
hunt not after all occasions, and prosecute all means of catching riches, by
which thou shall fall into the snare of the Devil; and so of other
particulars, in which Satan takes advantage, where we are least circumspect.
Yea even the most holy men are to be watchful, least they be surprised by that
same virtue, in which they labor most; no godly action, but it has a sin
that carries show of it: We see craftines and deceit to draw near to wisdom,
cruelty to justice, rashness to fortitude, prodigality to liberality,
superstition to religion, presumption unto hope, cowardlines unto fear,
negligence and sluggishnes to humility; that the servant of Christ must be
watchful in all his actions, that he receive not the poison, whilst he
labors for the honey. This in particular St. Paul expresses, as a most
necessary part in a watchman, beseeching the Romans to mark diligently, Rom:
16.17, 18, 20.
and avoid their enemies, who with fair and flattering speech deceive the
hearts of the simple; to the doing whereof he promises, that the God of peace
shall tread Satan under their feet.

2 A good ear.
2. A watchful Christian must have a good ear, to discover thereby what he
cannot perceive with his eyes. The watchmen of the Midianites could not
perceive the Israelites come upon the^ for the darkness, Judge: 7, 11.
nor espy Gideon that was among their tents; and because their ears were dull,
(or rather stopped by God) they had no means to prevent their destruction. A
watchman therefore must listen, and give ear, that by noise he may discern the
approach of the enemy, if he cannot plainly see him. The seed of sin enters
into the soul by the eyes and ears, as two gates into which the blasts of
Satan do enter, which set our corruption on fire. This ear was the part by
which sin entered into mankind, and by which he overcommeth unstable souls,
plying them with wicked counsels, with malicious and bitter words, lying
reports, filthy and corrupt communications; that though men were blind, Satan
has this way to come into the soul to overcome it; We ought to learn to
discern the voice of the enemy; Satan is a lying Spirit, 1 Kings 22, 22.
and dwells in the mouth of false Prophets, and counterfeit Christians, as well
as he did sometimes in the mouth of the Serpent. John 8, 44.
We must not therefore believe every one that speaks, but try their spirits
whether they be of God or not. 1 John 4, 1.
Many speak with the voice of Satan, but they themselves know not what spirit
they are of: Mark 8, 33.
Peter spoke as if Satan had possessed him, when he counseled Christ to avoid
death; James and John spoke cruelly, Luke 9, 54, ^5.
when they desired Samaria to be burnt: Christ says to Peter, Get thee
behind me Satan, to teach us how to use the counsel of Satan, for our ears
are framed to hear what is spoken before our face; and therefore whatsoever
has an other voice than the word of God, to reject it, and give it no hearing,
because that Satan is aiming in it to betray the soul.

3. The Christian soldier must have a good tongue, to give warning when danger
is at hand, 3 A good tongue
that is, he must have means to awake both soul and body, to stand to
defense, to resist sin entering into the soul. The voice that is best heard
is the fear of Gods wrath and eternal death to ensue: and therefore we ought
ever to have before our eyes, Rom: 1, 18.
that the wrath of God is declared from heaven against all ungodlines, Psalm:
50, 21.
and that he will lay our sins in order before us, and give us a portion with
Satan and his Angels: and as we fear not him when we are to commit sin, so
he will not favor us when we are to be punished, at a day and hour when we
looked least for his coming.

4. The Christian watchman must have good hands, he must be courageous and
valiant, 4 Good hands.
to fight as well as to watch: without this valor he cannot be a watchman, who
must needs be a soldier: Quid praescire juvat, Sir Th: Moore Epigram.
quae patiere tamen? what boots to know the evils we needs must suffer? All
the servants of Christ must be valorous, to resist sin and Satan, and fight
against the^ so long as they live. Gain and glory are most powerful to
increase valor against sin, Cic. Tusc. quest. lib. 1.
Omnes incenduntur ad studia gloria: Let us therefore set before us the high
price of our calling, and the voice of Christ, saying, To him that overcommeth
will I give, to sit upon a throne: 2 Timothy: 2, 5.
and seeing no man is crowned except he fight as he ought, let us search out
sin in all the corners of soul and body, and prosecute it with the terror of
the Almighty, and fight against it with the word and command of God.

5. Not troubled with worldly cares. 2 Timothy: 2, 4.
The second part of our ability to watch consists in preparation, which must 1.
be of the soul, that the mind be not troubled with the love and care of this
world. No man (says St. Paul) that warreth, intangleth himself with the
affairs of this life, because he would please him that has chosen him to be a
soldier; much less he who is continually employed both to watch and fight. So
Christ exhorts us in our watching and preparing for his coming, Take heed to
your selves, Luke 21, 34.
lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with the cares of this life, and
lest that day come upon you at unawares. He that has his heart fixed on the
cares of this life, can have no heart to watch for another life, neglecting
this life which he loves so well: For though the world obtained cannot fill the
heart, nor content the desire of man, yet the love, desire and care of it being
not obtained, does so take up and fill the heart, that he is in continual
heavines, and cannot think upon any thing, but how to satisfy his desire. Yea
the love of the world is contrary to Christian watchfulness, for it inlargeth
our heart unto all lust, and has the object only fit, to make us increase more
and more in sin. St. John by the same reason exhorts us to sequester our
minds from it, 1 John 2, 15
Love not the world, neither the things, in the world, for all that is in the
world, is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life.
Therefore we must conclude a separation between our minds and the transitory
things of this world, and make them a ladder, upon which we may mount up to
heaven, Eusebius. Emiss. de Ascen. Dom. Ser. 1.
(sublimabunt nos si fuerint infra nos) if they be under us, and not cared for,
they will mount us up to heaven, and not burden us, or make us heavy in mind,
or careless of the danger of sin, and sodainnes of death, of which we are
incontinual danger.

2. Our bodies must be prepared for watching, 6. No glutton nor drunkard.
with needful nourishment. Old men because their strength fails them, must (as
Jacob did) get a staff to rest on; but in our nature there is such a weakness,
that the youngest grow faint, weak, and wither away, as if they were blasted
with old age, if they be not supported with the staff of bread. An army of
Saul's, 1 Samuel: 14, 31.
that (in pursuit of the enemy) fasted one day, was exceeding faint: and
Jonathan, though young and strong, yet his eyes waxed dim as if he had been
old. Therefore they must be continually enabled by the use of the creatures, by
which the senses may be kept sound, and the spirits in continual vigor. But
in this necessity there is an ensuing danger, for nothing is more dangerous to
a watchman, than too much of meat and drink, because it makes him heavy and
sleepy, that he can not watch. Luke 21.
So Christ exhorts us, Take heed lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and drunkenness, because they are the causers of sleepiness, and
send up such abundance of fumes and vapors to the brain, which cooling, do so
possess the place and first instrument of feeling, that the senses (for the
time) are without any sense or feeling. And they that use either gluttony or
drunkenness, become dull and heavy, senseles and careless of their estate or
honesty. Of al men this becomes not him who would watch and war against sin, A
man that cannot rule his appetite, is as a City that has no wall. Prove. 25,
28.
because even the actions of them are the wrath of God and punishment of former
sin, abominable sins in themselves, and a way made for the Devil to enter
and possess the soul, and make them ready for any wickedness that can be
devised. This is the way to betray Christianity, and to fight against all grace
and good motions, and finally to laugh at the terrors of it, and make men go
dancing through the causes of their mourning, and with laughter to act the
tragedy of their own destruction.

7 Furnished with armor.
3. A watchman must have outward preparation. We are safest when we are fully
appointed and armed; it is dangerous to be a naked sentinel, whose life is
most aimed at. St. Paul names the furniture to be a good and sincere
conscience, Ephesians. 6, 14.
a love to the Gospel, assured faith in the merciful promises of God,
knowledge and understanding of Gods word, and perseverance in prayers and
supplications: without this preparation it is in vain to think that we can be
able to resist in the evil day, or to prevent any never so well known danger.

Being thus prepared and furnished to stand against sin and Satan, 8 Faithful
and diligent.
and to watch for our Lords coming, there only remains, that the watchman be
faithful and diligent, to foresee all dangers, and to give a true and speedy
notice of them. In all the former conditions hypocrisy has place in most men;
but in this, hypocrisy is the direct enemy of our salvation, and the means
by which multitudes are conveyed to hell, who make show to be in continual
guard against all manner of wickedness, and to be as ever standing and knocking
at the gate of heaven, only to be so accounted of men: but in their secret
actions they labor to go to hell, without any knowledge or noise of the
world. And seeing the heart of man is deceitful above all things, it stands
every man upon it, to search and examine his heart, whether in his intents he
labor either to please the world, or to puff up himself with a conceit of
sincere life: or whether his eye be truly set upon the Lord, and the prise of
glory. This is only the means to draw us from deceiving our selves, and to
prevent us, that we labor not in vain.

To conclude all, let us remember, that death is certain, we must plead no
immunity; the time of it is uncertain, we must not plead security; it comes
hastily, we must therefore be hasty in preparation; this life is for
preparation, we must not plead inconveniency; and warning is given us of all
these things, therefore no place remains for ignorance.

Beloved, you hear your charge, you know your peril, now choose if you will
hear the counsel of Christ and his Apostles, all giving the same voice of
prevention; the labor is theirs, the profit is yours: the glory (whatsoever
you do) appertains to God, whose mercy is magnified in your salvation, and
whose justice is exalted by your destruction. Draw near (therefore) unto the
Lord, proclaim enmity to sin; if you cannot avoid all sin, yet stand to the
hatred of all; frame your life as you desire eternally to be, and your works
according as you would have them appear, and be rewarded in judgment: expect
that death shall ever knock at your doors, and remember that though we be
unreadie, yet death is ever ready, the grave never out of season, nor hell and
destruction ever satisfied. It is long since eternal glory was prepared for
you, hasten thither, let your hearts be there, remember the glory of Christ,
and what it were to be made like unto him. Call unto God to end your miseries,
to remove you to glory, and to be partakers with his Saints, of the blessed
presence of God, and of our Redeemer, and of the God of peace and love. Now to
him that is able to keep you that you fall not, Jude verse 24, 25.
and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with joy; Even
to God only wise, our Savior, be glory and majesty, and dominion and power,
both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

