A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS THE THIRTEENTH OF JUNE, THE SEcond sunday in
Trinity term 1591. by THOMAS BARN student in Divinity.

Brethren I exhort you to watch those that make divisions and offenses among
you, and decline from them. Romans 15. Cap. Frustra autem (vt ait quidam) niti,
neque nihil aliud litigando nisi ^dium quaerere extremae dementiae est.
Hieronymus ad Domnionem and Rogatianum. Nullum vitium est quod non a mendacio
sumit originem neque virtus cuius non sit origo veritas. Ioannes Maxentius
aduersus episcopum Ormisdae. printer's or publisher's device (...) ACADEMIA
OXONIENSI^ Veritas in (...) JOSEPH (...)



Printed at Oxford by JOSEPH BARNES, Printer to the University. 1591.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL GEORGE ROTHERHAM ESQVIER, HIGH Sheriff of
Bedforde-shiere: THOMAS BARN wishes peace and prosperity in Christ Jesus.
I PRESENT unto your worship a copy of that Sermon, the which I preached
publicly at Paul's Cross: in that I am already persuaded, that the doctrine
therein contained, is requisite and expedient for these days. The which when I
had considered, I found sundry and diverse men that had clothed themselves in
Pharisaicall garments, wherein was embrodered the sum of Christianity, they
themselves in the mean season altogether deprived of the grace of God. Faith
says the Apostle, it is the gift of God, and in vain tends all our
preaching, if the heart and soul of man be not prepared before by the
special assistance of Gods spirit: Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but
if God does not give the increase all tends to small effect.

The Virgins that slept, and had not their lamps burning, were forthwith
excluded the presence of the Bridegroom. The figtree, that had broad and
green leaves, and no fruit, once cursed, withered. So it falls out with us,
which in external show attend and expect the coming of the son of man, are
found at the last unfit to attend upon him, although we make glorious shows
of Christianity, and do not perform works of charity. These and such like
maladies have infected diverse, the which of a zeal have put forth themselves
before they were called, and in a vain presumption of humane learning, have
caused the weaker sort to follow them, and to rely upon them, that were not
able to upholde themselves. Such men were Eunomius, Vigilantius, whom Saint
Augustine in his second book entitled, quaestiones in Exodum, terms opicos
mures the which are spumei in sermrne and in fide parum sani: of whom Saint
Cyprian in his book de simplicitate praelotorum speaks in this wise. Hi sunt
qui se vltro apud temerarios conuenas sine diuina diuina dispositione
praeficiunt, qui se praepositos sine vlla ordinationis lege constituunt qui
nemine episcopatum dante episcopi nomen assumunt. The which words of their
blessed and aged father duly considered, lay open the preposterous course of
sundry leaders in these days, the which exclame against Caesar and his right
laboring as much as lies in them, to pluck up by the roots that which they
never planted.

So heady, that they will not stand to the truth received, preaching
contrarieties, of whom Irenaeus li. 3. ca. 15. speaks: Valentinus and
Ptolomaeus deliri and fanatici homines auditores suos, co^tradictores fecerunt,
as these can sufficiently approve. This Sermon diligently perused, lays open
the sinister means, and deceitful practices of these men, the which being
unstable in their doctrine (as the sundry change of the Church of Scotland)
approves: have at the last followed the steps of the Parmenian, to contempe
all men in respect of themselves, whom Optatus in his 2. book against Parme:
counsels and advises in this wise. Non enim spiritum Dei soli vobis
uindicare potestis aut includere quod intelligitur and non videtur, per mitte
deum vnde velit ire and quo velit accedere, habeat libertatem qui audiri potest
videri non potest. A kingdom divided in it self cannot stand, satan if he
were in arms against himself, his kingdom forthwith would be ended:
discord crept in among the Romans, and overthrew the Roman Empire. The parts
in man's body if they were at variance, life could not long continue said
Menenius Agrippa long ago. And so, si paruis componere magna liceret, The
Church of Christ cannot continue among us, since one preacher ioyeth to
contradict another: and delight in novelties, and few to be found that dares
oppose themselves to withstand these men, the which pretend conformity and
order, and practice nothing else but irregular disorder. Let the Church or
Scotland be diligently regarded: good God? What vptores and tumults has that
poor Island sustained by factious and seditious means and what has it
procured in the end but flat rebellion, such malcontents among us at home,
have as much as lies in the^ disgraced the established government of our
church as diverse books 15 years passed printed at Andwerp can sufficiently
testify: and these men to obtain a name and to enrich themselves have
procured a defection from our Church: contemning the Right Reverend fathers of
our Church and wilfully opposing themselves against al lawful authority
whatsoever. These me^ may very well be resembled to one Hermogenes of whom
Tertullian in his book the which he wrought against him reports that he
was homo in saeculo turbulentus, qui Loquacitatem facundiam existimat, and
impudentiam constantiam deputat, and malidicere singulis officium bonae
constantia iudicat. Such innouations in Religion are and have been dangerous
and when men are zealous in contention, then does God permit them to be
guided by their own discretion, and then that is approved a verity the which
the Philosopher gave out long ago, vno absurdo concesso mill sequuntur, when
a man has once made a breach into an absurdity, it is an easy matter to cause
him to grant al absurdities and contradictions whatsoever. These and the like
inconveniences to avoid with the which this age of ours abounds, I have set
down my sermon as I delivered the same at Paul's Cross, in the which I have
laid upon the causes of this schism and dissension with the which our Churh
of England is pestered, and the means to remove the same. But I am assured that
I do surdis canere cantilena^, to the^ especially that utterly reject the
authority of our Church. And frame unto themselves a kind of religion that
has altered the course of ours, delivered unto us by our fathers, the verity
whereof to approve where nothing else then if I should lucente sole lychnum
accendere. For the parties I would if I might choose not meddle with the^: they
stand not to any lawful authority, if scripture be urged, expounded by the
uniform consent of Christ his Church, the interpretation is rejected, and the
reason is at hand, the Church was then by heresy corrupted. If the Canons of
general councels be cited: for the peaceable and godly government of our
Church. The fathers that the^ lived did caecutire they had not so special
aportio^ of gods spirit as they have object unto them the estate of the Church
as it is now, ratified by invincible authorities of scripture, confirmed by the
ancient fathers heretofore, defended by the blessed hand of her majesty against
the greatest Monarchs in Europe at this day. Iamque faces and saxa volant
furor arma ministrat. And these are the men of whom Saint Hierom speaks in
his Commentaries upon the 5. Chapter of Saint Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians.
Qui semel fuerit furore superatus, necesse est vt profiliat in clamorem, and
turbide fremens huc atque illuc in modum fluuij ventiletur and dicat: O rerum
iniquitas: O iniusta Dei iudicia, and catera quae solent loqui, qui per
indignationis furorem, mentis iudicium per diderunt. These men I leave to their
own fantasies, and commend this my sermon unto your worship unto whom I
acknowledge my self in duty greatly bound desiring God to bless your worship
with many happy and prosperous years in this world to the glory of God and
your hearts desire.

Oxon*
The second Epistle of S. Peter 2. Cap. 1.2.3. verse. There were false Prophets
among the people: so likewise there shall be false teachers among you, which shall
bring in damnable heresies denying the Lord that redeemed them, bringing upon
themselves a speedy destruction, and many shall follow their riotousnesse, by
whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed. And in covetousness with pleasing
words, they shall buy and sell you, whose judgment that was long ago does
not linger and their destruction does not slumber.


THE Church of God the which the Apopostle Saint Paul terms the pillar and
the foundation of truth: is as Augustine writes upon the 28. Psalm, planted
in the midst of thorns and briers, omnes amici and nulli pacifici, Genesis 8.
says Hierom writing to Damasus. The crow that returned not, and the Dove
that brought an Olive branch were preserved from the general deluge by the
arch of Noah. Christ and his Church are one, therefore inseparable: Christ the
head, we his members. One God, one faith, one baptism. Is Christ divided? or
have we received any prerogative, but by the Cross of Christ? Saint Paul
gloried in this only, that he was crucified to the world, and the world unto
him. In these perilous and dangerous days, wherein every peculiar fantasy be
it never so ridiculous once shrouded under hypocrisy is accounted piety,
wherein likewise, quot auditores tot detractores, as many auditors, so many
detractors, I have thought it necessary, to stay them that are running headlong
to their own perdition and if it may be to pluck them out of the fire that
are already schorched, and to remove all occasion of schism and dissension,
that as God is a God of peace, so we likewise may endeavor to observe the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. The Apostle speaks unto us,
telling us, that in God there is no change or shadow of change, and if God be
always one and the same, we ought likewise to conform our selves unto him,
and to stand fast in that doctrine which we have received. And not to be carried
away, with every blast of vain doctrine. The Apostle Saint Peter in these
three verses propounds unto us, three several parts to be observed: The
first a prophetical prediction of the future calamities incident unto the
Church of Christ by false teachers contained in these words: There were false
Prophets among the people so likewise their shall be false teachers among you.
During the time of the law Iannes and Mambres, Balam the son of Bosor with
others seduced the Church of God: Pharisees and Saduces, Elymas and Simon
Magus, Alexander the copper smith, raised sedition among them Since their time
Diosciorus, Iouinian, Vigilantius issued forth, and these with Arrius and
Eunomius brake down the heads of the vineard (...), corrupting the word of God
and perverting the same. False prophets there were among the people so likewise
there shall be false teachers among you. The second contains in it a
description of them: They shall privily bring in sects, damnable sects denying
the Lord that redeemed them and shall bring upon themselves a sudden
destruction, many men shall follow their riotousnes, the way of truth shall be
blasphemed by them, and to enrich themselves, they shall buy and sell you,
according to their own disposition. The third is the rigorous and fearful
judgment of God that houereth over their heads seta equina by a twine thread
contained in these words The judgment of these men does not linger, and the
ruin and destruction of them all does not slumber. You see beloved, the scope
and final end of the apostle, his words are plain and manifest verified at
this day in the eyes and ears of you all: and the like event, that camp upon
them will also light upon us, in that we have divided the cote of Christ that
had no seame, and have dried up the ointment of unity that ran down upon
Aarons beard even unto the skert of his garment. Saint Paul perpending the
state of his time, protested plainly, that if he should labor to please men,
he could not be a Disciple of Christ. And I would to God that there were not
some to be found among us that will preach according to the direction of their
auditory from whence have risen divisions tending to the subuertion of
Christian faith and religion, And from this sort of men the Apostle exhorts
every one to depart. The harvest approaches the Master of the ground expects
a good croppe: but the tempestuous blast of schism and division, has shaken
the blade that the corn is perished, and he that thresheth the same shall well
perceive his labor to be lost. Men and brethren in this military expedition,
let every one be advised, how, and in what order he stands. He that is
persuaded that he is sure of foot, may fall, he that runs may forthwith
stumble: but in humility, let every one learn: for God resists the proud,
and applies himself to the humble, and has dealt mercifully with the poor
in spirit, when the rich men of the world have been sent empty away. The
Apostle S. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy cap. 4. The spirit speaks
plainly, that in the later days certain shall revolt from the faith. (...)
addicting themselves to spirits of error, Oecumenius in 4. cap. epist. ad
Timoth.
so Oecumenius speaks (...). That he that has once swarued from the verity
of Gods word, is presently carried away with every fantasy. In the infancy of
the Church sprang forth Cerinthus and Saturninus, in the second centenarie
issued forth Carpocrates and Montanus, in the third Nouatus and Sabellius, in
the fourth, Eunomius, Vigilantius, and Heluidius, in the fifth Pelagius and
Nestorius, in the sixth, Agnoitae, Monophysitae, in the seventh, Iacobitae and
Sergius, that retchlesse helhound, of whom Anastasius Bibliothecarius makes
mention. And in these latter days certain shall revolt from the faith, giving
attendance unto spirits of error, and doctrine of devils, as Palmerius did
with Menno the Anababtist, denying the deity of the son of God. As Francis
Ket did, not long since in Norwich, sounding forth innouations contrary to the
doctrine already received, with Brown and Barrow, making an external show of
piety, as the Puritanes in England do at this day: dividing themselves from
the Church of Christ, as withered branches, co^tending de lanae caprina, for
moonshine in the water, have among them a spotless spouse, as they term it,
in the which there is no direct or prescript form of prayer, but as the spirit
ministers, so every one to speak and prophecy. And these recusants are
planted in the superlatiue degree, they are omnium infime, and yet
superbissimi, not able to defend a bad cause by argument, exclaim against the
government of the Church of England and her ministers, and each of these is
assured that he has the spirit of God. Brethren wheresoever you be, and
whosoever you are, be not deceived, for God assure your selves will not be
mocked. For a time he forbeareth but in his due time he strikes: he is not
tied or chained to any one corner of this land: his name is glorious in the
midst of his people: there has he planted an holy temple for himself, an
habitation for the God of Jacob. I pray you, look into the practice of the
disturbers of the Church: I am a Prophet as well as you are, and my doctrine is
derived from heaven by revelation. So those irregular Friars termed pauperes
de Lugduno that rose up in the year a thousand five hundredth and seventy under
Lucius the third and Alexander, the 3. Popes of Rome, as writes Abbas
Vrspergensis in the year a thousand two hundredth and twelve affirmed that they
had a peculiar calling from God, and therefore they regarded not the ordinance
of man. What was Samosatenes, Epiphanius in his second book contra haereses
reports, (...), puffed up with a little learning that he had fell from the
truth. What caused Julian surnamed the Apostata to decline, In Julianum oration
prima.
it was a Gregory Nazianzene speaks of him, a presumptuous opinion that he
had of himself, the which in the end turned to his own destruction. This
self same thing Saint Augustine confesses in his 53. tracte upon John:
Quosdam nimia suae voluntatis fiducia extulit in superbiam, and quosdam nimia
suae voluntatis diffidentia deiecit in negligentiam. Certain there are says
he, that of a reverent opinion conceived of themselves, wax proud, and others
distrusting themselves, sit at home and do nothing. And as Bernarde de
consideratione, to Eugenius, ociosus est, non tantum quia nihil operatur, sed
qui continue laborando nihil tandem lucratur. That man says Bernarde, is not
only said to be idle, that does nothing, but he likewise that alvvaies
turmoyleth, and reapeth nothing. So these zealous men carried away with a
popular applause Saxum sudant nitendo, nec proficiunt hylum: They are always
inueighing against the scandalous government of our Church, and as Hierom
vvriting to Marcellam speaks: Itur in verba: sermo teritur, lacerantur
absentes, vita aliena describitur, and mordentes inuicem consumimur ab inuicem.
Here the quarrel begins, a disputation is intended, and thereof proceeds
malice and rancour, and one envying the other, one in the end consumes
another. Heretofore the controversy was about (...), books extant at this day
pro and con, by that right honorable, right reverend, and most learned father
of the Church of England his grace of Canterbury sufficiently approved the
same. The question is now, whether our ecclesiastical order be allowable by
the word of God, and hereupon, as the Poet speaks successit vetus comaedia
and in vitium libertas excidit and vim, dignam lege regi: for the lives of our
spiritual fathers are made scandalous, their doctrine for fashion sake lightly
regarded, and cursed cham John Penrie of Wales has laid open the shame of his
father, but a curse shall light upon his head, his days shall be prolonged
to his own shame, and like a fugitive he shall beg his bread. A lewd
liver does not argue a corrupt teacher: Scribes and Pharisees were lewd
livers, and yet good preachers, and their doctrine ratyfied and approved by the
son of God. Christ was preached for envy, he that preached Christ in that
order was a lewd liver, yet a good preacher: Saint Paul gloried in him.
Christ was preached for ostentation; he that preached him in that order was a
lewd liver, yet a good preacher, Saint Paul gloried in him. Be the preacher
in life lascivious, if his doctrine be good, Saint Paul speaks I have
rejoiced in him, and I will rejoice. Men and brethren, I speak not this to
defend the irregular lives of any, but only to stop the mouths of them
that for a small infirmity vvoulde exclude the best preachers in this land
from preaching, and being unlearned labor to determine matters, the which
they do not understand. Although I wish daielie, that every one of us would
conform his life to his doctrine, for the word and the work agreeing,
does as Basil speaks in his Homily upon the Proverbs, (...), it causes the
word preached to be better accepted. False Prophets there were says the
Apostle among the people, I have not sent them and they are gone: false
Prophets are dispersed among the people, so likewise there shall be false
teachers among you. Hieronimus ad Fabiolam.
Hierom observed in his time three several sorts of false teachers, the
world, the flesh, and the devil. The world makes a great show of security,
and in the end it offers unto us anguish and sorrow. The flesh assures unto
us continual joy, and sudaine destruction is incident unto her. The devil,
he will not break his promise, for honor and dignity are his rewards, and in
them he brings us to perpetual shame: sic solet amicos bear suos, in this
order does he magnify himself in his friends. In these days where hypocrisy
can hardly be discerned from piety, it stands us upon to know a false
teacher. Hieron. lib. 1. ad Iouinianum.
For as Hiero^ speaks, O quantus est numerus falsoru^ Prophetarum in omni
statu, omnes vicissim qui ex habitu suo, aut dignitate, aut officio, aut
condition praetendunt bonum and faciunt malum, omnes igitur habitum religionis
deferentes, and religionis opera non facientes. False teachers, they swarm in
every corner, in every place and age, men are apt enough to deceive, and
religion is now a harbor to graceless and thriftlesse men. The doctrine
received in the Church of God is not mutable, and the reason is, because God is
not mutable, so Augustine in his book de vera religione cap. 53. affirms:
The doctrine of our Puritanes it is mutable, therefore it is not of God: Miseri
homines, and miserabiles quibus cognita vilescunt, and nouitatibus gaudent:
they are says Augustine the miserablest men in the world, that cannot digest
the known truth, but continually addict themselves to novelties: for proof of
this, T. C. I. P. I. D. I. P. T. C. G. W.



no singing in the Church is lawful: afterward the singing of the Psalms was
lawful. The Psalms of David says a fugitive of Scotland selected are and
may be used: The Psalms of David says Penrie, concern not us, therefore
not to be used in divine service. Allegations of fathers and councels are
impious, assertions of fathers and decrees of councels says one that shall be
namelesse, may be used. Sermons preached with premeditation, derogate, from the
majesty of God, dabitur vobis in illa hora: Sermons preached without
premeditation, they are but fardels of verbal divinity. Innouations in
doctrine, in religion, are dangerous, Endoxius, and Acacius perverted the
greek Church, and as Nicephorus in his 9. book of his ecclesiastical history
c. 46. Men says he, were so rash, that they did contemn the custom of the
Church, and nouas leges sibi pro se quisque conderet, every man had a religion
peculiar unto himself: and is not this verified among us at this day? and what
is the reason thereof? men are carried away with a show of doctrine, so
headstrong, that they will not stand to the judgment of the Church:
corruption in manners, in religion, are very rife, all have erred, and the
truth is revealed but unto a few, and that is unto them. Saint Paul would
have all things done (...), in decent and good order, and according to
ordinance: but our conformers are so repugnant unto that, as the Poet speaks,
qui rectum nil esse putat, quod non facit ipse decorum: that they labor to
control the custom of the Church, and to call in question controversies
already decided, and to avoid an inconvenience, Epiphan. in Anchorato.
they do as Epiphanius speaks (...), flying away from the smoke, they fall
into the fire. False Prophets there are among the people, so likewise there
shall be false teachers among you. The Church of Christ has not been free from
this malady. Master, did thou not sow good corn in thy field: from whence
came these tares? The Church is said to be Columba vnica; his only Dove: via
directa, a direct way. The Church is said to be vnica, quia in vnitate
consistit, because she consists in unity: sancta, holy; because she is
sanctified by the holy Ghost, and because she is the pillar and the foundation
of truth: and said to be corpus Christi, he himself the head. Ephesians. 1. and
5. Coloss. 1. 1. Timot. 3. she is said to be vniuersalis, because she is
not only resident in one place, but is extended to the confines of the whole
earth. The same affirms Isidorus in his first book de officijs
ecclesiasticis cap. 1. Aluarus, Pelagius, lib. 1. de planctu ecclesiae art: 65.
Torquemada lib. 1. de ecclesia c. 13. The church was instituted in paradise,
and after the fall of our first parents being barre^, she became fertle, watered
with the precious blood of Jesus Christ: the benefit whereof, we all have
received, and shall continue to the end of the world, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against her. Are we all agreed of a Church? and of the
unity thereof? from whence arise these disse^tions? the Seruetian, he has a
Church by himself, and is his the true Church? the Anabaptist he is a member
of the true Church, therefore he cannot miscary? The Family of love, he is of
the true Church: Frauncis Ket opposes himself against them all, for his
reasons and allegations are of themselves so evident, that they cannot be
answered. Our Puritanes of England, are now a purging of the Church in taking
away humane traditions, and unnecessary ceremonies, and will offer up a Church
pure, undefiled, without spot. If ancient Hilarie were alive at this day,
Hilar. ad Constantium Augustum.
and should see us contend at noone day, in the heat of summer de Asini vmbra:
I am very well assured he would use the same words that he did long ago whenas
the like occasion was offered in his time: periculosu^ admodu^, atque etia^
miserabile est, tot nunc fides existere, quot voluntates: It is lamentable that
there should be as many several faithes, as there are diversities in wills. Et
tot nobis doctrinas esse, quot mores. And as many cha^ges of manners, so many
diversities in doctrine; Et tot causas blasphemtaru^ pullulare quot vitia sunt,
and as many vices, so many causes of blasphemy, since that we are come to this
point, that we will have one faith written according to our will, or else the
exposition thereof shall be according to our direction. Thus spoke this
Ancient father of his time, I appeal to you whither these words of his are
not veried among us in these days? But is the Church of England thoroughly
purged? What obstacles have you removed? Assuredly the Revenues
Ecclesiastical, Bishoprics and Deaneries, Cathedral Churches, have been
obstacles unto them, for had they been able to remove these they had brought
in Idaeam Platonicam the like unto this at any time should never have been
known. But God has taken the reign into his own hand and has put a snaffle
into their mouths, and has assuaged the corages of them, that to run forward
they cannot, and the vigilant eye of our sovereign has caused them like
Seriphian frogs to live in silence, and whereas heretofore the hole Realm
has swarmed with there books the date of the^ is now expired, and God grant
them grace that in time they may see there own infirmities, and al occasions
of dissension taken a way, we may live together in Christian unity, that in
this world we we may so glorify God, that into the world to come we al
likewise may be glorified of him. It were not altogether repugnant unto this
matter, if a question were demanded wherefore God permits his Church to be
persecuted by false Apostles, false teachers. Vt qui in vobis sunt manifesti
fiant, to this end, that their good and best men among you may be made
manifest. A greater punishment cannot be laid upon us then this, when as God
as Aug. speaks in his 19 sermon de verbis Apostoli permits us to be
seduced by them, they which make a glorious show of piety and religion: and in
the end they bring both soul and body to co^fusio^ Arrius deluded Irene the
Empres with hypocrisy, Menno the Anabaptist corrupted multitudes with the
same, Castellio infected with pharisaical leven was the overthrow of himself
and his audiditory, and as Hierom observes: writing to Lucilius, there is no
heresy, be it never so pestilent, but carries a resembla^ce of christian
piety. The D. spoke in paradise, but how, in the form of a serpent. There is
no place be it never so well fenced and guarded, but the devil will intrude
himself, and he that spoke to Ada^ in paradise, in the likeness of a serpent,
to the which of Endor and to Saul in the likeness of Samuel to the Jews in the
likeness of Moses to benefit himself will easily be persuaded to deceive us to
tra^sforme himself into the likeness of an angel of light. Georgius Cedrenus
lib. 2. Annal. ad Jsasi. com.
Therefore it stands us upon to look into our own estate, not to addict our
selves to diversities of doctrine and to be carried away with any blast,
resident in no one place like wandering stars and like Euripus being always
in motion like the raging waves of the sea, we cast forth our own shame. I say
that, says the Apostle that each of you says, I hold with Paul I am with
Cephas, I am with Apollo, and what are all these but the ministers of Christ.
And in these days the laity of England is so prejudicial, that if they once
have conceived an opinion of one preacher, presently they magnify thar one
above the clouds, and labor to bring the other in contempt: this man is a good
liver, a right Cephas, he cannot abide circumcision, no ceremonies, and Apollos
a mighty man in the scripture, able to put al my Lord B. in England to silence,
what learning there is co^cealed in any of these I know not, I come not
hitherto disgrace any: but well I am assured, that this popular applause of our
laity, has caused sundry mean scholars to step up into the pulpit, the
inco^uenie^ce whereof the right reverend fathers the Bishops of this land, have
to their no small grief already found. And this malady S. Aug. found in his
time as he confesses in his book de anima ad Renatum, illud est molestum and
periculosum vel perniciosum, si cum laudatur eloquentia persuadetur insipientia
vt in praetioso poculo bibatur pestifera po^io. This is a dangerous matter
says he, that one shall presume of himself so far above his reach in that he
is not able to perform half that is expected at his hands, in the mean season
his ignorance is detected and his doctrine scorned, from hence springs
division sca^dalus to the church of God: the waring of a dece^t garment in the
church as a Cap or a Sirples is superstitious: unlearned men have we spread this
in corners and unlearned men maintain it publicly that as Hierom writes ad
Demetriadem virgine^ feruentissimi in terrenis frigidissimi in caelestibus
sumus and summa^ in rebus paruis exhibentes authoritatem ad maiora torpescimus:
In things that do not concern us we are very careful but in matters that do
concern us, for the^ we take no care at all. Luther in his time found no
inco^uenicence in them, in so much that he used them. Erasmus ad fratres
inferioris Germaniae was so far from condemning them, that he defended them,
if Calvin or Beza have exclamed against them as abuses scandalous. Caluinus ad
pastorem Helueticum. Beza ad Edm: Grindallum Episcop: Londinensem Epi. 38,
Yet Calvin and Beza found at the last that they might be used, and no
offense at all in the using. Wherefore should we contend beloved so seriously
for nothing, and make our selves ridiculous to the sight of the world, and to
leave that doctrine that was bequeathed unto us, and now to begin to frame a
new doctrine, the which as Hilarie writes ad Constantium Augustum: scribendae
and innouandae fidei vsus inoleuit, it is a common custom to every one to have
a new faieth, a new religion: qui postquam noua potius caepit condere quam
accepta retinere, nec veterata defe^dit, nec innouata firmauit, and having one
according to our humor, we neither regard the old faieth, neither do we
labor to confirm the new religion, and facta est fides temporum potius quam
Euangelioru^, and our faith does more fit the present time, then the course of
Scripture. Men and brethren, I have been somewhat long in these points, I will
leave them to your good consideration: in the mean time, let us be assured of
this, that God permits this cockle and darnell to grow among us, until in
due time he flingeth them into the fire. And if we persist in these
contentions, God he will separate himself from us, and leave us to our own
direction, and then we shall very well perceive, that it is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God, And happy and blessed is he, that
has escaped the heat of his indignation, for our God is a consuming fire.

The causes that moved our professed enemies to send forth these teachers are
diverse: among the which I will at this time observe one, and that is, the short
continuance that he has in this world, the reason is in that he furmised, that
this world is languishing and lies at the last gasp, and by reason the time
is short, he does not omit any opportunity, diverse are allured with an
external show of piety, others are carried away with a persuasiue hope of
permanent felicity, some are drowned in despair: in fine, there is but one way
to heaven and the by-waies and cross paths that lead to hell, are
Innumerable. Bernard lamenting the disordered lives of the Clergy in his time,
compared them to conduit pipes the which yield water unto us plentifuully, but
in fine reserve none themselves, so these that speak well, and do ill, in
sending forth a shrill sound unto others, benefit themselves nothing at all.
Thomas Aquinas writing upon the 9, of Genesis affirms that the priests in
his time were disordered, in that they reserved the Revenues of the Church to
their own peculiar use and in the end he concludes, exorti sunt in ecclesia
gigantes qui potius videntur reges quam episcopt. The priests says he are so
sumptuous in their diet, and so prodigal in superfluous expenses that they live
more like princes, then priests. Bernard that lived 5. hundred years ago
lamenting the irregular behavior of his time, nostri praelati facti sunt
pilati, nostri pastores facti sunt tonsores, and in another place plus calcaria
quam altaria fulgent. Is the clergy of England in this point so reformed as at
their hands is required? I will not defend any where he is faulty, we are full
gorged, we have abundance, plenty is harbored among us and there is no
complaining in our streets. Our children they are brought up idely, I will not
say lewdly, few of the^ will follow there fathers in this spiritual function,
and what is the reason thereof. Assure your selves beloved our spiritual
lands are turned into temporalles, hundreds by the year, are not sufficient
to maitaine them, this is scandalous to the eye of the multitude, and their
disordered lives are laid as heavy burdens upon the backs of their aged
parents. Bona ecclesiae, bona pauperum. But it is now inuerted. God he
provided for there parents above their expectation, and is not God able to
provide as well for them, in the mean season many an hungry belly is not
filled, many naked are not clothed the halt, the diseased, the blind lie in
the streets, and are not called to be refreshed, and the reason is, in that
our sons and daughters must be made spectacles for every one to gase upon:
and adorned like Lords, and ladies, they forget their own state, and the
honorable calling of their parents.

Erasmus of Roterodame writing to a friend of his in Germany certifieth him of
the death of two famous and learned men in England, the greatest patrons that
he had the one, Farrag. Epist. lib. 15.
was William Warham, Lord Chancellor of England and Archbishop of Canterbury in
the latter end of the reign of Henry the 7. and the greatest part of the
reign of Henry the 8. he lived vsque ad decrepita^ etatem This man had many
children the which he kept for charity some at the Universities, others that
were not ingenious he disbursed a sum of money, and placed them in an
occupation, for his daughters that were fatherles and motherles, fearing least
they should incline to leudnes, he gave not many hu^dreds as we do in these
days, but a competent dowry of twenty nobles, and bestowed them to their great
likings. This man was summoned by sickness to depart out of this world, three
hours before his departure he called his treasorer unto him, charging him to
bring unto him his accounts, that he might make even with the world, before he
departed, the which when he had done, it was found that the old Bishop was not
in debt: and that he had in ready money a great mass of current coin 10.
pounds: 10. pounds, O says he satis viatici, there is enough for me to spend
by the way, I have but a short journey to take, and forthwith departed. The
other was John Colet a cuntry man of mine born in London, unto who^ al his
fathers lands, and substance came, by reason of the death of all his children,
22. Eras. ad Jodocum Jonam.
he had, and it pleased god to take the^ al away this man excepted. I need not
to tell you what he did his school at my back can tell you, he has sent forth
from thence heretofore many a famous scholar, that have proved necessary and
profitable me^ in the church of god. This learned father has left yet somewhat
to be finished by some of you, whom it has pleased God, not to bless with
children, the which having borne all offices belonging to this City, and
living in great wealth and abundance, craves of you, that you would join with
him, in begetting children, spiritual children to Christ, that where some of
you have not a child, and others likewise but one, that you would follow the
example of that famous and honorable gentleman Sir Thomas Wight, to bestow
some part of your livings, upon some one poor College or other in Oxforde or
Cambridge, that once a year there might be a free election, that those
children whose parents are poor, might according to their desert be preferred
in the College to a scholler-ship or fellow-ship, I doubt not, but the smoke
of this incense would ascend like a sweet perfume in the nostrels of or God.

As there were false Prophets among the people, so likewise there shall be
false teachers among you. Among many plagues wherewith God did afflict and
punish his people, this was the greatest, that for their contempt and
disobedience of his people, he would give the^ their hearts desire, he would
permit them to be seduced by every spirit. Does God afflict his people by
famine, upon their repentance he sends abundance: does he afflict them
with pestilence upon their conversion, the plague cease. Does he afflict
them with war God at their amendment, he breaks the bow and spear
insunder, and overthrows all the chariots and horsemen of the Egyptians, and
causes the violent waves of Jordan to return backewarde, and delivers his
people in great security from imminent dangers by the hands of Moses and
Aaron. But are his people light headed? Will they have Gods to go before them
as the heathen have, this light meat in the wilderness cloyeth us, it is not
comparable in any degree, to the flesh pots of Egypt: the tabernacle of
Moloch, and the star of Rempham, their Altars vvhereon they used to sacrifice
the body of their Sons and Daughters to devils: all these ascended up into
the presence of God, and then they neglected the due service of God, and laid
open their ears to the enchantments of false Prophets, and brought a speedy
destruction upon them, haec loquutus est Dominus, thus says the Lord when I
have not said it. Among many inconveniences that the Church susteyneth, this
is the greatest, that the simplest and the vnlearnedst among us, are easily
persuaded to take upon them the exposition of Gods book, and a fantasy
being once conceived can hardly be removed. This caused Saint Augustine in
an Epistle that he writes to Honoratus, to lament the folly of certain in his
age: Nulla imbutus poetica disciplina, Terentium sine magistro attingere non
auderet, he that is ignorant in poetry, he will not presume to take Terence in
his hand and expound him, Asper, Cornutus, Donatus his interpreters are had
in great reverence and admiration vt quilibet poeta possit intelligi, for this
cause that every Poet be he never so hard and obscure, may the easier be
understood, Tu in sanctos libros sine duce irruis, and de his sine preceptore
audes far sententiam? Will thou then says Augustine, being unlearned,
without a guide take upon thee to expound Scripture? The like has Saint
Ambrose in his third book de fide ad Gratianum, and Hierom vvriting to
Paulinus, is copious in this argument and Leo his Epist. 33. ad Theodosium. I
speak this the more confidently in that the Scriptures, are thought to be so
easy, that the simplest may read and understand them, and what has followed,
diverse have preferred their own fantasy before the right and perfect
exposition. Laymen have in their nocturnall conuenticles presumed to interpret
the same, and the weaker sort likewise, whom Saint Paul in any wise would not
permit to teach, have perverted the ordinary means of salvation to their own
destruction. Demosthenes a servant and Cook to Valens the Emperor, intruding
himself into that secret conference that the Emperor had with Basil, as you
may read in the tripartite history, lib. 7. cap. 36. had texts of Scripture so
rife and copious in his mouth, that the old father began to muse, unto what
end all his textuall cotations tended. Sir Cook says he, tuum est de
pulmentarijs cogitare, non dogmata diuina decoquere: Master Cook says he, if
I be not deceived, your office belongs to the seasoning of the pot, and in
matters appertayning to Gods Church you have no interest. Read beloved the
holy Scriptures with fear and reverence, prefer not a private interpretation
before that which has been received, and is approved a truth. If any be
ignorant, let him repair to the learned, that all sects and schisms and false
teachers detected, we may so hear, read and believe the Scriptures, that they
may be unto us a savor of life unto life, that the course of our life ended,
each of us may receive a full reward in the kingdom of heaven, of the which
God for his mercy make us all partakers. And thus much, by your favorable
patience shall suffice to have spoken of this first part.

The second part contains a description of them: they shall bring in damnable
heresies tending to the destruction of the instructor and the instructed, they
shall impugn the deity and the humanity of Christ: the people that are
credulous shall follow them, the truth shall be blasphemed and corrupted by
the^, and of a greedy appetite, to enrich themselves, with pleasing and
perswasiue words, they shall buy and sell you according to their own
disposition. The Apostle writing to the Hebrews, exhorts them not to be
carried away with strange doctrine, from heaven, to earth, from Angels, to
damned spirits, from faith, to infidelity, from felicity, to misery, and in
fine, to every mischief: for they that leave faith, hope, and charity, and
with the contrary unto these do converse, are forthwith carried into eternal
damnation, being of the seed of Abraham, they degenerate and are of the seed
of Cain: descending lineally of Christ, they approve themselves of the seed of
Antichrist, Jude exhorts all Christians to remember the words of the Apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which told you, that in the later days there should
come mockers, which should walk according to their carnal desires: worldly
minded men having not the spirit. Our savior in the 18. of Luke, the son of
man when he comes, do you think that he shall find faith upon the earth? And
again, take heed of false Prophets that come unto you in sheeps clothing,
yet inwardly they are ravening wolves, whereunto the Apostle adds this, that
they shall make merchandise of godliness, and as our Savior speaks under a
pretense of piety, they shall devour widows houses. Whosoever, says Christ
is not with me, is against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters
abroad: professor of Christ and professed enemies to Christ, gathering
multitudes together and dispersers of them, whose end shall be according to
their works.

Christ is preached to many: believed of a few: some require discipline in the
Church of Christ, the whip of Christ is not exercised, the straight way is
laid open for every passenger and liberty stands at the gate and offers
free access to every one, people are incredulous, Master we would see a sign
from thee: an extraordinary sign would sufficiently approve thy doctrine.
Simon Magus flew up into the air as he corrupted men on earth, Arnobius lib.
2, cont. gentes.
he would if it might be, pervert Angels in heaven: but his supporters the
princes of the air, forsook him, and let go their hold, and as sin of it
self is heavy, so likewise at the voice of Peter, down fell Simon the man of
sin, and the fall of him is a memorable president for curiosity: hereupon
Saint Augustine in his 22. book de ciuitate Dei. cap. 8. quisquis adhuc
prodigia vt credat inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium qua mundo credente non
credit: he that to ratify his faith, requires a wonder, that man says
Augustine is a wonder, that stands in doubt of his faith, when all the world
receaueth the same. Christ and Christianity cannot be separated: Luciferians,
Vigilantians, Donatists, Anababtists, and as many as glory in the bare title of
any man: these have separated themselves from Christ, and are none of his
fold. Ignoro Miletium, Paulinum respuo, and qui Christiani non est, Antichrist
says Hierom to Damasus, I neither care for the one or the other, I am assured
of one thing says Hierom, that he that is not with Christ, is against
Christ. Satan has sent forth his messengers, I came says Christ in the name
of my father, and you received me not. Another has come in his his own name,
and him you have received.

Gog and Magog in the Revelation are abroad, and their armies are as the
sands of the sea. The gnostique heretic that sprang from the rotten root of
Carpocrates, they pretended piety and integrity of life, and practiced
secretly by Magique: Arrius he perceived that the deity of Christ was generally
received, in that he was termed (...), he likewise perverted multitudes in
adding a letter, and drowned the same in the sound, affirming, that Christ was
(...) not of the same substance with God his father, but of the like, and
brought upon his own head sudden destruction: Christ is very God and very
man, God of his father before the world, and man of his Mother borne in the
world, perfect God and perfect man, his humane flesh subsisting. Yet Ioannes
Langius affirmed, that Christ was not man, whose damnable heresy was long ago
condemned in Eutiches, in the 3. Calcedon Councels, and the 2. councels held
at Constantinople. Christ became sin, that is, he offered himself to God
the father a sacrifice for sin, he died for the sins of the world: if any
presumptuous and blasphemous mouth will say, that there was sin in Christ.
Anathema sit, let him be accursed, I hope there is no preacher in England
will say so, if any have affirmed it, that man is in the highest degree of
heresy and blasphemy, and if he persist in the same, I assure him, little
comfort shall he reap by the passion of Christ: for the benefit of his
passion is extended in omnes peccatores, but as Durand speaks respicientes,
but unto them that have conceived within themselves a godly sorrow for sin
the grace of God assisting. If then this doctrine be true, as without
controversy it is most true, where are they which were termed patropassiani
and the like, from whence Michaell Seruetus derived his execrable and damnable
assertions opposite and repugnant to the analogy and proportion of our faith.

Christ suffered in his humanity, the deity impassible, Lutherus in 2. ca. ep.
1. Petri.
Luther defended the contrary and was ouer-reached, Christ descended into
hell, and preached unto the spirits that were in prison: here Erasmus of
Rhetrodame decyphered his verbal divinity, and his Atheism, in affirming,
that the passion of Christ extended it self so far, that it released the
souls of Cicero, Homer, Plato, Socrates. If any learned man doubt of this his
assertion: I refer him to his epistle written Iacobo Tutori. Me^ in these days
are curious: Erasmus he misliked the old interpreter: Beza misliked him,
Castellio condemned him, Tremelius magnified of a number: Vatablus little
regarded our ordinary translation of the Bible in English, in pulpits not long
since reprehended. What have these procured but a defection from Christ and
Christianity: Laurentius Valla in his sixth book of Elegances cap. 34 by
nomeanes could be persuaded to allow of the word persona in the Trinity:
Jouius in vitis virorum illustrium.
Pomponius Laetus had conceived so pleasing an opinion of himself, that he
utterly detested the Greek tongue, in that he feared it would corrupt his
fluent and copious style in Latin. And oftentimes it falls out, that men
standing too much in their own light forgette themselves, and are persuaded of
a verity, the which of them is not conceived: sects are rife among us, the
truth is blasphemed, and diverse in these days for lucre sake to obtain a
poor benefice can preach according to the direction of the patrons*
Demosthenes being once corrupted by money by Legates, protested that he had
little to say in the behalf of his King and Country, for his tongue was not
his own, in that he had sold it: so these Clurina peccora, that with money
carry deaneries and prebendaries upon their backs, they have but little to say
in the church of God, for they paid extremely for it, and if they may save
himself he cares not.

It was an oulde verse Curia Romana non captat ouem sine lana, so they may
reap the benefit, let them that list take the labor. And that which is a
soul inconvenience, when men that have spente all their days in physic,
or in the studies of the Civil Law, if he cannot by that aspire to promotion
presently he intrudeth himself into the ministry, and with their flesh hooks
like Elies children they snatch the flesh out of the pot which in equity
belonged to the priest, and not unto them. In the mean season, many a famous
scholar in the university, whose friends are poor, lingereth away his days
and is not regarded. Our patrones should be vigilant in this point: but every
man provides for his own, one man he supporteth 4 steeples on his shoulders,
like Atlas that supporteth heaven, that by reason of his burden he cannot
speak. Others that have consumed their patrimonies in chambering and
wa^tonnesse and excessive Rioting they forthwith take sanctuary in some one
Cathedral Church or other, and are prebendes in the same. The Church of God
feels the inconvenience of it. And as yet, it is not redressed. Heresies
creep into the Church of God sects and divisions abound, the way of truth is
blasphemed and diverse are carried away with fair and pleasant speeches. Lucian
in a treatise that he writes de non credendo calumniae. (...) is a seducer
crept in among you well furnished with learning this man says he would with
great diligence be regarded: lest in the end he seduce others.

Are these teachers in outward show religious? avoid them, for as Leo speaks
in his 9. Sermon ac qudragesima, plus plerunque pericili est in insidiatore
occulto quam in host manifesto: there is more danger says he in him that is
not detected, then in a professed enemies, Matters that nothing at all concern
us have been scandalous to the Church of God. Augustine and Hierom contended
about the gourd of Jonas. Hierom and Ruffinus whither Origin were saved: Aug.
in his 17. book de ciuitate Dei cap. 20 doubts wither Solomon were saved so
does Chrysostom in the 68. homily upon Matthew and Alphonsus Abulensis
writing upon the 2 of Reg. cap. 7. quaestione vltima. Those things that do
not concern us, let us not contend about them, we have no such custom,
neither the Church of God. Let us not search into the mysteries of God, for
what man is he that is able to comprehend them?

Pride is properly incident unto these teachers, and as Aug. speaks it is
matter omnium haereticorum. The wisdom of man it is foolishnes with God, of our
selves we are not able to think a good thought, much less to perform any
thing that is good. Ambrose compares the night oule to these kind of men,
Ambr. in Hexa.
Animal is it ud haereticorum figura est qui tenebras amplectuntur diaboli luce^
saluatoris horrescunt: this creature says he, is a right and perfect figure
of heretics, which delight in palpable darckenesse peculiar to the devil,
and cannot abide the light of Christ, and granbus disputationum oculis cernunt
vana non recipient sempiterna, and with their great eyes of contention they
look after vanity, and regard not those things that concern eternity acuti ad
superstitiosa, quicksighthd to spy superstition, hebetes ad diuina, slow and
very dull in Christian Religion, qui dum se putant sub limibus euolare
sermonibus by which persuade themselves to flee into heaven with great words,
tanquam noctuae very luminis splendore turbantur: like unto night oules are
thrown down at the brightness of the true light.

A man infected with some one dangerous malady is avoided: for as Aristotle
speaks (...) an infection is always in motu, forthwith it will disperse
herself. But the infection of the soul, which is heresy as Bernarde
speaks, serpit vt cancer, when we think it is going away from us, it comes
upon us that is not regarded. The body being sick, we forthwith have recourse
to sundry expert physicians, and be the disease never so dangerous, one or
other is persuaded that he can cure the same. But the soul of man lying in a
consumption, that the very essence of Religion, faith in Christ is almost
brought to nothing, few resort unto him, that with clay and spittle can open
our eyes: whose hem of his grame^t can immediately stay the issue of blood, who
in saying: puella tibi dico surge, damsel I say to thee arise, who can raise
the dead to life, who waketh Lazarus out of his sound sleep, Lazare veni
for as, Lazarus come forth? This physician is not sought nor regarded, but it is
with us, as with desperate patients, when the physician perceives that there
is no way but death, leaves the patient to his own appetite, so ducimus in
laetis dies nostros, and in puncto ad inferos, descendimus we keep holy day all the year long, and in the twinkling of any eye, we are turned into the pit.
We are al persuaded of a truth, yet we are not resolved of the truth, much
like to the goast that in his trau^ce pasquill discerned houering in the sphere
of the Moon with a weighty stone at his heels, that gladly would ascend
higher, yet the love that he bare to the world did keep him down, this was
Erasmus of Roterodame that knew the truth, and yet for fear of loosing his
dignities, in the world durst not profess the same. He that denies me before
man, I will likewise deny him before my father in heaven: he that confesses me
before man, I likewise will acknowledge him before my father in heaven. That
man that wears the cognizance of a noble man, and under him is protected from
diverse that lie in wait to slay him, and receiving sundry benefits of him,
does in eury place revile and slander him, he is unworthy of his benefits
already received: so we that bear the cognizance of Christ, and under him are
protected from three capital enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil,
that continually lie in wait to kill both soul and body, do keep the
company of his professed enemies, and associate our selves with pride, luxury
and prodigality, and with them little esteem of him and his Cross: we approve
our selves unprofitable servants, and greater injury then these unto him,
cannot be offered. If we profess Christ in outward show, for fear of the
Rigor of some penal statute, and in our hearts do not believe in him, this
profession of ours serves not. So the devils likewise know him and acknowledge
him, yet they believe not in him. In the mean season we are secure, every one
doubts not his own estate, cathedra Mosis, the chair of Moses, and we have
Abraham to our father, but these avail not: division is crept in among us: a
kingdom divided in it self cannot stand, concordia res paruae crescunt
discordia mazimae dilabuntur. Antioch a famous City, as you may read in the
11. of the Acts. in that the faithful believing were called Christians, a City
greatly honored for Religion: in so much, it was had in so great honor and
reputation that the patriarch had under him: 14 metropolitanes, as Volaterane
in his 11. book reports, there were an hundred and fifty Bishops. The City
double walled, for it had four hundred and threefcore strong towers, and three
hundred threescore beautiful Churches, but what of these, they were at
division: some followed the doctrine of Nestorius, others relied wholly upon
Macarius, denying the son of God that redeemed them. Insomuch that God being
offended with the^, he sent Cosroe king of Persia, invaded the City,
overthrows it, put the inahbitants to fire and sword, and this eue^t had
schism and division. To let pass Constantinople conquered by the Turk, to
omit the Empire of Trapez^^t, vanquished by him, in that the inhabitants
disseuered themselves in matters of Religion, in that the Greek Church
dissented from the latin: the Emperor of Constantinople came with the Patriarch
to a council holden at Florence in Italy, and there confirmed the unity of both
Churches, what followed? Marcus B. of Ephesus kindled sedition, perverted the
Empire in 14. years after, made great variance among the^: insomuch, that the
Turk came suddenly upon the^, conquered the Empire, and put them al to the
sword: the Emperor in fleeing away was slain, his head carried upon a pole in
derision, his wife and daughters reserved to satisfy their carnal appetite.
This is the end of sects and schism. In the time, of John the 9. Pope of
Rome, Platina in vita Joh. 9.
when as barbarism had over run all Italy, insomuch, that we read nothing
worthy memory to have been done in that age, that is reco^me^ded to posterity:
there was found a monster, in proportion like unto a man, his head excepted,
and that was like unto a dog, the which resembled the estate and condition of
that time, for so long as in hand and foot we carry the shape of a man, if we
have not that reason and discretion that is given unto us by God, but according
to our appetite, follw that which is not expedient for us, we approve our
selves in the end more like beasts then men, the question at this day betwixt
us and the church of Rome is, whether we fell from the^, or they from us. There
is say they, no change, no innouatious in our doctrine, that which was delivered
unto us, we have received, and that which we received, have we preached and
believed. Is this true; all of the^ agree in it: what is the reason that in
their Mass of late years, there have been such sundry innouations and
alterations. Leo the 10. defended in his time, that order of the Mass which
was secundu^ vsum Sarum: so did Clement the 7. yet Paulus the 4. he began to
vary a little from it. Afterward came Pius the 5. and he sub anathemate
sanxit, none to be authentical but that which he allowed: Gregory the 13. he
liked not of his, and he set out one according as he thought expedient:
afterward Sixtus 5. he caused a new one to printed at Rome with his additio^s
which in the year 1588. was printed by Plantine at Andwerp. Tho: Stapleton, he
exclameth against us for our often change. In that Henry the 8. lest his 6.
articles in force: Edw. the 6. he put the^ not in execution, and her M. has
varied from the^ both. Beloved I know no change or alteration in our doctrine,
the book of common prayer is the sa^e now, that it was at the first, her M.
has defended it against the monarchs of Europe, and in great lenity she has
governed us and peace has lodged within the walls of our Cities: I pray God
long to continue the same even to the last generation. Gregory Martin in his
discovery of corruptions, seems to sport at the several editions of our
English Bibles, in that there is no harmony or consent between them. The words
may vary, but the sense is one and the same, and he whosoever he be, foreign
or domestique, that shall go about to alter a known and received truth, a
white leprosy shall mark his forehead, as we have been taught, so have we
believed, and he that adds to this book, God shall add unto him all the
plagues contained therein, and he that takes any thing away, God shall
likewise race out his name out of the book of life, and give unto him his
portion in the burning lake with hypocrites and foxes.

No Priest may marry: diverse have maintained the same, so Alphonsus Viruesius
aduersus Lutheri dogmata affirms, and Perionius l. 2. topic: theolog: the
Greek Church have allowed thereof. Our late Canonists have found out a new
devise, that it is not lawful for a Monk or a priest to marry openly, but
privately minori cum dispendio, aliud esse aiunt cum occulto Monachus duxit
vxorem, quia tunc magis praesumitur delo peccasse quam intellectus errore. So
holds Francis Squilla de fide catholica cap. 15. and Ludouicus Carer tractatu
de haereticis numero 38. I could lay open several repugna^ces among the^, all
which will sufficiently approve this, that in the Church of Rome there have
been and are at this day to be found, sundry and diverse innouations. Let us
beloved, be firm and resolute in the truth, if any offer unto us any other
doctrine tending to schism and dissension refuse the same, and as Basil
writing aduersus Anomaeos and Sabillianos (...): Christ himself has so taught
us: The Apostles of christ have so preached (...) the fathers in the primitive
church have observed the sa^e (...). Let it be sufficient then for thee to say,
I have been thus taught. The Apostle Saint Peter observes two especial
properties in them, the one is (...), their intemperancy: they shall be so
licentious in their doctrine, that they care not what they speak, the second
is their covetousness, they preach unto you, says the Apostle not to save
your souls, but to save themselves to enrich themselves, and these are two
notable tokens to discern a false teacher.

A riotous and luxurious person overthrows himself in his prodigality: so
these riotous and luxurious preachers they overthrow themselves in their
superfluities: he that in diputatio^ has once made a breach into any
absurdity, he will not spare to swallow many: so these having erred in the
principal points, of christian religion care not what they say. A fool says
Solomon, he is lavish of his tongue, and he that is unadvised in his speech
shall feel mischiefs. David attributes to a slanderous tongue a fit reward,
and that is hot consuming coals. Saint James in his third cap. A horse, says
he, is an unruly beast, if once he have the bit in his mouth, will turn
according to the will of the rider: a ship, a huge and vast vessel is ruled in
the sea by a little piece of timber: the tongue is a little member, and it
polluteth the whole body. There are few years in the which our physicians do
not give out, that there is a new disease, insomuch, they are ignorant how and
in what order to proceed. This summer past, diverse have been infected with a
dangerous malady termed (...), their tongues have had such a shaking ague,
that seldom they were at rest: He says the Apostle, that offends not
with his tongue, he is a perfect man. Homer observes, that Irus the beggar
was (...), one that used no measure in speaking, but in Menelaus he notes this
in him, that he used to speak (...), few words, yet (...), every word weighed
a pound. Augustine in xlv. Sermon, ad fratres in eremo, describes sundry
inco^ueniences that have happened unto diverse by this excessive riot: videte
fratres, says he, quanta mala habet lingua: brethren, sundry are the
inconveniences that the tongue brings. In bono magna est, in malo mors est,
laudable in a good man, but present death it is in a wicked man. Diabolus vnde
cecedit? Can you tell me how the devil came by his fall: numquid adulterium
fecit? assure your selves he committed no adultery: numquid furtum fecit, theft
he never committed: diabolus non propter hoc cecidit, the diuill was not
expelled out of heaven for these things: sed propter linguam, cum dixit in
caelum ascendam super sydera, pona^ thronum meum, and ero altissimo: only his
tongue was in fault, when he said, he would ascend up into heaven, and place
his seat above the stars, and be equal to God himself.

In the Church of England there is but one uniform consent of prayer, ratified
by authority, yet that form and order of prayer, cannot by no means be
received. For we will pray as we are disposed. This man's prayer is effectual,
it contains in it, all things that are requisite to corporal sustenance, or
spiritual comfort. The prayer prescribed in the Church by authority, they are
thankesgiuings for victories obtained by David, or else if of late years they
have been set down, they do not concern the state of the present time.
Again, diverse are so addicted to their own fa^tasies, that if it be not
adorned with variety of choice words, and beautified with metaphors, containing
sundry and diverse repetitions, they do not regard the same. Our coming to
the Church is to praise God, with one uniform consent of prayer, one man he
has written prayers, and so he prays to himself. Another, he deuiseth a
prayer as he kneeleth, if the preacher be not as they require, they will not
repair to hear him. One man he comme^deth the order of prayers, prescribed by
the faithful brethren of the Church of Scotland, another allows not so well
of that, as he does of certain prayers that were privily printed of late
years: in fine, so they may deface the uniform order of prayer, in the book
of common prayer they could be content to receive any order whatsoever. John
Penry his unlearned confutation of Master D. Bancroftes sermon.
John Penrie has of late set forth a paltry pamphlet, carrying a show of a
confutation of a learned Sermon, preached out of this place, by a learned and a
reverend man, wherein he inueigheth against notable and learned points of
doctrine, the which the poor seely soul does not understand. And to
aggrauate the matter, he desires them unto whose hands his book shall come,
to peruse the Collect appointed for Saint Michaell the Archangell, wherein he
says, there is plainly set down a plain article, of popery, prayer to
Saints. On the other side, I desire you, that at this day hear me, at your
coming home to peruse the collect, if you can find any one such point therein
contained, tending to his words. I will recant this that I say, if not, I
beseech you for Gods cause suspect these men, that seek nothing but the
overthrow of Religion, and the subversion of the state, yet all is not they
would have it, you have gotten the start of us. Our books are forbidden, our
printing presses are taken from us, and our prolocutor. T. C. is now in
durance. Libanius the Sophist, made a Rhetorical declamation, adorned with
tropes, beautified with variety of sentences, and the phrase of it self so
fluent and copious that Julian the Apostate perusing the same, cried out,
(...). Libanius says he, thou art aureus partus matris tuae. I never heard of
the like: (...), O the excellency of thy declamation (...), what an invincible
argument have thou, (...), I have not seen so elegant a disposition, (...),
and so forth. So these men T. C. has ouerthrown them by the word of God, if
his tongue and pen were at liberty, he is now better furnished then ever he
was. The presbytery of England should be furnished with sufficient preachers,
all sca^dals removed, the government of the Church should peaceably be
governed, and the spirit of prophecy should not be extinguished. Well I am
assured of one thing, I shall have no thanks for my labor, and I look for
none, what I have spoken is for the duty that I owe to the Church of God, and
to benefit the same.

The Apostle would have us to pray continually, lifting up pure hands unto
heaven, and as long as we heap one innovation upon the neck of another, so
long we exceed in excessive riot and blaspheme the way of truth. The second
thing that the Apostle observes in these false teachers is, their
covetousness, a fault not tolerable in them that are appointed by God to
instruct his people. This vice it is too too common among us. Our livings are
pared and little is reserved for us, patrones ca^ be content to keep them in
their own hands, or if they cannot he that is presented unto it, of necessity
he must offer somewhat to the silver shrine of Simon before his institution.
Others again that have sufficient, they provide for others, and heap up riches
for their children. In the mean season, open exclamatio^s are sou^ded forth
derogatory to the church and her ministers. Hiero^ writing upon the 143. Psa.
Videtis says he, magistros haereticorum nihil aliud facere nisi studere
diuitijs: diuitijs stude^t and paupere^ Christu^ co^te^nunt, it is the custo^e
of false teachers to heap up riches in making greater account of this world,
the^ they do of Christ. Covetousness, it has overthrown multitudes, it is the
root of al mischief, vnde habeas, quaerit nemo, sed oportet habere, so we have
it, we care not how, and in what order we come by it, (...). Bern. in a
treatise that he writes de bonis desere^dis deciphereth the estate of his
time. A gentleman says he has 4. children. This say they shall have an
aduousion of some co^petent personage, the other shall attend upon my Lord
Bishop, vt ditetur de bonis domini ne in nostros liberos nostra diuidatur
haereditas. This shall attend in the University upon some one man that shall be
head of an house. And in time it may so fall out, that in delicijs and
delictis nutritus Archidia conatu dignus habeatur, he shall be a fit man to be
an Archdeacon. Another, that by reason of his poverty has no friends, vndique
sedulus circuit, rangeth up and down the country: obsequitur blanditur,
simulat and dissimulat, with cap and knee he attends on his patron, if at
the last he may intrude himself in patrimonium crucifixi and bona domini, upon
the goods of the Church: quae sola ex omnibus hodie inueniuntur exposita, the
which alone at this day are laid open for every one, in the mean season he
unto whom these goods appertain which is Christ, peregre profectus est, he is
gone abroad, in plenilunio rediturus, at the full moon he purposes to
return: and of all these he will severely exact his own. If any think that I
have gone further the^ I should, he is deceived, Bernard de bo^is deserendis.
these words are not mine but Bernards. Saint Paul he points at these
teachers and tells us: quae sua sunt quaerentes non quae Jesus Christi, they
seek those things that concern themselves, and not those things which
concern the honor of god. Such a one was Nicholas one of the seven deacons:
and Simo^ Magus if he could have purchased the holy Ghost with his money, he
would not have been a loser. Livings of the Church are saleable ware in these
days, sundry intrude themselves into liuinges, of the which they are unworthy.
Giez^ in the 4. Reg. c. 5. for his simony was stricken with a leprosy. Judas
in selling our redemption hanged himself. Simon Magus for his voluntary
proffer, he was utterly rejected by S. Peter Act. 8. Christ he drove away
these money changers out of his temple.

Men so that they may obtain riches what ways they use they care not. Church
lands are not greatly sought for: but if they lie in their way, they can easily
be entreated to take them. Our auncestores, thought it works of charity to
build Churches, and their progeny upon a zeal, pull down Churches ecclesias
Christi quas fundauere parents, perdere nitunturnati pietate carentes. I will
leave this, and hasten to the third and last part of my division. Let us
beloved, live together in Christian unity, verily says Christ, if you love
one another then are you my Disciples, let us avoid al excess whatsoever, and
every one labor to maintain the truth, for

(...)
