A DIVINE CENTVRIE OF Spiritual Sonnets.

Altera Musa venit, quid nisit and alter Apollo.

LONDON Printed by John VVindet. 1595.



TO THE RIGHT REVERENDE FATHER IN GOD, the Right honorable and my very good
Lord, TOBIE (by the grace of God) Bishop and Count Palatine of Duresme and
Sadberge: Increase of all true zeal, honor and perpetual consolation of mind
and body.
RIGHT gracious, and my very good Lord (if in any measure I could have better
devised, consonant with the weakness of my slender faculties how for so many
your honorable great favors to me worthless, neither of any the least
deserueable: publicly to divulge, and promulgate the reverend gratuitye
which I still by numberless respects of duty, pretend and bear to your
worthiness) it should have been even in the mightiest power of my wits, and
vertuousest endeavors more (though not better) manifested. But since it both
proceeds from a francke spirit, and the chiefest treasures of my better
part: I beseech your good Lordship (not only as in tollerating this
boldness braunching from the firm confidence of my mere love and duty,
but that also in gracious admittance of your honorable Patronage) you would
dignifie these spiritual Poemes: which this last year in my late little
trauails had through some parts of France (as tribute of that measure of
wit, and invention, which it has pleased almighty God of his super abundant
grace, and mercy to endue my feeble spirit withal) I daily to his honor and
service by prescribed task, devoted. And albeit it nothing near (by millions
of sacred degrees) attayneth to the glory of this divine subject, and
argument: yet was it written (I call his sacred Majesty to record, that I
neither for vain glory nor my justification speak it) in lively touch,
motion, and feeling-anguishe of spirit, void of all colorable varnishe, and
hypocrisy: and therefore more fit for their spiritual consolation to be
perused of diverse, whom numerous Orations move much more then proase: and to
that end these (at motion of some others my wel-deseruing friends) I have
committed to the public tipographicall Theater of general censure, which if
they shall his omnipotency (in whose honor by me most unworthy vassal of
sin and mortallitie they were composed) please, then am I most pleased,
fortunate, and comforted for ever. And then I doubt not but they shall also
hightly stand with your Lordshippes good liking and contentment: to whom if
in favor these shall in this world pass, I much less depend of other men's
opinions: referring them alone (next under God) to your honors virtuous
protection, and the protection of your honor to the great Protector, and
disposer of all honors and blessings. With which I beseech his mightiness
indue your good Lordship, and yours to his best pleasure and your dear souls
comfort. From London this 30. of August. 1595.

Your Honors in all spiritual devotion assured. Bar. Barnes.

To the favorable and Christian Reader.
I Have published (courteous Reader) an hundredth Quatorzaines in honor of the
greatest disposer of all great honors; wherein, if through secret, and
inseparable combat betwixt earth and my spirit, the privy motions, and sting
of diverse wounds, as they did succeed and grieve my soul, manifested appear:
Let them (though not in these, that singular virtue to contricion, may mouingly
persuade and stir up your Spirit to Divine contemplation of your Ghostly
comfort) remain yet as remembrancers to kindle more gracious and rich spirits
of zeal and pure holiness in your more Copious and Facile prepared wits and
natures: Which only as they be in respect of all other creatures reasonable,
and most Divine; so ought they to be (likewise) in all reason employed to the
propagation, honor and mightiness of his Divinity; whose virtue abundantly
moves upon all unworthy creatures of his hands: but upon us (the models of
his similitude, and liknes) in that large measure, which as it is ineffable, so
does it by nature enjoin us to glorify the singular operations, of his
omnipotent hands.

The glorious subject, as it is matchless, and incomparable for Tytles and
Mightiness, so would it (in some richer and more copious Inventions) raise
the tryumphant charyot of your sacred Muses, above the starre-bearing
firmament, and upon the spiritual Pegasus of celestial poesy in divine
harmony of spirit bear the writer to that maiesticall Throane, and Hemicycle
of incomparable state and comfortable dignity where he should (with consent
and assistaunce of Angels and heavenly Spirits, to the musical stringes of
royal crowned Harper's) for ever sing ALLELVYA, Salvation, Honor, Glory,
Renown and Eternity be ascribed always to the greatest God of gods, King of
kings, Lord of lords, only victorious, tryumphant, merciful and gracious:
And if any man feel in himself (by the secret fire of immortal Entheusiasme
the learned motions of strange and divine passions of spirit, let him refine
and illuminate his numerous Muses with the most sacred splendor of the holy
Ghost, and then he shall (with divine Salust the true learned french Poet)
find that as humane fury makes a man less then a man, and the very same
with wild unreasonable beasts: so divine rage and sacred instinct of a man
makes more then man, and leads him (from his base terrestrial estate) to
walk above the stars with Angels immortally.

The several passions of comfort and ghostly combats, albeit they stand in
my book confused, and peradventure therefore may to some readers seem
disordered and strange, as in their unequal coherence of praises, penitence
and fearful afflictions, yet upon some especial occasions and in earnest
true motions of the spirit were they devised: and I therefore in this respect
implore your general favors. Read I beseech you, and with singleness of
zeal and true spirit give censure according to my good will and endeavors.

Farewell. Bar. Barnes.

INVOCATION To the Divine Father of sacred Muses.
SONNET. I.
NO more lewd lays of Lighter loves I sing,
Nor teach my lustful Muse abus'de to fly,
With Sparrowes plumes and for compassion cry,
To mortal beauties which no succor bring.
But my Muse fethered with an Angels wing,
Divinely mounts aloft unto the sky.
Where her loves subjects with my hopes do lie:
For Cupids darts prefigurate hell's sting.
His quenchlesse Torch foreshowes hell's quenchles fire,
Kindling men's wits with lustful lays of sin:
Thy wounds my Cure dear Savior I desire
To pearce my thoughts thy fiery Cherubinne,
(By kindling my desires) true zeal to infuse,
Thy love my theme and holy Ghost my Muse.
SONNET. II.
Sweet Savior from whose fiuefold bleeding wound,
That comfortable Antidote distilde:
Which that rank poison has expeld and killed,
In our old wretched father Adam found.
In Paradise when he desertlesse crowned,
Received it as the enuenomde Serpent willde,
In steed of lustful eyes with arrows fillde:
Of sinful loves which from their beams abound.
Let those sweet blessed wounds with streams of grace,
Abundantly solicit my poor spirit:
Rauish'de with love of thee that did debase
Thy self on earth that I might heaven inherit,
O blessed sweet wounds fountains of electre,
My wounded souls balm, and saluations nectre.
SONNET. III.
SAcred redeemer, let my prayers pearce
Thine ears to contrite sinners open still
At my hearts altar made, where (to fulfill
My vows) I sacrifice in humble verse.
Which do with troubled penitence rehearse
My ceaselesse sins repugnant to thy will:
Let mercy mittigate the large black bill
Of my dead sins: Dear judge the doom reuerse
Which with foul guilt agrieu'de my conscience gave,
By justice justly damned to quenchlesse fire:
Oh my dear Savior crucified, me save!
Let my contricions incense up aspire
(With true zeal kindled on my Altar heart)
And of thy sweet salvation purchase part.
SONNET. IIII.
Dear comforter (with whose dear precious blood,
The costly ransom of my sins was paid,
For my redemption murdered and betraide,
Sole spotless Lamb before the throane which stood
Opening the seven sealde Book: who for pure food
Thy precious self in sacrifice had laid
To my souls sustenance: which had decaide
If thou had not been lifted on the roode)
O let my soul (thy Temple) be perfum'de
With sacred incense of thy virtuous grace:
Which having with repentant sighs presum'de
(Though charg'de with sin) to kneel before thy face,
Yet for like Alms (in mercy) does implore,
Though last in work, with those which wrought before.
SONNET. V.
BLessed creator let thine only son
(Sweet blossom stock and root of David's line
The clear bright morning star) give light and shine
On my poor spirit, which has new begun
With his loves praise and with vain loves has done:
to my poor Muse let him his ears incline,
Thirsting to taste of that celestial wine
Whose purple stream has our salvation won.
O gracious bridegroom, and thricelouely bride
Which come and fill who will for ever cry,
Water of life to no man is deny'de:
Fill still who will if any man be dry.
O heavenly voice! I thirst, I thirst and come
For life, with other sinners to get some.
SONNET. VI.
PVre sacrifice, once offered for us all,
Even all which were defilde with deadly sin:
Let me poor deadly sinner, who begin
With voice and heart repentant thee to call,
And cry that find my self about to fall
Into that quenchlesse lake, repleate within
With howling fiends which ever gnash and grin,
Have Audience from thy throane celestial.
Dear spotless sacrifice (which did descend
And as a man for mankindes safety died,
And ransackt Hels foul dungeon without end:
Enlarging sinners which therein were ty'de)
Since thou did die that sinners sau'de might be,
I am a wicked sinner (Lord) save me.
SONNET. VII.
WHite spotless Lamb (whose precious sweet bloodshed
The whole worlds sinful Debt has satisfied:
For sinners scorned, whipp'de, wounded, crucified,
Behold my sinful soul by Satan led
Even to the gates of Hell: where will be red
My consciences black book: unless suppli'de
Be (to those leaves past number) thy wounds wide:
Whose purple issue which for sinners bled,
Shall wash the Register of my foul sin,
And thence blot out the vile memorial:
Then let thy blessed Angel enter in
My temple purged, and that historiall
(Of my sins numberless) in deep Seas cast:
So shall I be newborn, and saved at last.
SONNET. VIII.
Lion of Judah (which do judge and fight
With endless justice, whose anointed head
Was once with wounding thorns environed,
But now with sacred Crowns by glorious right:
Whose glorious host succeedes in armor white,
Before whose face so many millions fled,
And whose Imperial name, no man could read)
Illuminate my thoughts, with the beams bright
Of that white powrefull and celestial Dove:
Kindle my spirit with that sacred heat,
Which me may ravish with an heavenly Love:
Whilst I thy ceaselesse graces do repeat,
Down powrde in full abundance to mankind,
Which comfort in my soul (poor wretch) I find.
SONNET. IX.
O Gracious shephearde (for thy simple flock
By guilefull Goats to ravening Wolves misled,)
Who thine own dear hearts precious blood did shed,
And Lambelike offered to the butchers block;
O gracious shepherd (vnremouing rock
Of succor to such all as thither fled)
Respect one of thy flock which followed
These cursed Goats, and does repentant knock.
To be with mercy taken to thy fold,
I know thy grace does still for wanderers look,
I was a lost sheep once (dear Lord) behold,
And in compassion take me with thy hook:
In one lost sheep new found thou do rejoice,
Then know thy sheep, which knows his shepherds voice.
SONNET. X.
Heavenly Messiah (sweet anointed King,
Whose glory round about the world does reach,
Which every beast, plant, rock, and river teach,
And aerie birds like Angels ever sing,
And every gale of wind in gustes does bring,
And every man with reason ever preach)
Behold, behold that lamentable breach:
Which (my distressed conscience to sting)
False spiteful Satan in my soul does make:
Oh (sweet Messiah) lend some gracious oil
To cure that wound, even for thy mercies sake:
Least (by that breach) thy temple he dispoyle.
Help, help, my conscience thither him does lead,
And he will come, if thou bruise not his head.
SONNET. XI.
Merciful Jesus thine eyeliddes of grace
Decline unto a wicked sorry sinner
Humbly prostrate, who (but a new beginner)
Begges that thine holy Ghost might Satan chase
From his foul soul, ordaind for thy palace:
as it did Mary Mag'daline save, and win her
From seven foul spirits which did reign within her:
But now behold a more contagious place,
A place where the seven mortal sins root take,
From whence beside all ougly crimes branch out,
With each of these seven legions do partake
Of unclean spirits raging round about:
Oh now dear Jesus, Jesus show thy power,
And drive them forth, least they my soul devour.
SONNET. XII.
Bountiful Lord Christ (whose hand liberal
Is still outstretched for man's sustenance
Which we much thankelesse with small souenance
recount, when in such larges it does fall:
But that which all men in especial
Ought to maintain in high rememberance,
(Naylde feet and hands, and heart pearc'de with a Lance
For our redemption from the sinful thrall)
With fervent zeal, true Love, fear reverent,
Is quite forgot of most: and yet these be
The chief dear signs for our salvation sent:
Oh blessed Christ, bestow thy grace on me
Bestow this blessed grace (dear Christ) that I
May hope new life by thy death, when I die.
SONNET. XIII.
Dear David's son (whom thy forefathers have
In Psalms and prophecies unborn foretold,
That hell in Adamantine chains should hold,
And thence poor sinners both enlarge and save
Whom former blindness to damnation gave)
Me swallowed in the gulf of sin behold:
A Lamb amongst wild wolves (once of thy fold)
Whom Satan now does for his portion crave:
Dear son of David help, yet help with speed.
Thy wounds bleed fresh in my remembrance yet,
Which blessed wounds did for offenders bleed:
These wounds I will not in distress forget,
For all chief hope of my salvation, grounds
In Nectre of those comfortable wounds.
SONNET. XIIII.
O Benign Father let my suits ascend,
And please thy gracious ears from my soul sent;
Even as those sweet perfumes of incense went
From our forefathers altars: who did lend
Thy nosthrils to that mirrh which they did send,
Even as I now crave thine ears to be lent.
My soul, my soul, is wholly, wholly bent
To do thee condign service, and amend,
To fly for refuge to thy wounded breast;
To suck the balm of my salvation thence,
In sweet repose to take eternal rest,
As thy child folded in thine arms defense:
But then my flesh me thought (by Satan fir'de)
Said my proud sinful soul in vain aspirde.
SONNET. XV.
Pitiful Lord (whose endless mercy reaches
From East to West and the worlds compass fills,
Whose charge imperious (as thy spirit wills)
Things senseless as in life obedience teaches:
Whose bright omnipotence the Dumb borne preaches:
Whose grace in full abundance down distilleth
To contrite sinners, which old Satan kills,
And wounded spirits heales, whom sin appeacheth)
With those bright eyes of mercy me respect,
From my soul (made thy temple) Satan drive,
That my pure spirit may thy praise detect,
And from death by thy lively grace revive:
That (sin and Hell suppressed) I might appear
After deaths conquest, by thy mercies clear.
SONNET. XVI.
SVre corner stone of that rock firm and hie,
(Where of eternal life the fountain springs,
Whose virtue to the soul such comfort brings
That he which tastes never shall be dry,
Nor ever slave of death again shall die)
Oh let thy blessed Angel carry wings
And arm my soul: which loathing earthly things
For lively water to that rock would fly:
There never dare approach my Ghostly foe,
Which would from number of thy Saints exempt
My silly soul: sweet Christ let him forgo
That dear souls purchase: which he does attempt.
Remember (my dear Lord) thou died to save it
Then never shall the roaring Lion have it.
SONNET. XVII.
MYlde King of Salem Lord of lovely peace,
(Who do in brother like agreement joy,
In mercy mourning when thou do destroy,
Where justice condign anger does increase)
Behold a wretch, whose sins do never cease
With heinous guilt his conscience to annoy:
Who by that means cannot calm rest enjoy
Behold dear Christ, and for my free release
(Upon contrition) those offenses blot
Out of those large inditements, which be given
By my just conscience: let them be forgot.
Forget, forgive (dear Lord) for I am driu'n
(By their remembrance) almost to despair:
Which my souls ruin ready would prepare.
SONNET. XVIII.
HYe priest of Syon (whose eternal throne
With endless right, and mercy seated is:
Which all knees (when his name repeated is)
Adore: whose rule has times swift wings outgone,
Whose Scepter is an everlasting one,
Whose Monarchy never completed is)
This humble Alter see, which heated is
With fervent zeal I bear to thee alone:
Which from the Syon of my soul aspireth,
Even from this zealous heart unto the chair
Of everlasting power, where it desires
(Through pleasing incense) for me to prepayre
A glorious Crown, which never will take rust:
Which grant (Dear Savior) in whose help I trust.
SONNET. XIX.
Lovely Samaritane, draw near, and view
The mangled object of a wretched soul,
Afflicted deadly with a conscience foul:
The just sting of such sins as my soul slew,
Whose faults be numberless though years be few.
Oh note them not sweet Lord in thy black scroule
Which may my dear saluations hope control,
When breath and body shall be changed new:
But these foul desperate wounds (dear Christ) up bind,
Cherishd with oil of mercies and sweet grace:
And let thy Gospel minister each kind
Of heavenly food, and be thy Church the place
Where I may me repose to purchase cure,
That (when thou come) I may be sound and pure.
SONNET. XX.
GReat God of Abraham (whose eternal power
Shakes the worlds unsure foundations,
Whose frown affrights all Kings and nations,
whose anger does like flames of fire devour,
Whose triumph coming is in unknown hour,
Whose praise exceedes all mortal men's Orations,
Whose time of grace (for sinners preparations)
Thou do enlarge, to yield us more succor)
Like Father chastise me with tender twigges,
Not like an angry Judge with yren Rod,
Least Satan purchase conquest by despair.
That (when heaven shall shake down her Stars like Figs)
Thou (both as equal judge, and gentle God)
For me the Crown of glory may prepare.
SONNET. XXI.
SOle hope and blessing of old Isreal's line
(Which gave by promise to his blessed seed
A land that should all blessings plenty breed,
Rivers of pleasant Honnie, Milk, and wine,
Whose offspring numberless thou calledst thine,
Whom with thine Angels Manna thou did feed
Being before from Pharoes bondage freede,
When Moses first thy statutes did resign)
Behold dear God, one in these days of grace:
Since by thy precious blood thou freede mankind,
By promise which a portion and a place
Amongst thy children hops for to find
In Gospels comfort, through thy bloudes dear prise,
Oh let him purchase such a Paradise!
SONNET. XXII.
Fountain of life, and endless happiness,
O quench these wordly sparks of Satan's fire,
Enkindled in my fancies and desire:
Rock of salvation and all blessedness
Defend me charg'de with sinful wickedness;
Spirit of comfort let thy breath inspire
My soul infected, ready to retire,
And carnal mocions striving to repress.
I thirst (clear fountain) for the stream of life,
I fall far set from my saluations rock,
And Satan with my Spirit is at strife,
Urging that I am seuer'd from thy flock:
Yet my dear Savior, strong rock, and sweet spirit,
Through mercy, my poor soul shall heaven inherit.
SONNET. XXIII.
FAther of Piety by this we know
The glories greater of thy gracious love
Then of desires which carnal fancies move:
For if we praise a mortal shape below
By flattery their Diuinities we show,
Comparing them their perfectness above:
Their cheeks to Roses, their necks white to Dove,
Their eyes to stars from whence all fortunes flow:
Their eyes effects to the Meridian Sun,
Their modest thoughts to the cold Virgin moon.
Oh fools, fools ignorant, when this is done,
We know we flatter them, then Muses soon
Why turn you not your numbers musical
To God above man's praise which rules all?
SONNET. XXIIII.
PVre spotless offspring of ungrateful Jury
(At morning, midday, and at quiet night)
I neither will forget thy praise, nor might:
When men ungrateful shall provoke thy fury
I shall be safe, if that dear grace procure I
And find sweet comfort of eternal light,
Among Cherubes, Seraphins, and Angels bright.
But if thy precepts I forget, then sure I
With sinners must expect my portion dew,
Because thy grace celestial I abused.
And in thy face (with vile contorcion) threw
Those sacred blessings stubbornely refused:
At length I like an Angel shall appear
In spotless white, an Angels Crown to wear.
SONNET. XXV.
GLorious Jehovah Oh how full of power,
How full of sacred maruailes be thy deeds!
Thou that with plenties every creature feeds,
And blessed bounties which bestows each hour.
With hand of mercy sending forth a shower
In large abundance to produce good seeds,
My wounded heart with pearsed conscience bleedes,
When I remember thee my souls succor:
Who was so many times by me forgot,
Who by me wicked, vilest, heinous wretch,
Profaned often have been, but praised not:
At length though late) mine arms, mine heart I stretch,
My soul, my sinful soul I lift to thee,
Who (with thy praises triumph clear) would be.
SONNET. XXVI.
GReat God of larges, bountiful good giver
Of endless blessings (as thou did bestow
On me poor wretch, that reason how to know
Thee without all beginnig endless liver)
Power likewise down thy graces lovely River,
And let it (Lord) my poor heart ouerflow:
These like sweet fire (which Divine spirits blow)
May clearly burn in zeal of thy Loves ever:
That all my thoughts thy Testament embrace,
That all my wits thy tearmelesse grace set out,
That by thee praising I may show thy grace
Which in large Talent thou to me let out:
That after good account (past term of ages)
I may receive a trusty stewards wages.
SONNET. XXVII.
HIgh King of Kings (who with thine awful cheek
Controles the stern winds, sinful land, rough Seas:
Who chides in thunder when we do displease,
Whom all things fear and tremble at his beck,
Yoking in one the Kings and beggars neck
Without respect (in wrath) yet will appease
His wrath, when sinners penitent shall prease
His throne (in zeal sincere) without contecke.
Oh God just, merciful, and gracious,
Full of all plenty, blessing, and kindness,
Whose endless rule past limit, spacious,
Illuminate my soul, and banish blindness:
Consider how this sinful soul (oppressed
With nature) by thy grace would be redrest.
SONNET. XXVIII.
Fortress of hope, Anchour of faithful zeal,
Rock of affiance, Bulwark of sure trust,
(In whom all nations for salvation must
Put certain confidence of their souls weal)
Those sacred mysteries dear Lord reveal
Of that large volume, righteous and just:
From me (though blinded with this earthly dust)
Do not those gracious mysteries conceal.
That I by them as from some beam some Lamp,
May find the bright and right direction
To my soul blinded, marching to that Camp.
Of sacred soldiers: whose protection
He (that victorious on a white horse rides)
Takes, and evermore triumphant guides.
SONNET. XXIX.
RAyons of glory beams of endless joy,
Cheerish my soul, illuminate my wits:
Ravish my senses with celestial fits,
That mistes infernal do not them anoy:
All carnal motions weaken and acoy,
Even from that beam some throne (where glorious sits
The Lord of light whose eye no shade admits)
That filthy Dragon my sonles foe destroy,
Which in foul pit of dreadful darkness lives,
Repleat with horror, and contagious smell:
Whose shadow, noisome mist and blindness gives,
Raysde from the infectious damps of ugly Hell.
Rayons of comfort through my Temples pearse,
And consecrate my Muse to sacred verse.
SONNET. XXX.
HIgh mighty God of Gods, and King of Kings
(Whose awful charge through the round world does run,
Even from the rising of the glorious Sun
Unto the Seas, where he his Chariot brings)
What instruments, or what harmonious strings
Shall to thy graces, which be new begun,
And have so many souls with comfort won,
Give praises due to such celestial things
Praise and thanksgiving to the Lord surrender,
And pay thy duties to thy God most highest,
Least thou before his throane a vile offender
Appear, when sin and Hell (to conscience nighest)
Accuse thee wicked sinner, for that grace
Which God bestowde, and thou cast in his face.
SONNET. XXXI.
O Glorious Patron of eternal bliss,
Victorious conqueror of Hell and death,
Oh that I had whole western winds of breath,
My voice and tongue should not be so remiss:
My notes should not be so rare and demisse:
But every river, forest, hill, and heath
Should echo forth his praise, and underneath
The worlds foundations sound that it is his:
He which did place the worlds foundations,
He which did make the Sun, the Moon and stars,
Who with his blood redeemed all nations,
And willing none from Paradise debarres,
Shall not all instruments and voices sound
His glories, which in all these things abound?
SONNET. XXXII.
THe well of life, the forte of happiness,
Rock of affiance, Pillar of sure trust,
Anchor of hope, Treasure repining rust,
Star of direction, Ease of wretchedness,
Great Lord of largess, Judge of wickedness,
Balm of salvation, Ayder of the just,
Fountain of grace, Quickner of Clay and dust,
Cure of disease, Releeuer of distress,
Bright Sun of comfort, Justice of true peace,
The branch of glory, and the Fruit of bliss,
Kingdoms disposer, Husband of increase,
For penitence who pardons things amiss,
And in contrition daily who delights:
What man can give due glorious Epithites?
SONNET. XXXIII.
THrice puissant general of true Christian host
(Whose voice it self is dreadful thundercracke,
Whose wrath does nether fire nor lightning lack,
Whose stormy frown makes tremble every coast:
Chasing thy fearful foes from post to post,
Whose hands force can all the worlds forces sack,
Who turns his foemens colors into black,
Whose murdering thunderboults for arrows be,
Whose sword victorious, Trenchant, double edged,
His holy Scripture is, whose foes convert,
The point to their own breast, and have alleged
Vain arguments thy dear Saints to subvert)
As thou dear God art judge, so give thy doom
(In justice) to subvert ambitious Rome.
SONNET. XXXIIII.
BEhold dear Father (with those gracious eyes
Which all the world with their beams glory brighten)
My plaints, and then my cause in justice righten.
My soul repentant still for mercy cries
Pricked with vain sins, which in my thoughts arise:
Hope of thy mercy does my sorrow lighten,
Fears (least more sins ensue) with my soul fighten,
And true zeales of thy love my thoughts surprise.
But angry justice seems (with irefull threate)
To give black sentence of damnation
unto my soul distressed, and does repeat
Old sins, provoking desperation:
Oh save me, save me (Lord) least that I fall
Into damnation, save Lord when I call.
SONNET. XXXV.
A Rise thou mighty God of heaven, rise up,
Against thy sinful foes of Babell rise:
And scatter thou like dust thine enemies:
Let them dregs of thine indignation suppe:
That have been drunken with the strumpets cup:
Like smoke which vanishes into the skies
Disseuer them, and like the wax (which fries
Before the fire) so melt, and burn them up.
O magnify the Lord, and praises sing
Unto the mighty God of heaven, who makes
The clouds to thunder, and his boults does wing
With fire and fury: who the round world shakes:
Before whose face Kings with their Armies fly,
And at whose feet proud Emperors dead lie:
SONNET. XXXVI.
LOrd (with the light of thy clear countenance)
My sinful troubled soul illuminate:
And with thy mighty shoulders eleuate
My feeble spirit, and his state advance:
From thy sweet breast (pearc'd sometimes with a Lance
For my redeemption from accursed state)
Lend one dear drop, whose force shall animate
My soul infect with sins misgouernaunce:
Then purge my spirit by thine holy Ghost,
And as an Angel let it mildly rest,
In thy thrice blessed bosom wished most
By my poor soul, with grievous sins oppressed:
And let thy blessed feet suppress all those,
Which to thee, and my soul be vowed foes.
SONNET. XXXVII.
O My dear God how shall my voice prevail?
How shall my tongue give utterance to my mind?
Where shall my thankful hartfree passage find?
My slender voice, tongue feeble, and heart frail
(Before they can give condign praise) will fail:
I cannot celebrate (in their due kind)
Thy glories numberless, which Angels find
Even to surmount all Angels best travail.
Oh my dear God, my comfort, my sollace,
My swift soul flies (with my Divine thoughts wings)
Even to thy bosom. Oh let it embrace,
And triumph in my sweet saluations springs:
For I believe thou will not me forsake,
Who for me did thy Son a Martyr make.
SONNET. XXXVIII.
GRacious, Divine, and most omnipotent,
Receive thy servants Tallent in good part,
Which hid it not, but willing did convert
It to best use he could when it was lent:
The sum (though slender, yet not all misspent)
Receive dear God of grace, from cheerful heart,
Of him, that knows, how merciful thou art,
And with what grace to contrite sinners bent:
I know my fault, I did not as I should,
My sinful flesh against my soul rebeld,
But since I did endeavor what I could,
Let not my little nothing be withheld
From thy rich treasuries of endless grace;
But (for thy sake) let it procure a place.
SONNET. XXXIX.
I Nuironed with dangers manifold,
At home and foreign both by land and wave,
(Where change of Nations diverse dangers gave,
And nouels erst which I did not behold:
Much like a doubtful Pilgrim, whom infould
Millions of woes, that knows no help to have,
Nor how from dangers pressed himself to save)
Was I: but when me thought I perish should,
My God of mercy did my life redeem,
My God of mercy did my soul sustain,
Oh then how well shall it my Muse beseem
To praise the Lord, and him collaude again?
Nay try (vain Poets) try, that King, that place,
If God, and heaven, give not your Muse most grace.
SONNET. XL.
MY days be few, my sins past number be,
Add to my days (Oh God) more time of grace,
And mercy to my sins: behold my case,
With eyes of gracious pity look on me:
My wounded and afflicted conscience see,
My soul afraid to stand before thy face:
In pity Lord, (dear Lord) a longer space,
Or else in mercy (Father) set me free,
I find high justice does my soul condemn,
Which Satan urges still to my despair:
Satan avoid, thy malice I contemn,
Al thy suggestions vain illusions are.
Of thy temptations this is my construction,
Then perish in vain hope of my destruction.
SONNET. XLI.
TEmpted in foreign nation by that foe,
Which both my soul and bodies health enuies,
And vexed with several strange perplexities,
Whose cause or reason I could never know,
Or why my mind should mourn afflicted so
To thee my God, I turn my sinful eyes,
(Whom I provoke with my remorse full cries)
Some succor for my vexed thoughts to show.
That (as I have my native Country changed)
So likewise from the world I may be weaned:
And as my weed with nation is estranged,
I so may shine in Christian arms unfeigned:
And as I leave my nations true language,
My Muse may change for a diuiner rage.
SONNET. XLII.
OH you light Poets (whose Ardure divine
Inkindl'd with immortal fury was
Ordaind therefore, all other wits to pass;
Because those faculties you should incline
To make with praise the most praise-worthie shine:
From sacred numbers, roll'de in just compass,
Sphoerelike in Music) turn your tunes alas
To ravish ears with notes of your engine.
By these you shall the God of Gods collaude,
The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords exalt.
Make not Divine wit foul affections baude,
It is against that holy Ghost a fault.
Who therefore with his beams your wits did brighten,
That your wits likewise should his glory lighten.
SONNET. XLIII.
Satan abroad (when I was left alone
A stranger and distress'de) did me assail:
Finding my nature hoped to prevail,
And make sure entrance where he could find none.
A gentle nature soonest overthrown
He thought, supposing (for his more avail)
The sting of sin should help if others fail:
But now behold Gods mercy to me shown.
He gracious, loving, merciful, and wise,
Declared expressly that I was ordaind
Unto salvation, for that enterprise
Of Satan's mou'de my soul (before profaind)
To purge it self, with that repentant grace,
Which me shall save from hell, and him displace.
SONNET. XLIIII.
O Lord increase in me true faith, and love:
Faith of salvation in thine only son,
And his love that has my souls health begun,
Who from my soul (his incense) will remove
That deadly sting which sin did under shoue.
O Lord increase my zeal, and let it run
Through my souls Organes: that thereby be done
A pleasing incense to thy throane above:
O Lord increase in me that earnest care
To make a mends for those high sins by past,
And equal charity to work welfare,
Unto my neighbors bound in fetters fast:
That by faith, Love, true zeal, and charity,
(Through thee) my soul may find felicity.
SONNET. XLV.
O What great comfort is it to give praise
To God the Lord of heaven, Oh what comfort
Is it abroad his praises to report,
And of his wondrous works our notes to raise?
To lift our Muses from base earthly lays
To that Dinine angelical consort,
Bearing Palm, Olive, and immortal Baies
With change of harmonies in one consort:
To glorify the mighty God of glory,
To magnify the mighty God of might,
To triumph in the guide of victory,
To celebrate the Justice of all right,
To make our refuge where all help is found,
To cure our wounded souls with his sole wound.
SONNET. XLVI.
OH Sun and Moon the days and Euenings lights,
With powerful Stars bright subjects of the same,
Archangels, Angels praise his holy name:
The glorious Cherubin which fiery fights
With his proud foes: the Seraphes, holy sprights,
Who with sweet himnes record his endless fame,
The dreadful thunder with his angry flame,
Which (when he list) all men, and beasts affrights:
Rain, Hayle, Snow, tempest, clouds, and bitter wind,
Darkness, and light, Earthquakes, and foggie mist,
With Flies and fethered fowls of several kind,
My soul and spirit in his praise assist:
Who (past all human wonder) did create
Us all, that all his praise might propagate.
SONNET. XLVII.
OH what celestial Angel will down send
Into these eyes some dewy clouds of grace
To wash the furrows of my withered face
Defilde with sin? what spirit will me lend
Sufficient wind, that my sighs might ascend
And (with contrition) pearce to that palace,
From whence proceeds all succor and solace?
What Champion Michaell my soul to defend,
Will lend his puissant and victorious cross,
To conquer that old Serpent, which assayles
My feeble soul entombde in earthly dross?
Thy precious cross, that lance, those pearsing nails,
If he shall them, or their dear wounds epsy,
Will bruise his head, and yield me victory.
SONNET. XLVIII.
O Glorious conquest, and thrice glorious spear,
But seven times thrice more glorious the name,
By which thrice powerful we conjure the same:
Which but repeated does that Dragon fear,
That old Leuyathan whose jaws Lord tear.
Root out his tongue which does thy Saints defame,
And thy sweet Gospel seek to veil with shame:
This the chief conquest of all conquests wear,
For which Archangels, and all Angels might,
With Cherubins, and Seraphins out bring
Victorious Palms, arraide in sincere white:
For which al Saints might Alleluya sing,
Then glorious Captain, our chief God and man,
Break thou the Jaws of old Leuiathan.
SONNET. XLIX.
I Feel my soul in combat with the dust
Of sinful flesh, and ready to break out
From loathsome bondage, dreadlesse of all doubt:
I feel my soul (by shadows) sever must
From that base prison of terrestrial rust,
Where it shall triumph in celestial route
Of my forefathers Angels round about
That glorious throne of the faithful and just.
But yet my feeble flesh (surcharg'de with guilt)
Trembles at thought of death, but why should it
Fear coward death, since for my soul was spilt
His blood, that shall for me in triumph sit?
Death do thy worst, but yet (Lord) thine ear give,
Why I with David would not die but live.
SONNET. L.
I Would not die but hue (dear living Lord)
And to thy glory show that faculty,
With which thou did me worthless beautify:
Turning my Muse to that Divine concord,
Which I perceive does with my soul accord
In endless praise of thy Divinity.
But (if unworthy them to magnify,
Because my sinful mouth has not abhorr'de
To be before with vanities abus'de)
Thou loath my wicked tongue should them declare:
Thy will be done, which cannot be refus'de:
For death of sin the guerdon does prepare,
Yet when I die (dear God of Love and truth)
Remember not the follies of my youth.
SONNET. LI.
Break thou the jaws of old Leuiathan,
Victorious conqueror, break thou the jaws,
Which full of blasphemy malign thy laws:
Ready to curse, to lie, slander and banne,
Which nothing but abomination can:
Who like a ramping Lion with his paws
Thy little flock with daily dread adawes,
Antichrists Harrould who with pride began,
Even into thy triumphant throane to prease,
And therefore his first comfort had forgonne:
The bodies ruinor, and souls disease,
Bawd to that harlot of proud Babylon,
Which mortal men to mortal sins inuiteth,
Tear out those Fangues with which he thy flock biteth.
SONNET. LII.
FVll of celestial syrropes, full of sweet
are all thy precepts, full of happiness,
full of all comfort, full of blessedness
those salutations which our Savior greet:
O let us then contend (since it is meet)
to keep those laws with upright holiness,
oh let us use, and have in readiness
those sweet orations, prostrate at his feet:
Begging, imploring, weeping, smiling, kneeling
for succor, grace, and for our sins humbly
repentance mercies signs in our heart feeling:
Repent, and praise our God, for it is comely,
O nothing does a Christian more beseem,
Then him to praise that did his soul redeem.
SONNET. LIII.
Did thou redeem my soul, my sole salvation?
Oh with what ransom (Lord) did thou redeem it?
Even of so precious worth did he esteem it,
Because at our forefathers first creation,
He in his breast by sacred inspiration,
From his own mouth (which did so well so well beseem it)
Breathed a soul divine, then let us deem it
A gracious, precious and dear immolation,
For him to save our souls with his bloodshed,
For him to take man's nature, man to save,
For him to be whipped, nayl'd, torn, crucified,
For him to sweat in blood, to lie in grave,
For him (most mighty) to lie down beneath,
Where (for our life) he vanquished hell and death.
SONNET. LIIII.
THen awful sting of Paile deaths leaden darte,
Where is thy killing poison and thy pile?
Then fearful horrid Serpent full of guile
(Whose ugly kingdom hoped for his part,
The most of all poor souls in endless smart)
Where is thy dreadful conquest all this while?
Behold how Christian souls triumph and smile
To see thee bound, where thoufast burning art,
To see that sacred and victorious troop
(Whose Captain Lord of Lords, and King of Kings
Adorned with many Crowns, makes all Crowns stoop)
Which in high triumph Alleluya sings,
Makes God and Magog his fell fury find,
Which scattred fly like dust before the wind.
SONNET. LV.
FRom depth of fearful Hels eternal shade,
And bottomless descent into that lake,
In heat, and cold where sinners burn and quake:
Where all things vnconsum'de for ever fade,
At whose remembrance sinners are dismaide
For horror of those dreadful pangues which shake,
And for sweet succor intercession make,
Of their sins burden, and hell fire affraide:
Even from the fearful bottomless black pit,
(At whose remembrance my poor soul does tremble)
Save and deliver me, whereas I sit
Inuiron'd with despair, which does resemble
An Island (with rough seas enclosed round)
At every gust, in danger to be dround.
SONNET. LVI.
O That I might with the wise Prophet sing,
Mine heart is ready, ready to give praise!
But mine is not, though willing most always
To celebrate the glorious heavenly King
Poor heart, not worthy to that Angels wing
(Which with his glory through the world does paise
In heavenly number stemp'red with sweet phrase)
The least soft down of Plumage for to bring.
Then mild, then spotless, comfortable Dove,
Whose wings were sin of sins to violate,
Pure Bird of heavenly sollace, peace and Love,
With Rayons bright my soul illuminate,
From that false lustful Pygeon late returnde,
Which almost had both soul and body burnde.
SONNET. LVII.
THrough Satan's malice and my nature weak,
When in my soul I find my faith is dead,
Those sacred schoedes of comfort, then I read
Whose powrefull words the gates of hell can break:
Then faith in kindles fresh, and then I wreake
My wrath on Satan, and upon his head
Me thinks (like Michaell or Saint George) I tread:
Whilst he that erst against the Sun did beak
His foreswolne poisonous bulk, does vanquishdlie
In his own filth: and I (which lately was
Like to be swallowd by mine enemy)
Now safely like a conqueror may pass.
Behold my Captains puissance, who did this
To rid my soul from hell, and ransom his.
SONNET. LVIII.
COmfort thy self (poor soul) whom grief of sin
Down presses to the mouth of the lowest hell,
With contrite penitence thou know well
Him that will raise and it from danger bring:
Pray then, and praise the Lord, who will begin
To purge thy soul, and Satan's filth expel
Who thee defiles and in thee does dwell.
Oh Lord my voice shall praise and never linne
So long as thou shall lend breath to my voice,
My voice unto my soul shall spirit lend,
And in the comfort of my soul rejoice,
And (with my mouth) consent world without end
To speak, to praise, to glorify to singe,
That God, which to my soul does succor bring.
SONNET. LIX.
MY soul, my soul I feel, I feel is vexed,
My mind and thoughts in uncouth forte distressed,
My brains with fearful dreams by night oppressed,
My heart with strange discouragement perplexed,
My soles vnneathed unto my feet annexed,
My spirit with faint languor still distressed,
And help (Lord) help my soul, my soul addressed,
(By Melancholies poison) is connexed
In fetters serpentine of foul despair:
Death almost my life's ceasure has begun,
And (after) Satan will his books prepare
Blotted with ugly sins, past number done.
Oh my God, my dear God, help and assist:
Sin, death, and hell, my safety do resist.
SONNET. LX.
TVrne not away the sun shine of thy face
(Sweet God of comfort) from my troubled heart
Congeald with sin: do not (sweet Lord) depart
From him that penitently sues for grace.
Whose soul through countlesse sins (my whole lives space)
Benumbd, can scarcely feel contritions smart:
What Physic then shall serve, what help of art.
My dead soul to revive, and sin forth chase?
Even those pure Rayons of thy holy Ghost,
Those gracious beams of thy pure holy word
Shall mollify, give ease, and comfort most
To my cold frozen soul, and help afford:
Least with the frost of sin my soul astounded,
After deaths grief, should with hels sting be wounded.
SONNET. LXI.
WHere is that copious fury, whilom which
My brains in kindled with an uncouth fire?
Whose sacred spirit did of yore aspire
Above the glorious Sun with passions rich
Which thoughts in choice words to the stars would stich,
With sacred Music tempering my desire:
Contending holily to mount up higher
Whilst heavenly chaunture did my soul bewitch.
Oh precious Ardoure, by whose cheerful heat
The brain especial recreation finds,
The soul chief comfort, I thy beams entreat
Which cheer all plants, and beasts of sever all kinds
From my poor spirit, do not take away
Those rays which must with light my wits array.
SONNET. LXII.
FOr comfort (my dear God) I did attend,
And gracious ears to me thou did incline:
At my petitions thou did not repine,
But present succor to my suits did send.
Thou did direct my feet, which did depend
On thee my steadfast Rock, where brightly shine
Thy laws those Lamps to which my thoughts incline,
Which Lord grant that my soul do not offend.
In my mouth (Lord) thou did put a new song,
A due thanksgiving unto thee my God,
Which men shall fear to violate and wrong
Least they should be corrected with thy rod.
Oh God great wonders thou for me have wrought
(For thy Sons sake) who my salvation bought.
SONNET. LXIII.
O Dreadful horror and tormented mind,
Foul restless conscience charged with heinous sins,
Lothsom and numberless (when God begins
His fruitful harvest in fair sheafe to bind)
Has thee for tares to quenchlesse fire assigned,
Where tears, nor hope of vain repentance winnes
Thy soul from Torture: where grief never linnes
More pangues (by worm of conscience) to find.
Oh dreadful hour, when (to thy soul condemned)
The judge of truth and King of glory says
Hedlong with Lucifer fall, who contemned
My laws: fall down thou Fiend of little faith:
And with Devils damned thy due portion take,
Immortally to burn in fiery lake.
SONNET. LXIIII.
THen if derne Love of thy dear loving Lord,
His gentle graces Oil, his mercies balm,
His bounties numberless, his spirit calm,
His love of peace, and comfort in concord
Of the thrice sinful soul remain abhorrde:
If to thy soul sin wounded, no sweet Psalm,
Nor heavenly Harp, nor Organe, Trump, nor Shalme
Can comfort bring with their Divine record,
To make thee join in praise of his good grace,
Or to thy sinful soul correction give:
Yet let that quenchlesse lake and dreadful place,
(Where souls in deadly torment ever live,
Creator and creation which reprove)
Make thee repent for fear, if not for Love.
SONNET. LXV.
O Mercy, mercy, which much greater is
Then heavens themselves! Oh truth, Oh sincere truth,
Which to the clouds extends and insueth!
Of justice which does never judge amiss!
Oh age of ages, evermore in youth!
Oh Judge whose righteous punishment is ruth!
Which sinners worthless do with bounty bliss?
Oh where shall I find to my spirit voice?
Where to my voice sufficient choice of words?
To show how much my spirit does rejoice
In those large blessings, which thy grace affords?
My spirit first will fail with feeble voice:
Oh my Lord God lend spirit, life and breath,
That I may praise thy name to conquer death.
SONNET. LXVI.
IF death may by thy praises vanquished be,
Then voice, then spirit, let your organes break
And of his glory sing, criefoorth, and speak
Of him that succors, helps and comforts me,
Move toungue, sound voice, and from your slothful gree
Avoyde, and in this utter aunce be not weak:
If hell the venom of his fury wreake,
It shall not be of force to vanquish thee.
Oh laud, lauds, glory, gloryes, praise of praise,
Fame, honor, truth, eternitye, renoume,
And justice merciful ascribe always
To thee great Keyser of the thorny crown:
Which coronation infamous, did gain
That millions should rich glorious Crowns obtain.
SONNET. LXVII.
What thing in spacious heaven, round earth, deep seas,
Which thy praise worthy glories does not tell?
Whose golden Sunneshine ever does excel
In many millions far above all these:
So much exceeding (that if any prease
To give due praise) he shall perceive it well
His faculties against his will rebel,
And that his toungue cannot his spirit please.
Oh who shall give due glories to his name,
That glorifies all things, with decent pride?
Or what is he can signify the same,
Or in an equal share his praise divide
With those great bounties which he has bestowed,
And those great mercies (on us sinners) showed?
SONNET LXVIII.
THat bounteous largess of sweet mercies oil,
That peace of soul, that silver stream of grace,
That comfort of salvation, that palace
Of heavenly succor which death cannot spoil,
That fortitude, whose force no force can foil,
Of IESSES precious branch that royal race,
Who with his glory fills every place,
And with sweet dewes does cherish every soil:
Can with no flourish of eternal phrase
Be glorifi'de, according to desert:
Who with meet colors shall his glory blaze?
Who to the world shall condign praise impart?
What instrument, what voice, what toungue, what spirit
Shall give due commendations to demerite?
SONNET. LXIX.
WHo to the golden Suns long restless race,
Can limits set? what vessel can comprise
The swelling winds? what cunning can devise
(With queint Arithmetique) in steadfast place
To number all the stars in heavens palace?
What cunning Artist ever was so wise
Who (by the stars and planets could advise
Of all adventures the just course and case?
Who measured has the waters of the seas?
Who ever (in just ballaunce) poys'd the air?
As no man ever could the least of these
Perform with human labor, strength and care:
So who shall strive in volumes to contain
Gods praise ineffable, contends in vain.
SONNET. LXX.
Unto my spirit lend an Angels wing,
By which it might mount to that place of rest,
Where Paradise may me relieve oppressed.
Lend to my tongue an Angels voice to sing
Thy praise my comfort, and for ever bring,
My notes thereof from the bright East to West.
Thy mercy lend unto my soul distressed:
Thy grace unto my wits; then shall the sling
Of righteousness, that monster Satan kill:
Who with despair my dear salvation dared,
And like the Philistine, stood breathing still
Proud threats against my soul, for heaven prepared:
At length I like an Angel shall appear
In spotless white, an Angels Crown to wear.
SONNET. LXXI.
O Glorious Crown more precious many ways,
Then simple human Temples can deserve,
Thrice glorious God who does that Crown reserve
For men unworthy to set out his praise.
Oh mortal Temples what Muse can you raise,
Which unhard precious spirits does reserve
His praise most meritorious to serve?
Admit that past all number were your days,
Admit your spirit more then the four winds,
Admit your learning be (by more degrees)
Above the Seraphins, admit all kinds
Of Musickes instruments inferior were
(In heavenly tunes and sacred harmonies)
To thy sweet voice, all cannot his praise bear.
SONNET. LXXII.
THe sun of our souls light thee would I call,
But for our light thou did the bright Sun make,
Nor reason that thy Majesty should take
Thy chiefest subjects Epithites at all.
Our chief directions star celestial
(But that the stars for our directions sake,
Thou fixed, and can at thy pleasure shake)
I would thee name: The Rock substantial
Of our assurance I would term thy name,
But that all Rocks by thy command were made:
If King of Kings thy Majesty became,
Monarch of Monarchs I thee would have said,
But thou gives kingdoms, and makes Crowns unstable:
By these I know thy name ineffable.
SONNET. LXXIII.
TRiumphant conqueror of death and hell,
Behold what legions (though in vain) conspire,
Thy Temple militant to set on fire,
And Saints which in thy sanctuary dwell
To burn, whilst they against thy power rebel:
See how like bloody tyrants they desire
Ambitiously to rise and mount up higher,
Like Lucifer which to perdition fell.
Their forces are addressed against thy Saints,
Break thou their bows, knap thou their spears in sunder:
I know their spirit at thy presence faints,
Against their Cannon plant thy dreadful thunder,
Thy thunderbolts against their bullets dash,
And on their beauers bright let lightning flash.
SONNET. LXXIIII.
ARmies of Angels, Myriades of Saints,
Millions of Emperors, and holy Kings,
Legions of sacred Patriarchs he brings,
Which his rebellious foes with fear attaintes.
Whose spirit at thy puisant spirit faintes,
(Great Lord of Lords) whose sacred armis singes
Triumphant Peans, and new music bringes
In glorious phrase, which thy sweet glory payntes:
Whilst under thy tryumphant chariot wheels,
Rolling upon the stars, thy captives lie
In quenchlesse fiery lake, whose spirit feels
An endless torment in captiuitye:
When thy four sweet Evangelists ride bye
(Like corporalles) proclayming victory.
SONNET. LXXV.
ELders of grace, in number six times four,
Fall down, fall down upon your aged faces;
Send from grave ceerefull voice (throughout all places)
Such joyful tydinges in abundant store
Of praise (then sands of seas in number more)
To the great bounteous giver of all graces
Harmonious Kings cast down your Crowns and Maces,
Sounding your cheerful harpes his throne before:
Let Alleluiah round about resounde,
Power, honor glory, praises and renown
Ascribe unto the Lord, who does confound
Even with his nostshils, breath, and casts down
His worthless enemies of Magogs camp,
And (unto dust and ashes) them does stamp.
SONNET. LXXVI.
AS those three Kings (touched with a sacred zeal)
By presents rich made Royal offerture,
Our newborn Saviors blessing to procure,
Borne in an Ox stall for our public weal:
When in adoring him they did reveal,
his Godhead, by those gifts they did assure.
So let faith, hope and love make ouerture
Of new salvation (which themselves conceal
In this base mortal stable sins foul place)
Whereof eternal joys, they may present
To my salvation (borne of thy dear grace)
Such rich Propines: As from thy Gospel sent
By precious incense may my spirit bring
The tearmelesse praises of my God to sing.
SONNET. LXXVII.
PVrge thou my guilty soul sweet gracious Lord
Defiled and ugly made with sinful spots:
Heal my wounds desperate whose festure rots:
My vexed members loathsome and abhorrd:
Do not in register my sin record,
My wicked practices, and vain complots,
But lift my soul from the defiled pots;
And let thy mercy with my suite accord.
Make thou my soul clear like white Salmons snow,
Or like a silver winged Dove appear,
Where diverse glorious golden feathers show:
Convert thy foemens forces into fear,
Like Iaben make them, and like Cysara,
Like Seba, Zeb, Horeb and Salmana.
SONNET. LXXVIII.
RIde on in glory on the mornings wings
(Thrice puisant conqueror) in glory ride:
That heaven as Horse, courragious doth'st bestride,
Who whether thou disposest succor brings.
Ride on the glorious clouds high King of Kings:
Thy conquering sword guirde to thy puisant side,
Bright soldiers muster up, whose armies guide
Raungde into Quadraines, and triumphant Rings,
That shameless strumpet of proud Babylon
(Which thine Apostles killes, and Prophets stoneth,
With Cup full of abomination,
Which poisons millions, and no man bemoneth)
With her false, proud and Antichristian route,
Suppress, and put to slaughter round about.
SONNET. LXXIX.
THe tearmelesse date of my sweet second life,
(When this corruption mortal in sin bred,
Shall resting in oblivion vanish dead,
Ending the period of all earthly strife)
Freshly recals those Loves, and graces rife
Which from my sweet saluations conduict bled:
These have true zeal to my faithes refuge led,
So that no torture faggot, cross or knife
Can sever me sequestered from thy flock,
I fear no Pagan, Schismaticke, nor Jew,
No worldly menaces can tear that Rock
Of my faithes Adamant, assur'de and true:
But for that truth, I thousand deaths would die
To live ten thousand lives immortally.
SONNET. LXXX.
A Blast of wind, a momentarie breath,
A watrie bubble simbolizde with air,
A son blown Rose, but for a season fair,
A ghostly glaunce, a skeleton of death,
A morning dew perling the grass beneath,
Whose moisture Suns appearance does impair:
A lightning glimse: a Muse of thought and care:
A Planets shot: a shade which follows:
A voice which vanishes so soon as heard:
The thriftlesse heir of time: a rolling wave:
A show no more in action then regard:
A Mass of dust: worlds momentarie slave
Is man in state of our old Adam made,
Soon borne to die, soon flourishing to fade.
SONNET. LXXXI.
BEhold (by misaduenture) how the wind
From earth blows dust and it in air scatter,
And if therefore the very smallest matter
Thine eye (the bodies Jewel in some kind)
Do but by chance appeach, will grieve and blind,
Unless from thence it by good means you shatter:
So that smooth foe who cunningly can flatter,
And as a tempest rages in his kind,
Moves dust our flesh, from earth vpraysde to bleare
Of our redemption the much better part,
Our souls (with charge of sins) to vex and fear,
Blinded and grieved with earthly dust and smart.
To thine eyes (Lord) let our eyes open be,
And shut from sin, who sight blinds, blind makes see.
SONNET. LXXXII.
AFter acoale-blacke comfortless foul night
(With tempests horror and thick showers oppressed,
Disease of Pilgrims, Trauayllers unrest)
When as the glorious Suns vprising right
With cheerful beams, and virtuous motion bright
Has from his Eastern mansion redressde,
The chearelesse Meadows, and Cornefields suppressed
With lively means of animating might.
In equal semblance my poor soul enlargde
From this earthes blindness and black dangers free
With deadly sins sharp tempest late surchargde
Shall (when my glorious Judge, I coming see)
After rough storms of sighs, and showers of tears,
Through dear contrition franchised from fears.
SONNET. LXXXIII.
THat Bird imperial which the gentile Poets worthy thought
For virtues rare pre-eminence to stand ascribed fit
To Jupiter, and since in chief when Romans honored it
As richest ensign which could be for their great Monarch sought.
That puissant and imperial beast great into Judah brought,
Which of all other beasts beside does as commander sit:
That other firm and permanent which does so well befit
(For courage strength humility and service which he wrought)
The figure of that glorious, and legate most Divine:
Together with that Angel child chaste innocent and fair
Which to the spirit of thy dear Ambassador did shine.
As Eagle first whose precious eyes more bright the^ Sunbeames are,
The next is Lion mighty made, as Bull the third more strong
And of thy dear Evangelists, the fourth as Angel young.
SONNET. LXXXIIII.
THe paradise of joys, true mercies seat
The throne of judgment, refuge and distress,
Sweet bosom of love, health, and happiness:
The glorious Theater where Saints repeat
The most praise worthies praise: where froste nor heat
With violent assaylance souls suppress.
The quyre of Angels, Church of holiness:
Sweet pardons place where pennaunce does entreat:
The Palace of eternal peace and ease:
The spacious Court where Kings and Angels serve:
The scaffolde where true pompes of honor please:
The golden paths where Pilgrims never swerue:
The Stage of sacred tryumphes: and that place
Where tearmelesse victory gives endelesse grace.
SONNET. LXXXV.
COntrariwise, that horrible black pit,
That ougly jail of sorrows without end:
That filthy sincke to which foul sinners tend:
That dreadful fiery lake where furies sit:
That ward of madness and outrageous fit:
where hiddeous diuilles condemned spirits rende:
Black desolations den, where lives no friend
But tortured souls deprived of their wit:
That filthy dungeon whose chief music is
The groans, outcries, sobbes, and forlorn laments
of Parracydes, and men which liu'de amiss:
The bootlesse tears of too late penitents:
That love of haeu'n, this loathsomeness of hell,
The ways of life and death directly tell.
SONNET. LXXXVI.
THat loathsome spirit of vain stinking pride,
Which (with contempt and detestable scorn)
Begets all sins to condemnation borne:
That self consuming Envy, that foul bride
Of filthy lust that gulf still gaping wide
For treasures numberless: that poignant thorn
Of wraths fell passion, furious and forlorn:
That sincke of gluttony: that slothful guide
Which to destruction and all sickness brings:
None of these mortal vices which abound
In sinful creatures, but in sorrowestings
The troubled carkase with a curelesse wound:
And none of these but does the soul dismay
With restless guilt, and it to death betray.
SONNET. LXXXVII.
But that sweet spirit, modest, meek and mild,
Which with true zeal and solace does embrace
The love of virtues, and eternal grace:
That charity whose deeds of mercy build
With fayths assistaunce for his soul defilde
An hospital of ease in heavens palace:
That spotless contenance with rosy face.
That sober temperance which has exilde
Detested riot, and foul surfets vice:
That hand of bounty which still gives and lendes:
That blessed patience souls caulme sacrifice:
That honest labor which life's state defendes.
Through peace of conscience and souls comfort these
Our hearts for heaven prepare and high God please.
SONNET. LXXXVIII.
THe worlds bright comforter (whose became some light
Poor creatures cheereth, mounting from the deep)
His course does in prefixed compass keep,
And as courageous Giant takes delight
To run his race, and exercise his might:
Till him down galloping the mountains steep
Clear Hesperus smooth messenger of sleep
Viewes: and the silver ornament of night
Forth bringes with stars past number in her train:
All which with Suns long borrowed splendor shine:
The Seas (with full tide swelling) ebb again:
All years to their old quarters new resign,
The winds forsake their mountayne-chambers wild,
And all in all things with Gods virtue filde.
SONNET. LXXXIX.
I Feel by motions in my sinful breast,
My silly soul, through weakness is depraved,
And Satan (fearing least it should be saved)
My memory does with vile sins infest:
And to procure my spirits more unrest,
When of my soul in anguish help is craved,
(where her chief refuge is) with horror raued
My conscience in despair cries out oppressed,
O mercy, mercy, grace and succor send
Father of mercy for thy Son sweet Jesus,
my sore heart and sinwounded soul defend,
With thy sweet help and holy Spirit ease us:
Thy quickening virtue lend to my soul dead,
Then shall my foot on Satan's belly tread.
SONNET. LXXXX.
IF that sweet spirit of omnipotence
(All virtues and all comfort which contains:
Which in souls penitent and heavenly raygneth,
Whose glorious power and virtues excellence
Did raise up Jesus our sweet souls defense)
In us and our reformed hearts remains.
Then he (whose puissance heavenly forceretayneth,
and Christ vpraysde our souls pre-eminence)
Shall our base mortal bodies lively make
Through sin and nature corruptible first,
And by that holy Ghost which place does take
In our revived spirits (mortal erst)
Our souls and bodies both regenerate,
Chaung'de for a joyful and immortal state.
SONNET. LXXXXI.
OH whither does my lamentable soul
(Winged with a spirit of a sighing breath)
Prepare this langued carkase if to death
Then farewell bondage of this prison foul,
The sin of vile transgression where I roll
In earthly dust and tumble underneath.
I feel that sacred freelidge follows,
(Maugre the rage of Satan) which does howl,
And cries out for laws vengeance hear him not,
Respect not him (dear Lord) but on me look:
Look on me (my dear Lord) I fear him not:
My God, my loving God, turn not thy book
Which may my conscience with sins burden grieve,
But let thy mercies baulme my soul relieve.
SONNET. LXXXXII.
Relieve my soul with thy dear mercies balmes,
Monarch of precious mercy succor send:
I will endeavor my vile sins to mend
And to thee my souls sacrifice in Psalms.
High God (whose holy spirit outrage calmes,
Calm thou my sinful spirits which intend
To thy great praise their faculties to lend.
On my souls knees I lift my spirits Palms,
With humble penitence to purchase grace,
These eyes this mortal bodies skies down power
Tears of contrition on my blushing face,
Fruits of repentance flourish with this shower.
My soul, I feel is comforted and eas'de,
Then Lord with my poor offering be well pleas'de.
SONNET. LXXXXIII.
WIth my poor offering be well pleased sweet Lord,
And then with ghostly peace and heart vpraised
(Thy Temple celestiue where thou live praised
With ceaselesse Canticles, and Hymns record,
And meekenes which mine humble thoughts afforde)
I will approach not any wise amazed,
To see those sacred mysteries rich blazed
To my sin blinded eyes before abhorr'de,
In thy dear presence their due tribute paying
For their misgouernance and riotise,
My soul afflicted with hearts incense praying
It self devoutly Lord does sacrifice
To that Lamb blemishlesse, which offering made
Himself for my sins, and deaths forfeite paid.
SONNET. LXXXXIIII.
O What a gracious burden huge and heavy,
What charge importable, and painful weight
Those deadly sins which with our souls do fight,
And fresh supplies of vile offenses levy?
Yielding more puisance to their powrefull might,
In hope with shade of everlasting night
To blind the beamesome rays of my poor soul
(Which does a restless stone of labor roll)
Till thy dear gracious mercies from thy sight
Do banish them, and with the glory bright
Of thy sweet pardon lighten them again?
And then (albeit no volumes can contain
Thy praise and mercies) yet will I contend
From East to West their memory to send.
SONNET. LXXXXV.
THat golden Planet, Lamp of this worlds light
Whose glorious Eastern insurrection shows
His ceasclesse course, whose term no creatures knows:
That silver Planet torch of silent night,
Which (when the Sun reposeth her beams bright
In Western Seas) her Planet-darts forth throws,
Whose influence does strange events compose:
That boystrous turbulence of North winds might
Which swells and ruffles in outrageous sort:
Those cheerful Southern showers whose fruitful dew
Brings forth all sustenance for man's comfort:
East West, North, South, (if none thy puissance knew)
Relate thy wondrous virtues, and with praise
From West to East, from North to South them raise.
SONNET. LXXXXVI.
Firm Rock of during stone, sure Bulwark of defense,
Strong arm of fortitude, Shield of protection,
Courage of puisance, and virtues of perfection,
Eorne of salvation, and diuinest essence.
Thou shall sustain my spirit least it backward fall,
Thou shall my soul relieve from Satan's fierce given charge,
Thou shall my cause maintain and combat him at large,
Thou shall huige blows of sin, ward from my soul in thrall,
Thou shall with ghostly valor my souls strength inspire,
Thou shall annointe my head with oil of peace and joy,
Thou me shall purify with pure zeales holy fire,
By these I shall my spirits enemy destroy.
By these I shall effect my souls chief happiness,
By these I shall my soul unhallowed redress.
SONNET. LXXXXVII.
MY soul through manifold assaults of sin
(In grievous combat with my flesh retain'de)
Declining faintes, unless it be sustain'de:
Then send thy mercies which might enter in,
To sever them least further broils begin:
And if my soul (with wounds affliction payn'de)
Have penitently to thy grace complayn'de,
Let it by gracious mnee as some mercy win.
Pure grace, sweet mercy, comfortable peace
Zeal, truth, and righteousness are dearly met,
Whose fame from East to West can never cease,
Nor those which in these their affiance set
Can ever be (for glories want) obscure:
But with Salvation eternizde endure.
SONNET. LXXXXVIII.
WHere shall I vex'de my sinful head repose?
If that in error and conceived vice,
Which with deceitefull Blandishments entice
My feeble nature mortified with sin.
Then hope shall gates of my salvation close,
Against my soul: and my despair begin,
If that in open sight, then open shame
The Scarlet of my conscience will disclose;
And sound the shameful Trumpet of my fame.
Where then shall I my vexed soul dispose?
(If not in blind obscurity nor light)
Then there even there impenitence with those
Which weep down tears of comfort to delight
Their soul enlarged from eternal night.
SONNET. LXXXXIX.
OH whether shall my troubled Muse incline?
When not the glorious Scaffolde of the skies
Nor highest heavens resplendent hierarchies,
(Where heavenly Soldiers in pure armor shine)
Nor air which thy sweet spirit does refine,
Nor earth thy precious blood unworthy prise,
Nor Seas which when thou list ebb and arise,
Nor any creature profane or Divine,
Can blaze the flourish of thy tearmelesse praise:
Surreaching far by manifold large space
All Divine fabric of thy sacred hands?
Even thither shall my Muse her Music raise;
Where my souls everlasting palace stands,
Sweet refuge of salvation, Court of grace.
SONNET. 100.
SAcred directour of divine Syon
With gracious hands and mercy-mouing eyes,
With ears attentive) take my sacrifice:
Behold my tears, hear my playntes which cry on,
Lighten my pensive soul which would fly on
To thy sweet mercies seat, heavens Paradise:
Thy pure Dooues white Wings (that my soul may rise,
And mount from this base earth) dear Lord tie on:
So shall my Spirit fly from star to star:
And in consent of musickes sweet report
Bear thy rich Glories forth from far to far,
When Cherubines with Seraphines resort,
And Angels with Archangelles still to sing
The glorious wonders of their heavenly King.
FINIS.
HYMN TO THE GLORIOUS HONOR OF THE most blessed and indivisible Trinity.
SACRED dear Father of all things created,
(Whose joyful throane of endless triumph stands
In glorious heaven: whose name earth (animated)
Proclaymeth through the compass of all lands)
I lift these humble hands,
Vpheau'de with courage of a zealous heart,
Confirm'de with fortitude of constant faith,
Assured in grace of some sweet mercies part:
Which Treasures my dear hope in high heaven layth,
Which comfort my soul has.
And thou dear only Son of God alone,
Thou precious Immolacion of mankind,
Who sits on right hand of thy Fathers throne,
Who fearful Satan did in fetters bind,
Whom death alone did find,
To be the peerless Champion of his foil,
Thou that redeemed'st from infernal pain
Our great graundfathers and our selves assoyle
Of our foul sins; nor humbled did disdain
For mankind to be slain:
And lastly thou sweet comfortable Spirit
Of meekness, holiness and spotless love,
By whose dear incense, not our vain demerite,
We purchase heritage in heaven above:
Thou that (in form of Dove)
Thy sanctified Apostles did salute:
Spirit of truth which does our comfort bring,
Without whose heavenly motions men are mute,
By whose power in the Virgins womb did spring
Our comforter and King:
And thou dear sacred Father of like power,
With thy most dear Son sacrifice for sin,
And thou sweet holy Ghost who did down shower
Cloven tongues of fire true glory for to win:
All which three powers cloase in
One sacred and indivisible God.
Vouchsafe oh you perpetual highest powers,
Of equal virtues, yet in number odd,
These simple fruits of my repentaunt hours,
And (with your graces showers)
The temper of my feeble wits renew,
To prosper, cherished with celestial dew.
A Table to find out any Sonnet herein Alphabetically.
A
ARise thou mighty God. Son. 35. Armies of Angels Son. 74 As those three
Kings. Son. 76. A Blast of wind. Son. 80. After a coale-blacke. Son. 82.
B
BLessed Creator. Son. 5. Bountiful Lord Christ. Son. 12. Behold dear
Father. Son. 34. Break thou the Jaws. Son. 51. Behold by misaduenture. Son.
81. But that sweet. Son. 87.
C
COmfort thy self. Son. 58. Contrariwise that. Son. 85.
D
Dear comforter. Son. 4. Dear David's Son. Son. 13. Did thou redeem.
Son. 53.
E
ELders of grace. Son. 75.
F
Fountain of life. Son. 22. Father of piety. Son. 23. Fortress of hope Son.
28. Full of celestial. Son. 52. From depth of fearful. Son. 55. For comfort
my dear. Son. 62. Firm Rock. Son. 96.
G
GReat God of Abraham. Son. 20. Glorious Jehovah. Son. 25. Great God of larges.
Son. 26. Gracious Divine. Son. 38.
H
Heavenly Messiah. Son. 10. High priest of Sion Son. 18. High King of Kings.
Son. 27. High mighty God. Son. 30.
I
Environed with dangers. Son. 39. I feel my soul Son. 49. I would not die.
Son. 50. If death may. Son. 66. I feel by motions. Son. 89. If that sweet
spirit. Son. 90.
L
LIon of Judah. Son. 8. Lovely Samaritane. Son. 19. Lord with thy light. Son.
36.
M
Merciful Jesus. Son. 11. Mild King of Salem. Son. 17. My days be few. Son.
40 My soul my soul. Son. 59. My soul through. Son. 97
N
NO more leude lays. Son. 1.
O
O Gracious shepherd. Son. 9. O benign Father, Son. 14 O glorious Patron.
Son. 31. O my dear God. Son. 37. O you light Poets. Son. 42. O Lord increase.
Son, 44. O what great comfort. Son. 45, O Sun and Moon. Son. 46. O what
celestial. Son. 47. O glorious conquest. Son. 48. O that I might. Son. 56. O
dreadful horror Son. 63. O mercy mercy. Son. 65. O glorious Crown. Son. 71.
Oh whether does. Son. 91. Oh what a grievous. Son 94. Oh whether shall Son. 99.
P
PVre sacrifice. Son. 6. Pitiful Lord. Son. 15. Pure spotless. Son, 34.
Purge thou my guilty. Son. 77.
R
RAyons of glory. Son. 29. Ride on in glory Son. 78. Relieve my soul. Son.
92.
S
Sweet Savior Son. 2. Sacred Redeemer: Son. 3. Sure corner stone. Son. 16.
Sole hope and blessing. Son. 21. Satan abroad. Son. 43. Sacred director. Son.
100.
T
THe well of life. Son. 32. Thrice puisant general. Son. 33. Tempted in foreign
nation. Son. 41. Then awful sting. Son. 54. Through Satan's malice. Son. 56.
Then it derne Love. Son. 64. Turn not away. Son, 60. That bounteous largess:
Son. 68. The Sun of our souls light. Son. 72. Triumphant conqueror. Son. 73.
The tearmelesse date. Son. 79. That Bird imperial Son. 83. The Paradise of
joys. Son. 82. That loathsome Son. 86. The worlds bright. Son. 88, That golden
Planet. Son. 95.
V
Unto my spirit Son. 70.
W
Whilst spotless. Son. 7. Where is that copious. So. 6. What thing in
spacious. Son. 67. Who to the golden suns. Son. 79. With my poor offering.
Son. 93. Where shall I vex. Son. 98.
FINIS.
Errata
Sonnet 59. for vnneathed read vnneathes. Sonnet 74. for bye read by. Sonnet.
83 for is Lion. read as Lion.

LONDON Printed by John Windet, dwelling at Powles Wharfe at the sign of the
Cross Keys and are there to be soulde. 1595.


