Musarum plangores: Upon the death of the right Honorable, Sir Christopher
Hatton, Knight, etc.
FLock on apace you troops of saddest wights,
Fly fast unto repining Sorrows Cell,
Banish your joys, abandon all delights,
And count each pleasing moment for a hell.
For he that late did move your sweet content,
Even now his chiefest fire of life has spent.
Muses come mourn, come gentle Muses weep,
Wayle you the want of such an English Peer:
Whose virtues might vprayse from deadly sleep,
The Ghoasts of Poets buried many a year.
Whose ceaseles moanes might pearce the azurd skies,
And fill fair Albion with their woeful cries.
Perished is the root from whence such branches sprang,
Dimd is the light that glistered like the Sun,
Whose worthy deeds to every Region rang,
And has ere since his Honor first begun.
Then you that loved the Lord that gave the HIND,
Breathe forth the sorrows of your mournful mind.
Princeps.
SOrrow is sealed upon our Palace gate,
And Heaviness with discontented steps,
Has chosen Sighs to be his careful mate,
whereby our heart with inward passions leaps.
How can the Members then but be distressed,
When as the Head so highly is oppressed?
Our Cedar stock has lost a lively branch,
And Death the hunts-man of our humane race,
His fierce and egre appetite to stanch,
In ranging through our Forest Syluane chase,
Has slain the spotles HIND with cruel spite,
In whom his Prince reposde a chief delight.
Syluanes approach with mournful melody,
And woody Nymphs, that sit in spreading bowres:
With brackish tears commix your harmanie,
To wayle with me both minutes, months, and hours.
For we have lost that nothing can amend:
A faithful subject and a loyal friend.
Primates.
Upon the Sea, in threatening winters frown,
When rising billows struggle with the wind:
What sooner casts the Sea-mans courage down,
Then want of him their Pilot was assignde?
Such may we call misfortune of our state,
Deprived the counsel of a worthy mate.
If brothers do lament a brothers death,
And Nature join the Parent to deplore
His tender son, bereft of vital breath:
If for their young the savage beasts will rore,
Then Reason, Nature, duty knit in one,
For our grave friend inioyneth us to moan.
The grace he got by virtue to arise,
Was governed with such an humble mind;
As none his Honors titles could despise,
Or for his favor any grudging find:
Such name his wisdom always sought to have,
Loved he lived, and honored to his grave.
Populus.
BLack Sorrows night with dismal pitchie clouds,
Has chaste the comfort of the day from hence,
Within a hollow toombe our Solace shrowds,
And Desolation burieth our defense.
For which in tears, in sighs, in hearts distress,
We now are forced to show our heaviness.
Our cries were heard, our prayers found remorce,
Our help stood not on lingering delay,
Pity in him retaynd a greater force,
And Justice walked in Virtues perfect way:
Nor meede, nor friendship ever could avail
To make our just and noble Patron quayle.
Why is it not granted of deuiner powers,
That such as best maintains their sacred laws,
Should have the longest days and happiest hours,
Where honor springs by virtues worthy cause?
But all things precious and of purest price
Forsakes the earth, to dwell above the skies.
Musarum plangores.
Melpomene.
NOt from the sea (though salt does hide my breast)
But from a flood of tears, bankt in with grief,
Whereas the black-foot Raven sought for rest,
I come to menace moan without relief:
My pen is Ebon, and my paper earth,
Where I must write of honors endless dearth.
My palled face, my eylids hung with lead,
The Arches hollow, like the chalkie cliffes,
My teeth that chatters echoes from the dead,
Forced by their sighs that through their sorrow whiffes,
Shows that some noble Lord has left this land,
Whose honored graces, multiplied with sand.
Of earths more tarter is my body made,
Of waters scumme ordaynd to tragic tale:
Yet were I harsher, his fair flowering fade
Would make my sullen nature couch and quail.
And so my tragic Muse shall sit and write,
The wasting woe the Commons shall indite.
Polihymnia.
CEase proud vayn glorious birds, and buzzing winds,
My Rethorick shall persuade me more to sing:
But neasts of Hornets from the rotten rindes,
A harsher murmr to my sorrow bring.
For from the groaues (inchaunted now with care)
The HIND is wandered: ill the flock do fare.
The tongue of Time does sightles glyde away,
And carries Envy with his swift-foot course,
His spightfull Date has brought before the day,
An end to Honor (fell without remorse)
My Rethorick now shall be to ridgie rocks,
Where Ruin feeds in stead of quiet flocks.
The quill I lately plucked from Hermes wing
Shall write my groaning playnt unto the sky,
There shall the Throni with their Censors sing,
His Noblesse and his Honors victory.
And with this pen the burden I will bear,
That all may know how heaven his praise does rear.
Calliope.
NOw Phoebus Altars crack with rotten weeds,
None brings spices from the Phoenix nest:
Who discontented with those choking seeds,
Brings floods of tears to drown that noy some Feast.
His brows as smooth, as was his Iuory Lute,
Sends looks for frownings with a swift pursuit.
This makes me cast my Music to the grouund,
And send Musaeus back again to hell,
The nights sad Prophet makes me pleasant sound,
And breeds desire within a cave to dwell:
For all my Sisters drop their tears like showers,
And leave the pleasure of Idalian bowers.
Of round Cayister quills I Will make a pipe,
And sing the Swannes last song upon this hill:
For Death does Honor with his tallants gripe
And with his blasting breath the Bay does spill.
Hereafter what I write shall be in praise
Of him, his bounty and his virtuous days.
Clio.
MY ancient books of graven monumentes
Are claspt for ever up with dustie leaves,
For in the margent lies my discontents,
How Fate and Death of Honor me bereaues,
I Will change my late Historical intent,
To write with them whose groans to clay are sent.
Yet first I Will turn my Pen unto a Spade,
And choose the entray les of the purest mould,
Where when I see this noble Lord is laid,
I Will write the rest my Sisters leave vntould:
The ground shall be embalmed with Muses breath,
Whose virtue purges all contagious earth.
Then shall my Sisters dance about his Toombe,
And with their feet shall make a wreath of flowers:
So shall his Coarse be stuck with virtuous bloome,
Shall make the ground smell like perfumed bowers,
And of these flowers I will Garlands make,
And ever wear them for his noble sake.
Thalia.
SVrceasing pastime of my comic pen,
I Will tune my laughter unto lowed exclaymes
And tragic tears the floods of sorrowing men,
Do seek to quench the fire that honor flames.
My laboring hand does let my tongue prevail,
To treat of sorrow when my mirth does fail.
I Will set my breast to Lacus dulcis stream,
And swim unto Elisean lilly field,
And in Ambrosian trees I Will write a Theme,
Of all his deeds that Honor has vpheld:
My dwelling is too full of mirth and glee,
To write the Poems of a Tragedy.
To all the Poets that inhabit there,
Having their wits refind with heavenly air,
By me his gifts of wisdom shall appear,
And they shall sing them to the highest fair:
Then turning back from whence I came again,
I Will write of that which has my pleasure slain.
Euterpe.
THe Northern Hunter blows his ycie Horn,
And bids me lay aside my windy sound,
And blackfast storms out-braue the rosy morn,
And makes her look as heavy as the ground:
So like the noyce of frost and rain together,
My evil sounding Music tunes with wether.
Stiff are my fingers like a Marble stone,
Unfit to move a warbling instrument:
My tawnie skin is shriueled to the bone,
As if my senceles Senses did lament,
The silent tale with dumb deliverance,
The passion of some heavy dire mischance.
My tongue incorporate with my scalding roof,
Fears to report the failing of my hand,
My sorrowing playmates shrink, and keep a loofe,
As if a darth did cover all the land:
No darth, because it is not barren brought,
But yet the fruit is cropped which dear I bought.
Tarpsicore.
MY Harp is strung with stretching Sorrows strings,
And Death has tunde it with his knobbie bones,
A solemn dump, the Music that it ringes,
Linked in Consort with deep fetched groans.
For with my Sisters in a Cipres bower,
My Bliss is Bale, my Sweet tormenting Sower.
The Summers season with her fresh attire,
That always used t'muite me to her Palace:
Where Nightingales did make a pleasant Quiere,
With sundry Lays to cause their Sovereigns Solace;
Is nipt with Winter, and her pride is lost,
My fingers stiff, my senses numbd with Frost.
The prospect that appears to my eyes,
Are wringing hands of such that are forlorn:
My ears are filled with Echoes double cries,
Proceeding from unconstant Fortunes scorn.
Thus are my Eyes, my Ears, my Hand and Heart,
Made thrall to Sorrows never dying smart.
Erato.
I That did measure haughty Towers tops,
And took the compass of the largest ground,
My Sorrows headlong course no Reason stoppes,
And infinite mine agonies abound.
For that proportion nature ritchly framde,
By Death dissolue'd does make the Graces blamed.
The numbers that adorned my sacred skill,
Are now become Decrees of waxing Woe:
My study is distress, my books do kill,
And contemplation makes dolors grow,
Because the substance that I wished to save,
Has his dimension in a senceles grave.
But since the Destinies have been severe
To rob the earth of her assured delight,
I Will find a place deuoyd of deadly fear,
To measure out a mansion far more bright,
Where free from harms, or any foul annoy,
This Potentate shall have eternal joy.
Urania.
Give me (at last fair Sisters) leave to speak,
Me thinks you should not wilfully repine,
Or with extremities your duties break,
When as the glory and the gain is mine:
It grieves not me, when ought accords your will,
Your ouerflowing mirth, my joys does fill.
Draw in your tears and let your sighs surcease,
Exile exclaymings from your drouping hearts:
For with his death his Honors does increase.
And though the earth contaynes his humane parts,
Yet shall his soul made pure with heavenly air,
Receive the guerdon of his virtuous care.
The stars bright eye shall guide his happy feet,
The sun of gladness shine upon his face,
The glorious Planets where so ere they meet,
Within their shining arms his soul embrace.
So that although his mortal days do wayne,
Despair not Sisters greater is his gain.
FINIS.
R. Ihonson. Sa:


