THE Pleasant Walks OF Moore-fields.

Being the gift of two Sisters, now beautified, to the continuing fame of this
worthy City.

Printed at London for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Sun
in Pater noster Row. 1607.

To the Right Worshipful, the Knights and Aldermen of this Honorable City of
London.
THose sweet and delightful walks of More fields (right Worshipful) as it
seems a Garden to this City, and a pleasurable place of sweet airs for
Citizens to walk in, now made most beautiful by your good worships
appointment, has emboldened me to search for the true antiquity thereof: and
furthermore to satisfy the desires of many, I have given here a true light of
the late glory done unto the same: and withal briefly set down a few notes
of ancient records, of their being a kind of morish ground in times past,
and by whom, and in what manner they were brought to this beneficial use,
together with many other Honors done to this city, If your worships
vouchsafe to think well of my labors, I attain my wished hopes: So ending I
commit you all to the joy of your own hearts.

By your Worships to be commanded. Rich: Johnson.

The pleasant walks of Moore Fields.
The Speakers names in this discourse, a Country Gentleman, and a London
Citizen. Gentleman. THis City of London (sir) in my mind both for antiquity
and situation may challenge glory with any City in the World.


Cit. Most true (sir) for it is reported, that Brute lineally descended from
the Demy-god Aeneas, son of Venus, daughter of Jupiter, about the year of the
world 2855 and 1108. before the Nativity of Christ, builded this city, and
named it Troynouant. But in process of time K. Lud, not only repaired it, but
also increased the same with fair buildings, towers and walls, and after his
own name called it Luds town: and by corruption of speech, it is now called
London: which king lies buried at a gate in the West part of the City, which
he likewise built in the honor of his name, caling it Ludgate.


Gent. Since that time (I perceive) in every Princes reign it has bin much
beautified: but of all pleasurs that contents me, these sweet walks of Moore
fields are the chiefest, and the causers thereof deserve much commendations.


Citi. Those be the worthy Aldermen and Common-counsell of London, who seeing
the disorder used in these fields, have bestowed this cost, and as occasion
requires intends further to beautify the same.


Gent. In so doing, they purchase same after Death, and much pleasure to
posterity: But to what use are these Fields reserved?


Citi. Only for Citizens to walk in to take the air, and for Merchants
maids to dry clothes in, which want necessary gardens at their dwellings.


gent. By whom was these fields given to the city?


Cit. Marry sir by two mayds, the only daughters to Sir William Fines, a knight
of the Rhodes, in the time of Edward the Confessor: who dying, left these
Fields of Fines-berry after his own name to his two daughters, Mary and
Katharine, who refusing the pleasures of this world, betook themselves to a
devout kind of life, and became two Nuns in the Monastery of Bedlem: where
having spent their days in the service of God, at their death gave these
aforesaid fields to the City of London, for an ease to the Citizens, and a
place for their servants to dry clothes in, and likewise builded the two
Crosses, the one at Bedlem gate, the other at Shoredich.


Gent. These walks (Sir,) as it seems, bears the fashion of a cross,
equally divided four ways, and like wise squared about with pleasant walls,
the trees thereof makes a gallant show, and yields unto mine eye much delight.


Citizen. They may well, for the like border of trees are not at this day in all
the land again, for they be in number within these walls two Hundred,
foure-score, and eleauen, beside those other standing westward without, to the
number of some four or five and thirty.


Gent. I have heard that many of these trees do carry proper names?


Citiz. According to the planting thereof, they do: and those which I remember
so called, now stand on the the west side within these walls, the first of
them at the corner of the middle walk westward, was first of all placed by
Sir Leonard Hollyday then Lord Mayor: the next on the corner northward at the
steps coming down, by a Captain, being a Gentleman of good reputation: the
third by a Citizen, and Son to Sir Leonard Hollyday, which stands next to
his Fathers tree. There stands near unto that, a tree called the two
brothers, planted by two little boys, and sons to a Citizen here in London,
there is likewise a tree called the three sisters, by the name of three maidens
that set it, and another the three brothers: there is a tree likewise on the
north-west corner, which I saw set up (called Stubs his tree) by one
Christopher Stubs, one of the principal Porters of Black-well hall, a man well
beloved, and of good credit. Many others were set up by our Citizens, which I
think needless to speak of, nor tell of the bounty they showed to the
worke-men, at the planting of these same trees.


Gent. The charges hereof show their liberal minds, and no doubt but this
field will be maintained time out of minds in as good order as it is now kept,
for what you Citizens mean to give glory too, neither cost nor care can be
wanting, But I pray you how many Akars may this plot of ground contain?


Citiz. Marry Sir, within the walls some ten Akars, which was so measured out,
and by a Plough made level, as it is now, a thing that never has been seen
before to go so near London.


Gent. But why are these stocks of wood here provided, with such a huge chain
of iron locked to the wall?


Citiz. Only as a punishment for those that lay any filthy thing within these
fields, or make water in the same to the annoyance of those that walk therein,
which evil sauors in times past have much corrupted man's senses, and supposed
to be a great nourisher of diseases.


Gent That bears good reason, and the manner of this punishment I like well,
and pity it were, but it should be maintained, for it is one of the best
things that ever your City bestowed cost upon.


Citiz. The cost hereof they regard not, and the more they bestow hereon, the
more honor they tie unto our City, and the causers of these walks has
deserved high commendations, making their posterities famous by these their
deeds.


Gent. It seems they intend a further grace to these fields?


Citiz. Their purpose is not fully known, but surely their intents are
inclined to bountiful proceedings, as I hear, the building of certain houses
for shelters for maidens having their clothes lying there a drying, if at any
time it should chance to rain.


Gent. All England may take example, at your London Citizens, who not only
seek for their own benefits* but strive to profit others, showing themselves
good commonwealths men, and as they be called the Fathers of the City, so be
they cherishers of the poor and succourlesse.


Citiz. If I should show you the charitable deeds, of all our Citizens now
living, as of those in times pass, from one kings reign to another, I should
fill a large volume with antiquities: but I will briefly touch but only such
as concerns this our discourse of these walks of Moorefieldes, and things
pertinent to the same purpose.


Gent. But I pray you show me sir, have they never bin otherwise used?


Citi. Yes that they have, for time is often the ouerthrower of lawdable
customs: for Halles Chronicle sets down, that the inhabitants about
London, as Isling ton, Hogsdon, Shoreditch and others, before the reign of
Henry the eight, had so enclosed these fields, with hedges and ditches, that
neither the young men of this City might shoot, nor the ancient persons walk
for pleasure in these fields, but that either their bows and arrows were
taken away, or broken, or the Citizens arested for walking, saying, that no
Londoner ought to go out of the City, but in the hye ways. This so grieved
the Londoners, that in the sixth year of King Henry the Eight, a great number
of the City, assembled themselves in a morning and a Turner in a Fools coat,
ran crying therough the City, Shouels and spades, Shouels and spades, by which
means followed so many people, that it was a wonder to behold, and within
less than three hours all the hedges about the City were cast down, the
ditches filled up, and every thing made plain, such was the quickness of
these diligent workmen, after this the fields were never more hedged in.


Gent. The Citizens I perceive ever carried gallant minds, and to this day (I
see) they continually strive to beautify this famous City, for what fair
summer houses with lofty towers and turrets are here builded in these fields,
and in other places, the suburbs of the City* not so much for use and profit
as for show and pleasure, bewraying the nobleness of their minds.


Citiz. Many of our ancient Citizens sir have far more worthyer dispositions,
and chiefly delights in the repayring of Hospitals, and building alms houses
for the poor and therein employ their wits, spending their wealths to the
common commoditis of this our City.


Gent. You speak but truth* for London Citizens are the Laws mirror for
charitable gifts: but of all other stately buildings near unto these fields,
this bears the greatest show, called Fishers folly.


Citiz. It is sir, a very fair house indeed, large, and beautiful,
incompast with many walks and gardens of pleasure, builded by one Jasper
Fisher, free of the Goldsmithes, late one of the six Clerks of the Chancerie,
and a Justice of peace, it has since for a time been the Earl of Oxfords
place: our late Queen has lodged there, and now it belongs to Sir William
Cornewallis.


Gent. This house (as I have heard) being so large and sumptuously builded by a
man of no greater calling, was mockingly named Fishers Folly, and a rhyme has
been lately made of it, and others the like (not far off builded) in this
manner.

Kirkebyes Castle, and Fishers folly;
Spynylas pleasure, and Megses glory.

Citiz. Indeed of such like houses builded by Citizens, men will report their
pleasures, but if I should speak of the true glory of our Citizens, Gresham
house, with the Royal Exchange, builded by one man: Whittington College,
Newgate, part of Christ church by another with diverse other monuments which I
omit, as the charge of London bridge, builded at the first by two Sisters of
Saint Marie Oueryes, and such like: but of all other memorable deeds
maintained to this day by our Citizens, there is three which deserve immortal
commendations, the Orphants Court in Guild hall, where covetous executors are
prevented, Christ's Hospital, where fatherless children are well brought up,
and the prison of Bridewell where vice is justly corrected.


Gent. Three things in my mind that your Citizens win heaven by, but for
what Offenders is that Bridewell chiefly reserved?


Citiz. For (...) persons: as vagabonds, and for those that are obstinate, and
will not live in the fear of God, but abuse their bodies with lewd vices, as
whoredom, and such like.


Gent. That place I think needless sir to speak of in these walks,
therefore I pray you show the of the antiquity of this Monastery of Bedlem
where these two charitable sisters were buried.


Citiz. The Monastery (now ruinated) was builded by their Father Sir William
Fines the chief owner of the rich Farm of Finesburie house, the which to this
day holds privileges of good esteem. Likewise here in Bedlem is now situated
an Hospital for the cure of distracted people, which in former times about the
year 1246, was founded by Simon Fitz-marie, one of the Sheriffs of London, of
the same house and kindred, naming it the priory of Saint Marie de Bethlem,
after the elder of the two Sisters, to which King Edward the third granted a
protection, but after in the time tune of King Henry the 8. in the beginning
of his reign, there was one Sir Walter Gennings one of the Kings Chamber, who
being distract of his wits got help in that place, by the means of that holy
Prior, in regard of which King Henry at the suppression of this religious
Monastery, gave it to the City for Hospital for that use, the Chapel
whereof was taken down in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and houses builded
there by the Governors of Christ's Hospital in in London, and now in this
place, people that be distract of wits, are by the suite of their friends
received and kept, but not without chargers to their bringers in.


Gent. Here is Sir, as it seems a burying place walled in with brick, which
surely is, the devotion of some charitable Citizen.


Citiz. It is sir for in the year 1569, sir Thomas Roe, Merchant tailor, and
Mayor of this City, caused to be enclosed within this wall, about one akar of
ground, being part of this Hospital of the Hospital of Bethlem, this he
appointed for a burying place, as an ease for such Parishes in London, as
wants a convenient ground within their Parishes. The ^^die his wife was there
buried (by whose persuasions he enclosed it) but himself borne in London, was
buried at Hackney.


Gent. But now sir, let us return by the walk near this Ditch fide, where I
am willing to understand how those fields came so beautified, being in times
past, as I have heard, a Fen or moorish kind of ground.


Citiz. To begin first, after it was given by these two sisters to this City:
I find that in the time of William the Conqueror. it was continually in
winter, as you say, a great Fen or moore of water, stretching all along betwixt
Crippie-gate and Bishops-gate, but not in such good manner as it now does, for
all these whole fields of Finsburie, from Hollow well to this place. was a wast
and unprofitable ground a long time, so that in the reign of Edward the
second, it was let to farm for four Marks by the year: but in the year
1415, the 3. year of Henry the fifth, Thomas Falnet Mayor, caused the wall of
the City to be broken toward this Moore, and builded here the posterne called
Moore-gate for the case of the Citizens, to walk this way upon caus^ (as was
the^) toward Isllington, Hogsdon and such like. Moreover, he caused the
ditches of the City, from Shoreditch to Houndsditch and so to this Moore ditch
along by Bedlem to be new cast, and cleansed, by means whereof this Fen or
Moore, was greatly drayned and dried: so shortly after it grew such hard
ground, that Raph loselin Mayor for repayring the City wall, caused this Moore
to be searched for clay, and here in this place brick to be burnt.


Gent. But sir, here is stones set upright, what is the meaning of them?


Citiz. Marry where they stand, tons underneath the common shore from a
spring called dame Annis de Clear called by the name of a rich London widow,
called Annis Cla^e, who matching her self with a riotous Courtier in the time
of Edward the first, who vainly consumed all her wealth, and leaving her in
much poverty, there drowned she herself, being then but a shallow ditch or
running water, since which as I said before) turns by sluices arched over, all
along by these stones here standing: which sluices or bridges was made in the
year 1512, by Roger Atchley Mayor, who likewise caused the grounds to be
leauelled, as they were this last year, by Sir Leonard Holliday Mayor, and the
other worshipful Aldermen his brethren, whereby these fields were made
something more commodious, but not so pleasant and dry as now they are, for
many times they stood still full of noisome waters, which afterward in the
year 1527. was by the means of sir Thomas Semor, Mayor made dry, who
repairing the sluices, conuayed the said waters over this Town Ditch, into the
course of Wall-brooke shore, and so into the Thames, and by these degrees was
this Fen or Moore at length made maine and hard ground, which before being
ouergrowne with flags, sedges, and Rushes, served for no use, since the which
time, all the further and higher grounds beyond Finesbury court, have been so
heightened with leastals and dung, that now three Windmils are set thereon, the
ditches being filled up, and the bridges overwhelmed.


Genesis But now I pray you let us walk back again to Moore gate, and go into
this narrow lans called the posterne, between Moore-gate and Criple-gate,
because it has at either end a door to be shut in the night season.


Cit. This is a posterne belonging to Criple-gate so called long before the
conquest, only to keep night-walkers out of the subberbs, but now I have named
Criple-gate, I think it not amiss to show the antiquity thereof, and why it
was so called at the first.


Gen That would I gladly understand, for I have heard diverse reports thereof.


Cit. I have read in the history of Edmond King of England, written by John
Lydgate. Munke of Berry, that when the Danes spotled part of his kingdom, a
reverent bishop of this land, caused yt body of king Edmond martyr to be
brought from S. Edmonds bury to London, in at Cripplegate, a place says he so
called of cripples begging there, at which gate (it was said) the body
entering, Mirracles were wrought, as some of the Lame to go away, praising
God: This Gate was sometimes a Prison, whereunto such Citizens and others as
were arested for debt, or common trespasses, were committed, as they be now to
the Counters. This Gate was new builded by the Brewers of London. 1244.


Gent. This has much contented my desires, and considering it is yet far, to
night I will request you to turn back into the walks, and there to discourse
of further antiquities.


Citiz. Withal my heart Sir, I cannot spend my time better.


Gent. Then I pray you tell what course (Sir) has this common shore thorough
the City into the Thames.


Citiz. This City in old time, (as I find it recorded) was divided, the one
halfs from the other, which is East from West, by a fair brook of sweet
Water, which ran from these fields thorough this wall into the river of thames,
which division to this day is maintained without charge, which water is called
Wall-brooke. The course from hence runs directly first to Saint Margrets
Church in Loathbury from thence from the lower part of the Gracers hall, about
the East of their Kitchen, under Saint Mildreds Church, somewhat West from the
stocks Market, from thence thorough Bucklers-bury, by a great House built of
stone and Timber, called the old Barge, because in times past, Barges out of
the Thames were rowed up so far into this brook, on the backeside of the
Houses on Wall-brooke street, which street takes the name of this said
brook: then by the west end of Saint John's Church upon Wall-brooke, under
Horshee bridge, by the West side of Tallow Chandlers Hall, and of the Skinners
Hall, and so behind the other houses to Elbow lane, and by a part thereof
down Greenwitch lane, into the river of thames, this is the right course of
this water, which of old time was bridged over in diverse places, for passage
of Horses and men as need required: but since by ye means of increasement on
the banks thereof, much annoyances be done therein. But at length the same by
a common consent of this City, was arched over with Brick, and paued with
stone equal with the ground whence it passed thorough: and is now in most
places builded upon, that no man may deserve it, and therefore the trace
thereof is hardly known to the common sort of people.


genesis Now I pray you let me know how this vaute or River is made clean,
considering so much Channel dirt runs therein.


Citi. Where these stones stand as I said before, there is a long hollow
Cesterne or shore arched over, reaching into the City, into the which once a
year, as it is the custom of our City, to see it made clean, there enters
diverse laboring men, with Links and Torches lighted, with a Taber and a pipe,
or other such Mellody, that the Merchants, whose Uautes and Houses of offices
stand over, may hear them, and by such means they may know what is amiss, and
wants mending, and still when this business is effecting, the owners of those
houses spare not for cost, which they give down at the Grates as they pass
along.


Gent. This is a good order, and an encouragement to such an intricate
business, but to let that pass, and show me the antiquity of your Aldermens
going to the Sermons to the Spittle, near Soreditch in Easter week, which in
my mind is a most memorable custom.


Citi. First to show you the first antiquity thereof, that place was in times
past an Hospital, commonly called Saint Mary Spittle, builded by Water Brown,
Deane of Paul's, in the year 1197. first named by him Domus Dei, but at the
suppression of Abbeys bring surrendered to King Henry the eight, it was valued
to be worth yearly 478 pound, wherein was found (besides the ornaments of the
Church) and other goods belonging to the Hospital, a hundred and fourscore
Beds well furnished for the receate of poor people, for it was an Hospital of
great relief: but now touching the custom why three Sermons be made there in
the three Holidays of Easter week, I find that in the year 1398. King
Richard having procured from Rome confirmation of such statutes and ordinances
as were made in the Parliament, begun at Westminster, and ended at Shrew* bury,
he caused the same confirmation to be read and pronounced at Paul's Cross,
and at Saint Mary Spittle in the Sermons, before all the people: Phillip Malpas,
one of the Shriefes in the year 1439. gave twenty shillings by the year, to
the three Preachers at the Spittle. Steven Foster Mayor in the year 1454. gave
forty pounds to the Preachers at the Spittle and Paul's Cross: I find also
that the said house wherein the Mayor and Aldermen do fit at the Spittle, was
builded for that purpose of the good, and by the executors of Richard Rawson
Aldermen, and Isabell his wife in the year 1488. Likewise in the year 1595.
the Pulpet being old, was taken down, and a new set up, the Preachers face
turned toward the South, which was before toward the west: Also a large House
on the East side of the said Pulpet, was then builded for the governors and
Children of Christ's Hospital to sit in, and this was done of the goods of
William Elkins, Alderman lately deceased, but within the first year the same
house decaying, and like to have fallen, was again with great cost repated at
the Cittyes charge.

And now here is to be noted, that time out of mind, it has been, and is a
lawdable custom in London, that on good Friday in the afternoon, some
especial learned man, by appointment of the Bishops, has Preached a Sermon at
Paul's Cross treating of Christ's passion: and upon the three next Easter
Hollydaies, Monday, Teusday, and Wednesday, the like learned men, by the like
appointment, have used to preach on the fore-noones at the said Spittle, to
the same effect, and then on low sunday, one other learned man at Paul's
Cross, to make rehearsal of those four former Sermons, either commending or
reproouing them, as to him by the judgment of the learned Deuines was thought
convenient, and that done, he was to make a sermon of his own study, which in
all were five Sermons in one. At these Sermons so severally preached, the Mayor
with his breathren the Alderme^ are acustomed to be present, in their violet
gowns at Paul's, on good Friday, and in their Scarlet gowns at ye Spittle
upon Monday, and Teusday, on the Wednesday in their violets, and on Low sunday
in their Scarlets again at Paul's Cross, which is used to this day.


Gent. These are lawdable customs, but have your Aldermen no place to sit in
at the Spittle, if it should chance to rain.


Cit. There is provided for the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs, a fair house of
two stories hie to sit in, and in the lost over them, where the Bishop of
London, and other Prelates were wont to sit, now stand the Ladies and Aldermens
Wives in a fair window, where they may likewise sit at their pleasure. And
this is all the antiquity, that I ever read of the Spitle Sermons. And now
(sir) considering the tediousnes of this my long discourse, I will revive you
with a few verses, writ in the honor of London.

Londons Description.
That famous offspring of down raced Troy.
King Brute the Conqueror, of Giants fell,
Built London first, these mansion Towers of joy,
As all the spacious world may witness well,
Even he it was, whose glory more to vaunt,
From burned Troy, sur-named this Troynouant.
This name, if that antiquities prove true,
Full many years in Majesty she bore,
Till princely Lud did christen her anew,
And changd her name, from that it was before,
So kingly Lud did shape a second frame,
And called this Luds Town by his princely name.
Luds-towne it was, and yet is termed so,
But that for briefness, and for pleasant sound,
Few letters of that name it does forgo,
And London now, which was once called Luds-Towne,
Thus Brute and Lud, London parents were,
Since fosterd up by many a royal peer.
But since that time, five conquests have insewd,
And all save one, been glutted with red goare,
Yet nere were London streets with blood imbrewd:
Yet still retaind the state it held before,
Such was her beauty, and the victors pity,
That spard their swords, from spoiling this fair City.
From her first founders, thus has she increased,
Fauord of those, the Diadem advanced,
Scarce with their deaths, their large diuosions ceased,
Yet by their deaths, her better fortunes chanced,
As one gave place, and left what he intended,
The next successor what he found amended.
One famous King, this City does indew,
With wished freedoms, and innimities,
The next confirms, augmenting it with new,
And graunts more large and ample liberties,
And thus fair Londons members strongly knitteth,
When Kings adorn what fame and honor fitteth.
From Lud unto King James, thus London fared,
Sacred Monarcke, Emperor of the West,
To whom the world yeeldes none to be compared,
By Londons love thou art here earthly blessed,
Mirror of mankind, each lands admiration,
The worlds wonder, heavens true contemplation.
Long may thou live fair Londons wished bliss,
Long may thou reign great Britains happiness,
Live, reign, and be when there no being is,
Triumphant over all that wish thee less,
In earth adored with glory and renown,
In heaven adorned with an Angels crown.
Of Londons pride I will not boast upon,
Her gold, her silver, and her ornaments,
Her Gems and Jewels, pearls, and precious stone,
Her furniture, and rich habilliments,
Her cloth of silver, tissue, and of gold,
Which in her shops men daily may behold.
What mines of gold the Indian soil does nourish,
Within the secrets of her fruitful womb,
London partakes it, and does daily flourish,
Ordayn'd thereto by heaven, and heavenly doom:
All foreign Lands whom majesty does move,
Do still contend to grace her with their love.
What Civil, Spain, or Portugale affords,
What France, what Flaunders, or what Germany,
What Creet, what Scicile, or what Naples hoordeth,
The Coasts of Turkey, or of Barberie,
The boundless Seas to London walls presents,
Through which all Englands state she much augme^teth.
If Rome by Tiber substance does attain,
Or Euphrates to Babylon brings plenty,
If golden Ganges Egypt fills with gain,
The Thames of London surely is not empty,
Her flowing channel powers forth much profit,
For Londons good, yet few knows what comes of it.
Thus by the bounty of imperious minds,
Furthered by nature with a noble flood,
Proud wealth, and welthy pride, brave London finds,
Nor wants she not, that bringes her gain and good,
Within her walls there lies close concealed,
That wealth, by tongues can hardly be revealed
London has likewise four terms of law most fit,
The four fould year in equal parts divide,
In which the Judges of the law do sit,
Depending matters justly to deside:
The poor man's plaint, and eke the rich man's cause,
And sentence given by righteous dooming laws.
First of the four, fresh spring does intertaine,
The second is, in sweating summer plast,
The third, With windy harvest does remain,
And freezing Winter, does delight the last,
When these times come, and Courts of law unlock,
It Is strange to mark how men to London flock.
These be the Bees, by which my being is,
England the Orchard, London is the Hiue,
Their toil, her triumph, and their fruit her bliss,
When most they labor, London most does thrive,
The lofty Courtyor, and the Country Clown,
By their expense, brings London rich renown.
And thus from all sides does much substance flow,
By Thames, by terms, by Sea, and by the Land,
So rich a mass, whole kingdoms connot show,
In this estate fair London still does stand,
Foure-piller, terms, and Thames be the fifth,
Which taken away, then farewell Londons thrift.

Genesis By these verses Sir, you have highly honored your city, and no doubt but
therein have bin many worthy Citizens which has thus brought her glory to this
height.


Cit. The City of it self Sir, is the most Noble, Populous, and richest in
all the Land, for it is most glorious in manhood, furnished with munitions,
insomuch as in the troublesome time of King Stephen, (when it was not half so
populous) it has showed at a Muster, twenty thousand armed Horsemen and three
score thousand foot men, serviceable for the wars. Moreover, the Citizens
hereof, wheresoever they become, be regarded before all other Citizens, both
for civility of manners, attire, company, and talk. The women, or rather
Matrons of this City, resemble the very modest Sabine Ladies of Italy.


Gent. Now, I pray you sir, discourse the gallant minds of some of your
Citizens in times past, for I have seen many records of them, and such as be
most memorable.

Henry Picard Mayor. 1357. did in one day sumptuously feast at his own charge
4 Kings, 3 Princes, and one Queen: which was, Edward the third King of
England, John King of France, David King of Scots, and the King of Cypress,
then all in England: the black Prince, his Princess, and the Dolphin Prince
of France, with many other noble men, and kept his Hall open for all comers to
revel and dice in.

John Barnes Mayor 1371, gave a Chest with three locks and a Thousand Marks
therein to the City, to be lent to young men upon sufficient suertie, or upon
pawn.

John Philpot Mayor 1378, hiered at his own charge 1000 Soldiers, to defend
the Land from the incursion of the enemy, so in short time his hiered (...)
took many sea Rouers with fifteen Spanish Ships laden with great riches.

William Walworth Mayor 1381, most valiantly with his own hands slew the
Kebell Wat Tyler, for which he was knighted in the field, and the bloody
Dagger given to Londons arms, to his great honor and praise.

Richard Whittington three times Mayor in the year 1421, began the School of
Christ's Church in London, he builded Whittington College, with Alms houses
for 13 poor men, and divine lectures to be read there for ever, he repaired
Saint Bartholmewes Hospital in smith field, he glazed and paued part of
Guild Hall, he builded the West gate of London called Newgate.

John Allen Mercer, Mayor of London, one of the Council to King Henry the
Eight, he deceased 1544, and he was buried at Saint Thomas of Achars in a fair
chapel by him builded, he gave to the City of London a rich collar of gold,
to be worn by the Lord Mayor for ever: he gave 500. li. to be a stock for Sea
coal for the City, his Lands purchased of the King, the rent thereof to be
given to the poor in the wards of London for ever. He gave besides to prisons,
hospitals, lazer-houses, and all other poor in the City, or two miles about
very liberaily too long to be recited.

Sir Thomas Gresham Mercer 1466, builded the Royal Exchange in London, and by
his testament, left his dwelling house in Bishops-gate street, to be a place
for readings of the seven liberal Sciences, allowing large stipends to the
readers, and certain Alms houses for the poor.

Thus have I made a brief of some of our worthy Citizens, and their charitable
actions, some done in their lives, the rest left to their executors, I have
heard some of them hardly (or never) performed, wherefore I wish men to make
their own hands their executors, and their eyes their Overseers, not
forgetting this old and true proverbs,

Women be forgetful, children be unkind,
Executors covetous, and take what they find:
If any one ask where the Lega^^es became:
They answer, so God help me, he died a poor man.
There is now living one Master Dove a Marchant-taylor, having many years
considered this old proverb, has therefore established in his life time to
twelve aged men Marchant-taylors 6 pounds 2 shillings, to each yearly for ever;
he has also given them gowns of good broad cloth, lived through out with
bays, and are to receive at every three years end the like gowns for ever.
He likewise in charity at Saint Sepulchers Church without Newgate, allows ye
great bell on every execution day to be toled till the condemned prisoners have
suffered death, and also a small hand-bell to be rung at midnight under newgate
the night after their condemnation, and the next morning at the Church wall,
with a prayer to be savd touching their salvation, and for the maintayning
thereof, he has given to Saint Sepulchers a certain sum of money for ever.


Gent. This is my mind, it is a charitable devotion, and deserves eternal
praise, I have much been delighted not only in these your walks, but also in
your pleasant discourses, which now we are forced to end, by reason of the
night drawing on. Therefore I humbly take my leave.


FINIS.

